A GODLY AND LEARNED EXPOSITION of CHRIST'S Sermon in the Mount: Preached in
CAMBRIDGE by that Reverend and judicious Divine M. WILLIAM PERKINS. Published
at the request of his Exequutors by TH. PIERSON Preacher of Gods word.
Whereunto is adjoined a twofold Table: one, of special points here handled;
the other, of choice places of Scripture here quoted.

Matthew. 17. 5. This is my well-beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear
him. PRINTED BY THOMAS BROOK AND CANTRELL LEG, Printers to the University
of Cambridge. 1608.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, OLIIVER LORD St. JOHN, BARON OF BLETSO, his very good
Lord, Grace and peace.
THe sacred Scriptures (Right Honorable) are so plainly styled by the spirit
of truth to be all and wholly Prove. 8. 8.
righteous, Psalm. 19. 7.
perfect and Prove. 30. 5.
pure, yea most Psalm. 119. 140. ^ellar. lib. 2. de verb. dei. cap. 15. par. 31.
pure, that it must needs savor of the spirit of Antichrist to judge any part
thereof (as the Papists do) unmeet for Gods people to be acquainted withal.
And yet I doubt not but that on our behalf for some respects, a kind of
pre-eminence may be yielded to some parcels of Scripture above others, without
any derogation therefrom-: else the 2. Cor. 3. ^, 9, 11 13. 18. 2. Pet 1. 19.
Apostles should have wronged Moses and the Prophets, by preferring the Gospel
far before them in glory and evidence. And therefore as Paul gave a special
charge to 2. Tim. 4* 1^*
Timothy of his parchments above his books, as being, though not for matter
more precious, yet for present use at least, more expedient: so may our hearts,
embracing with reverence the whole truth of God as pure and perfect, in regard
of fitness to our peculiar estate, cleave more nearely to some portion thereof
then unto others: for seeing herein is both milk and strong meat, who will
doubt, but that according to our age and growth in Christ we should affect? But
I may not here dilate of this difference of Scripture, and therefore will come
directly to that portion of it, Christ's Sermon in the Mount, which is here
explaned in this Commentary; endeavoring briefly to show some notes of
eminence in these three Chapters, for which they deserve among all the Lords
Worthies to have the name of the first three. And to omit the Author hereof,
though Jesus Christ the Son of God, because the 2. Tim. 3. 16
whole Scripture was given by inspiration from the same spirit; as also his
preparation hereunto (though extraordinary) by Luke 6. 12.
prayer to God the whole night before, which must needs import some
consequence of great importance; I will only point at the manner of penning
this Sermon, and the matter which it contains.

For the first: when the beloved Apostle says of Christ's sayings and doings,
that many things were not written, and yet Ioh. 20. 3^, 31
some things were written for the ground and confirmation of our faith, none (I
hope) will deny, but these things which were written, were by the H. Ghost
judged more behoouefull for the Church, the^ those which were omitted, whence
by good collection it will follow, that things more largely penned were also
deemed the more expedient: for why should the holy Ghost in penning be more
copious, unless the things propounded were (to us at least) more precious? Now
search the holy records of Christ throughout, and see what Sermon is so fully
registered as this is; unless it were his Ioh. 14. 15. 16. 17. chapt.
consolation uttered to his Disciples, with his prayer unto his Father a little
before his passion: This being his welcome to them into their Apostleship, and
That, his farewell at his death.

The matter of this Sermon.
But to come to the matter it self. This Sermon contains 12. several heads
of Doctrine, answerable indeed to the number of the 12. Apostles, to whom it
was principally intended, upon their calling to that office, although I dare
not say, particularly to be applied part to person, but rather generally the
whole to every one; unless it may be, in the last parcel by the great ruin
of the house upon the sands, Christ had a special aim at the fearful fall
of Judas that betrayed him. Now the first of these concerns man's chief Chap.
5. v. 3. to the 13.
good in true happiness, which is here so plainly declared in eight several
rules, as they lead every man hereto, and give the child of God most
comfortable assurance hereof, even in his greatest misery. The second does
more peculiarly respect Ver. 13. to 17
the function of the ministry, the ordinary means of attaining the former
happiness. The third restores the moral Verse. 17. to the end of the Chapter.
law to his true sense and meaning, which the Jewish teachers had shamefully
perverted, so as now we may make straight steps unto our feet in the way of
obedience. The Chap. 6. v. ^. to the 19.
fourth directs us in the right manner of doing good works, by special
instance in these three, Alms, Prayer, and Fasting, wherein the hypocritical
Pharisees had spent much labor in vain. The fist prescribes that moderate
care and desire of Verse. 19. to the last.
earthly things, which does stock up covetousness, the root of all evil. The
sixth reformeth the practice of rash judgment, Chap. 7. v. 1. to the 6.
for the better evidence of humility in our selves, and of love unto our
brethren. The seventh prescribes ministerial discretion, Verse. 6.
in the dispensation of the holy things of God, for the pure keeping of the
things themselves, and the safe-beeing of the dispensers thereof. The eight
does notably encourage Verse. 7. to the 12.
us both by precept and promise, to the holy exercise of prayer and invocation.
The ninth does furnish us to the practice Verse. 12.
of justice and equity in our civil conversation. The tenth does Verse. 13, 14.
effectually urge us unto care of our salvation, by walking in the strait way
of life, and shunning the broad way that leads to destruction. The eleventh
does forewarne us of false teachers, Verse. 15. to the 21.
who be the maine seducers out of the way of life. The twelfth and last, with
the conclusion, does knit up all, persuading Verse. 21. to the ^nd^.
us both by promise of happiness eternal, and of security, most comfortable;
as also upon peril of utter ruin irrecouerable, with outward profession to
join answerable obedience, both in heart and life.

Now all and every one of these (Right Honorable) are of that importance in
the life of a Christian, that none of them can be neglected of him that with
comfort and safety would live godly in Christ Jesus. For the better evidence
whereof, I must refer your Honor, with the Christian Reader, to this godly
and learned exposition ensuing; wherein Prove. 10. ^.
the reverent Author, of blessed memory, has faithfully labored upon sound
interpretation of the Text, to lay down wholesome instructions for the
obedience of faith. My pains herein has been chiefly this, as near as I
could, out of mine own and others notes, to commend unto the public view, the
authors faithful labors in his own meaning. Only I have here and there upon
good occasion (though private to my self) added some references in the margent
unto classical popish writers, for such opinions as are herein charged upon
them. Mine interest for the publishing of this work, I hope I shall approve
unto any gainsayer. Now whatsoever it is, in all bounden duty and service, I
humbly commend it unto your Lordship, and under your Honorable protection, to
the household of faith. And because I doubt not of your diligence in the
faithful and frequent perusal of it, I will turn my persuasions toward you
this way, into prayer to the Almighty for you, that by the edifying of your
faith, and other graces of God herein, you may more and more abound in the
fruits of righteousness, inioying here much true honor, with long and happy
days, in the peace of our Syon, and the prosperity of your family, and in
the end eternal life through Jesus Christ.

Your Honors to command, THOMAS PIERSON.
May. 1608.
A GODLY AND LEARNED EXPOSITION OF CHRIST'S Sermon in the MOUNT.
Math. 5. 1. And when he saw the multitude, he went up into a Mountain: And
when he was set, his Disciples came to him.

2. And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying, etc.


IN this Chapter and the next, is contained Christ's Sermon in the Mount,
preached to his Disciples, and others that were converted unto him among the
multitude. Hereof I have chosen to entreat, because it is a most divine and
learned Sermon; and may not unfitly be called the Key of the whole Bible; for
here Christ opens the sum of the Old and New Testament.

Before we come to the parts of this Sermon, three general points are to be
scanned, for the clearing of the doctrine following. First, the 1 Time.
Time when this Sermon was preached; to wit, in the second year of CHRIST'S
ministry, upon this occasion: when Christ Luke 6. 7.
had wrought a miracle, in cu^ing the man with the withered hand, upon the
Sabbath day, the Scribes and Pharisees went about to kill him; whereupon he
departed from among them, and went into a Mount, where he spent the whole night
in prayer. And when it was day, he chose the twelve Apostles: which done, he
came down into a plain place near to the Mount, where he wrought many
miracles; but because the people thronged about him to touch him (for there
went virtue out of him which cured them) therefore he withdrew himself out of
the throng into the Mountain again, and there preached this Sermon unto his
Disciples soon after their election; no doubt for this end, to teach them his
will, and also to frame and instruct them so as they might become profitable
teachers unto others.

2 Scope.
II. Point. The scope and drift of this large Sermon: namely, to teach his
Disciples, with all that believe in him, to lead a godly, an holy, and blessed
life. Although this be evident in the text, yet the Popish Iansen* comment^n
concord. E^^ang. cap. 40. Bell. lib 4. de Ius^f. c. 3.
Teachers have depraved this end and scope; saying, that Christ herein
propounds a new Law, far more perfect then the Law of Moses: and also
delivers new divine counsel to his Disciples, which was not given in the Law
or in the Prophets. But they err and are deceived: for Christ's intent is to
clear the true meaning of Moses and the Prophets, which was corrupted by the
false gloss of the Jewish teachers; and not to add any new Law or counsel
thereunto, as chap. 5. 17. and ^. 12.
afterward will plainly appear. Again, there cannot be given unto man a more
perfect rule then Moses Law, the sum and scope whereof is, To love God with
all the heart, with all the soul, and with all the strength; then which there
cannot be greater perfection in a creature. We therefore upon the consideration
of this worthy end, must labor to show the greater care and conscience, to
learn and do the things propounded in this Sermon.

3 Whether Matthew and Luke set* down the same Sermon.
III. Point. Whether is this Sermon the same, with that which is set down by
S. Luke, Chap. 16. v. 20. This question is necessary, for if they be the same
Sermon, then will the one give great light unto the other. Men indeed differ
in judgment touching this point: some say they are diverse Sermons; others say
they are one and the same: and that opinion is most likely. For first, they
have one beginning and one matter, the same order of preaching, and the same
conclusion, as the comparing of them together will plainly declare. Secondly,
this Sermon recorded by them both, was made upon the election of Christ's twelve
Apostles, a little after the curing of the man with the withered hand. This is
plain in S. Luke, and may well be gathered from the doctrine of this Sermon
recorded by chap. 5. v. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Matthew, wherein Christ instructs his Apostles particularly in their office
and calling: which he would not have done, if he had not formerly called them
thereunto. If it be said, that S. Matthew records their election afterward in
the 10. Chap. Ans. In the writings of the Evangelists there be certain
Anticipations; that is, some things are set down after, which were done
before, and some things are set down before, which were done after, as might
easily be proved by sundry examples, and in the point in hand is evident: for
the election of the Apostles is set down by S. Matthew in his tenth Chap. upon
occasion of his recording their commission to preach: so that this circumstance
of the Apostles election, does notably prove these Sermons to be one, S.
Matthew setting down the same more largely, and Luke more briefly.

Their Reasons who hold them to be two distinct Sermons, are of no moment. They
say, that the Sermon recorded by S. Luke, was made on the plain; this of
Matthew in the Mountain: that of Luke was made by Christ standing; this of
Matthew as he sat down. Answ. But Luke says not, that it was made by Christ
in a plain, or standing: only this he says, that Christ coming from the
Mountain stood in a plain place, and there wrought certain miracles, and
then preached: now all this might be done, and yet Christ might preach this
Sermon in the Mount sitting, as S. Matthew says: for the order of this story
is this. Christ being maligned of the Jews, went into a Mount, and there
prayed; after long prayer, he chose the twelve Apostles, and then came down
into a plain and wrought Miracles, but by reason of the throng which pressed
about him to touch him, he went into the Mountain again, and there preached
this Sermon to his Apostles, and others that followed him.

Thus much in general. Now we come to the Sermon it self: which Parts of this
Sermon.
contains three parts. A Preface; the Matter of the Sermon; and the
Conclusion.

The Preface or preparation is contained in the two first verses of I. Preface.
this Chapter, wherein are set down diverse circumstances pertaining to the
Sermon. As first and principally, the Author of it, to wit, JESUS 1.
Circumstance. Author.
CHRIST the Redeemer and Mediator of mankind, who in the making of this
Sermon, must be considered two ways, even as he is a Prophet: first, as the
Minister of Circumcision for the truth of God, as the Apostle Romans 15. ^.
speaks: whereby thus much is signified, that Jesus Christ as he was man,
borne among the Jews, was unto them a Prophet and Minister in his own person,
and with his own mouth was to teach them the will of his Father: which thing
was requisite for the accomplishing of Gods word, who had promised before to
his ancient people by Moses, that he would raise up unto them a Prophet like
unto Moses, Act. 3 22.
whom they should hear in all things that he should speak unto them: which
prophecy was verified in this Sermon: wherein he manifested himself to be the
Minister of Circumcision unto them. Secondly, here we must consider Christ as a
Prophet like unto Elijah, and Elisha, who were as Fathers and masters to the
rest of the Prophets: for herein he does not only teach believers among the
multitude, but his own Disciples also, who were afterward to make Disciples
unto Christ, and to build up further them that did believe; yea, this
instruction of his Disciples, is the chief scope of this Sermon.

Secondly, here is noted the Place where this Sermon was made, to 2.
Circumstance. Place.
wit, a Mountain in Galile: He went up into a Mountain. This place he chose
for two causes: First, to avoid the throng that pressed about him, while he
stood on the plain, to see him and to touch him, because Luke 6. 19.
there went virtue out of him. Secondly, that he might have a fit place, both
for himself to sit and teach, and for his Disciples and the multitude
attentively and orderly to hear and learn that wholesome doctrine which he
delivered.

In this choice of the place, First, he shows great care and wisdom 1
to maintain outward order in the dispensation of his word: whereby The uses.
he teaches us, that in all holy ministrations, outward order is to be kept,
and convenient places chosen, where the word of God may be reverently and
profitably both spoken and heard. Secondly, herein he 2
shows special care to dispense his Fathers will when occasion was offered;
yea, he declares his diligence herein: so as it is true, it was Ioh. ^ 34
meat and drink unto him, thus by teaching the people to do his Fathers
will. And this his practice must be a president and example to all Gods
Ministers. They must not preach by constraint, but of a willing mind; yea,
they must rejoice and be glad when occasion is offered, that they may dispense
the will of God unto his people. This Paul meant in his strait charge to
Timothy, that 2. Tim. 4. (...)
he should be instant, and teach in season, and out of season: that is, take
all occasions to teach the word; following the example of Christ, who stayed
not, till he came to Jerusalem, or to some Synagogue, but having good occasion
offered, taught the multitude in this Mountain.

Thirdly, here is noted that bodily gesture, which Christ used in this ^.
Circumstance: Gesture.
Sermon; he taught them, not standing, but sitting, when he was set* so when he
preached in Nazaret, Luke 4. 16. 20.
he stood up and read his text, and then sat down, and preached unto them.
And when his Father and mother sought him at the feast, Luke 2. 40.
they found him in the Temple (sitting) among the Doctors, and asking them
questions: and being apprehended, he said to the multitude, Mat. 26. 55.
I sat daiely with you in the Temple teaching. Now Christ used to preach
sitting, because it was the manner and custom of that Church so to do: The
Scribes and Pharisees (says Mat. 23. 2.
Christ) sit in Moses chair, where he notes their gesture in teaching and
expounding the Law. Whereby we are taught to be careful in observing all
seemly, commendable, and convenient gestures, which are used in that Church,
whereof we are members. If any shall ask whether we may not preach sitting,
as Christ did? I answer: if it were the custom of our Church, we might
lawfully doc it; for these gestures be indifferent in themselves: but we do it
not, because our custom is otherwise. And so we may say of preaching with the
head covered, which is the manner used by the Ministers of the French Churches;
but we use it not, because we have no such custom in our Church.

Fourthly, here are noted the parties whom Christ taught, namely 4.
Circumstance: Heare^*
his Disciples; for though he spoke in the audience of the multitude, yet
herein he chiefly intended to instruct his Disciples: that is, all those whom
he had converted by his former Ministry, and among them principally the
twelve Apostles, whom he had newely chosen to become teachers of others. This
circumstance must be well observed, for as it helps to clear some points in
the doctrine following; so it serves notably, to prove and justify the
Schools of the Prophets, wherein some teach, and others hear and learn, for
this end, to furnish themselves with gifts, that afterward they may become
good and able teachers in Gods Church: for what is this, but to follow the
example of Christ, who in this place delivers doctrine and instruction to his
twelve Apostles, the better to enable them to the faithful discarge of their
holy Ministry.

Lastly, in this Preface is noted Christ's manner of speaking, in these 5.
Circumstance. Christ's manner of speaking
words: And he opened his mouth and taught them, saying: which some do take to
signify nothing else, but a full and evident kind of speech; as if the holy
Ghost had said, he spoke with his mouth: as we use to say in English, I heard
it with mine ears. But this phrase has a further meaning, for as Paul willing
the Ephesians, Ephesians. 6. 1o.
to pray to God for him, that a door of utterance may be given him, that he
might open his mouth boldly to publish the secrets of the Gospel, does there
make that opening of his mouth, a more special kind of speaking, and of far
more weighty matter, then his ordinary communication; and as Elihu saying, Job
(...). 20.
I will open my lips, and will answer, does thereby import, that his speech
should be upon due consideration, and sound knowledge: so the Evangelist
saying, Christ opened his mouth, does thereby mean, that upon serious
meditation upon sundry points of heavenly doctrine, he began to speak with
liberty and authority, and to deliver unto them deep matter of weight and
great importance: that this is the meaning, may appear by the conclusion of
this Sermon, where it is said, Chap. 7. 29
the people wo^dred at his doctrine, because he taught as one having authority:

Does Christ here open his mouth and utter weighty points of doctrine The
uses. 1.
in this Sermon? then it stands all Churches and people in hand, to open
their ears, and apply their hearts to hear, learn, receive, believe, and
obey the same: this is that Prophet foretold by Moses, who must be heard Act.
3. 22, 23.
in all things that he shall speak: yea, whosoever will not hear his voice,
must be cut off from among Gods people: and great reason, for if the word
spoken by Angels stood steadfast, and every transgression received a just
recompense of reward; Heb. 2. 2, 3.
how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation preached unto us by
Christ? Secondly, hereby all 2. Use.
Gods Ministers are taught, by all godly diligence to seek to furnish
themselves for their holy ministry, that they may bring serious and weighty
matter unto Gods people, and deliver the same with that convenient boldness
and authority, which beseems Gods word. Thirdly, in Christ's addressing of
himself to speak, all persons must learn 3. Use.
to make conscience both of silence and of speech: this we shall do, if by
silence we close up our lips till we have just matter to speak of, tending
to the glory of God, or the good of our brethren; and being so prepared, upon
fit occasion, and in due time, we may utter our mind: we must remember that
Christ left himself an example, that we should follow his steps; and also
consider, that of every idle word that we shall Math. 12. 36.
speak, we must render account unto God. If this were known and believed,
there would not be so many sins in words, by cursing, swearing, vain and
idle speaking, as there be.

Thus much of the Preface. Now we come to the matter of this Sermon, The matter
of Christ's Sermon.
beginning at the third verse of this Chapter, and so continuing to the 28.
verse of the 7. Chapter. And it may be divided into 12. heads or places of
doctrine: The first whereof, concerns true happiness or 1. Part: of
happiness.
blessedness: from the 2. verse of this Chapter, to the 13. wherein are
propounded sundry rules directing men to attain thereunto. The scope of them
all must be considered, which in general is this: Our Savior Christ had now
preached two years among the people, and thereby had won many to become his
Disciples; and among the rest, his 12. Apostles: to all whom he promised
happiness and life everlasting, if they would continue in the faith and
obedience of his word. Now though they believed in him, yet they still remained
in the same state for outward things, and became more subject to outward
miseries then before; so as if they judged of happiness by their present
outward estate, they might easily suspect the truth of Christ's doctrine, and
think he had deceived them, because he promised them happiness, and yet for
outward things, their case was far worse, then before they knew him. This
our Savior Christ considering, does here go about to remove this false
conceit out of their minds; and for this purpose delivers this doctrine unto
them, in the first general head of his sermon; that true happiness before
God, is ever joined, yea covered many times, with the cross in this world.
Whereby he strikes at the root of their carnal conceit, who placed true
happiness in outward things, and looked for outward peace and prosperity upon
the receiving of the Gospel.

As this is the scope of the doctrine following, so it stands us in hand 1
to learn the same, and to find experience hereof in our own hearts, The Use.
that true comfort and felicity is accompanied with manifold miseries in this
life. Indeed, carnal wisdom deemeth them happy that enjoy outward peace,
wealth, and pleasure: but this conceit must be removed, and Christ's doctrine
embraced, who joins true happiness with the cross. Secondly, this serves
to teach us patience in affliction; for it 2
is Gods will to temper happiness and the cross together: now this puts life
into an afflicted soul, to think that Christ will have his felicity inioyed
and felt in outward misery. Thus much of this head of doctrine in general,
now we come to the branches thereof.

Verse. 3. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven.
Here is Christ's first Rule concerning happiness; wherein observe 1. Rule of
happiness.
two points: first, the parties blessed, the poor in spirit: secondly, wherein
this blessedness consists, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Before we
come to these parts severally, note in a word, the form of speech here used,
they that are led by humane reason will rather say, blessed are the rich, for
theirs are the kingdoms of the world: But Christ here speaks the flat contrary;
saying, blessed are the poor, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven, which is
infinitely better then all the kingdoms of the world: whereby we may see that
the wisdom of this world is foolishues with God, and the ordinary conceit of
man, flat opposite to the saving doctrine taught by Christ.

Blessed are the poor in spirit. The word translated poor, does properly 1.
Part. (...)
signify a beggar, one that has no outward necessaries, but by gift from
others: but here it is more largely taken, not only betokening those that want
outward riches, (for Luke 6. ^0* ^4.
S. Luke opposes these poor to the rich in this world) but also those that
are any way miserable, wanting inward or outward comfort: and such an one was
Lazarus, Luke 2^* (...), 21.
that lay begging at Dives gates. What is meant by poor in spirit, is plainly
expounded Isa. 66. 2. where the Lord says, I will look to him that is poor,
and of a contrite spirit, and that trembles at my words. Christ's meaning then
is this, that those poor are blessed, who by means of their distress,
through want of outward comforts, are brought to see their sins, and their
misery thereby; so as finding no goodness in their hearts, they despair in
themselves, and fly wholly to the mercy of God in Christ, for grace and
comfort, as Lazarus did to Dives gates for outward relief.

Seeing Christ does thus set out the person that is truly blessed, let us Use.
1. T^^^ll of our poverty.
see whether we be in the number of these poor ones. Indeed we have many poor
among us, some that by excess and riot have spent their substance, and others
that through idleness increase their want; as the wandering beggars, a
sinful and disordered people, who join themselves to no Church: but none of
these can by their poverty make just claim to true felicity. The blessed
poor, are poor in spirit, and this poverty we must find in our hearts, if
we would know our selves to be truly happy; but after trial, this will be
found much wanting: for first, if men live outwardly civil, and keep
themselves from gross sins, this thought of pride takes place in their
hearts, that they are righteous; and they persuade themselves with the Mat. 19.
20
young man in the Gospel, that they can keep Gods commandments. Secondly, let
worldly wants befall men, in body, goods, or name, and they are grieved; yea,
their souls are full of sorrow: but for spiritual wants, as blindness of
mind, hardness of heart, unbelief, and disobedience, their hearts are never
touched. Now whence comes this, but from that pride of heart, whereby they
bless themselves in their estate, and think all is well with them in respect
of their souls? so that true it is, poverty of spirit is hard to be found. We
therefore must search our selves, and labor to feel our spiritual wants; and
look how Lazarus lay for his body, at Dives gates; so must we lie at Gods
mercy gate in Christ, for our souls, abandoning this pride of heart, and
acknowledging that there is no goodness in us of our selves; for the strait
gate of heaven cannot receive a swelling heart that is puffed up with pride.
And to induce us unto this good duty, let us consider the gracious promises
made to them that be poor in spirit; Psalm. 72. 2.
they are called Gods poor: Psalm. 40. 17.
he thinks on them: though heaven be Gods throne, and the earth his
footstool, yet will he Isay 66. 2.
look to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit: yea, the Lord will Isay
57. 1^.
dwell with him that is of a contrite and broken heart: Luke 4. 18.
Christ came to preach the glad tidings of the Gospel to the poor: yea, Luke
1. 53.
the Lord fills the hungry (that is, the poor and hungry soul) with good
things, but the rich he sends empty away. Let these and many such favors with
God, which they enjoy, provoke us to become poor in spirit.

Secondly, are they blessed that be poor in spirit? then here all poor 2.
Poor men's duty.
and wretched persons in the world, may learn to make good use of their wants
and distresses; they must consider them as the hand of God upon them, and
thereby be led to the view of their sins: and by the consideration of
their sins, be brought to see their misery in themselves, the true ground of
this spiritual poverty. Now, when they are once poor in spirit, they are in
a blessed state in the judgment of Christ. If a man bleed dangerously at the
nose, the best way to save his life, is to let him blood elsewhere, and so
turn the course of the blood another way: even so, when a man is oppressed
with worldly calamities, he cannot find any comfort in them, for in
themselves they are Gods curses; yet if thereby he can be brought to see his
spiritual poverty, then of curses they become blessings unto him: and
therefore when we are in any distress, we must not only fix our eyes upon
the outward cross, but by means of that, labor to see the poverty of our
souls; and so will the cross lead us to happiness.

Thirdly, they that abound with worldly wealth, must hereby learn 3.
Rich men's duty.
to become poor, if they would be saved: Poor I say, not in goods, but in
soul and spirit: this indeed is hard to flesh and blood, for naturally every
rich man blesses himself in his outward estate, and persuades himself that
God loves him, because he gives him wealth: but such conceits must he strive
against, and learn of God to rejoice in this, that he is made low: Iam (...).

Fourthly, on this saying of Christ, that the poor are blessed, the Popish 4.
Against the vow of poverty. Bellar. cont. Genesis 5. lib. 2. cap. 20.
teachers (observing the word translated poor, to be^oken outward poverty)
go about to build their vow of voluntary poverty, whereby men renouncing
their wealth and possessions of this world, do be take themselves to some
Monastery, there to live a poor and solitary life. But their voluntary
poverty will not agree with this text; son Christ's poor^ here pronounced
blessed, are such, as by reason of their poverty, are miserable and wretched,
wanting outward comforts, as we showed o^t of Luke* Luke 6. 20. with 24.
where Christ opposes them to the rich, who abound with all worldly delights:
but to undergo the Popish vow of voluntary poverty, is no estate of misery
or distress* for who do live in greater ^ase, or enjoy more freedom from the
crosses and vexations of this life, then their begging Friars? Again, if their
vowed poverty had any ground in this text, then Christ should pronounce such
poor blessed, as made themselves poor; but that he does not, for then in the
next verse he should pronounce such mourners blessed, as voluntarily cause
themselves to mourn: for that verse depends on this, as a more full
explanation of this first rule: But no man will say that they that mourn
without a cause, are there called blessed; and therefore Popish vowed poverty
has no ground on this place. And thus much of the persons.

II. Point. Wherein the blessedness of these poor consists; namely, in having a
right to the kingdom of heaven, For theirs is the kingdom of heaven. By
kingdom of heaven (for the better conceiving of this Kingdom of heaven.
blessedness) we must understand a state or condition of man, whereby he is in
Gods favor, and has fellowship with God. The truth of this description is
evident by the tenor of the new Testament. Now this estate of man is called a
Kingdom, because herein God rules as king, and man obeies as Gods subject: for
no man can be in Gods favor, nor enjoy his fellowship, unless God be his
King, ruling in his heart by his word and spirit, and he Gods subject resigning
himself to be ruled by him: for this happy estate consists in Gods gracious
ruling of man, and man's holy subjection unto God. Indeed, few do see any
great happiness in this estate, but the truth is, man's whole felicity stands
herein: Romans 14. 17. The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Here the Apostle teaches us
three things: namely, that when Gods spirit rules in a man's heart, then first,
he is justified, there is righteousness: secondly, he has peace with God, even
that peace of conscience which passes all understanding: thirdly, the joy of
the holy Ghost, which is all unspeakable comfort, passing all worldly joy
whatsoever. And these three do notably set out the state of an happy man:
which will yet more plainly appear by their contraries in Judas, who being a
wretched sinner, unrighteously betrayed his master, and thereupon fell into the
misery of a guilty accusing conscience, which was the cause of his desperate
death, and also that his body burst asunder, and his bowels gushed out: now
if an evil conscience be so fearful, then ^ow blessed an estate is the peace
and joy of a good conscience? which a man then has when God by his word and
spirit rules in his heart. Again, this estate is called the kingdom of
heaven, because that man in whom Christ (...) by his word and spirit, is
already himself in heaven, though i^ body he be yet on earth: for heaven is
like a city with two gates, thorough both of which a man must pass, before he
obtain the full ^oyes thereof: now so soon as God by his word and spirit,
rules in any man's heart, he is already entered the (...)te of grace, which is
the first gate: the other remains to be passed thorough at the time of death,
which is the gate of glory, and then he is in full possession.

Does true happiness consist in this estate, where Christ rules and The use. 1.
man obeies? then here behold the error of all Philosophers and wise The error
of the world touching happiness.
men of this world touching happiness: for some have placed it in pleasure, some
in wealth, and others in civil virtue, and some in all these. But the truth
is, it stands in none of these. A natural man may have all these, and yet be
condemned: for the civil virtues of the heathen, were in them but glorious
sins. Our Savior Christ has here revealed more unto us, then all the wise
men of the world did ever know: and hereby we have just occasion to magnify
the books of Scripture, far above all humane writings, because they do
fully set out unto us the nature and estate of true felicity, which no humane
works could ever do: we must therefore account of them, not as the word of
man, but of the everliving God: yea, this must persuade us to maintain the
books of Scripture against all devilish Atheists, that deny the same to be
the word of God.

Secondly, hereby we are taught, from the bottom of our hearts, to 2
make that petition for our selves, which Christ teaches in his holy Pray for
Gods kingdom.
prayer; namely, that he would let his kingdom come: that is, not suffer
sin, Satan, or the world to reign in us, but by his word and spirit to rule
in our hearts, giving us grace to be guided thereby in all our ways. We affect
nothing more then happiness, and therefore we must oftentimes most seriously
make this request to God, preferring this estate with God, before all pleasures
and happiness in this world, and use all good means to feel in our hearts the
power of Christ's kingdom.

Thirdly, this should move us to hear Gods word with all fear 3
Hear Gods word.
and reverence; for by this means, the kingdom of Christ is erected in us:
when the word of Christ takes place in our hearts by faith, and brings forth in
our lives the fruits of righteousness, and true repentance, then may we truly
say, the kingdom of heaven is in us.

Lastly, Christ ascribing this happy title of his heavenly kingdom to 4
them that be poor, and of a contrite heart, does herein minister a sovereign
Consolation to the poor.
remedy against all temptations, from outward poverty and distress:
Doubtless poverty is a grievous cross, not only in regard of the want of
bodily comforts; but especially because of that contempt and reproach, which in
this world does hang upon it: whereupon many do esteem their poverty, as a
sign of Gods wrath against them, and thereby take occasion to despair,
thinking the kingdom of darkness belongs unto them. But here consider you
poor, this sentence of Christ, where he plainly teaches, that if a man in
outward distress, can be brought to feel his spiritual poverty, and the
wretchedness of his soul, by reason of his sins; then he is so far from
having just cause to despair of Gods favor, by reason of his poverty, that
on the contrary, he may gather to his soul a most comfortable assurance, from
the mouth of him that cannot lie, that the kingdom of heaven belongs unto him.

Verse. 4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.
Here is Christ's second rule touching blessedness: wherein consider ^. Rule.
two points; first, the parties who are blessed, they that mourn: secondly,
wherein their blessedness consists, namely, in receiving comfort. For the
first: by mourners, we must not understand every one that is any way grieved,
but such as have just and weighty causes of grief, and do therefore mourn:
for the words import an exceeding measure of grief, (...)
such as is expressed by crying and weeping, as is plain by Saint Luke, who
thus relates Christ's saying; blessed are ye that now weep. And yet Luke 6.
21. (...)
every one is not blessed, that mourns under grievous distress; for Caine,
Saul, Achitophel, and Judas, were all deeply affected in soul with their most
woeful estates, though far from this blessedness. This rule then, must thus
be understood; that they are blessed, who with their mourning for weighty
causes of grief, do withal mourn for their sins: for so was the former Rule
to be understood, of those that with the sense of their outward distress, had
adioined an inward feeling of their spiritual wants: and this verse is but a
more full explication thereof, as if he should have said, they are blessed that
are poor in spirit. Yea, put case a man be distressed for most weighty
causes of grief, so as he howl and cry under the burden of them; yet if
withal, he can unfeignedly mourn and wail in heart for his sins,
notwithstanding all his poverty and distress, he is truly blessed.

This blessed sentence upon them that mourn, serves sundry ways Uses.
Consolations.
for a sovereign salve to the conscience of a Christian. As first; put the
case a man were distressed with grievous calamities, and withal were 1
overtaken with some heinous sin, whereupon not only his body is afflicted,
but his conscience also wounded, and so he is cast into the gulf of
desperation: yea say further, that by reason of the terror of his conscience,
his flesh were withered, and his marrowe consumed in his bones; were not this a
cause of exceeding mourning? yet lo, our most blessed Physician Christ Jesus,
has made a plaster for his sore; for if this man of distresses, can withal
truly mourn for offending God through his transgressions, he is undoubtedly
blessed: for Christ has said it, whose word shall never fail, though heaven
and earth come to nothing. A blessed text, which being well applied, will not
only support the heart in great distress; but recover the conscience from
under deep despair. Secondly, put case a man were grievously sick, 2
and that he felt the very pangs of death without all ease to seize upon him,
so as both speech and sight, with all outward comforts began to fail him; this
state were lamentable: yet if in his soul he can truly mourn for his
offenses, even in this extremity, he is blessed. Thirdly, 3
put case a man were taken of his enemies, and his wife and children slain
before his face, having their brains dashed out upon the stones, afterward
himself put to a most woeful rack and torture: this were an estate more
woeful then death: yet herein a man must not judge himself a castaway, but
with mourning for this misery, he must labor to be sorrowful for his sins,
and then he need not fear what flesh can do unto him, for he is blessed.
Christ's word must stand, let thy distress be what it will, if under it thou
mourn for thy sins, blessed art thou. We cannot conceive while we enjoy
peace, of the worth of this rule in the evil day: neither do we know how
near the time is, wherein we shall have need thereof; and therefore we must
now learn this never to be forgotten, to season all other mourning with godly
sorrow for our sins.

II. Point. Wherein this blessedness consists; namely, in that their mourning
shall have an end, and be turned into true comfort. That this is true happiness
will appear by the contrary: for the woe and sorrow that is here begun, and
continued in the world to come, is the punishment of the damned spirits, and
the portion of the Reprobate, which is endless misery: and therefore unto the^
that mourn, it is true happiness, that they shall receive comfort. This promise
of Comfort is accomplished Four ways of comfort.
four ways. First, when God tempers and delays the sorrows and 1
afflictions of them that mourn, according to the measure of their strength:
1. Cor. 10. 13. God is faithful, and will not suffer you to be tempted above
that you are able to bear. This was promised to David and his seed, that if
they did sin, he would correct them with the rod of men: but not take his
mercy quite from them. 2. Sam. 7. 14. Secondly, 2
when God remooues the grief with the causes thereof: thus he comforted
Manasses, who for his abominable Idolatries and witchcrafts, was carried
captive into Babylon, and there laid in prison, fettered in 2: Chr. ^3. 13.
chains of iron: yet when he did mourn under that affliction, and withal
humbled himself unto God for his sins, the Lord comforted him, by bringing
him out of that captivity and prison, to Jerusalem into his own kingdom.
Thirdly, when God gives inward comfort to the heart and 3
conscience, by his word and spirit. In this case Paul said, we rejoice in Romans
5. 3.
afflictions, knowing that the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by
the holy Ghost, which is given us: yea, when he was exceedingly afflicted above
his strength, so as he received the sentence of death in himself, having no
hope of life, yet even then he professes, that as the sufferings of Christ
abounded toward him, so his consolations through 2. Cor. 1. 8. with v. 4. 5.
Christ abounded in him. Fourthly, when God by death puts an end to 4
all their miseries, and brings their souls to eternal life. Thus was Lazarus
comforted, as Abraham says unto Dives, Luke 16. 25. and thus does Christ
comfort the Thief upon the cross (who with his bodily torment for his lewd
life, was undoubtedly touched in conscience for his sins, and therefore
desires Christ to remember him when he came into his kingdom) by telling him,
that that day he should be Luke 23. 43.
with him in Paradise.

Here then we have a notable remedy against the immoderate fear Use 1.
of death, whether natural or violent, and of any other judgment of God: for
when death it self, or any other misery whatsoever, shall befall us, if we
can there with bewail our transgressions, we need not fear, still holding
fast this promise by faith in our hearts, that we shall be comforted. Secondly,
this promise well observed, may teach us to 2
avoid the peril of this false conceit; That true faith does always minister
present comfort. Many do herewith perplexe themselves, measuring their estate
toward God, by that which they feel in themselves, so as if in time of
trouble they find not present comfort, they judge themselves void of faith,
and cast out of Gods favor: but herein they greatly wrong themselves: for
though the apprehension of comfort from God in distress, be a fruit and work
of faith, yet a man may have true faith, that wants this sense and feeling of
present comfort. Doubtless none are blessed that want faith, yet many are
blessed that want feeling: for here it is said, they that mourn for sin are
now blessed: and yet it is not said, they are now comforted, but they shall be
comforted; meaning afterward, in Gods good time.

Verse. 5. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.
This is the Third rule of Christ touching happiness: which as the ^. Rule.
former, contains two parts: first, the parties blessed: secondly, wherein
this blessedness consists. For the first: The parties blessed, be the meek.
That we may know aright who be meek, I will somewhat lay open the virtue of
meekenes, and briefly handle these four points: first, what meekenes is:
secondly, what be the fruits thereof: thirdly, wherein Four points touching
meeknes. What meeknes is.
it must be showed: fourtly, the cause and ground thereof.

I. Point. Meekenes is a gift of Gods spirit, whereby a man does moderate his
affection of anger, and bridle in himself impatience, hatred, and desire of
revenge.

II. Point. The fruits of meekenes are principally two: First, it The fruit of
it.
makes a man with a quiet and patient heart, to bear Gods judgments: 1
which is a worthy grace of God, and the greatest fruit of meekenes: Levit.
10. 3. When Aarons two sons Nadab and Abihu were burned with fire from
heaven, which was a grievous judgment, he went to Moses to know the cause
thereof, who told him, that God would be glorified in all that came near him;
which when Aaron heard, he held his peace, and was not moved with grudging or
impatience: So David being in great distress through the hand of God upon
him, does notably show forth this grace, saying, Psalm. 39. 9.
I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because Lord thou did it. Secondly,
meekenes causes 2
one with a quiet mind to bear the injuries men do unto him: yea, to forgive
and forget them; and to requite good for evil, referring all revenge to God
that judges righteously. When Psalm. 38. 12. 13. 14.
David's enemies laid snares for his life, uttered sorrows, and imagined deceit
against him continually; yet by this virtue he suffered all patiently, being
as a deaf man that hears not, and as the dumb which opens not his mouth:
so far was he from private revenge. And our Savior Christ sets forth
himself a pattern of this virtue; saying, Math. 11. 29.
Learn of me, that I am meek and lowly in heart: herein he left himself an
example that we should follow his steps, 1. Pet. 2. 23
who when he was reviled, he reviled not again, when he was buffeted, he
threatened not, but referred all to the judgment of him that judges
righteously: yea, Luke 23. 34.
he prayed for them that crucified him: So did Stephen, Act. 7. 60. Lord, lay
not this sin to their charge: so Zachariah the son of Iehoida, being
stoned, said only this; The Lord will see and require it at your hands. 2.
Chron. 24. 22.

III. Point. Wherein must this meekness be showed? Ans. Not Wherein meekness
must be showed.
in the matters of God, when his glory is impeached: for therein we must have
zeal as hot as fire: but in the wrongs and injuries that concern our selves.
Moses was the meekest man upon the earth in his time, Numb. 12. v. 3. and yet
when the Israelites had made a golden calfe, in zeal to Gods glory, Exodus 32.
19. 27.
he brake the two tables of stone; and put to the sword that same day, three
thousand men, of them that had so dishonored God. David also, that held his
tongue at his own wrongs, did consume away with zeal against his enemies that
forgot Gods word, Psalm. 119. 139. And our Savior Christ, who as a lamb before
the shearer opened not his mouth for the wrongs done unto himself; did yet in
rescue of his fathers glory, make a whip of cords, and drive the buyers out
of the Temple, who made his Fathers house a den of thieves: Math. 21. 12.

IV. Point. The cause and ground of this meekness, is affliction and Ground
of meekness.
poverty of spirit, as the order of these rules declares; where it is placed
after poverty of spirit, and mourning: and therefore Psalm. 37. 11. whence
these words are borrowed, the meek person is called by a name that signifies
one afflicted; to teach us, that he that is meek indeed, is one (...)
who by affliction and distress, has been brought to mourn for his
offenses: for hardly can he be meek and patient in spirit, that has not
been acquainted with the cross, Lamen. 3. 27, 28, 29. The Church commends
this bearing of the cr^sse in youth, because it makes a man to sit quietly
alone, to put his mouth into the dust, and to give his cheek unto the nippers.

Does blessedness belong to meek persons? hereby then we are The use.
Moderation of affections.
admonished to labor for the moderation of all our affections, especially of
anger, hatred, and revenge; and to beware of all hindrances to this blessed
virtue, as choler, hastiness, grudging, impatience under wrongs, with all
railing, reuiling, chiding and brawling, and all such threatening speeches,
which come too often in practice, that we may forgive, but we will never forget:
yea, in Action we must avoid all quarrelling, fighting, contending, and going
to law on every light occasion; for true meekness admits none of all these to
take place with Gods children. Motives to meekness.
And to induce us hereunto, consider first Christ's precept and example, bidding
us Mat. 11. 29
learn of him, for he is meek and lowely. Again, 1
consider Gods own dealing with us, we daiely wrong him by our offenses, and
yet he bears with us; shall we then be so unlike our heavenly 2
Father, that we will straight revenge the wrongs that others do unto us? See
Colloss. 3. 12, 13. As the elect of God, holy and beloved, put on the bowels of
mercy, gentleness, lowelinesse of mind, meekness, long suffering,
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel
against another; even as God for Christ's sake forgave you, so do ye. Lastly,
the fruition and practice of this grace has the 3
promise of blessedness belonging to it; and therefore as we would be happy,
so we must get the spirit of meekness into our hearts, and express the
virtue and power thereof in our lives.

Object. I. Here some will say, If I put up all injuries, I shall be counted a
dastard and a fool. Ans. In this case learn of Paul, to pass little for man's
judgment, but be careful to get and (...) this grace of meekness, and then
Christ will pronounce thee ^^^ssed, which ought more to prevail with thee,
then all men's estimation in the world; and so it will, unless thou love the
praise of men, more then the praise of God: Ioh. 12. 48.

Object. II. Again, it will be said, The more I use to put up wrongs, the more
shall I have still done unto me. Ans. That is only so* ^^th wicked men; for 1.
Pet. 3. 13
who else will wrong thee, if thou follow that which is good? Yet say they
do, thy 1. Pet. 2. 19.
patient suffering, is praiseworthy with God: and, Psalm. 10. 4.
he will take the matter into his hand: yea Christ Jesus, who judges not by
the sight of the eye, Isay, (...). 4
he will rebuke aright, for all the meek of the earth.

Object. III. But yet thou say, this is the way to loose all that a man has,
and to be thrust out of house and harbor. Ans. Nothing less: for Christ here
says, the meek shall inherit the earth; doubt not but Christ will make good
his word: and therefore if thou respect these outward things, labor to get and
exercise the spirit of meekness.

II. Point. Wherein does this blessedness of the meek consist? namely, in their
inheriting of the earth. And this is a great happiness, for a man to be Lord
of the whole earth. But how can this be true? since many of Gods dearest
servants, have been strangers on this earth, thrust out of house and land, and
constrained to wander in mountains, and deserts, afflicted and miserable, yea
destitute of convenient food and raiment, Heb. 11. 37, 38. Ans. The meek are
here called Inheritors How the meek inherit the earth.
of the earth, not for that they always have the possession thereof; but
first, because God gives a meet and convenient portion of the earth, 1
either to them, or to their posterity: thus he dealt with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, they had sufficient for themselves, and a promise of great
possessions, which their posterity did enjoy. Secondly, if it fall 2
out, that meek persons die in want, or banishment; yet God gives the^
contentation, which is fully answerable to the inheritance of the earth: so
Paul says of himself, and other Apostles, 2. Cor. 6. 10.
they were as men having nothing, and yet possessed all things: meaning through
contentation, with the peace of a good conscience. Thirdly, the meek have this
inheritance, 3
in regard of right, being the members of Christ, who is Lord of all. Hence
Paul says to the believing Corinthians, 1. Cor. 3. 21, 22.
all things are yours, whether it be Paul, or Cephas; or the world, things
present* or things to come, all are yours, and ye Christ's. Fourthly, the meek
are made kings 4
by Christ, and after the last judgment, they shall rule and reign with him
for ever(...) ^eu. 5. 10. And in these two last respects, the meek are more
properly said to be the inheritours of the earth. Object. Yet here it will be
said again, that wicked and carnal men are oftentimes the greatest Lords of
the earth, as Nimr^d in his time, and the Turk A twofold right to earthly
things.
at this day. Answ. The right unto the earth is twofold; Civil and
Spiritual: Civil right is that, which stands good before men, by their laws
an^ ^ustomes; and in regard thereof, men are called Lords of such lands, 1
as they have right unto in the Courts of men: and so the Turk at this Civil:
day, is a mighty Lord of a great part of the whole world. Spiritual 2
right is that, which is warrantable and approved with God himself;
Spiritual.
and such right and title had Adam to all the world, before his fall, which he
lost by his sin, both from himself, and all his posterity: but yet in
Christ, the same is recovered to all the elect. And of this right, Christ here
speaks, when he calls the meek inheritours of the earth: in regard
whereof, the Turk, and all unbelievers and ungodly persons, are but usurpers
of those things, which otherwise ciuilly they do lawfully possess.

Here then is an excellent privilege of all the true members of Uses.
Christ, that in him they be Lords of the earth: whereby first, we may 1
see how far most men do ouershoote themselves in seeking earthly The common
error in seeking wealth.
possessions; for the manner is, without all regard of Christ, to hunt after
the world: but this is a preposterous course, these men set the Cart before the
horses; for seeing all our right to the earth was lost by Adam, and is only
recovered by Christ, doubtless till we have part in Christ, we cannot with the
comfort of a good conscience, either purchasse, or possess any inheritance
upon earth. In regard of certainty, men desire to hold their lands in capite,
that is, in the Prince, as being the best tenure; but if we would have a sure
title, and hold aright in capite, we must labor to become true members of
Christ, and hold our right in him, for he is the Reu. 1. 5.
Prince of the kings of the earth, and Lord of all the world: and till we be in
Christ, we shall never have an holy and sanctified right to any worldly
possessions.

Secondly, this serves for a bridle against all immoderate care for the 2
world; for if we be members of Christ, and meek persons, then the
inheritance of the earth is ours: what need have we then to carke and care so
much for worldly pelf, as most men do, who never think they have enough?

Thirdly, this serves for a just rebuke of all those that seek to enrich 3
themselves by cruelty, lying, fraud, and oppression: for if thou be in
Christ, thou have right to the whole world; what need then have thou to use
unlawful means to get that which is thine ow^e? But sure it is, thou have no
part in Christ, while thou give thy self to these courses; for if thou
had, thou would be content; with whatsoever God sends in the use of
lawful means. Philip. 4. 11.

Lastly, hence all Gods children may learn to comfort their hearts 4
against the fear of any punishment for the name of Christ; for keep Christ
sure, and whither soever thou art sent, thou art upon thine own ground: for
the whole earth is thine, and in Christ one day thou shall possess it, when
all Tyrants shall be banished into hell. Now being on thine own ground, what
need have thou to fear?

Verse. 6. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they
shall be filled.
Here is the fourth Rule touching blessedness, which is also mentioned 4. Rule
by Saint Luke, yet some thing different from this of Matthew: for according to
Luke, Christ directs his speech to his Disciples, and speaks of bodily
hunger, saying; Blessed are ye that hunger now, for ye Luke 6. ^1.
shall be satisfied: as if he should say, You my Disciples do now suffer
hunger and thirst, but this shall not prejudice your happy estate, for
hereafter you shall be satisfied. Now Matthew goes a degree further, and lays
down a cause and Reason* why they being hungry are blessed; not simply, for
that they were pinched with bodily hunger, but because withal, they did
further spiritually in their souls hunger after righteousness. Thus then the
two Evangelists do agree; S. Luke lays down this Rule generally, but Matthew
propounds therein the reason of this blessedness.

This Rule, as the former, contains two parts: first, who are blessed:
secondly, wherein this blessedness does consist* For the first, the parties
blessed are such, as hunger and thirst after righteousness. The exposition of
these words is diverse; Some give this sense: Blessed are those that are Diverse
expositions.
grieved with the iniquities that abound in the world, and withal do 1
in heart and soul, long for the amendment and reformation thereof. Others
expound the words thus: Blessed are those that by wrongs and 2
injuries are deprived of their right (...) this world, and so are constrained
to hunger and thirst after that which is their own, waiting by patience 3
to obtain the same. But there is a third exposition which does The right
meaning.
more fully open unto us the meaning of Christ; to wit, by righteousness we may
well understand in the first place, the righteousness* of faith, whereby a
^inner is justified through grace in Christ, and so stand^ righteous before
God* having the pardon of all his sins ^besides this, we may here also
understand inward righteousness, whereby a man ^s sanctified and made holy,
having Gods image renewed in him by the spirit of grace, which was lost by the
fall of our first parents. And that this imputed and renewed righteousness may
here be understood, will appear by these reasons: First, in such places of
Scripture where like sentences are repeated, we must understand not Civil
righteousness, but justification, sanctification, and regeneration: as Isa. 55.
1. Hoe, every one that thirsts, come to the waters, and buie without silver:
and, Ioh. 7. 37. If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink: and,
Revel. 21. 6. I will give to him that is a thirst, to drink of the waters of
life freely: all which places are one in substance: for by waters, we must
understand righteousness, which is that spiritual grace of God the fountain of
all blessings, whereby sinners are justified and sanctified. Secondly, that
which is most of all to be desired, must needs be the most excellent
righteousness: but this righteousness here mentioned is most to be desired; for
Christ says, men shall hunger and thirst after it, thereby expressing a most
earnest and vehement desire: and therefore by righteousness, we must understand
Gods grace and mercy in Christ, absoluing a sinner from the guilt and
punishment of his sins, with sanctification the fruit thereof, whereby he is
purged from corruption. Secondly, Spiritual hunger and thirst.
by hungring and thirsting, we must understand two things: first, a sorrow and
grief of heart in regard of a man's own sins, and unrighteousness; secondly,
an earnest and constant desire of the righteousness of God, that is, of
justification and sanctification in Christ. Answerable to these two things
which are in bodily hunger and thirst, to wit, first a pain in the bottom of
the stomach for want of meat and drink; secondly, an earnest desire and
appetite after meat and drink, to be satisfied therewith. And blessed is he
that is so grieved for his own unrighteousness, and withal has an earnest
desire after reconciliation with God in Christ, and after true regeneration and
sanctification by the holy Ghost: for this is true spiritual hunger and
thirst, whereto belongs this gracious promise, that in due time he shall be
satisfied and filled with plenty of Gods mercy and grace, wherein this
happiness does consist, which is the second branch of this Rule. This I take
to be the true and proper meaning of these words, whereupon the two former
expositions depend; for he that is thus spiritually an hungered, is often deprived
of his own right among men, and* so is said to hunger and thirst after that
which is his own in this world. Again, such a man does unfeignedly grieve at
the iniquities that be in the world, and withal, his heart does most
earnestly desire reformation thereof, both in himself and others.

First, this sentence must be remembered, as a storehouse of true comfort The
use. Comfort in Temptation. 1. from want of faith.
in all grievous temptations, but especially, against these three; the want of
faith, the smallness of sanctification, and despair. For the first, many in
Gods Church have a true care to please God in all things, and to live in no
sin against their conscience; and yet they find in themselves much distrust
and despair of Gods mercy, they feel more doubting then faith: whereupon
they are brought to doubt of their election, and state of grace before God. Now
how may such be relieved, and be well persuaded of their good estate? Answer.
The way is laid down by our Savior Christ in this Rule; Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst after righteousness. For here he teaches, that those are
blessed, who are displeased with their own doubting and unbelief, if they have
a true earnest desire to be purged from this distrust, and to believe in God
through Christ. Indeed this desire of faith, and to believe, is not true faith
in nature, but in Gods acceptance; for God respects them for this true desire,
as if they had faith. And they are blessed, because they shall have plenty of
faith, and assurance of grace and favor with God in Christ: for it is mercy
and grace with God, to hunger after grace and mercy, when the heart feels the
want thereof: But yet such persons must be admonished, that they show the truth
of this desire, by a constant endeavoring in the means which God has
sanctified for the obtaining of a true and lively faith in Christ* wherewith
they may be satisfied.

The second temptation is, from the smallness of sanctification. Many 2. from
want of sanctification.
there be that endeavor to please God, making conscience of all sin, and yet
they find in themselves an exceeding measure of rebellious corruption, much
ignorance in their minds, perverseness in their wills, and frowardness in
their affections; yea, a continual pronenesse unto all manner of sin: and on
the contrary, they can perceive but small fruits of sanctification; the old
man they feel rushing in them like a mighty Giant, but the new man so weak
and seeble, that they can hardly discern any spiritual life: and hereupon
they are sore troubled with temptations, yea oftentimes driven to doubt,
whether they have any true grace at all: This cannot but be an heavy case, and
yet here is true comfort for them; for Christ calls them blessed (not that
are filled with righteousness) but who hunger and thirst after it; that is,
who feeling the want of righteousness in themselves, do earnestly desire it
in their souls. These persons therefore, that feel in themselves a sea of
corruption, and scarce a drop of sanctification, must truly examine their own
hearts, how they stand affected to these things; for if they be truly grieved
for their corruption and rebellion, and withal do earnestly desire grace and
sanctification, using the means constantly, whereby they may be freed from the
one, and endued with the other; then they have wherewith they may comfort their
hearts, for Christ calls them blessed: and so they are, for in due time they
shall be satisfied: and in the mean time, their will and desire is accepted of
God in Christ for the deed it self.

The third temptation is, to despair; when a man after the breach Comfort
against despair.
of conscience by some grievous sin, is plunged into this gulf, that he
thinks verily hell is prepared for him, and he must needs be damned: what
remedy now in such a case? Answ. Some think the only way is to propound unto
him, the grounds of universal grace; as that, because he is a man, Christ died
for him, for Christ died for all: but this is a slender comfort, for the
despairing conscience will thus reply; God indeed has done his part, but I
refused Gods grace, when it was offered. Therefore another way of comfort must
be sought; which is, by proouing unto him out of Gods word, that he is within
the covenant, and that the promises of grace and life do belong unto him: for
the effecting whereof, one maine ground is here propounded; to wit, that though
a man want all righteousness, yet if he truly hunger after it, he is blessed:
and the right applying of this ground, is this; search must be made, whether
the party thus despairing, has in him any spark of true grace, or no; and
this will be known by these two demands: first, whether he dislike his sins,
because they are sins? secondly, whether he truly desire to be reconciled
unto God, to repent and believe in Christ? Now if his conscience tell him, that
these things be in him indeed, then is he brought within the compass of this
blessedness here pronounced by Christ, and has title to this promise, that he
shall be satisfied: for he that is grieved for his sin, because thereby he
has offended God, and withal has an earnest desire of mercy and grace, to
repent and believe, is truly blessed. And therefore it may be said unto him,
seeing thou find in thy heart, this grief for sin, and desire of grace,
thou art blessed and shall be satisfied. Thus may the distressed soul receive
comfort; but as for them that live in sin, here is no comfort, for they have
no true dislike of sin, no purpose or desire to repent thereof.

Secondly, as this rule of Christ ministers comfort to some, so it dedeclareth
The misery of the full.
the miserable estate of others; to wit, of all those that want this spiritual
hunger after righteousness, for they have no title to the promise of heavenly
satisfaction by Gods mercy in Christ. And yet generally this is the state of
men every where: for after riches, pleasures, honors, and preferments men
hunger and thirst, as the drought in summer does after rain; but rare it is to
find a man that sauoureth the things of God, and thirsts after his
righteousness, and yet such only are blessed.

Thirdly, this rule of Christ serves for sure direction, whereby we How to know
who are happy.
may know our estate before God, in regard of true happiness: if we hunger and
thirst after righteousness, we are surely blessed: for the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it. Now this spiritual hunger is known by two things: first, by
an unfeigned hearty sorrow and grief for sin past; where this is wanting,
true spiritual hunger and thirst is not: secondly, by an earnest desire of
Gods mercy in Christ, for the pardon of sin, and for sanctification,
testified by a constant endeavor in the use of means to come thereby: he that
has these things in him, may assure himself that he is blessed, for these be
the motions of Gods spirit, and the true pledges of his grace. Hereby then we
must try our estate, if these things be in us we have wherein we may rejoice;
but if our hearts be dead, and hard, so as we have no touch for our sins, no
hungering after the blood of Christ, nor desire of sanctification, then are we
void of grace, and so most miserable: for the smallest measure of true grace
that can be, is to hunger after grace in the want thereof.

Lastly, this rule of blessedness must admonish us, as we tender our Labor for
spiritual hunger.
salvation, so to labor for this spiritual hunger in our souls, after
reconciliation with God in Christ for all our sins past, and for the
sanctification of our hearts and lives by his word and spirit: we may hear,
read, and talk of Gods word, and yet all to no end, unless we be in heaviness
for our own unrighteousness, and from our hearts do send forth sighs and
groans after mercy and grace in Christ. For what avails it to have wit and
learning, honor and riches, if the soul be void of mercy and grace in
Christ? which doubtless it is, while this spiritual hunger is wanting in the
heart. And to move us to labor for this hunger, the reason annexed is very
effectual, namely, the Lords promise that they shall be filled, which also
shows wherein this blessedness does consist. Now they that thus hunger are
filled, partly in this life, by receiving the testimony of the spirit,
touching their reconciliation with God in Christ, and some fruits of
sanctification, whereby the old man is mortified, and the new man renewed in
them; but principally at the end of this life, when they shall be fully
justified and sanctified, and have Gods image perfectly renewed in them.

Verse. 7. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.
This verse contains the fifth Rule or precept of our Savior Christ 5. Rule.
touching true happiness, in which observe two points: first, who be blessed:
secondly, wherein this blessedness consists* For the first: the parties
blessed be the merciful. And that we may the better know them, I will speak
something of this virtue: first, showing what mercy is: then, what be the
chief duties thereof.

First, Mercy is an holy compassion of heart, whereby a man is moved Mercy
described.
to help an other in his misery. First, I call it a compassion of heart,
because it makes one man to put on the person of an other, and to be grieved
for the miseries of an other, as if they were his own: and therefore it is
called Col. 3. 12.
the bowels of compassion, because when a man's heart is touched therewith* his
very liver and entralls do stir in his body, and are rouled within him, as
the Hos. 11. 8.
Prophet speaks: and he is affected, as though the bowels of him that is in
misery were in his body. Secondly, I call it an ( Holy) compassion, to
distinguish it from foolish pity, whereby a man does unlawfully tender him
that is in deserved misery: such was 1. King. 20. 41.
Ahabs mercy to Benhadad, and 1. Sam. 15. 9.
Saul's in sparing Agag, whereas the express commandment of God was to the
contrary: but such mercy and compassion as God approoueth, is a fruit of his
spirit, and a virtue commended and commanded in the word of God. Thirdly, this
virtue of mercy stirs and moves the heart to help an other that is in
misery: for help in misery is a notable fruit of true compassion, neither
can these be severed: for in the compassion of the heart, and in the act of
relief, stands true mercy: and therefore 1. Ioh. 3. 17
John says, He that sees his brother in need, and shuts up his compassion
from him, how dwells the love of God in him? whereby also we may see, that no
work of mercy is showed to any man in misery, but that which comes from
compassion: and thus we see what mercy is.

Secondly, the duties of mercy are answerable to man's misery: Now The duties
of mercy.
man's misery is either in his soul, or in his body. The greatest miseries of
man are in his soul; as ignorance, impenitencie, and trouble of conscience:
man's bodily miseries are sickness, thirst, nakedness, etc. and to these the
works of mercy are answerable. Some therefore concern the soul, and some the
body. Mercy toward the soul is, when a man is careful for the salvation of
an other, using means to bring a man from spiritual darkness, unto light, from
the power of Satan, unto God, from the state of sin and the danger of hell
fire, to the state of grace in true faith and repentance, and so to life
eternal. And look how far the soul is more excellent then the body, so
far does this, work exceed any work of mercy that concerns the body:
Mercy toward the body is called Alms or Relief, whereby a man's outward
necessity, for food, raiment, or such like, is supplied: that this is a work
of mercy, is manifest, Isay, 58. 10. where the Releeuing of the hungry, is
the pouring out of the soul vnto-him: and Saint John makes 1. Ioh. 3. 17.
the not releeuing of our brother in need, to be the shutting of the door of
compassion from him.

Now by this which has been said concerning mercy, and the works thereof,
we may see who is a merciful man; namely, such a one ^ Merciful man.
as has his heart touched with compassion toward the misery of another, and
thereby is moved to help and relieve him in soul and body, according to his
estate: and such a man is blessed by the testimony of Christ himself,
howsoever in the world he may be despised.

First, here we have to consider, what a number of miserable and cursed The
use. The misery of the unmerciful, and their number.
persons do live, even in the bosom of Gods Church; for if this Rule of
Christ be true, then unmerciful men are accursed. Now such are common among
us: The Richer sort which abound in outward blessings, think themselves
happy; but if they be unmerciful, they are wretched: and such are all those,
that for the maintenance of their outward po^^pe and bravery, spoil the poor
that live under them, by enclosing of commons, racking of rents, unreasonable
fines, etc. or for the satisfying of their vain pleasure and delight, bestow
more upon hawks and hounds, then on the poor: Such a wretched person also is
the Corne-monger, who has his barnes full, and his garners full, and yet
suffers the poor to want bread, waiting still for a deerer time: Such also
are our common usurers ingrossers, and fore-stallers of needful ^
commodities whatsoever: all these seek themselves, and have no mercy on them
that are in misery: yea, such likewise are those householders, who spend their
time and wealth in some disordered course, as whoring, gaming, drinking, or
such like, and so neglect their family; these 1. Tim. 5. ^.
deny the faith, and are worse then Jews and Turks, nay then many bruit
beasts, for they are merciful, toward their own. It were an easy thing thus
to show through all estates, the great multitude of miserable persons; for now
the common proverb is become the common practice, Every man for himself, and
God for us all.

Secondly, seeing the merciful man is blessed, we must learn to put Motives
to mercy.
on tender mercy, or the bowels of compassion toward those that be in
misery. And to move us hereunto, let us mark these things: First, 1
the state of the merciful is here pronounced blessed of Christ. Secondly, 2
mercy is a gift of the spirit* and the grace of Colo^^. 12.
Gods elect, which always accompanies the happy estate of those that be in
Christ: for the power of grace does change their carnal nature, Isay, 11. 6.
7. Thirdly, hereby we become like unto God our heavenly Father, who is 3
the ^. Cor. ^. 3.
father of merci^^. Fourthly, hereby we are made instruments of Gods mercy to
them that be in misery; for God conuaies his blessings 4
unto his poor creatures ordinarily by means: We count it an high honor to
be the Kings Almner; oh then, how great is this dignity, to be Almner to the
God of heaven, to disperse his goodness and mercies among the children of men?
and hereto we are advanced, if we help the poor that be in misery.
Fifthly, the exercise of mercy commends 5
our Religion, not only before men, but unto God: for pure Iam. 1. 27.
Religion and undefiled before God is this, to visit the fatherless and
widows in their distress: and, Hos. 6. 6.
God will have mercy, and not sacrifice: therefore the Apostle bids, Heb. 13.
16.
to do good and to distribute forget not, for with such sacrifices God is
pleased. This is the fast Isa. 58. 5. 6
which God requires, to loose the bands of wickedness, to take off the heavy
burden, and to let the oppressed go free, to take off every yoke: and on the
other side, to break thy bread unto the hungry, to bring the poor that
wanders into thine house, and to cover the naked, etc.

And because this duty is so necessary and excellent, I will propou^d Rules
for the exercise of mercy. 1. Rule.
certain Rules to be observed for our furtherance herein. First, we must
exercise three of our senses; seeing, hearing, and feeling, in other men's
miseries: for seeing, Deuteronomy. 15. 9
we must be very wary it grieve us not to look upon our poor brother, but
we must see and behold his misery and distress, whether it be in soul or
body. This is the Lords practice. Israel is oppressed in Egypt, and the Lord
says, Exodus 3. 7. 9.
I have surely seen the trouble of my people, and the oppression wherewith the
Egyptians oppress them. And we must be followers of God, as dear children,
and learn to visit them that be in misery, either through sickness,
imprisonment, poverty, or such like; for sight will stir up in a man a sense
and compassion of others miseries. Hence it is said, that Math. 4. 14
when Jesus saw a great multitude, he was moved with compassion toward them.
And who can see a poor distressed person to lie in straw, or on the ground
without needful relief, as many a one would not suffer his dog to lie, and
not be moved with compassion? Secondly, if we cannot come to see a man's
misery, then we must be content to hear of it, and give heed and credit to
the true reports that others make thereof unto us. Thus did Nehemiah, hearing
of the affliction of the residue of the captivity, Nehem. 1. 3. 4. and (...).
2. 5.
he wept and mourned, fasted and prayed, and sought for relief for them at the
Kings hands. Thirdly, for feeling, if the Lord shall afflict our bodies with
sickness, or our souls with temptations, we must be willing to suffer the same
patiently, that thereby we may be fitted to take more compassion upon others in
like case, and to comfort them the better. Paul says of himself and Timothy,
that in 2. Cor. 1. 8.
Asia they were pressed with affliction above measure passing strength, so as
they altogether doubted of life, and yet (he says) the Lord dealt mercifully
with them; that they might be able to comfort others which verse. 4.
were in any affliction, with the same comfort wherewith God had comforted them.

Secondly, we must make our particular callings wherein we live, the 2. Rule.
instruments of mercy, and in doing the duties thereof show forth compassion
toward others. This Rule is of great use, and therefore it will (...).
not be amiss to show the practice of it in particular. The Magistrate must
rule and govern in mercy: and the Minister must preach in mercy: every
sermon must be a work of compassion toward the people, not only for the
matter which it contains, but for the manner of his delivery, and in the
scope and drift which he aims at: he which preaches otherways does bar
himself of all mercy, even then, when he intreates of mercy unto others.
There is a carnal and humane kind of preaching, which now adays takes place,
wherein nothing is so much regarded as the vaunting of wit, memory, and
learning, by fine contrived sentences, multiplicitie of quotations, variety of
allegations of Fathers, Schoolmen, and other learning: but herein is no
mercy nor compassion to the poor soul. It is said indeed, that none
condemn this kind of preaching, but they that can not attain unto it. But
the truth is, God will have his word delivered, 1. Cor. 24.
not in the enticing speech of man's wisdom, but in the plain evidence of the
spirit, and of power: and therefore a man can not with good conscience apply
himself to such kind of preaching, else no doubt a man of mean gifts might
find it more easy to attain unto, then to the true preaching of Christ
crucified. Thirdly, every private man must make the duties of his calling,
works of mercy: the rich man must know himself to be, not a lord, but a
steward of Gods blessings, and therefore must employ and dispense the same in
mercy, by giving and lending unto the poor freely, as God shall minister unto
him just occasion. The trades man must buie and sell in mercy, dealing justly
with the rich, and showing liberality to the poor. The master must thus in
mercy use the labor of his servant; and the servant thus in mercy do
service to his master, for conscience toward God. And happy were it with all
estates, if this rule of mercy were observed; the want whereof, is the bane of
all societies.

Thirdly, for the more cheerful practice of mercy, we must lay aside some
part of our goods, for the relief of them that be in misery. 3. Rule.
The Jews were commanded to set apart the first fruits of their corn and
cattle, for the Lords altar: but in the new Testament the altar is ceased, and
the poor come in stead thereof; and therefore we must now bequeath some thing
for their relief. Many are given to great excess in fare, and in artire; but
they may do well to abate some part thereof, and bestow it on the poor, for
hereby will the rest be sanctified to their more free and comfortable use: nay,
in case of necessity, we ought to sequester some part of our own necessaries,
for the refreshing of the poor; so did the Church of 2. Cor. 8. 2.
Macedonia, even beyond their power, give to the relief of the afflicted
brethren. Men are exceeding cold in charity, and one maine cause thereof, is
want of observing this Rule, in setting apart some thing, according as God
shall bless us in our callings, for the relief of the poor.

The second point to be considered in this rule is, wherein this blessedness
does consist; namely, in the obtaining of mercy: he that shows mercy, shall
find mercy, both with God and man. Where first, we The use. 1. Against ma^s
merits.
may see the error of the Church of Rome in their doctrine of merits: for they
make a special part of humane satisfaction, to consist in Alms deeds and
releeuing of the poor, teaching that a man may hereby merit eternal life: but
they or to grossly; for then Christ would not have said, blessed are the
merciful, for they shall find mercy: but rather thus; they shall find
justice: for that which comes of merit, is due by right. Secondly, hereby we
may see what to think of our Church, 2
and Nation; in respect of true Title to Gods mercy, for only the merciful
shall find mercy. Now it were easy to go through all orders and conditions
of men among us, and therein to show abundance of unmercifulness and cruelty;
so as we may be justly called a cruel people, and therefore can not look for
mercy at Gods hands: for to Iam. 2. 13.
the merciless shall be judgment without mercy. This is evident by the Lords
dealing with his own people: for all their sacrifices and duties of religion
were Isa. 1. 11. 12. 15.
abomination unto the Lord, because their hands were full of blood; and because
they had no mercy, therefore they were led into captivity, as we may see at
large, Ier. 5. 28. Euck. 9. 9, 10. and Zach. 9. 12. Now we being in the same
case with them for unmercifulness and cruelty, have no doubt deserved long
since the same punishment; even that the Enemy should deprive us both of
Gospel and peace, and of all our prosperity and wealth: what then shall we
do? surely we must humble our selves by prayer and fasting unto the Lord, if
not publicly, yet privately; every man and every family apart, even for this
one sin of unmercifulness: and withal in this humiliation, begin to
practice mercy, by bestowing that upon the poor, which we spare from our
bodies in the day of our fast.

Verse 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
These words contain the sixth Rule of Christ, touching true happiness; 6.
Rule.
wherein, as in the former, observe two points: the persons blessed, and
wherein their blessedness consists. The persons blessed, are thus qualified;
they are pure in heart. This is diversely expounded: By pure in heart, some
understand those that are chasse; others, those that are simple hearted, void
of guile and deceit. But the words will bear Who be pure in heart.
a more general sense, and betoken such as are holy in heart, having their
hearts purged from the defilement of their sins, and be in part renewed and
sanctified by the holy Ghost: and that they are so to be taken, may appear,
Psalm. 24. 4. whence these words are borrowed; where also the Prophet expounds
the pure in heart to be such, as have not lift up their mind to vain things:
to which purpose, the Author to the Hebrews Chap. 12. 14.
says, Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man can see
God. Again, the intent of our Savior Christ in this place, was no doubt to
cross the Pharisaicall conceit of those times, whereby men did content
themselves with outward holiness, as sufficient to true happiness; and
therefore he says, Blessed are the pure, not outwardly, but inwardly in heart.
Further, by heart we are to understand the soul, with the parts and faculties
thereof; that is, the mind, the conscience, the will, and affections. And that
we may yet conceive more clearly of this point, we are to search out two
things; first, in what manner, then in what measure the heart is made pure: For
the first, the purifying The manner of purifying the heart.
of the heart is by a twofold Action of the holy Ghost; first, by creating in
the mind a saving faith, which unites a man unto Christ, and as an hand
applies Christ's purity, that is his obedience, to the heart: so Peter
speaks of the Gentiles, in the Council at Jerusalem, that Act 15 ^.
by faith the Lord purified their hearts. Secondly, when a man is in Christ,
the holy Ghost purges and sanctifies the heart inwardly, by mortifying all
the corruptions in the mind, will, and affections, and by putting into it
inward holiness, whereby the image of Christ is renewed therein. And this our
Savior Christ expresses, John 15. 2. when he says, that the father purges
every one that brings forth fruit in him. Now unto these the holy Ghost
adds an excellent grace of Christian Resolution, whereby a man has a
constant purpose not to sin against God any way, either in thought, word, or
deed; but in all things to please God continually; so as if at any time
he-sinne, it is against his holy The measure of purification.
resolution. Now for the measure of this purification, it is only in part in
this life; for the grace of sanctification is not perfect till death, as the
Apostle says, Rom 8. 23.
we receive but the first fruits of the spirit: that is, not the Tenths, but as
an handful of corn to a whole field: the soul is freed from the punishment
and guilt of sin, and in some sort purged from corruption, but not wholly.
This we must observe the more diligently, Council. Trid. sess. 5. sect. 5^.
because the Papists teach otherwise; to wit, that after Baptism and
regeneration, sin is so taken away, that there is in man nothing that God can
hate: but experience in every child of God, shows this to be false. The
chief ground of their opinion is this, that if sin properly called, should
remain in the regenerate, then God should repute a man to be just, which is a
sinner. But we answer, that God never reputeth an impenitent sinner just, but
only the repentant, and regenerate, which are by faith in Christ, and so in
effect are no sinners, because though corruption remain in them in part, yet
it is not imputed to their persons. Besides, in the act of their conversion,
corruption has received that deadly wound, whereof it shall never recover, but
daiely die, till it be quite abolished, and therefore does it not reign in
them. And thus we see in what manner and measure the heart is purified, whereby
the pure in heart may be thus described: They are such, as Pure in heart
described.
believe the pardon of their sins in Christ, and be in part renewed in their
souls by the holy Ghost, having their natural corruptions mortified and
abolished in some measure, and the graces of Gods image repaired in the^, and a
godly resolution wrought in their hearts, not to sin against God in any thing.

Considering that the pure in heart be blessed, we must search our Uses. 1.
selves, and see whether our hearts be qualified with this grace: As in former
times, so at this day inward purity is much neglected. The ancient Jews stood
upon their legal purity and righteousness, and the Pharisees after them,
relied upon their outward holiness; and the holy Ghost foretold, that in 2.
Tim. 3. 5.
the latter days should come perilous times, by reason of sundry sins,
whereof this is one, that men should content themselves with a shadow and show
of godliness, and in truth deny the power thereof. And does not experince
show this to be true among us? for the pure heart is so little regarded, that
the seeking after it, is turned to a byword, and a matter of reproach: Who are
so much branded with vile terms of Puritans and Presitians, as those, that
most endeavor to get and keep the purity of heart in a good conscience?
Again, the general ignorance that every where abounds, does plainly argue
the want of this grace; for what can be in the heart but impuritie and
iniquity, where there is no knowledge of the will of God in the mind? And for
such as have more knowledge then the rest, generally they are not answerable
unto it in practice; for take a view of all the markets in the land, and you
shall hardly find a man that is to sell his grain, that will be brought to
abate one jot of the highest price, no not unto the poor that stand in
extreme need; which as it argues a bloody and cruel heart, so it shows
our times to be evil da^es, wherein men profess much, and do naught: which
sin will draw Gods judgment upon us, and cause the Gospel to be removed,
and given to a nation, that with profession, will join the power of godliness
in heart and life. What befell the Mat. 21. 19
sigge-tree whercon Christ sought fruit, and found nothing but leaves, was it
not accursed? and how shall we think to escape, if we be like unto it? Heb. 6.
7, 8.
for the earth that drinks in the rain that falls often upon it, and yet
brings forth briers and thorns, is near unto cursing, whose end is to be
burned.

Secondly, if the pure in heart be blessed, then we must labor to practice the
counsel of the Prophet, Isav 1. 16.
Wash you, make you clean; and and 8. 13.
sanctify the Lord in your hearts: yea as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 7. 1.
Let us purge our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit. Indeed
it is the Act. 15. 9.
work of God to purify the heart, man of himself can no more do it, then
the Black-moore can change his skin: but yet every one that would feel in
himself this work of God, must use the means, wherein the spirit does purge
the heart; first therefore, we must humble our selves unfeignedly for all the
sins and corruptions of our life already past, and for the time to come,
grow to a resolute purpose, not to finne against God in any thing: which we
must testify by a godly endeavor to obey him in all things; for a pure heart,
and a purpose to live in any one sin, cannot stand together: but this
constant purpose not to sin, is a notable grace, and an infallible token of a
renewed and sanctified heart.

The second point in this Rule is, wherein this blessedness does consist;
namely in this, that they shall see God: for the understanding hereof, two
points must be handled. First, how God may be seen; secondly, how the seeing
of God is true happiness. For the first, the Apostle says, 1. Ioh. 4. 12
no man has seen God at any time: yea further, Paul calls him, 1. Tim. 6.
16 How God may be seen.
King of kings, whom never man saw, neither can see. We must therefore know,
that there is a twofold sight in man, the sight of the eye, and of the mind;
by the sight of the eye no man can see God in his essence and substance, which
is most spiritual, and so invisible, for the eye sees nothing but things
corporal and visible: a man by his eye cannot see his own soul, and much
less the substance of God.

Object. I. But Genesis 17. 1.
Abraham and Exo. 33. (...).
Moses saw God, for he appeared unto them. Answer. They saw him not in his
nature and substance, but in certain created images and similitudes, wherein
God for that time did testify his presence unto them: some indeed say, that
though a man cannot see God in this life, yet in the life to come he shall see
him with his bodily eyes. But this opinion is not true, for though the body
shall then be perfectly sanctified, and the eye sanctified, yea glorified, yet
still it remains a true body, and a true eye, and therefore cannot see the
essence of God, which is invisible to the eye of flesh.

Object. II. I shall see God in my flesh (says Job) and mine eyes shall Job.
19. 26. 27
behold him. Answ. He speaks there of God his Redeemer, who is not God
simply, but God incarnate; for the word translated Redeemer signifies one
allied unto us in blood: now no man doubts, but God in Christ may be seen,
as John 14. 9. he that has seen me, has seen my father.

Object. III. 1. Cor. 13. 12. We shall see him face to face. Answer. God has
no face, and therefore that cannot be understood literally; but thereby is
signified, that we shall have plentiful knowledge of God, as we have of him whom
we see face to face.

Object. IV. If we shall not see God with our eyes, then they serve to no use
in heaven. Ans. God forbid; for besides the glorious company of all the
Saints, we shall therewith behold our Lord Jesus Christ, who redeemed us by
his blood, and made us Kings and Priests unto our God, to whom we shall sing
praise, and honor, and glory, for evermore, Reu. 5. 12.

The second kind of sight, is of the mind, which is nothing but the knowledge
or understanding of the mind, and that is twofold; imperfect in this life,
and perfect in the life to come. In this life, the mind knows not Gods
essence or substance, but only by effects; as by his word and Sacraments, and
by his creatures: and indeed, the special sight we have of God in this life,
is by these his effects to conceive in our minds how God is affected to us; as
that God is our Father, and Christ our Redeemer, and the holy Ghost our
Sanctifier. The perfect vision of God, is reserved to the life to come, where
Gods elect shall see him in regard of his substance: for 1. Ioh. 3 ^.
we shall see him as he is. Yet that we be not deceived herein, we must know
that perfect sight is twofold, simple, and comprehensiue: Simple perfect sight
is, when man sees a thing wholly as it is in it self, and thus God is not
seen by the mind of man. Comprehensiue sight is, when the Creature sees God,
so far forth as it is capable of his knowledge; and thus shall men see God in
the world to come perfectly, and be filled therewith, though they know him not
wholly, as he is in himself: even as a vessel cast into the sea may be
perfectly full of water, though it receive not all the water in the Sea. But
some will ask, how shall the mind see God? Ans. The manner is such, as
neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, neither can any man tell, but they
only, that have fruition of it in heaven: yet certainly such it is, as shall
give full contentment to every one that does enjoy it. But it shall be far
better for us, to seek for a pure heart, whereby we may be assured of this
blessed sight of God, then curiously to search how we shall see him: for to
them that be of a pure heart, God will reveal himself perfectly, to their joy
unspeakable and glorious.

The second point is, how this seeing of God can be true happiness. How the
seeing of God is happiness.
Answ. A man that has been blind, will count himself happy when he
receives his sight; and he that has long laien in a dark dungeon, will count
it a blessed thing, to be brought out, to see the light of the sun: now if
this bodily light be so comfortable, how endless is the joy of that heavenly
light, which comes from God himself? The 1. Kin. 10. 8
Queen of Sheba counted those servants blessed, that stood before Solomon to
hear his wisdom; then doubtless the sons of God must needs be happy, that
stand before the Lord, hearing his wisdom and beholding his glory: Psalm. 16.
11.
for in his presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures
for evermore. Moses is renowned with all posterity for this prerogative, that
God vouchsafed Exo. 33. 23
to let him see his back parts: and Christ's Disciples were so ravished with a
glimpse of Gods glory in his transfiguration, that they would needs Mat. 17. 4.
abide there still. Oh then, what glory is it to see him as he is? doubtless
this sight of God is true happiness. But then (will some man say) the devils
shall be happy, for they shall see him at the last day. Answ. Their sight shall
be their sorrow, for they shall see him as a terrible judge, not as a Savior,
with apprehension and approbation of his love and mercy, which is the sight
here meant: as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. (...). 12.
we shall see face to face, and know as we are known. So then the meaning
of these words is this, they shall see God by his effects in this life, and
perfectly in the world to come, with approbation of his love and mercy.

This gracious promise must be observed as a ground of special comfort The
Uses. (...) Comfort against reproach.
to all Gods children; for they that endeavor after purity of heart, shall
suffer much contempt and reproach in the world; but they must not be dismayed,
for God will look upon them, and show himself favorably unto them: Isa. 66.
5.
he will appear to their joy, and their adversaries shall be ashamed:
therefore they must say with David, Psalm. 118. 6.
I will not fear what man can do unto me.

Secondly, is it true happiness to see God? then in this world we must strive
to come as near unto God, as possible we can; for the nearer we come unto him,
the more we see him, and the nearer we are to our perfect happiness. Now that
we may come near unto God, we must set God always before our eyes; that is,
wheresoever we are, and whatsoever we do, we must persuade our hearts that we
are in his presence: this was David's practice, Psalm. 16. 8. I have set the Lord
always before me: this persuasion will make us to walk with God, as Enoch
did, who for this is said Heb. 11. 5.
to please God.

Thirdly, this must allure our hearts toward all those means wherein God
shows himself unto his children: the Lord revealed himself in his sanctuary
unto his people, and hereupon David was ravished with desire to Gods courts;
see Psalm. 27. 4. and Psalm. 48. 1, 2. And the like affection must we have to
Gods word and Sacraments, therein he shows his beauty, as in his sanctuary;
and therefore we must labor therein to see the goodness and mercy of God
toward us, using them as pledges of his grace and love in Christ: yea, we must
endeavor to see him in all his creatures, as his wisdom, power, and goodness
to us wards: this is a notable step to our perfect bliss.

Verse 9. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children
of God.
Here is the seventh Rule and precept of Christ touching true happiness;
wherein observe first, who are blessed; secondly, wherein this 7. Rule.
blessedness consists: The parties blessed are Peacemakers. By peace Peace.
we must understand concord and agreement between man and man: Now peace is
twofold, Good, or Evil; Good peace, is that which stands with good conscience
and true religion. This was among the conuerts in the Primitive Church, Act. 4.
3.
who lived together, and were all of one heart, and one soul. Evil peace, is
an agreement and concord in evil, as in the practice of any sin against Gods
commandments: in a word, evil peace is such, as cannot stand with true
Religion and good conscience. Hereof Christ spoke, saying, Mat. 10. 34
I came not to send peace, but the sword: that is, division by means of the
doctrine of the Gospel. Now in this place, good peace is the quality of those
parties that be blessed. Further, by Peacemakers, two sorts of men are to be
understood: first, all such as have care, so much as in them lies, to have
peace with all men, good and bad: secondly, such as not only themselves be at
peace with others, but also do labor to reconcile parties at variance, and to
make peace between man and man; both these sorts are blessed, that is, they
are in a happy state and condition, because this gift of Peacemaking, is a
grace of Gods spirit in them alone who are blessed: for where Gods spirit
works peace of conscience toward God in Christ, there the same spirit does
move the party to seek peace with all men; as also to make peace between
those that are at variance, so far forth as it may stand with Religion and a
good conscience. Yet here are certain questions to be scanned touching peace,
which will give great light to the better understanding of this Rule.

Quest. I. Seeing Peacemakers are blessed, why should they be blamed which
seek to make peace between Papists and Protestants, by reconciling these two
religions? Answer. Because this is not good peace, for there is no more concord
between these two religions, then is between light and darkness. Whereas it
is said, they differ not in substance, but in circumstances, both having the
same word, the same Creed, and Sacraments; we must know, that notwithstanding
all this, yet by necessary consequent of their doctrine and religion, they do
quite ouerturne the foundation of the Bible, of the Creed, and Sacraments: as
in the points of Justification by works, of humane satisfaction, of
worshipping Saints and Images, and their massing sacrifice, and Priesthood, may
soon appear. But they have the same Baptism with us? Answ. Baptism severed
from the true preaching of the word, is no sufficient note of a true Church;
for the Samaritans had circumcision, and yet the Lord says, Hos. 1. 9.
they were not his people. Again, they hold the outward form of Baptism, but
they ouerturne the inward power thereof, by denying Justification by faith
alone in Jesus Christ. Thirdly, Baptism is preserved in the Church of Rome,
not for their sakes, but for the hid Church which God has kept to himself,
even in the midst of all Popery: so that if they return to us, we shall
accord; otherwise we may not go to them, lest we forsake the Lord.

Quest. II. If Peacemakers be blessed, how can any Nation with good conscience
make war? Answ. The Lords commandment to have peace with all men, does not
bind men simply, but with this condition, Romans 1^* 18.
if it be possible, and as much as in us lies: but when there is no hope of
maintaining peace, then the Lord allows a lawful war, such as is for just
defense, or claim of our needful due and right: for herein the case stands
with the body politic, as it does with the natural body; while there is hope
of health and safety, the Physician uses gentle means; but when the case is
desperate, then he uses desperate means, and sometimes gives rank poison, to
try if by any means life may be saved. And so may the fafetie of a State be
sought by war, when Motions of peace will not take place.

Quest. III. How can suit in law be maintained with good conscience, seeing it
can hardly stand with this blessed peace? Ans. So long as means of agreement
other ways may be had between man and man, suits in law should not be taken
up; for Paul blames the Corinthians, not only 1. Cor. 6. 6.
for going to law under heathen Judges, but because they lawed for light
matters upon small occasions: why rather (says Verse. 7.
he) sustain ye not harm? But if by private means we cannot get or hold our
right, we may use the help of law.

Quest. IV. How far forth may one man, or one people be at peace with
another? League or society between man and man, people and people, is
twofold; either of concord, or of amity: The league of concord is, when men
bind themselves in peace one with another; and this may be had between all
men, believers or unbelievers, good or bad; Romans 12. 18
have peace with all men (says the Apostle.) League of amity is, when men or
people bind themselves one to another in special love, beside their outward
concord: and this kind of peace ought only to be had with true believers. Good
king Iehosaphat is greatly blamed of the Lord, for making this special league
with wicked Ahab, Would thou help the wicked (says 2. Chr. 19. 2*
the Prophet) and love them that hate the Lord? for this thing the Lords wrath
is upon thee.

Whereas Peacemakers are blessed, we are to be admonished, if it be uses. 1*
possible to have peace with all men, as much as in us lies; and within the
compass of our callings, to avoid all occasions of contention and strife:
Saint Paul's exhortation must here take place, Epes. 4. 3.
we must hold the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. To the effecting
whereof, three virtues are there propounded for our practice; Humility,
Meekness, Virtues preserving peace. 1. Humility.
and Long suffering. Humility is a virtue, whereby one man thinks better of
another then of himself; for this makes a man think basely of himself in
regard of his own sins and corruptions, whereupon he is content to give
place unto others, and to yield of his own right, for the maintaining of
peace: when as on the other side, pride causes men to seek for more then
their due, and so causes contention: as Solomon says, Pro. 15. 10. ^ Meekenes.
only by pride does man make contention. Meekness is a virtue, whereby a man
is gentle in behavior toward every person, good or bad: this causes a man to
put up injuries, and to forbear wrong Long suffering.
, when occasion of revenge is given him. Long suffering is a virtue, whereby a
man does bear with other men's wants, as morositie, and hastiness, and in
bearing yields of his own right, for the maintenance of peace: thus dealt
Abraham with Lot, when their heardmen were at variance, though he were the
superior both for age and place; yet for peace sake, he put Lot Genesis 13. 8. 9
to chose the place of his abode, whether on the right hand or on the left.
Besides these, there are many other virtues propounded in the writings of the
Apostles, for the maintaining of peace; to wit, Humanity, when a man can so
carry himself toward 4. Humanity
all others, that he can take well all indifferent sayings and doings, and
construe them to the best part, if it be possible: This is a most needful
virtue for Christian peace, which we must follow, and hereunto frame our nature
and affections, which are crooked and rebellious of themselves, that so far
as is possible, we may have peace with all men; for peace is the bond of every
society, of families, towns, and common wealths, without which no state can
endure; and Christian religion co^mends the same unto us, Iam. 3. 17. The
wisdom which is from above, is pure, gentle, peaceable, full of mercy, and
good fruits.

Secondly, if Peacemakers between man and man be blessed, then much more
happy are they, who make peace between God and man; and these are the
faithful ministers of the Gospel, which set themselves wholly to reconcile men
unto God: so Paul (speaking as a Peacemaker) says, 2. Cor. 5. 20
we beseech you as the Ambassadors of Christ, that ye be reconciled to God:
and therefore all those, that by Gods grace are set apart for this work, must
in sincerity set their hearts, and employ themselves diligently for this end,
to reconcile men unto God, and to bring them to peace with God; and in their
own conscience, this shall be a seal of the Lords mercy toward them,
whereby they may assure themselves that they be blessed: for howsoever unto
some, their misery may be the savor of death, yet they are always a sweet
savor unto God in Christ.

Thirdly, hereby we may see, what a blessed thing it is, in the day of Gods
wrath against his people, to stand in the breach, and by earnest prayer to
stay his hand, and so to make peace between God and his people by prayer.
This was Moses practice many a time, for which he is renowned with all
posterity, Psalm. 106. 23. Exodus 32. 10, 11. And so did Aaron, Numb. 16. 47.
48. David, 2. Sam. 24. 17. and many others. This duty concerns us, for God
has a controversy with our Land, for the innumerable crying sins hereof, as
blasphemy, oppression, contempt of Religion, adulteries, and such like: now
when we see the great mortality of our brethren, or hear of treasons and
conspiracies, and rumors of wars by enemies, who threaten our overthrow;
then must we know that God shakes his rod at us, and then especially is
every one to entreat the Lord more earnestly for mercy and reconciliation; for
this is a blessed work of peace, to stay the Lord from the destruction of his
people: Read Isay Isay 59. 16 and 63. 5.
, Jeremy Ier. 5. 7. and 12. 11.
, and Ezekiel Ezech. 2^. 30. 31.
, sundry times God complains of the want of such, as should stand in the
breach before him for the Land, that he should not destroy it. Behold the
weight and worth of this duty, in Abraham's intercession for Sodom, for he so
far prevailed with the Lord, Genesis 18. 32
that if there had been ten righteous persons in Sodom, the whole city had
been spared for their sakes: but because there were none, so soon as
righteous Lot was got out, it was burned with fire and brimstone from heaven,
Genesis 19. 23, 24.

Lastly, if Peacemakers be blessed, the Peace-breakers are cursed: many there
be of this sort, but above all, they are most notorious, who disturb the peace
of the Land, which by Gods mercy we have for many years enjoyed. It may be
thought we have none such among us, but only traitors, and such as plot with
foreign enemies; but the truth is, all those do disturb our peace, that
walk after their hearts lusts in sin and wickedness, as idolaters,
blasphemers, oppressors, drunkards, and such like, these are peace-breakers,
who cause the Lord to take away the blessing of peace: see Ierem. 16. 5. the
Lord says, He has taken his peace from his people: the reason is, verse. 12.
because every one walked after the stubbornenesse of his wicked heart, and
would not hear him: and Leuit. 26. 23, 25. The sword of the enemy is sent of
God, to avenge the quarrel of his covenant. It is then our transgression and
rebellion against God, that will bring war and rebellion into our Land; if
this were not, our peace would continue for ever: for Isay 32. 17.
the work of justice shall be peace, quietness, and assurance for ever. And
again, Isay 54 14
in righteousness shall thou be established, and be far from oppression.
This therefore should move all ungodly persons to repent, and to break off
the course of their sins; unless they will continue professed enemies to the
peace of the state, under which they live.

The second Point, wherein this blessedness of Peacemakers consists; namely,
in that they shall be called the children of God: that is, they shall be
esteemed and reputed for Gods children in this world, of God himself, and all
good men; and in the world to come, fully manifested so to be. That this is
true happiness will soon appear, by the view of the state of every child of
God; for they are united unto Christ by the spirit of grace, by which they are
regenerate, and in Christ they are adopted for sons and daughters, and so
enjoy Gods special grace and favor. Now hereupon they are Kings children,
having God for their Father, who loves them more tenderly, then any earthly
Parents can love their own children: secondly, they have Christ for their
brother, and so are heirs annexed with him, having heaven and earth for their
possession: Reu. ^. ^.
In him they are made Kings and Priests unto God: and shall be 1. Co^. 6. 1.
judges of the world at the last day: yea, they have the Heb. ^ 14.
holy Angels for ministering spirits to attend upon their persons, for their
defense from the power of the enemy, which far surpasses the dignity of any
guard of men on earth whatsoever: all things work together for the best unto
them, their crosses and afflictions are no curses, but fatherly trialls and
chastisements; yea, their sins are turned to their good: to them death is no
death, but a sweet sleep unto their bodies, and a strait passage for their
souls into eternal glory: yea in the act of death, they have the comfort of
life in the joy of the spirit, and the Angels ready, when breath departs, to
carry their souls to heaven.

If this be true happiness, to be called Gods children; then they that The 1.
use.
live after their own wicked lusts, void of all care to keep a good
conscience, are miserable and accursed; for they are the children of the
devil, serving him in the works of sin, and expressing his image in
ungodliness and worldly lusts. It stands them therefore in hand, if they have
any care of true happiness, to labor after regeneration; whereby, forsaking
the lusts and courses of their former ignorance, and embracing and obeying
sincerely the word of life, they may become Gods children, and so happy.

Secondly, have thou received this grace of Gods spirit, whereby thou 2
art inclined to have peace with all men, and to seek for peace between God
and thine own conscience, yea between the Lord and others? then comfort thy
self, thou art the child of God, these motions come from grace, flesh and
blood brings forth no such fruits: labor therefore to maintain these good
motions, with all other pledges of thine adoption, and so shall thou grow
fully assured of thine own happiness. In this age men make much ado to get good
assurance of earthly purchases; but what madness is this, so greatly to regard
momentanie things, and to have no care, in comparison, of our eternal
inheritance, which we shall have assured unto us, when we become the children
of God?

Verse 10. Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

11. Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner
of evil against you for my sake, falsely.

12. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted
they the Prophets which were before you.


Here Christ propounds his eight Rule touching happiness, which he handles
more largely then the former; for having laid down the Rule, verse. 10. he
expounds the same in a special application of it to his Disciples in the 11.
and 12. verses. In the Rule it self, note two points; first, the parties
blessed: secondly, wherein their blessedness consists. The parties blessed,
are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake. Persecution properly
signifies pursuit, such as one enemy makes after another; but here the word
must be taken generally, for all kind of persecution whatsoever. Now because it
is a paradoxe, and absurd in humane reason, to think him blessed, that for any
cause is persecuted; therefore Christ to verefie the truth hereof, repeats the
same Rule in the nextwerse, where also he expounds every parcel thereof,
wherewith I will content my self, because Christ is the best interpreter of
his own words.

In the 11. verse therefore Christ sets down three things, all pertaining to
the true exposition of this Rule: First, he explaines more particularly 1
the parties that be blessed, saying to his Disciples, Blessed are ye. In the
beginning of the Chapter, we heard, that he cast his eyes upon them, and
spoke unto them; and now here he does the like again: and therefore this Rule
must not be understood of all men in the world that suffer, but of all Christ's
true Disciples; and generally it is not true, for the heathen and infidels do
often suffer for good causes, and yet remain infidels, without the true God,
and so are not blessed. Again, a Chrstian professor may give up his life in a
good cause, yet not of love to God or his truth, but upon ambition; and so not
be blessed: for 1. Cor. ^3. 3.
though I give my body to be burned, yet wanting love, it* profits me
nothing. Secondly, Christ expounds particularly, what he means 2
by persecution, naming three parts thereof: first, slaundering and reuiling,
which is the persecution of the tongue: Thus the Jews persecuted the Apostles,
saying, Act. 2. 13.
they were drunk, or full of sweet wine: Thus Festus persecuted Paul, making
him Act. 26. 24.
mad, or beside himself. Secondly persecution, meaning hereby (as the word
does properly signify) first, pursuit, such as one enemy makes after
another, when he seeks to spoil him of his goods, or of his life: secondly,
the bringing a man unto the Bar, and there of malice to accuse and arraigne
him: thirdly, evil speaking with lying* when as men of purpose be without
cause maliciously carried thereunto, as when the Jews called Christ a Ioh. ^.
48.
Samaritan, that had a devil: and said that Luke (...). 15.
he cast out devils by Beelzebub the prince of devils; and thus were the
Christians in the Primitive Church persecuted, being maliciously accused for
killing their own Tertul. apol. cap. 7. and 16.
children, for worshipping the head of an ass, for incest, and such like. To
these three kinds of persecutions, S. Luke Chap. 6. 22. adds a fourth;
namely, hatred: and a fifth, called separation, whereby men were excommunicated,
and cast out of the Temple and Synagogues, for Christ's sake and his Gospels.
These are the several kinds of that persecution, for the enduring whereof,
Christ pronounces men blessed, verse. 10. whereof Hatred is the root, and the
rest are the branches. Thirdly, Christ lays 3
down the cause, for which, this persecution shall be inflicted; namely, for
my sake: or as S. Luke says, for the son of man's sake: which expounds this
phrase, for Righteousness sake. v. 10. to wit, for professing, believing, and
maintaining the doctrine of the Gospel taught by Christ, touching remission of
sins, and life everlasting, to them that believe.

The uses in general: We see that Christ urges this Rule of blessedness* more
largely then the former: this he does for special cause; first, hereby he
would teach his Disciples, and us in them, that it is the will Gods church must
be afdicted.
of God, his Church in this world should be under the cross, in such
affliction and persecution, as their blood shall be sought, for the maintenance
of the faith. And this he will have to be the state of his Church, for
special causes: First, that the members thereof, by their afflictions, may be
acquainted with their own wants and infirmities, which they would not much
regard, if they were freed from the cross. Secondly, that by affliction they
may be kept from many grievous sins, into which they would fall, if they
lived in peace. Thirdly, that others seeing the correction of the Church for
sin, might learn thereby to hate and avoid sin: and lastly, that the
Church might glorify God, in a constant and courageous maintenance of his
truth unto death; for even in persecution is Gods truth preserved, against the
reason of man's wisdom, patient suffering for* the truth, being faithful
witnes-bearing thereunto.

Secondly, Christ had newely called the Twelve out of all his Disciples, to be
Apostles; whereupon they might think, that they should be Luke ^. 1^.
advanced to some outward honor, ease, and peace: but Christ hereby calls
them from that conceit, and puts them in mind of affliction, which should
befall* them in time to come; that when it came, they might the better endure
it. And thus he prepares all churches to suffer affliction; yea, and we our
selves, must hereby learn in time of peace, to prepare our selves against the
day of trial, because his will is, that whosoever* would live godly in Christ
Jesus must suffer affliction.

Thirdly, hereby Christ intends, to lay a ground of comfort to his disciples in
their persecution, by a plain and full declaration of their happiness that
suffer for righteousness sake, in that they have sure title to the kingdom of
heaven; out of which estate no sound comfort can be had. And this same must we
lay up in store, against the time to come: for we live now in peace by Gods
mercy, but we know not how long it will continue; we have been threatened,
and dangerously assaulted by our enemies many a time, beside the rod of God
shaken with his own hand against us; and we may not think our peace will
last always, but seeing our sins increase, we may be sure our joy and peace
will one day be turned into sorrow: and therefore it will be good to have this
Rule engraven in our hearts, that they are blessed which suffer for
righteousness sake. If therefore tribulation come for the defense of the
Gospel, we must have recourse to this promise of blessedness, and that will be
our comfort.

More particularly: In the words of this Rule, Blessed are they, etc. The world
hates Gods Church: and ^hy ^
Christ would let us see that deadly hatred which the world bears unto Gods
Church; for so much the word (persecute) imports: The reasons of this hatred
may be these; First, the Church of God in the ministry 1
of the Gospel, seeks the ruin of the devils kingdom, who is the Prince of
the world; the devil therefore rages, and inflames the hearts of his
instruments, with malice against Gods Church, that they may persecute and quite
destroy it, if it were possible. Secondly, Gods 2
Church is a peculiar people severed from the world in profession, doctrine,
and conversation, and therefore the world hates them, Ioh. 15. 19. And this
very point may serve to stay our hearts, when we shall be persecuted for the
profession and embracing of the Gospel of Christ; for the world does hate Gods
Church, and will do to the end: there must be enmity between the seed of the
serpent, and the seed of the Genesis 3.
woman: as then he that was borne of the flesh, persecuted him that was borne
after the spirit, so is it now. Gal. 4. 29.

Secondly observe, that this hatred of the world, is not only against the
members of Gods Church, but even against Christ's holy religion; so Christ
says, for my sake: or, for my Religions sake. This is to be marked, as a most
excellent argument to persuade our consciences, that the Gospel of Christ which
we profess, is the true and blessed doctrine of God, because the wicked world
does always hate it; yea, it hates us also for the Gospels sake: now if it
were a doctrine of men, it would fit their natures well, and they would love
it, for the world does love his own. Ioh. 15. 19.

Thirdly, if they be blessed that suffer persecution; then how may any man
lawfully fly in persecution? Answer. A man may fly in persecution with good
conscience, these two things observed: first, that he be 2. Caueats about
flight in persecution.
not hindered by his particular calling: secondly, that he has liberty offered
by Gods providence to escape the hands of his enemies. The intent of this
verse, is not to forbid flight, but to comfort such as are in persecution, and
cannot escape; for the word signifies such persecution, as is by pursuit and
oppression, which cannot be avoided.

Lastly, seeing they are blessed that suffer for righteousness sake, Whether are
they always cursed that suffer deservedly for an evil cause, for the
contrary reason is in contraries? Ans. They are always accursed, save in one
case; to wit, unless they repent for their unrighteousness, for which they are
afflicted; but by true repentance they become blessed. The thief upon the
cross had lived in theft, and was therefore attached, condemned, and crucified,
and so he suffered for unrighteousness; but yet he was saved, because he
repented, and believed in Christ.

It is added, for righteousness sake: In this clause we are taught a special
lesson; namely, that when God shall lay upon us any affliction or persecution;
as imprisonment, banishment, loss of goods, or of life it self; we must
always look that the cause be good, and then suffer willingly. This is a
necessary Rule, for we must suffer affliction either publicly or privately,
if we will live godly in Christ Jesus. Now it is not the punishment, but the
cause that makes a Martyr: and to this purpose Peter 1. Pet. 4. 15.
says, Let none of you suffer as a Murderer, a Thief, or a busie-body; but
if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but glorify God in
this behalf: and therefore we must be sure the cause be good; yea this we must
look unto in our particular private crosses.

Verse 11. Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you, etc. In
handling the former verse, we showed the meaning of these words, and how they
serve to expound the former Rule. The point here to be observed is this, That
to revile and slander, yea (as Luke says) to hate a man for a good cause,
especially for religion, is persecution: which shows how fearful the common
sin of the age is, whereby men revile their brethren, with base and odious
terms, because they show some care to please God, and to adorn their
profession by a godly life. But thou art a persecutor whosoever thou art that
use this, and therefore repent and leave it, for it is a preparation to a
greater sin in this kind, and most odious in Gods sight, as the punishment
hereof declares, Genesis 21. 9, 10. with Gal. 4. 29, 30.

S. Luke adds a second word, And when they separate you, whereby Luke 6. ^2.
is meant exco^municatio^ out of the Temple and Synagogue; a punishment which
Christ foretold should befall his disciples. This censure was put in execution
in their Synagogues; for besides the administration of civil Justice,
Ecclesiastical matters were there handled. Now mark what Christ says, Though
excommunication be mine own ordinance; yet blessed are you when men
excommunicate you out of the Temple and Synagogues, for my names sake: where
he makes excommunication a kind of persecution, when it is denounced against
men for righteousness sake.

Here then we may learn, what to think of the Popes Bulls, whereby 1
he excommunicates Kings and Queens, and particular Churches, for denying
subjection to his chair: namely, that they are the devils instruments, where
with Gods children are persecuted; and that all such as are thus
excommunicated, for defending the truth of the Gospel, are blessed: for
excommunication is not the instrument of a curse to them that suffer it for
good cause. Secondly, hence we learn, that excommunication 2
abused against Gods word, is no powerful censure, though in it self, being
used according to Gods ordinance, it be a most terrible thunderbolt, excluding
a man in part, from the Church, and from the kingdom of heaven: and therefore
all Churches must see, that this censure be not abused, for the abusers of it
incur the danger of the curse, and not they against whom it is unjustly
pronounced.

Verse. 12. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven: for so
persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.
Here Christ draws a conclusion from the former Rule; for having said in
general, that they which suffer for righteousness sake are blessed, v. 10.
and applied it in particular to his Disciples, ver. 11. hereupon he infers,
that they must rejoice in affliction, even then, or as ( Luke Luk 6. 23. (...).
says) in that day: yea, they must be glad; which word signifies exceeding
joy, such as we use to express by outward signs in the body; as skipping and
dancing; such as 2. Sam. 6. 14. 1^.
David used to testify his joy, for the return of the Ark of God to his
city. This is a most worthy conclusion, often urged and commended unto us in
Scripture, Iam. 1. 2. Brethren, count it exceeding great joy, when ye fall
into diverse temptations. Romans 5. 3. We rejoice in tribulation, knowing that
tribulation brings forth patience: and Act. 5. 41. The Disciples rejoiced,
that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Christ.

Here we learn then, that Gods church and people, that suffer in a good cause
must rejoice and be glad: This must be remembered, for we ^aue been many times
in great danger of our enemies for the Gospels ^ake; and it may please God to
leave us in their hands, for our manifold sins, and great abuse of his
heavenly blessings; which if he do, what must be our behavior? must we be
swallowed up with sorrow and grief? no, but humbling our selves for our
sins, we must remember for what we do suffer, and rejoice and be glad in
that behalf; for though our outward man perish* yet the inner man shall be
revived.

Now because it is a hard thing to rejoice in grievous afflictions, therefore
Christ does give two reasons to move them hereunto; first, from the Recompense
of reward after this life, in these words, for great is your reward in heaven.
This point I have handled heretofore, and therefore Re^^l. ^ Rhemis^ this verse.
I will here only show how the Papists abuse this text, to prove the merits
of man's works of grace; for hence they reason thus, Where there is a reward,
there is merit: But in heaven there is a reward for man's works of grace; and
therefore in this life, there is merit by them. To this, it is answered diverse
ways: I will touch the heads of the principal. First, the word reward must
not be understood properly, 1.
but figuratively; for Christ's speech is borrowed from laborers, who after
they have done their work, do receive their wages, which is the reward
thereof: even so, after Christ's disciples and servants have suffered
afflictions for the name of Christ, at the end of this life they shall receive
life everlasting. Secondly, when we read of wages and reward 2*
in Scripture, we must not dream of any thing due by right of debt and merit,
but conceive thereby, that which is given by promise, and of mere mercy; like
as when an earthly Father promises to his son, to give him this or that
thing, if he will learn; now the Fathers gift is not merited by the child,
but is freely given, the more to incite the child to learn his book.
Thirdly, if we understand reward properly, 3*
then we must refer it, not to our sufferings, but to the sufferings of
Christ: for there is no proportion between our sufferings, and life eternal:
the afflictions of this present life, are not worthy of the glory which shall
be showed unto us, Romans 8. 18.

The second reason is taken from the example of the ancient Prophets; for so
persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. In this Reason, Christ
intends two things; First, to teach his Disciples and us, that persecu^ion
for good causes, is no new or strange thing: Secondly, to comfort his
Disciples and servants in their sufferings; for that thereby, they should be
made comformable to the ancient worthy Prophets, who were of old renowned among
men, and are now glory fied of God in heaven. Hereto we must compare the words
of Luke' spoken to the same purpose: Luke 6. 23.
for after this manner did the Fathers to the Prophets. By Fathers, we must
needs mean the ancient people of the Jews, for here he speaks to his
Disciples and others that were Jews by nation. Now hence observe a strange
point; to wit, that the ancient Prophets, who were most worthy men of God,
were persecuted in their time, not so much by forrainers and enemies to
religion, as by those that were outwardly members of the Church of God, and
professors of religion. This may seem strange, that men living in Gods Church,
should grow to this height of impiety, to become persecutors of Gods Saints:
but Saint Stephen gives the reason hereof; namely, their Act. 7. 51.
hard hearts, whereby they resisted the holy Ghost in the ministry of the
word; for which God left them to themselves, so as they ran headlong to this
height of impiety, to persecute Gods dearest servants. The like we may see in
these our days; some that have been professors, after long hearing, break
forth into open Atheism, calling this into question, whether there be a God:
and among others, there is also to be seen as vile cruelty and oppression in
their particular dealings, and as abominable filthiness, as is to be found
among the heathen, or Idolaters: all which, and many other enormous sins
proceed from this; that though men profess religion, yet they deny subjection
to the Gospel preached, so as it is not in them a Word of power: for which
cause, God in his justice gives them up to hardness of heart, to commit sin
without remorse. And therefore if we would escape the fearful judgment of a
reprobate sense, let us labor with fear and trembling, to become obedient to
the word which we hear; for if we do not glorify God in the means wherein
he offers grace and mercy, God will be sure to glorify himself in our
deserved confusion.

Verse. 13. Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost his savor,
etc.
In this verse and the rest, to the 16. Christ propounds the second branch of
his sermon, touching the office of the Apostles, and in them, of all Ministers;
wherein, his intent is to move them to diligence in preaching the will of God
to all people.

The Coherence of this part with the former stands thus: Christ had showed
before in diverse precepts, that many are blessed, whereupon some might ask, how
they should attain to this happiness, and to those graces of the Spirit, which
make them fit for that estate? Christ here answers, that the preaching of the
Gospel is the principal means to work in their hearts those graces, to which
true happiness is promised. And because it is an excellent privilege to bring
men to this estate, therefore he exciteth his disciples to diligence in this
Ministry by two Reasons, drawn from the properties of this work, and
propounded in two similitudes: The first is taken from salt, in these words: ye
are the salt of the earth: and amplified in the words following, to the end of
the verse. The second is drawn from light, ver. 14. 15.

For the first: ye are the salt of the earth: ye, that is, you whom I have
called to be Apostles, and set apart for the work of the Ministry, are salt;
not properly, but by resemblance; yet not in regard of their persons, but of
their ministry; because hereby they were to season men for God, and to make
them sauourie both in heart and life: Of the earth; not of Judea only, but of
the whole world, as may appear by their commission, Math. 28. 19. Go
therefore and teach all Nations.

From this description, both Ministers, and people, may learn their duty.
First for Ministers: by this title of salt hear given unto them, Christ would
teach them, first, how they ought to dispense the word Ministers must seek to
express ^he properties of salt.
of God, both Law and Gospel; namely, so as they labor therein to express
the properties of salt, whereto Christ alludeth in his Title: Now the
properties of salt, applied to raw flesh, or fresh wounds, are principally
three; First, it will bite and fret, being of nature hot and dry: Secondly, it
makes meats sauourie unto our taste: Thirdly, it preserves meats from
putrefaction, by drawing out of them superfluous moistness. The Apostles
therefore and other Ministers being salt, must not only in general deliver
the word of God unto the people; but withal apply the same particularly unto
men's hearts and consciences, as salt is applied unto meat: And that for three
ends; first the Law must be applied, to rippe up men's hearts, to make them see
their sins; it must fret and bite them by the curse thereof, to cause them to
renounce themselves, and to cry with the Jews, Act. 2. 37.
Men and brethren what shall we do? Secondly, the Gospel must be preached,
that men feeling their corruption, like rottennes in their souls, may by the
blessing of the spirit be thereby seasoned with grace, and so reconciled unto
God, and made sauourie in his sight. This is the end of the Ministry, 2. Cor.
5. 20. We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you through
us, we pray you in Christ's steed, that you be reconciled unto God. Thirdly,
both the Law and the Gospel must be continually dispensed, that thereby sin
and corruption may be daiely mortified and consumed both in heart and life;
even as superfluous humors are dried up by salt; And this is the right
dispensing of Gods word: for every discourse upon a text of Scripture is not
preaching, but he that so expounds and applies the word, that his ministry
may be salt unto his hearers, he it is that preaches the word indeed.

Secondly, Christ calling his Disciples salt, teaches them and all ministers,
that they themselves ought first to be seasoned by the word: for how can they
fitly season others by applying this salt unto their consciences, who never
felt the biting of it upon their own? He that is unseasoned himself may
speak Gods word, which God may bless to the good of others: but yet in
respect of himself, it is a riddle which can not be understood.

Thirdly, this Title gives good direction to every Minister for his manner of
preaching: for if the word of God alone be that sauory salt, wherewith man's
heart is seasoned for the Lord, then it ought to be dispensed purely and
sincerely, without the mixture of humane inventions. This was Paul's care, 1.
Cor. 2. ^* ^.
my word and my preaching (says he) stood not in the entising speech of man's
wisdom, but in plain evidence of the spirit and of power, that your faith
should not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. Experience
teaches us that salt by mixture with other things loses of his savor: and
so is it with the word: In deed there is a place for Arts and tongues, and
humane learning with every dispenser of the word, wherein he may use them with
great commendation, to wit, in his private preparation: but not in the
public dispensation whereby he seasoneth men's hearts unto God; that the word
of God alone must do, for to it alone belongs the promise of the spirit. Isay.
59. 21. And therefore he must use great discretion in this ministry, and
labor so to speak that the spirit may take delight to accompany the same.

Fourthly, this Titile teaches all Gods Ministers by patience to possess
their souls, when the wicked do fret and fume against them for their
ministry, for this is a testimony that their ministrcie is salt, and bites
their corrupt consciences as it ought to do: therefore they are to go on with
chearefulnes, endeavoring more and more to season their hearers herewith.

Secondly, the people of God that hear his word, may learn good instruction
from this Title: first, hereby every one may see what he is by nature, namely,
like unto flesh subject to corruption, nay, as unsavory flesh, and stinking
cation in the nostrels of God; for else what needed this salt? This therefore
must move us to lay aside all pride of heart, whereby we think highly of our
selves: yea, we must become base and lowly in our own eyes, in regard of the
unsavory taste of our natural corruption, else we shall never feel the
seasoning virtue of Gods holy Ministry.

Secondly, every one must hereby learn to suffer the word of reproof, whereby
his heart and conscience may be ripped up, and his sores of sin discovered:
when we have a cut or a wound in our flesh, we can be content to put salt upon
it, to dry up the noisome humors, that otherwise would corrupt; now can we
endure the smart of salt for the health of our bodies, and shall we not much
more suffer the word of God to rip up our sins, and to mortify the same, for
the salvation of our souls?

Thirdly, every one must give all diligence to be seasoned throughout, with
this heavenly salt, that the thoughts of his heart, the words of his mouth, and
the actions of his life, may be all sauourie and acceptable unto God in Christ;
yea, in his conversation with men, he must labor to show the power of this
seasoning: Coloss. 4. 6. Let your speech be gracious always and powdered with
salt: that is, seasoned by the word, that it may savor of grace, to those that
hear us. If we live under the Ministry of the word, and be not seasoned
therewith, our case is dangerous; for therein it is of the nature of salt,
which causes barrenness, where it seasoneth not: as we may see in the
practice of Abimelech, who sowed Judge. 9. (...)
salt in Shechem, to make the ground barren, and the place despised.

But if the salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be salted: it is
thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden under the foot
of men. Here Christ amplifieth the former reason, whereby he moved his
Apostles to sidelitie and diligence in their Ministry, by the danger of the
contrary infidelity, which is as unsavory salt, incurable and unprofitable,
and so subject to a fearful curse; and therefore (says Christ) you had need
to be faithful in seasoning the world by your Ministry. In this
amplification we may observe four points: First, the ordinary sin that does
accompany the calling of the Ministry. Secondly, the danger of this sin.
Thirdly, the unprofitableness of such a Ministry. Fourthly, the judgment of
God due unto it.

I. Point. As other callings have their several faults, so has the calling of
a Minister, noted in these words; If the salt have lost his savor, etc. Salt
is said to become unsavory, when it loses that virtue and acrimonie which
it has in seasoning that flesh on which it is cast. Now Ministers are as
unsavory salt, when they become unprofitable in their Ministry, and either
do not, or cannot dispense Gods word, for the seasoning of men's souls, that
they may be acceptable to God, and reconciled unto him in Christ. In this
calling, there be especially four Four kinds of unsavory Ministers.
kinds of unsavory salt; First, the blind watchmen that have no knowledge;
Isay 56. 10
and dumb dogs that cannot bark: that is, such as either cannot, 1
or if they can, will not dispense Gods word, for the salvation of men's souls.
Secondly, Heretical Teachers, who preach false and damnable 2
doctrine, such as does not season, but poison and destroy the soul: such
were the false Prophets among the Jews, who enticed to Idolatry: Deuteronomy. 30. 1,
2. and the false Apostles, and Heretics in the Primitive Church, 2. Tim 2. 1^,
1^.
whose words did fret as a canker, and destroyed the faith of many. And such
are the Romish teachers at this day, and the Jesuits and Seminaries among us,
who though they be qualified with many good gifts of learning, yet by mingling
the word of God with their own inventions, and humane traditions, they raze
the foundation, they become unsavory salt, and heretical Teachers. And here
by the way, who cannot but wonder, that students in Divinity, should so much
affect the Postils and Comments of Friars and Popish writers, as they do?
doubtless it argues that the word of God has not seasoned their hearts; for
where such unsavory salt has relish, the wholesome doctrine of Gods word
has never seasoned. Thirdly, they are unsavory 3
salt, who teach true doctrine, but yet misapplie the same. Many such were in
the Church of the Jews in the days of Ier. 23. 1^, ^7.
Jeremy and ^zek. 13. 10. 1^.
Ezekiel, who much complain, of sowing pillowes under the elbowes of the
wicked, by preaching peace unto them, when they should have called to
repentance by the discovery of their sins, and the denunciation of Gods
judgments: as also, for making sad the hearts of those, whom God has not made
sad: And such are those at this day, who have sinooth tongues, in respect of
sin, and yet are full of bitter inuectiues against the better sort. By this
means the word of God loses his acrimonie and sharpness, whereby the wicked
should be awaked out of their slumber of security, and the godly further
seasoned, and made more acceptable unto God. Fourthly, they are unsavory
salt, who 4
though they teach the truth, and generally apply it well, do yet lead
ungodly and scandalous lives: for an offensive and unsavory conversation in
the Teacher, does hinder the seasoning virtue of the word of his Ministry in
the hearts of the people; and his doctrine cannot so much edify, as his course
of life destroys, because natural men regard not so much what is said, as
what is done. This being so, all Gods Ministers, and those also that destinate
themselves to this calling, must have special care, so to be qualified for
this work, and so to preach the word of God, that it may be sauourie in the
hearts and consciences of them that hear it. This is a matter of great
importance, as well in respect of the Minister, as of the people; and thus
shall it appear, that they are not only no unsavory salt, but even such as
do season others.

II. Point. The danger of this sin, in being unsavory salt (that is
unfaithful in the Ministry) is very great, noted in these words; wherewith
shall it be salted? Some refer this salting to the earth, as if Christ had
said, wherewith shall the earth be salted? but it does more truly belong to
the salt it self, as Mark. 9. 5. Salt is good, but if the salt be unsavory,
wherewith shall it, that is, the salt it self, be seasoned? Again, the
interrogation wherewith, imports a vehement denial; as if Christ should say,
If salt once loose his natural property of saltness, it can never be
recovered: now unfaithful and unprofitable Ministers, are unsavory salt; and
therefore their danger is exceeding great. And yet the comparison must not so
be urged, as thereby to prove the state of Ministers to be incurable, if they
once become unfaithful: but Christ's meaning is, to show that unprofitable
Ministers are very hardly, or seldom ever made sauourie again; at least, if
formerly they have been faithful, and after have fallen from it. That this is
the true meaning, may thus appear; for notes of negation in as no^ not never:
and ^^terrogations impor^^ng denial.
Scripture, do not always import an absolute denial, but sometime they are
put to express great difficulty, and to show things that seldom come to
pass, Matthew. 23. 33. O generation of vipers, how should you escape the
damnation of hell? that is, very hardly: And so where it is said, that David
did not decline from the way of the Lord, save in the matter of Vriah: that is,
very seldom: for he sinned grievously in 2. Sa^. ^4.
numbering the people: so Matthew. 13. 57. A Prophet is not without honor (that
is, very seldom) save in his own country; for sometime he may be dishonored
elsewhere: and sometime also, have honor in his own country: So in this
place, this resemblance of incurablenesse in unfaithful Ministers, must be
understood, of great hardness and difficulty; not of an impossibility, as
experience also teaches: for king Solomon was a Prophet of God, who by his
adulteries and idolatry, became wonderful unsavory, and yet no doubt, he
afterward recovered, and became sauourie again by true repentance, whereupon
he penned the book of Ecclesiastes: so Peter by his denial of Christ, became
unsavory; but yet by Gods mercy, upon his repentance, he was seasoned again.

This then is the danger, that Ministers declining from fidelity, do seldom
or hardly recover: the reason is; First, because they want teachers to instruct
them, as they instruct the people: Secondly, the word in them is unsavory
which should season them, and so there is no other means to recover them
ordinarily. Go through all ages, and observe the examples of false prophets in
the old Testament, of false Apostles in the new, and of Arch heretics in
the primitive Church; and hardly shall you find any that repented: yea, mark
such Ministers as in our age incline to popery, and for the most part they
become irreuocable. Hereby then every Minister is taught to learn and practice
Paul's lessons to Timothy, To take heed unto himself, and unto learning,
continuing therein, fighting a good sight, having faith and a good conscience.
These things Paul does notably urge in that Epistle, giving good direction to
attain thereunto: 1. Tim. 4. 13. 14. 16. and 6. 11, 12.

III. Point. The unprofitableness of unfaithful Ministers, expressed in these
words; It is thenceforth good for nothing: that is, as unsavory salt,
becoming unfit to season meat, is good for nothing; (for cast it on the
ground, it makes it barren; nay, cast it on the dunghill, and it hurts that
also, which otherwise serves for good use:) so it is with Ministers that become
unfaithful, they are of all other most noisome both to the Church and
commonwealth; for Gods curse is upon them, and they are good for no society.
This might be declared by many examples, of such as having fallen to Popery,
from our Ministry, have after proved not only deadly enemies to our Church,
and to the truth, but the rankest Rebels and Traitors unto our Prince and
State, of all others.

Question. Whether may such Ministers as become unsavory salt, by making
Apostacy from the truth (as if a protestant Minister become a Masse-preist) be
restored again into the Ministry of Gods Church, upon their repentance?
Answer. Some be of mind, that they may not be received at all into the
Ministry, after such apostacy: but I find nothing in the Scripture, which
should hinder their restitution, if their conversion unto God, and to his
truth, may appear to be true and unfeigned. It is alleged, that the Priests
under the Law, falling to Idolatry, (...). 44. ^2, 13.
were for ever debarred from the Priests office? Answer. That was for special
cause; for the Priests were types of Christ, and their outward holiness
shadowed out the perfect integrity and holiness of our Saiuour Christ; for
which cause their was none chosen to the Priests office, who had any blemish in
his body. Now by such open Idolatry, they disabled themselves from being
figures of Christ, and therefore were rejected. Again, we find that inferior
officers were not debarred from their office in the Sanctuary, though they
committed idolatry, as the Priests did. It is said again, that a Minister
must be unblameable; but a Mass Priest cannot be unblameable. Answ. Without
true repentance none is unblameable; but by true repentance, even a
Mass Priest may become unblameable. But such as fall away, become unsavory
salt, which cannot be made sauourie again? Ans. By the power of God it may;
and so may an unfaithful Minister through Gods mercy be renewed by repentance,
and become profitable in the Church.

IV. Point. The curse and punishment of unsavory salt: It is cast out, and
trodden under foot of men: whereby Christ signifies, that unfaithful and
unprofitable Ministers, shall be condemned both of God and man: Hos. 4. 6.
Because thou have despised knowledge, therefore also will I despise thee. Mal.
2. 9. Therefore have I made you to be despised and vile, before all the people;
because ye kept not my way, but have been partial in the Law. See the sign
of the Lords contempt, in his fearful judgments upon them; as on Nadab and
Abihu, Leuit. 10. 1, 2. Hophni and Phinehas, 1. Sam. 2. 34. And though they may
escape his hand in this life, yet will Christ at his coming, Matthew. 24. 48,
49, 50.
cut them off, and give them their portion with Hypocrites, where is nothing
but weeping and gnashing of teeth.

The consideration whereof, must move all Ministers to beware of
unfaithfulness in their calling, lest the curse of unsavory salt light upon
them. The Carpenters who builded Noah's Arc, were themselves drowned in the
flood; because neither Noah's preaching, nor their own working did move them
to repentance: And the like judgment will befall unfaithful Ministers; though
they have the name of such as should season others, yet because of their
unfaithfulness, they become unsavory; God himself at length will cast them
out, and tread them under foot. If this were laid to heart, as it ought to be,
it would drive many from their idleness, vanity, and covetousness, whereby
they become unsavory unto God.

Verse 14. Ye are the light of the world: a City that is set on a hill cannot
be hid.

15. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a
candlestick; and it gives light to all that are in the house.

16. Let your light so shine before men, etc.


Here Christ lays down the second reason, to induce his disciples, and in
them all Ministers, to preach the word of God faithfully; as if he should say;
By calling you are the light of the world, and your condition is such, that all
your sayings and doings are open to the eyes of men: therefore be careful
that ye glorify God therein. The first part of this reason, is in these
words; ye are the light of the world: the second is expressed by two
comparisons, in the words following; A city that is set on a hill, etc. the
conclusion in the sixeteenth verse.

For the first part: ye are the light of the world. If Ministers be lights, why
says the Scripture, that John Baptist was not the light of the world? Ioh. 1.
8. Answ. There be two kinds of lights, Original, and Derived: Original is
that, which is the cause of all light; and so Christ alone is the light of the
world: and in this sense does the Scripture deny John Baptist to be that
light. Derived light, is that which shines forth, but yet is received from
another; and so Ioh. 5. 35.
John Baptist was a burning and a shining lamp: so were the Apostles lights,
2. Cor. 4. 6.
for God that caused the light to shine out of darkness, shined into their
hearts, to enable them to give the light of knowledge in the face of Jesus
Christ. And so must these words be understood, that whereas the world naturally
sits in darkness, and in the shadow of death, the Apostles by the light of
their ministry were to shine unto them.

The use: First, this title of light given to Ministers, shows the right use
of the Ministry of the word. The whole world lies in darkness, that is, in
ignorance under sin, and so subject to damnation by nature; now God has
ordained the Ministry of the word to be a light, whereby this ignorance may
be expelled, and they brought to the knowledge of their sins, and of the way
that leads unto life: Act. 26. 18. Paul must preach, that both Jews and
Gentiles may come from darkness unto light.

Secondly, by this Title, Christ shows how his word is to be handled; namely,
so as it may be a light unto men's minds and consciences, to make them see their
sins, and their great misery thereby; then, to let them see the remedy from
that misery, which is Jesus Christ: and lastly, to show them that strait way
of obedience in all good duties to God and man, which God requires in the life
of a Christian. Men may make long discourses upon a text of Scripture; but that
only is true preaching, which gives this light of knowledge to the mind and
conscience, which leads men to God.

Again, the hearers of the word must be admonished of their duties from this
title; First, if Ministers be lights in regard of their Ministry, then every
hearer must so apply his heart unto the preaching of the word, that it may
enlighten his conscience with the knowledge of his sins, and of his misery
by reason of them; as also, with the true knowledge of Christ, and of the will
of God, which may guide him in obedience: otherwise, this holy ordinance,
turns to his deeper condemnation.

Secondly, every hearer must learn Paul's lesson, Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were once
darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord, walk as children of the light:
that is, look what the word teaches, which is this light, that do: When the
time is dark, wherein we walk, we use torches and candles, that so we may see
the right path; behold, the world is darkness, we therefore must labor to
have the word of God to be a light unto our feet, in all the steps of our
callings wherein we live; for he that walks in the dark, knows not
whither he goes, John, 12. 35.

Lastly, there be many that live in ignorance, as blind, as though they had
never heard of Christ; and though they hear the word preached, yet still they
remain in darkness: but they must know, that their case is fearful, for
the Ministry of the word is light: they therefore, having the benefit
thereof, ought to be children of the light: and because they are not
enlightened, undoubtedly a most fearful judgment of God is upon them; for
mark what Paul says, 2. Cor. ^. 3. 4.
If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that perish, in whom, the god of this
world has blinded the eyes of their mind: and therefore, such persons must
labor to know and practice the special grounds and duties of true religion,
that so in conscience they may be truly assured, that the word of God is
become their light.

The second part of this reason, is this; Your condition is such, in regard of
your calling, that all your sayings and doings are seen of men: and it is
expressed by two similitudes: First, of a city set on a hill, which cannot be
hid: Secondly, of a candle put on a candlestick, ver. 15. And thus it
depends on the former part: Whereas Christ had called his Disciples the light
of the world, they might take it for a matter of some outward renown: Christ
therefore tells them, that his intent herein, is not to give them titles of
praise, but to make them acquainted with their hard condition, in which they
were like to be, by reason of their great and weighty calling; wherein they
should become spectacles to all the world: for thus he says, A City that is
set on a hill, cannot be hid, but all that pass by may see it: and a Candle
lighted and set on a candlestick* gives light to all that are in the house;
even so, you mine Apostles, by reason of your public calling, shall have all
your sayings and doings manifest to the eyes of the whole world.

Because both these similitudes serve to express the same thing, therefore the
points of instruction, which specially concern Gods ministers, shall be
propounded from the joint scope of them both. First, 1
whereas the condition of Gods ministers is such, to have their whole
conversation open and manifest to the eyes of the world; therefore they
especially, above all others, (though it concern every man in his place) must
have care that their lives and conuersatio^s, both for sayings and doings, be
holy and blameles: for their place is such, that by their well doing, they win
many unto the Lord; but by their bad conversation, they carry many a soul with
them to destruction. 2. Hereby they must learn, not to 2
think it strange, if they lie open to manifold reproaches, and abuses, more
then any other sort of men: for they, of all other, lie most open to the world;
and if their conversation be godly, it is the more distasteful to the world:
as Cain hated Abel for his good works, 1. Ioh. 3. 12. 3. Hence 3
it appears, that men in this calling, cannot without great sin, hide the
gifts and talents which God has given them; for they are as lighted candles,
which must not be put under a bushel. Sundry men have heretofore offended
this way, as those in the Primitive Church, who being godly men, and well
qualified for the Ministry, did yet withdraw themselves from public
societies, to live in solitary places; for by their gifts they were excellent
lights, and therefore they ought to have shined forth to others. And at this
day, they offend this way, that will not abase themselves in their Ministry,
to speak plainly, to the meancapacitie of the simple: yea, they also put the
light under a bushel, who being fit for this Ministry, do spend their
days wholly in the Universities, except it be that they want a calling into
the Church, and have a lawefull calling for their stay in the Universities:
and though men have not such means of calling forth, as were to be wished, yet
they that live in Schools of Learning, ought to show themselves willing to
become lights abroad in the Church; saying with the Prophet Isaie, when his
lips were touched with a cole from the Altar, Isay, 6. 8.
Here am I, Lord send me. In a word, all persons in this calling, that any way
hide their gifts, are here blamed; for they are lights which should not be
hid.

From these comparisons, wherein Christ sets out the open state of his Apostles
to the view of the world, the Papists do gather, that the Rhem^sts on this
place.
Church of God cannot be hid, and therefore visibilitie must needs be the note
of a true Church. But we must know, that Gods Church may sometime lie hid, in
regard of the word* and the Ministry thereof; as it did in the days of 1.
Kin. 9, 10
Elias, and in the time when Popery spread it self over these Western parts.
Neither does this place make ought against us, for Christ here speaks of his
Apostles, and of their ministry properly, which could not be hid; and not of
every ordinary Minister, who are not lights of all the world, as the Apostles
were, but only in their particular standing. Secondly, the Ministry is a
light, yet not always shining to the whole world; and therefore it is added in
the second similitude, that it gives light to them that are in the house: that
is, in the Church of God. And so in the darkness of Popery, the Ministry
of the Gospel was hid from the world, and yet it gave some light to the
hidden Church, the house of God, to show them their calling, and the means of
salvation.

Now, as these similitudes concern the Ministers, so they may well be enlarged
to every Christian in his place: for in this regard the Minister is a pattern
to his people, and many times in Scripture others besides the Ministers are
called lights, 2. Sam. 21. 17. David is called the light of Israel; not only
for the comfort of his Regiment, but also as he was a King, by his upright life
he gave light to the people, whereof he was governor: And so answerably, all
Superiors in their places must be lights; the public magistrate, to the
common wealth; the master, to his servants; parents, to their children; and
every Christian, to his brother: Philip. 2. 5. Shine as lights in the world, in
the midst of a naughty and crooked nation. This therefore is our duty, if
we be Christians; as we must labor to get the knowledge of Gods will into our
hearts, so must we cause the power thereof to shine forth in the example of a
good life, whereby others may be directed in the darkness of this world. But
alas, here in the case of many is lamentable, who thorough ignorance and
disobedience, be yet in darkness; these must be taken out of their places,
as dark candles, and trodden under foot, and so cast into eternal darkness;
where they shall flame in woe for evermore.

Verse. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your father which is in heaven.
This is the conclusion of this reason; where, by shining, is meant
ministerial teaching, whereby they make known Gods will unto his people:
wherewith, he also requires answerable practice in a godly life: as if he
should say, Seeing by your calling you are so conspicuous to the world,
therefore look to the evidence of your Ministry, and to the holiness of
your lives, that so the people may not only hear your doctrine, but also see
your good works, and thereby be moved to follow the same, and so to glorify
God in heaven.

A most worthy conclusion, wherein observe two points touching the ministry
of the word: First, in what manner Ministers must teach the word: Secondly, the
end of all teaching. For the first: Gods word must first be preached, that men
may hear it: secondly, therewith must go an unblameable conversation,
bringing forth good works, that men therein may see the will of God. Here then
are two parts of a ministers 2. parts of a Ministers office.
office, Doctrine, and good life; and they must go together in him that is a
good Minister. He that teaches to write, will first give rules of writing to
his scholars, and then set them copies to follow; and so does every master in
his Art: there is no learning of any thing, unless examples go with rules.
Again, God will have men to learn his will two ways; by Hearing, and Seeing:
the Minister therefore, that is to teach Gods will, must not only by doctrine
instruct the ear, but by a godly life exemplify his doctrine unto the eye: 1.
Tim. 4. 12. Be unto them that believe, an example in word, and in conversation.

In regard of this double charge, that lies on every Minister, the people Use.
for their parts, must remember, in all their prayers to ^raue of God, that the
Ministers may be enabled to teach Gods will, both in doctrine and life. The
Apostle Paul does sundry times require the Churches to whom he writ, to pray
for him in regard of his Romans 1^. 3^ 2. Cor. 1. 1^. ^ph. 6. 19. Colos. 4 3. 2.
These. 3. 1.
Ministry. Now if so worthy an Apostle had need to be prayed for, much more
has every ordinary Minister in Gods Church. And great reason it should be so,
for the devil stands Z^k. 3. 1.
at Iehoshuahs right hand to resist him: 1. Th. 2. 18.
he hindered Paul from coming to the Thessalonians. Though he malign every
believer, yet he aims especially at the Minister, that he may cause him to
fail, if not in teaching, yet at least, in the exemplifying of his doctrine,
by a sincere and godly conversation.

Now, because Christ requires of every Minister, besides teaching, the evidence
of good works in a godly life; therefore here I will handle this point of good
works: and first show what a good work is: secondly, Of good works.
the differences of good works: and then observe the necessity, the dignity,
and use of good works.

I. Point. A good work, is a work commanded of God, and done by a A good
work described.
man regenerate in faith, for the glory of God in man's good. First (I say) it
is a work commanded of God, for Gods will is goodness it self, and the Rule
of all goodness in the creature; and every good thing is therefore good,
because it is answerable to the will of God: no work therefore can be good,
unless it be appointed, ordained, and commanded of God: men indeed may invent
and do many good works, but they shall have no goodness in them, unless
they do accord with Gods will. Again, good works must be done in obedience to
God: now, unless God appoint them, the doing of them cannot be any obedience
to his will. Thirdly, will worship, whereby men thrust upon God their own
inventions for his service, is every where Col. 2. 22, 23. Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
condemned: and of like nature be all those actions, wherein men of themselves
do fasten goodness, without the will and appointment of God. This point must
be remembered, because the Church of Rome does teach the contratie; Bellarm^.
de Mona. l. 2. c. 7
That a man may do good works, not required or appointed by God: but the
former Reasons show this to be false; and the arguments which they bring for
their opinion, are nothing but abuse of Scripture, as in these few may plamely
appear.

First, they say, the Jews Levit. 7. 1^
had free will offerings, which were not Object 1.
commanded in the word, and yet were acceptable unto God; and so do many now
adays many good works acceptable to God, though not commanded. Answ. Their
free will offerings were ordained of God, and therefore were acceptable: they
were only free, in regard in the time of offering them; but for the manner
how, and the places where they must be offered, both these were appointed of
God.

Again, they say, Phinees Psalm. 106. 30, 31.
slew Zimr^ and Cosbie with Gods approbation, Object. ^.
though he was no Magistrate: and therefore works not commanded of God, may
be acceptable unto him. Ans. Though Phinees had not any outward commandment,
yet he had that which was answerable thereto; to wit, an extraordinary instinct
by the spirit, whereby he was carried to do that fact; which was as much, as if
God had given him an express commandment. And so we may say of the Ministry
of sundry ancient Prophets, who by extraordinary instinct were moved
thereunto: and upon this ground did 1. Ki. 18. 40.
Elijah slaie Baals Prophets.

Thirdly, Mary's fact (say they) in Mat. 26. 7.
pouring a box of costly ointment Object. 3.
on the head of our Savior Christ, was a good work; and yet there was no
commandment for it in Gods word. Answer. Mary's fact was a work of confession,
whereby she testified her says in Christ, and so was generally commanded,
though not in particular. Again, she was carried thereto by a special
instinct of the spirit, for verse. 12.
she did it to bury him, (as Christ himself testisieth) because his burial
was so speedy after his death, in regard of the approaching of the sabbath,
that they could not embalme him, as the manner of the Jews was; now every
instinct of Gods spirit in the conscience of the doer, has the force of a
particular commandment.

Fourthly, the spirit of God (say they) mooues every man to any Obict* 4.
good work that is to be done; and therefore men need not a particular
commandment for every work; for those that are carried by the spirit, cannot
but do well? Answer. True it is, the spirit moves men to good works freely,
but yet this motion of the spirit, is in and by the word of God; and at this
day, those instincts which are besides the word, are men's own fancies, or
illusions of the devil. Many other reasons they allege to this purpose, for
the Justifying their vows of Chastity, of regular obedience, pilgrimages,
trentals, and such like; but they are like to these, and notwithstanding them
all, the truth is this; that for substance, a good work is such a one, as is
ordained, appointed, and commanded by God. And here by the way, we may observe,
that they are far deceived, who so much commend the times of Popery for good
works; for the truth is, that all their oblations to Images, to Monasteries,
and to Churches, for Masses, Pardons, and such like, were no good works, but
only in their own opinion; for God commanded them not: Now it is the Lords
revealed will, that must give the goodness to man's work: Mich. 6. 8. he has
showed thee O man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee.

Next I add: Done of a regenerate person. The Author of a good work, is not
every one in the world, but that man or woman that is a member of Christ, borne
a new by the holy Ghost: so Christ here says, Let your light etc. restraining
his speech to the persons of his disciples. True it is, that among Turks and
Infidels, many a civil man will do works of mercy, of civil justice, and
liberality, and will abstain from outward sins, and live orderly; now
these, and such like, though in themselves they be good works, so far forth
as they are required by the law of nature, or commanded by Gods word; yet in
an infidel, or an unregenerate person, they are sins: for first, they proceed
from an heart which is corrupt with original sin, and with unbelief (for
the Mat. 12. 35.
heart is the fountain of all actions) and also they are practiced by the
members of the body, which are weapons of unrighteousness; and therefore must
needs be like unto water springing from a corrupt fountain, and running
through a filthy channel. Secondly, these works are not done for Gods glory,
and the good of men. Thirdly, they are not done in obedience to God, according
to the Rule of goodness, the will and word of God, and therefore cannot be
good works. And this must teach every one that would do good, to labor for
regeneration by the holy Ghost, that so his person may be good, and then shall
his works of obedience be good in Gods sight; for such as the tree is, such
will be the fruit: An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit, nor a good
tree evil fruit: Matthew. 7. 18. We must therefore labor to be engraffed into
Christ, for without him, we can do no good thing; but being pa^takers of his
grace, we shall abound with the fruits of rightcousnesse, which are by Jesus
Christ, unto the praise and glory of God. Phil. 1. 11.

Thirdly, I add; that good works must be done in faith: for says is the
cause of every good work, and without faith it is impossible to do any good
work. Now, in the doing of a good work, there is a twofold faith required:
First, a general faith, whereby a man is persuaded that God requires of him,
the doing of that work which he takes in hand: as when a man gives alms, he
must be persuaded it is Gods will he should give alms; and so for other good
works: for Romans 14. 1^.
what soever is not of faith, is sin: that is, whatsoever proceeds not from
this persuasion in the conscience, that it is Gods will that such a thing
should be done, or should not be done, is sin; for he that doubts of the
thing he does, sins therein, though the thing done be good in it self.
Secondly, herein is required Justifying faith, whereby a man is persuaded in
his conscience, of his own reconciliation with God in Christ: of this it is
said, Heb. 11. 6. Without faith it is impossible to please God. This Justifying
faith has a double use in the causing of a good work: First, it gives the
beginning to a good work; for by justifying faith, Christ with his merits is
apprehended, and applied to the person of the worker, and he thereby is united
to Christ, who renueth the mind, will, and affections of the worker, from
whence the work proceeds; and so it is as pure water, coming from a cleansed
fountain. Secondly, faith covers the wants that be in good works, (for the
best work done by man in this life, has it wants:) now faith apprehends
Christ and his merits, and applies the same unto the worker, whereby his
person is accepted, and the imperfection of his work covered in the sight of
God; and this must provoke us to labor for faith.

Lastly, I add; the end of a good work; namely, Gods glory in man's good. The
honor of God, must be the principal end of every good work: now Gods
honor stands in reverence, obedience, and thankfulness; so that when we do
any good work, we must do it in reverence unto God, in obedience unto his
commandments, and in token of our thankfulness unto him, for his manifold
mercies. The good of man must herein also be respected; the Apostle says, Gal.
5. 14.
The Law is fulfilled in one word, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self:
how can this be, seeing to love the Lord our God is the great commandment of
the Law? It must therefore thus be understood: that the law of God must be
practiced in the love of our neighbor, and not apart by it self. Again, the
end of a man's life, and of all his actions, is to serve God, in serving of
man, and by serving of man, to serve God; as when we pray (which is a good
work) we must not only respect our selves, but pray for others; as for the
Church of God, and for our brethren, as well as for our selves: yea, and for
our enemies. So we must hear the word, and receive the Sacraments, that
thereby we may be better able to further our brethren in the way of salvation:
this our Savior does here express, saying, ( that they may see your good
works, and glorify your father in heaven:) as if he should say, Glorify you
God, and also cause others to do the same.

First, here we may see what to judge of the works done by Papists: The use.
It is commonly thought that they abound with good works, but it is not so;
their best works are sins before God, for they fail principally in the
maine end of well-doing, which is to glorify God, in the good of men: for a
Papist doing a good work, according to the Rules of their religion, does it to
satisfy Gods justice, for the temporal Tollet. instruct. sacer. lib. 6. cap.
21.
punishment of his sins, and to merit heaven by it; and so erreth quite from
the right end of a good work, respecting therein, his own good, and nothing at
all the good of others.

Secondly, hereby we may see, for our selves, how far we come short in our
good works, for commonly we fail in the maine end thereof: men spend their
days and strength in labor and toil, but all is for themselves, for their
own pleasure, their own profit and preferment, without respect to the good of
their brethren: now all such actions wherein men seek themselves only, and not
Gods glory in the good of others, be sinful in the doer, though otherwise
good in themselves. And therefore we must learn, in all our actions, to aim
at the glory of God, in the good of men.

II. Point. Thus we see what a good work is: now follow the differences Two
sorts of good works.
of good works. Good works be of two sorts: First, those which God in his
word has directly commanded, as parts of his worship; 1
such are prayer, thanksgiving, receiving the Sacraments, hearing the word,
and releeuing the poor; and these are the more principal kinds of good
works. The second sort, are actions indifferent, sanctified 2
by the word and prayer, and done to Gods glory; as to eat, to drink, and
such like; for howsoever in themselves they be neither good nor evil, being
things neither commanded, nor forbidden; and therefore in respect of the things
themselves, may with good conscience be either used, or refused: yet because
God has commanded the manner how they must be used; namely, by being
sanctified by the 1. Tim. 4. 5.
word of God, and prayer; and the end thereof, to wit, Gods glory; therefore
when they are so used, they become good works.

Upon this difference of good works, observe the largeness thereof, how far
they extend. There be three estates ordained of God, the Church, the Common
wealth, and the Family; and for the preservation of them, there be sundry
callings required; some whereof, are prescribed of God, and others left to be
appointed by men; as all trades, and such like: now not only the callings
appointed by God, and the duties thereof, are good works; but even all
inferior callings, appointed by men, for the good of these three estates; and
the duties thereof, be they never so base, if they be sanctified by prayer,
and done to Gods glory, are good works. Example. A man is called to be a
shepherd, and does willingly accept thereof; now, though the calling be but
base and mean, yet the works thereof being done in obedience to God, for the
good of his Master, are good works; yea, as good in their kind, as the best
works of the highest callings: and the same may be said of all lawful
callings, and the works thereof, be they never so base; for God judges not
the goodness of the work, by the excellency of the matter whereabout it is
occupied, but by the heart of the doer. This point must be learned, for the
Papists conceit does stick fast in men's hearts, That there are no good works,
but the building of Churches, and Hospitals, the mending of high ways, giving
of large alms, etc. but we must learn, that every action of a man's lawful
calling, done in obedience to God, for the good of men, is a good work before
God: and therefore we must so walk every one of us in our callings, that the
duties thereof may be acceptable to God. Again, this will hence follow, that
in these our days, we may as well abound in such works as be good indeed, as
the Papists did in their superstitious. Thus much of the differences of good
works.

III. Point. Now more particularly, in the text are further set down 1
three points touching good works: the Necessity, the Dignity, and
Necessity of good works.
the Use of good works. The necessity of them appears by Christ's commanding
of them, saying, Let your light so shine, etc. for hereby he binds all
Christians, after the example of his Disciples, to walk in good works. If it
be said, that Christ has freed us from the law, and therefore we are not bound
to do good works? I answer, Christ has freed us from the law, in regard of
the curse and rigor thereof; but not as it is a rule of Christian obedience.

Quest. How far forth are good works necessary to salvation, or to us that
do them? Ans. There be three opinions touching the necessity Bellar. de
Justify. l. 4. c. 7.
of good works: First, of the Papists, who hold them necessary, as causes of
our salvation and justification; but this we have confuted heretofore.
Secondly, of some Protestants, who hold them necessary, though not as
principal causes, (for they say, we are only justified and saved by Christ)
yet as conseruant causes of our salvation: but the truth is, they are no causes
of salvation, neither efficient, principal, nor conseruant; nor yet material,
formal, or final, as has elsewhere been showed. The third opinion is the
truth, that good works are necessary, not as causes of salvation, or
justification; but as inseparable consequents of saving faith in Christ,
whereby we are justified and saved; or as a way is necessary to the going to a
place. The dignity of good 2. The dignity of good works.
works is expressed in this, that they are called good: now they are good only
in part, not perfectly, as I show thus: Such as the tree is, such is the
friute; but every one regenerate is partly spirit, and partly flesh: that is,
in part regenerate, and in part natural and corrupt: this is true of his
mind, will, and affections, which are the fountain of all his actions; and
therefore the works that proceed thence must needs be answerable; that is,
in part corrupt, as they come from nature; and yet good in part, as they come
from grace.

Quest. But how can God approve of them, if they be evil? Ans. We must
consider good works two ways: First, in themselves, as they are compared with
the law, and the rigor thereof, and so they are sins, because they answer not
to that perfection, which the law requires: for there be two degrees of
sins; Rebellions, which are actions flatly against the law: and Defects,
when a man does those things that the law commands, but yet fails in the
manner of doing, and so are man's very best works sins. Secondly, consider
good works, as done by a person regenerate, and reconciled to God in Christ,
and so God accepts of them; for in Christ the wants thereof are covered. But
here we must take heed of the Romish doctrine, Bellar. de Iustif. l. 4. ^. 15,
^7.
which teaches that good works are so far forth good, that there is no
sin in them: their reasons are many to prove this point, but they have been
heretofore confuted: First, they say, good works have God for their Author,
and therefore are perfectly good? Answ. This were true, if he alone were the
author of them; but man is another author thereof, from whom they take their
imperfection. They say again, that here they are called good, but if they had
any sin in them, they should be called evil; for every sin is perfectly
evil? Ans. Where sin is vnremitted, it is perfectly evil; but when it is
pardoned in our Savior Christ, it is as though it were not. Thirdly, they
object, that if good works be sinful, then they must not be done; and
hereupon they say, that by our doctrine men are bound to abstain from all good
works. Answer. That which is evil must not be done, so far forth as it is
evil: now good works are not simply and absolutely evil; they are good in
themselves, and in us in part, coming from grace: and therefore they must be
done, because God requires them at our hands; and for the imperfection of them,
we must pray for pardon in our Savior Christ. And here by the way, we may
justly tax the proud doctrine of the Papists, who teach, that men may be
justified by good works; when as the best works of any man, in this life, are
tainted with sin, and are far unanswerable I^^^ ^. 4. ^
to that perfection, which the law requires: we must be of a far other
mind; namely, that for our best works, God may justly condemn us; because
we have not done them as we ought: therefore Christ bids us say of our selves,
that when we have done all that we can, we are unprofitable servants.

The use of good works is here set down by our Savior Christ, to The use of
good works.
glorify God: this is not the whole end of good works; and therefore I will
propound the same more fully, out of other places of Scripture; for Christ here
only propounds that end of good works, which concerned his intended
purpose.

The use and end of good works is threefold; either concerning Three fold.
1. Concerning God.
God, our selves, or our brethren. As good works concern God, they have three
uses: First, they serve as means whereby 1
we give unto God testimony of our homage, and obedience unto his
commandments; for by creation, preservation, and redemption, he is our Lord
and our God, and so prescribes laws for us to keep: in which regard, we owe
homage unto him; which, that we may show forth and testify, we must walk
in good works, as he in his word has commanded us. Secondly, they serve to
be tokens of 2
our thankfulness unto God, for our creation, redemption, and manifold
preseruations, both in soul and body. Thankfulness indeed, is showed in
word; but yet true thankfulness stands in obedience: and our obedience is
showed by doing good works. And therefore the Apostle Paul exhorts us, to give
up our bodies, as holy and acceptable sacrifices unto God, Romans 12. 1. Thirdly,
they serve to 3
make us followers of God: we are commanded to be holy, as he is holy, 1. Pet.
1. 15. and to put in practice the duties of love one toward another, Ephesians. 5.
1, 2.
as the Lord loved us: and therefore we must walk in the duties of the Moral
law, that therein we may imitate God: 1. Ioh. 3. 3. He which has this hope
purges himself, as he is pure.

Secondly, the use of good works in regard of our selves, is fourefold 1.
Concerning our selves.
especially: First, they serve to be outward testimonies of the truth of our
faith and profession; proouing that the grace of our hearts 1
is not in hypocrisy, but in truth and sincerity. And for this cause, Iam. 2.
21.
Abraham is said to have been justified by works; because his works did
testify that his faith was true and sincere: for where the fire of grace is,
there it cannot but burn; and where the water of life is, it cannot but slow
and send out the streams thereof, in good works.

Secondly, they serve to be signs and pledges of our election, justification, 2
sanctification, and of our future glorification: as we know a tree to live,
by the fruit and budde which it brings forth; so by keeping a continual
course in good works, a man is known to be in Christ, and to have true title
to all his benefits: and therefore when the Apostle wills men, to 1. Pet 2.
5, 6
give all diligence to make their calling and election sure, he propounds
certain virtues, wherein they ought to walk, as being the most evident
tokens of election, that we have in this life.

Thirdly, they serve to make us answerable to our holy calling: for every 3
one that professes the Gospel, is called to be a member of Christ, and a new
creature, whose duty is to bring forth good works, Ephesians. 4. 1, 2. Walk worthy
of the vocation whereunto you are called, with all humbleness of mind,
meekness, etc. and Ephesians. 2. 10. Ye are the workmanship of God, created in
Christ Jesus, unto good works, which God has ordained that we should walk
in them. Now this is a most excellent thing, for a man to be answerable to his
calling: When David was a shepherd, he kept his fathers sheep, and lived as
a shepherd; but when he was called to be a King, he behaved himself like a
King, Psalm. 78, 72.
in governing Gods people: and so every Christian ought to do; being a new
creature, he must walk as Gods child, and testify his vocation by showing
forth the virtues of him that has called him, 1. Pet. 2. 9.

Fourthly, good works serve to be a way, in which we are to walk, 4
that so we may receive the mercies of God promised to his children, and
escape the Judgments threatened against sinners: for Gods word is full of most
sweet promises unto the obedient, and of terrible threatening against rebellion
and iniquity. Now a man by walking in good works, eschewes the paths of
wickedness, wherein Romans 3. 16.
Gods judgments light; and holds the ways of righteousness, wherein Gods
blessings are scattered, Prou. 3. 17.

Thirdly, the end of good works, in regard of our brethren, is principally
this; that by our example in well doing, we may win some unto God, and keep
others in the obedience of the truth, and prevent offenses, whereby many are
drawn back. The contagion of a badde example, especially in men of superior
place, is such, that it will not only cast their own souls to hell, but also
draw many with them. When Jeroboam the King sinned, he caused Israel to sin:
1. Kings 15. 34. And therefore we must carefully look to all our ways, in
regard of others, and so live according to Christ's commandment in this place,
that others seeing our good works, may be won to the truth, and so glorify
God which is in heaven. And thus we see the ends of good works.

Now considering good works be of such excellent use, we are hereby admonished
to exercise our selves therein, with all diligence; for hereby we benefit our
brethren, we help our selves, and we glorify God: neither must any man's
poverty hinder him from this duty, for not only alms deeds, and large
gifts to Churches, and high ways, are good works; but also the special
duties of every man's lawful calling, done in faith, to the glory of God, and
the good of men, be the calling never so base: by the doing whereof, in faith
and obedience, he may get sure testimony of his election. This exhortation is
most needful, for so soon as men have occasion to commit any sin, then they
shake off the yoke of all obedience, as there were no way of good works to be
walked in. The Papists indeed make the merit of justification, and life
everlasting, the end of good works; but that has bin sufficiently confuted
heretofore.

Hitherto we have spoken of the first point in this conclusion, touching the
manner of teaching.

The second point herein contained, is the end of all teaching; namely, to
turn men unto God, and thereby to bring them to glorify God. That men may see
your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven: that is, so
teach, that men may see your good works, and be won thereby to the faith,
and so glorify God. Our Savior Christ his Commission given to his Disciples
before his ascension, bids them, Mat. 28. 19
God, make all nations my Disciples: and Paul says, that 1. Cor. 9. 22
he became all things to all men, that by all means he might not only
instruct, but save some.

Hereby then all Ministers, and all those that set themselves apart for this
calling, must learn to propound this unto themselves, as the maine end of all
their studies and labors; namely, to turn men unto God, that being converted
they may glorify God. Again, the same end of the Ministry admonishes all
hearers so to yield themselves obedient to the Ministry of the word, that it
may take place in their hearts, to turn them unto God, that after their
conversion they may glorify God. This the people ought the ra(...) to yield
unto, because it is the maine comfort that the Minister has of all his
labors, to see his hearers converted, and so enabled to glorify God. And to
move them hereunto, they are further to know, that if they hear, and be not
thereby converted, that so they may praise and glorify God, by their
obedience; then this Ministry will be a Bill of Indictment against them, for
their deeper condemnation at the last day. See Matthew, 11. 21. 24.

Verse 17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets: I am
not come to destroy them, but to fulfill them.
In this verse, and the rest which follow, to the end of this Chapter, The
third part of Christ's sermon.
is contained the Third part of Christ's Sermon; wherein he goes about to
restore the Moral law to his true sense and meaning, which was much corrupted
by the Jewish teachers. And to the end the same might be the better accepted,
he makes way thereto by a notable Preface, verse 17, 18, 19, 20. Wherein he
seeks, as well to prevent and to remove the false opinion which the Jews had
conceived of him, in respect of the Law; as also to procure all reverence and
loyalty to be showed thereunto: For the Jewish teachers seeing our Savior
Christ condemn and neglect the traditions of the Elders, and not so much to
respect the ceremonies of the Law, as they thought he should, did thereupon
judge him to be a deceiuer, and one that went about to ouerturne the whole
law* of Moses. This opinion Christ confuteth by three arguments: First, from
the end of his coming, in this verse: The second, from the nature of the law,
in the 18. verse; whereupon he infers two notable conclusions, to procure
reverence thereunto, verse 19. And thirdly, from the scope of his Ministry,
verse 20.

For the first: The Exposition. Think not that I am come, etc. This coming of
Christ, must be understood of the manifestation of the godhead in our nature:
for otherwise, his godhead being every where* cannot be said to come properly;
and as for his manhood, it had not The law in general.
been in heaven. To destroy the Law* The Law in general, is that part of Gods
word, which commands things just, honest, and godly; and being thus
conceived, it is threefold; Ceremonial, Judicial, and Moral. The Ceremonial
law, is that part of Gods word, which prescribed Ceremonial.
to the Jews, ceremonies, rites, and orders, to be performed in the worship
of God: this law is laid down in the books of Moses, especially in Leuiticus.
The Judicial law, is that part of Gods word, which Judicial.
prescribed ordinances for the government of the Jews common wealth, and the
civil punishment of offenders: The Ceremonial law concerned the Jews
only: the Judicial law did indeed principally concern them; but yet so
far forth as it tends to the establishing of the Moral law, having in it
common equity, it concerns all people, in all times and places. What the
Moral law is, I Moral.
will describe in three points: First, It is that part of Gods word, concerning
righteousness and godliness, which was written in Adams mind by the gift of
creation; and the remnants of it be in every man by the light of nature: in
regard whereof, it binds all men. Secondly, it commands perfect obedience,
both inward, in thought and affection; and outward, in speech and action.
Thirdly, it binds to the curse and punishment, every one that fails in the
least duty thereof, though but once, and that in thought only: Galatians 3.
10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in
the law, to do them. The sum of the Moral law is propounded in the
Decalogue or ten Commandments, which many can repeat, but few do
understand.

That we may further conceive aright the Moral law, we must Difference
between the Law and the Gospel.
make a difference between it and the Gospel: for the Gospel is that part of
the word which promises righteousness and life everlasting to all that
believe in Christ: the difference between them stands especially in five
things.

First, the Law is natural, and was in man's nature before the fall; but 1
the Gospel is spiritual, revealed after the fall, in the covenant of grace.

Secondly, the Law sets forth Gods justice, in rigor, without mercy; 2
but the Gospel sets out justice and mercy, united in Christ.

Thirdly, the Law requires a perfect righteousness within us; but 3
the Gospel reuealeth our acceptance with God, by imputed righteousness.

Fourthly, the Law threatens judgment without mercy, and therefore 4
is called 2. Co ^3. 7. ^.
the ministry of condemnation, and of death; but the Gospel shows mercy to
man's sin, in and by Christ, if we repent and believe. Lastly, the law
promises life to the worker and doer of it; Romans 10. 5.
Do this, and thou shall live: but the Gospel offers salvation to 5
him that works not, Romans 4. 5.
but believes in him that justifies the ungodly: not considering faith, as a
work, but as an instrument apprehending Christ, by whom we are made righteous.

The Church of Rome in a manner confound the Law, and the Gospel, Tonens.
August. Confess. lib. 2. cap. 6.
saving that the Gospel, which is the new Law, reuealeth Christ more clearly
then Moses Law did, which they call the old Law. But this is a wicked opinion,
which ouerturnes all religion, being the cause of many gross points in
popery, which could not stand, if they would acknowledge a true distinction
between the Law and the Gospel. They say for their defense, that the precepts
of both, are the same Bellar. de Justice. l. 4. c. 3.
for substance; that both require righteousness, both promise life, and
threaten death; both command faith, repentance, and obedience; and therefore
they are the same. Answer. First, the laws and precepts of 1
Law and Gospel differ in precepts.
the Law and Gospel are not the same; for Adam in his innocence knew the Law,
but he knew nothing then of believing in Christ: and though both require
righteousness, promise life, and threaten death, yet the manner is far
different, as before was noted: So likewise they differ in the commanding of
faith; for the Gospel commands faith, not as a work done, as the Law does;
but as an instrument laying hold on Christ. Again, the Law commaundes faith
generally; 2
as to believe in God, and to believe his word to be true: but besides this,
the Gospel requires a particular faith in Christ the Redeemer, whom the Law
never knew. Thirdly, the Law commands not 3
repentance, for the knowledge of the Law was in Adams heart, when he needed
no repentance: true repentance therefore is a saving grace, wrought and
commanded only by the Gospel. And fourthly, 4
for obedience, though it be commanded both by the Law and the Gospel, yet
not in the same manner: The Law commands obedience every way perfect, both
in parts, and in degrees, and allows none other: but the Gospel commands,
and in Christ approoueth imperfect obedience; that is, an endeavor in all
things, to obey and please God, if it be without hypocrisy. Again, the Law
commands obedience, as a work to be done, for the obtaining of salvation:
but the Gospel requires obedience, only to testify our faith and
thankfulness unto God. The Church of Rome therefore erreth grossly, in
co^founding the Law and the Gospel, which indeed are far differing; and so we
must believe, if we would come into, and hold the right way that leads unto
life.

Now whereas Christ says, Think not that I came to destroy the Law; by Law he
means principally the Moral law, and in the second place, the Ceremonial
law also: Next observe the opposition that Christ makes between the Law and
the Prophets; thereby signifying unto us, that by the Law, he means that
part of Gods word, concerning Righteousness, and Justice, which Moses penned
by Gods commandment: and by the Prophets, he means that part of Gods word,
which is contained in the writings of all the Prophets in the old Testament,
after Moses; which books of the Prophets, contained in them either an
interpretation of Moses Law, or predictions of the state of the Church in the
new Testament. Again, by destroying the Law, we must not understand a breach
of the Law, such as is made by man's sin; but such a dissolution, as takes from
it all virtue and power, whereby it is a Law: and so to destroy the Prophets,
is to put an end unto them, so as they should nothing avail, either to the
interpretation of the Law, or to the foretelling of the state of Gods Church
under the Gospel. Christ fulfilleth the law 3. ways.
But to fulfill them. Christ fulfilleth the Law three ways; by his doctrine,
in his person, and in men. By his doctrine he fulfilleth the Law 1
two ways; both by restoring unto it his proper meaning and true use, as we
shall see afterward, where he corrects the corrupt interpretations thereof,
by the Pharisees; as also, by revealing the right way, whereby the Law may be
fulfilled. Secondly, in his person he fulfilleth the Law 2
two ways; First, by becoming accursed to the Law, in suffering death upon
the cross for us. Secondly, by performing perfect obedience unto the Law,
doing all that the Law required, for the love of God, or of his neighbor; in
which respect he was said, Gal. 4. 4. 3.
to have been under the Law. Thirdly, Christ fulfilled the Law in men; Men be
of two sorts, Elect, and Reprobates: In the Elect he fulfilleth the Law two
ways; First, by creating faith in their hearts, whereby they lay hold on
Christ, who for them fulfilled it: Secondly, by giving them his own spirit,
which makes them endeavor to fulfill the Law; which in Christ is accepted for
perfect obedience in this life, and in the life to come is perfect indeed. In
unbelievers Christ fulfilleth the Law, when he executes the curse of the Law
upon them; for that is a part of the Law, and the execution and enduring of the
curse, is a fulfilling of the Law. And thus does Christ fulfill the Law; so
that the meaning of the words is this: Whereas you think that I came to
destroy the Law and the Prophets, by making them of none effect, you are
deceived; nay, on the other side, know that the end of my manifestation in the
flesh, was to fulfill the law, both in my doctrine and person; and also, in the
persons of men both good and badde.

In this Apology of Christ, for his behavior toward the Law; observe, The
Use.
what malice some of the Jews, especially the Scribes and Pharisees, bare unto
him: for Christ was the Author of the Law, and yet they maliciously suspect and
charge him with the abrogation thereof; so as he is feign to clear himself in
this behalf.

The like has been the malice of wicked men in all ages, against the dearest
servants of God; Act. 6. 14. Stephen is accused to speak blasphemous words
against the Law: Act. 21. 28. Paul is charged with the same crime. And such is
the malice of the Papists, against all Evangelical reformed Churches; because
we deny Justification by works, therefore they condemn us for enemies to
good works: and in many other points, they fasten upon us notes of reproach,
for holding the truth. Yea, among our selves, the like malice does appear in
those that brand their brethren with odious names, because they show forth more
care then others, of their duty to God: but let all Gods children beware of
this Pharisaicall practice.

Again, observe the Titles, under which he comprehends the Use 2.
whole Scriptures of the old Testament; The Law and the Prophets: Luke 16. 31.
they are called Moses and the Prophets. Luke 24. 27. Christ began at Moses,
and at all the Prophets, and interpreted unto them in all the Scriptures: there
Moses and the Prophets contain all the Scriptures of the old Testament.

Here then we may note a property of the books of the old Testament; A
property of the old Testament.
namely, that every one of them was written either by Moses, or some other of
the Prophets. And by this we may know the Canonical books of the old
Testament, and distinguish them from the books called Apocrypha: for the
Apocrypha books were not penned by any of the Prophets, who spoke and writ in
the Hebrew tongue, the native language of the Jews; but by some other in the
Greek tongue, which was not the language of the old Prophets. These books
may be regarded in sundry respects, as containing many worthy Rules touching
manners; in which regard, we may prefer them before other writings of men,
so far forth as they are consonant with the Scripture: and so the Church of
God has of long time reverenced them; but yet they are no part of the Law, nor
of the Prophets. Council. Trid. sess. 4 sect. 1.
And therefore the Church of Rome does notably wrong and abuse the world, in
stiling these Apocryphal books, for Canonical Scripture.

Thirdly, Christ in this his Apology, shows a sweet consent between the Law
and the Gospel: They are not contrary one to the other; Consent of Law and
Gospel.
for Christ, who is the substance of the Gospel, came to fulfill the Lawe^ and
therefore Paul says, that by Romans 3. 3^.
faith we establish the Law: and Hebrews 9. 19, 20. etc. When Moses had given
the Law unto the people, he offered sacrifices, and sprinkled the blood
thereof upon the book, and upon the people, which was a type of the shedding
of Christ's blood, as it is ver. 23, 24.
there expounded: which did notably signify this consent between the Law and
the Gospel, in so much* as without Christ, the Law could not stand.

Now this consent between them stands herein; The Law requires perfect
obedience, and threateneth death to the least breach thereof, not propounding
any way for the fulfilling thereof, out of our selves; but the Gospel directs
us to Christ, who as our surety has fulfilled the Law for us: for which
cause, Christ is called, Romans 10. ^.
the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes. And
through Christ it is, that the Romans 8. ^.
righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit.

Verse 18. For truly I say unto you, till heaven and earth perish, one jot or
one title of the Law shall not escape, till all things be fulfilled.
Here our Savior Christ propounds the second argument, for the clearing of
himself from their false imputation of destroying the Law, and it is drawn
from the nature of the Law, which is immutable.

The Exposition. For: This shows the dependence of this verse upon the
former. Truly I say unto you: This is a form of speech which our Savior
used, when he would solemnly avouch any weighty truth: and* propounding this
in his own name; herein he shows himself to be the Doctor of his Church,
whom we must hear in all things, for he speaks as one that cannot lie. The
thing he says is this; Till heaven and earth perish, one iotte or title of
the Law shall not pass. In which words he sets down the stabilitie and
the vnchaungeablenesse of the Law; and that he might fully express his
mind^, he borrows a phrase from the Hebrewe Alphabet, wherein Iod is the
least letter: One jot; signifying, that not so much, as this little letter Iod,
shall pass out of the Law.

Again, by Title some think is meant the Hebrewe vowels; but properly it
signifies a line bent crooked, or the top of an horn; so that (...)
here it properly signifies the bending or bowing that is in the top of some
Hebrew letters; insinuating, that not so much as the least part of a letter in
the Law should pass away. Now these things must not be taken properly, for it
has been, and may be, that in the Hebrew copies of the old Testament, some
letters should be changed, as may appear by the diverse readings in sundry
copies; for that may be without the loss of any sentence: but Christ's meaning
is this; That not the least parcel or sentence in the Law shall pass away;
making parts in the Law, to be as titles in the Alphabet. Till heaven and earth
perish: that is, never; so much this phrase insinuates: for though heaven and
earth shall be changed in regard of their qualities, yet the substance of them
shall never pass to nothing: and in this sense is the word Till used
elsewhere, 1. Sam. 15. 35. Samuel came no more to see Saul, till the day of
his death: that is, never. Till all things be fulfilled: that is, till every
thing commanded in the Law be done, so as it shall no more urge a man to any
obedience: which shall never be, for it must eternally be fulfilled: so that
this phrase has the like sense with the former; importing thus much, even for
ever and ever: so that this is the meaning of this verse; That the Law of God
is unchangeable, not only in the whole, but for every part thereof; and the
fulfilling thereof shall never have an end. Christ's reason then stands thus;
If the Law be immutable, and for observation eternal, then I came not to
destroy it: but the Law is immutable and eternal; and therefore I came not to
destroy it.

Gods law is ^perpetuall.
First here observe, that the Law of God is made perpetual and unchangeable:
If any man ask how this can be, seeing the Apostle faith, Heb. 7. 12*
The Law is changed? Answer. The Law is threefold; Ceremonial, Judicial, and
Moral, as has been said: now that place is principally to be understood of
the Ceremonial law, which indeed is abrogated, in regard of the observation
of it in Gods worship; but in the scope and substance of it, which is Christ
crucified, with his benefits, whom it shadowed out, it remains still, and is
now more plain then ever it was. As for the Judicial law, though it be
abrogated unto us, so far forth as it was peculiar to the Jews; yet, as See
Treatise of Co^sc. cap. 2. sect. 5.
it agrees with common equity, and serves directly to establish the precepts
of the Moral law, it is perpetual. If it be said, that Christ changed the
Moral law, in changing the Sabbath day, from the seventh day to the eight: I
answer, Christ did so indeed by his Apostles, but that is no change of the Of
the change of the Sabbath day.
substance, but of the ceremony of the Sabbath: for the substance of that law
is, the inioyning of a seventh days rest unto the Lord. Now though the
seventh day from the creation be not kept, yet a seventh day is kept still.
If it be further said, that the Law it self is abrogated; for that every one
that breaks the Law is not accursed, according to the sentence thereof,
Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Answer. We must know that the Law is but one part of Gods word,
and the Gospel another, revealing another part of Gods will, besides that which
the Law made known; for it adds a qualification to the Law, moderating the
rigor thereof, after this manner: He is accursed (says the Law) that fails
in any commandment, except (says the Gospel) he be reconciled again in
Christ, and in him have the pardon of his transgressions. And yet the Moral
law remains for ever a rule of obedience to every child of God, though he be
not bound to bring the same obedience for his justification before God.

Again, this property of the Law, in being unchangeable, and for ever to be
kept, shows, that no creature may dispense with the Law of No creature may
dispense with Gods law.
God. Men's laws may be abrogated and changed, but Gods Law even in the least
parts thereof, must stand for ever, till it be accomplished to the full: but if
it might be dispensed with, then not only iots and titles thereof, but whole
laws might be abrogated. This shows the blasphemous impiety of the Popes of
Rome, who in their 1. In Gregorian. de co^cess. praeb. cap. proposuit, in Glos.
Papa dispensat contra novum and vetus Testamentum.
Canons be authorized to dispense with the laws of God: yea, in the last Sess.
24. Can. 3.
Council of Trent, he is privileged to dispense with some of the laws of
Consanguinitie, against nature, flatly forbidden in the I. euit. 1^. No book
of Scripture is lost.
word of God; which is most horrible rebellion, and a great disgrace unto God.

Thirdly, from this property of the Law, we may observe, that it is not likely
that any whole book of Canonical Scripture is lost; for not one sentence* of
the Law shall pass till all be fulfilled; much less then can whole books
perish. Sundry men do think that whole books be lost; but that opinion calls
into question the fidelity of the Church, and Gods own providence, in
preserving his word: neither can it stand well with this text, that says, no
title thereof shall fail. Those that seem to be lost, were either humane
writings, as books of laws and Chronicles, such as our books of statutes or
Chronicles be; or books of philosophy, such as Solomon writ: or else some of
them are in the Canonical Scripture; for the books of Samuel and the Kings,
were written by diverse Prophets: and therefore we may more safely hold, that no
part of holy Scripture is lost, neither shall ever fail. For howsoever after
the last judgment the use of the word written shall cease, yet the substance
thereof shall remain in men's hearts, and be kept for ever.

Fourthly, this immutabilitie of the Law, contains a matter of great terror
and woe unto al impenitent sinners; for howsoever they may flatter themselves
with a presumption of Gods mercy, yet the curse of Law which is against them,
shall stand for ever: and therefore while A terror to the wicked, moving to
repentance.
they go on in sin, they have just cause to houle and cry; for Gods justice
in that his Law is inviolable: neither will Pro. 11. 4.
gold or silver pacify Gods wrath; for though a man by his power and wealth
were able to ouerturne heaven and earth, yet that would not help him: though
heaven and earth be brought to nothing, yet every part of Gods Law must stand
for ever, and be fulfilled. And therefore whosoever do lie in any finne, must
in time repent, humble themselves, forsake their sins, and betake themselves
unto Christ, that he may fulfill the Law for them; or else the cuise thereof
shall certainly be fulfilled in them, and they shall there lie howling under it
eternally, where is nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Fifthly, this immutabilitie of the Law, and so proportionably of every A
comfort to the godly.
part of Gods word, as it proves the Scriptures to be the word of God, so it
is a most excellent ground of comfort for all Gods servants to stablish their
hearts in the assurance of all his promises. A Christian heart is subject to
receive many doubtinges of the truth of Gods promises, especially in the time
of trial and temptation; but this must be remembered for ever, that the whole
word of God is immutable; though man's promises may fail and their laws be
abrogated, yet no jot or part of Gods word shall pass unfulfilled: and
therefore they must constantly wait for the accomplishment thereof, for in due
time it shall be fulfilled.

Sixthly, we are hereby taught to put on patience in afflictions; for they A
ground of patience.
come by the special appointment of our God, who says in his word, Act 14. 2^.
That through many afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of heaven: now
every part of Gods word must be accomplished; and therefore Christ bade Peter
to put up his sword, when he would have rescued his apprehension; for (says
he) I could pray to my Father, and he would send more then twelve legions of
Angels to help me; but how then should the Scriptures be fulfilled, which say,
It must be so? Matthew. 26. 52, 53, 54.

Seauenthly, our Savior Christ in this property of immutabilitie, The
integrity of the Law.
gives unto the whole Law, and unto every syllable and letter thereof, his
proper force, virtue, and sense; so as there is nothing in it, not so much as
one letter vain or idle: for every commandment reueales the perfect justice
of God, and every letter serves to express the same commandment. And herein
the Law of God differs from men's laws; for in them be many vain and idle
words, yea oftentimes whole sentences; but in the law of God it is not so:
Prou. 8. 8. All the words of my mouth are righteous, there is no lewdness nor
frowardness in them: yea, the Law of the Lord Ps. 19. 7. 8.
is perfect, his statutes are right, and his judgments true and righteous
altogether. Now the consideration Diligent stadie of the Scripture.
of this integrity and perfection of the law, and word of God, must move us
to study the Scriptures with great diligence; so says our Savior Christ,
Ioh. 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures: that is, shake and sift them (as the word signifies)
search narrowely, till the true force and meaning of every sentence, yea of
every word and syllable; nay, of every letter and iotte therein, be known and
understood; confer place with place, the scope of one place with another,
things going before with things that come after; yea, compare word with word,
letter with letter, and search it thoroughly. This manner of studying the
Scripture is most necessary, as being the thing* indeed, which preserves
and vpholdeth the Church of God, and the purity of religion; for about four
or five hundred years agone, men left off to study the Bible, after this sort,
and betook themselves to the writings of men, occupying their wits wholly in
vain quid^ities in Philosophy; and in hid mysteries of Divinity: by which
means it came to pass* that Popery and Apostacy from the truth, spread it
self over the world, for many hundred years together. Afterward, God of his
mere mercy, put into the hearts of some men, to be careful searchers in the
word of God, by which means the truth appeared, as light out of darkness.
Thus God stirred up Luther* about the year of our Lord* The means of Luthers
conversion.
1517. who by diligent search in the Scripture, and especially by serious
meditation; with prayer, upon these words of the Apostle, Roman. 3. 21. That
now by the Gospel, without the Law, the Justice of God is made manifest: did
find that by the perfect obedience of Christ, our justification was wrought;
and thereupon, began to maintain and profess Justification before God to be
free, through and by faith in Christ only, without help from the works of the
law, against the doctrine of the Church of Rome; and so by further diligence
and industry in the Scripture; the truth of God shone forth more and more. Let
all men, but especially Students in divinity, consider this effect, of
searching out the Scriptures, as a spur to diligence, in this behalf. By
this means also, errors and heresies are avoided and suppressed, and the will
of God is plainly revealed. And here by the way, we may see how profitable and
necessary the gift of Interpretation is* It is a most excellent gift of the
spirit, pertaining to the Ministry; and therefore most commendable and
necessary is the use thereof in Schools of Learning.

Eighthly, this immutabilitie ascribed to Gods law, that every part thereof
shall be accomplished to the full teaches all Princes and Magistrates,
Magistrates must be keepers of the Law.
not only to be keepers of Moses law in their own persons; but also within
their rule and dominions, to do their best endeavor, that the same be
fulfilled and kept by others. For this cause did the Lord command, that the
Prince of his people should have the Law Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19.
written before him in a book, to read upon continually, that he may learn
to fear God, and to keep all the words of the Law to do them: and that which
is there enjoined unto Princes, belongs also unto all Magistrates, Masters,
and Parents; within their places and charges, they must be careful to see the
whole law of God practiced, and obeyed, both in their own persons, and of
those that are under them.

Lastly, by this immutabilitie ascribed to the Law, we may learn, What it is
to keep the law
what it is to fulfill the law; namely, to keep and observe to the full, every
particular thing which the law commands us: and upon this we may ground two
conclusions against the Papists; First, that no man can come to life
everlasting by his own righteousness and obedience; for he that would come
to heaven by his own righteousness, must be able to fulfill the whole law
perfectly, in every respect: but since Adams fall, no man could keep the law
in all things, saving our Savior Christ, both God and man. Secondly, that our
fulfilling of the law, must be in the obedience of Christ, for he only was
answerable to the whole law in all things; and therefore if we would come to
heaven, we must not come in our own righteousness, but in his; as Paul
wishes to be found of God, Phil. 3. 8, 9.

Verse 19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments,
and teach men so, he shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven; but
whosoever shall observe and teach them, the same shall be called great in the
kingdom of heaven.
Our Savior Christ having plainly propounded in his Apology for himself,
the stabilitie and eternity of the whole law; does here lay down two notable
conclusions, for the upholding thereof: 1. Because the Law is immutable and
eternal, therefore he that breaks one of the least of the commandments, and
teaches men so, shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven. 2. Because
the Law is eternal* therefore he that keeps the commandments, and teaches
men so, shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.

For the first; by least commandment, he means the precepts of the Moral
law, though in the former verse, by (Law) he understood the whole law in three
parts; Judicial, Moral, and Ceremonial: And he calls them little, not
simply in regard of themselves, as though How some commandments are little.
they were so indeed; for in it self every commandment of God is great and
weighty: but he speaks according to the opinion of the Jews, for the
Scribes and Pharisees had ordained certain rites and ceremonies, according to
the tradition of their Fathers; the observation whereof, they made a greater
matter of conscience, then the keeping of some of Gods commandments: and so
esteemed them little. Again, saying these least commandments, he points
out what particular commandments of the Moral law, the Jews esteemed less
then the traditions of men; namely, those which afterward he expounds in this
Chapter, touching Murder, Adultery, Swearing, and the rest: for they esteemed
not all the commandments of the law lesser then their traditions. Shall be
called least in the kingdom of heaven: Here Christ sets down the punishment
of a false Prophet, Punishment of a false Prophet.
which breaks Gods commandments, and teaches men so; to wit, his base
esteem in the Church of God; for the kingdom of God is twofold, the kindome
of grace, and the kingdom of glory: The kingdom of grace, is the society
and company of Gods faithful servants here on earth: The kingdom of glory,
is the blessed estate of all the Saints in heaven. Now here by kingdom of
heaven, he means the kingdom of grace, which is the militant Church on
earth: and so John Baptist calls it, Math. 3. 2. Repent and amend, for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand: that is, the Church of the old Testament is now
abolished; and the Church of the new Testament is ready to take place by
Christ's coming: and therefore repent and amend: and Math. 11. 12. from the time
of John hitherto, the kingdom of heaven suffers violence. So then the
meaning of this first conclusion is this, The meaning.
Whosoever breaks one of these least commandments of the Moral law (which
afterward I shall expound) and teaches men so to do, he shall be contemned,
and not counted worthy to be a member of the Church of God in the new
Testament.

In this conclusion, in the practice of the Jews, Christ sets forth The
corruptions of hypocrites respecting Gods word.
two notable corruptions of an hollow heart, toward God: The first, to set
little by the commandments of God, esteeming no more of them, nay less, then
of men's laws and traditions: but Saint James Iam. 2. 10.
says, he that breaks one commandment, be it never so little, is guilty
of all, though he make show of keeping all: so likewise, he that makes
light and base account of one commandment, contemns all; though he seem to
honor the rest never so much. Though Herod heard John gladly, and obeyed his
doctrine in many things, and so seemed to make some account of some
commandments; yet because he would needs live in incest, against the seaue^th
commandment, he did in effect contemn and break them all: so at this day,
there are many who profess religion, and give testimony thereof, by hearing
the word, and receiving the sacraments; and hereupon they would be counted
lovers of Gods law: yet in the course of their lives, and in their particular
callings, they will not stick to oppress* the poor, and to deal unjustly
for their advantage; to profane the Sabbath for a little profit or pleasure,
and to swear, and curse, when they are a little provoked. Now howsoever such
persons may make a glorious show of profession outwardly, yet by these and such
like particular actions, they show plainly that they have but Pharisaicall
hearts, which indeed make little or no account of Gods commandments. Let us
therefore every one look into our ways, and search in our own hearts, whether
this corruption be in us, or no: and if it be, let us repent and forsake it,
and labor to become like David, Psalm. 119. 6
who had respect unto all Gods commandments: and so shall we not be despised
in the Church of God.

The second corruption of an hollow heart, noted likewise of Christ, ^.
Corruption
in these Jews, is to place the ceremonies, rites, and traditions of men,
above the commandments of the Moral law: Herewith he does expressly charge the
Jewish teachers, Matthew. 15. 3. Why do ye transgress the commandments of God,
by your traditions? And this is also the practice of the Church of Rome at this
day, they account Tollet. Summa Cas. Consc. l. 6. cap. 3.
eating flesh in Lent, and on their fasting days, a deadly sin: and yet they
will Lib. de iusta abdicat. Heur.
dispense with threasons, and murders, of Christian Princes: they Pope Six^us
4.
allow of Stues, they permit and pardon Sodomie; and yet Calixt. ^. ^pud great.
did. 27. Can. Presbyt. Rbem. ^. Tim. ^. sect. 5.
utterly forbid marriage in some estate, which the holy Ghost Heb. 13. 4.
calls honorable among all men. In these and many more, they prefer their
own traditions before the most holy commandments of God: yea, many ignorant
persons among us, are tainted with this corruption; for be not some feast
days, appointed by the Church, as Christ's nativity, all Saints, and such
like, observed by them with greater conscience and reverence, then the Lords
own Sabbath? Though the memory of Christ's nativity may be celebrated; yet
the Lords day should have the special honor. Now for the reforming of this
corruption, we must labor to have the same mind that was in David, who grew
into admiration with Gods Psalm. 119.
commandments, and thereupon invred himself to the observation of them. We
must therefore labor to have an high estimation of the A ground of obedience.
laws of God, and this will be a notable means to draw us to a reverend
fear and obedience toward to the same: one cause why men do not so highly
advance the law of God, as they ought, is because they do not sufficiently
weigh the dignity thereof. In every commandment therefore, we must first
deeply consider the weight thereof; then labor to understand it aright:
thirdly, learn to admire the wisdom and justice of God therein: and lastly,
endeavor to yield loyalty and obedience thereunto.

Secondly, in this Rule our Savior Christ puts a difference between Difference
between a false prophet and a true.
a false Prophet, and a true: The false Prophet breaks the commandments of
God in his own person, and also by his doctrine teaches others to do the
like: But the true Prophet and servant of God, in the Ministry, endeavors
the advancement of Gods glory, as well by integrity of life, as by soundness
of doctrine.

Thirdly, in the punishment of a false Prophet here set down, we Rome no part
of Christ's Church: and why.
have good direction for our judgment, touching the present Church of Rome;
namely, that she is not worthy to be esteemed a part of Christ's Church on
earth, by the sentence of our Savior Christ; because she breaks Gods
commandments, and teaches men so: for whereas the second commandment
forbids the worshipping of Images, yea and the making of Images to resemble
God; the Church of Rome does not only allow the contrary, against this
commandment; but teaches others so to do: saying, that it is lawful Sanders
treatise of the worship of images. Bellar. de Imag. Sanct. l. 2. c. 8.
to resemble the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost in Images, either
painted or carved, and to worship them therein; yea, and to worship Bellar.
ib. cap. 12.
the very Images of Christ, and of Saints, as also the Idem de sanct. beat. l.
^. c. 1^.
Saints themselves, with religious worship.

Again, they plainly break the tenth commandment, which forbids the
first motions unto sin with delight, though without consent of will, by
teaching Council. Trid. sess. 5. Can. 5.
that concupiscence after baptism, is no sin. And as they deal with the
commandments, so deal they with the Prophets, who give testimony unto
Christ; for first they destroy his manhood, by their forged transubstantiation:
secondly, they ouerturne his kingly office, by making the Pope the Bellar. de
Council. author. l. ^. c. 15.
head of the Church, and giving him power De Romans Pontif. lib. 4. c. 15, 16.
to make laws to bind the conscience. Thirdly, they ouerturne the Priesthood,
by their massing Priesthood, wherein The. Heb. ^. sect. 10. Council. Trid. sess.
22. c. 1, 2. etc.
they daily offer up an unbloody sacrifice, for the sins of the quick and
the dead. Fourthly, they rob him of his prophetical office, in giving liberty
to the Sea the Popes robbery of Christ at large, Fox Acts and Monuments, ^.
784. edit. 1583.
Pope, to make new Laws, and Hand answ. to Jewel, art. 4. diuis. 19.
to expound the Scriptures, as supreme judge: these things they teach, and
therefore that Church is not worthy to be counted a member of Christ's Church.
But seeing God in great mercy has vouchsafed us this favor in this land,
that we should* receive, and embrace his holy word, to publish* and teach the
same; and so esteems us worthy to be accounted a member of his Church: we
are therefore to rejoice in this mercy, and to praise God unfeignedly for this
unspeakable blessing; and to show forth our thankfulness, not only by
teaching, and receiving the truth of his word, but also by yielding obedience
in all things thereunto: yea, our earnest and daily prayer must be, because it
is so great a blessing, to be counted worthy of his kingdom, that God would
continue the truth of his will to us, and to our posterity for ever.

The second Conclusion: Whosoever shall keep them, and teach men so, the same
shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven: that is, he shall be
honored in the Church of God, and esteemed a worthy member thereof, because
by this means, he endeavors to keep the law unchangeable for ever. In this
conclusion two points are The office of a faithful Teacher.
to be considered; the office of a faithful Teacher, and his reward: his
office is twofold; First, in his own person he must be a doer of Gods
commandments: Secondly, in his public Ministry he must teach men so to do.

Here first observe the order of these duties; Doing must go before Do, and
teach.
Teaching: This order Christ propounds, and that doubtlesle on special
grounds; First, because a man cannot with joy and comfort fitly teach others,
before himself be a doer of the thing he teaches; for if a man teach
others, from the instruction of the spirit, he shall find his own heart
inclined by the same spirit, to the obedience of the word he teaches.

Again, the experience of the fruit and efficacy of the word, in his own
person, is the best Commentary a man can have, for the opening of it unto
others: The writings of men, with the knowledge of arts and tongues, are
excellent helps* yet if a man want the spirit of God, framing his heart to
believe, and obey the word he teaches, whereby he should become a doer of it;
doubtless the word will seem but a dream or riddle unto him, neither can he
fitly apply the same unto others, having never had experience of it in his own
soul. This then should move all Ministers, and such as set themselves to this
calling, first and chiefly, to labor to become doers of the word themselves;
other helps of learning are to be fought for with all diligence, to make them
fit and able Ministers of so great mysteries; but especially, they must labor
for the spirit of grace, to frame their hearts to embrace, and their lives to
obey the word which they teach* that so they may be fitted, according to our
Savior Christ's direction. Now this spirit is attained, by knocking ut hea^^n
gates by prayer, Luke 11. 13. and by opening the door of our hearts, when our
Savior Christ knocks thereat by his wo^d, Revel. 3. 20.

Secondly, in ^aying down this duty, our Savior Christ propounds A comfort
to faithful Ministers, in their peoples untowardness.
a singular comfort to such faithful Ministers, as be grieved with the
untowardness of their people; he propounds not the conversion of the
people, as a property of a faithful Teacher, but the doing and teaching of
the will and word of God. And doubtless a man may be a faithful Teacher, and
yet not convert many unto God; hence the Prophet complains, that he had Isay
49. ^.
labored in vain, and spent his strength in vain* nay, the same Prophet is
sent Isay 6. 9. 10
to blind the eyes of his people, to make them dull of hearing, and to harden
their hearts by his Ministry, which was a heavy case, but yet that saying of
the Apostle Paul, must be remembered; that howsoever unto some, his Ministry
was the savor of death; yet, 2. Cor 2. 15, 16.
unto God it was always the sweet savor of Christ: So that a Minister
mourning truly for his people, to see their hardness of heart, may comfort
himself with this; that in a good conscience he endeavors to obey the word
of God, and to teach men so.

II. Point. The reward of a faithful Teacher is this; he shall be The reward
of a faithful Minister.
counted great in the kingdom of heaven: that is, he shall be honored, and
counted worthy to be a member of Christ's Church, both in this life, and in
the life to come. This must be remembered, to incite all Ministers to become
faithful Teachers, both in life and doctrine. To get respect in Princes
courts, is much sought after on earth; O then, how should this high respect
with God, prevail in our hearts, to incite us to be faithful in this calling.

Verse 20. For I say unto you, except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees* you cannot enter into the kingdom
of heaven.
These words are commonly taken to be a Reason of the former verse, by way of
answer to a secret objection, which the Jews might frame therefrom, to this
effect; Thou say, whosoever breaks one of these least commandments, and
teach men so, shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven: But our Teachers
the Scribes and Pharisees, look to have chief place in the kingdom of heaven;
and yet (if thy doctrine be true) they break Gods commandments, and teach
others so to do. Now here-to Christ should answer thus; I say unto you, except
your righteousness exceedes theirs, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of
heaven. But if we mark well, the words may more fitly be referred to the 17.
verse, as a third reason, to prove that Christ came not to destroy Scope.
the Law, or the Prophets, but to fulfill them; because he exacts at every man's
hands, a more perfect and exact righteousness, then that which the Scribes and
Pharisees either have in themselves, or require in others; without which, no man
can enter into the kingdom of heaven.

In this verse are three points to be handled: First, what these Scribes and
Pharisees were: Secondly, what was their Righteousness: and thirdly, what is
that true Righteousness, whereby a man may enter into the kingdom of heaven,
and stand just before God.

For the first: a Scribe is a name of office, whereof there were two A Scribe.
1. Civil.
sorts among the Jews; Civil, who as Public Notaries, did register the
affairs of Princes, and such a one was Shimshai, Ezra 4. 8. And
Ecclesiastical, who were employed in the expounding of the Scripture; 2.
Ecclesiastlcall.
such a one was Ezra, Ezra, 7. 1, 5, 6. And those of whom our Savior Christ
says, Matthew. 13. 52. Every Scribe taught unto the kingdom of heaven, is like
a good householder: and Matthew 32. 2. the Scribes and Phraises sit in Moses
chair: that is, they are expounders of the law of Moses. And such Scribes are
meant in this place; to wit, men in Ecclesiastical office, descending from the
tribe of Levy, who expounded the Law unto the people; and these were all one
with the Priests and Levites under the Law: and therefore Ezra is called both a
Scribe and Priest, Nehem. 8. 1, 2.

The name Pharise betokens a sect, not an office; for there were Pharise.
three special sects among the Jews: The Essenes, the Sadduces, and ^. Sects.
1. Essenes.
Pharisees. The Essenes were like Popish Monks and Friars, which did separate
themselves from the people, vowing and dedicating themselves to live in
perpetual sanctity. The Sadduces were a sect that did ^. Sadduces.
expound the law, according to the letter and syllable, and with-all denied the
resurrection, and the immortality of the soul; as is plain, Acts 23, 8. The
Pharisees were such, as did forsake the common exposition ^. Pharisees.
of the Scribes* and taught and framed a more exact and strict exposition of
the Law, according to the traditions of the Fathers; and they were most holy
outwardly, and of chief account among the Jews: and therefore the Apostle
Paul says, Act. 26. 5.
that after the most strict sect of their religion, he lived a Pharis^^ and
that he was Act. 23. 6.
a Pharise, the son of a Pharise. Yet besides these, there were another sect,
called Herodia^s, who (as some think) were courtiers, which held and taught
that Herodia^s.
Herod was the Messiah. And thus we see what the Scribes and Pharisees were,
whom Christ here joins together for amplification sake; understanding
thereby such teachers among the Jews, Priests and Levites, as lived after the
most strait custom of the Pharisees: for the Pharisees were by office Scribes,
as we may plainly see by comparing together, Ioh. 1. 19. with v. 24. where the
Priests and Levites (who were Scribes as we have showed) are called Pharisees.

II. Point. What was that righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, which is
here so debased, as being unable to bring a man to heaven? By the tenor of
Scripture it will appear, that it was Luke 11. 3^ Matthew. 23. 25.
an external righteousness only, standing in the outward observation of the
law: for they were careful to abstain from actual gross sins; as
whoredom, theft, murder, idolatry, and such like, and they were very forward
in Luke 18. 11, 12. Matthew. 6. 2. 5. 16.
fasting, praying, and giving of alms openly, and in Mark. 7. 3. 4.
keeping the traditions and ceremonies of the Elders, and in all things to
carry themselves in show Phil. 3. 6.
conformable to the law; but the inward righteousness of the heart they nothing
regarded, thinking that perfect righteousness consisted in outward obedience,
and by that they looked to be saved; as it is said, Romans 10. 2. neglecting
utterly the righteousness of God.

In these Scribes and Pharisees we may observe, what is the natural Man's
natural conceit of righteousness.
persuasion of man, touching righteousness: to wit, that an outward righteousness
will serve the turn: and therefore every man naturally contents himself
therewith: and hence it is that men will bring their bodies usually to the
place of Gods worship to pray, to hear the word, and receive the Sacraments;
but few have care to bring their hearts with them, that they may inwardly
worship God in spirit and truth: so likewise, many are content to rest from
their ordinary labors on the Sabbath day, but few are careful to consecrate
their rest unto God: men be careful to abstain from actual murder, but few
make conscience of malice, hatred, reuiling, and quarelling: many hate theft,
that yet will not stick to rob their neighbors of their good name, by vile
reports: many are ashamed to rob openly, that make no bones to deceive by
false weights and measures, by glosses, and such like: and yet all these will
bless themselves with their outward righteousness, and think all is well; not
doubting but they shall be saved by it, though they have no more: but this is
Pharisaicall pride and folly: for all such outward righteousness is here
condemned, as unable to save the soul.

Again, here we may see the palpable and gross opinion of all Civil
honesty insufficient for the soul.
worldly men, even of those who commonly are called honest men: if they be told
of their sins, and of the danger of damnation, except they repent: their
answer is; they are no thieves, no murderers, no gross sinners, and therefore
they hope God will save them; for they live orderly, and do no man wrong: but
let all such take heed, lest they deceive their own souls, for this civil
honestis was the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, which could
neither bring them, nor any other into the kingdom of heaven, as Christ the
God of truth says expressly in this place. To give alms, to fast, to pray,
and to deal uprightly with men, be very good things; but yet we must labor
for more then these, if ever we mean to come to heaven: we must get another
righteousness of the heart, renouncing utterly our own righteousness, in the
matter of Justification, and condemn our selves for our best actions, that so
we may be fit to receive that true righteousness, which will commend us unto
God.

III. Point. What is that true righteousness which will bring a True
righteousness.
man to heaven? Answ. It is the righteousness of Christ, 1. Cor. 1. 30. for
Christ is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness; yea, he was made
sin for us, that we might be made the 2 Cor. 5. 21
righteousness of God in him. This is that righteousness, which exceedes the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, and whereby a sinner does stand
just before God: for when as by Adams fall we all became guilty of sin, and
thereby subject to the curse of God, and to eternal condemnation, from which
we could never have delivered our selves; then it pleased Christ to come from
the bosom of his father, and to become our surety and Savior, who in his
life became obedient to the law for us, and in and by death upon the cross,
suffered whatsoever was due unto our sins: which obedience and satisfaction
being made by him that was both God and man, was alone all-sufficient, both to
free us from the curse of the law, and also to justify us before God: and this
righteousness of Christ, is that which exceeds the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, and is able to bring a man to heaven. Yet further Parts
of Christ's righteousness.
for our Justification, Christ's righteousness has three parts; the purity of
his humane nature, the integrity and obedience of his life, and the merit of
his sufferings upon the cross; and all this must be ours, to answer for our
corrupt nature, and sinful life, deserving a cursed death.

Here some make question, how Christ's righteousness can be ours? Object. 1.
Bellar. de Iustific. l. 2. c. 7. Answ.
and how one man's righteousness can save so many thousands? Answ. Christ's
righteousness is not the righteousness of a mere man (for then it could save but
one at the most,) but it is the righteousness of that person, who is both God
and man, and therefore is an infinite righteousness, of merit sufficient to save a
thousand worlds. But some here say, If Christ's righteousness be ours, then we
are as righteouse as Christ? Object. 2.
Answ. The same righteousness that is in Christ, is ours, but not in the Answ.
same manner or measure; for Christ has it by merit and action of himself, we
have it only by mercy and imputation: it is in Christ as a root and
fountain, in us by reception and application; like the light in the Moon, and
in the Stars, which is not in them originally, but received from the Sun,
the fountain thereof. Thirdly, it is said, If we Object 3.
by Christ's righteousness be justified, and made the sons of God; then is
Christ by our sins made unjust, and so the child of the devil? Answer. We
may safely say, that Christ was made a sinner by Answ.
our sins, not actually, but by imputation: now hence it will not follow,
that he should be the child of the devil, for that comes by the act and
habit of sinning, after sinful conception; al which, our Savior Christ was
free from: for at the very time when he bare our sins, he was in himself
more holy, then all men, and all Angels. Fourthly, it is said, that if Christ's
righteousness be made Object. 4. Answ.
ours, then we are made Saviors? Answer. It follows not; for Christ's merits
and righteousness are conuaied and applied unto men, not as they are in
Christ's person, in whom they are sufficient to save ten thousand worlds; but as
they serve to save and justify that particular person only, to whom they are
imputed: so that this remains an undoubted truth, that that righteousness
which brings salvation, is Christ's righteousness only.

Here some may say, How is Christ's righteousness made ours, and Christ's
righteousness is made ours by faith.
we assured of it? Answ. It is made ours by saving faith, which the holy Ghost
creates in the heart and soul, as an hand whereby we may lay hold on Christ,
and apply his righteousness unto our selves, as he is offered unto us in the
promises of the Gospel. Some object, that if Christ's righteousness be made
ours, by our believing it to be ours; then if a man believe his neighbors
house to be his, it is his also: and so for any other thing? Answer. There is
not the like reason in these things; for it is a mere fancy and imagination,
for a man to believe his neighbors house to be his, having no ground for it,
besides his own conceit: but when a man believes Christ's righteousness to be
his, he has Gods commandment and promise, for his warrant and assurance, that
it shall be imputed unto him; and withal, that faith so grounded, makes
Christ's righteousness as truly his, as any thing a Sanctification goes with
Justification.
man has is his own, being given him of another. Now this saving faith,
laying hold on Christ's righteousness, for man's justification, is never severed
from sanctification by the spirit, with the fruits thereof, whereby the old man
being mortified, and the new man in Christ renewed, according to his image, in
knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness, the whole person is turned unto
God, and made careful to ^
please him, both in thought, word, and deed: and hereby do we receive
assurance of our justification; for true sanctification is the earnest of the
spirit of adoption in our hearts, whereby we are sealed unto the day of our
redemption.

Does that righteousness, whereby we must be justified and saved The use.
in the day of our Lord, come from Christ only, and not from our 1
selves? then we see what just cause we have to humble our selves, and to
acknowledge our great unrighteousness, and want of all goodness in our
selves: and when we can do this unfeignedly, we have gone one step in the
way to true happiness. Secondly, we also must hereby 2
learn, to esteem all things as dross and dongue, with the Phil. 3. 8, 9.
Apostle, in respect of Christ Jesus, and his righteousness; for he it is that
brings us to heaven, and therefore we must honor him above all, and value his
righteousness, as that most precious jewel, which when a man has found, he
will sell all that he has, to get and keep it, Matthew. 13. 46. Thirdly, we
must hunger and thirst after Christ, and his righteousness, 3
for it is the fountain of all blessedness, and without it we are most
miserable: yea, though we had all the world beside, yet without it we Matthew.
16. 26.
loose our salvation. Now what will it profit a man to win all the world, if
he loose his soul? Fourthly, seeing Christ's righteousness is 4
made ours by faith, and we made assured of it, by sanctification of heart, and
life; we must labor for true faith, whereby our hearts may be inwardly
renewed: we must not content our selves with an outward holiness, for that will
never bring a man to heaven; but our endeavor must be for inward holiness,
whereby we shall be preferred with God, above all the Pharisees in the world, and
get assurance of eternal happiness. And this faith we must show forth in
all holy exercises; as when we hear the word, we must lend the inward ear of
the heart, with the bodily ear; and when we fall down to prayer, we must bow
the knees of our hearts; and in fasting from meat, we must abstain from
sin: yea, in all things we must be careful to serve God, in spirit and
truth; for which cause, we must pray with David, Lord renew Psalm. 51. 10.
a right spirit within me, that so feeling Christ to live in us by grace, we
may be assured that Christ's righteousness shall bring us unto glory.

Verse 21. Ye have heard that it was said of old, Thou shall not kill, for
whosoever kills, shall be culpable of judgment.
Our Savior Christ having laid down his Preface, does here begin his
interpretation of the Law, being indeed the only true doctor of his Church;
and herein especially he does meddle with the second Table, beginning first of
all, with the sixth Commandment, touching Murder. In the handling whereof, he
observes this order; First, he sets down the false interpretation of this
law, by the Scribes and Pharisees, in this verse: Secondly, he shows the true
meaning of it, v. 22. And lastly, he propounds rules of concord and
agreement between those that be at variance, verses 23, 24, 25, 26.

For the first: The Exposition. Ye have heard: that is, you Jews which now
hear me, whether Scribes, Pharisees, or others; you have heard, that it has
been said of old: that is, by your ancient Teachers, the old Scribes and
Pharisees, who have expounded this law unto you: and that this phrase must be
understood of the ancient Jewish Teachers, may plainly appear, because in the
next verse he opposes his own teaching thereunto, and would have these his
hearers, that before had learned a false interpretation of this law, from their
old Teachers, now to learn of him, the true exposition thereof. The Law is
this, Thou shall not kill: The exposition of the ancient Jewish Teachers was
this, for whosoever kills shall be culpable of judgment: that is, whosoever
lays violent hands on another, to take away his life (for they knew no other
murder, neither did they extend this commandment to forbid any sin, but
actual murder) shall be culpable of judgment: that is, shall be held guilty
of murder, both in the courts of men, and also before the judgment seat of
God, where he shall receive the deserved punishment thereof. This was the
interpretation of the Jews.

Here first observe, that Antiquity is no infallible mark of true doctrine;
Antiquity no infallible mark of truth.
for this exposition of this commandment was ancient, received from ancient
Teachers; and yet Christ the doctor of truth, rejects it, as false and
corrupt: and therefore the argument which the Papists use, for the stablishing
of their religion, drawn from Antiquity, is of no effect.

Secondly, by these words of Christ, ye have heard, it has been said How the
Pharisees expounded the law.
of old, we may easily gather, after what manner the Scribes and Pharisees
expounded the law; namely, they left the Scriptures, and followed the
interpretation of their ancient Teachers. But here Christ checketh and
reprooueth this manner of teaching; and therefore the like cannot be
warrantable among us at this day: whereby we see that kind of teaching
reproved, wherein every point is stuffed out with the testimonies of Fathers,
Schoolmen, and humane writers. And here also is discovered a wicked and
dangerous practice of the Rhem. Test. pre^. sect. 1^.
Papists, who refer all deciding of controversies, and interpretation of hard
places of Scripture, to the Church and to the Fathers. If we say that Fathers
often dissent, and the Church may err, then they send us to the Heart. conf. with
Rainol. chap. 2. div. 2.
Popes breast. But if this course were safe, then the Jewish teachers might
have had a good defense against this charge of Christ: for they had both Church
and Fathers on their side, and the high Priest that was then in place. Indeed
the Fathers must be reverenced, as lights of the Church in their time, and
their testimonies duly regarded, wherein they agree with the written word: but
for the confirmation of the truth in man's conscience, and for the edifying of
the soul in the graces of the spirit, the word of God has the only stroke:
by it alone Gods children are begotten, and borne anew to a lively hope, and by
it alone they are fed and nourished in the faith, yea, by it alone they are
confirmed and stablished in the truth.

Thirdly, in these Jewish Teachers, forbidding nothing as a breach of Man's
natural conceit of keeping the Commandments.
this law, but the outward sin of murder; and on the contrary approouing of
those as keepers of this law, that kept their hands from this Actual crime of
blood, and by consequent worthy of life everlasting; behold a plain picture
of every natural man: for is not this the common opinion, that unless a man
kill an other, he breaks not this commandment? and so for the rest, if he
abstain from the outward actual gross sins of stealing, adultery, and
false witness bearing, then he keeps those commandments, though his heart be
never so full fraught with envy, malice, lust, covetousness, falsehood, etc. But
let us observe Christ's reproof of such erroneous interpretations of Gods law,
as a means to school our hearts from such vain conceits.

verse. 22. But I say unto you, whosoever shall be angry with his brother
unadvisedly shall be culpable of judgment: and whosoever says unto his
brother, Raca, shall be worthy to be punished by the Council: and whosoever
shall say, fool, shall be worthy to be punished by hell fire.
Here our Savior Christ propounds the true interpretation of this
Commandment: But I say unto you) that is, whatsoever you have Exposition.
heard the Scribes or Pharisees teach you from themselves, or from their
fathers, it is nothing, let them not deceive you: for I that am the Lawgiuer
and Doctor of my Church, and therefore best know the meaning of mine own law,
I say otherwise unto you: whosoever is angry with his brother, etc. Here
Christ lays down three kinds of murder, and three degrees of punishments for
the same. The first degree of murder is Anger, not anger simply: but rash and
indiser^et anger toward 1
a brother: and by Brother, he means, first, one Jew with an other, to 3.
degrees of murder.
whom Christ spoke; secondly, one neighbor with an other, whether Jew or
Gentile: for by creation we are all brethren, having one father which is God,
as Adam is called the son of God. Luke 3. 38. The second 2
degree of murder, is calling his brother Raca. Some expound this word Raca,
an idle or empty brain: others, an evil man: others take it to signify a
loathsome man, one to be spit at, as we by spitting use to show our contempt:
but these interpretations cannot so fitly stand: for then the third degree of
murder and this second, should be one and the same: for to call a man empty
brain, evil, or loathsome, and to call him fool are equal in degree. Now
Christ's intent is to set down distinct degrees of murder, as is evident by
the distinct degrees of punishment adioined thereunto. A more fit exposition is
this, that Raca has no perfect signification, but is only an interiection of
indignation, whereby a man does not slander or revile his brother, but only
in gesture show the contempt and anger of his heart against him; as when in
English we say, fie, tush, or such like: which words are not open raylings, but
only outward signs of the inward anger and contempt concealed in the heart;
so that the meaning is this: He that is angry with his brother, and expresses
this his anger either in gesture or countenance, by frowning looks, gnashing
of teeth, or by imperfect speech, as tush, fie, pish, or such like, he is
guilty of murder. The third degree of murder is, when a man does show his
anger against 3
his brother by open raylings, and reproachful names; expressed in these
words, whosoever shall call his brother fool. And all these three degrees are
beyond the interpretation of the Jewish Teachers, who only condemned actual
killing by this commandment.

Now to these several kinds of murder, Christ adds distinct degrees of
punishment. The first is, to be culpable of judgment for unadvised anger. The
second, to be worthy to be punished of a Council, for outward signs of this
anger. The third is, to be worthy of hell fire, for reproachful names or
raylings. And here we must understand, that Christ speaks not properly, in
setting down these degrees of punishment, but figuratively alluding to the
custom of punishing offenders Courts among the Jews, 3. P. Fagius in Deuteronomy. 16.
used among the Jews: for they had three courts; The first was held by three
men for mean matters, and other cases of small importance. The second was held
by three and twenty men, wherein were determined matters of great importance,
that could not be decided in the first court; as matters of life and death: and
it was kept in the chief cities of the land. The third court was held at
Jerusalem only, called the court of the Seauentie-two, from which none might
appeal to any other. In it were all weighty and great causes determined, and
this court is here called a Council. Now Christ alluding hereto, says to this
effect: Look^ as among you Jews there are different courts, and some matters
are adjudged in your courts of judgment, and others in the Council at
Jerusalem; so God also he has his Judgment, and his council: those that are
rashly angry, shall undergo Gods judgment: and he that makes known his
anger by speech or countenance, shall be punished more grievously and undergo
a deeper judgment, as it were by the Lords council: but he that shall by open
reuilings and raylings, show forth his malice against his brother; as by
calling him fool, or such like, he shall be worthy the most grie^^us
judgment and torment of hell fire; alluding to the highest degree of torment
among the Jews, which was burning: for before their Government was taken from
them by Herod, the Jews used these four kinds of punishments; hanging,
beheading, stoning, and burning. Further, the words translated hell fire, are
properly the fire of Gehenna; for there was a place near to the suburbs of
Jerusalem called Gehenna, which is a compound Hebrew word, signifying Gehenna.
the valley of Hinnon, wherein was a place called Tophet, Ier. 7. 31. where the
idolatrous Jews, following the horrible superstition of the Nations about
them, used to burn their children unto Molech: for which fact the place became
so odious to the godly, that to aggrauate the heinousnes of this crime, they
used this name to signify and betoken the place of torment appointed for the
reprobate: whereupon in Christ's time, Gehenna, and the fire of hell, were in
signification all one. Now in this valley the Jews used to burn their
malefactors; and unto this kind of judgment Christ alludeth, meaning not
simply hell fire, the torments of the damned, but a more grievous and greater
kind of punishment then the former, because it was a higher degree of sin: so
that Christ's meaning is this; Howsoever your Scribes and Pharisees teach you,
that there is no murder but actual killing, and that it only deserves
condemnation: yet I which am the lawgiver say unto you, that as you have
diverse punishments in several courts for diverse offenses, as hanging, stoning,
and burning: so God he has diverse degrees of punishments for the several
breaches of this commandment: he that is rashly angry, is worthy of
judgment: and he that gives out any show of his anger in gesture, shall be
punished more grievously; but he that shows forth his anger by railing and
reuiling, shall endure the most grievous punishment of all.

First, whereas Christ here makes degrees of punishments for diverse Rhem. o^
this place.
sins, the Papists hereon would build their distinction of sins into
venial, and mortal. Venial sins (say they) are light sins, as badde
thoughts, vain speeches, and such like, which do not deserve damnation, but
some temporal punishment only, such as were allotted to civil courts among
the Jews: for here (say they) Christ only makes open railing and reuiling of
our brother, such an heinous sin as deserves hell fire. But this distinction
cannot here be grounded: for Christ does not appropriate condemnation to this
term of hell fire: but he has reference thereto in every phrase that here
imports a punishment; as, to be culpable of judgment for unadvised anger, is
to deserve condemnation in hell fire; and to be punished by a Council, for
testifying anger by outward signs, is to deserve condemnation, but yet in a
deeper degree: And to be worthy to be punished with the fire of Gehennah, for
open railing, is to deserve condemnation also, but yet in a deeper measure then
the former: for as among the Jews by the sentence of their Courts, some
offenses were punished by beheading or hanging; greater offenses by stoning,
and the greatest by burning; all which punishments differed in degree, and yet
every one was death: so before God, lesser sins deserve lesser condemnation
in hell fire, and greater sins deeper damnation; and yet every sin deserves
damnation: for the wages of sin, be it never so little, is death, Romans 6. 23.
so that Christ here makes degrees of punishments, according to the degrees of
sin; and yet so, as every sin is mortal, deserving damnation, and none
venial in it self.

Secondly, we may here observe two excellent Rules for the expou^ding 2. Rules
for the expounding of the Law.
of the Moral law. First, that under one sin named in a commandment, are
forbidden all sins of the same kind, with all the causes thereof: 1
for Christ in expounding this sixth commandment, does not only condemn
Actual murder, but even Rash anger in the heart, and all signs thereof in
countenance and gesture, with all railing, and reuiling speeches, as breaches
of this commandment: and the like he observes in those which follow. II.
Rule. To the breach of every commandment 2
there is annexed a curse, albeit it be not expressed: for Christ here fetting
down the breaches of this sixth commandment, threatens condemnation to the
least breach thereof; saying, he that is unadvisedly angry with his brother,
shall be culpable of judgment. Is it not then a wonder to see, how ignorant
people do use the commandments for prayers, when as indeed (if they could
perceive it) they are Gods thunderbolts to throw their souls to hell for every
sin they commit?

Thirdly, Christ condemning unadvised anger as a breach of this law, gives us
to understand, that advised anger is not unlawful: and true it is, that all
anger is not sinful: for Mark. ^. 5.
Christ was ofttlines angry with Advised anger not unlawful.
the ^ewes, and the Apostle bids us Ephesians. 4. 26. ^ow lawful anger may be
discerned.
to be angry, but sin not. If any here a^ke, how we may discern godly
anger, from that which is evil and unadvised: I answer: two ways, first, by
the beginning of it: for good anger proceeds from the love of him with whom
we are angry; now love is the fulfilling of the law, and therefore anger
proceeding from love and guided thereby, cannot be a breach thereof: but evil 1
anger proceeds from self-love, from dislike or hatred of the party with
whom we are angry. Secondly, we may discern it by the 2
end. Good anger is for Gods glory against sin, because God thereby is
dishonored; and for our brothers good: but evil anger wants these ends, and
intends private respects. It is quickly moved, it continues long, and also
carries with it a desire of revenge.

Fourthly, seeing unadvised anger, with the sign thereof, is a breach Anger
must be bridled.
of this law deserving death; hereby we are admonished to beware of this
headstrong affection of anger, and betime to restrain and bridle the same: it
has a bad beginning, and an evil end, and thereby we become murderers. Now
that we may ouerrule it, so as it prevail not How.
against us: first, we must lay to our hearts this commandment of God 1
forbidding rash anger, as a bar to stop it. Secondly, we must remember, 2
how lovingly and mercifully God deals with us every day, in forbearing and
forgiving us: and therefore we ought to be like minded toward our brethren.
Ephesians. 4. 31, 32.

The second branch of sin here condemned is, to say unto our brother, Raca:
whereby we may see that every gesture expressing rash anger, Signs of despite
are degrees of murder.
and despite of heart toward another, is murder before God; as casting down
the countenance toward him: this God reproved in Cain, Genesis 4. 6. frowning
and nodding the head, or shaking it in contempt, 1
as the Jews did to Christ, Matthew. 27. 39. also contemptuous laughter 2
and deriding: hence Genesis 21. 9. ^
Isma^ls ^eering at Isaac, is called persecution, Gal. 3
5. 29. and the like may be said of all signs of contempt in words: as fie,
tush, pish, and to ( thou) a man in disdain, for otherwise a superior may 4
thou his inferior: so also when ^ man contemptuo^sly takes a thing in 5
snuff, though he say nothing, but flings away with an heart rising against
his brother. All these and such like tokens of contempt, and disdain, are here
condemned for murder of heart: and therefore it stands Make conscience of
gesture.
us in hand, to make conscience of every gesture of our body, of the casting
of our eyes, of our laughter, and of all passionate words, lest thereby we show
any contempt, or anger toward our brethren.

If it be said, how can every gesture expressing rash anger or contempt be
murder, seeing the law permits a widow to Deuteronomy. 25. 7, 8, 9.
spit in the face of her husbands brother, or next kinseman, even before the
Elders of the city, if he refused to raise up seed^ unto his brother. Ans.
First, the Lord might command her so to do, thereby to manifest his great
dislike of want of love in him toward his dead brother. Secondly, I answer,
the words may as fitly be translated thus, and spit in his sight, that is, spit
on the ground before his face, that he might see her: and that seems to be
the true meaning of that place: for it was very unseemly for any one, much
more for a woman, so publicly to spit in a man's face. And in that sense is the
word used in the same book, Deuteronomy. 4. 37. where God is said to bring Israel out
of Egypt in his face, that is, in his sight.

Secondly, under this branch of murder by sign of contempt, are many Abuses
of the tongue.
abuses of the tongue most justly condemned: as first, bitterness of 1
speech; when men that be at variance, give out hard and grievous words one
against an other: these are as pricks of Prove. 12. 18
swords, as the wise man says: and therefore the holy Ghost charge us, that
Ephesians. 4. 31.
all bitterness, anger, and wrath be put away from us. Secondly, all wrangling
and contentious 2
speech between parties disagreeing, when as neither will yield, but each one
thinks to have the last word: Philip. 2. 14. Do all things without murmuring
and reasoning: for that springs of choler and stout stomach, clean contrary
to meekenes and patience, a fruit of the spirit. Thirdly, Ephesians. 4. 31.
crying also is here forbidden, whereby men or women 3
being at variance in private speeches, do through choler and malice lift up
their voices, that they may be heard a far off. This is a fruit of raging
anger, and surie, Fourthly, threatening speeches are also here condemned, 4
when as men from an inward dislike and rage* in their own private cause, do
give out menacing words against others: Ephesians. 6. 9. Masters are forbidden thus
to deal with their servants: much less then may one brother thus threaten an
other. Fifthly, all kind of girding 5
and taunting others by privy and close nipps, is here condemned, although
there be no open railing: for thereby men seek to disgrace their brethren, and
to glad their own hearts by grieuing others; which is more then to say, Raca.

The third degree of murder is, in Reviling terms, calling our brother
Reuiling terms forbidden.
fool, or such like: this also is a sin against the ninth commandment, by
robbing him of his good name: for one sin in diverse respects may be against
many commandments. It is a breach of this sixth commandment, in that hereby we
grieve and trouble our neighbor, and so far as a reproach can go, make him
weary of his life.

Upon the ground of this degree of murder, be all grievous practices Grievous
practices here forbidden.
of men against their brethren, justly condemned for bloody practices. As
first, Usurie, whereby men bind their brethren to return 1
gain, for the bare lone of money or other goods, which naturally yield Usury.
no increase; without all respect to their necessity, or to the success of
the employing of it. Hereby many are brought to great poverty: reuiling
terms do nothing so much pinch the poor, as this oppression. Secondly, the
hoarding up of corn till times of dearth, that thereby they 2
may gain the more: these men make a private gain of Gods common Hoarding up
of corn.
judgment upon the poor. Indeed it is not unlawful in time of plenty, to
lay up stoare against a time of dearth: but to do it with the hurt of the
poor, is to suck their blood, and to eat up Gods people; as when men keep
their garners full, and suffer the poor to starve; the peoples curse lies on
such, Prou. 11. 26. Thirdly, fighting and striking 3
by private persons, or by others in their private causes: for they wound
Fighting.
or weaken the body of their neighbors, which is more then to grieve him by
reuiling speeches. Fourthly, the detaining the food of the soul, 4
by those that cannot, or will not preach, is a damage against eternal
Soule-staruing.
life: and therefore Paul to clear himself from blood in this behalf, said,
He kept nothing back, Act. 20. 26, 27. Fifthly, to give offense by 5
Offending.
word or deed, whereby others are occasioned to fall: this is uncharitable
walking, Romans 14. 15. whereby we do as much as in us lies, destroy him for
whom Christ died. As this is cruel in all, so especially in public persons,
as Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, Masters, and such like, because their
practices are Rules to their inferiors. They are like lights in an haven which
guides the ships that sail by night, which standing amiss, lead the
ships upon rocks and sands, and so cause shipwreck.

Having seen the true meaning of this Law expounded by Christ, let es here
further observe, how he restores the true use thereof. We must not think,
that he did only here intend the rectifying of our judgments for
understanding, and not also strike at the reformation of our hearts and lives
for practice. Touching the use of this law therefore, The true use of this law.
Christ here teaches us two things: first, to descend into our own hearts,
and there to search how we have broken this commandment: 1. Search our hearts.
as whether we have borne in our hearts any malice against our brother, and
whether we have expressed the rash anger of our hearts by speech or gesture, or
have any way wronged him by reuiling terms, or other injuries against his
life: if we have, Christ tells us we are murderers.

Secondly, Christ setting down the curse to every degree of murder; teaches
us, upon due examination of our hearts, fuiding our 2. Judge our selves.
selves guilty in any degree, to cast down our selves before the Lord, to
accuse and condemn our selves, crying out that all shame and confusion belongs
unto us: this we must do, that by the view of our miseries, we may be moved
more earnestly to sue for mercy. And indeed if we examine our hearts, and our
behauiours thoroughly, we shall find, that we are all murderers. For though we
may be free from actual killing, yet our consciences will tell us, that the
motions of wrath and malice, and the signs of unadvised anger have broken
forth, both in our words and gesture: for who can say he never snuffed at an
other by way of contempt or dislike? who can clear himself from deriding and
disgracing others? now these things and such like, make us guilty of sin
against the law, and so subject to the wrath and curse of God; which must
needs be fulfilled, though heaven and earth should pass away. This
undoubtedly is our miserable and woeful case in our selves. And there is no way
to escape this curse, but only this: we must humble our selves before God, and
confess against our selves the murder of our hearts, declared in our gesture,
speech, and behavior; then we must labor to be grieved for these sins: for
which end we must apply unto our selves, Gods fearful judgments due unto
us for them. Thirdly, we must earnestly sue unto God for mercy and pardon, as
for life and death, like as poor prisoners do, when the sentence of death is
to be pronounced against them: yea, we must cry with sighs and groans that
cannot be expressed, and give the Lord no rest, till he send into our
consciences the comfortable message of mercy and pardon by his good spirit.
This done, we must labor in our callings for the time to come, to procure and
further the welfare and safety of our brethren, as well as our own: we must
not seek our selves, but the common good, eschewing those things that may
grieve our brethren; and doing those that may be good and comfortable unto
them: that so by new obedience we may show forth thankefulnes for Gods mercy
and favor toward us.

Hitherto we have handled the three degrees of murder, which Christ condemns
by this law, beyond the doctrine of the Jewish teachers. Actual killing.
Besides these, there is a fourth degree here condemned, which is actual
killing. This Christ does not here name, because he takes it for granted,
even by the doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees. Now because it is the main
sin of this commandment, therefore here it is to be handled; which we will do
thus: first, we will show when killing is murder, and when it is not: and then
handle the kinds thereof.

For the first: Killing is not always murder, for sometime a man When killing
is allowed.
has power given of God to kill, and it is no sin: now God gives a man power
to kill three ways: I. by the written word: thus Princes and Gouerners, and
under them executioners, are allowed to kill malefactors 1
that deserve death: and thus soldiers are warranted to kill their enemies in
a lawful war: II. by an extraordinary Commandment: 2
and so Abraham might lawfully have killed his son, if the Cen. 22. 2. 10, 11.
Angel of the Lord had not stayed his hand: III. by an extraordinary 3
instinct, which is answerable to a special commandment: and so Psalm. 106.
30, 31.
Phinees slew Zimri and Cosbie, without guilt of murder. But killing is
murder, when men of their own wills, without warrant from God, slay others:
and this sin is plainly and directly forbidden in this commandment.

II. Point. The kinds of killing be two; either voluntary, or casual. The
kinds of killing. 1. Voluntary.
Uoluntarie killing is, when a man kills of purpose and intent: and this
sin is so heinous, that it Numb. 35. 33.
defiles the land where the blood is shed, till it be purged by the blood of
him that shed it. And this purpose to kill is twofold; either with
deliberation and fore-desire of revenge, as when a man has carried a grudge in
his heart long before: or without deliberation, when a man without all former
malice is suddenly carried by fury and anger to slay his brother: and this
second kind of killing is distinguished from that which is upon deliberation,
by the name of manslaughter, and also favored by the laws of some
Manslaughter is murder.
Countries, because it is not done of set purpose, but through sudden anger
before the blood be cold: but Gods law makes both of them murder, and
admits Number. 35. 3^.
no recompense for the life of the murderer: nay, beside it adiudgeth the
murderer to eternal death, both in soul and body. To this voluntary
murder, we must refer those that 2
give commandment, counsel, or help unto the murderer: for he that
commands is the principal Agent, and the murderer is his instrument. 3
Again, it is voluntary murder to strike an other, though with purpose only
to wound, if death follow thereon: And that also which is committed by a
drunken man: for his will is free, though sense and reason be blinded.

Casual killing, commonly called chance medlie, is when a man kills Casual
killing. The signs thereof.
an other, having no purpose to do him hurt. The presumptions of casual
killing be these: First, if a man kill an other, having no ill will or anger
toward him, nor to any other for his sake; neither is moved 1
thereto by covetousness, or any affection. Secondly, if he be doing 2
the lawful duties of his particular calling. Thirdly, if he be well occupied,
doing some lawful work beside his calling. And lastly, if he be 3
doing a thing which he ordinarily practices, keeping his usual place 4
and time. And albeit this kind of killing, if it be merely casual, is no
sin, yet the party committing it, in old time was bound to come to his
answer, thereby to purge and clear himself from suspicion of murder, as also
to avoid the hatred and danger of the friends of the party killed; and
lastly, to keep and maintain the hatred of murder among Gods people. Now
this sixth commandment, is not to be understood of casual, but of voluntary
killing. And this also must be observed, that Christ gives the name of
murder, to all the occasions thereof, that he might breed in our hearts an
hatred of them all, as of murder it self.

verse 23. If thou then bring thy gift to the Altar, and remembrest that thy
brother has ought against thee,

24. Leave there thy gift before the Altar, go thy ways, first be reconciled
to thy brother, then come and offer thy gift.


Here Christ propounds a Rule of concord, by seeking reconciliation with them
whom we have wronged: and it depends upon the former verse as a consequent and
conclusion drawn therefrom, as may Coherence.
appear by the first words, If then, or therefore: as if he had said, If rash
anger and the testification thereof, either in gesture or reuiling speech be
murder, and deserve condemnation, then we are with all diligence to seek to
be reconciled to our brethren, whenever any breach of love is made between
us and them.

The Exposition. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar] Here Christ alludeth to
the Jews manner of worship under the law; which was, to offer in the Temple
sacrifices unto God both of propitiation, and thanksgiving. And though Christ
here only name this one kind of ceremonial worship, yet under this he
comprehends all manner of true outward worship, whether Legal or
Evangelical; as if he should say, If thou come to worship God any way, either
by offering sacrifices, or by praying unto God, by hearing his word, or
receiving the Sacraments; and remembrest that thy brother has ought against
thee, that is, that thou have any way wronged and offended thy brother: this
appears to be the true meaning by the like words of Mark. 11. 15.
Mark, If thou have ought against thy brother, (meaning for injury done unto
thee by him) forgive him: and therefore our brother has something against us,
when we have wronged or offended him in word or deed, and he has knowledge
thereof, and just cause thereupon to complain.

Leave there thy gift before the Altar] Still he alludeth to the manner of the
Jews worship; who when they went to sacrifice to the Lord, brought their
sheep or bullock unto the utter court; or as some think, tied it to the
horns of the altar, in token that they presented it unto the Lord: now if at
that very instant, they did remember that they had any way offended their
brother, then were they to leave their gift there, (not quite omiting this
duty, but only suspending or deferring it for a while) and go seek to be
reconciled to their brother whom they had wronged.

Question. How could this departure be warrantable, seeing the Jews had a law
Ezekiel. 46. 10.
that when the service of God was once begun, none might depart, no not the
Prince himself, till it was ended. Ans. This Rule must be understood of
departure out of the utter court of the Temple, whither the people brought
their sacrifice soon after they had presented it, before it was begun to be
offered: for till the Priests had begun Gods service, it was lawful for the
people to depart, especially upon this occasion.

Question II. But what if the party offending, cannot possibly come to his
brother whom he has wronged, by reason of his absence in some far country,
his close imprisonment, or such like. Ans. He must testify his endeavor to be
reconciled unto him; and if the act it self be necessarily hindered by Gods
providence, God will accept the will for the deed, if there be a willing
mind: for this is Christ's meaning, that we should do our utmost endeavor to
be reconciled unto our brethren whom we have wronged, showing such care
thereof, that we prefer the same before the outward actions of Gods worship;
not presuming to worship God, till we be reconciled to our brethren.

Here we have a notable Rule for the maintaining of love and charity among
men; namely, brotherly reconciliation. In the giving whereof, Christ still
continues his exposition of the sixth commandment: for having condemned
murder, and the prouocations thereunto, in the former verse; here he
commands the contrary virtue of brotherly love, and the means to uphold the
same; to wit, Reconciliation for offenses given.

Out of this Rule in general we may observe: first, a Third direction A third
rule for expounding Gods commandments.
to the right expounding and understanding of Gods commandments; namely, where
any vice is forbidden, there the contrary virtue is commanded: and on the
contrary, where any virtue is commanded, there the contrary vice is
forbidden. This Rule must be observed as a privilege of the law of God, above
all humane laws; for men's laws are satisfied, by abstaining from the vice
forbidden, though the contrary virtue be not practiced: as he satisfies man's
law, forbidding Murder, that abstaines from the actual crime, though he love
not his brother: But he transgresses the law of God, that performs not the
contrary virtue, though he abstain from the vice forbidden: for though a man
abstain from killing, yet if he do not love his brother, he is guilty of
the breach of this sixth commandment; which serves to confute the error of our
ignorant people, who because they abstain from Murder, Adultery, and other
outward sins, do persuade themselves that they keep the law, and that God
will therefore be merciful unto them. But they must know, that though they
should abstain from the vices forbidden, yet they stand culpable of Judgment,
for want of doing the contrary virtues; for it is not sufficient to abstain
from evil, but we must do good, and therefore John Baptist says, Math. 3. 10
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into
the fire: and the sentence of damnation shall be denounced against the
Reprobates, for their omission of doing good: Mat. 25. 42
I was an hungry, and ye gave me no meat etc.

Secondly, by this Rule of Reconciliation, it appears that the performance
God reiects sacrifice without mercy.
of any outward service unto God, is displeasing unto him, if it be separated
from the love of our brethren: Isay 1. 11, 12. What have I to do with the
multitude of your sacrifices, says the Lord: and so he proceeds, rejecting
in particular, all the service of the Jews, because they lived in envy,
debate, and oppression; Their hands were full of blood, Isay, 58. 5, 6. The
Lord does there reprehend the Jews fasting from meats, because they did not
withal abstain from strife, and oppression; adding withal, that refraining
from cruelty, and doing works of mercy, is the fast which he requires:
which serves to overthrow the natural conceit of men, who think that the
whole worship of God, stands in the duties of the first Table. This was
indeed the conceit and practice of the Pharisees, whereupon they Math. 15. 5.
taught the people, that if they gave oblations to the Church, though they
relieved not their poor parents, yet God was well pleased with them. And the
like is the practice of the Church of Rome, who in cases of transgression,
through want of brotherly love, do not appoint this Reconciliation, but
Auricular confession, and Canonical satisfaction, as matters well pleasing
unto Almighty God: yea, such is the conceit of our common people, that if they
be present at divine service, if they hear the word preached, and receive the
Sacrac^aments at ordinary times, then they have done good service, and he will
respect them, though in their civil conversation they be at enmity with their
brethren, or live in such like sins. But we must learn, that God is served,
not only in the duties of the first Table, but of the second also; and that
God abhortes the duties of piety in such persons as make no conscience of the
practice of love and mercy: Ierem. 7. 9, 10. Will you steal, murder, comm^t
adultery, etc. and yet come and stand before me in this house* wherein my name
is called, and say we are delivered though we have done all these
^b^ominations? as if he should say* never think it: and therefore if (...)
desire true comfort in our serving of God, let us make conscience to join
therewith the practice of mercy toward our brethren.

Thirdly, here also we may learn, how to behave our selves before A duty of
(...).
we come to the Lords Table: if we call to mind, even when we be in the
Church, that we have any way offended our brother, we must first go and
reconcile our selves unto him, and then come to the Lords Table: we must not
abstain upon the remembrance of our wrong doing, for so we add sin unto
sin, refusing spiritual society with God, because we will retain enmity
toward our brother: but seeking speedily reconciliation, we must return to
receive the Lords Sacrament. Which flatly condemns the common practice of
many, who abstain from the Lords Supper, because they will not seek to be
reconciled to their brethren. This argues an heart full stu^^ with pride and
malice, which preferres it own lust before the will of God: for God commands
that the sun go not down upon our wrath; and it is his ordinance we should
receive the Sacrament to show forth Christ's death, when it is administered by
the Church; against both which he offends that abstaineth, because he is at
variance with his brother: for Christ will not have the gift that is brought, to
be taken away, but there left a while, till reconciliation be made.

Fourthly, in this Rule of Reconciliation, we may see, there be degrees Degrees
of duties in Gods worship.
in the duties of Gods worship; all are not equal, but some more, and some
less necessary. The first and highest degree of holy worship, is prescribed
in the first Commandment, as to love, sear, and to 1
rejoice in God above all, and to believe in him, and all his promises. The
second degree of holy duties, is to love our neighbor as our selves, 2
to seek peace and reconciliation with them whom we have wronged or offended.
Thus much does Christ here import, in preferring the practice hereof before the
offering of sacrifice. The third degree consists, in the outward ceremonial
duties of Gods worship, commanded in the first Table: as the outward actions of
Gods worship, and the outward solemnity of the Sabbath: for these give place
to the works of love and charity commanded in the second Table, and therefore
Christ says, first be reconciled, and then offer thy g^^t.

Now by this distinction of holy duties, we have a good direction (...).
for our behavior; that seeing the love of God and of our brethren, are the
two highest degrees of good works, therefore we are above all things to seek
after them, and to prefer the doing of them before the outward worship of
God; for that we see comes in the last place. But the practice of men i^
otherwise; generally they are more forward in outward ceremonies, then in the
maine duties of the love of God, and of their brethren; like to the Pharisees,
Luke 11. (...).
who passed over judgment and the fear of God, and were very strict in
tything mint and ^ue: but this is a preposterous course, and clean contratie
to this precept of our Savior Christ.

Thus much of this Rule in general. Now I come to more particular (...).
obseruati^us out of the words: I ^aue thy gift at the Altar Here Christ
approou^^h of this worship of God among the le^^es by offering sacrifices; from
whence it follows, that sacrificing a^ the Al^ar, and by proportion other
ceremonial worship, was not abrogated either at Christ's birth, or baptism,
for here Christ allows of them: and therefore they ceased only at his death,
when upon the cross he said, Ioh (...). (...). ^ Col. 2. ^.
It is finished, then he put out the hand writing of ordinances that was
against us.

Thy gift; that is, thy sacrifice; whereof the Jews had two kinds:
Propit^ator^e, and Gra^^lator^e, or of thanksgiving: and they are here called
gifts, because in sacrificing the people gave some thing unto God: in which
respect a sacrifice differs from a Sacrament, wherein (...).
God gives some thing unto us. Now the sacrifices of the law, wherein men gave
something unto God, signified two things: first, that Christ should give
himself unto his Father for our sins: secondly, 1
that we should wholly give our selves unto God, both in soul and 2
body, to serve him: and therefore God says, Prove. 2^. 26. My son, give me
thy heart: Romans 6. 13. Give your members (...) we ^pons of righteousness unto
God, as they that are alive from dead work^^* Romans 12. 1. I beseech you
brethren, by the mercies of God, that you g^ue up your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God: this we ought to do in token of
thankefulnes for Gods endless mercies: and this we then do; First, when we
acknowledge our selves not to be our own, but Gods in Christ: Secondly, when
we consecrate and dedicate our selves to the service of God, that both in heart
and life we may show our selves thankful for our creation, preservation, and
Redemption especially. But lamentable is the case with men in this behalf: in
stead of giving themselves to God, men bequeath themselves to the devil, and
become his slaves and vassals: they make their hearts his dwelling place, by
malicious, wicked, and lustful thoughts; they consecrate the faculties of
their souls, with all the parts of their bodies unto him in the practice of
sin: this ought not to be, seeing Christ gave himself for us, let us give
our selves wholly unto him.

And there remembrest; that is, do call to mind, that thy brother has
ought against thee, etc. By this Christ teaches us, that whenever
Examination of our selves before w^ do service to God.
we come to do any service unto God, we ought first of all to enter into our
own hearts, and there to search and try our own estate, in respect of
offenses given to God or man, whereof we have not repented, that so before we
come to Gods solemn worship, we may be reconciled both to God, and to our
brethren. The want of this, brings many a curse upon men's souls, even in the
means wherein they think to receive Gods blessing: and therefore we must
look to the practice of this duty, that we do it speedily and from our
hearts. This we had need to look unto in respect of God, whom we daily
offend: for if he have ought against us, and yet we stand out against him by
impenitencie, who can save us from his wrath? Let us think on Elies speech, 1.
Sam. 1. (...).
If one man sin against an other, the Judge shall judge it: but if a man
sin against the Lord, who will plead for him?

verse 25. Agree with thine Adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with
him, least thine adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver
thee to the Seria^t, and thou be cast into prison.

26. Verily, I say unto thee, thou shall not come out thence, till thou have
pated the uttermost farthing.


Our Savior still goes on with his former Rule of concord and Reconciliation.
Now because the meaning of the words is controuersall, it shall not be amiss
somewhat to discuss the diverse expositions that are made hereof. The Papists
say, that by Adversary is meant God, (...)e (...) lib. 1. cap. 4.
commanding men in his law; and by way, is meant the space of time in this
life: by Judge, they understand Christ: by Serieant, Gods Angels: by prison,
hell: and because in hell there be many places, therefore here by prison, they
understand purgatory: and by the uttermost farthing, venial sins: as if
this were the meaning, Agree with God whiles thou art in this life between
this and the day of Judgment, least thou come before Christ, and he cause his
Angels to cast thee into Purgatory, and there thou remain till thou have
satisfied for thy least venial sins. This exposition they stand upon the
more, because hereupon they would build their doctrine of Purgatory.

But this cannot be the true meaning of this place, for the reasons The consat.
following: First, these words depend upon the former, and are a continuance of
the rule of Reconciliation between man and man, and not between God and man.
Secondly, their exposition overthrows the mediation and satisfaction of
Christ for man to God: for if (as they say) man may and must satisfy for his
venial sins, even to the uttermost, then Christ did not make a perfect
satisfaction for man to God: for if he did, why should man satisfy for
himself? Thirdly, by this exposition they confound the Adversary and the
Judge (for the Father and the Son are one) which in the Text are made diverse
and distinct. Fourthly, they make a Redemption and delivery from hell, from
whence indeed there is no redemption. And lastly, in making a parable of this
place, they set their Purgatory on a sandy foundation: for from the words of
a parable can no sound collection be made, but only from the maine scope
thereof.

Others there be, that understand these two verses of the party offended, for
(say they) Christ had showed before the duty of the party offending, to seek
for reconciliation: now therefore he lays down the duty of the party
offended and wronged, namely, that when the party offending comes unto him and
desires reconciliation, he must agree and be reconciled with him quickly. This
exposition, how soever it is plausible and sit in reason, yet it cannot well
stand with the words of the Text, which threaten to the party that agrees not
with his adversary betimes, to be carried before the Judge, and cast into
prison, there to lie till he have paid the uttermost farthing: but there is no
reason why the party offended and wronged, should thus be cast into prison,
and therefore it can not be understood of him.

Thirdly, others expound these words, to be a parable, borrowed from the courts
of the Jews; and hard it is to say, whether they be the words of a parable or
not.

But to leave all these, A fourth Exposition, which I take most fit and The
trae exposition.
proper to express the true meaning of the place, is this. The words co^taine
no parable, but are literally and properly to be understood: for Christ had
before exhorted the party doing wrong, to seek to be reconciled with his
brother, by acknowledging of his offense, and making recompense, according to
the injury offered. But because men are obstinate and stiff necked, and will
not yield and submit themselves to this duty; therefore he further urges the
party offending, to the speedy performance of this duty, by the danger
ensuing upon the neglect here of; saying, Agree with thine adversary, etc.]
that is, use means to become friends with him, with whom thou art at variance,
(for an adversary does not here signify an open enemy, but any one, with
whom we are at difference, who has an action against us in any matter by
reason of our injury done unto him.) Quickly] that is, without delay, stand
not upon thy supposed right, but rather yield from thine own right, then
ouer-long to defer to be reconciled. Whiles thou art in the way] that is, (as
we may plainly see, Luke 12. 5. 8.) while thou art going with thine Adversary
to have the matter tried before the Magistrate. Lest thine Adversary deliver
thee to the Iudge] That is, lest thine adversary, having a good action against
thee, do convince and cast thee, before the Magistrate. And the Judge deliver
thee to the Serieant, and thou be cast into prison.] That is, lest after thou
art convinced of wrong doing, the Judge command the Serieant to cast thee into
prison. And because it might be thought a small thing, to be cast into
prison, for that he might quickly come out again; therefore our Savior Christ
adds in the last place, Verily, thou shall not come out, till thou have paid
the uttermost farthing: this farthing, was the least coin used among the
Jews, called a quadrin, which contains two mytes, as we may see, Mar ^2. 42
by the widows gift cast into the Treasury; and it is the fourth part of a
penny in English: so that this last phrase is prouerbiall, as if he had said,
Look for no compounding or agreement with thine adversary, when thou art once
cast into prison, for he will show thee no favor, but use thee as hardly as
may be, remitting nothing; but causing thee to make full restitution and
satisfaction, even to the uttermost farthing. And this I take to be the true
and proper meaning of the words.

The special points to be observed in the words, are two; a Precept, and a
Reason thereof: The Precept in these words, Agree with thine adversary
quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him: that is, use all good means to
become friends with whomsoever thou have any ways offended, before the matter
come to be tried before the Magistrate. The Reason is in the words following,
drawn from the danger that will ensue deferring of agreement, lest thine
Adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge to the Serieant, etc. The
Precept is a rehearsal of the Rule of Reconciliation given in the former
verse, touching agreement with those whom we have offended: which point,
Christ stands the more upon, because of the stubbornness of men's hearts, that
cannot abide to submit themselves, either in yielding a little of their own
right, or in making satisfaction for wrong done to others. Now this precept is
further set out, by two circumstances; First, of the time, it must be done
quickly, and not deferred upon any pretense or show of our own right:
Secondly, of the place, in the way, as we go to the Court.

In this Precept, our Savior Christ gives unto us a notable Rule of How to
preserve peace.
equanimitie, for the maintenance of peace and love, with those with whom we
are to deal in the private affairs of our special callings; namely, to deal
moderately, if the matter concern our selves, without all rigor or
extremity: unless our place be such, wherein our silence may impeach the
glory of God, or the good of his Church, Phil. 4. 5. Let your patient mind be
known unto all men.

To the practice of this Rule, many duties are required: First, we must Rules.
1.
construe all men's sayings and doings in the best part; herein they failed,
that ba^e false witness against our Savior Christ, by applying his speech to
the Math. 26. 60. 61.
material Temple in Jerusalem, which he spoke of the Temple of his body.
This mistaking and misconstruing of men's sayings and doings, is the cause of
much debate continually. Secondly, we 2
must learn to bear with, and to wink at our brothers wants, Prou. 19. 11.
It is the glory of a man, to pass by an offense: if the same only concern
us, and be not derogatorie to Gods glory; as if he be froward, hasty, angry,
reproachful, and so forth; we must in Christian patience pass by the same, as
though we took no notice of it, till by our reproof we may do him good.
Thirdly, though direct injury be done 3
unto us, yet if the same be private, and do not impeach the glory of God,
our life, or good name, we must be content to bear it; 1. Cor. 6. 7. Paul does
sharply rebuke the Corinthians, for going to law about trifles; Why rather
(says he) suffer you not wrong? why sustain you not harm? And this by Gods
grace a man shall do, if first he duly and equally consider his own deserts,
both of like injuries from men, and of eternal damnation from God himself,
whom he continually offends. Secondly, if he have an eye to the providence of
God, in that thing wherein he is wronged, which disposes all things for the
good of his children. Fourthly, for the maintenance of peace, we must yield 4
of our own right: so did Genesis 13. 9.
Abraham unto Lot, though he were above him both in years and authority,
bidding him choose where he would dwell, whether on the right hand, or on the
left: and our Savior Christ, though he were free, being of the Kings stock,
yet for the Mat. 17. 26
avoiding of offense, paid tribute for himself, and Peter. And observing these
things with good conscience, we shall by Gods grace maintain Christian concord.

Secondly, Christ commanding speedy agreement, condemns that Wrangling
forbidden.
wilfulness and stubbornness of men, whereby, rather then they will submit
themselves, and yield a little of their right, they will carry every trifling
matter before the Magistrate. This is a common fault among us in these days of
peace, for every tri^lie is made a law matter, which ought not to be among
Christians; it plainly argues great want of love, and small regard to this
commandment of our Savior Christ. I speak not this, to condemn the lawful
use of the law, but to reprove the bad practice of carnal men, who make
lawing the means of their private revenge, and sometime of flat injustice
against their brethren, whom they do not affect.

Thirdly, Christ here also notes out the hardness and cruelty of Man's
natural cruelty.
men's hearts, who will never let a man go, if once they get him in the lurch:
such cruel wretches are they that take the forfeitures of leases, bonds, and
obligations: and such, for the most part, are our common usurers: but all these
must know, that they are void of love, and grace, whereby they should maintain
this concord, which Christ requires.

Fourthly, by this circumstance of time, (Agree quickly) Christ Heart burning
in suits unlawful.
would teach us to keep our hearts clear from grudging and heartburning, even
then, when we have occasion of suite or controversy with others; for this
rancor of heart, will cause further debate and contention, like to an angry
humor in the veins, which sets the whole body in burning fits.

Fifthly, if we must use speed in seeking agreement with men whom
Reconciliation with God must be sought betime.
we have offended, before we come to the trial of a mortal Judge; then much
more must we give all diligence to be reconciled unto God, for our daiely
sins, whereby we offend him; and that with all speed, even in this life,
before we come to his tribunal seat: for howsoever in the courts of men, we
may go upon sureties; yet at the bar of Gods Judgment, none can answer for
us. If we be not before hand reconciled to God in Christ, this undoubtedly will
be the issue; we shall be cast into utter darkness, and there remain till
we have fully satisfied the Justice of God, which will never be. Let all
estates and degrees think on this, and especially the younger sort, who deceive
themselves by deferring repentance, when as indeed, they as well as others, are
every day going forward to the bar of Gods judgment.

Sixthly, as in seeking Reconciliation, so in doing every good work Use speed
in well-doing.
that concerns Gods glory in the good of others, we must use all convenient
speed; Gal. 6. 10.
while we have time we must do what good we can unto all, for death and the
last judgment come suddenly: Say not to thy neighbor (says Pro. 3. 28.
Solomon) go, and come again to morrow, if thou have it now. And again,
Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand shall find to do, do it with all thy
power: This is Jobs defense, Job. 3^. 16.
that he restrained not the poor of their desire, nor caused the widows eyes
to fail: and his practice must be our president, for the more good we do, the
more grace we have, and the liker we be to our Mat. 5. 44, 45.
heavenly father.

Thus much of the Precept: The Reason follows, Least thine adversary deliver
thee to the Judge, etc.] which is thus much in effect, If thou show extremity,
thou shall find extremity showed unto thee again, even by the Magistrate.
They that deal stiffly and rigorously, shall be rewarded in their kind: God
in his just judgment will have men measured unto, as they measure unto others,
Matthew. 7. 2. 6. Mark. 4. 24.

Here then we are taught to deal in equity and moderation with all men, in
the private affairs of our callings, even as we would have them to deal with
us; and then God will cause others to deal well with us: but if we deal ill
with others, God will reward us in the same kind. This point all Usurers,
Ingrossers, Tradesmen, etc. should well observe, who think they may do with
their own, what they will; but we must know, we are but Stewards, and our
account will be exact.

Secondly, here we see, Christ allows of the Magistrate, and his Magistracy
approved.
Judgment seat: 2. Of his proceeding against the guilty, in delivering him
to the Officer: 3. Of the office of the Sergeant: 4. Of casting guiltic persons
into prison: 5. Of suing at the law, when right cannot be gotten by any other
lawful means; but law must not be the first course we take, in seeking our
right, we must rather suffer some wrong, and seek to end the matter by
friends: and use law, as Physicians use poisons, when gentle physic will not
serve the turn; then in case of extremity, they do minister stronger
physic; yea, sometime poison it self: so when we cannot otherwise procure
our peace and right, then we may lawfully take the benefit of the law.

Verse 27. Ye have heard that it has been said of old time: Thou shall not
commit Adultery.
Here our Savior Christ goes about to restore the seventh commandment,
touching Adultery, to his true sense and meaning, and so to his proper and
right use, by purging it from the false and erroneous interpretation of the
Jews; for which end, he first lays down the false interpretation of the
Scribes and Pharisees, verse 27. and then adioyneth the true sense thereof,
verse 28. especially; yet so, as he continues the same in the verses following.

For the first; before the interpretation of the Jews Teachers, he prefixeth
this Preface: Ye have heard that it has bin said of old time; or, of the
ancient Teachers, the meaning and use whereof, we have before showed, verse
21. Then after follow the words of the seventh commandment, Thou shall not
commit Adultery; which are the proper words of the H. Ghost; yet here must not
they be taken in that sense, which the Scribes and Pharisees gave unto them: for
the better conceiving whereof, this one thing especially must be opened;
namely, what is Adultery here forbidden. Adultery properly, is the breach of
wedlock Adultery.
by such parties, some one whereof, at the least, is either married, or
espoused: I call it the breach of wedlock, to note the property of this
sin, which is not in any other sin, unless it be of this kind, though the
sin be far more grievous. Idolatry is a more heinous sinn^ then
Adultery, being a breach both of the first and second commandment, of the
first Table; and yet it comes short of Adultery, in this quality of breaking
wedlock: for wedlock may be kept of those which are Idolaters. Secondly, I
say, between any parties, if one be married; meaning the husband as well as
the wife, to confute the opinion of some Jews, and by some laws also
maintained, that the man has a privilege above the woman, so as he breaks
not wedlock, when he goes in to another woman, besides his wife; which is
false: for though he have a prerogative over his wife, in being her head; yet
he has no privilege to free him from matrimonial fidelity, but is as much
bound to keep himself unto his wife, as she is to keep her self to him. The
pre-eminence of superiority cannot free the husband from the bond of marriage,
the husband is bound to the wife, as much as the wife is to the husband; and
she has power over his body, as much as he has over hers, 1. Cor. 7. 4.
Thirdly, I say, or espoused, because Adultery is not only committed by such
parties, whereof one or both, be fully married; but also by them, whereof one is
single, and the other contracted only; and therefore is the same Deuteronomy. 22. 22,
23, 24.
punishment allotted to both: for contract in right is marriage. Thus we see the
sin here directly forbidden, according to the letter of the Law. Now, though
the Lord under this one includes all the sins of the same kind, as we shall
anon perceive; yet the Pharisees took this litterall signification, for the
whole meaning, and taught that the sin here forbidden, was bodily adultery
only; and so made the adultery of the heart to be no adultery; which
exposition Christ here confutes.

First, here observe the fraud and cunning of these Pharisees; they The use.
Fraud in expounding Scripture.
would seem faithful interpreters of the Law, in that they keep themselves so
close to the words, that they will not pass one jot beyond the litterall
sense: but yet in the mean time they omit the full meaning and true use of
this Law. The like has been the practice of heretics in all ages; as the
Arrians, who denied that Christ was God, stuck fast to these words of
Scripture, Ioh. 14. 28.
the father is greater then I, and to such like. And the Papists to uphold
their breaden God, by transubstantiation, will needs keep tke litterall sense
of these words of Christ, This is my body, whereby they ouerturne the nature
of that sacrament. And the Rhem. Mat. 26. sect. ^* 9.
like might be showed by sundry examples, in all ages; whereby we are taught,
not to stand upon the propriety of the words of Scripture only, but to labor
to have the true spiritual sense joined with them.

Secondly, here observe how grievous a sin Adultery is, in that Adultery a
grievous sin.
Christ by name does expressly forbid it, among all the sins of this kind;
yea, the very Pharisees do every where condemn it: for though they would
easily dispense with Math. 15. 4, 5, 6.
disobedience to Parents; yet the woman taken in Adultery must be put to
death, John 8. 4, 5. The greatness of this sin might be showed by many
arguments; for if he be 1. Tim. 5. 8.
worse thou an infidel, that cares not for his family, then far worse is
the Adulterer, for he destroys his family. Solomon Pro. 7. 30. 32.
(we know) makes Adultery worse then theft, and yet theft is a notorious
sin, greatly hated, and severely punished of all nations. Again, Adultery
destroys the Seminary of the Church, which is Mat. 2. 15.
a godly seed in the family, and it breaks the covenant between the parties
and God, it robs another of the precious ornament of chastity, which, is a
gift of the holy Ghost, it dishonors their bodies, and makes them the
temples of the devil; and the Adulterer makes his family a Stews, for as
David dealt with Vrias, so his own son Absalon dealt with him: and lastly,
it brings Gods vengeance upon the posterity: and therefore Job calls it
Job. 31. 12.
a fir^ which shall devour unto destruction: yea, the greatness of Gods
punishment upon Adulterers, partly in this life, and principally after death,
may plainly show the greatness of this sin; for this and other sins, God
in his wrath ouerthrewe Deuteronomy. ^9. 23.
Admah and Zebomi, Sodom and Gomorrah, with five and brimston^^ from heaven;
and the place where they stood, it made a poole of poisoning water unto this
day. And although the Lord do not show such extraordinary revenge against
sin, yet his wrath is a consuming fire against whole families, towns, and
kingdoms, for this sin; though David repented of his Adultery, yet for that
very sin, the sword ^. Sam. 12. 10.
must not depart from his house for ever. And for the life to come, Heb. 13. 4.
Adulterers, and wh^rem^ngers, God will Judge. Again, 1. Cor. 6. 9.
neither fornicators, nor adulterers, etc. shall inherit the kingdom of God:
they may indeed repent, and so be saved, but then they cease to be adulterers.

Now if Adultery be so grievous a sin, worser then theft, etc. then we must
wish that in all places, it were as severely punished, as theft is; so would
families be reformed, and become good Seminaries, both for Church, and common
wealth. Secondly, the grieuousnesse of Gods wrath against this sin, must
admonish every one to beware thereof, for it brings the besome of destruction,
to sweep all away, both in Church and common wealth.

Verse 28. But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after
her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart.
Here our Savior Christ lays down the true sense of this commandment, and as
we see, he speaks as the Lawgiver, and Prophet of his Church, who has
absolute power to give laws, and to expound the same. But I say unto you: The
Pharisees said there was no adultery, but that which was outward, and bodily;
but Christ plainly confuteth that, and says, he that looks on a woman to
lust after her: that is, either in looking on her, lusts; or by looking,
lusts after her: that is, desires to increase his lust, he has committed
adultery with her already in his heart. Here then our Savior Christ sets
down two things touching the interpretation of this law: First, the occasion of
adultery, which is looking to lust. Secondly, that the ^ust of the heart, that
is, the motion and inward inclination of the heart, unto this sin, is
adultery before God, though it never come into action.

For the occasion: To look upon a woman, is not sin, but may be done
lawfully; yea, thereby a man or woman may glorify God, as the Queen of Sheba,
by beholding* Salomons person, and hearing ^ 1. King. (...). ^.
his wisdom, did take occasion to glorify God: but here is meant the abuse of
the sight; that is, the idle looking, or curious looking of men Idle looking on
man or woman.
upon women, or women upon men. Now idle looking, is when one looks without
just cause; as when a man looks with intent to lust: Thus did the sons of
God behold the daughters of men: Genesis 6. 2. by whose looking came lust, and
for lust came the flood: so Potisers wife Genesis 39. ^.
first, lift up her eyes upon Joseph, and then lusted after him: and Dina Ge.
34. 1, 2.
Jacobs daughter went out to see the daughters of the country, and to be
seen again, and so when Shechem saw her, he lusted after her, and ravished
her: so the Prophet David 2. Sa. 11. 2, 3*
living in peace and security, cast his eye idly and curiously upon '
Bathsheba, as she was washing her self, whereupon he lusted after her, and so
committed both Adultery and murder. This idle and curious looking, Saint
Peter calls 2. Pet. 2. 14*
an adulterous eye, both because it is the beginner of lust, and the increaser
thereof. But this sin is little regarded, and made a small matter with many,
who can be content to come with Christian ears into the assemblies, and yet
will bring with them idle and curious, yea adulterous eyes: but such persons,
which so abuse their sight, to the dishonor of God, must know, that they are
adulterers before God: and howsoever they may persuade themselves, that grace
enters into their hearts by hearing, yet undoubtedly by their idle and curious
eyes, Satan enters into their soul, and keeps out Gods word, whereby the
soul should be renewed. We therefore must here be admonished, to take heed
how we use the sight of our eyes, especially when we are in the assemblies of
the Saints, and holy exercises: and to prevent this evil, it were to be
wished, that men and women, would sort themselves, and not be mingled in the
congregation, unless it were the husband with his own wife. Again, if the
idle and curious eye be the beginning of adultery, then we must learn, with
care to govern our eyes, as the servants of God have done. ' David prayed the
Lord to Ps. 119. 3^.
keep his eyes from regarding vanity: and Job, because he would avoid
unchaste thoughts, Job. 31. 1.
made a covenant with his eyes, not to look on a maid.

Now, as looking to lust is here forbidden; so by proportion are all other
Occasions of adultery here forbidden.
like occasions unto adultery: as first, reading of unchaste and wanton books
of love matters, and using light and wanton talk. Many are given to these
kinds of delights, but they must know, that herein they 1
sin grievously; for they have not only a wanton eye, but a lascivious
tongue also. Secondly, the acting of all such Plays and Comedies, the 2
matter whereof, is the representation of the light behavior of men and women;
for therein are idle and curious looks set forth to the eye, which ought not
to be, being here condemned. Thirdly, the wearing 3
of vain and light attire, whereby others are provoked to cast their eyes upon
them unto lust; for if the light and wanton eye be condemned, then that which
causes it, is much more condemned. This ought to be regarded; for light and
foreign attire is a secret profession of an unchaste heart. Fourthly, mixed
dancing of men and women, in 4
time and measure, for therein is more occasion and provocation unto lust, then
by the bare beholding of each other with the eye. Fifthly, 5
evil company: so are the words of the Apostle Paul out of an Heathen Poet,
1. Cor. (...). 33. Menander in Thaide.
Evil conuersings, corrupt good manners: which may well include that unseemly
conuersing of men with women, not warranted either by the general, or
particular calling. Sixthly, the 6
pampering of the body with dainty meats, or strong drinks; this was the
sin Ezekiel. 16. 49.
of Sodom: and it is much more an occasion of lust, then the bare sight of the
eye. Seauenthly, Idleness and laziness, in not 7
employing the body in some honest calling, for thereby also is lust incited.

And thus much of the meaning of this commandment, forbidding all occasions to
adultery, under a lustful eye.

Now considering that a man is guilty of adultery, that uses the occasions
thereof; hereby we may see, that we cannot excuse our selves from the breach of
this law: for though we be clean from the bodily outward fact, yet who can
say, My heart is clean? who is free from the occasions thereof? as from a
wanton eye, vain apparel, wanton speech, intemperance, and the rest; all
which makes us culpable of this sin: and therefore we must lay our hands
upon our mouths, and condemn our selves of guilt before God; we must humble
our selves, acknowledging our sins, and breaches of this commandment: and
lastly, we must take heed of all occasions, that may move or incite us unto
lust or wantonness.

The second point which our Savior Christ propounds, in the interpretation
of this law, is this; that the lust of the heart, though it never come into
act, is Adultery: now that we may know what our Savior Christ means by
lust, sundry points are to be handled: First, how lust can be a sin,
considering it is only a hidden desire of the heart: Secondly, how lust can
be a sin of the seventh commandment, seeing it is forbidden in the tenth:
and thirdly, how great a sin lust is.

For the first, that lust is a sin, is thus proved: Gods Law requires Lust
is a sin.
obedience of the whole man, both in soul and body, and in every part,
faculty, and power thereof; Thou Mat. 22* 37.
shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with
all thy strength: and that obedience which comes not from the whole man, is
sinful. Now when a man conceiueth unchaste thoughts in his heart, then his
soul, and mind, and his affections, have not done their duty unto God; and so
he sins in lusting.

Yet this doctrine was never received of all, but some have still excepted
against it, and their principal reasons are two: 1. They say, lust Pelag^an^.
is a natural inclination, desire, and appetite, which was in Adam before his
fall, and so cannot be a sin? Ans. Lust or appetite in the heart, is not
simply a sin; for so it is a natural desire, which was in our first parents
in their integrity: but to lust after that which God forbids, that is the
sin; as for a man to lust after a woman, or a woman after a man, not being
man and wife, which we see here Christ condemns. 2. They say, God blesses
adulterers and fornicators in their lust, with the issue of seed in
childbearing, as well as man and wife, in lawful marriage; and therefore it
cannot be a sin? Ans. In adultery two things may be considered; the
unlawful lust of the heart, and the act of generation: now when God gives
issue to adulterers and fornicators, it is no approbation of their sinful
lust, but only a common blessing of natural generation, which is his own
ordinance by creation: for howsoever God approoues not of our sin, yet he
preserues nature in sinful works. And thus we see that lust is a sin.

II. Point. How can lust be a sin of the seventh commandment, seeing it is
directly forbidden in the tenth, for in this brief decalogue there is no
needless repetition of any thing? Ans. Lust is two-folde, either without
consent of will, as when unchaste desires come into the mind and heart, and
are not entertained of the will, but be speedily checked so soon as they
arise; and such lust is forbidden in the tenth commandment: or with consent of
will, when a man is willing to entertain and cherish the unchaste thoughts that
come into his mind; though he never put them into practice, and these are
forbidden in the seventh commandment.

III. Point. The greatness of this sin of lust: This is here expressed Lust
of the heart a grievous sin.
by Christ, calling it Adultery before God; as if he should say, Look how
great a sin bodily adultery is before men, who punish the same with death;
even so great and heinous a sin before God, is the inward unchaste lusting of
the heart, whereto a man gives consent of will, though he never bring it into
action; for this he stands culpable of adultery before God, and shall
therefore be condemned, unless he repent.

The use of this Third Point is manifold: First, hereby we may learn how to
examine our selves by this seventh commandment; for our Savior Christ here
teaches us, that they which willingly retain unchaste How to examine the
heart by the 7* commandment.
desires with delight, though they never give their bodies to the outward act,
are Adulterers before God: and therefore when we would examine our selves by
this commandment, we must search our hearts, whether we have willingly
retained therein any lustful thoughts; and if we have, we must know that we
are guilty of Adultery before God. And because none of us are free from this
sin, it must humble and cast us down before God, as breakers of this
commandment.

Secondly, if the lust of the heart be Adultery before God, then we must with
care and diligence learn the Apostle Paul's lesson, 2. Corinthians 7. 1. To
purge our selves from all uncleanness both of flesh and Motives against lust.
spirit: that is, we must labor to keep our hearts and minds pure and
chaste, as well as our bodies. And to induce us hereunto, consider the Reasons
following: First, we all desire to see God, and to know his 1
love in Christ, for our comfort in this life, and salvation for ever: but
without holiness and purity Heb. 12. 14
of heart, we can never see God, nor know the comfort of his love: for when a
man defiles his mind, with unchaste thoughts, he depriues himself of the
taste of Gods favor, and of the experience of his love. Secondly, consider the
state and 2
condition of man's heart, by effectual calling; it is the dwelling place and
Temple of the holy Ghost, (for when a man is in Christ, he lives in Christ by
faith, and Christ in him by his spirit:) now then look, as men use to trim
up their dwelling houses, for the receiving of some noble guest, so ought we
to keep our hearts pure and clean from unchaste lusts, that they may be fit
habitations for the blessed spirit of God; but by unchaste lusts, we make the
heart a stable for the devil, and a cage of all unclean spirits. Thirdly, if
we suffer 3
our hearts now to burn with fleshly lust, we make an entrance in them, for
the burning of hell fire for ever: for these two always go together, burning
lust, and hell fire, (unless repentance come between.) (...)
And therefore, if we would escape hell fire, we must quench the fire of
lust, and cleanse our hearts from this uncleanness. Fourthly, 4
by profession we seem to be the members of Christ; and if we would be so
indeed, then we must take heed of unchaste lusts, for thereby we pull our
hearts from Christ, and knit them to an harlot. These and such like ^^^sons,
must move us to avoid all unchaste desires* and for the preservation of
chastity in our hearts, these Rules must be observed.

First, the mind must be filled with godly meditations, and the word of God
must dwell in our hearts plenteously: for unchaste lusts 1
Rules for the preservation of chastity.
do therefore arise in our hearts, because we are idle minded, and empty of
Gods word: if that were truly ingraffed in us, these wicked desires could not
enter, or at least take no place in us. Secondly, we must 2
often give our selves to the spiritual exercises of faith, repentance, and
new obedience; as to the usual hearing, reading, and meditating in Gods word,
to the often receiving of the Lords supper, and to continual prayer, not only
publicly, but privately especially: for these confirm Gods graces in the
heart, and do even nippe in the head all ungodly motions whatsoever. Thirdly,
we must use sobriety in meat, 3
drink, and apparel: for ungodly lusts are kindled, fed, and nourished with
too much pampering of the body: Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim sinned
most grievously in this kind through fullness of bread; and therefore we must
use a moderation in these things, that grace may be strengthened, and all evil
lusts weakened in us. Fourthly, we must always be doing some good thing,
either in 4
our general calling of a Christian, or in our particular calling: yea, in our
lawful recreation we must intend and practice good: for when men are idle,
Satan fills their hearts with evil thoughts, and so defiles the same. Fifthly,
men and women must not privately converse together, 5
without warrant so to do, either from their general, or particular calling,
so as with good conscience they can say, the Lord does call them so to
converse: for the mutual conuersing of men and women, is the cause of many
noisome lusts: and therefore neither men nor women without good warrant, should
thrust themselves into such occasion of temptations. Remember what the Apostle
says, 1. Cor. 15. 33.
Evil conuersings, corrupt good manners. The Apostle Peter felt tho smart of
this boldness, though in an other case: for coming to warm himself in Caiphas
hall, without good warrant so to do, when a silly maid demanded of him,
whether he was not one of Christ's company, he denied him flatly, and that with
cursing: and so many men and women conuersing without warrant where they should
not, do fall into many noisome sins; and when they think themselves most
strong, then with Peter, have they the greatest falls.

verse 29. Wherefore if thy right eye cause thee to offend, pluck it out, and
cast it from thee: for better it is for thee, that one of thy members perish,
then that thy whole body should be cast into hell:

verse. 30. Also if thy right hand make thee to offend, out it off, and cast it
from thee; for better it is for thee, that one of thy members perish, then that
thy whole body should be cast into hell.


In these two verses, our Savior Christ lays down a most heavenly Scope.
instruction, for the avoiding of offenses; propounding it by way of answer to
a secret objection, which might be framed, by occasion of his former exposition
of this seventh commandment; for having condemned the Adultery of the heart,
declared by the eye, some man might say, What shall we do with our eyes, if
an unchaste look be so dangerous? Our Savior Christ answers, If thy right
eye cause thee to offend, pluck it out; Which words must not be taken
literally, in their proper sense: for this is a Rule in the expounding of
Scripture, Rule of expounding Scripture.
that when the litterall sense is against any commandment of the law, the^ the
words must not be taken properly. Now these words in their proper sense, do
command a breach of the sixth commandment, which binds every man to preserve
his own, and his neighbors life; and so no man can without sin pull out his
eye, or cut off his hand.

By eye then, we are to understand, First, the eye of the body; yet not
Exposition.
that only, but any other thing that is dear and precious unto us: as our
eye, even our right eye is. If it cause thee to offend,] that is, cause thee to
sin, and to fail in the way of obedience unto Gods commandments: Pluck it
out, and cast it from thee:] these words are a lofty kind of speech, called
Hyperbole, whereby thus much is signified: Restrain and govern it most
carefully, though it be to thine own great pain, loss, and hinderance; For
better it is for thee, that one of thy members perish, then that thy whole
body should be cast into hell:] These words contain a Reason of the former
exhortation, to this effect; It is better for thee, to want the benefit and use
of things most precious and dear unto thee, in this life, and so to be saved;
then by having and using them, to perish for ever: So that the true meaning of
this place, is this; as if our Savior Christ had said, Go through the whole
course of thy life, ^arapluase.
and take a view of all thy ways, and therein see what thing is an occasion
of sin unto thee; that take heed of, and avoid, though the use thereof be
most dear unto thee: for it is better that thou should want the use
thereof, and so be saved; then by it to perish eternally in hell fire.

Also if thy right hand make thee to offend, cut it off, for it is better for
thee, and. Here the same exhortation and Reason is again repeated, which we
must not think to be a thing needless and frivolous; for such Repetitions in
Scripture have special use, to signify that the things so delivered, be of
special importance, worthy all careful observation and obedience. Now by
right hand, here is meant, any thing that is most profitable unto us, what ever
it be, if it cause us to sin against God, it must be avoided, and left off
most carefully.

By this Exhortation of our Savior Christ, we are taught to carry Use. Guard
the senses.
a strict watch over all our senses, and over all the parts of our bodies,
especially the eye and hands, that they become not unto us occasions of sinning
against God: and for the government of the eyes, there be two special Rules;
First, we must use our sight, that is, open and Rule* for the eyes.
shut our eyes, in obedience unto God. Solomon giving Rules, for the 1
well ordering of the tongue, sight, and foot, says thus of the eye; Pro. 4.
24. 25.
Let thine eye behold the right, and thy eye liddes direct the way before thee:
which words seem to carry this sense, That we should order our sight
according to the strait Rule of Gods word, for that is the way wherein we
ought to walk. Now the necessity of observing this Rule, may appear by
sundry examples: Eues Genesis 3. 6.
looking upon the forbidden fruit, with desire to eat thereof, against Gods
commandment, was the door and entrance of that sin into her heart: was not
Cham Genesis 9. 2^, 25.
accursed for looking upon his Fathers nakedness? was not Lots wife turned
into a pillar of salt for Genesis 19. ^6
looking back toward Sodom? Fifty thousand threescore and ten men of
Bethshemish were slain 1. Sam. 6. 19
for looking into the Ark of the Lord, against his revealed will: by all which
it is plain, that we ought to use our sight in obedience to God: for which
end, it will be good before we look on any thing, to consider whether the same
will be for Gods glory, the good of our selves, and of our brethren; if it be,
we may use our sight; if not, we may not use it.

Secondly, we must make our eyes, not the weapons of any sin, but the 2.
Rule. Look to Gods glory.
instruments of Gods worship and service. This we shall do, if we employ them
thus: 1. In beholding Gods creatures in heaven and earth, that 1
in them we may see Gods glory, wisdom, mercy, power, and providence, and
thereby take occasion to magnify the name of God. 2. In 2
beholding Gods judgments very wishly and narrowly, that therein we may see
his justice and wrath against sin, and so be humbled in our selves, and
terrified from sin. 3. In beholding of the Elements 3
of Gods Sacraments, especially the bread and wine in the Lords supper, which
be visible words, wherein we may see our Savior Christ, as it were crucified
before our eyes. 4. In using them as instruments 4
of Invocation, by lifting them up Psalm. 1 2.
to heaven, to testify the lifting up of our hearts unto God. This use of the
eyes nature teaches us; for whereas other creatures have but four muscles in
their eyes, whereby their eyes are turned round about, man only above them all
has a Columb. l. 5. cap. 9.
fifth muscle, whereby his eye is turned upward toward heanen. And this which
is said, for the well ordering of our eyes, must be observed in the rest of
the senses, and in all other parts of the body; they must all be employed and
set a work in obedience to God, and continually observed, that they become not
the weapons of sin, but the instruments of his glory.

Secondly, this Exhortation of Christ, must teach us to avoid all the Avoid
all occasions of sin
occasions of every sin, though it be with great loss unto our selves, in
the things of this life. This is the chief point that our Savior Christ
aims at in this place, and therefore it ought with special regard to be
learned, and remembered. Man's nature is like unto dry wood, or towe, which will
burn so soon as fire is put unto it; give a man the least occasion of any
sin, and he is as ready to commit it, as dry wood is to burn, though
thereby he do as much as in him lies, to cast away his own soul for ever.
Look therefore, as Mariners on the Seas, have constant and continual care to
avoid both rocks and sands, whereby they may suffer shipwreck; so must we
most warily avoid the occasions of every sin. A most worthy example hereof
we have in Moses, who was brought up in Pharaohs Court, till he was forty
years old, where he enjoyed all earthly pleasures and honors that his heart
could wish; and so might have continued if he would, for he was the adopted
son of Pharaohs daughter: but yet Moses left them all, and ^^b. 11. 25. 26.
chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God in Goshen, then to
enjoy all the pleasures of Egypt. And this he did, because they were but the
pleasures of sin, which he could not enjoy, unless he would forsake the
true fear and worship of God, and all good conscience: and his example we
ought to follow.

Now that we may avoid all the occasions of sin, and so put in practice this
wholesome precept of our Savior Christ, I will here entreat of the occasions of
sin, and show withal, how they may be avoided.

By occasion of sin, I mean any thing that either of it self, or by An
occasion of sin desc^^bed.
man's abuse, becomes offensive, and provoke unto sin. In this large
acceptance, an occasion of sin extends it self, not only to such things
as are evil, but even to things good and commendable in themselves, which by
man's abuse, cause transgression against God. Occasions 2. Kinds of offence^. 1.
Gia^^.
of sin are twofold; either given or taken. An occasion given, is that
thing, either word or action, that is evil in it self, the speaking or doing
whereof, stirs a man effectually to sin. Occasions given are twofold;
either of one man unto another, or of man unto himself. Men give offense to
others 6 ways
The occasions whereby one man may provoke another to sin, are many; I will
reduce them unto six heads. The first is, badde counsel, whereby one man
persuades another unto sin. This is a great 1
Bad couns^.
cause of much evil in the world: thus came the fall of our first parents; for
Genesis 3. 4, 6
Satan persuaded Eve, and Eve her husband: thus came the crucifying of the
Lord of life; for the high 'Priests and Rulers Mat. 27. 2^.
persuaded the people to ask Barrabas, and to destroy Jesus. Hence comes
seeking unto wisards; one friend persuades another, for their outward good, as
they think: yea, from this bad counsel comes the common neglect of all good
duties in Gods worship.

The second is, consent or approbation of sin, and it is two-folde; 2
Consent.
secret, or open: Secret approbation and consent is, when men see sin
committed, and are not grieved thereat; for this cause the Apostle Paul
checketh the 1. Cor. 5. 1, 2
Corinthians, that they were not sorrowful, but rather puffed up at the fact
of the incestuous man: whereby they did in some sort hearten him in his sins:
this is a great occasion of sin in our days. The Prophet David was of
another mind, his Ps. 119. 136.
eyes gushed out rivers of tears, because men brake Gods laws. Open
approbation of sin is, when men do openly countenance sinners, and lewd
persons, which make profession of badde practices; this is a great occasion of
many horrible impieties: hereby the hands of the wicked are strengthened in
their wickedness, as Ier 23. 12. 17.
the Lord complains: and this is the sin of this age; for who is so badde,
that has not some patron of his evil, and some back friend to sooth him in
his sin, which makes sin shameless, and sinners impudent? But all Gods
children must follow Elisha, who in great feruencie of spirit told Iehoram to
his face, though he were a king, that 2. Kin. 3. 14.
if it had not b^ene for the preseuce of good King Iehosaphat, he would not
have looked toward him, nor seen him: the Lord himself will not Job 8. 20.
take the wicked by the hand, neither can he endure, that his children should
2. Cor. 19 2
help the wicked, or love them that hate the Lord.

The third occasion given, is provocation unto sin, when either by 3
Provocation to sin.
word or deed, men excite or draw on others to some evil; as unto anger,
revenge, hatred, to drunkenness, or such like; and this is a common fault of
those that delight in drunken fellowship.

The fourth occasion is, neglect of good duties unto our brethren; as of 4
Negl^ct of good duties.
exhortation, admonition, instruction, or rebuke, Joshua 7. Achan stole the
execrable thing for himself alone, and yet all the people are charged with
that fault, and punished for it: the cause was, their neglect to keep one
another from that sin, according as God commanded the^. chap. 6. 18. This is
a great occasion of impiety among us; if neighbor would admonish neighbor,
and one brother an other, sin would not be so rife as it is. But this duty
is not only neglected of private men one to another, but of public persons,
who are more bound unto it. The Magistrate is negligent in punishing, and the
Minister in reproouing sin: and the master of the family careless in
reforming those that are under him, which causes sin to abound.

The fifth occasion given, is evil Example in the practice of any sin 5
whatsoener, which may be known: this is most dangerous, like unto Bad example.
wild fire that inflameth all places whereon it lights. The truth hereof
appears among us: for let any one man or woman take up a new fashion in
attire, and presently the same is generally received: let a man invent or sing
a lewd song, and presently it is learned of all, even of little children that
can scarce speak: whence also comes it, that crawling infants should swear
roundly, and frame themselves to all impiety, when they cannot speak readily,
but from the bad example of their Elders, with whom they are brought up? Now
among all men, their bad example is most dangerous, who make the greater
profession of Religion. They are like false lights upon the shore, which lead
the shippesvpon the sands. And therefore such as show any care or forwardnes in
holy practices of religion, must have special watch over all their ways, that
(if it be possible) they may be blameless both in word and deed: for all men
have an eye at them, and the wicked would gladly spy holes in their coat.

The last occasion given is, the private slandering of Gods Ministers, 6
and the disgracing of their Ministry: this is an offense as general as
Slandering Gods ministers.
the rest, and it causes many to contemn the means of their salvation. When
men meet together, their common talk is of the Ministers, and of their
doctrine, not to be edified by mutual conference, but only to disgrace their
persons, and to make their ministry contemptible; but they little know what
mischief this causes, and therefore it ought to be avoided.

These are occasions of sinning given by one man to another: for the How to
avoid occasions given.
avoiding whereof, which is the plucking out of the eye, and cutting off the
hand here commanded, this Rule must be observed: We must hate and eschew the
occasions of sin as deadly poison: and esteem those persons A Rule.
that give them unto us, in that regard, as ill as the devil. Thus Christ
dealt with Peter his own disciple, when he went about to hinder him from doing
his Fathers will in suffering for our sins; saying, Mat. 16. 23
Come behind me Satan; considering him in that action, as if he had been the
devil himself: for we must know, that the devil comes not openly unto men,
but cunningly conuaies himself in these occasions of sin given by others,
that thereby he may enter into them for the destruction of their souls: we
therefore must endeavor as Paul did, Act. 24. 16.
To keep a good conscience in all things: that is, to keep our selves pure
and vncorrupt from all the occasions of sin in the world: with a watchful
eye against offenses must walk on, in that way that leads unto life,
eschewing these stumbling blocks which the devil casts in our way by other
men: and so shall we obey this good counsel of our Savior Christ.

The second kind of occasions of sin given, are those which a man gives The
second kind of offenses given.
unto himself: and they arise either from his affections, or from his
imaginations: from man's affections arise so many occasions of sin, as
Offenses arising from a man's corrupt affections.
there be corrupt affections in him; as from corrupt desire arises
covetousness, which is so great an occasion of sin, that the Apostle calls it
1. Tim 6. 10
the root of all evil. This draws man's heart so much to the world, that he
can spare no time for the means of his salvation; herewith he is so choked,
that he never thinks of repentance, till the last gasp. Such an other
occasion of sin, is pride of heart, whereby many give themselves so much to
the garnishing of their bodies, that they neglect their souls altogether. The
like is self-love, whereby men ouerweening their gifts, think not themselves
honored according to their desert, and so through discontent give themselves
to plotte and practice much mischief, for the advancing of their estate. Of
this sort are the Romish Priests and Jesuits, as their manifold dangerous
attempts against our Church and State do evidently declare. And thus we might
run through all the affections of man's heart, showing that the corrupt
motions thereof are the cause of much sin unto him, and a most dangerous
means for the ruin of his soul.

In regard whereof here also we must snew, how this eye may be plucked How to
avoid offenses arising from a man's own heart. The Rule.
out, and this hand cut off: that is, by what means we may reform our hearts,
and stay the rage of our affections, that they cause us not to sin. The way
is this, we must mortify and crucify our unruly affections and corrupt
desires. And for this end we must put in practice three duties. First, we must
believe that we are crucified with Christ; that Means.
is, as we conceive our selves to be in Christ by faith, whereby we have 1
communion with him; so we must conceive that this communion with Christ, is in
his death and burial, so as our sinful nature, with all our corrupt
affections, were nailed to his cross and buried in his grave, as the Apostle
shows at large, Romans 6. 3, 4. etc. Now when this persuasion shall take place
in our hearts, it will by Gods grace keep us from yiedling to corrupt motions
and desires, and move us to labor to subdue them daily: for herein stands our
assurance that we have fellowship with Christ, when we have fellowship in his
death. And therefore as we see malefactors to cease from stealth and robbery
when they are once hanged; so we being crucified with Christ in respect of the
old man, must not suffer the same to rule in our affections, or to have force
in our members: knowing (as the Apostle Romans 6. 6.
says) that our old man is crucified with Christ, that the body of sin
might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin: and, Gal. ^. 24.
they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts
thereof: whereupon he bids us Romans 6 11.
think, that we are dead to sin, meaning with Christ, and so cannot live
therein: S. John says, 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
he that is borne of God, sins not, because the seed remains in him: that
is, true faith assuring the heart that all the benefits of Christ's death and
passion belong unto him; whereof this is one, that in our nature he suffered
death upon the cross, that we by the power of his sufferings might have sin
crucified in us, so as it should not reign in us to bring forth fruits unto
death. Secondly, we must remember Gods commandment forbidding 2
every sin, and every wicked lust and affection; and withal we must apply
the threatening of his wrath against the same, that thereby our flesh may be
subdued. Thirdly, we must strive against our corrupt 3
motions and affections, not giving them liberty to bear sway in us, but
ruling them by meditating in the word of God, and by prayer for strength of
grace to overcome them all; dealing with them as parents do with knives,
turning the edges of them before they leave them in the hands of their
children, least they be hurt therewith: as if our love be set upon the world,
we must labor to set it upon Christ and his righteousness; and if our hatred be
against our brethren, we must labor to set it upon sin, and so for every
affection, as joy, fear, etc. we must so keep them to their right objects,
that they may rather further us in well doing, then become in us the occasions
of any sin against God.

The second kind of occasions of sin which a man gives to himself, Offenses
arising from man's mind.
arise from his mind and imagination: And they are many, I will only note
three. The first, is an inward conceit of perfect knowledge, 1.
touching man's duty to God, and the way of his salvation: that this is a
common conceit in the hearts of the ignorant especially, may appear by this
common speech of theirs; that they know as much as any Preacher can teach them:
for the sum of al (say they) is, to love God above all, and my neighbor as
my self, and to believe to be saved by Christ: now this they know as well as
the best; and hereupon they become contemners of the preaching of the word, the
ordinary means of their salvation, as of a thing needeles and superfluous.
This conceit is common among us, and does much hurt to many a man's soul.

The way to cut it off is this; the vain man that is puffed up with Remedy.
this conceit, must examine himself touching his knowledge, whether it Try
our knowledge.
be sufficient to his salvation. And for this end he must make inquiry in
himself for these two things; first, whether he see his own natural 1
blindness, and whether he be moved thereby to labor for the knowledge of God
and of his will; where this is wanting, there is nothing but a vain conceit of
knowledge: Secondly, whether his knowledge 2
be joined with conversion of heart from sin unto God, and with reformation
of life from evil to good. This change of heart and life goes with all saving
knowledge. Now if these be wanting (as undoubtedly they are in all vain
persons) then is their knowledge so far from being saving knowledge,
profitable to salvation, that it rather turns to their deeper condemnation.

The second Imagination in man, occasioning him to sin, is the 2
persuasion of his strong faith. The more ignorant sort that want both faith
and repentance, will thus brag of their strong faith; that no evil company
can hurt them, and hereupon they take occasion to live as they list. But that
this is a vain presumption may hereby appear; because Act. 15. ^.
true faith purifieth the heart, and 1. Ioh. 5. 4.
strengthens a man in life to avoid sin, yea, it ministers sweet comfort
toward the time of death. But usually these men that brag and boast so much
of their faith, are corrupt in heart, sinful in life, and fearful in their
death; many times despairing of Gods mercy, as lamentable experience often times
teaches.

The way to cut off this occasion of offense is this; to make trial in
Remedy. Try thy faith. 2. ways.
our selves whether our faith be true and sound or not. This will appear two
ways: First, by the beginnings and degrees of the works of the spirit, which
go before a true and lively faith, which be three; first, a 1
true sight of our sins, with an apprehension of the wrath of God due for the
same; secondly, a true sorrow and grief of heart for offending God by these
our sins; and lastly, an hungering and thirsting after the mercy and grace
of God in Christ, above all worldly things: where these things are, there is
grace; but where these are wanting, there is no true faith, but a vain
presumption, Secondly, faith will 2
appear by the work of love: for in love will faith bring forth all the
duties of the moral law, both to God and man: for Gal. 5. 6.
faith works by love, and love is the fulfilling of the law, Romans 13. 10. Now
all such persons as stand so much upon the strength of their faith, shall soon
find, if they examine themselves by these two Rules, that they have nothing in
them but a vain presumption, which will turn to their deeper condemnation,
unless they repent* and get true faith.

The third Imagination causing a man to sin, is a thought of security, 3
whereby he puts far away the evil day; persuading himself that though God
will come in judgment against sin, yet it is far off. This was the wicked
thought of the Jews, who said; the P^^k. 12. 2^.
visions showed to the Prophets, were of times a far off, and for many days
to come. This conceit is naturally bred in every man, and is the occasion of
many foul sins: Math. 24. 48. The evil servant said in his heart, my master
does defer his coming, and thereupon he takes occasion to smi^e his
fellows, and to live lewdly. Isa. 28. 15. The wicked say, they have made a
covenant with hell and death, and though a scourge run over, and pass
through, yet it shall not come at them. And the ungodly that walk after their
own lusts, say, 2. Pet. 3. 3, 4.
Where is the promise of his coming? And is not this wicked thought rife among
us? for God has now a long time called us to repentance by the preaching of
the Gospel, and because it takes no place in our hearts, he sends upon us his
heavy judgments, as plague, famine, rumors of wars; but yet all this have
not caused us to meet the Lord: generally that complaint of the Prophet may be
applied unto us, Ier. 8. 6.
No man says, what have I done? now the cause hereof, is this wicked conceit,
whereby we think Amo. 9. 10.
the evil shall not come not hasten for us. In this regard we are like the men
of the old world, who would not believe Noah, though he preached unto them both
by word and deed; and so they knew nothing till the flood came and took them
all away: so fearful is it, to put away from us the threatenings of Gods
judgments. And yet this sin takes place not only in the ignorant, but many
times in the hearts of Gods children.

The way to remove this wicked conceit is, to esteem of every present Remedy.
day, as the day of our death, or of the last judgment, and so accordingly, to
prepare our selves to die, and to meet God in judgment every day. This thing
Moses aimed at, when he prayed God Psalm. 90. 12
to teach him and his people s^ (...) number their days, that they might
apply their hearts unto wisdom* for this persuasion of long life, mooues many
to give themselves to the sins and vanities of this world excessiuely: we
must therefore shake off this vain persuasion, and every day prepare our
selves for death, and for the day of judgment; so shall we number our days
aright, and apply our hearts unto wisdom: for this is true wisdom in man,
rightly to consider his latter end. And the more nearer does this duty
concern us, because of the continued intercourse of Gods judgments upon us,
in famine, plague, and pestilence, etc. which plainly argues, that more heavy
judgments are to ensue, unless we prevent the same by speedy and true
repentance.

Having thus showed, what be the occasions given whereby men are Offenses taken.
drawn to sin, I come to occasions taken. An occasion of sin, or, an
offense taken is, when a man of a good thing frames that unto himself which
causes him to sin against God; and so as much as in him lies, to cast away
his own soul. These occasions taken, arise especially from 4. heads from
whence offenses are taken. ^. from Scripture.
four heads. First, from the Scripture: secondly, from the doctrine of the
Church drawn out of Scripture: thirdly, from the state of the Church: and
fourthly, from the state of the wicked. For the first: though the word of God
be most perfect every way, both for matter and style, yet hence do many take
offense, and that two ways principally; partly from the plainness and
simplicity of the Scripture, and 1. From the plainnes of it.
partly from the contents thereof. For the first, it is most true, that the
Scripture style and phrase in many things, is plain and familiar even to the
capacity of the simple; yet this is no disgrace to Scripture, but rather an
honor, which more sets out the Majesty of Gods word. And yet hereby many
take occasion to contemn it, esteeming the study of Scripture too base and
shallow, and the knowledge thereof, too plain and familiar for their fine
wits; whereupon some give themselves to other studies and courses, which might
glorify God in this calling. Others also, though they addict themselves unto
Divinity, yet they more employ themselves in the writings of men, for their
private studies, then in the word of God; and in their public Ministry,
they more affect the ostentation of humane wit, eloquence, and learning, in
multiplicitie of reading, and set words and phrases, in diverse languages, then
that plain evidence of the spirit, which the Apostle 1. Cor. 2.4.
Paul so much commends. This also is a great fault in many hearers, that they
are more delighted with the vain conceits of men in preaching, then with the
pure and plain word of God, counting basely of that Sermon, wherein the
Prophets and the Apostles are only quoted, but highly advancing that Sermon
for deep learning which is stuffed out with Fathers, Schoolmen, Poets, and
such like.

To cut off this offense: First, the will of God must be considered, for the
penning and preaching of his word, in plain and simple manner! for herein is
that true, 1. Cor. 1. 27, 18.
that God has chosen such things, as to the world are foolish, weak, vile,
and despised, to confound and bring to naught the wise, and mighty things of
the world: and hereby also it is made evident, that 1. Cor. 2. 5.
the faith of Gods elect, does not consist in the wisdom of men, but in the
power of God: again, the preaching of the Gospel, 1. Cor. 1. 17
with the wisdom of words, makes the cross of Christ of none effect: let no
man therefore deceive himself, for v. 25.
the foolishnes of God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God stronger then
men. Again, he that does exercise 2
himself in the word of God either privately or publicly, must labor
thereby to see his own sins, and Gods heavy judgment due unto him for
them; and so will he begin to reverence Gods word, as the only means of
true comfort. The woman of Ioh. 4. 11, 12.
Samaria, at the first began to cavil with Christ, when she heard him talk
of the water of life: but so soon as he discovered her sin to her
conscience, telling her v. 18.
she had had five husbands, and he whom she now had, was not her husband;
then she left off to cavil, and 19. etc. 19.
honored him by believing his word, and causing others to come and to believe
in him. The Jews made Act. 2. 12, 13.
light of the giving of the holy Ghost unto the Apostles at the first; but when
Peter had v. 36. 37. 41
pricked their hearts, they sought unto the word, and received it with gladness:
so the Iayler, though over night he dealt unkindly with the Apostles Act. 16.
24.
putting their feet in the stocks in the dungeon; yet being stricken with a
fear, by the opening of the prison doors, he then fell down before them
trembling, and asked v. 29 30.
what he might do to be saved.

Secondly, others take occasion of offense from the contents of the 2. Offense
taken from the contents of Scripture.
Bible; as when they read of the Miracles wrought by the Prophets, by Christ
and his Apostles; they say, the like may be done by Magic, and so
blasphemously do father upon the Scripture that most wicked practice of
sorcerie; like to the malicious Jews, who said of Christ, that he cast out
devils by the power of Beelzebub, Luke 11. 15. Others deny the History of
Moses to be true, by reason of Noah's Arc, which (they say) as it is described
for quantity could not contain a couple of every kind of creatures, with
provision and fodder for them, for a whole years space: of this opinion was
Appelles an ancient heretic in the primitive Church: and many upon these
occasions have become Atheists, denying the truth of Gods word to their
damnation. To these I answer; first, for the Miracles, that no creature, men,
or Angels, is able to do such works, as are recorded in Scripture, to be done
by the power of God: Ioh. 9. Christ opened the eyes of one that was borne
blind. The devil by his skill, and man by Art can do much in curing
blindness, caused by wounds and diseases, but no power of nature, nor of magic,
no not all the power of all Angels, is sufficient to procure sight to one that
was borne blind; that must be done by a power creating, which is in no
creature. Again, as Histories record, the devil is able to enter into a dead
body, and cause it to move, and can speak in it; but to raise up one to life
that had been dead four days, as Ioh. 1^. 43, 44.
Christ did Lazarus, is a work that all the devils in hell, nay all the
Angels in heaven, are not able to do. And for Appelles the heretic, who took
occasion from Noah's Arc to condemn the books of Moses: the answer Origin*
hom. 2. on Genesis de sab. ica arcae.
made to him in the Primitive Church may serve the turn; to wit, that it was
in quantity sufficient to contain couples of all kinds of creatures, and
provision for them for a whole years space: for to omit the height and breadth
of it; it was Genesis 6. 15.
three hundred cubits long, and every cubit (according to the ancient measure)
contained nine foot, which in all came to the length of half a mile and more.
Again, others say, that though every cubit had been but one foot and an
half long (as our cubits are) yet having v. 16.
three lofts, it was of sufficient bigness to contain all kinds of creatures
by couples, and provision for them for a years space. But yet put the case
that we could not tell, how an Arc should be made great enough, to contain
couples of all kinds of creatures, and provision for them; should we thereupon
take occasion to condemn the books of God that record the same, and the thing
it self? God forbid: nay rather, we must hereby learn to acknowledge and
confess our own blindness, and the shallow reach of our understanding, and
so admire the wonderful work of God.

The way to cut off this occasion of offense, taken from the Scripture,
Remedy. 1. Rule.
is, first to observe, that (howsoever nothing is more repugnant to our nature
then the word of God) yet the same word of God has more prevailed with many
men's hearts, to win the same unto it, then any thing in the world besides
could ever do. Humane writings are far more plausible to natural men, then
the holy Scriptures of God: for the wisdom of God in Scripture is esteemed
foolishness to man's natural reason; and yet who did ever cleave so fast to
the writings of men, as Gods children have done to the word of God, for the
testimony whereof they have been and are content, to live and die? This thing
argues plainly, that there is in Scripture a divine power, for if it had
been from man, and against his nature as it is, man would have contemned it.

Secondly, this must be considered, that the penmen of holy Scriptures, both
the Prophets and Apostles, have recorded their own faults in penning Rule 2.
of it, which plainly argues that they were penned by holy men of God,
according to the direction of the holy Ghost, and are not the inventions of
politic heads to keep men in awe: for then the Authors and penmen thereof,
would rather have concealed their own faults, then have published the same in
their own works to their discredit. Lastly, consider the subject and matter
of the whole Bible: Rule 3.
to wit, Jesus Christ, who therein has professed himself to be the Son of
God: now if Christ had not been very God, and yet should have taken that
honor unto him, then the like judgments would have befallen him that befell
others for the like offense: for none ever took that honor unto them, who
were not grievously punished. As was Genesis 3. 17. 23.
Adam in Paradise, for seeking to be like unto God: and Herod, for receiving
and applying to himself, the blasphemous praise of the people, crying, Act.
12. 22, 23.
The voice of God, and not of man: but howsoever most fearful judgments
befell Gods enemies, that thus sought to rob him of his honor; yet Christ's
end was glorious and blessed: which may move us to think highly of
Scripture, as of the word of God.

The Second head from whence offenses are taken, is the doctrine of 2. Head of
offenses taken: The doctrine of the Church.
the Church, grounded on the word of God. The offenses hence taken are
manifold: first, from a supposed newness of our doctrine: this is taken of the
Papists, and especially of our own Recusants: for they say our doctrine is but
of fourscore years continuance, since the days of 1 From supposed newnes.
Martin Luther: auouching also that for the space of fourteen hundred years,
we cannot bring record of any Church that held and professed the doctrine,
which we now teach and hold.

Now for the avoiding of this offense, two points must be remembered: Remedy.
I. that the doctrine of our Church for the substance thereof, is the doctrine
of the Prophets and Apostles, Act. 2. 42. the doctrine taught by the Apostles
concerning Christ, is made the foundation of the Church, and look where this
doctrine is rightly held and confessed, there it is an infallible note of a
true Church. Again, the Apostles to justify their doctrine, had recourse to
Moses and the Prophets, as we may see in the Acts of the Apostles in sundry
Act. 26. 2^.
places: now the doctrine touching Christ held and received in our Churches, is
confirmed by the testimonies of the Prophets and Apostles, and therefore for
substance and doctrine is theirs. Secondly, we must know, 2
that for the ground and foundation of Religion, our Churches agree with the
Churches after Christ, which continued for the space of six hundred years:
for we do not only allow of the Apostles Creed, but of the four general
Counsels, and of their Confessions and Creedes, and that in the same manner
and sense which they did; so as the religion of our Church is unjustly
slaundered to be new.

The second offense taken from the doctrine of our Church, is from II. From
supposed strictnes.
the supposed strictness and rigor thereof: we teach indeed, that a
Christian man must wholly deny himself, his own will and desires, and
resign himself wholly unto Christ, to be guided by his spirit, according to
the direction of his word. Now hence some would gather, that our doctrine
permits not a man to laugh, or be merry, or to do any thing for his own
delight; and hereupon they grow to contempt of Religion, counting the
profession and practice thereof preciseness; and therefore will not be bound
unto it, but live as they list: and this is common among us.

The way to cut off this occasion of offense, is twofold: 1. we Remedy.
must know, that by the doctrine of our Church, it is lawful for a man 1
Rule.
to be merry, so it be in the Lord: Philip. 4. 4. Rejoice in the Lord always
(says the Apostle) again I say rejoice: Psalm. 104. 15. God causes wine that
makes glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine, and bread to
strengthen his heart. Again, God does put most glorious colors, and
delightsome smells into the flowers of the field, no doubt for this end that
man might take his delight therein: yea, besides the skill of music, God has
given to many a man, a voice more sweet and pleasant then is the sound of any
musical instrument, which were to no end, if a man might not therewith cheer
up his heart in a moderate delight: nay, laughter it self is the gift of
nature, which was in Adam before his fall, and therefore is lawful. But yet I
say, man's rejoicing must be in the Lord, to cut off many abuses of delight: for
first, there be many that cannot be merry, but in the practice of some sin;
if there be a thought of God or of his word, all their mirth is quasht. But we
must endeavor our selves so to rejoice, that God may approve thereof. Again,
I say, in the Lord; because sin will soonest prevail with a man, when he
gives himself to delight and pleasures. This Job knew well, and therefore
while his sons feasted each other, Job 1. 5.
he offered sacrifices for them particularly every day: for (says he) it may
be my sons have sinned and blasphemed God in their hearts.

The second way to prevent the taking of this offense, is to resign II. Rule.
Resignation of our selves unto God.
our selves wholly unto God, that he may do his whole will in us and upon us;
so Christ said to his Disciples; Luke 9. 23.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, take up his cross, and
follow me: that is, wholly resign himself to be guided by me: and Math. 13.
46. he that would get the precious pearl, must sell all that he has and buie
it. Romans 12. 1. We are desired by the mercies of God, to give up our selves,
both souls and bodies unto God: whereby we may see, that we have just cause to
bewail the case and condition of all such, as count religion precisenes: for
they are like unto Ananias and Saphyra, who brought part of the sale of their
possession unto the Apostles, and said it was all: so these men look to be
saved by Christ, they hear his word, and receive his Sacraments, and therein
make as high a profession as any can do; namely, that they will give
themselves wholly to Christ: but when they are out of the assemblies, they show
themselves to have dissembled with God: for they practice no such thing as they
made show of: and therefore they may justly fear, least that befall them in
their souls, which befell Act. 5. 5. 10.
Ananias and Saphyra in their bodies, even sudden death: for they are liars
unto God himself.

Thirdly, others take offense at the cross, which accompanies the III. o^fence
taken from the cross accompanying the truth.
sincere profession of true Religion: many like well of the doctrine of our
religion, but yet they are loath to embrace, and to profess the same, least
they should be reproached for it in the world.

The way to cut off this occasion of offense is this, we must remember Remedy.
that the cross endured for the Gospel sake, especially if we profit by it, is
an infallible mark of a child of God. Heb. 12. 17. If ye endure chastening,
God offers himself unto you, as unto sons: for what son is it, whom the
father chasteneth not? In reason we find this to be true: for say that two
children be fighting in the street, and there comes a man who takes one of
them and beats him, but the other he lets alone: will not all men say, that
the man is father to the child whom he beats? even so the Lord for our
nurtering, will send crosses upon us, when we embrace his Gospel: now if we
shall profit by his corrections, and learn thereby to humble our selves under
his mighty hand, then we begin to receive assurance of his fatherly dealing
toward us his sons and daughters: and therefore we must be so far from
being hindered in the course of our holy profession by reproaches and crosses,
that they must be means to encourage us therein. Iam. 1. 2, 3.

As from the doctrine of the Church in general, so from the parts Offenses
taken from particular doctrines. ^ Of Predestination.
thereof, do many both learned and ignorant take occasion of offense; as
first, from the doctrine of Gods predestination, whereby we teach that God has
decreed the condemnation of some. This doctrine many do renounce, as a
doctrine of cruelty, and thereupon frame unto themselves private opinions,
which will not stand with the word of God.

The way to avoid this occasion of offense, is this; First, to grant Remedy.
1 Rule.
unto God himself so much in this case, as we will yield to mortal man in the
like. Among our selves we allow of this liberty one to another, that a man may
kill a fly, or a worm; and for his lawful use and pleasure, kill sheep,
oxen, and other creatures, and yet be a merciful man: shall we not then allow
unto God, that he may glorify his name, in the just and deserved condemnation
and destruction of his creature? This is less then we grant to men, for a
worm is something unto man; but a man is nothing in respect of God. Again,
among our selves, in some things we give liberty one to another to do as we
will, and yet think the action just and lawful; much more then ought we to
give freedom of will unto God in all his actions, without conceit of cruelty
in any one of his works; for all his works are done in equity. Secondly, it
must 2. Rule.
be remembered, that we teach not, that God does simply ordain some men to hell
fire: but touching reprobation, our doctrine is this* that God has decreed and
purposed to glorify his name, in the due and Doctrine of Reprobation
deserved condemnation of some: for in ^an^ reprobation? God has two actions:
First, he decrees to pass by some men, without showing his eternal mercy
unto them, and only to declare his justice upon them; then after he decrees,
when they are by themselves fallen into sin, to inflict upon them deserved
condemnation for the same.

The unlearned also, from this doctrine of Predestination, take occasion of
most fearful falling; for thus they reason: If I be predestinate to
salvation, I am sure to be saved, let me do what I will; and if I be
predestined to condemnation, I am sure to be condemned, though I live never
so godly; for Gods decree changes not, and therefore I will live as I list.
Thus do desperate persons imbolden themselves to sin, and to cast away their
souls.

The way to cut off this offense is this; they must remember, that in Remedy.
Rule.
Gods decree, the end, and the means that bring men to that end, go always
together: and therefore, that such as are ordained to salvation, are ordained
to the means thereof; namely to vocation, justification, and sanctification,
Romans 8. 30. The end and the means in Gods decree must never be severed: Now
righteousness and holiness in Christ, is the means whereby God has decreed to
bring men to salvation: and therefore they sin grievously, that upon the
immutabilitie of Gods decree, take occasion to live profanely. Isay 3^. 5.
Hezekias is* sick unto death* yet God promises to add unto his days
fifteen years: now if Hezekias had consulted with these men, they would have
told him thus; be of good cheer O King, neither eat nor drink, nor use any
thing to cure thy sore, or to preserve life: for thou shall certainly live
fifteen years; God has said it, and it must be done: but Hezekias takes no
such course: nay, he uses the means both to cure his sore, and to preserve
his life. And so did Paul, for his own and others preservation, keep Act. 27.
31. with 24.
the mariners in the ship, who were the means upon the sea to bring them
safe to land, though God had given unto him all that sailed with him.

The second special doctrine of the Church, whereat some take occasion 2. Of
the fall of Adam.
of offense, is concerning the fall of Adam: for we teach, that God in some
sort decreed his fall: whereupon some object, that we make God the author of
sin, considering his decree is unchangeable. Now to prevent this offense, two
Rules must be remembered: I. that Gods Remedy. I. Rule.
will may be distinguished. It is either general, or special. Gods general
will is that, whereby he wills that sin shall be, by his just permission.
But Gods special will, is the approouing will of God, whereby he taking
pleasure in any thing, will have the same done and brought to pass. Now we say
not, that God willed Adams fall by his approouing will, but only by his
permitting will; because it was good in regard of God, that man should fall.
II. We must remember, that Gods decree II. Rule.
went before Adams fall, only as an antecedent, not as a cause thereof: for
the unchangeable decree and will of God takes not away the liberty of man's
will, or of the second causes, but only inclines and orders the same, as
the first and highest cause of all.

The Third special doctrine of the Church, whereat offense is taken, 3. Of
man's inabilitie of himself to do good.
is this, That man of himself can do no good, but all goodness and grace in
man come from God. Hence our common people take occasion of looseness of life:
for tell them that they must repent and believe, if they will be saved; their
answer is, that they do it so well as God will give them grace; all goodness
(say they) must come from God: yea, the wiser sort amongst us will not stick
to lay the fault of their loose life on God, who gives them no more grace. But
for the avoiding of this occasion of offense, we must know; that when we are
not Remedy.
able to do our duties as we ought, and to pray, to repent and believe as God
requires, the fault is in our selves, and not in God: for we were created
righteous in Adam, and in him, had power and grace to have done whatsoever God
required at our hands: but Adam lost this power through his own default; and
we in him lost it also: and therefore our inabilitie comes from our selves.
Again, we must consider that God gives grace indeed, yet not miraculously in
Alehouses and Tavernes, but then when men use the means to come by grace, and
do that which by nature they are able; that is, come and hear the word
attentively, endeavoring to believe and to obey the same: for though the good
usage of the gifts of nature cannot merit any grace, yet ordinarily we may
observe, that in the use of means is grace received: Act. 2. 41. At one sermon
there were converted three thousand souls, among the rebellious Jews: Act.
16. 14. Lidias heart was opened in hearing Paul preach: and ordinarily men are
converted in the means: for faith comes by hearing the Gospel preached, Romans
10. 17.

The last point of doctrine, from whence many take occasion of offense, 4. Of
Justification.
is the doctrine of Justification by faith alone, without works. Hence the
Papists condemn our Church as an enemy to all good works: and many hereby
take occasion of a lewd life, because good works must not justify them before
God. Now to cut off this offense, we must Remedy.
hold and know, that good works and faith are disioyned in the work of our
Justification before God; but they are conjoined in the whole course of our
lives and conversation, both before God and man. No work in man but faith is
required to his Justification, though in God there be respect to his own free
mercy, and to Christ's merits: but in our lives faith and works must go hand
in hand together. Now that these may thus be well distinguished, I show it
plainly: In the fire is both heat and light, yet in the warming of the body
the heat has force only, and not light, though to many other uses it serve
necessarily; even so in a child of God are required both faith and works, but
to justify him faith only is required, though works be necessary thorough
his whole life: for they justify us before men, and win unto us a testimony
of our justification before God, not only in our own hearts, but from the
Lord, Iam. 2. 21. and therefore we must not content our selves with a faith in
speculation, void of works; but within the compass of our callings, do what
good we can for Gods glory, and the comfort of our brethren.

The Third head from whence offenses are taken, is the state of the III. head
of o^fences, from the state of the Church. 1. from the wants in it.
Church: first, in regard of the wants that be in the Church, and namely in
this our Church. Hence sundry men take occasion to condemn our Church as no
Church, our Sacraments as no sacraments, our Ministers as no Ministers, and our
people as no Christians; and therefore do separate themselves from our Church,
as being no true members of the Church of God. To prevent this occasion of
sinning, three Rules must be observed: first, that to believe and confess the
doctrine of salvation, Remedy. I. Rule. A true note of the Church. Gods church
described.
taught and delivered by the Prophets and Apostles, is an infallible and
inseparable note of a true Church of God: for Gods Church is nothing else, but a
company of Gods people, called by the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles
unto the state of salvation. This doctrine is the seed of regeneration,
whereby men are begotten unto Christ; and it is that s^ncere milk whereby they
are fed and nourished unto eternal life. Now I say, that this our Church of
England (through Gods mercy) does maintain, believe, and profess this
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles: for the proof hereof, let him that
doubts have recourse to our English confession, and to a book entitled, the
Articles of Religion established in the Church of England; in which are set
down the foundations of Christian Religion, allowed and held by all
Evangelical Churches. And further to show that this our profession is not in
hypocrisy, but in truth; this our Church is ready to maintain and confirm
the same doctrine by the shedding of their blood, against all foes wha^soeuer;
and this thing indeed has been the only cause of all our disse^tions with
the Church of Rome: whereupon we see there is just cause our Church should be
reputed the true Church of God, and a good member of his Catholic Church.

Secondly, observe the practice of Christ and his Apostles toward II. Rule.
Christ^ practi^* toward the Church of the Jews.
the Church of the Jews, which in their time without all doubt, was
exceedingly corrupt: for the office and place of the high Priest was bought and
sold, and through ambition and covetousness became annual; y^a, there were two
high Priests together at one time: all which were against Gods ordinance.
Again, the Scribes and Pharisees which were the Doctors of that Church, erred
in some fundamental points of doctrine, teaching Justification by works: and
withal they greatly corrupted the law of God, both by their doctrine and
traditions; and the Temple became a den of thieves: and yet for all this,
Christ did not separa^e from that Church, neither taught his Disciples so to
do; but was present at their sacrifices and assemblies, and kept his Passover
with them: and so did his Apostles, till they saw them of obstinacy and
malitiousnes refuse the grace of God, off^red unto them in the ministry of
the Gospel. Now their example must teach us, that so long as our Church holds
Christ, we must esteem it to be the Church of God, and not for some wants
thereof depart from it.

Thirdly, all the reformed Churches in Europe do with one con^ent, honor our
Church as a true Church of Christ; now their judgment III. Rule. R^formed
Churches judgment of our Church.
is not slightly to be regarded, but to be preferred far before the rash
opinions of private men: for the Church has a gift of discerning in weighty
ma^ters; she can judge of books of Scripture, which be authentical, which
not; she can judge of spirits, and of doctrines; and therefore also can judge
what company of men is a true Church, and what is not: and this their
judgment also must confirm us in this truth, that this our Church is a true
member of Gods Catholic church. Now whereas some allege the wants of our
Church, to make it no Church: I answer, though I will not excuse any default in
it, wherein i^ is wanting, to that which Gods word requires, but rather
desire, that the righteousness thereof may break forth as the light, and
salvation Isa. 62. 1.
thereof as a burning lamp; yet this may be said in behalf of our Church,
that the wants thereof are not such as do anyway raze the foundation of
religion, or of Gods holy worship, and so can not make it to cease to be a
true Church, and therefore none ought to separate from it for such wants: and
yet this hinders not, but that Gods servants may in a godly manner desire the
Reformation of things that be amiss: for a good Church may be bettered; and we
ought to strive after perfection.

The Second offense taken from he Church, is from the d^uersitie of 2. Offense,
from controuersses in the Church.
opinions that be therein: for hence many reason thus; learned men be of so
many opinions, that we know not what to follow; and therefore we will be of no
religion, till the truth be established by some general Council, and all
agree in one.

For the avoiding of this offense we must know; that though men Remedy.
dis^er in sundry opinions in the true Church of God, yet they all agree 1
in the Articles of faith, and in the foundation of Gods worship: their
difference is in matters beside the foundation, and therefore it must hinder
none from receiving and embracing true religion. Again, it is 2
Gods will that there should be diversities of opinions, yea scismes and
heresies in his Church, that men might be proved, whether they hold the truth
in synce^itie or not: as we may see, 2. Cor. 11. 19. Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2. Now in
this ^ase Ieremias direction must be observed, Ier. 6. 16.
Stand in the parting of the wa^es (says he) and inquire for the old and
ancient way ^ (that is, the doctrine of the Prophets) what God wills and
commands by them and by his Apostles, and that we must follow with all good
conscience. This Christ intended, when he bade the Jews to Ioh. 5. 35.
search the Scriptures, which testified of him: and this we must sanctify by
earnest prayer, as Cornelius did, Act. 10. 1, 2.

The third occasion of offense taken from the Church, is the miseri^ 3 From the
^^seri^ of the Church.
thereof: for the state of the Church is oftentimes in affliction, because it
consists of such as are subject to the contempt and reproach of the world.
Hence sundry are discouraged from joining themselves truly to the Church; and
although this occasion of offense be not much among us, save only in
reproaches; yet it may be more: and therefore we must learn to prevent it, and
to cut it off.

The way is this; we must believe and remember, that out of the church Remedy.
Consider the pri^iledges of the Church.
there is no salvation: In this regard, Noah's Arc was a true type of the
Church; for as none were saved from drowning, that were out of the Arc, in the
general deluge; so none can be saved ordinarily from condemnation, 1
that are out of the Church: for in the Church is Gods covenant of grace, with
the Sacraments, which be the s^ales thereof. In 2
the Church is vocation, justification, sanctification, and the way to
glorification; but out of the Church are none of all these, and therefore it is
said, that Act. 2. 47.
God added to his Church daiely such as should be saved. In the 3
Church is protection against all enemies, and from all judgments, so far
forth as shall be for the glory of God, and the good of the church: and in a
word, in the Church is li^e everlasting; but out of the Church, is nothing but
a fearful looking for of eternal woe and condemnation: and for this cause
Heb. 11. 26
Moses chose rather to suffer afflicton in Gods church, then to enjoy all the
pleasures in the world, out of it: whose example we ought to follow, and so
shall not the misery of the Church, be any occasion unto us to forsake the
same, especially if we consider, that the whole world will profit a man
nothing, if he loose his soul, Matthew, 16. 26.

The fourth offense taken from the Church is, from the Apostacy 4. From the
Apostacy of some.
of some that live in the Church; for ordinarily in Gods Church are many
Apostates, as in this our Church, many that were in times past Protestants, are
become Papists, some Arrians, Sabellians, and some open Atheists, and
blasphemers. Hence many, fearing their falls (as they pretend) dare not join
themselves to the truth, and the profession thereof. But to cut off this
occasion, two rules must be remembered; First, Remedy. 1. Rule.
that the falling away of any man, from the truth, is the work of God,
discovering an hidden hypocrite, 1. Ioh. 2. 19. They went out from us, but they
were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us:
but this is come to pass, that it might appear they were not all of us.
Secondly, consider that the beginning and continuance of our 2. Rule.
religion and salvation, stands on Gods free election, which is unchangeable;
and hereupon must we stay our selves touching our estate, when we see others
fall away. 2. Tim. 2. 19. Paul comfort the Church, against the fear of
grief which they might conceive, by the Apostacy of Himeneus and Philetus,
which were two pillars amongst them, by this Rule; The foundation of God
remains sure, and has this seal: the Lord knows who are his. Now because
some might say, God indeed knows it, but we do not: to this (I take it) the
Apostle answers, when he says, and let every one that calls upon the name of
the Lord, depart from iniquity: as if he should say, Look that you call upon
God for grace, and make conscience of all sin, and by this you shall know
your selves to belong to God; which thing when once you know, then stay
thereon, for Gods calling is unchangeable.

Again, as these occasions are taken from the whole Church in general, More
special offenses in the church
so more especially, some take offense from several things therein; as first,
from the wants that be in Ministers, both for judgment and 1
doctrine. Hence politic carnal men plead thus; Preaching is full of From
want in Ministers doctrine.
imperfection, therein men publish their own errors; but the written word
contains in it the sermons of Christ, and of his Apostles, which are most
perfect: and therefore it is best to content our selves with the Scripture
read, and to hear no preaching by men.

To cut off this offense, we must remember, that the preaching of Remedy.
the word, though it be by sinful man, is Gods holy ordinance, prescribed
and enjoined as solemnly, as any moral precept is, either against murder, or
adultery: for from the beginning, till the Jews came to mount Sina, God
himself preached to his Church, which was then contained in some few
families. But from that time, Deuteronomy. 5. ^6
because the people could not abide the voice of God himself, it pleased him
to ordain the Ministry of the word, by the hand of sinful man. Now it
being Gods own ordinance, unless we will make our selves wiser then God, we
must subject our selves thereto, with all reverence, albeit it be delivered by
sinful man. Thus Cor^elius did, Act. 10. 33. and the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.

Secondly, many are offended at the lives of Ministers, and from the 2. From
the lives of Ministers.
wants that be in them, whether in deed, or in suspicion only, many take
occasion to contemn their doctrine; thinking, as the Rulers of the Jews said
to the blind man; Ioh. 9. 34.
Thou art altogether borne in sin, and do thou teach us? Now to cut off
this occasion, two things must Remedy.
be remembered. First, we must distinguish of every Minister, and consider 1
in him a double person; both that he is a sinful man, subject to many
infirmities, as we our selves are; and also that he is the Lords Ambassador,
sent in Gods name to deliver his will unto us. Now look, as we honor the
Ambassador of a Prince, though his person be vile and base; so much more ought
we to reverence the Ambassador of God himself, and receive his doctrine, as
from God, though for his person, he be subject to manifold infirmities.
Secondly, we must consider, that it is Gods will and commandment, that though
ministers be manifestly faulty and sinful, yet their ministry must be
received and obeyed carefully. Math. 23. 2. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in
Moses chair (says Christ,) all therefore that they bid you observe, that do,
but after their works do not. Phil. 1. 15. Some preach Christ of envy (says
Paul) and not in sincerity, but yet the Apostle rejoiced therein, because
Christ was preached every manner of way, verse 18. And therefore, as we do not
refuse meat for our bodies when we be hungry, though a wicked person have
dressed it, so must we not refuse or contemn the word of God, the food of our
souls, for the sins of the party that delivers it.

Thirdly, many take offense at the lenity of the Church, toward offenders, 3.
From lenity toward offenders.
and for the presence of wicked persons at the Lords table, do refuse to
communicate with the Church: now albeit men should not be admitted hand over
head, to the Lords Table, but scandalous persons ought to be restrained; yet
the want thereof, ought not to keep the godly from this Sacrament: for another
man's evil conscience cannot defile thy good conscience, another man's sin
cannot hurt thee, unless thou do some way communicate with him therein.
Christ was more careful in his duty, then ever man was, and yet he
communicated with the wicked Jews, Scribes, and Pharisees, in the service of
God, under the Law.

The fourth head from whence offense is taken, is the state of the wicked, 4.
General head of offenses taken. From the estate of the wicked.
principally in regard of their prosperity. Hence some holy ones suspect their
own estate and religion, as either not good, or not regarded of God. This
befell David, Psalm. 37. when he saw the prosperity of the wicked, and their
increase in riches, with peace, and ease, he said, Verse. 13
Certainly, I have cleansed mine heart in vain* and washed my hands in
innocence. Hence also Jeremy reasons with God, Ier. 12. 1.
why the way of the wicked should prosper, and they be in wealth that
transgress rebelliously. Hence undoubtedly at this day, many call into
question the good providence of God. Now the way to cut off this offense, is to
Psalm. 73. 17
enter into the sanctuary of God, as David did; that is, to come to the
assemblies of Gods people, where the word is preached, for there a man shall
see the manifold reasons, why God will have his own people afflicted, and also
the fearful end of the pleasures of the wicked; namely, a fitting of them to
further destruction. Again, from this same ground, do many rich men take
offense; for having the world at will, they bless themselves with this
persuasion, that God loves them, and thereupon take occasion to condemn all
religion, and to go on in the pursuit of worldly profits and delights. And
this is one maine cause, why among the rich, we have so few good and sound
Professors; because that from a false ground of outward things, they persuade
themselves of Gods love and favor. But to cut off this offense, we must
remember that man's Remedy.
case is the more fearful, when he wants all crosses; for God chasteneth
every child whom he receives, Heb. 12. 6. and it is a mark of Gods child, to
be in affliction, if he profit thereby: the stalled ox comes sooner to the
slaughter, then the ox that is under the yoke; and the sheep that goes in
fat pasture, comes sooner to the shambles, then that which goes on the bare
commons: so oftentimes God fatteth the wicked with the blessings of this life,
as he did Luke 16. 25.
the rich glutton, that he may more justly condemn them in the world to come.
Lastly, we must remember what Solomon says, Eccl. 9. 1, 2.
No man knows love or hatred, of all that is before him: that is, of all
outward things: all things fall alike unto all, both good and bad: and therefore
no man must so bless himself with his outward estate, that he be drawn to
esteem of religion, as a thing needless or superfluous.

Verse 31. It has been said also, whosoever shall put away his wife, let him
give her a Bill of diuorcement.

32. But I say unto you, whosoever shall put away his wife (except it be for
fornication) causes her to commit adultery: and whosoever shall marie her
that is divorced, commits adultery.


Our Savior Christ proceeding further, to restore the seventh commandment
to his perfection, does here confute a false interpretation of a Politic law
of Moses, given by the Scribes and Pharisees. For this end, first he lays
down the words of Moses politic law; but yet so, as containing in them the
false interpretation of the Jewish teachers, ver. 31. then he opposes the
truth of God, against their false interpretation, and maintains the first
institution of marriage, v. 32.

For the first, Moses politic law was, That he which put away his wife,
should give her a Bill of divorce. This law the Jewish Teachers did falsely
interpret; for the better perceiving whereof, these three points are to be
handled, touching Moses politic law: 1. what kind of law it was: 2. the
straitness of that law: 3. what effect and force it had. For the first, the
law is set down, Deuteronomy. 24. 1. when a man marieth a wife, and she find no
favor in his eyes, because he has espied some filthiness in her; then let
him write her a bill of divorce, and put it in her hand, and send her out of
his house. This law was not moral, but civil, or politic, for the good
ordering of the common wealth. Now among their particular laws, some were laws
of toleration, and permission, which were such as did not approve of the evil
which they concerned, but did only tolerate and permit that evil which could
not be avoided, for the preventing of a greater evil, which otherwise would
fall out. As when the sea has made ^ breach into the land, if it cannot
possibly be stopped, the best course is, to make it as narrow as may be. Such
was the law concerning usury, Deuteronomy. 23. 20. permitting the Jews to exercise
it upon a stranger, but not toward a brother: and the like was the law
touching polygamie, Deuteronomy. 21. 15. If a man had two wives, the one hated, the
other loved, and they both have borne him children; if the first borne be the
son of the hated (though she were married to him the latter) yet her seed was
legitimate, and her son had the right of the first borne. In both which laws
were tolerated, that which God condemned, only for the preventing of a greater
evil. Under this sort comes our law of usury, for taking ten in the
hundred, not approving Bellar. de Amiss. great. and stat. pecc. lib. 2 cap. 18.
Harding co^fut. of the Apolog. part. 4 chap. 1. div. 1.
but permitting so much, for the avoiding of greater usury. Unto this kind,
the Papists would reduce their law of permitting Stews, for the preventing of
greater sins; but that law can have no title to such permission: for a law of
permission, is to diminish that evil, which by man cannot possibly be cut off
altogether: now that sin which they would prevent by their Stews, might be
cut off among them, if they would give allowance to Gods own ordinance of
lawful marriage, unto all sorts and sexes. So likewise this law of Moses for
divorce, was a law of permission, not approouing of the giving a bill of
divorce for every light cause, but tolerating of it, for the preventing of
greater mischeife, even of murder: for the nature of the Jews was this; if a
man once took dislike to his wife, he would never be at rest till he had shed
her blood, if they might not be parted asunder. Now this law of divorce, was
given to restrain this great evil, for hereby a man was tolerated to put away
his wife, when she found no favor in his eyes, lest he should kill her; yet
so, as he gave her a bill of divorce, wherein he must set down the cause why
he put her away: whereby also, many were restrained from putting away their
wives, because it was a great shame, for a light occasion, so highly to
transgress Gods holy institution, who made them by marriage, one flesh. The
truth of this may appear by the Lords own complaint, against his people, to
whom he speaks, as to a wife that had forsaken her husband, without a cause
on his behalf, Isay 50. 1. Where (says he) is that bill of your mothers
diuorcement, whereby I sent her away? As if he should say, I gave her no bill,
but her departure and separation from me, is by her own sins: which phrase
shows what was the custom of the Jews in this case.

II. Point. The straitness of this law appears in this, that the man only
was permitted to give this bill unto his wife, but the wife might not give it
to her husband; for Moses says, Whosoever shall put away his wife: neither is
there any place in Scripture, to prove that the wife had this liberty, so to
deal with her husband. If it be asked, whether the wife in a just cause, as
for adultery, had not the like liberty: I answer, If we respect Gods
institution touching marriage, the right of divorce is equal to them both; for
in regard of the bond of marriage, they are equally bound one to another. Here
indeed this liberty is permitted only to the man, by this politic law, not
that he had more right, but to prevent the evil, of the hardness of his
heart, who taking displeasure at his wife, would rather spill her blood, then
continue with her. If it be alleged, that i. Cor. 11. 3
a man is the woman's head: I answer, that is for regiment and direction in her
place, but not in regard of breaking the bond of marriage, whereby he is bound
to his wife, as well as she to him, as the Apostle teaches, 1. Cor. 7. 4.

III. Point. The force and effect of this law was this, It made the Bill of
diuorcement for any cause given, to be tolerable before men; and marriage after
such a divorce, lawful and warrantable in the Courts of men, Deuteronomy. 24. 4. But
yet in the court of conscience before God, the diuorcement it self, and second
marriages made thereupon, were both unlawful; for God hates this separation,
Mal. 2. 15. And whether party soever marieth another upon this divorce,
commits adultery, Matthew. 19. 9. This must be remembered, for the true
understanding of this law of Moses; the first words whereof, are a permission,
to this effect; If a man do conceive such a dislike against his wife, as that
he will not abide with her, but will needs put her away, then he may; but yet
so, as he give her a bill of divorce: which does not acquit him before God,
but before men only.

Having thus showed the true meaning of this law, it remains now to see what
the Pharisees taught touching divorce. Their doctrine was this, that he which
gave a bill of diuorcement unto his wife, for any light occasion, was thereby
acquitted from her before God; and thereupon might marie another, without the
guilt of adultery: and also that another man might lawfully marry her that
was thus divorced. That this was their meaning, may appear by the contrary
answer of our Savior Christ, wherein he crosses and confuteth this their
interpretation, in the words following.

Verse 32. But I say unto you, whosoever shall put away his wife, (except it be
for fornication) causes her to commit adultery: and whosoever shall marry
her that is divorced, commits adultery.
Here Christ answers not to Moses law, but to the corrupt interpretation of
the Scribes and Pharisees, whereby they depraved that law. By fornication Christ
means, not every sin of that kind, but only the sin of adultery; or
that which is greater in that kind, namely incest. Adultery, is a sin that
is committed by two parties, one whereof is either married, or espowsed, as has
been showed before. Causes her to commit adultery:] That is, gives her
occasion to marie again, and so to commit adultery; because their first bond
remains still: and he that marieth her that is divorced:] that is, for any
small cause, and not for adultery, he also commits adultery.

Here then two points are set down; First, that he who puts away his wife for
any light cause, causes her to commit adultery. Secondly, he that marieth
her that is divorced, commits adultery. Yet unto both these, Christ puts
an exception in the case of adultery. The Rhe^. on this place.
Papists and some others, would restrain the exception to the first part of
the sentence, and make it a negation, to this effect; He that puts away his
wife, being no fornicator, etc. But the truth is, that the exception belongs
to the whole answer of our Savior Christ, denying divorce, save only for
adultery; and permitting no marriage after diuorcement, save only where the
divorce is for adultery.

First, whereas our Savior Christ opposes unto this politic law The use.
of Moses, concerning divorce, the law of nature, touching marriage, Ge. 2. 24.
He gives us an excellent distinction between all politic laws, and the law
of nature, which is the moral law; for that is a law of eternal equity,
commanding good, and forbidding evil simply, without respect of man: but
politic laws are tempered according to the conditions of men, and though
they do not approve, yet sometimes they permit evil, for the avoiding of
greater mischief: yea, they tolerate that, which before God, and in conscience
is condemned. This point must teach us, not to content our selves with
performing obedience to the politic laws of men, for the laws of men may
tolerate that which Gods law does condemn: so the law of this Land in practice
tolerates usury, but usurers must not hereupon think that all is safe and
well with them, and that they sin not in taking ten in the hundred, because
the law of the land permits it; for our law tolerates that, for the preventing
of greater usury, when as the law of God does utterly condemn the same.
Again, our laws are open for men to go to law at the first, upon every light
occasion, without seeking former means of agreement; but yet such men as do
so, are guilty of sin before God, notwithstanding their liberty by our
politic laws. Some politic laws also tolerate contracts of marriage, made
without consent of parents; yet such children sin against the law of God, for
herein God requires childrens subjection to their parents and governors. And
the like might be showed in many other points, so that it is no sufficient
justification of our actions, to say the laws of men allow us so to do.

Secondly, hence we may learn, that a man cannot lawfully* and with good
conscience put away his wife, except it be for adultery; the text is clear
both hear, and also Math. 19. 7. which confuteth the civil laws of some
countries, and the Council. T^id (...). ^4. ca^ 8.
popish constitutions, that allow other causes of N^n rep^d^^ ^^d divo^^^ (...)
(...) Mat^i. sac^. c. 14.
divorce, besides adultery. Here they object sundry things, in their defense
against this doctrine. As 1. the saying of Christ, Whosoever forsakes Father
or Mother, wife, etc. shall receive much reward, Math^ 19. 29. Here (say they)
is divorce for religion allowed. Ans. Christ by forsaking, means not that
separation which is made, by giving a Bil of diuorcement; but that which is
caused by imprisonment, banishment, or by death.

2. Object. 1. Cor. 7. 15. If the unbelieving depart, let him depart; a brother
or a sister is not bound in such things. Here (say they) is another cause of
divorce. Ans. The malicious and wilful departing of the unbeliever, does
dissolve the marriage; but that is no cause of giving a bil of divorce: only
adultery causes that. Here the believer is a mere patient, and the divorce
is made by the unbeliever, who unjustly forsakes, and so puts away the other.

3. Object. Titus. 9. 10. Avoid an heretake after once or twice admonition.
This (say they) is spoken to all Christians; and therefore for heresy, may a
bill of divorce be given. Ans. First, that commandment is not given to every
private person, but to the Ministers of the church, who after one or two
admonitions, are to excommunicate and cut off all heretics from the Church.
Secondly, it hinders not, but that the bond of marriage may remain sure and
firm, though one of the parties be cut off from the Church; for the believing
husband must not forsake his unbelieving wife, if she will dwell with him: 1.
Corinthians, 7. 12.

4. Object. After marriage, one party may have a contagious and incurable
disease, which may cause the other to give a bil of divorce. Answer. A
contagious disease may cause a separation for a time, but no divorce; and if
that disease be incurable, and disable the party from the duty of marriage,
then such parties must think themselves, as it were, called of God to live in
single life.

5. Object. But married persons may seek to spill the blood one of another, and
therefore it is good to give a bil of divorce, to prevent that evil. Answer.
Such enmity may cause a separation for a time, till reconciliation be made,
but the bond of marriage must not therefore be broken.

6. Object. Death makes a divorce. Ans. Death indeed ends marriage estate,
and sets the party living free, to marry in the Lord, where he or she
will; but this comes not by divorce given of either party: so that the
conclusion still remains firm, that a man with good conscience cannot give a
bill of divorce for any cause, but for adultery: and therefore those laws
which permit divorce for other causes, are greatly faulty before God. If any
shall ask, whether men's laws may not make more causes of diuorceme^t, then
this one? I answer, no; for marriage is not a mere civil thing, but partly
spiritual and divine, and therefore God only has power to appoint the
beginning, the continuance, and the end thereof. If any yet ask, why Idolatry
and Magycke, which be greater sins then adultery, may not break marriage?
Ans. They are greater indeed, against God, but not in this ordinance of
marriage; for the sin of adultery, breaks only the bond of marriage, which
may remain still between two parties, though one be an idolater, a witch, or
an Atheist. Now considering that Adultery is so great a sin, that it cuts of
the knot off marriage, above all things, those persons that are called to this
estate, must take heed of all sins, so of this especially.

Thirdly, here may be asked, whether after divorce for adultery, the parties
divorced may marry again, without committing adultery? This point has bin
diversely discussed, we will consider the reasons on both sides; First, for the
lawfulnes of it, especially to the party innocent.

1. From Christ's doctrine in this place; for in his answer to the false
interpretation of Moses politic Law, touching divorce, he first propounds a
general rule, and then puts an exception thereto: the nature of which
exception is, always to implie and put down the contrary to the general
rule. As in this place; the general rule is, Whosoever puts away his wife,
causes her to commit adultery; and he that marieth her commits adultery.
The exception then must be contrary; namely, that in the case of adultery,
he that puts away his wife, lawfully convicted thereof, causes her not to
commit adultery; neither he that marieth her that is divorced, does commit
adultery. If it be said, that Christ propou^deth two rules, one for the case
of divorce, the other for the case of marying after divorce; and applies his
exception for adultery only to the case of divorce, and not to the case of
marriage after divorce. Ans. As the exception for adultery, is here in this
chapter joined with the case of divorce; he that puts away his wife, except
it be for fornication, etc. so in the 19. cha. v. 9. the same exception for
adultery, is expressly applied not only to the case of divorce, but also to the
case of marriage after divorce; saying, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except
it be for fornication, and marie another, commits adultery: so that if in
this place the exception make the divorce lawful for adultery, then in the
19. chapter, it makes it lawful to marie again after such divorce, without
the guilt of adultery. 2. The innocent party is not to be punished for 2
the wilfulness of the offender, and therefore the party that is faultlesse
may with good conscience marry again, after lawful divorce. 3. God has
provided marriage to be a remedy against 3
incontinencie for all persons, 1. Corinthians. 7. 2. But if parties lawfully
divorced, might not marie again, then they should want this remedy, and be
deprived of this benefit. If it be said, they may reconcile themselves each to
other, and so have remedy. Answer. But what if the party offending live in
adultery still, then the party innocent cannot in conscience join him or her
self to the other, and reunite the bond of matrimony; for that were too much
lenity, toward so foul a crime: and a sin against God, for want of
Christian reconciliation, which requires that this reuniting should be in the
Lord, and not in the flesh alone. 4. The phrases of Scripture used by the Deuteronomy.
24. 1, 2, 3. Math. 19 9. Luke 16. 18. Bellar. de Mat^im. Sacra. cap. 16.
holy Ghost, 4
concerning marriage after divorce, restraining it to some cases, and allowing
it in others, seem to take it for granted, that after lawful divorce, it is
no sin to marry again.

Reasons alleged on the other side. First, Christ's general saying, Man. 10.
11
Whosoever puts away his wife, and marieth another, commits adultery.
Hence some infer, that there may be no marriage at all after any divorce. But
they abuse that Scripture, for though Saint Mark put down no exception; yet
Matthew has made supply thereof in two places, Chapter 5. 32. and 19. 9. Now
the Gospels were penned by several men, that that which was not fully
expressed by one, might be supplied by another, that so by conferring writer
with writer, the whole truth might be made manifest.

Secondly, Matthew. 19. 6. Whom God has coupled, let not man put asunder:
Therefore after divorce, they still remain man and wife, before God, and may
not marry to others. Ans. The party offending breaks the bond of marriage, and
so sins grievously against that commandment: but the party innocent
marying again after lawful divorce, only takes the benefit of that liberty,
whereto God has set him free, through the unlawful breaking of the bond, by
the party offending.

Thirdly, Romans 6. 2. The woman is bound to the man while he lives, and
therefore may not marry again after diuorcement. Ans. That place must be
understood of the state of marriage, continuing undissolved till death: but in
the case of adultery, the bond of marriage is broken; and therefore that
hinders not, but marriage may be after lawful divorce.

Fourthly, 1. Corinthians. 7. 10, 11. Let not the wife depart from her husband, and
if she depart, let her remain unmarried, and be reconciled unto her husband,
and let not the husband put away his wife. Here (say they) is a plain place
against marriage after diuorcement. Answer. The Apostle speaks of departure,
and putting away, for other causes then adultery; as for hatred, dislike, etc.
which indeed are no sufficient causes of divorce, and therefore they that
separate thereupon, ought not to marry.

Fifthly, The bond of marriage, is a resemblance of the conjunction that is
between Christ and his Church, which is inseparable and eternal; and
therefore marriage also is inseparable. Answer. That resemblance stands not in
every thing, but in this, That as in marriage two are made one flesh, so
spiritually Christ, and every true member of his Church become one; and that as
Eve was taken out of Adams side, and made flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bone; so the Church springs as it were out of Christ's blood, which issued
from his side: for else, if their reason were good, we might say that marriage*
should be eternal, in the life to come; because the union of Christ with his
Church, is eternal: which we know to be false, for Mat. 22. 30.
in the resurrection men mary not, but are as the angels of God.

Sixthly, If parties divorced might mary again, their children should be
miuried, having step-fathers or step-mothers in stead of their own natural
parents. Ans. This reason is not sufficient to disallow divorce, or marriage
after it; for by the same reason we might delude all the judicial laws of
Moses, and of all countries, which impose death for sundry crimes, because
thereby some children should loose their parents; but Justice must be justice
with all men, though the posterity have hinderance by the execution thereof.
Quest. But what if the laws of some countries forbid marriage after
diuorcement? Ans. Yet the liberty of conscience remains still, for this
being given of God cannot be taken away by men; and therefore when men have
freedom from the Magistrate, they may with good conscience marie again after
lawful divorce. And yet here we must know, that diuorcement, or marriage after,
Ca^^ion.
must not be done privately by man and wife upon their own heads; 1
but by order of law, before the Magistrate, according to the custom of that
Church or Commonwealth whom it concerns. Again, there 2
be some particular causes which may justly hinder marriage after divorce: as
first, if the parties reunite their bond again by reconciliation; for the knot
broken by adultery, may be reunited by the consent of the party innocent.
Secondly, when the one party is a manifest cause of the Adultery of the
other, and so becomes an accessarie to the others offense: for it seems
unequal, that he who has put his hand to the committing of a sin, should
reap any benefit or privilege by the same. And therefore I say the party
innocent has freedom in this case.

verse 33. Again, ye have heard that it was said to them of old time, Thou
shall not forswear thy self: but shall perform thine oaths unto the Lord.

34. But I say unto you, swear not at all, etc.


Our Savior Christ having restored the seventh commandment to his true sense
and meaning, does here proceed to do the like unto the third commandment;
observing herein the same order that he did in the former: for first, he lays
down the false interpretation of the Scribes and Pharisees given to this
commandment concerning swearing, v. 33. and then delivers the true doctrine
of an oath. v. 34. The corrupt sense given by the Scribes and Pharisees, is
propounded in the words of the holy Ghost, Leuit. 19. 12. Deuteronomy. 5. 11. Thou
shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform thine oaths unto the Lord:
which are not here taken in that true meaning wherein Moses set them down, but
in the false interpretation of the Jewish teachers: whereof that we may the
better judge, let us search out the true meaning of Moses law concerning an
oath: for which end we must first see what perjury is; then propound the
kinds of perjury; and lastly, show the grieuousnes of this sin.

I. Point. In perjury there must be two things: First, a man Of peri^^i^.
must affirm or avouch something against his own mind, his own meaning,
purpose, intention, or persuasion. When a man knows a thing to be true, and
says it is true; or knows a thing to be false, and says it is false, and
swears thereto, this is no perjury, because his speech is answerable to that
which is in his mind: but when a man knows a thing to be true, and avouches
it to be false; or knowing a thing to be false, avouches it to be true, upon
his oath; this is perjury: because in so doing, he speaks against his mind
and persuasion. Secondly, in perjury there must be an oath; it is not perjury
to speak a thing that is false, unless he also swear to the thing he
speaks falsely, against his mind: and yet every oath makes not direct
perjury, unless it be a binding oath; for a man may swear to a thing that
is unlawful, and after alter his mind, and not perform his oath, without the
guilt of perjury: as if a child being under age, do bind himself by oath
to marry without his parents consent; but coming to riper years, does better
consider of the matter, and subjects himself to his parents disposing, who
marry him to another. Now though he sinned in so swearing, yet he is not
perjured, because the oath was not a binding oath; for a child under years
has not power to take an oath.

II. Point. That we may yet better judge of this sin, we must Kinds of
perjury.
know that there be three kinds of perjury: First, when a man confirms by
oath, that which he knows, or thinks to be otherwise; as when 1
he takes an oath that a thing is true, which he knows to be false; that a
thing was thus, which he knows was otherwise. Secondly, Deceitful 2
swearing is perjury, when a man, either about things past, or to come,
swears contrary to the true knowledge and purpose of his own mind. Example
of this we have in the Romish Priests, who both defend in writing, and
practice in action, this deceitful swearing; for being brought before the
Magistrate, and made to swear to this demand, or such like; Whether they said
Mass, or knew where Mass was said at such a time? They answer upon their
oaths, That they did not, or knew not, (though indeed they did) which is
according to their doctrine, That unto dangerous Interrogatories a man may
frame a safe Toll. summa Cas. consc. lib. 4. c. 21.
meaning unto himself, and swear to it: as in the former instance, they
swear they knew not where Mass was said, meaning, to reveal it to the
Judge. But this is flat perjury; for their oath is given them to answer
according to the meaning of the Magistrates demand: and if a man might
lawfully frame a meaning to himself, in swearing, he might easily delude all
truth, and so should not an oath for confirmation, be the end of strife; but
the breeder thereof, through surmise of false meaning in him that swears. The
third kind of perjury, is The breaking of a binding oath; as when a man upon
his oath promises to 3
do a thing that is lawful, and does it not: yet this is not always
perjury; as First, If God after the oath taken, make the thing promised,
impossible to be done: as if a man swear to make another his heir, of such
and such lands; now dwelling by the Sea side, the Sea breaks out, drownes all
his land before he dies; Is this man perjured, because he performed not his
promise bound with an oath? no verily; for God made the thing impossible.
Secondly, if a man be bound in conscience to break his oath: Thus 1. ^a. 25. 20
David swearing rashly to slaie Nabal, and his family, was yet stayed from so
doing, by Abigals counsel, and brake his oath, and Verse. 3^.
gave God thanks for it; for indeed his oath was unlawful, being the bond of
iniquity, and the doing of it had been the doubling of his sin.

Here it may well be demanded, whether those that are sworn to the Statutes
and laws of societies and incorporations be perjured, if they break the same?
Ans. The Statutes of incorporations be of two sorts; some are of the
foundation of societies, without which the incorporation cannot stand, and
these (not being against the word of God) cannot be broken without the guilt
of perjury: others, are Statutes only of outward order and decency* as
touching apparel, gesture, and such like: as in some incorporations the
Statutes require, that every man therein should wear the round cap: hereunto
many are sworn, who always wear it not: now (though I say not that they are
faultlesse altogether) yet they are not perjured; because this Statute of
order, binds not a man simply, but either to obedience, or to pay the mulct;
which if a man be content to pay, he satisfies the Statute, and benefits the
society, as much as if he kept the Statute.

Having showed what perjury is, with the kinds thereof; let us see whether we
be free from it. After examination it will appear, that men's lives are full of
perjury; for where is much swearing usually, there cannot but be much
perjury: because they that swear in their common talk, do forget their
oaths, as they do their communication. But say we are clear from perjury,
yet are we in danger of Gods heavy judgments, for the breach of our vow in
baptism; wherein we promise to believe in God, and to serve him, forsaking
the world, the flesh, Militiae sacrati propter iuramentum dicebantur milites.
Vegetius de re milit.
and the devil: now the breach of this vow, is as ill as perjury, for
therefore may Baptism be called a Sacrament, because of the oath and vow, which
a Christian makes to God therein; for the word Sacrament properly betokens
the oath which a Soldier makes to his Captain for his fidelity. The
breaking of Joshua his oath unto the Gibeonites, by Saul, 1. ^am. 21. 1
caused 3. years dearth, and was not satisfied, but with the blood of 7. of
Saul's kindred. And Ezekiel. 17. 13 15, 16.
Zedekias perjury to the King of Babel, was one cause of the Lords fierce
wrath against Jerusalem, and the Princes thereof. Now shall one man's perjury
cause such judgments? and shall we not think, that among other sins, this
our perjury unto God, in breaking our vow in Baptism, brings upon us Gods
heavy wrath, by plague, famine, and unseasonable weather? Wherefore let the
consideration hereof, persuade us to repentance, and to a more conscionable
care of performing our vow unto God.

III. Point. The grieuousnesse of this sin of perjury, which here
Grieuousnes of perjury.
the Lord forbids, appears by these three sins which are contained in it.
First, the uttering, or maintaining of a lie. Secondly, the calling on God to
be a witness unto a lie; wherein men do, as much as in them lies, set the
devil himself, the father of lies, in the room of God, and so greatly rob
him of his honor and majesty. Thirdly, in perjury a man prays for a curse
upon himself, wishing God to be a witness of his speech, and a judge to
revenge, if he swear falsely; so as herein a man is his own utter enemy, and
as much as in him lies, does cast both body and soul to hell.

Quest. Seeing this sin of perjury is so great, whether may such a man be
put to his oath, as is certainly thought will periure himself, if he be put
to swear? I answer, men that put others to swear, are either private persons,
or public Magistrates: a private man for his own private cause, may not put
such a man to his oath; for he should have greater care of Gods glory, and of
the other man's soul, then of his private gain: and therefore ought rather to
depart from his temporal right, then suffer his brother so to dishonor God,
and to hurt his own soul. But if a Magistrate be to put such a man to his
oath, as is verily thought will periure himself, he may lawfully do it; but
yet he is first, to advertise the party of the weight of an oath, and of the
fearful sin of perjury; and then, if the order of Law and Justice so
require, he may minister an oath unto him, leaving the event to God: for the
execution of justice must not stay on man's misdemeanour, nor wait, till they
make conscience of sin; for if it did, no common wealth could stand, no war
could be made: Moses and the Levites executed Exodus 32. ^7. (...).
vengeance upon the idolatrous Jews, without waiting for their repentance*

But shall perform thine oaths unto the Lord. These words are not set down
in any of Moses books, but are a collection from the former law of Moses,
gathered by the Jewish Teachers; which collection, though it be not expressly
set down, yet is it the very sense of the Law: for if a man cannot without
perjury break a lawful binding oath, then that Law which forbids
perjury, binds man to perform all that he has lawfully sworn unto God.

Here then in this collection of the Jewish Teachers, is set down an The
strait bond of an oath.
excellent point, touching the straitness of the bond of an oath. In every
lawful oath, there is a double bond; First, it binds one man to another, for
the performing of the thing he swears to do. Secondly, it binds a man unto
God, for he that swears, inuocates God as a witness, and a Judge of the
truth of his assertion; and he stands bound unto God, till the thing sworn
unto, be performed, if it be lawful and possible. And herein the Pharisees
are good Teachers, and from this their collection, we learn sundry points.

First, that if a man take an oath, though he were constrained thereto A
constrained oath of things lawful bi^des.
by fear, yet it must be kept, if it be of things lawful and possible;
because in an oath a man stands bound unto the Lord: as if a man swear unto a
Thief, for the saving of his life, that he will bring him some money, or
other booty, of his own goods; this he is to perform, because the loss is
but private; but if he were sworn further, not to detect the Thief, that
were a bond of iniquity, tending to the hurt of the common wealth: and
therefore such an oath a man ought not to take; and if he do so swear, yet he
must not keep it, but repent of his rash oath.

Secondly, if a man be brought to swear by error, being overtaken An oath
gotten by ^^^or
by another, yet if it were of things lawful, within his power, it must be
kept: so did Iosuah to the Gibeonites, and the breach thereof by Josh. 3. 19.
Saul was grievously punished, as we showed before.

Thirdly, if a man swear unto a lawful promise, and it fall out, that An oath
indamaging.
the keeping of his oath procure him great temporal losses; yet the oath must
be kept, because therein he is bound unto God: This David notes for a
property of him that must rest in Gods holy mountain, to keep his promise
whereto he is bound by an oath, though it turn to his own hindrance, Psalm.
15. 4.

Fourthly, here we may see, that the Azo^iu^ Jesuit. Inst. Mor. c. 15.
doctrine and Pi^s 5. Po^tis. in Bull. in Eliz.
practice of the Church of Rome is wicked and damnable: They teach, that the
Bishop of Rome, by the power of the Keys, may free a man in conscience from
the bond of a lawefull oath: Indeed, if the bond were only between man and
man, it were something; but being between God and man, he that will dispense
therewith, must be above, or at least equal to God himself. The Pharisees
doctrine was far better, who taught that men's oaths must be performed unto
God, without dispensing therewith. And therefore our English Priests who before
have sworn to the Supremacy of this state, and now are reconciled to the
Pope, are statly perjured persons, and so to be held.

But howsoever the Pharisees make this one good collection, yet they err
grossly, in their further meaning and expounding of this law: for when as God
forbids a man to forswear himself, hence they gather; first, that it was
lawful to swear ordinarily in common talk, even by the name of God, so that
they swear truly, and did not forswear themselves: that this was their
meaning, will appear in Christ's answer. Secondly, hence they gathered, that
the law spoke nothing of indirect oaths: for they made two kinds of oaths:
direct by the name of God, and indirect by the creatures. And as they held that
a man might swear directly by the name of God without sin in common talk,
so they taught, that swearing indirectly by the creatures, as by heaven, by the
temple, the head, Altar, and such like, was nothing; neither the breaking
thereof was any perjury, as Math. 23. 16. And like unto these Jews are Popish
teachers, who hold that men Aquin. 2. 2. q. 89 ^^t. 6.
m(...) are not only by the name of God, but by holy things, as by the ^^^^de,
the Mass, Saints, and Angels, if they be not abused.

verse. 34. But I say unto you, swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is
the throne of God, etc. Here Christ confuteth the false interpretation of the
Jewish Teachers. And his answer is propounded, first, generally; swear not at
all: then particularly in the words following to the 38. verse. The words of
his general answer are somewhat hard, and perverted by many; therefore that we
may come to the true sense thereof, two points are to be considered. First,
what it is to swear: then, how far forth Christ forbids swearing. For the
first, we shall best conceive of an oath by the parts thereof. In an oath be
two things: Of an oath^ in it are two things.
Confession, and Imprecation. Confession is threefold; though for outward form
the words of an oath be few. 1. A man confesses, that 1
that which he swears is true in his conscience: 2. that God is a witness
Confession.
not only of the outward action and speech, but also of his particular
conscience: and 3. that God is an omnipotent Judge of all, and of him that
swears, able to justify him if he swear truly, or otherwise to condemn him
eternally if he swear falsely. Imprecation, the second 2
thing in an oath, is a prayer to God for two things* First, that Imprecation.
God would be a witness with him that swears, to testify that he swears
truly, and according to his conscience: so Paul did, Romans 9. 1. I speak the
truth in Christ, I lie not: my conscienc^ bearing me witness in the holy
Ghost. Secondly, a man prays, that God would become a Judge to curse him with
eternal wrath, if he swore falsely: so 2. Cor. 1. 23. I call God for a record
unto my soul: and the form of swearing in old time, was the using of this
imprecation: God do so to me, and more also, if I do not thus and thus. 2.
king. 6. 31.

We see what it is to swear. Now we come to show, how far forth How far
Christ forbids swearing.
Christ forbids swearing, in these words; Swear not at all. The Anabaptists
gather hence that all swearing is forbidden, and so did some Pelagians and
Waldenses.
Heretics in the primitive Church; yea and Hierome, Theophyl. Chrysostom. in
Matthew. 5.
some of the ancient Fathers (that otherways deserved well of the Church)
thought that the Lord in the old Testament did only permit swearing, as he
did some other things that were evil, which he approved not, and that now
Christ did quite take away the same. But this opinion is false and erroneous:
for swearing is Deuteronomy. 10. 20.
commanded as a part of Gods worship: now if Christ should here forbid it, he
should be against himself, condemning that which himself approved. Again,
the Apostle Paul used it, as is plain to be seen in the most of his Epistles:
and Heb. 6. 16. An oath for confirmation, is called the ordinance of God, for
the ending of all Sixth. Senens. biblioth. Sanct. l. 6. a^ no^. 26.
strife. Others (as the Papists) say, that Christ here sets down a counsel of
perfection, not forbidding all swearing, but rather wishing that men could so
live in faith, love, and truth, that there should be no use of an oath. But
this can not be true: for Christ's words are not perswasiue, but prohibitorie,
expressly forbidding swearing. And yet we must know, that Christ's meaning is
not here to forbid all swearing simply, but all swearing after the Jewish
manner and custom; that is, in common talk and communication, as is plain in
the last words of this answer, when he says, Let your communication be yea,
yea. For this is a Rule to be observed in the interpretation of Scripture, that
things generally spoken, must particularly be understood, according to the
circumstances of the present matter in hand: as when Paul says, 1. Co^. 9. 22.
he became all things to all men, if it should be taken generally, we might
say, that with blasphemers he became a blasphemer, etc. but that speech must be
restrained to the use of things indifferent, in all which he yielded to the
weakness of all, that he might win some: and so here, Swear not at all, must
be restrained to the Jewish custom, which was to swear by the name of God in
their common talk, and by other creatures, both which Christ does utterly
forbid.

Here first, we learn that ordinary swearing is unlawful, either by Use. 1.
Against extraordinary swearing.
the name of God, or by other creatures. This is the common sin of our age in
all sorts and degrees: some swear by their faith; others by their troth,
before God, by the cross of the coin (having money in their hands,) by the
fire that is Gods angel (as they use to speak,) others by bread, drink, and
look how many occasions men have offered unto them, so many oaths have they
framed unto themselves.

Secondly, here is condemned all minsed oaths, as by my ^ay, maskins, 2
and yea mary; for the ground thereof was this Popish oath by Minsed oaths.
Marie. Thirdly, here are condemned all gross oaths by the parts of 3
Christ's body, as by his heart, blood, sides, and such like.

Yet men have their excuses for common swearing, as first that they P^etences
for swearing.
swear the truth, and nothing else. But the truth of their oath cannot dispense
1
with the commandment of God, forbidding all swearing in ordinary
communication. Others that be more simple, say, they swear 2
by good things. But that makes their sin the greater: for the goodness of a
thing, does aggrauate the offense in the abuse thereof. Others say, that they
can not be believed upon their bare word: Answ. But 3
Christ's commandment must not be broken, to win credit to our speeches;
that credit is dear bought, which is got by pauning the soul to the devil:
God must be obeyed for the matter of our communication, though no man will
believe us. Others, as Soldiers and young 4
gallants, use to swear to testify their courage and gentry; these men show
that they love the praise of men, more then the praise of God. But that will be
found in the end but sorry reputation, which is gained by transgression; their
glory will be their shame, and their end damnation, Philip. 3. 18. nay, their
base minds and cowardlinesse are herein evident, that they glory in their
slavish bondage unto sin and Satan. These excuses will not free men from the
guilt of condemnation at the day of judgment: for common swearing is a
shameful taking of Gods name in vain; now the Lord has said, that he will
not hold them guiltles, that take his name in vain. These therefore that have
this way offended, must betime repent of this impiety, and learn to fear the
name of God, making conscience of an oath, and let their communication be yea,
yea, and nay, nay, as Christ commands. The wicked fact of Iezabel covering
bloody impiety under hypocrisy, 1. king. 21. 9, 10.
in proclaiming a fast, when she would have Naboth slain for blasphemy,
shows that the custom of those times was to have public humiliation for such
sins, least the wrath of God should come upon the land. And when good king
Hezekias heard the grievous blasphemy which Rabshak^h uttered against the
Lord, 2. king. 19. 1
he fell to his prayers, and to humble himself before God: shall this good
King do this for an other man's blasphemy, and shall not we do the like for
our own, but continue in swearing without all remorse? Our common swearers are
devils incarnate, yea rather worse then the devil himself, for the Iam. 2.
19.
devils believe God and tremble; but they tear God in pieces, and are never
moved. If men abuse earthly Princes in their name and titles, they are
imprisoned, banished, or hanged, and that justly: now shall this be done to
them that impeach the dignities of mortal men; and shall not Gods wrath be hot
against that people, who live in the continual blasphemy of his name. Let us
therefore fear to open our mouths in any kind of common swearing, though it
be by the basest creature that God has made: for the least creature is better
then we can be allowed to abuse by our oaths.

Lastly, here is forbidden all cursing of our selves in our common Cursing our
selves.
talk, as when men say, If it be not so, I would I were hanged; I would this
bread might be my ba^e, and such like; for every imprecation is a part of an
oath: as we may see in the oaths specified in Scripture: 1. Sam. 25. 22. So
and more also, do God to the enemies of David, etc. and, 2. king. 6. 5. If I
do not so and so, then God do so and so to me: now as we are not to swear in
our common talk, so neither ought we to s^e imprecation therein, for being
part of an oath it ought not to be the matter of our common speech.

Here two questions must be skanned: first, when may a man lawfully swear, and
when not? for Christ's speech forbidding ordinary swearing, seems to grant,
that there is a time wherein a man may lawfully take an oath. There be two
times and cases wherein a man Two cases wherein an oath is lawful.
may lawfully take an oath. First, when the magistrate ministers an oath unto
a man upon a just occasion: for the magistrate has the power of God in this
case, and therefore when he justly requires it of man, then may he lawfully
swear. Secondly, when a man's own calling general or particular, necessarily
requires an oath; and that is in four cases: I. when the taking of an oath
serves to maintain, procure, or win unto God any part of his glory, or to
preserve the same from disgrace. In this regard, Paul moved with a godly
zeal, uses an oath in sundry of his Epistles, for the confirmation of his
doctrine, that the Churches to whom he writ might be stablished in the truth,
and so glorify God the more. II. When his oath serves to maintain or further
his own or others salvation, or preservation in soul or body; in this case
2. Cor. 1. 23
Paul calls God for a record unto his soul, that he came not to Corinth to
spare them. And David, to further himself in the way of salvation, Psalm. 119.
106.
bound himself by an oath that he would keep Gods commandments. III. When
the oath serves to confirm and stablish peace and society between party and
party, country and country, kingdom and kingdom. Thus did Abraham and
Abimelech swear each to other, Genesis 21. 23. and Jacob and Laban, Genesis 31. 53.
and by virtue hereof do subjects bind themselves by oath in allegiance to
their Princes, and soldiers to their Governors. IV. When a man by oath and not
otherwise, may either free himself from temporal losses, or procure to
himself temporal benefits which be of great weight and moment: for an oath
for confirmation is among men the end of all strife: now we know that much
strife and controversy does arise about worldly affairs. And in this regard a
man by oath may lawfully purge himself of infamy and slander. In these four
cases, a man may lawfully swear, not only publicly before the Magistrate,
but also privately, so it be with due reverence and good conscience. But in
common talk, or on light occasion, a man cannot lawfully swear, either by
small or great oath, for that is to take the name of God in vain.

II. Quest. How must a man take an oath, when by just occasion he is called to
swear? Ans. To this question the Prophet Jeremy answers, chap. 4. 2. Thou
shall swear the Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, 3. Virtues in an oath.
and in righteousness: where three virtues are required in an holy manner of
swearing. First, truth, and that respects two things, as 1
well the matter whereto we swear, for God may not be brought for a witness
to a lie; as also the mind of him that swears: for his oath must be
according to his mind, without fraud or deceit, and with intent 2
to perform that truly which he promises thereupon. Secondly, Justice or
righteousness, which also respects two things; first, the thing sworn to,
that must be just and lawful and according to Gods word: secondly, the
conscience of the swearer: for a man must not swear for a trifle, though the
thing be true, but either by the authority of the Magistrate, or upon some
necessary cause of his lawful calling: and against this virtue do those
sin, that swear usually in their common talk, though the thing be true: for
trifles and light matters are not a just cause of an oath. Thirdly, judgment
as well of the 3
oath, as of his own person: for the oath; he that swears rightly, ought to
know the nature of an oath, and be able to judge of the matter whereabout he
swears, and also discern rightly of the persons before whom, of time,
place, and other circumstances. And for his own person, a man that swears,
ought to see in his conscience that he is fit to take an oath, and thereby to
worship and glorify God: for he that swears ought to have his heart smitten
with fear and awe toward God, as in all other parts of his worship: Deuteronomy. 10.
20. the fear of God, and swearing by his name, are joined together: and a
profane man that has no fear of God in his heart ought not to swear. And
thus much of Christ's general Answer, to their false interpretation.

Neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God: v. 35. Nor yet by the earth,
for it his footestoole: neither by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great
King, etc. Here our Savior Christ comes particularly to forbid swearing in
four several kinds of oaths used among the Jews, under which he includes
all indirect oaths by the creatures: and withal observe, that he adds
several reasons in prohibiting these several kinds of indirect oaths; as
that a man must not swear by heaven, because it is the throne of God, etc. Now
as I take it, Christ does not directly forbid swearing by the creatures in this
place: for his intent is to forbid ordinary swearing in common speech, whether
it be by God, or by the creatures; which here he names, because the Jews
counted them but light oaths. Yet here this point must needs be skanned,
Whether we may swear by the creatures. Iansen. concord. Euang. cap. 40.
Manu^le confess. Martini ab Aspilc^eta. c. 12. number. 4.
Whether it be lawful at any time to swear by the creatures. Sundry Papists,
and those of the best account both for learning and devotion, make two kind of
oaths, in swearing by the creatures: First, when a man swears by the
creature, and puts it in the place of God, making it a Judge and witness to
his conscience of the truth of the thing whereof he swears: and this do all
condemn as wicked and unlawful, both Protestants and Papists. Secondly, when
the creature is named, but yet the oath is directed to God in the mind of the
swearer, under the name of the creature, as the creature is in relation to God
a sign of his presence: and this kind of swearing is taken for lawful, not
only of all Papists, but of many Protestant Divines which be of good account
in our age. Yet with reverence to them all, I see no reason in the word of God,
to warrant this kind of swearing by the creature, with direction to God in the
mind of him that swears. Indeed a man may name the creature in his oath (as
Paul did, I call God to record to my conscience) and yet swear by God: for it
is one thing to name the creature in swearing, and an other thing to swear by
the creature.

Reasons against this form of swearing by the creatures, are these. Reasons
against swearing by the creatures.
First, an oath is part of Gods worship, as has before been showed: now every
part of Gods worship must be referred to God directly; so we pray and give
thanks unto God directly, and not in the creature, and so we ought to swear;
but in indirect swearing by the creatures, the oath is directly referred to the
creature, and indirectly unto God, namely in the creature; which is not
lawful. Secondly, a man must swear Heb. 6. 16.
by him that is greater then himself, and therefore v 13.
God swear by himself because there was no greater to swear by; where it
seems, the holy Ghost takes it for granted, that there is no lawful
swearing by the creatures; because they are not greater then man, and so there
must be but one only direct kind of swearing, by God himself. Thirdly, Deuteronomy.
6. 13. Thou shall swear by my name: there it seems he prescribes 3
such a form of swearing* wherein the name of God in some plain manner is
expressed; but in indirect oaths, an other besides him that swears, cannot
tell whether he swear by God or not, because the oath is by the creature, and
directed to God only in the mind of him that swears. Fourthly, Math. 13.
16. He that swears by the 4
Temple, swears by God: whence I gather, that an indirect oath is
superfluous, because it is sufficient that a man swear by God only, and not
by the creature also.

By these reasons I have been moved to dislike of indirect oaths: now let us
see what is said in the behalf of them. First, it is said, that Genesis 42. 16
Joseph a man commended for his faith, swear by the life of Pharaoh: therefore
men may swear by the creatures. Ans. It may be well expounded; not to be an
oath, but an asseueration to this effect, as surely as Pharaoh lives: but say
it is an oath, yet this fact proves not the lawfulnes of this kind of
swearing: for no man is so good, but he may be tainted with the impieties of
the place wherein he lives, especially being so wicked a place as Pharaohs
court was*

Second reason. 2. King. 2. 4. The Prophet Elisha swears by Eliah's soul.
Ans. That place proves not the point in hand, for the question is of indirect
oaths, where the name of God is concealed; but in that place Gods name is
prefixed, as the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives. Again, that phrase may
be taken for a solemn Asseueration only, as it is well translated; as the
Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee.

Reason. III. Canticl. 3. 5. There (say they) Christ himself swears by the
creatures; the Roes and the Hindes of the field, Answ. Those words are not an
oath, but an admiration: for Christ charge the enemies of his Church not to
trouble her; and he confirms his charge by a testimony from the bruit
beasts, which may be done without an oath: for it is all one as if he had said,
If you do trouble my Church, the Roes and Hindes of the field shall be
witnesses against you, because you do that which they would not do, if they
had reason as you have: now* the creatures may be made witnesses unto an
Admiration: as Deuteronomy. 32. 1. Moses calls heaven and earth to witness: and so
does the Lord, Isa. 1. 2. but when a man swears by a thing, the same is made
a witness to his conscience, which no creature can be.

Reason IV. Paul (say they) swear by 1. Cor. 15. 31.
their rejoicing, which is a gift of God. Ans. Those words, are not an oath,
but an obtestation, to testify the constancy which he showed in his
ministry, and they declared in the confession of their faith: now a
testimony may be drawn from a creature, as we showed before. But (say they)
the word there used, is a note of an oath. Ans. Not always: for sometime it
betokens an asseueration, as in other authors might be showed: so that I take
it, there ought not to be any indirect oaths wherein Gods name is concealed,
and the creature sworn by made a pledge of Gods presence.

Now I come to the reasons, for which Christ forbids these indirect oaths: the
sum of them in general is this, because Gods name, which must not be taken
in vain, is set in every one of his creatures, even in the least hair of a
man's head, (for therein a man may see the wisdom and power of God) therefore
we may not swear in our common talk, no not by the least creature that God
has made.

Hence we learn sundry instructions. 1. That it is not lawful to
Instructions.
1
swear by faith, troth, bread, drink, and such like: for faith (to insist in
Swearing by faith, troth, etc. unlawful.
one) is a gift of God, which bears Gods name in it: for the matter of our
faith is Christ, so as when we swear by it, we swear by Christ, whose name we
may not take in vain, and therefore may not swear at all by any such oaths.
Again, God has set his name on every creature, he has imprinted in them the
signs of his power, wisdom, justice, and mercy: Romans 1. 20. The invisible
things of God are seen by his works: and, Act. 14. 17. Rain from heaven, and
fruitful season, were witnesses unto the Gentiles of Gods goodness unto them:
which serves first to condemn the world of great ingratitude: for we have set
before our eyes, we daily taste and handle the good creatures of God; yet who
beholds in them his wisdom, mercy, and goodness, that thereby he might take
occasion to praise his name? for men are like to bruit beasts, who use the
benefit of the creatures, but yet never think on God the creator; and like unto
the swine, who eats up the mast, but never looks up to the tree from whence
it comes; yea, some are so shameless, that they deny God by their works,
though not in word.

Secondly, this teaches us carefully to meditate upon the creatures 2
of God, laboring therein to see Gods wisdom, justice, mercy, and the
Meditate on Gods creatures.
rest of his attributes; that hereby we may take occasion to praise his name:
Psalm. 139. 14. I will praise thee, for I am wonderfully and fearfully made:
marvelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well: here the Prophet
does profess: First, that he did meditate on the creatures of God seriously;
then, that his meditation made him to fear and to be astonished: and thirdly,
to praise God. Psalm. 92. 5, 6. Oh how glorious are thy works? therein
importing, that he did meditate thereon: but the unwise man (says he) knows
it not, and a fool does not understand this: where he shows, that it is a
great point of folly to see Gods creatures, and not to behold the wonderful
power and goodness of God in them. Psalm. 145. 5. I will meditate upon all thy
wondrous works: and, v. 10. All thy works praise thee, O Lord. His example we
should follow. And whereas Gods judgments are among us, we must labor in them
to see Gods indignation against our sins, and his mercy in chastening us for
our amendment, that we might not be condemned with the world.

Thirdly, if every creature carry in it some stamp of Gods name, then 3
what should the reasonable creature do? should not men much more bear Gods
image? yes verily, both in thought, will, affection, and action: we must
therefore seek to repair in us Gods image decayed in Adam: and above all
things take heed, we carry not about us the image of the devil in any sin:
for if we do, we are far worse then the dumb creatures.

Fourthly, whereas every creature bears about some part of Gods image, 4
this serves to strippe the ignorant sort of their false plea; who Plea of the
ignorant confuted.
think God will hold them excused, because they are not book learned: but
they must know they deceive themselves, for since they are ignorant of the
wisdom, mercy, justice, and power of God, and of many other things in God,
which the very unreasonable creatures might have taught them, if they had
beheld the same, and meditated thereon: they may justly fear, least these
silly creatures stand up in judgment against them at the last day.

And lastly, seeing God has set his image in every creature, we must 5
labor to use them all in an holy manner; as meat, drink, apparel, and Use
the creatures re^e^ntly.
such like: we must beware we abuse them not unto our lusts any manner of way,
for the abuse redounds unto the Lord whose name they bear, and we know God
will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

Now I come more particularly to the several reasons annexed to the several
prohibitions. The first particular prohibition is this, Thou shall not swear
by heaven: and the reason follows, for it is the throne of God. This reason
is to be scanned. A Throne is a chair of estate, wherein earthly Princes use
to sit in judgment, and show themselves in glory and majesty. Now heaven is
not properly a Throne, but by resemblance; because that God does in heaven, and
from heaven show his glory and majesty unto men. In heaven the Saints and
Angels behold the unspeakable glory of God. And from heaven does God show his
exceeding power, even in spreading the heavens like a curtain above the earth,
in setting therein the Sun, the moon and stars, most glorious creatures;
in giving particular motions unto the^: by sending rain from heaven with
storms, lightnings, and thunder. Again, he shows his justice from heaven,
by pouring down his judgments thence: As the 2. Pet. 2. ^.
flood upon the world of the ungodly, and fire and brimstone upon Sodom and
Gomorrah: as the Apostle says, Romans 1. 18. The wrath of God is revealed from
heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. Again, Gods
mercy and goodness is daily manifested from heaven, thence comes every good
gift, Iam. 1. 17. yea, thence our Savior Christ descended for the work of our
redemption: thence also the holy Ghost descended in Christ's baptism; and the
Fathers voice was heard from thence, pointing out that lamb of God which
takes away the sins of the world: and thence shall Christ come again in
glory at the last day, to be glorified in his Saints: all which do magnify
unto us the glory of this Throne.

Is the Throne of God in heaven and not on earth? the^ must we learn The use.
to conceive of God, as of an heavenly King: in the chapter following we are
taught to call him our heavenly Father, v. 9. and therefore when we speak or
think of God, or do worship unto him in prayer or tha^ksgiuing, we must not
conceive of him in any carnal sort, but in an heavenly manner. The second
commandment forbidding the representation of God in any similitudes, may teach
us, that we must not conceive of God after any earthly or carnal manner.
Indeed the Popish church approouing of the images of the Trinity (as before
was showed) do thereby teach the people to conceive of God, as of an old man
sitting in heaven, with a crown upon his head, because he is called Dan. 7. 2^.
the Ancient of days; but all such carnal conceits of God are here forbidden.

That we may then conceive aright of God, two Rules must be remembered. How to
conceive aright of God.
First, we must not frame in our minds any image of God at all, as that he
should be like unto man, or any other creature: but we 1
must conceive of him both in his works, as our creator, governor, and
preserver; and also in his properties, as most wise, most just, holy,
merciful, and such like. Secondly, we must conceive that God is one in
substance, 2.
and three in person: we must not confound the persons, nor divide the
substance, but conceive of one God in three persons; and three persons in one
and the same godhead. These two Rules being well observed, will keep our
hearts from those vain conceits of God, which many frame to themselves when
they think of him in their minds.

Secondly, seeing Gods throne is in heaven, therefore our conversation A^
h^^^e^^y conuersatio.
must be there also: for where God is and his throne, there ought our hearts to
be. Now we shall have our conversation in heaven by doing two things: first, by
a continual elevation of our minds unto heaven, morning and evening, and at
all times when we have occasion: 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. we are commanded to pray
continually, and that we do, so often as in the duties of our ordinary calling,
we desire in our hearts the blessing and assistance of God: for the sighs and
groans of the soul, are prayers approved before God: we must therefore lift
up our heart to God, as David did, Psalm. 25. 1. Secondly, we must set all our
affections on God, and on heavenly things, as our love, our joy, and fear, yea
our care must be of coming to heaven: for where can we be in a more happy
place then before Gods throne in heaven, where God sets out his glory and
majesty to his creature?

Thirdly, hence we may learn, to conceive aright of the providence ^ow we must
conceive of Gods providence.
of God: for God sitting in his majesty in heaven, and being infinite in
wisdom, power, and greatness, does by a most careful providence see, know, and
govern all things that are done upon the earth: this is notably set forth unto
us, Psalm. 11. 4. The Lords throne is in heaven, his e^^^ will consider, his eye
lids will try the children of men: the words are very significant, importing
that God from heaven does most narrowly see into all men's dealings and
affairs: which teaches us, when we shall be in any distress, either in
body, mind, goods, or friends, to behave our selves in an holy manner, for
God sees our case: and therefore first we must make our moan unto him, and
humbly entreat for that grace and mercy at his hands whereof we stand in
need. David makes this a ground of much comfort in affliction: Psalm. 102. 19,
20. Out of heaven (says he) did the Lord behold the earth, that he might hear
the mourning of the prisoner, and deliver the children of death.

Lastly, this serves to terrify every sinner: for the Lord sits in heaven A
terror to sinners.
with a piercing eye, beholding all thy doings whatsoever thou art; and
therefore when a man sins, though he may hide the same from men, yet the
Lord sees him, and will reprove him, and judge him: let us therefore make
conscience of all sin, and fear to not evil, either by thought, word, or
deed, seeing we are ever before the Judge that ^its upon this throne.

The second particular prohibition is, against swearing by the earth; verse. 35.
the reason is, because it is the Lords footstool. The earth is the Lords
footestoole, not properly, but by resemblance; because as the footstool is
nothing in glory to the throne, no more be those glimpses of glory, which God
shows here on earth, comparable to that surpassing dignity and glory,
wherein God manifests himself in heaven.

Is the earth the Lords footstool? then is he not included in heaven,
Instruction.
but is present also upon the earth: God is not in one place alone, but 1
he is every where at one and the same time. Here then we have a plain Gods
omnipresence*
proof of Gods infinite greatness and omnipresence, in regard of his essence
and godhead; for Christ compares him to a king, who is of that bigness that he
fills heaven with his glory; and of that height, that the earth below is his
footstool, according as he says, Ierem. 23. 24. I s^ll heaven and earth. This
point David proves at large, Psalm. 139. 7, 8. Whither shall I go from thy
presence? etc. showing plainly, that there is no place, whereof it can be
truly said, that God in essence is not there present. The consideration
whereof teaches us,

First, to understand aright that saying of Paul, Act. 17. 28. In him we Use 1.
live, move, and have our being: we are not in God, as parts of God, for his
essence is most simple; and yet it is true we are in God, because his essence
is every where: it is in us, forth of us, and about us, and being in us, and
about us, gives us living, being, and moving.

Secondly, this teaches us to conceive aright of Gods holy providence; 2
A ^^ght con(...) of Gods. providence*
to wit, that God in regard of his substance, is in every place, giving being,
life, and moving to all things that be, live, and move, preserving the^, and
killing the^ at his pleasure, and doing whosoever he will.

Thirdly, this consideration of Gods essential presence, serves to kindle 3
in our hearts that fear of God, which is the ground of true obedience A
ground of fear and obedience.
in all estates. If God shall lay upon us any affliction, either in body or
mind, friends, or goods, let us then consider the essential presence of God,
laying that cross upon us, and it will strike into our hearts a reverent fear
of God, and move us to patience, meeknes; and contentation; yea, it will cause
us to humble our selves under his hand: for the cause why men fly not to God,
by humbling themselves in their afflictions, is because they think God is
far off. Again, if in prosperity we consider Gods essential presence with
us, giving unto us all good things, it will make us thankful; so much we do
unto man, when we be in his presence that has bestowed a favor upon us, we
readily address our selves to thankefulnes: and shall we not do so to God? In
a word, this holy meditation of Gods presence, will make us to humble our
selves unto God, and to rest contented with his good will and pleasure.

Fourthly, if God in essence be present every where, then it is needelesse to
make choice of places in regard of holiness, for the worship 4
of God, for one place is no more near to God then an other: which No
difference of place for worship in regard of holiness.
confutes the vanity of Popish Pilgrimages to chief places for religious
worship: and it checketh also the blind opinion of many among us, who think
the Church is the only place of prayer and other parts of Gods worship;
whereupon they never regard to pray in their private houses. But God is in
thee, and in thy house, as well as in the Church, and therefore thou may lift
up pure hands unto God in all places, and must pray at home, as well as in the
Church (always provided that thou honor Gods ordinance in the public
assemblies.)

Fifthly, if God be every where, then we must labor to have hearts 5
affected with this persuasion, that wheresoever we be, God is present Think
on Gods presence.
with us. This lesson God taught Abraham, Genesis 17. 1. Walk before me and be
upright: and this Enoch had learned long before, Genesis 5. 24. and therefore was
reported of* that he had pleased God, Heb. 11. 5. now where this persuasion
takes place, (...) will strike the heart with a reverend fear and awe toward
God, making a man thus to reason; God is present with me, how then should I do
this evil in his sight. Oh that this thought did run in our minds in the time
of temptation, then by Gods grace we should fear to sin, and endeavor to
walk before God in all holy obedience, as his servants have done. Many are
shameless in sinning, which comes from the want of this persuasion of Gods
presence, which should strike this fear into their hearts, as we may see, Genesis
20, 11. Psalm. 10. 3. 4. 11. and 94. 6, 7.

Sixthly, this knowledge of Gods presence serves, to quiet and strengthen 6
their hearts that are troubled with fear of the devil: thus they A help
against the fear of the devil.
must reason with themselves; the Lord my God is present with me, both in power
and essence, he can bind Satan, and he will keep those that trust in him from
the snare of the hunter, wherefore then should I be afraid?

Secondly, is the earth the Lords footestoole? then while we live here II.
Instruct. A ground of an humble and penitent life.
upon the earth, our lives ought to be a daily practice of humiliation and
repentance: when good subjects come before the chair of estate, especially if
the Prince be present, then they bow their bodies, to testify their loyal
subjection unto their Prince; shall man do this to man, and shall not we,
whose dwelling is at the Lords footstool, much more humble our selves? When
David's wrath was kindled against Nabal, Abigail Nabals wife, being wiser then
her husband, went to meet David with a present, and so soon as she saw him,
1. Sam. 25. 2^, 24. 28.
she light off her ass, and fell down on her face, and bowed her self to
the ground, and fell at his feet, and be sought him humbly to forget the
trespass, and to stay his hand from blood: so likewise when Jacob met his
brother Esau, Genesis 33. 3.
he bowed himself seven times, to move him to compassion toward him and his
family: how much more then ought we to bow our selves before the Lord, who
have ten thousand fold more deserved his wrath then Nabal did David's, or Jacob
Esaus? and besides, our humble walking before him at his footstool here on
earth, may give us assurance, that one day he will place us on his throne in
glory in the heavens. But if we walk proudly before him in the practice of
sin, being at his footstool, let us know that he has feet like unto fiery
brass burning in a furnance, Revel. 1. 15. under which he will trample all his
enemies, and make them his footestoole. Psalm. 110. 1.

The third inhibition, is from swearing by Jerusalem: the reason is, for
Jerusalem is Gods city, though abounding with corruptions.
it is the city of the great King: that is, the city of God, the king of
kings: for God had chosen the Jews to be his peculiar people, and Jerusalem
for his holy city, where he had his Temple, and sacrifices for his solemn
worship. Now here observe, that at this time the Temple was made a den of
thieves, and many of the Scribes and Jewish teachers were notable Heretics,
erring against the foundation of religion; yea, the people were rebellious and
wicked, as Steven plainly tells them, Act. 7. 51. and yet Christ here calls
Jerusalem the city of God; and so the people, Gods people; though they for
their parts had forsaken When a people cease to b^ Gods people.
God. The reason hereof is this, because neither the Jews, nor any other do
then presently cease to be the people of God, when they by sin cut off
themselves from God and forsake him; but then do they cease to be Gods people,
when God forsakes them and cuts them off from him: like as in the state of
matrimony, when either man or wise commits adultery, that party breaks the
bond of marriage, and as much as in him lies cuts off himself from the other:
but yet while the party innocent retains matrimonial affection toward the
party offending, and gives not a Bill of divorce, they still remain man and
wife. This appears in these Jews, whom neither Christ himself did then
forsake, when they rejected him (for he prayed for them when they crucified
him) nor yet his Apostles, till they saw in them manifest signs of incurable
obstinacy. Act. 13. 46.

This point must be remembered, as serving to rectify our judgments touching
the state of a Church or people, that have many grievous wants and faults among
them, both for doctrine and manners: for though a people do what in them
lies, to cut off themselves from God, yet till God cut them off from him, they
cease not to be his people; and therefore we must not judge them to be no
people of God, till we see that God has cut them off. And to apply this to
our own Church: put case we had forsaken God, and had among us all those
abuses which some would fasten upon us, as making us to be no church; B^^^nists.
yet this proves us not to be no Church, neither ought we for all this to be
so reputed: for though we have deserved indeed that God should cut us off, yet
seeing he vouchsafes unto us the doctrine of life, and the pledges of
salvation, it cannot truly be said, that we are no Church. If it be said, that
by this reason we will make the Church of Rome to be Gods Church, because they
have some signs of Gods favor, as Baptism and the word, though grievously
corrupted. Ans. Though I doubt not but God has his company in the midst of
Popery, yet if we understand by the Church of Rome, a company of men who
profess and hold the Pope for their head, and embrace the doctrine established
Rome no tr^e church.
by the Council of Trent, then (I say) they are no Church: for Christ has cut
them off, and given them a Bill of diuorcement in his holy word, Revel. 18. 4.
Come out of her my people.

Hence also we are taught, to carry a charitable opinion of such particular
Charity toward the impenitent.
persons, as go on in sin without remorse: for though they for their part
have forsaken God, yet we know not, whether God has forsaken them; he may in
mercy call them to repentance, and therefore we must not rashly give sentence
of judgment against them. Quest. But what if a man give himself to the devil
by covenant, as many have done, and do daily, may we not then give sentence
against them, or they against themselves? Ans. No verily: for though this case
be most fearful, yet they have not absolute power over themselves: Manasses
2. Chr. 33. ^* 12.
king of Judah had most wickedly forsaken God, and bound himself in league to
the devil; but yet when he humbled himself being in affliction, and prayed
to God, he was received to mercy. Saul's case was fearful, while Act. 9. 1. 3.
he made havoc of the Church; and yet the Lord converted him when he went to
persecute. This must not embolden any to go on in sin, for the Lord will not
be merciful unto such, Deu. 29. 19.

Neither shall thou swear by thine head* This is the last form of verse. 36.
swearing forbidden by Christ; the reason, because thou can not make one
hair white or black: that is, thou shall not swear by thine head, because
thou have not power over thine own head, thou a^t not able to make thine head;
nay, thou can not make one hair of thine head: nay (which is less) thou
can not give to any hair his natural color, by making it either white or
black.

Where observe the honor given to God, not only to make the hairs of man's
head, but even to give the natural color to every one of them: man can not
do the least of these things.

This teaches us, first, that there is a particular providence of God, Gods
particular providence pr^^ued.
whereby he disposes of all things, even of the least and basest things that
be in the world: for what is more base then the hair of a man's head? and what
is less to be regarded then the color thereof? and yet the Lords providence
reaches hereunto. This is a matter of endless comfort to Gods children: for
when we are once persuaded of the particular providence of God over so base and
light things, we shall easily be resolved that all things which befall us in
this life, whether in prosperity or adversity, come by Gods special
providence: which will move us to a patient bearing of all miseries, and to
contentment in every estate, because it is the Lords sending; yea, this will be
a notable comfort in any affliction, to know that God is the author thereof.

Secondly, has not man power over the least creature, no not over Against
sweari^g by the creatures.
the hair of his head? then doubtless he may not lawfully swear by any
creature, though he have relation to God therein: for if he might lawfully
swear by a creature, it were because he might present that creature unto God,
as a pledge of his presence, wherein he desires God to punish him, if he fail
in his oath. This is granted of those that defend this form of swearing: but
a man may not lay down any creature, as a pawn before God, and appoint the
Lord to punish him therein; because the creature is not in man's power, every
treature is the Lords, and we may not appoint him how he shall punish us for
our perjury. If it be said, that the oath made by the creature, is a binding
oath, which must be kept, for Christ calls it an oath, Math. 23. 20. and
therefore a man may lawfully use it. Ans. The reason is not good: for that oath
binds and must be kept, because indirectly a man swears by God, and so in
substance it is an oath; but yet the manner of it is unlawful, because an
oath, being part of Gods worship, ought to be directed unto God immediately:
when an Infidel swears by his false gods (as Genesis 31. 53
Laban did by the god of Nahor) this is an oath, and it binds his conscience,
because in his intent ^e swear by the true God; and yet the form of it is
unlawful, because he puts that in the room of God, which is not good.

Thirdly, is the hair of the head the creature of God, and the natural Abuses
about the hair of the hea^.
color his workmanship? then all abuse hereof must needs be unlawful: as
first, the custom of those men or women, who being ashamed of Gods
workmanship in their own hair, do beautify their 1
heads with bought hair, sometime of dead persons. This is an odious thing,
and such persons take Gods name in vain, as much as they which swear by their
head at every word; for be they what they will be, God in some sort has set
his own name in the natural color of their hair, which none ought to be
ashamed of. Secondly, the painting of 2
faces, and coloring of the hair is another abuse of Gods name set therein.
This practice was abhorred of the heathen, who in their writings Pl. n^nat
hist. l. 11. c. 41. and l. 28. c. 12.
have branded Poppaea Neros wife, because she used an ointment made of Asses
milk, to make her face fair and bright: what then shall we say of our ladies
and gentlewomen, who paint their faces with Spanish white, and color their
hair? These doubtless believe not Gods word, which prefers the fear of
God before favor and beauty, Pro. 31. 30. But yet me thinks they should be
ashamed to be followers of Iesabel, 2. King. 9. 30. Thirdly, the wearing of
long hair is another abuse thereof, in the younger sort; it began indeed among
the aged, but now it is become a trick of youth, and is the badge of a proud
heart: for how can they say they glorify God thereby, when the Apostle says,
It is a shame for a man to have long hair. Well, since God has set his name
therein, we must beware how we make it an instrument of sin. If it be said,
to wear long hair is our English fashion: I answer, It is not our ancient
English fashion, but indeed it is a foreign trick, and therefore as
unlawful as foreign attire, which God condemns, Zeph. 1. 8. Our ancient
English fashion (except it were among the aged) was to wear short hair; and
in every country, the most ancient and grave fashions ought to be followed;
not only in the use of the hair, but in apparel also, that therein men may
show the grace of their heart: for man's attire is Gods ordinance, borrowed from
his creatures, wherein God has set his name, and therefore we ought not to
deface it, with the stamp of pride and vanity; but rather show therein, that
liberty and modesty, that may honor Gods name.

Verse 37. Let your communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay; for whatsoever is
more comes of evil.
This verse contains two parts: A rule for the framing of our A rule of
communication.
speech in common talk; and a Reason thereof. The Rule is this, Let your
communication be yea yea, nay nay: where he shows, that though men may not
swear in their common talk, yet they may use a simple affirmation, or
negation to the thing they speak. This Rule is diversely expounded; some take
it to respect the truth of our speech, as if Christ had said; Whatsoever you
affirm in speaking, affirm it truly, and whatsoever you deny in speaking,
deny it truly. But by the circumstances of the place, it rather seems, that
Christ here propounds a Rule for the very form of our common talk, to this
effect; If you would affirm any thing in your ordinary speech, let your
affirmation be yea; and if you would deny any thing, let your negation or
denial be no, and in your ordinary communication say no more, though you be
urged thereto. So must we take communication, for ordinary common talk; for
in some cases it is lawful to swear, as has been showed.

First, by this Rule is condemned the adding of inuocations to our The use. 1.
Inuocatio^s in communication unlawful.
common affirmations or negations; as O Lord, yea; nay* good God, and such
like. In some cases, and at some times these may be used; but in ordinary and
familiar communication, these inuocations are abuses of Gods name. An earthly
Prince will not suffer his name to be tossed in every man's mouth; and much
less will the Lord, who herein is jealous of his glory.

Secondly, here note, that asseuerations may not be ordinarily used in 2.
Asseuerations.
common talk; as verily yea, no in truth, and such like; these are more then
simple affirmations and negations, and therefore in common speech may not be
used. Our Savior Christ, the pattern of piety, never used them, but in
weighty matters, which were carefully to be remembered; and then he said,
Verily verily, I say unto you.

Thirdly, here is condemned the use of execrations, when we affirm 3.
Execratio^s
or deny a thing in our common talk; as to say, yea, or else I would I were
dead, and such like.

Fourthly, ordinary swearing is here again plainly forbidden, whether 4.
Ordinary swearing.
it be by the name of God, or by other creatures. Some to avoid swearing (as
they think) in their common talk, for yea, and nay, use to say, by yea, and
by no: but herein they offend, for these phrases are oaths, as well as by
faith, and by troth: and in a word, all speeches in common talk, added to
confirm our speech, above yea, and nay, are abuses against this Rule of
Christ, for ordinary communication.

For whatsoever is more then these, that is, whatsoever exceeds a simple
affirmation or negation in common speech, comes of evil: that is, of the evil
one, the devil: so Chap. 6. 13. Deliver us from evil: that is, from the devil,
that evil one. This is a most excellent reason, to move men to put in practice
this Rule; for all abuses of oaths, asseuerations, inuocations, and
deprecations, in common speech, are abuses of Gods name, and they come from the
devil, he is the schoolmaster that teaches men to use them.

Quest. Whether does every temptation come from the devil? Answer. Every
temptation to evil, is of the devil; so much this Text proves: and Math. 4.
3. the devil is called the Tempter, because he gives himself to tempt all
men, by all means, at all times. True it is, that some temptations come from
our corrupt hearts, but yet the devil has an hand in them to further them.
Quest. How can this be, seeing the devil is but one, and can be but in one
place at once? Answ. There is indeed one head of wicked spirits, called
Beelzebub, and the devil, who has innumerable wicked angels ministering unto
him, as may be gathered, Matthew. 25. 41. where hell is said to be prepared for
the devil and his angels: and it is not unlike, but they are more in number,
then all the men upon the earth; for where can any man be in this life, but
some wicked spirit will be ready to tempt him unto sin? does he not provoke
the filthy person to uncleanness, and every man to such sin, whereunto he
is most inclined? And say the evil motions arise from our own corruption, yet
the devils help is never wanting to bring it into action.

This serves to confute the folly of our common people, who never Use 1.
Devils often about us though unseen.
fear the devil, but when he appears unto them in some shape; they think
he is never near them, but when they see him: but they must know, that the
devil by his wicked spirits, is always about them day and night, and in all
places; and therefore they must learn more to fear his temptations, then his
appearance; for that is not so terrible to the sight, as his temptations are
hurtful to the soul. Secondly, this presence of 2
the devil with every man, to tempt him at all times, must teach us, to keep
strait watch against all sin, and the occasions thereof: we are easily
persuaded to watch against thieues that would deprive us of our temporal
goods, or natural life; now the devil our spiritual enemy, is daily about
us, to seek the ruin of our souls, and therefore we must always have an
eye to his temptations. And indeed, if we would well consider his presence,
and malice against us, it would make us watch and fear, lest he should take us
in his snare.

But why is the devil called the evil one? Answ. By a kind of excellency Why
Satan is called the evil one.
of speech; for these reasons: First, because he is evil in excess, his
sins are in the highest degree; for it is like, his first sin was directly 1
against the holy ghost, which may be one reason, why God chose not angels, but
men, on whom he would show mercy after their fall. Secondly, because he
commits evil and wickedness continually without 2
ceasing, and therefore is compared to an 1. Pet. 5. 8.
hunger-bitten Lion, who goes about continually seeking whom he may devour.
The most wicked man that is, or ever was, will sometime do good: Exo. 10. 16
Pharaoh humbled himself, and confessed his sins to Moses, and 1. Sam. 15.
^0.
Saul desires to worship God with Samuel: Herod also heard John Baptist Mar.
16. 20
gladly, and did many things according to his Ministry; but the devil herein
differs from all wicked men, that he does nothing but practice wickedness, he
is always murdering, and never cease to seek men's destruction. Thirdly, 3
because he practices sins of all sorts and degrees, in himself, and by his
Ministers; for the sins that be in the world, be all from him, either
originally, or by furtherance. The vilest man that is, does abstain from sin
sometime, yea by nature he hates some sins: the proud and prodigal man
cannot abide covetousness; and the drunkard may abhor idolatry; but the
devil continually practices sins of all sorts, and therefore is justly
called the evil one.

Here the^ we may see a reason, why we are called the children of wrath, Why we
are called the children of wrath and of the devil.
and of the devil by nature: namely, because by nature we carry in us, and
about us, as lively an image of the devil in sin, as any child does of his
natural father. For first, in our corruption we are guilty of Adams sin, in
eating the forbidden fruit. Secondly, our nature is stained with original
sin, which is (not a practice) but a proneness^ unto all manner of mischief
and wickedness, that is committed in the world. See thou a man kill his
father, or mother, or betray his Master, as Judas did to Christ, though it may
be, thou abhorrest such sins, yet doubtless the seed thereof is in thee;
yea, if God in mercy did not keep us from it, our corruption would carry us
to the blasphemy against the Spirit. And thirdly, from this natural
corruption, do arise innumerable evil thoughts, words, and deeds, in the course
of our lives, in all which we bear the image of the devil, till God bring us
to repentance; and therefore justly may we be called the children of wrath, and
of the devil by nature, having the same corruption in us, that is in the
devil, though not in the same degree and manner.

Hence we learn, First, to be ashamed and confounded in our selves, Use 1.
yea to hang down our heads; for what cause has he to be puffed up with
self love, that is by nature in himself like to the devil. Secondly, 2
this teaches us above all things, to labor to have the image of God renewed
in us, in righteousness, and true holiness, which was lost in Adam, that so
the devils image, in sin and wickedness, may be defaced. Thirdly, this must
cause us to make no account of any worldly thing, 3
that pertains to us; but all our joy must be in Christ, he must be our
wisdom, and righteousness, our riches, and all things else, because by him
we are renewed, from the devils likeness to the image of God.

Verse. 38. Ye have heard that it has been said, an eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth, etc.
Here Christ returns to the commandments of the second Table, intending to
restore the same to their proper sense, and withal to confute the erroneous
interpretation thereof, given by the Jewish Teachers. And first, he comes to a
particular Judicial law of Moses, pertaining to the sixth commandment,
touching the Requital of like for like: in which, as in the former, he first
sets down the words of the law of Moses, but yet to be understood, with the
erroneous interpretation of the Scribes and Pharisees, verse 38. Then, he gives
the right sense of that law, and withal confuteth the false interpretation of
the Jewish teachers, v. 39, 40, 41.

For the first, the words of Moses law here set down, An eye for an Moses law
of like f^r like expounded.
eye, and a tooth for a tooth, are written, Exodus 21. 24. whereto, as to the
former, Christ prefixeth this preface, It has been said, thereby giving us to
understand, that he is about to lay down the law of God in the false sense of
the Jewish Teachers: for the better perceiving whereof, we must observe the
true meaning of that law. An eye for an eye, and a Leuit. 19 ^8.
tooth for a tooth: wherein the Lord requires, requital of like for like, not
by every private man, but by the public Magistrate. As if a man did put out
his neighbors eye, then the Magistrate should put out his ^ie; and strike out
his teeth, that strikes out his neighbors teeth: this appears to be so,
because revenge is directly forbidden to every private person, and plainly
appropriated to the Judge, Deuteronomy. 19. 18, 19, 21. But the Jewish Teachers
expounded this law of private revenge; as though God had said to every private
man, If thy neighbor pluck out thine ^ie, pluck out his again; and if he
strike out thy tooth, strike thou out his tooth: this is the false
interpretation of the Jews. Quest. How could they so far ouershoote
themselves in so clear a case, seeing in all the books of Moses, it is
plainly referred to the Magistrate? Ans. There may be two reasons given
thereof; First, it is a natural opinion, that a man may revenge himself in
his own cause privately, and not wait for recompense of the Magistrate; and
answerable hereunto, there is a mighty strong desire of revenge in every man's
heart by nature, when he is iniuried: now it is like, that these Jews followed
their corrupt nature, and headie affections, in the interpretation of this law.
Again, the Jewish people were mightily given to revenge, by their natural
disposition, as may appear by the law of the Cities of Refuge, and by
mentioning of the Revenger of blood: which plainly imports, that the Jews
would have blood again of him that shed blood, whersoeuer they met with him.
Now the Jewish Teachers framed their doctrine to the common disposition and
behavior of their people, and so falsified the truth of God, as many times it
falls out, that the common practice of men makes sin to seem no sin.

In the person of these Jewish Teachers, we may see the policy of the Vs^ 1.
Tempering religion to men's humors a Satanicall policy.
devil, whose intent is, and has been in all ages, to ouerturne religion: and
to this end, he endeauours to cause men to temper religion to their natural
disposition and common opinion in outward manners; whereby he ouerturneth both
religion and people. This appears in other points among the Jews, as well as
in this case of revenge: They were a people given much to covetousness, as may
appear by the law of toleration for taking usury of strangers, and by their
hardness of heart, so much reproved by all the Prophets. Now the devil
perceiving this to be their natural disposition, makes Gods doctrine of
salvation, seem to them a doctrine of earthly benefits; for he caused them to
dream of an earthly king, for their Messiah, and of an earthly flourishing
kingdom under him. Thus also has the devil dealt with other heathen people:
The Romans in Italy have been ever grossly addicted to superstition, sorcerie,
and idolatry, as heathen writers do testify. Now though God vouchsafed them
his true Religion in the primitive Church, yet the devil perceiving their
natural disposition to superstition, has so tempered the truth of God among
them, with a natural and superstitious religion, that now they abound as much
in idolatry and superstition, as ever they did when they were heathen. The
like malicious practice does the devil show among the Protestants, where the
Gospel is truly preached; for though he cannot (as he desires) corrupt
religion in the mouths of the Teachers, yet he weakens Formal profession.
it greatly in the hearts of men, both Teachers and hearers, causing them so
far forth only to receive it, as it is suitable to their nature and
disposition: but where it crosses their humors, there to leave it. Is not
this evident? for he that embraces the truth with his heart, will frame his
life according to it; but generally the entertainment of religion is only
formal: for though men profess it, yet they live in their sins, they make
it to i^mpe with their natural disposition, having indeed a show of
godliness, but they want the power thereof; and so in them religion is vain,
Iam. 1. 26. Whereby we must be advertised, to take heed of this policy of the
devil, and whereas he labors to transform religion to men's dispositions, we
on the contrary, must endeavor in all things to transform our selves into
religion, obeying that form of doctrine, whereunto we are delivered, Romans 6.
17.

Secondly, in these Scribes and Pharisees we observe the property of a A
property of a bad Teacher.
bad Teacher; namely, to transform himself and his doctrine, to the custom
and manners of the people, when as the people should be transformed into his
doctrine and practice, according to godliness. Hereof the Lord admonishes
Jeremy, Ier. 15. 1^*
Let them return to thee, but return not thou to the^: for it was the
practice of the false prophets in his time, thus Exo. 2^. 14
to strengthen the hands of the wicked: and it is a common fault in many
Teachers, that they frame themselves, both for doctrine and practice, to the
custom and manners of the people: but this is the devils policy, whereby he
overthrows religion, and destroys men's souls.

Verse 39. But I say unto you, resist not evil: but whosoever shall strike
thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.
In this and the three next verses, Christ confutes the false interpretation of
this law. The sum of his answer stands in two points; the first is an
inhibition, resist not evil, which is explained by three examples in the words
following. The second, is a commandment to requite good for evil, verse. 42.

For the first, by evil is meant, the injury or wrong that is done to
Exposition.
man; or more properly, the evil one, that is, the evil man that does the
wrong. Resist not] that is, rise not against the evil one, to requite like for
like, according to the injury he has done unto thee; so much the word (...)
signifies. Now Christ forbids not resisting by a lawful defense, but by
way of private revenge; for he speaks to his Disciples, and to private men,
saying, I say unto you which hear, (as Saint Luke has it, Chapter 6. 27.) Yet
further to clear this interpretation, we must know, the Scripture mentions
two kinds of revenge, Public, and Private: Public Revenge twofold. ^* Public.
revenge, is when the Magistrate according to justice, and the law of God,
punishes an evil person, that wrongeth his brother. Private revenge, 2.
Private.
is when those that are no Magistrates, will revenge themselves on such as do
them wrong. The public revenge is allowed by Saint Paul, calling the
Magistrate, Romans 13. 4.
Gods minister, for the executing of revenge upon evil doers. Private revenge,
is forbidden by the same Apostle, Romans 12. 17
Revenge not thy self. Now by this doctrine it is plain, that our Savior
Christ here forbidding revenge, means not public, but private revenge.

First, here we see those men confuted, who think it unlawful for a The ^s^.
^. Magistracy lawful.
Christian to be a Magistrate, to execute revenge upon malefactors by the
sword, or to make war against the common enemies: these men are deceived, by
mistaking this text, which forbids only private, and not publik revenge.
Secondly, here we see, that al private revenge is flatly 2
condemned, as a sin against the sixth commandment. This point Private
revenge unlawful.
must be remembered, because it is our natural opinion, and our hearts desire
to requite like for like in private cases, when we are iniuried.

Now that we may see more into this sin, we are to know that private
revenge is two-folde, Inward, and Outward; Inward private Kinds of private
revenge. 1. Iaward.
revenge, is a purpose in the heart, to do a man an evil turn; this is
commonly called the bearing of a grudge, and it is here condemned. Outward
revenge, is when the spite of the heart comes into action, 2. Outward.
either by word or deed: by word, when a man gives out threatening speeches; as
that he will sit on his skirt, or be even with him, if it lie in his lot, and
such like; or uses cursing speeches, as a plague take thee, a murraine or
pestilence light upon thee; or raileth or chideth, calling another knave,
villain, etc. By deed and action men show outward revenge, when they be at a
word and a blow, using to fight and to strike one another, by way of private
revenge. Hereto also we may refer an ordinary bad practice of some
Magistrates and Superiors, though (it may be) few think it to be a fault; to
wit, when the Magistrate does aggrauate the punishment upon a malefactor, for
some private grudge he bears to him, for then he uses private revenge: as
also when Parents or Masters correct their servants and children in fury and
rage; for though they be public persons in this regard, yet to give correction
in a chollericke mood, is to ease the heart by way of revenge.

Here then we must learn, that we may not requite evil for evil, Use. 1.
in thought, word, or deed, to those that do us wrong, any manner of way, but
must rather suffer injury, and refer the revenge unto God that judges
righteously. And because this duty goes against our natural disposition, I
will use some reasons to persuade Reasons against private revenge.
our hearts to yield unto it: First, the Apostle teaches out of Deuteronomie,
that Romans 12. 19.
vengeance is the Lords: if then we shall privately 1
revenge our selves, we rob God of his right, and so sin against the first
commandment. Secondly, in the next words he adds, and I will repay says the
Lord: where God takes upon him to be our debtor in the case 2
of injustice, and therefore when we are wronged, we must not be rash to
revenge our selves, but must wait with patience upon the Lord, laying down
our injury at his feet; for he will repaie in due time, to them that have
wronged us. Thirdly, consider the examples of worthy men 3
in this case; for our Savior Christ never sought revenge, but bare wrong
patiently, committing all to him that judges righteously, leaving us an
example to do likewise, 1. Peter, 2. 10. Yea, when he was cruelly and
unjustly crucified, he prayed for his persecutors, Luke 23. 34. Steven also
prayed for them that stoned him, Act. 7. 16. and David, though a King, would
not suffer revenge to be taken on Shime^ that cursed him, 2. Sam. 19. 9, 10.
neither would he ever touch Saul, who sought his life, though he had him 1.
Sam. 24. 5, 6.
often in his hands: nay, Cap. 26. 9, 10.
his heart smote him, for cutting off the lap of his coat: so far was he
from seeking revenge. Fourthly, in the fifth petition we pray, Forgive us our
sins, as we forgive our trespasses: but if we carry grudging in our 4
hearts, we pray God not to forgive us, but to condemn us; for we will not
forgive, but be revenged on them that offend us. Now this is a most fearful
case, that a man should pray for vengeance upon himself. Fifthly, it is not
meet in common reason, that the same party 5
should be the accuser and the Judge; and yet, if a man might revenge himself,
this should be so: and therefore, ^f we would be Christ's Disciples, we must
arm our selves with patience, in suffering wrong, and refer revenge to God
that judges righteously.

Yet some will say, If we always put up and suffer wrong, we shall never be
in quiet, but still be abused. Answer. Though in our own person we may not
revenge our selves, yet we may crave the help of the Magistrate, either for
the preventing, or for the punishment of wrong done unto us; for the Magistrate
is Gods Liuetenant, to relieve the oppressed, and to execute vengeance on
malefactors: thus did Act. 23. 17.
Paul send to the chief Captain, to prevent a conspiracy that the Jews
intended against him, and Act. 25. 10.
appealed to Caesar, to avoid the danger of the Jews at Jerusalem: and yet
when wrong is done unto us, we must bear it patiently, without seeking
private Revenge, although the wrong were doubled or trebled upon us.

Thirdly, our Savior Christ here calling the wrong doer an evil Wrong doing
the property of an evil man.
one, gives us to understand, that it is the property of an evil man to do
wrong unto others; and this title is given to the wrong doer, to teach us, that
we must suffer wrong patiently, though he be an evil man that offers it
unto us. It is the property of a good man to do good continually, but to do
wrong is the mark of an evil man, who herein is like the devil: which must
teach us, not to do wrong to any one, in his body; goods, or name, either by
word or deed; but rather apply our selves to do all the good we can, to
every one within the compass of our calling. Hereby we shall see what our
estate is, for if in our callings we set our selves to hurt others, either by
word or deed, we are in the sight of God evil men: such are our usurers, and
extortioners, and all those that use fraud and deceit in their callings. But
if we would show our selves to be good men, approved of God in Christ, then
we must refer our bodies and souls, and all that we have, to the good of
others. Although men by nature be like to Isay 11 6. ^
savage beasts, as Lions, Woolues, Cock ^trices, etc. whose property is, to
devour and hurt other creatures; yet when it pleases God to receive them to
mercy, and to place them in his kingdom, then they lay aside their cruel
nature, and live peaceably one with another; for in all the Mountain of Gods
holiness, none shall hurt or destroy, verse 9. It is a prophecy of Christ's
kingdom, that therein the sword and spear, which are weapons of war, shall
be turned into scythes and mattocks, which are instruments of common good in
time of peace; whereby was signified, that when men are converted, and become
true children unto God, they lay aside all malice, and give themselves to do
good, and become serviceable unto all for the good of all. This was notably
verefied in Paul, who of a Act. ^ 21.
persecuter became a preacher: yea, 1. Cor. 9. 22
he became all things to all men, that by all means he might win some. And
thus doing, we are like to our heavenly father, who does good to all; but if we
give our selves to wrong doing, we are evil ones, and herein like to the
devil himself.

Fourthly, Christ here forbidding private revenge, which is unlawful, Of
lawful revenge.
does hereby establish that revenge, which is lawful and just. Now lawful
revenge (to speak somewhat hereof) is the work of a just and lawful power,
requiting evil for evil. This just revenge is two-folde, Divine, and Humane;
Divine revenge, is the work of Gods absolute power, 1 Divine.
taking vengeance upon offenders: of the lawfulness of this revenge in God,
there is no question: only this we must remember, that God executes this
vengeance daiely, in the manifold miseries of this life* and likewise in the
just condemnation of the impenitent after death. Indeed as a father he
chasteneth his Church and children, for vengeance in Christ becomes
nurturement; but as a severe judge he plagues the wicked, pouring vengeance on
them, both temporal and eternal. Humane revenge is the ordinance of God,
whereby men being thereunto 2 Humane.
called by God, do execute vengeance in the name of God; and it Extraordinary.
is twofold, extraordinary, or ordinary: Extraordinary, when men are
extraordinarily stirred up by the spirit of God, to execute vengeance upon
offenders, in the name of God. Thus N^^^. 25. 7, 8, ^.
P^i^e^as slew Zimri and Cosbie: and thus many of the Judges of Israel,
specially I^^ ^. (...).
Ehud and (...)* 1^* 19. and (...). 1^. (...).
Sampson, took revenge upon the enemies of Gods people: thus Elias the Prophet
slew Baals priests, 1. King. 18. 40. and destroyed the two Captains and their
fifties, with fire from heaven, 2. King. 1. 10. 12. thus A^^* ^. A^^* (...). 10.
Peter killed Ananias and Saphira: and Paul stro^ke Elimas with blindness.
This kind of reueng is now rare, for we are not to look for extraordinary
instincts: we know Christ rebuked his Luke 2. 54. 55.
Disciples, for seeking to execute this extraordinary revenge upon the
Samaritans; and therefore when we have a conceit hereof in our selves, we may
justly suspect what spirit it is that moves us. Ordinary revenge, is
Ordinary.
that which men ordinarily put in execution, in the Church and common wealth,
according to Gods will, being thereto called by God: and it is twofold,
Lesser, or Sovereign. Lesser revenge, is the inflicting of lawful correction
upon offenders, in word or deed, not reaching to the case of life and death;
this kind of revenge is committed to parents over their children, and masters
over their servants, to schoolemasters over their scholars, and Tutors over
their pupils. Sovereign revenge, is that whereby the Magistrate may lawfully
punish men according to their offenses, in body, goods, or life it self; this
I call sovereign, not simply, but because it is the highest that agrees unto
man, being of life and death. This revenge is executed partly in peace, and
partly in war; In peace, by the confiscation of goods, by imprisonment,
banishment, and (if the offense deserve it) by taking away of life, for the
good of the state public. In time of war, when as (not for every case) but
for the just repelling or requiting of wrongs, war is made against the
enemies of the state. Now though it belong to the Magistrate only, to execute
public revenge, yet every private man may have the benefit hereof, and may
upon just causes use the Magistrates help for his revenge: as first, if his
cause be weighty wherein he is wronged: 2. if Wherein we may seek to the
Magistrate for revenge.
it be necessary: and 3. if it be for his just defense, for the common good,
and the punishment of the offender; and the Magistrate in these cases may
lawfully, nay he must put in execution, revenge for private men: for without
this, neither church, nor common wealth, nor any society could stand.

Thus we see what just revenge is; now considering it is the ordinance of God,
this must admonish us to eschew all outward offenses, that we may so escape
the just revenge of the Magistrate; and also to make conscience of all sins,
that so we may avoid the vengeance of God. And thus much of the general rule.

Now because this general rule might seem to be hard, therefore Christ
explaines the same in 3. particular examples, wherein he shows 1. Example of
^u^f^^ing wrong.
how men are to behave themselves when they are wronged. The first example is
in these words, Whosoever shall smi^e thee on the right cheek, turn to him
the other also: under which, are comprehended all injuries done to men's bodies,
not only by blows and words, but also in the contempt of their persons,
signified by striking on the right cheek: for usually men strike with the
right hand, which directly should light on the left cheek, and if the right
cheek be smitten it is commonly with the back of the hand, which is a blow
with contempt: now, say a man is abused in his body, even by blows of
contempt, yet he must not revenge himself, but turn the other cheek also:]
which words must not simply be understood, but by comparison, thus; rather then
thou revenge thy self, and resist the evil one that has stricken thee on the
right cheek, turn to him the other: for this particular example comprehends
in it the general rule of not resisting evil by private revenge: and that it
may not simply be taken may herby appear: first, because Christ should then
command the sufferer, to give further occasion of wrong doing to the evil man,
which is not his meaning: again, Christ himself who gave this rule, did not
so practice it, when he was smitten by the servant of the high Priest. Ioh. 18.
22, 23.

First, by this example Christ condemns the common practice of The use.
Chalenging the field unlawful.
chalenging the field for personal wrongs, and of taking that challenge when it
is given; as also the fighting the single combat* for Christ teaches, that a
man must take many wrongs, before he seek to revenge himself by any such
course: if it be said, it is a disgrace to refuse a challenge; we must know,
that true grace and credit stands in yiedling obedience unto God, and not in
sinning against him for the saving of our reputation with men.

Secondly, the common practice of fighting and quarelling, is here Fighting,
and quarelling.
condemned: many hold it unlawful to give the first blow, but yet if an other
strike them, then they think they may strike again: but this Christ here
condemns, and his own example is against it: for when he was smitten before
the high Priest, he Ioh. 1^. 22* 23.
smote not again: when Paul Act. 23. 3.
was smitten, he only defended himself in word, but smote not again. And
Christ checketh Peter for taking the sword, to resist the officers that
apprehended him in the garden; indeed he permitted his Disciples to wear
weapons, yet not for revenge, but for their just defense only.

Thirdly, Christ here condemns their opinion, that make it a matter of praise
for a man that he will not turn his face from any man. It is indeed the
praise of the Magistrate to be courageous, and not to fear the face of man.
But yet a private man, be he never so strong, ought to turn his face from the
adversary, unless it be in the case of his necessary defense: for a man must
suffer double or treble wrong, rather then defend himself. If any shall think
this to be a great disgrace, still he must remember, that our chiefest honor
consists in approouing our selves unto God, by obeying his will, who here
commands us rather to turn our backs and fly, then to resist in our own
revenge.

Question. But what if a man be assaulted, either on the high way, or What a
man may do, being unlawfully assaulted.
in his house, may he not then resist to save his life, and his goods? Answer.
In such a case he may do two things: First, he may to the uttermost of his
power, defend himself and his goods; for this Text speaks not against
defense, but against revenge. Secondly, if a man can see no way to escape,
either by flight, or calling for help of the Magistrate, then he is to stand
so far in his own defense, that he is rather to kill then be killed; for in
this case, God puts the sword into a private man's hand, and makes him a
Magistrate, to execute revenge upon his adversary: and thus might a man
lawfully kill a thief in the night without the guilt of blood, Exodus 22. 2.

Fourthly, hence observe, that no private man may lawfully kill a Private men's
duty toward Tyrants.
Prince, though he should tyrannically destroy both Church and common wealth;
for this Rule must square the actions of private men, they must rather bear
double and treble wrong, then by way of private revenge resist the evil one.
The revenge of evil Magistrates must be referred to God, to whom it justly
belongs, as David did, 1. Sam. 26. 10. and Psalm. 43. 1.

Lastly, in this first example of particular injury, we may see one property
Quarrelling notes an evil person.
of an evil man; namely, to be given to fighting, quarrelling, and contending:
such a one may think himself a goodly fellow, but yet he that uses his
strength to ordinary quarrelling, and wrong doing to others, is here made an
evil one, by the sentence of our Savior Christ: and therefore such as excel
in strength, if they would be approved of Christ, must make conscience of
quarrelling and fighting, and offer violence to no man.

Verse 40. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let
him have thy cloak also.
Here Christ propou^ds the second example of wrong done unto me^, 2. Example of
suffering wrong.
wherein he forbids the party wronged to revenge himself; to wit, being
iniuried in his goods, either privately, or under color of law, for both these
may here well be understood. By coat properly is meant the inner garment; and
by cloak the outward: but here the words are not so strictly to be taken, but
indifferently for any diverse garments; for in Luke they are thus set down, And
him that would take away thy cloak, forbid not to take thy coat also. And
Christ's meaning is this; If one unjustly contend with thee, to take from thee
one garment, let him have another also, whether coat, or cloak, or such like
thing. And yet this commandment is not simply, but comparatively to be
understood; to wit, rather then a man should seek private revenge, he must not
only suffer the loss of one garment, but of more, and so of other temporal
goods.

Out of this example, we may learn these Instructions; First, that 1
Christians must be quiet and patient, and not given to contend, whether
Contenti^^^ lawing, not Christianlike.
it be privately, or openly by suite at the law. This contention Paul reproved
in the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 3. 3. and charge the Philippians, that nothing be
done among them by contention, Philip. 2. 3. which is a notable rule; for
though men be at difference, yet there ought to be no contentions either in
word or deed, all things ought to be done in love, and so strife shall cease:
that wrangling spirit is not of God, whereby men strive to put down others in
words: when a man has spoken his mind, he ought to cease, for multiplying of
words is against Christian civility, and every where condemned in the holy
Scripture.

Secondly, here is condemned, not the lawful, but the common use 2
of lawing, whereby men for every trisle will trouble the Courts. This Common
vs^ of lawing naught.
argues a contentious spirit, and a mind that is given to revenge, which
beseems not Christians, as Paul shows, 1. Cor. 6. 1, 2, 5, 6. and yet it is
the common practice in these our days, from whence come such unchristian
speeches as this, I will be revenged on him, or else I will spend all that I
have. But the truth is, that rather then a man should go thus to law, he ought
to suffer a double and treble loss.

Thirdly, here Christ teaches, that in all our dealings we must have 3
a principal regard unto charity, and rather seek to maintain this grace in
our hearts, then our outward worldly goods.

Fourthly, we are here taught to prefer our own peace and quietness, 4
before our temporal goods; yet not simply, but in this respect, How we ought
to esteem of peace.
that hereby we may have fitter time with quietness to employ our selves in
the worship of God, and to edify our selves in holiness and piety: this
duty concerns them especially, which have much dealing in the world, and
thereupon many occasions of anger and vexation, for such unruly passions make a
man unfit for Gods service; it is the meek and lowly heart that receives the
blessing from the Lord, Matthew, 11. 29.

Lastly, in this example is set down unto us, a second property of evil 5
men; namely, to be given to wrong their brethren in their goods, either Wrong
doing a note of an evil person.
privately, or under color of law; such a one was Zacheus before his calling,
when he gathered tribute and custom for the Roman Emperor, he used Luke 19.
8.
forged cauillation, for his own*gaine: and these our days abound with those
that eurich themselves by pilling and polling of their brethren; but all such
are unjust and evil persons, by the judgment of our Savior Christ.

Verse 41. And whosoever will compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.
Here Christ propounds the third example of wrong doing, by Superiors 3.
Example.
toward their inferiors, wherein the party wronged is likewise forbidden to
make resistance by way of private revenge. For the understanding whereof, we
must know, that as in this our common wealth we have Post -- masters, so in
other countries, especially in Persia, there were the like officers, who by
authority from their Kings or Emperors, might take men's cattle, nay men
themselves, and use them for travel and carriage, at their pleasure: and it is
like, the Jews had got this custom among them after their captivity, as may
in part appear, by their Mat. 27. 32.
co^pelling Simon of Syrene to bear Christ's cross when they met him. Now
Christ speaks here of the abuse of this authority; saying, That if a man
compel thee wrongfully, under color of the Magistrates authority, to go with
him one mile, go with him twain: that is, ^ather then by resisting thou
should revenge thy self, go with him two miles: whence he gives to all
inferiors a commandment, to bear patiently the wrongs that are done unto
them by their Superiors, and rather to suffer a double wrong, then seek to
revenge themselves by private resistance.

Here then we see a just ground of ^eproofe of inferiors for sundry Practices
of impatience i^ ^^feriours.
practices of impatience toward their superiors; as first, when a man is
attached by an Officer, to make violent resistance. This practice swarueth 1
from the Rule of Christ, for say thou art attached wrongfully, yet thou
ought to acknowledge Gods ordinance in Magistracy, and to 2
obey the same, without offering private revenge. Secondly, it often falls out,
that Landlords, and men of wealth, oppress the poor, by enclosing of common
lands, and such like; now hereupon the poorer sort use to rail against them,
and to curse them: but this practice is also here forbidden by our Savior
Christ; for albeit the rich men sin grievously in oppressing the poor, yet the
poor must suffer rather a double or treble wrong, then by cursing speeches
seek private revenge.

Again, in this example we may see a third kind of wicked men; to A ^^te of
evil superi^^^^.
wit, all such as being superiouts, do wrong and violence to their
inferiors, as cruel Magistrates, oppressing Landlords, cauelling officers,
usurers, and such like: these are here called evil ones by our Savior Christ,
and therefore they must learn to show mercy, and leave off wrong and
violence, if they look to escape to be judged as evil ones at the last day.

Thus we see the three particular examples of wrongs, wherein men Christianity
a state of suffering.
may not revenge themselves privately. Now from them all jointly considered, we
may note two points; First, that the calling of a Christian is a state of
suffering, 1. Pet. 2. 20, 21. If ye take it patiently when ye suffer wrong for
well-doing, this is praise worthy, for ye are hereunto called: and therefore
if we would declare our selves to be the true members of Christ, we must
show forth patience in bearing wrongs, without seeking revenge. This was
Christ's lesson to his Disciples, for having told them of afflictions to come,
he bids them to Luke 11. 19
possess their souls with patience: so when the spirit of God sets down the
afflictions of the Church, he adds this as an Item, Re^. 1^. 10. and 14. 12.
here is the patience of the Saints. We therefore must labor to repel all
malice and rancour when we suffer unjustly, remembering this rule of Christ,
that rather then we offer private revenge, we must suffer the doubling and
trebling of the wrong. It is true indeed, this is hard for flesh and blood to
do; but if we be but flesh, that is, natural men, why do we profess our
selves to be Christians? for he that has not the spirit of God, is none of
his, Romans 8. 9. And if we be in the spirit, we must obey the motions thereof,
and learn of Christ who was meek and humble, and following him we shall
find rest for our souls.

Secondly, when Christ sets down these three examples of suffering wrong, he
applies himself to the present outward estate of the Jews, which was this;
For one man to suffer wrong of another in his body, and in his goods, and yet
to rest contented, without relief or amends: Now the cause of this their
miserable condition, was their servitude to the Roman Emperor, who a little
before Christ's coming, had removed the Scepter from Judah, and made Judah a
Province tributarie unto Rome, so as they were ruled not by a Prince of their
own, but by a foreign enemies Deputies.

In this estate we may see the miserable condition of any people that Foreign
regiment a grievous thing.
are in bondage to a foreign enemy, their lives are every way miserable; for
besides their personal bondage, they are constrained to suffer losses and
wrongs, in goods, and in their names, without all remedy or relief. The
consideration hereof must teach us, First, to be heartily tha^kfull unto God,
for the happy outward peace, which with the Gospel of Gods grace we now enjoy
under our dread Sovereign, being free from subjection unto any foreign power.
Secondly, to pray earnestly unto the Lord, for the good estate, life, and
health of our Prince, by whom under God, we enjoy such joy and prosperity; as
also for the continuance of Gods holy hand of protection to preserve the whole
land against all foreign power whatsoever. Thirdly, to repent unfeignedly of
all our sins, that so we turning unto God from them, he may continue unto us
those happy days of peace, wherein we have freedom from subjection to
foreign tyranny: for our sins are our greatest foes, they lay open the
ports of our lands, and the gates of our cities to the spoiling enemy; they
will put down our strong walls, and take away the strength of our armed men:
no enemies can do us so much harm as our own sins: and therefore we must
humble our selves for them, and if we have not repented, now we must begin;
and if we have begun, we must proceed and renew the same more and more. If
we had felt the misery of subjection to foraine power, as these Jews now did,
it would touch us: and therefore before these evils come upon us, let us meet
our God by true repentance, that so he may keep from us this fierce wrath.

verse. 42. Give to him that asks: and from him that would borrow of thee,
turn not away.
Christ having forbidden private revenge, does here command the Do good for
evil.
requital of good for evil, in two particular examples of well-doing, taken
from giving and lending: by both which, though not expressly, yet in sense and
meaning Christ would teach his hearers thus much: Let the man be what he will,
do thou good unto him for evil.

For the first, Give to him that asks, etc. These words must not be taken
simply, but in this sense: Give to him that asks on a just cause being
poor, though be cannot requite thee again, nay, though he had done thee
wrong, and were thine enemy. This exposition is plain, Luke 6. for having set
down his commandment for giving, v. 30. he renders this reason thereof in
effect; because they cannot requite thee again, v. 33. which plainly imports
that it must be to the poor.

Here now first observe, the form of Christ's words, they are commanding, Give
to him, etc. whence I gather that a man is bound in Alms giving a duti^.
conscience upon pain of death to give Alms, and relief, Matthew. 25. 41, 42.
Christ adiudgeth some to hell for the neglect of this duty: now there could be
no such course, if there were no commandment that did bind their conscience to
do that, for want whereof they are condemned. Again, in the sixth
commandment, we are bound to do all duties that may preserve our neighbors
life, of which sort is giving relief unto the poor, without which they cannot
live. If it be said, that D^^. 4. 24.
Daniel made Alms deeds no commandment, but a matter of counsel unto
Nebuchadnezzar: I answer, that things commanded may be propounded by way of
counsel: so does Christ to the Church of Laodicea, R^u^l. 3. (...) Use 1.
I counsel thee to buie of me gold, etc. Again, Daniel used this form of
speech to the King, Let my counsel be precious unto thee; not because it was
no commandment, but because he would so temper his speech, that it might
better take place in the stout heart of this proud king. And when as Paul (2.
Cor. 8. 8.) speaking of Alms says, he speaks not by commandment, it is to
be understood not simply of Alms* giving, but of the measure thereof, as the
former verse does plainly show.

Here then we see those men confuted which say, they may do Use 1. We may not
do with our own what we will.
with their own what they will: this is not so, for men's goods are not their
own simply, but Gods also; and they indeed are but the Lords stewards to
dispose of them as he commands: now his will is, that part thereof should be
given to them which want.

Secondly, we see here also that those men sin grievously who are so
Parcimonte condemned.
covetous, that they will give nothing to the poor; sell they will, and lend
also, upon a good pawn, for their own advantage: but by free gift they will
part with nothing. These are miserable persons, who do what they can to
condemn themselves: for Gods commandment binds men in conscience to give unto
the poor, and that freely. Yet here we must know, that not only they who give
f^eely do a work Lending and selling may be works of mercy.
of mercy; but also they who lend and sell, when as their lending and selling
will as much profit the poor as giving: this in effect is alms deeds here
also commanded: and therefore is Joseph commended, not only for giving, but
for selling corn to the Egyptians and others in the time of dearth.

Thirdly, this being a commandment binding conscience, must stir us up to
do all good duties of relief with cheerefulnes, that so meet and decent
provision for the poor may not only be begun, but also continued: for it is
acceptable unto God.

A second point here to be observed is, what kind of commandment this is; Give
to him that asks. Gods commandments be of two sorts, Affirmative and
Negative; and in the Moral law the one is always comprehended in the other:
now this commandment is affirmative, Negative precepts more forcible then
affirmative.
which must be noted, because negative precepts lay a straighter bond upon the
conscience then the affirmative: and therefore are the precepts of the Moral
law for the most part propounded negatiuely: for the negative precept binds a
man to obedience always, and to all and every time; as when God says, Thou
shall not kill, a man is never exempted from obedience hereunto: but an
affirmative commandment, though it bind always, yet not to all times, as
this of Christ for giving alms, it binds not all men, but only those that are
enabled to give; nor yet the rich to all times, but then only when just
occasion of giving is offered: and the same may be said of every affirmative
commandment, as of keeping an holy rest unto the Lord, it binds a man for
ever, but not at all times, only for the seventh day, and such like.

Yet further to lay open this commandment touching Alms, we Of Alms* giving
eight points.
will herein handle eight points: I. who is to give: II. what is to be given:
III. to whom we must give: IV. in what order: V. how much: VI. in what place:
VII. at what time: VIII. in what manner we must give.

For the first: the person that is to give, is not every one, but such as 1
God has set apart for this duty: for, Matthew. 25. 42, 43. some are there Who
must give.
made to receive, as the hungry, thirsty, naked, sick, etc. and others are
made fit to give clothing, food, comfort, and such like. And S. John tells
us who is made fit to give, namely, 1. Ioh. 3. 17.
he that has the goods of this world: not only he that has abundance, but
even he that has but a small portion of worldly goods: and therefore the
thief that stole for want, is forbidden to steal, and commanded to labor,
Ephesians. 4. 28.
that he may have to give to him that wants: and the poor widow is commended
of Christ, that Luke 21 2, 3 Properties in a giver.
of her penury gave to the treasury but two mites. Now in a giver there must
be two things: first, a right unto the goods he gives: for a man may not give
that which is not his own: secondly, a present full propriety in the things
he gives, (unless it be in the case of necessity:) and by this are children
and servants excluded from giving, unless they have some things of their own,
or do it by command.

Quest. Whether may the wife give relief unto the poor, without Of
almes-giuing by a wife.
her husbands consent? An ancient answer is this, that many wives in giving
are Abigails in regard of their husbands, who are like unto Nabal; and
therefore may give: and yet some other ancient Divines August. epist. 1^9.
add this, that the wife cannot give, where all consent of her husband is
wanting, because both she and all her possessions belong unto him principally:
yet here we are to know, that there is a double consent of the husband,
expressed in open words, whereupon there is no question, but the wife may
lawfully give: and secret, which is threefold; first, when the husband does not
dissent; secondly, when he gives consent generally, as when he allows her to
give, but names not any particular; thirdly, when the wife has a probable
conjecture and presumption, that if her husband do know, he would allow of her
giving. And in these cases of secret consent, the wife may also give: but if
she have not his consent any of these ways, she may not lawfully give,
unless in these cases: 1. that she has something private of her own, either
by exception before, or by grant after marriage: 2. that her giving serves to
preserve the life or good estate of her husband and family, as Abigails did
when she gave to David: 3. that the necessity of the receiver requires
present relief, for extreme necessity dispenses with propriety.

II. Point. What is to be given? namely, Alms. Here two questions 2. What is
to be given.
are to be skanned: I. what is alms: II. whereof alms are Alms desc^b^d.
to be raised. For the first, Alms is a free gift, tending to preserve the
temporal life of our neighbor: first, I call it a gift, understanding it
largely, because forgiving to them that are not able to pay, is an alms deed.
Secondly, I say free, to distinguish it from subsidies to Princes, and
Tenthes-giuing for the stipende of the Minister, and such like. These are
gifts, but not free gifts: for the people receive protection from the
Magistrate for their subsidies, and instruction from the Minister for their
Tenthes. Thirdly, I say, the end of Alms is to preserve temporal life; to
distinguish it from spiritual gifts, which concern the soul: the Papists
make all works of mercy, whether they concern the body or soul, to be
alms; but alms properly, are gifts that tend to preserve this natural
temporal life.

II. Question. Whereof are alms to be raised? Ans. First, of our Whereof must
alms be raised.
own goods: for a man ought not to give that which is an other man's: and
therefore those that owe more then they are worth, cannot give alms, but are
rather fit to receive, for all that they have in right and conscience belongs
to some others. Secondly, our Alms must be of 2
Prove. 9. 3.
our first fruits: things wholesome and good, and such as are fit for the person
relieved. They must not be the refuse of our goods, which we know not else what
to do with: Nehem. 8. 10. Part of the fat, and of the sweet must be sent to
them, for whom none is provided. Thirdly, 3
Alms must be of goods lawfully gotten: for evil gotten goods must be
restored, either to the owner (if he be known) or to some of his kindred, or to
the Magistrate: which shows, that the Usurer ought rather to restore, then to
give alms of his gain for usury. Fourthly, 4
Temporal goods distinguished.
our Alms must be given of our own, with difference and discretion: every
man's goods for the most part may be distinguished into four degrees: first,
some are necessary to preserve life, without which a man 1
and his family cannot live: secondly, some are necessary to a man's estate, 2
as those goods by which a man puts in practice the duties of his calling,
such are books unto the Student, and tools unto the trades man: a third sort
are such, as are requisite for the decency of a man's estate, 3
and such are those that make a man walk in his calling with comfort, ^ase,
profit, and delight: the fourth sort of goods are superfluous; that 4
is, all that portion which a man may want, and yet have things necessary for
this life, and estate, and for the decency thereof: these two last degrees are
in Scripture called abundance. And answerably, there are 2. Degrees of poverty.
two degrees of poverty: the first, is common want, when a man can live
without receiving Alms, but yet very hardly: the second is, extreme want,
when a man withoat relief cannot possibly maintain life: now in common want
we must give of our abundance; that is, both of our superfluity, as also of
our riches that serve for decency: Luke 3. 11. He which has two coats, let
him part with him that has none: now he that has two coats, is not he that
has a coat and a cloak, for so had 2. Tim. 4. 13.
Paul, and yet retained them both lawfully for his use: but Christ's meaning is,
that he which has things necessary, and besides some thing over, serving for
decency and superfluity, must give thereof to him that lacks. And in
extreme necessity, he must give of those goods which pertain necessarily to
his life and estate: for our neighbors life must be preferred before our own
temporal goods, and outward estate: 2. Cor. 8. 3.
Paul testifies of the Macedonians, that in the extreme necessity of the
Saints, they gave to their power, yea and beyond their power: upon this ground
the Christians in the primitive Church, Act. 4. 34.
sold their possessions for the releeuing of the poor brethren in extreme
want: rather diminishing their own temporal estate, then suffering the poor
to want that were in extreme necessity. This Rule ought always to be
regarded and practiced, especially in times of want: as for those that make
advantage of a dearth, and enrich themselves by Gods judgment on the poor,
they are most miserable and wretched people, quite void of every spark of
that gracious disposition which was in Christ, who being rich, even king of
heaven and earth, 2. Cor. 8. 9.
made himself poor, that though his poverty, he might make others rich. It
is the will of God, that we should bear one another burdens, and help to
lift up the poor that are pressed down with the judgment of God; which we
shall do, when we give not only of our abundance in common want, but even of
our necessaries in the extreme want of the poor.

III. Point. To whom must we give? Ans. To the poor: this To whom we must
give.
needs no proof: yet in these poor two things are required. First, they must
be truly poor: that is, such as are indeed either in common or extreme want;
and of such poor S. John says, 1. Ioh. 3. 17.
If any have this worlds goods, and sees his brother have need, if he shut up
his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? Secondly, they
must be such as cannot help themselves, Leuit. 25. 35. If thy brother be
impouerished, and have a trembling hand, thou shall relieve him: the man of a
trembling hand, is one that is not able to maintain himself; of this sort are
Orphans, widows, the aged, sick, blind, lame, maimed in service, and such
like, all these must be relieved. But the case stands otherwise Of gi^ing to
lusty beggars.
with that kind of poor, which we call lusty beggars, who are able to provide
for themselves, if they would take pains: S. Paul's rule belongs to them, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
If they will not work, they must not eat: that is, they must not be
maintained on the Alms of the Church. Quest. 1. What must such lusty poor
do? Answ. They must be employed in some lawful calling, wherein they may
labor to get their own bread, and not eat the common food of those that are
poor indeed. For the Church and Commonwealth are as a man's body, wherein
every member has his several office, for the good of the whole body: and
indeed every man should have not only a general calling of a Christian, but
a particular calling also, wherein he must employ himself for the common good:
it is against the word of God, and the light of nature, that any should live
having nothing to do. Adam in his innocence was enjoined to work in the
garden; and our Luke 2. 51. with Mark. ^. 3.
Savior Christ before his baptism, lived under his Father in a particular
calling, till he was thirty years old; whose examples we must follow. Quest.
2. What is our duty toward these lusty beggars? Ans. From 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
Paul's rule we may gather, that we must not ordinarily and of custom relieve
them: indeed upon present necessity they are to be relieved, but yet with
this aduertisment, that they look not for it again, but that they provide for
themselves by laboring in some lawful calling: for this common releeuing at
men's doors, makes so many idle vagabonds and rogues as there are.

IV. Point. In what order must we give our Alms for distinction The order of
gi^ing alms. I. Rule.
of persons? Ans. Touching order in releeuing, the holy Ghost has laid down
three Rules: First, by S. Paul, 1. Tim. 5. 8.
He that provides not for his own, and namely for them of his household, is
worse then an insidell: whence this order may be observed, that I. a man must
give to them that be of his own household and family: II. to his own blood,
kindred, and alliance: III. unto strangers. The second Rule is this: Gal. II.
Rule.
6. 20. 'Doe good unto all, but specially to the household of faith: first,
believers must be relieved, and then all others, good or badde. The third Rule
is given by Moses, Deuteronomy. 15. 10. We must first relieve our own III. Rule.
poor, that is, such as live among us, and then give unto strangers, if our
ability will affoard, and their necessity do require.

U. Point. How much must we give? Touching the measure of our Of the quantity
of our Alms. 1. Rule.
Alms, there is no particular commandment in Scripture: but yet these
general Rules may thence be gathered. First, that a man is not bound to give
all that he has: Prove. 5. 15, 16. Drink the waters of thine own ^isterne,
and flowing streams out of the midst of thine own well: let thy fountains
disperse themselves abroad: where under an allegory borrowed from waters, the
holy Ghost directs a man, for the disposing of his riches; as namely,
comfortably to enjoy his own goods, and yet to bestow some part thereof on
them that want: and, Luke 3. 11. Let him that has two coats give (not both)
but one to him that wants: where we see them justly rebuked, that in
prodigality do riotously lavish and spend all that they have: for if a man
may not give all, much less may he spend all wilfully. II. Rule. 2. Cor. 8.
13. A man must 2. Rule.
not so give to others, that he himself be grieved, and they be eased
altogether. III. Rule. Alms must be according to the giuers ability, 3. Rule.
and withal answerable to the necessity of the poor, whether in food,
raiment, or harbor: so Paul says, speaking of common relief, 2. Cor. 9. 12.
The ministration of this service, supplieth the necessity of the Saints: and
S. James requires, that in relief such things be given Iam. 2. 16.
as be needful to the body: and, Deuteronomy. 15. 8. If thy brother be poor, thou
shall open thy hand unto him, and lend him sufficient for his need which he
has.

VI. Point. In what place must Alms be given? Touching the The place of Alms.
Releeuing wandering beggars a great disorder. Reasons. 1.
place we must know this; that it is a disorder not beseeming Gods Church, to
give relief to wandering beggars at our doors: this may appear by these
reasons: I. It is Gods commandment, Deuteronomy. 15. 4.
that among his people there should be no such beggars: if any man ask, how
the poor were then relieved? I answer, God took sufficient order for their
provision: for first, the husbandman Lev. 19. 9.
must not gather his grapes clean, nor yet his corn field, but leave the
after-gathering and gleaning for the poor. Secondly, besides the Number. 18. 26
yearly Tenthes for the Priests and Le^ites, every Deuteronomy. 14. 28, 29.
three years tenthes were to be gathered and kept for the poor, and for
strangers. Thirdly, every seventh year the land was to rest, and all that it
brought forth that year, with the fruit of vineyards and olives was for the
poor. Exodus 23. 11. Again, in the new Testament the Apostles ordained, that
in every Church there should be Act. 6. 3.
Deacons; that is, men of wisdom and discretion, who were to gather for the
poor, and likewise to dispose of that which was given, according as every man
had need: in which very order of provision for the poor, the Lord forbids all
wa^dring begging. II. These wandering 2
beggars, are the shame and reproach of the people where they are suffered: for
it argues want of care of good order in gouerners, and want of mercy in the
rich, that they gather all to themselves, without regard how the poor should
live. III. In releeuing these wandering beggars, 3
there is this double want in the giver; he cannot tell what to give, nor how
much; because he knows not the state of the party that beggeth. Now in alms
deeds there ought to be a double discretion: the giver ought to know both his
own ability, and also the necessity of the receivers. IV. Common releeuing
at men's doors makes many beggars, 4
and maintains a wicked generation: for these wandering beggars are for the
most part flat Atheists, regarding nothing but their belly, separating
themselves from all congregations: and from begging many fall to stealing; or
else they take such pleasure therein, that they will never leave it, no not for
a yearly rent. This is known to be true by experience. All which things duly
considered, must move the Magistrates and every other in their place, to see
that better order be observed for the poor then doore-releeuing to all that
come. And since good laws are made in this behalf, men ought in conscience to
see the same observed and kept; neither can any man without sin tra^sgresse
the same. Indeed if good order were not provided for the poor, it were better
to relieve them in their wandering course, then to suffer them to starve: for so
dealt Christ and his disciples with the poor, when good order failed among the
Jews, they relieved them in the high ways and streets.

VII. Point. At what time must Alms be given? Ans. Hereof the Time of alms
gi^i^g. Rules. I.
Scripture speaks little, yet this may be gathered thence: First, that
relief must be given when present occasion requires: therefore Solomon says,
Prove. 3. 28.
Say not to thy neigbour, Go and come again to morrow, if thou now have it.
Secondly, that the Sabbath day is a fit time for the giving of relief 2
for the poor: for the 1. Cor. 16. 12.
Apostle commanded the Corinthians, that each one should lay aside upon that
day, according as God had prospered him the week before, that which he would
give for the poor: where by the way, it may be observed, that daily giving at
men's doors was not allowed by the Apostles. Also touching Tradesmen this may
be added: from this, that the Apostle makes contribution for the poor a
Sabbath days work; that whereas they use to employ part of the Lords day, both
morning and evening in serving their customers for their own private benefit,
this can not be ^arranted: only this they may do; upon the Sabbath they
should sell unto none, but to such as buie of necessity, and then they may not
make a private gain of their sale, but must turn that work to a work of
mercy for the poor, either selling without gain if it be a poor body that
buies; or giving the gain of that which they sell to the rich, for the relief
of the poor. This indeed will hardly be obtained at trades-mens hands, but yet
they must know that the whole Sabbath day is the Lords, wherein he will be
worshipped with delight, neither ought men to do therein their own works,
nor seek their own wills, nor speak their own words. Isa. 58. 13.

VIII. Point. In what manner must Alms be given? Ans. Hereof The manner of
Almesgiuing.
more is to be spoken in the chapter following: yet from this text these things
may be observed: First, that Almes-giuing must be free; the giver 1
must neither look for recompense at the hands of man, nor think to merit any
thing thereby at the hands of God. That Popish conceit depriues a man of the
true comfort of the spirit in this work of mercy: none but Christ by his
obedience could ever merit at Gods hands. Secondly, our hearts in giving must
be touched with charity, and the 2
bowels of compassion; we must give with cheerefulnes: for without love all
that we give is nothing, 1. Cor. 13. 3. and the Lord loves a cheerful giver,
2. Cor. 9. 7. now if we consider the poor as our own flesh, and see Gods
image in them, this will move us to pity. Thirdly, in 3
the person of the poor we must consider Christ Jesus, and give unto them as
we would give unto Christ. This will move us to give, and that chearefully:
for in the day of judgment Christ will make it known that he comes for relief
to the rich in the person of the poor: to the merciless he will say, Math.
25. 45.
In as much as ye did it not to them, ye did it not to me: but to the merciful
thus, v. 40.
In as much as ye did it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have
done it unto me. Fourthly, our alms 4
must be given as a pledge of our thankfulness unto God for the blessings we
enjoy: for all we have comes from God; 1. Chr. 29. 14.
and of his hand it is, whatsoever we give: now he professes, that when men
do good, Heb. 13. 16
and distribute to the poor, he is well pleased with such sacrifices.

Having seen what this duty of Almes-giuing is, and how it must be performed;
we must now stir up our selves to put the same in practice: and to move us
hereunto consider the reasons following. I. We 1
all desire to be counted religious; now if we would be such indeed, Mouues to
Almes-giuing.
we must visit the fatherless and widows, we must do good, and give alms to
the poor: for this is pure religion and undefiled before God, as Iam. 1. 27.
James says. To come to the Church and hear the word, and to receive the
Sacraments are good things, but without mercy to the poor they are not
regarded, but hated of God, Isa. 1. 13, 14, 15. II. If a 2
man should offer unto us a piece of ground to manure and till for our own
reaping, we would take it kindly and bestow both pains and seed upon it;
behold the poor are sent of God to the rich, as a piece of ground to be
tilled, and when they give to the poor, they sow upon the ground: now as Paul
says in this case, 2. Cor. ^. 6.
look as a man sows so shall he reap: we therefore must sow liberally, that
we may also reap liberally. III. Prove. 19. 17. He that has mercy upon the
poor, lends 3
unto the Lord: we would easily be moved to lend, if we had an honest man to
be surety unto us, for returning of our own with advantage: well, the Lord
offers himself to the rich to be surety for the poor; who then will fear to
lend having so good a debtor? IIII. 4
If these promises will not move us, let us consider the fearful curses
threatened against the merciless and hard hearted: for as he that gives to the
poor shall not lack, so he that hides his eyes from them shall have many
curses, Prove. 28. 27. and he that stops his ears at the crying of the
poor, he shall cry and not be heard: Prove. 21. 18. and the woeful sentence
of condemnation shall be pronounced upon the wicked for the neglect of this
duty. Matthew. 25. 41, 42.

Further, from the words, Give to him that asketh] we may learn, that
Propriety of goods lawful.
it is the will of God, that among his people there should be a propriety of
goods, and that all things should not be common in that behalf: for the Lord
would have some to have to give, and some to want that they might receive;
which would not be, if all things should be common both for use and propriety,
as some have fondly imagined. If any man think it was so in the primitive
Church, because it is said, Act. 4. 32.
they had all things common, he is to know, that that community was in such
things only, as men had then freely given for the common good. And yet even
then, none was compelled or bound in conscience to give all his substance in
that sort: for there Act. 5. 4.
Peter tells Ananias that his possession, while it remained unsold, appertained
to him, and after it was sold, the price thereof was in his own power to
dispose of as he would. Object. 2. All things belong to believers, as Paul
says, All things are yours, 1. Cor. 3. 21. and therefore they ought to be
common. Ans. The Apostle means, that they had right in Christ to all things,
and did enjoy them by hope; but yet the fruition of them in actual propriety,
is not had before the day of judgment.

Again, if giving to the poor be a duty of every one, whom God Vowed
poverty unlawful.
iuables hereunto, then no man may voluntarily disable himself from it;
whereupon the Popish practice of undergoing voluntary poverty falls to the
ground, as unlawful: for thereby they disable themselves unto this duty.
Indeed the Papists make this a state of perfection, but David judged begging
to be a curse, Psalm. 109. 10. else he would not have Rhem. on Matt 19. sect. 9.
Bellarm de Monach. l. 2. c. ^o. Gather* goods reproved.
spoken of freedom from beggerie as of a blessing, which he does, Psalm. 37.
25. I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging.

Lastly, in this commandment see the error of those men, that give themselves
wholly to gather riches to themselves, being like to the moule which is
always digging in the earth: for God requires, that a man should give as well
as get, nay he must get to give, and not to keep: for God is more glorified by
giving, then by keeping: and herein his children resemble their heavenly
father, who receives nothing of any man, and yet gives liberally to every one
that asks, without reproching any, Iam. 1. 5.

And from him that would borow of thee, turn not away.] These words contain
Christ's second precept, touching requiting good for evil, taken Of lending 3
points.
from lending and borowing. To know the meaning of this Rule three point* are
to be handled: I. what it is to lend: II. to whom men must lend: III. in what
manner. For the first, what lending is, is 1
well known by common experience. It is a civil contract or bargain What
lending is.
in which money, corn, or such like goods, pass from man to man both in
regard of use and title: yet so, as the borower is bound in conscience to
return the thing lent unto him, or else that which in value is equal unto it.

II. Point. To whom men must lend. This circumstance is not 2
here expressed by Matthew, but must be supplied out of Luke, chap. 6. To whom
we must le^d*
34, 35. where Christ forbids them to lend, as sinners do, to receive the like
again: but (says he) love your enemies, and do good, and lend looking for
nothing again: where it is plain, that lending must be to such as are truly
poor, and not able to lend again like for like. For the better understanding
whereof we are to know, that in humane Societies 3. Sorts of men in politic
bodies.
there be three sorts of men. First, such poor as are unable to provide for
themselves things necessary, by reason of some impotencie, as sickeenes, 1
age, lamenes, or such like; and these are commonly called beggars. A second
sort are those, which being poor have yet a trade, wherein 2
they can provide for themselves some part of their maintenance, and yet by
reason of their poverty. still want some things necessary, which of
themselves they cannot procure. The third sort are rich men, such as have 3
worldly goods in abundance, not only sufficient for their necessaries, but
much overplus: now to each of these belongs his peculiar due. To the first sort
of poor that have the shaking hand (as Moses Leu. 25. 35
speaks) alms are due, and they must be relieved by giving freely, as we
have showed in the former precept. To the second sort of poor, belo^gs lending
properly, specially then, when their necessity requires. To the rich, neither
gift nor loan is due; but on the contrary, they ought to give and lend to the
poor, maintaining themselves by the honest labor and industry of their
lawful callings.

3. Point. In what manner must men lend? Ans. With a willing mind, Manner of
lending.
without any show of grudging, either in speech, or by turning away the head or
body; as it is here said, From him that would borrow of thee turn not away:
which property in the lender, is yet further expressed by Luke, saying, Lend,
looking for nothing again: where Christ does not simply forbid men to look
for that which they lent; but his meaning is, to show with what affection and
disposition of heart men ought to lend: namely, having respect only to the
good of the party borrowing, and not to the restitution of the thing lent: as
when a poor man comes to borrow, we must not reason thus with our selves;
This man is poor, and it may be will not pay me again, therefore I will not
lend; nor thus, This man is painful though he be poor, and is like to pay
me again, and therefore I will lend. This (says Christ) is the practice of
sinners, who lend, because they look to receive the like. Be thou therefore
moved to lend upon a good desire to help the poor, and let not thy mind be
running upon the loss, or safe return of the thing lent. Thus is that clause
of Christ, looking for nothing again, to be understood, and not to be applied
to the game of usury, wherea^ Christ aims not in this place.

First, here observe, that to lend unto the poor, is a commandment Uses. 1.
Lending is a duty.
of God, binding the conscience of the rich: it is not left free to the rich
man's choice, whether he will lend or not, but if the poor man's case require,
he sins against God, if he do not lend; for he breaks this commandment.
David therefore makes it the property of a good man to be merciful, and to
lend: Psalm. 112. 5. where we see that wretched practice of many rich men
condemned to the pit of hell, who are so far from lending to the poor, that
they hoard up their store, till a time of dearth, that then they may enrich
themselves by poor men's want; and thus they increase Gods judgment upon the
poor, and as it were, ^s^ 3 15.
grind their faces, and Amo. ^5. 1^
tread upon them, as the holy Ghost speaks. But they shall one day find, that
they ought to have lent unto the poor, in their necessities; yea, and when the
hand of God in common want lies more heavy upon the poor, they ought then to
open their hands more liberally toward them. It is an usual and common
practice, that when a man begins to decaie in his estate, no man will lend
him any thing; ^u^^ because he begins to decay, therefore they withdrew their
help, least he should not pay them again. But this ought not to be so: its
Christ's commandment, that the rich by lending should sustain such a one as by
reason of want, is ready to fall into decay.

Secondly, this command of Christ binds the Rich not only to lend, but 2
to lend freely without taking any increase: for they must lend, not looking
Free lending.
for any again: yea, Exodus 22. 25. the Lord expressly forbids to take
increase of the poor: where we see the common practice of Usurers condemned to
the bottom of hell, who lend unto the poor upon bonds for increase: these
are they, that live on the blood and life of the poor, whose sin is every
where condemned, and ought to be hated as bloodshed it self. But the rich will
say, they are entreated so to do, and are greatly thanked for so lending. Ans.
This excuse will not serve the turn: for Saul's armor bearer was a murderer
for killing his master, though Saul earnestly besought him so to do. 2. Sam*
1. 9. 16.

Thirdly, here further learn, that a man must lend, and yet not always 3
take again the principal: indeed he may require, and receive Forgiving of
that is lent.
his own, else there should be no lending but all giving, which two are here
distinct: but yet when the poor that borrowed, is fallen in^o further poverty,
the Rich must turn his lending into giving, and forgive the principal or part
thereof, as their several estates shall require* Deuteronomy. 24. 10, 11, 12. A man
may take a pledge for his debt of the poor, but yet if the pawn be a thing
necessary to the poor man's life, he must not take it, or at least not retain
it till the sun setting.

Fourthly, some may here ask (seeing Christ bids o^ lend looking for 4
Luke 6 35. Of (...) increase for lending.
nothing again) whether may a man at no time with good conscience receive
increase for his lending? Ans. Lending is twofold: of due, or of courtesy:
lending of due is the loan of the rich unto the poor, when his necessity
compells him to borrow: and for this a man cannot with 1
good conscience take any increase. Lending of courtesy is, when one 2
rich friend lends unto an other; this is not forbidden in the word of God, but
is left to a man's own liberty and discretion, neither has it any promise of
reward. Now in this case of courtesy, I do not find in Scripture that all
taking of increase is simply condemned; nay, in some cases, both the law of
nature, and the laws of all countries do allow it: As first, when the
increase is given only in way of thankfulness, 1
as a blessing to require in kindness a good turn received: for ingratitude
Cases where in a man may receive in- crease for lending.
is abhorred of all, and the low of nature requires to do good for good: and
all Divines almost both Protestants and Papists do allow this* kind of
increase. Secondly, when a man sustaineth damage by his lending, he may
receive increase by way of satisfaction for his loss. Thirdly, when a man is
contented to adventure his principal in 3
the hand of him that borrows, then also may he take increase; like as a man
may receive hire for his hourse, or for the use of any other goods standing to
their loss. Exodus 22. 14.

Thus we see what the will of God is for giving and lending unto Duties of the
poor.
the poor: now hence the poor may receive instruction. First, hereby 1
all may learn, that God will have some poor among his people Contentation.
to receive and borrow of the rich: which may serve to persuade the poor to be
contented with their mean estate, esteeming it to be the best for them,
because God in his wisdom and providence has ordained it. Secondly, the poor
must take occasion from their outward 2
Seek to be rich in grace
poverty to seek to be rich in God through grace: Iam. 2. 5. Has not God
chosen the poor of this world, that they should be rich in faith? Herein they
may match, and go beyond the richer sort; which is a matter of great joy: Iam.
1. 9. Let the brother of low degree, rejoice in that he is exalted: that is,
with God, who counts them rich. Revel. 2. 9. Thirdly, hence the poor must
learn to carry themselves submissiuely 3
Humble.
toward the rich* of whom they receive great help and comfort by their
giving and lending: Prove. 18. 23. The poor (says Solomon) utters
supplications: noting their humility, which reprooues many poor, who are so
proud hearted and ungrateful, that they will not affoard the rich a good word:
but this beseems none, much less those that are to live by the rich: Psalm.
101. 5. Him that has a proud look and bigh heart, I cannot suffer.

verse. 34. Ye have heard that it has been said of old, thou shall love thy
neighbor, and hate thine enemy:
In this verse and the rest to the end of this Chapter, our Savior goes
about to purge the general commandment of the second Table touching the love
of our neighbor, from the corrupt interpretation of the Jewish teachers, and
to restore it to his true and proper meaning. And as in the former so here, he
first lays down their false doctrine touching this commandment, v. 43* and
then consutes the same, v. 44, 45, etc. In laying down their false
interpretation, he propounds the law of Moses touching brotherly love, Leuit.
19. 18. Thou shall love thy neighbor, which must here be understood in their
false sense, who by neighbor, meant a friend: as if God had said, Thou shall
love thy friend. Then he adjoyneth their tradition gathered from the law of God
misconceiued; namely, to hate a man's enemy.

In these Jews we may observe two manifest abuses of Scripture which ought not
to be in any Teachers: to wit, misinterpretation, and a false collection. The
word they misconstrue is Neighbor, which in Neighbor, taken two ways.
the old Testament is taken two ways, either strictly and more properly for a
familiar friend and acquaintance, in which sense it is commonly taken; or more
generally, for any one that in any kind of society is near unto us, as by
consanguinitie, habitation, office, traffic, or being only in the same
place with us: for so is the Samaritane said to be neighbor to the man that
fell among thieves, because he found Luke 10. 36, (...).
him lying in the way where he traueiled, and had compassion on him. Now the
Jewish teachers leave the general signification of the word, which expressed
the true meaning of the holy Ghost, and take the special signification, and so
restrain this law of love to friends only. Whereby we see how necessary it
is, that the tongues wherein the Scriptures were penned, should be well known
and understood: for the mistaking of the signification of a word by the Jewish
teachers, caused a manifest error to be taught among them for truth. And this
Schools of learning approved.
makes greatly for the honor of the Schools of learning, where the studies
of the Tongues is professed. And herein also an other thing may be noted in the
Jewish teachers, that in the time of Christ they were ignorant in their own
tongue, and therefore no marvel though at this day they know not the
proprieties thereof, seeing their Commonwealth is decayed, and they dispersed
among all people.

Their second fault is, a false collection and consequent, that because a man
must love his friend, therefore he must hate his enemy: this is against the
rules of Art, for unless the contraries be equal, a consequent will not
thence follow in this sort.

Here then observe the necessity of the study of humane Arts, and Use. 1.
among the rest, especially of the Art of Logic, whereby we may discern
between true and false collections. Again, here observe an 2
infallible note of a false teacher; to wit, to temper the word of God to A
note of a false teacher
men's natural affections, and so to expound it as they may both stand
together. The Jews were a people that loved their friends entirely, and hated
their enemies bitterly: now answearably do their Teachers expound this law,
whereby they ouerturne both the law of God, and the salvation of the people.
Thirdly, mark here the fruit of corrupt 3
Corrupt doctrine corrupts good manners.
doctrine, namely, to corrupt good manners. The Jews were a people that did
much brag of their Ancestors and privileges, and in regard of themselves
contemned all foreign Nations; yea, they hated them, and therefore* they were
^o^e in contention with Peter, for going to Cornelius a Gentile: Act. 11. 2.
now this their malice proceeded partly from nature, and partly from the false
doctrine of their Teachers, which was, that they might hate their enemies. The
like may appear in many practices of Popery to this day: for when that
Superstition was aloft, the people were taught a distinction of times and
places, in regard of holiness, the fruit of which doctrine stickes*fast in the
hearts of many unto this day: for they think Churches and Chappells to be more
holy then other places, and therefore some will never pray but when they come
into some-such place. And do they not make great difference of days and
times? all which are fruits of Popery. In regard whereof, we see it is
necessary that the purity of Religion in faith and manners, should be
strongly maintained by the sincere ministry of the word: for many disorders
in men's lives come from the unsound handling of the Scriptures. Whereby we may
see Gods unspeakable mercy and goodness toward us, in vouchsafing us an
holy Ministry, wherein the purity of doctrine is, and has been long and
may be still through Gods mercy maintained and published. This ought to move
us to all thankfulness unto God, and to endeavor to show the fruit of this
true Religion in all holiness and piety, both of heart and life toward God
and man.

verse. 44. But I say unto you, Love your enemies: bless them that curse you:
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which hurt you, and persecute
you.
Here our Savior Christ propounds his Answer unto the former false doctrine of
the Jewish Teachers, for the hating of an enemy. Wherein first he lays down
a general Rule, containing the sum of his whole answer, saying, Love your
enemies: then he expounds that Rule in the same v. and after proves it, v.
45, 46. Of these in order.

For the first, Love your enemies. In this Rule two things must be known: I.
what is an enemy: II. what it is to love our enemy: both these are evident in
the words following, wherein Christ expounds this rule, Bless them that curse
you, etc. An enemy then, is any one that of An enemy described.
hatred does wrong unto his neighbor, either in word by cursing or evil
speaking; or deed, by striking and persecuting him. But what is What it is to
love an enemy.
it to love our enemy? Love properly is an affection of the heart, whereby one
is well pleased with an other. But here more generally, love comprehends
these two things* first, to be lovingly affected in heart toward an enemy;
secondly, to use an enemy lovingly in speech and action: so it is taken, 1*
Ioh. 3. 18. Love not in word and tongue only* but in deed and truth. And Romans
10. 1^. Love is the fulfilling of the Law. For the first, love in the heart
comprehends all good affections that one man bears to another; a^ mercy,
compassion* meekness, and desire to do unto them what good we can; as it is
more plainly expressed, Luke 6. 36. Be ye therefore merciful* as your
heavenly father is merciful. And for the second* that kind usage which love
expresses in word and deed, is here set out unto us in three branches* First,
bless them that curse you* where is commanded all good speech, both unto our
enemy, and of our enemy. The second, Do good to them that hate you: where is
prescribed all loving usage in action, by affoarding them help, relief, and
comfort, any way we can. The third, Pray for them that persecute you: that is,
for their good estate in this life, so far forth as it serves for Gods
glory, and for their conversion and salvation in the world to come.

See the evidence of these things in examples; for the affection of the heart,
take Christ's example, who so loved his enemies, that he was contented to shed
his own hearts blood for them, and to suffer the pangs of hell upon the cross
for their salvation. For love in courteous speech* see Dauid's practice toward
Saul his professed enemy* for though David had him in his hands, and might
have killed him sundry times; nay, though he was provoked thereunto by his 1.
S^ ^4 7. and chapter 26. 9. 10
servants, yet he spared him, and with all terms of reverence toward Saul
appeased his servants, calling Saul his master, and the Lords anointed. Thus
lovingly also in speech did Paul behave himself to Act. 16. 25. and 27.
Fest^s and Agrippa, though they were heathen men, and his enemies. For doing
good in action to an enemy* read Exodus 2^. 4, 5. If thou meet thine enemies
Ox or his Ass going astraie, thou shall bring him to him again: and if thou
see thine enemies Ass lying under his burden, will thou cease to help him?
thou shall help him up again with it: and Prou. 25. 21. If thine enemy be
hungry* give him bread to eat ^f he thirst* give him drink. See the practice
hereof in ^ Elisha, when God deliue^ed them into his hands, that (...)* ^1.
sought his life, he brought them to Samaria; and when the king of Israel would
have slain them, he forbade him: nay, he caused the King to refresh them with
bread and water, and so sent them to their own master* For praying for our
enemies, we have the example of the Prophe^^* of ^our Savior Christ; and of
(...) A^^* ^. 60.
Steven* who prayed for those that put him to death.

Object. ^* It will be said, the Scripture elsewhere seems to make Of (...)
toward enemies.
against thi^* as Psalm 139* 21, 22* Do not I hate them, O Lord, (says David)
that hate thee* and do I not earnestly contend with them, that rise up against
thee? I hate them with an vn^ained hatred* whereby it seems, that in some cases
a man may* hate his enemies* Answ. First, we must put a difference between our
enemies cause, and his person* their evil causes, and their s^^^^s must be
ha^^^, and we must give no approbation thereso: but yet their persons being
Gods creatures, and be a ^^ng his image in some sort, must be loved. Again,
enemies be of two ^w^ ^ind of enemies.
sorts, private, and public; a priunte enemy is he that hates a man for some
private cause in himself, or concerning his affairs: and such a one we must
love, and not hate, as Christ here commands. A public enemy, is he that
hates a man for Gods cause, for religion and the gospels sake; and these
public enemies be of two sorts* curable, and incurable: If our public enemies
be curable, we must pray for their conversion, hating their conditions: If
they be incurable, and we have plain signs of their small impeni^^^^e, the^
we may hate them; for so we hate the devil* So Paul says, 1. Co^. 1^. 22.
If any man love not the Lord ^esion, An^thema, Mara^^tha, let him b^e finally*
and wholly accursed. And yet this we must know, that we ought to direct our
hatred to their sins, and for their sins hate their persons, and no
otherwise. Now David in that Psalm, speaks not of private, but of public
enemies, who hated not only him, but God also in his religion, and were also
incurable.

Object. 2. But the practice of Gods children seems to be otherwise, for
David often curses his enemies, and prays for the destruction of them and
^heirs, Psalm. 109. 6, 9, 10. And Peter wishes, that Act. 8. ^2.
Simon M^gus may perish with his money* and Paul prays the Lord, ^o reward
Alexander the copper-smith according to his (...)* 2* Tim. ^4. 14. How can this
stand with the i^^? Answ. There be ^^^^n interpretations of these shots* Some
say (which (...)) that in David's Psalms, his curses are in proper sense,
prophe^ies of the destruction of public incurable enemies of Gods Church, and
are only propounded in the form of prayers. Again* David Peter, and Paul,
were enlightened by Gods spirit* and saw into the small estate of these their
enemies whom they cursed, and therefore do they wish for their confusion, not
for their own cause; in way of private revenge, but upon a desire of the
furtherance of Gods glory, in the execution of his justice upon them whom he
had forsaken. And it is not unlawful for Gods children, to pray that God in
justice would glorify his name in the just punishment of impen^^ent sinners,
that be cruel enemies to his Church.

Object. 3. God gave commandment to his people the ^ewes, Deuteronomy. 7. 2.
to destroy the Can^^nites, and to r^^^e out their enemies (...) of the Land:
now, how could they love them, whom they must so cruelly kill? Ans. We must
only love the Lord absolutely, and others in God, and for God: that is, so
far forth as it stands with his pleasure: and therefore when he commands
to kill, we may lawfully kill. And this we may do by way of punishment
appointed by God, not only without hatred, but in love, both forgiving the
wrong which concerns us, and also praying for grace and mercy for the party,
if he belong to God*

4. Object. There be some that sin a sin unto death, for whom we are
forbidden to pray, 1. Ioh. 5. 16. and therefore we may not always pray for
all our enemies? Ans. Christ's commandment to pray for our enemies, admits
this exception, unless they sin a sin unto death, but that sin is hardly
known of the Church of God: and therefore private m^n must not in a conceit
thereof, surcease this duty, to pray for their enemies. Thus then is this Text
to be understood; Love your enemies, that is, your private enemies, and do
good unto them, unless God command you otherwise, and pray for them, if they
sin not that sin unto death.

Here is confuted the old received doctrine of the Church of Rome, Uses 1.
Popist^ doctrine of loving our enemies.
touching the love of our enemie^, as coming near to the doctrine of these
Pharisees: They teach, that a man is bound always, not to hate his enemies;
but for loving them in good usage outwardly, a man is not bound, save in two
cases: Aqui. 2. 2. q. 25. art. 8, 9. ^onau in. 3. sent. d. 30. q. 4. and 5.
First, when our enemy is in necessity, and danger of life, then he must be
relieved and helped. Secondly, Tollet. instruct. Sacer. l. 4. c. 10.
in the case of scandal, when as by not helping or releeuing him, we give
offense unto others: but out of these two cases to show kindness to an enemy,
is a matter of counsel, and of perfection* But this doctrine is damnable, flat
against this Text, and the practice of Gods servants expressed in his word; and
therefore we must renounce it, and acknowledge that we are bound in conscience,
on every occasion, to show our love in word and deed unto our private enemies.

Secondly, hereby is condemned the common practice of men in these 2
To wrong an enemy, unlawful.
days; which is, to wrong their private enemies any way they can, by word or
deed^: some will rail upon them, as 2. Sam. 16. 7*
Shemei did on David, and as Isay 36. 4. 6. 12.
Rabshekah did on Hezekias, and the people of God, yea on God himself. This is
a damnable practice, flat against this commandment of Christ and his holy
practice, 1. Pet. 2. 23. Nay, Michael the Archangel, durst ^^t blam^ the devil
with cursed speaking, when he strove against him, Jude 9.

Thirdly, that fruit of rancour is here likewise reproved, whereby 3
men will profess they will never forget their enemies, though they do Old
grudges unlawful.
forgive them. It is indeed agreeable to our corrupt nature, to keep a grudge
long in mind, and to revive old wrongs; but this commandment of Christ
condemns this practice, and binds us both to forgive and forget: and
therefore we must labor to beat down this spirit of revenge, and endeavor
to love our enemies in word and deed.

Fourthly, here also see, that it is not lawful to profess enmity to any 4
Have no m^^ person.
man's person, for we should love every man. But how can we love him, to whom
we profess our selves enemies, Christianity and private enmity cannot stand
together; and therefore we must labor to abandon out of our hearts, the hatred
of any man's person, and strive to show forth loving usage, even toward our
enemies, though it be against our nature, both by speaking well of them unto
others, and showing kindness unto them, both in word and deed; we must pray
for them, and go so far in all good duties toward them, that by our
well-doing, Romans ^2. 20
we may heap coals of fire upon their heads: that is, cause their consciences
like a fire to burn within them, accusing them of their ill dealing toward
us, and not suffering them to rest, till they lay away their enmity and
malitiousnesse against us.

Fifthly, this commandment of loving our enemies in word and deed, 5
shows it to be unlawful for any man to utter evil speeches of another, at
any time, unless the occasion be just, and he be lawfully called thereunto;
for love couers a multitude of sins, but disgracing specches are fruits of
hatred. Though Saul were David's professed enemy, and sought his blood, yet
David never reviled him; and we ought to follow his good example.

Verse 45. That ye may be the children of your father which is in heaven: for
he makes his sun to arise on the evil, and the good: and sends rain upon
the just and unjust.
Because it is against man's nature to love his enemy, therefore our Savior
Christ inforceth his Disciples hereunto, by the benefit they shall reap
hereby, in manifesting themselves to be the children of God: for he spoke to
those that were Gods children, thus persuading them to love their enemies: That
which will make you known to be Gods children, that you must do; but by
loving your enemies you shall make it manifest that you are Gods children: this
he proves in the words following, because it is a property of God so to do;
for he makes the sun to arise on the evil, and on the good, etc.

Here first observe a true note of the child of God; namely, to imitate Use 1.
A true note of god, ch^^d
God his heavenly father, in loving his enemies, and expressing the feign by
all kind usage, both in word and deed, praying for them, and releeuing them
in their necessities. And because it is so blessed a thing to be the child of
God, we must therefore hereby stir up our selves to the conscionable
performance of this duty.

Secondly, from the ground of this reason we are taught, that we 2
ought principally to employ our selves to those things, by the doing The
exercise of a Christi^.
whereof, we may get assurance that we are the children of God; as also to
shun the doing of all such things, at declare us to be the children of Satan:
that is, all sins which are indeed works of darkness, and of the devil.
In the evil day, whether it be of death, or of affliction, when no man can
comfort us, this will be an only joy unto our hearts, which will swallow up
all fear, that we know our selves to be Gods children; for then the Lord
will acknowledge us for his own: but if by sin we be like the devil, God
will refuse us, and so we fall wholly to the devil. Let us therefore practice
those things, whereby this ground of comfort may be treasured in our hearts.

Thirdly, note here the style and title of honor, which Christ gives 3
unto God; he calls him not only their father, but their father which is
Whereto Gods glorious titles serve.
in heaven: this he does, to stir up reverence in his hearers toward God,
and so have Gods children done, Dan. 9. 4. before that holy prophet powers out
his prayer unto God for his people, he sets out the Lord with most glorious
titles, O Lord God, great and terrible, which keep covenant and mercy, etc.
And Jeremy praying unto God, spends three or four verses, in setting out Gods
great power and Majesty, Chap. 32. 17, 18, 19. So Hezekias in his prayer for
the people, calls the Lord, the good God; which no doubt he did, to stir up
reverence in his own heart, and in the people, toward God. Whereby we are
taught, when we have occasion to mention the name of God, to do it with all
reverence, and to use some titles of honor therewithal, to stir up our
selves and our hearers, to a gracious awe of heart toward Gods majesty. But
lamentable is the practice of the world in this behalf, for every where the
name of God is tossed in men's mouths like a tennisball; some in the midst of
their laughter use O God, O Lord, for breathing words: but others spare not to
make Gods glorious name, the ensign of their rage and fury, in bloody and
blasphemous oaths: but void of grace are all such.

For he makes the sun to rise on the evil; and on the good, and sends
rain on the just, and on the unjust. Here Christ propounds the property of
God in doing good, and showing kindness to his enemies, to prove that by so
doing, we shall show our selves to be his children. Wherein first observe, the
manner of Christ's speech; he says not, He has caused the sun to rise, and
has sent rain, etc. but speaking of the time present, he does now cause the
sun to rise, and sends rain; so likewise John 5. 17. My father yet
works, and I work together with Gods preserving providence.
him. In which phrase is expressed a notable work of Gods heavenly providence;
namely; that after the creation of all things, whereby God gave being unto the
creatures, and power and virtue to do the things, for which they were created,
he does by his providence still preserve that being, and so in every
particular creature. It is God that gave being to the sun at the beginning,
and it is he that ever since continues the being of the sun, with the
light and virtue thereof; and the same is true of all creatures, and of
ourselves: Act. 17. 28.
for in him we live, moon, and have our being: he is not like a Carpenter
who buildes a house, and then leaves it, but still he preserues the things he
has created. Herein we may well be compared to a spring or fountain, which
causes the rivers to flow while it sends out waters, but when it is
stopped, they are dried up: even so, while God continues the being and use of
creatures, so long they are; but if he withold his hand from them, they
cease to be, and the use of them continues no more. Thus it is with us, both
in regard of our souls and bodies, with the faculties, powers, and graces
thereof; for 1. Cor. 4. ^.
what have thou that thou have not received from him? who Heb. 1 3.
bears up all things by his mighty word.

Now hence we must learn these duties; First, to seek to know him Duties from
Gods preserving providence.
that is daily about us, and preserves us in soul and in body, from hour to
hour. Secondly, to cleave unto God with our hearts, and to set our affections
of love; fear, joy, and hope, wholly upon him, because he is the author and
continuer of our being, what ever it be. Thirdly, to obey our God in all
things; for shall he give being to our bodies and souls, and shall we dispose
of them after our pleasures, to offend him, who does wholly support us, and
that continually?

Secondly, here note Christ says, his sun, not the sun, teaching us, The
sun is the Lord.
that the sun which shines in the firmament, is Gods sun, not men's; God
himself is the sole author and governor thereof, he continues that being
which it has, and the power and virtue which it shows forth. And the same
thing by proportion, must be understood of all other creatures both in heaven
an earth, the moon and stars, all beasts and cattle, yea and we our selves
are Gods creatures, and he is our creator, our Lord, and governor: Psalm. 50.
12. The whole world is mine, and all that is therein. Now hence we must learn
two things; First, not to abuse any creature to our lust, as food, raiment,
etc. but to use whatsoever we enjoy to Gods glory, according to his will.
Secondly, to endeavor to be lead by the creatures which we enjoy, to the
knowledge of our creator, for they are his: but alas, the practice of the
world is otherwise, men suffer themselves by the creatures to be drawn from
God: for some make their belly their God; to others, riches and pleasures are
their God.

Thirdly, Christ's saying of the Father, that he makes his sun to arise on
the evil and on the good, does show us that common bounty which God
vouchsafes to his creatures, both good and bad; for the rising and shining of
the sun, is an excellent work of God, by which The benefits of the sun
many other blessings are conuaied to the creatures: For first, every 1
thing upon the earth receives heat and warmness from it, nothing is hid
from the heat thereof Psalm. 19. 6. In which regard it may well be called, 2
the universal fire of the whole world. Secondly, the sun serves notably
for the distinction of times, by day and night, weeks, months, quarters, and
whole years, whereby we know the term of times from the beginning, and so
may do till the end of the world; in regard whereof, it may well be called,
the clock of the whole world. Which things considered, may make us to blush
and be confounded in our selves, for that light regard we have had of so
excellent a creature, whereby God conuaies so manifold blessings upon the
earth; let us therefore learn to bless God for the sun, and to express our
thankfulness by all good duties.

And sends rain on the just and unjust. Here is noted the second Rain a
common blessing of God.
common blessing bestowed of God upon the world; to wit, the falling of the
rain upon the ground, both of good and bad. Now here first observe the form
of speech used by Christ, saying, God raineth; see Deuteronomy. 11. 14. The Lord
gives rain in due season, the first and latter rain. This work is
attributed to God, for weighty causes; First, to show that Why God is said to
rain.
the same God, who ordained in the beginning, that the clouds should 1
water the earth, does by his own power uphold the continuance of the same
blessing unto this day: and indeed, if he should not will the continuance
hereof, it would for ever cease to rain upon the earth. Secondly, 2
to teach us that God disposes of the rain that falls, restraining and
enlarging it at his pleasure, either for the blessing, or the punishment of the
place whereon it falls, and that many times without the help of the second
causes. Leuit. 26. 3, 4. If ye walk in mine ordinances, I will send you rain
in due season: and verse 19. But if you will not obey me, I will make your
heaven as iron, and your earth as brass. Amos 4. 7. I have withheld the rain
from you, and caused it to rain upon one city, and not upon another; one
peete was rained upon, and that which was not rained upon, withered.

Here then we learn first, that we ought to pray unto God for his Use ^
rain of blessing; that is, for fruitful seasons; and also to be thankful
unto God for seasonable weather when we receive it, because he sends it.

2. This must teach us to obey and serve God, for he has the clouds 2
in his hands like a sponge, and when he will he presses out the rain thereof:
now, if we obey him, he will cause it to fall upon the earth for a blessing; but
if we rebel against him, he will either hold it back, or power it down upon
us for a curse.

3. Seeing God sends down the rain, we may gather that no man 3
can certainly tell, by the course of the heavens, the particular season of the
Astrological prediction of rain uncertain*
weather day by day. If the rain depended wholly upon the celestial bodies,
then should it fall alike in all places, that be of like position to the
heavens; but that is not so, for God orders it according to the state of the
people, upon whom it falls, either for a blessing, or a curse, as we have
heard.

4. Hence we may gather, that neither witches by the help of Satan, 4
nor yet Satan himself can cause rain, as many think; for it is God always
Witches cannot cause ^ame.
that raineth. The devil indeed is the prince of the air, and by Gods
permission he may join himself unto a storm, and make it more terrible and
hurtful; as he did in the destruction of Job. 1. 1^. 19.
Jobs cattle and children, by fire from heaven, and by a mighty wind: but
yet he cannot make the matter of wind, or of rain, that is proper to God.

5. Does God rain upon the earth? then we may well consider, 5
Unseasonable rain gods punishment.
why the land is so often plagued with unseasonable rain: it is no doubt for
our disobedience, as we have heard, Leu. 26. 19. and the contempt of the word,
among other sins, is one maine cause of this judgment. Now if we would either
remove, or prevent this plague at any time, we must turn unto the Lord, and
repent of our sins, for thereto we are called by this judgment, Amos 4. 7. And
if we do turn, then will the Lord send a gracious rain upon our land; but if
we will not turn, we shall have another rain, the rain of Sodom and Gomortha;
for Psalm. 1^. 6. ^
upon the wicked God will rain snares, fire, and brimstone. And this is
certain, where God sends his judgments for the contempt of his word, and yet
men do not repent, there Leu 26. 21. 24. etc.
one judgment is but the forerunner of a greater, till they be consumed. And
since experience teaches, that after inundations of waters, usually comes
plague and pestilence; for the preventing of these Judgments, let us repent.

The last point to be here observed is this; in what terms our Savior God
friends and enemies
Christ expresses, who be the friends of God, and who be his enemies. His
friends, he calls good and just; his enemies, evil and unjust. Now that we
may discern of our estate toward God in this behalf, we must see what a good
and just man is.

In every such a one two things are required: First, true faith, A (...) and
(...) man.
whereby a man lays hold on Christ for his righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption; and for the obtaining hereof, he must deny himself, and
become nothing in himself, that he may be all in Christ. Secondly, true
conversion of the whole man unto God, from all sin, so as his heart must be
renewed and disposed to please God in all things. And because these things are
inward and secret, therefore to make them known, there is further required,
that a man carry in his heart a resolute and constant purpose, from time to
time, never to sin against God: and this purpose of heart he must testify by
a godly and cons^^onable endeavor of life, to please God in all things; for
this is the fruit of true faith, and of sound inward conversion: and in regard
hereof, were Enoch, Job, David* Zachary, and Elizabeth called just. But he
that wants this constant purpose, and a daily endeavor, from a believing and
penitent heart to please God in all things, is a wicked person, and as yet Gods
enemy.

By this, first, we see how many are deceived every where, with civil Use. ^.
(...) (...) (...) many.
honesty; for if a man live uprightly among his neighbors, and do abstain
from murder, adultery, oppression, and such like sins, he is presently
counted a good man: such a one indeed may be counted an honest man ciuilly as
Ah^melec^ was, but yet this outward honesty ^ Genesis 20. 6.
makes not a man just and good in the sight of God so as he repute^ him for his
friend; thereto are required true faith and true repentance, testified by new
obedience.

Secondly, here also see, that neither the knowledge of Gods word, A man ^^y
(...) (...) (...) (...) ^^gton and no^ be the true friend of God.
nor the hearing of it with some gladness, and bringing forth some fruits, no^
yet to be able to conceive a prayer for the form thereof; that none of these
(I say) no no^ all of these, do make a man the friend of God indeed, for all
these may be in an evil man, who has a purpose in his heart, to live in some
sin* in whose heart as yet there is no true faith, no^ sound repentance:
without which (as we heard) no man is just in the sight of God, nor accounted
for his friend. And therefore we must not content our selves with these things,
but labor to be good and just indeed. When affliction shall be^^ll us, or
death approach, we would give all the world, if it were in our hands, for good
assurance that God were our friend: now then let us labor for true says and
repentance, and testify these by a constant purpose, and a godly endeavor to
please God in all things, through the whole course of our lives; and then will
the Lord esteem us for his friends.

Verse. 46. (...) if you love them that love you, what reward shall ye have?
do not the Publicans even the same?
In these words our Savior Christ propounds a second reason to (...)
persuade his Disciples and hearers to love their enemies, and to the end it
might take the deeper root in their hearts, he repeats the same again in the
next verse, which in effect is the same with this. The words are plain, if we
know what Publicans were; Publicans therefore were (...)
officers that gathered t^ll and tribute, taxes, and rents, of the Jews, for
the Roman Emperom, to whom the Jews were in subjection. Now in the gathering
of it, they used much injustice and oppression, for which cause they were hated
of the Jews, above all other people, and esteemed most basely of* Now (says
Christ) though these Publicans be void of all good conscience, yet they will
love their friends, of whom they are loved. And hence Christ reasons thus, If
you my hearers do but love them that love you, ye do but as these Publicans
do; but you must do more then such ungodly persons do: and therefore you must
love your very enemies.

Here first observe, that Christ does not forbid one friend to love another,
for then he should be co^t^ary to himself; but here he condemns carnal love,
whereby one man loves another, only because he is loved again, which in
effect is nothing else, but for a man to love himself in another. And here to
note the true manner of loving our neighbor, this Rule of lo (...) our
neighbor.
Rule must be remembered, that all the commandments of the second Table, must
be practiced in and with the first commandment, touching the love of God: thus
father and mother must be honored, in God and for God; and thus one man must
love another in God; yea though he be his enemy, because he is Gods creature,
and bears his image, as well as he himself does; yea, he is by God commended
to our love. This must be the ground, though for other respects our love may
increase toward our brother.

What reward shall ye have? Here Christ would teach us singular wisdom W^
(...).
for the ordering of our lives; namely, that we give our selves especially to
the doing of such things, as with God have promise of reward: what moved Moses
to refuse to be called the son of P^ar^^^ daughter, to forsake the pleasures
and riches of Egypt, and to choose to suffer affliction with Gods people? the
word of God is plain, (...) 11. 2^, 26.
he had respect to the recompense of reward. But this doctrine is not regarded,
else how should all places abound so much with idle persons, and such as give
themselves wholly to gaming and company keeping, to sports and delight: now
what reward can these look for at Gods hands, unless it be the wages of
sin, which is eternal death? Let us therefore beware of such a course, and
learn to abound in good works, which are things good and profitable.

Do not the Publicanes even the same? Our Savior Christ's intent in Christians
^n^^^ abound (...).
this instance, is to show that his Disciples, and so all professors of the
Gospel, must go beyond all other people in duties of love; indeed then whole
life should be spent in the practice of this virtue, Ephesians. 5. 1. Wal^e, that
is, lead the course of your life in love; and the state of the Church is, to
dwell in love, 1. John 4. 16. The reason is great, for Christians of all other,
receive the greatest measure of love from God, through Jesus Christ, and
therefore they must abound in this grace; first ^^wards God, and then one
toward another: this is the badge of a Christian, and the grace of our
religion, and therefore let us show it forth.

Verse 47. And if ye be friendly to your brethren only, what singular thing
do ye? do not even the Publicanes likewise?
Christ's drif^ in these words, is further to enforce the duty of love, to the
same effect with the former verse. The word translated be friendly, (...)
betokens the friendship which was showed in that country in salutations, by
embracing; now says Christ, the very Publicanes will kindly embrace their
friends, therefore you must do more.

We observed before, three branches of kind usage to be showed toward Kind
usage of an enemy.
an enemy; to wit, to speak well of him, to pray for him, and to do him good:
now here we may annexe a fourth, even friendly salutation. This Christ enjoined
to his Disciples, when he sent them to preach, Friendly salutation.
when ye come into an house salute the same: Mat. 10. 12. although it may be,
afterward they cursed it, because it was unworthy. And hence we must learn to
be kind and courteous in salutation to our professed enemies.

Object. 1. This is to countenance them in their sin, and wrong doing unto
us? Ans. In saluting an enemy, we must put a difference between his person
and his sin; we must show kindness to his person, but not countenance his
sin: nay, when we embrace his person, if occasion be offered, we must
disgrace his sin.

Ob. 2. 2. Ioh. 10. If any man bring not this doctrine, bid him not God speed.
Ans. John there speaks of such persons as are enemies to God, to his truth, and
to his Church, and such indeed we must not embrace: 2. Kin. ^. 14. Elisha says
to Iehora^ the idolatrous king of Israel, that he would not have looked upon
him nor seen him, had it not been for reverence of Iehosaphat the good king
of Judah then present. But private enemies of whom Christ here speaks, must
always be kindly used in salutation. And yet there is a case, wherein this
kind salutation may be denied to one that is not a public enemy: to wit,
when a superior omitteth it as a part of chastisement and correction upon the
inferior. Thus David denied liberty to Absalon to come in his sight for a
time, after he had pardoned him for killing Am^on, 2. Sam. 14. 24. but among
equals and private men this must be practiced; yea, we must salute kindly
though they salute us not again.

v. 48. Be ye therefore perfect, as your father which is in heaven is perfect:
Here Christ inferres an excellent consequent from the former reasons, wherein
he exhorts his Disciples to perfection in all the duties of love. In it observe
two parts: a commandment to be perfect; and a pattern thereof in God. For the
first, why does God command that which Why God commands men to be perfect.
no man can perform, for who can be perfect? Ans. God gives this and such like
commandments for diverse causes: first, in regard of his elect, for to them
Gods commandments serve as means of obedience, God by his grace enabling them
to do that which by command ho requires: for as in the creation Gods
commandment gave being to the creatures, so is it after a sort in the
regeneration, as here, be ye perfect, is a means to make Gods children
perfect. Secondly, in regard of the wicked, as well to restrain corruption in
them, for the peace of his Church, as also to leave them without excuse, seeing
the best works they do are short of that which they are bound to perform.

To come to the virtue commanded, which is perfection in duties of Of
perfe^^^on. Leg II.
love. Perfection in general, is twofold: of the Law, and of the Gospel.
Perfection of the law, is when a man loves God and his neighbor, according to
the rigor of the law. This is in no man in this life, but this shall be in
Gods elect in the life to come. Perfection of the Gospel, is Euangelical.
that endeavor of obedience which God accepts in Christ, at the hands of his
children. This distinction the Apostle makes, Philip. 3. for first he says,
he has not attained to perfection, v. 12. meaning, the perfection of the law:
and yet after he speaks of himself and others, as being perfect, v. 15. Let
us (says he) as many as be perfect be thus minded; that is, as many as be
perfect according to the Gospel. Thus were Noah, Abraham, Job, Zachary, and
Elizabeth perfect, that is, sincere and upright before God both in heart and
life: and this is that perfection which Christ here requires.

Further, this Euangelical perfection has 2. parts; either of man's nature, or
of his actions. The perfection of man's nature is by regeneration; for as in
original sin, is both guilt of Adams sin imputed, and corruption Parts of
Evangelical perfection.
inherent, which is the seed of all sin: so in regeneration, which is the
renewing of man's corrupt nature, there is an abolishing of corruption, and a 1
restoring of grace in every part and sacultie of the soul: for look how far
coruptio^ spread it self by Adams sin, so far does grace extend by
regeneration. Of this perfection there be three branches; First, an upright 3.
Branches of Evangelical perfection in (...)* nature.
judgment in the mind, whereby a man understands and beleeees not only the
grounds of religion, but every other doctrine truly grounded in the word, and
is ready to receive it, as it is further revealed; this 1
is sincerity in judgment: whereby it is plain, that to hold only the
grounds of religion, and for other points, to follow the time, is a great
imperfection and want of sincerity. Secondly, a pure and honest heart, 2
whereby a man is free from any purpose to live in sin; and on the contrary
is inclined to every thing that is good. Thirdly, a good conscience, 3
giving testimony according to the word, and so excusing, that a man may say
with Paul, 1. Cor. 4. 4.
I know nothing by my self: meaning, for which he should condemn himself. And
look, where nature is renewed, there these three are never wanting.

Perfections of man's actions, stands in two things; First, in bewailing 2
his wants and imperfections, known and secret; for it is a degree Perfection
of man's actions.
of perfection, to bewail our imperfection. Secondly, in setting himself from
a sincere heart, to obey God in all his commandments, as occasion is offered:
Psalm. 119. 6. I shall not be confounded, when I have respect to all thy
commandments: and this indeed, is the perfection of a Christian: half
obedience is nothing; for as Iam. ^. 10.
James says, he that fails in one commandment of purpose and custom, is
guilty of all, because if like occasion were offered, he would break all the
rest.

But it will be said, a man may have both these, and yet want much of
Perfection in parts, and in degrees.
perfection. Answer. A thing is said to be perfect two ways; either in parts,
when it has all the parts of perfection, though in weak measure; or in
degrees, when it has a full measure of perfection in every part. A child new
borne is a perfect man in regard of his parts, having all the parts and members
of a man; but it is not perfect in degree, till every part grow up to his
perfection. Now the child of God when he is regenerate, has all the parts of
perfection in soul and body, though in weak measure; but in this life, he is
not perfect in degrees, which is that full measure the law requires. 2. Chron.
15. 17. The heart of Asa is said to be perfect toward God all his days: and
yet the high places were not taken away; yea he failed in seeking to the
Physician, and not unto God, chap. 16. 12. Asa then had perfection of parts,
but to perfection of degrees he attained not in this life, and therefore he
failed in these particulars, through the weakness of sanctification, which
here is not finished till death.

So then it is plain, there is a perfection in the child of God, though joined
with much weakness, even in this life; his nature is perfect being renewed in
soul to sound judgment, to an honest heart, and a good conscience: his
actions are perfect in Gods acceptance through Christ, while he bewailes his
imperfection, and endeauours sincerely to please God in all things. This is
that which Christ enioynes to his Disciples, this we must labor for, if we will
resemble our heavenly father, we can get no higher in this life; but let us
attain to this, and in the life to come we shall be perfect in degrees, for
then our regeneration shall be accomplished.

But herein men fail and come short of their duty; as first, all those 1
Who fail in seeking perfection.
that spend their strength and wit to get the things of this world; these men
little think of this perfection which the Lord requires in his children; it
may be they will hear the word, but yet their hearts are so glued to the earth
and earthly things, that they savor not of regeneration, they know not what it
means: but if they will be Gods children, they must follow Iehosaphat, 2.
Chro. 17. 6. who lift up his heart to the ways of the Lord; for that is the
means to come to perfection.

Secondly, those also are reproved, that content themselves with a 2
small measure of knowledge, and do not strive after perfection, as Christ
requires: how can they have a sound judgment, which study not to know the
doctrine of the Scripture?

Thirdly, that general want of Christian perfection is here reproved, 3
when men content themselves, to yield respect to the outward duties The
general want of Christian perfection.
of the first Table, that concern Gods worship, and yet neglect the duties of
the second Table, that concern their brethren in general, and pertain to
their functions and callings in particular. This is a common fault in
Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, Masters, Servants, etc. they will be
Christians in the Church, but they neglect to show the power thereof in their
callings; but this is a grievous want of sincerity, which makes them far
unlike their heavenly father: for he is ever like himself, and therefore
look what men profess in Gods worship, that must they practice in their
callings. A magistrate must be a Christian upon the Bench, as well as in the
Church; in the administration of justice, as well as in the Congregation: and
so must Ministers, Masters, and all estates. God allows not of their service
in the Church, that serve their wicked lusts at home, Ierem. 7. 9, 10. Gods
sacrifices under the law must be whole and sound, not halt and lame, or maimed;
and such should our obedience be under the Gospel, with sincere respect to all
Gods commandments. It profited Herod little to hear John gladly, and to do
many things, so long as he kept his brothers wife; nor Judas to follow Christ,
while his heart was upon the bag. Let our practice of religion therefore,
show forth the truth of our public profession, and so shall we in some sort
resemble our heavenly Father.

Chap. 6.
Verse. 1. Take heed that you give not your Alms before men, to be seen of
them, or else ye shall have no reward of your Father which is in heaven.
IN the former Chapter, the Evangelist has faithfully recorded three parts of
our Savior Christ's Sermon, and here he begins the fourth, which 4. part of
Christ's serman.
reaches to the nineteenth verse of this Chapter; wherein our Savior Christ
goes, about to reform his hearers of all abuses in doing good works, and he
instanceth in these three; Alms deeds, Prayer, and Fasting: not so much
commanding them, as giving direction for the right manner of performing them,
so as they may be acceptable unto God. From the first verse to the fifth, he
entreats of Alms deeds, propounding two several O^ Alms deeds.
commandments, touching the manner of giving Alms: The first is in this 1.
verse, Take heed that you give not your Alms before men, to be seen of them:
which he enforces by an effectual reason in the words following, or else re
shall have no reward of your Father which is in heaven. And then exemplifieth
it by a particular example of a corrupt manner of giving Alms, borrowed from
the ambitions practice of the Scribes and Pharisees, v. 2. The second
commandment touching Alms giving, is in the 3. verse; whereof he renders a
reason in the 4. verse.

For the first commandment, Take heed, etc. This may seem to be repugnant to
that precept given before, Chap. 1. 16. Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works. But here is no contrariety, if we mark
well; for in the former chapter we are commanded to do good works before
men, that they may see them, and glorify God for the same. Now here we are
not forbidden simply to do good works before men, but to do them before men
for this end, to have our praise of men, that we might be glorified for doing
them, howsoever it went with God.

Before we come to the Rule, the words are somewhat to be scanned; A diverse
reading.
for whereas we read them thus, Give not your Alms before men, etc. Some
ancient Churches, after other copies and translations read them thus, Do not
your righteousness or justice before men: which must not seem strange, that
in Gods book there should be diverse readings; for in former ages, before
Printing was invented, the Scriptures of God were conuaied from hand to hand,
by means of writing: now they that writ out the copies of Scripture, did now
and then mistake some words and letters by negligence, or ignorance, and put
one thing for another, whereupon do come these diverse readings: yet we must
not think, that the word of God is hereby maimed, or made imperfect, for the
true sense of the holy Ghost, remains sound and perfect, though it may be we
cannot discern of the right reading. And the sense of Scripture is rather to
be judged the word of God, then the words and letters thereof. Now it being
here uncertain, whether reading to follow, (for either of them contain a
sense convenient to the place) therefore I will exclude neither, but from them
both propound this instruction.

That the giving of Alms is Justice; and a part of Righteousness Alms giving
is justice.
which God requires at our hands. This the Apostle shows plainly out of the
Ps. 112. 9.
Psalms, 2. Cor. 9. 9. He has distributed and given to the poor, his
righteousness remains for ever. And in common reason it must be so, for a
man is but a Steward over the goods which he possesses; the poor with whom
he lives, has title to part thereof, and he must give unto them by Deu^. 15.
(...).
Gods express commandment: so as unless he give in some sort, he plays the
thief, and robs the poor, by keeping back that which is their due.

In regard whereof we must learn: first, to acknowledge that providing of
maintenance for the poor, is not a work of freedom or liberty, Provision
for the pore a duty.
left to men's choice, whether they will do it or no, but a matter of justice,
and the not doing of it is injustice, against the law of God and of nature,
which require that the poor should be maintained at home without begging
abroad. Secondly, this should move us, to lay aside some portion of our goods
to give unto the poor, for the poor have interest into the^: and for this
cause we ought to cut off our superfluities in feasting, in attire, in sports
and pleasures, that so we may be better enabled to do justice in giving unto
the poor, for hereby commonly men are disabled to do this part of justice.
Thirdly, this should teach us according to our places, to see those good orders
well maintained and set forward, which are provided for the convenient relief
and maintenance of the poor: for the neglecting of them is injustice, and a
kind of theft against the poor.

Secondly, observe the word translated Alms: it is very pithie, signifying
mercy and pity; whence we may learn: first, what it is that What makes
giving to be alms.
makes our giving to the poor to be Alms: it is not the thing given, but the
merciful and pitiful heart of the giver, be the thing never so small, as was
the poor widows mite: and therefore all our alms must proceed from a
pitiful heart. Secondly, it shows what a one that party must be that is to
be relieved, namely, such a one as is to be pitied, not our lusty beggars, but
infants, orphans, the lame, blind, weak, maimed, and aged persons.

Thus much for the words: now follows the commandment it self. Take heed
that you give not your Alms before men to be seen of them. This commandment
tends to this end, to teach men how to Scope.
avoid the unlawful manner of giving Alms: for a good thing may be done in
an ill manner, and usually men offend this way in their good deeds. Now this
commandment prescribes a double circumspection in giving Alms: first,
touching the ground: secondly, touching the end of alms giving. The ground of
our Alms must not be the pride A bad groa^d of our alms giving.
of our hearts: this Christ forewarnes us of, if we look it should be good and
acceptable in the sight of God. This is a point of great importance, and
therefore for the better observing of it, I will here show two points: I. what
this pride is: II. why it must be so carefully avoided in our alms deeds. By
pride, I mean not outward pride in Pride of heart.
apparel, but that which is inward in the soul, consisting partly in the
mind, and partly in the will and affections, Pride of mind, is a corrupt
Pri^de of mind.
disposition thereof, whereby a man thinks himself to be better, and more
excellent then indeed he is: this was the sin of the Pharisie, who boasted
unto God of his own goodness, Luke 18. 11, 12. And hence it came that the
Church of Laodicea Rev. 3. 16.
gloried in her self, saying, I am rich, and increased in wealth, and lack
nothing; when as indeed she was poor, and blind, and miserable, and naked.
This conceit is most dangerous, especially in the point of grace, causing many
to deceive their own souls, by thinking they have grace when they have none,
Pride in will.
and ouerweening that which they have. Pride in will, is an inward affection,
whereby a man is not contented with that estate wherein God has placed him,
but desires a better. This befell Genesis 3.
Adam and Eve, who sought to be like unto God himself; and this takes hold of
most Practice of pride.
men in every age. Now from these two proceeds that practice of pride in man's
life, whereby he endeauours to do whatsoever he can for his own praise and
glory. This pride is not in some few persons alone, but in every man naturally
that comes of Adam, Christ Jesus only excepted. And where it takes place it is
so strong, that it will not be crossed: for rather then a man will not have his
will in this, he will commit any sin. This caused Absalon to banish his
father out of his own kingdom: and Achitophel to hang himself, when his
counsel was refused; Sylvest. 2. Platina: and fasc. Temp.
and some Popes (as histories makes mention) to bequeath their souls unto the
devil for the obtaining of the Popedom. And this is that inward corruption
which Christ here forbids to be the ground of our Alms deeds.

II. Point. The reasons why this inward pride must be carefully avoided, Why
pride must be avoided.
be these two. First, because whatsoever outward good work the child of God
can do by grace, the same may a wicked man do thorough pride; as conceive a
prayer, preach the word, and practice the outward duties of repentance, of
love, and such like: for pride is a sin that will counterfeit grace, and man
cannot discern it, but God only. Secondly, many other sins prevail in the
wicked, but pride is the sin that troubles the children of God, and when
other sins die, then will pride revive, yea it will arise out of grace it
self: for the child of God will be proud, because he is not proud: therefore
Paul' 2. Cor. 12. 7.
must be buffeted by the messenger of Satan, least he should be puffed up with
abundance of revelations.

Now the way to avoid this dangerous sin stands in two things: How pride
may be avoided.
first, we must be careful to know the pride of our own heart, for every man
has it in him more or less, and the more we see it, the less it is; but the
less we see it, the more it is in us indeed: and though we know nothing by our
selves, yet let us suspect our selves hereof, and labor to see it in our
hearts: for he that is the most humbled, is not altogether free from this
inward pride; Secondly, when we see over pride, we must labor to subdue it;
which we shall do; first, by considering the Judgments of God upon this
sin: were not our first parents cast out of Paradise when they would needs
be as Gods, and Herod was eaten up of worms when he took unto himself the
glory due unto God; Act. 12. 23. Therefore Peter ^. Pet 5. 5.
says, God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. A man that
would beg an alms, must not go in proud apparel; and so he that would
procure the favor of God, must not come with a proud heart. Secondly, we must
search into our selves, and labor to see our own wants and corruptions, as
our blindness of mind and ignorance, our unbelief, etc. and the sight of our
sins will be a means to humble us: for they that feel no wants in
themselves cannot choose but be puffed up. Thirdly, we must meditate upon the
death and passion of Christ, which he endured for our redemption; how he sweat
water and blood, and suffered the wrath of God both in soul and body for our
sins; now how can a man think that Christ endured all this for him, and yet
be not cast down with the sight of his own sins, which had a part in the
cause of all the curse that caused Christ to cry; My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me?

The second branch of circumspection in Alms giving here commanded, An ill e^d
in Almes-giuing.
respects the end thereof: We must not give Alms to be seen of men, that is,
to get praise and fame among men. This caveat Christ gives for weighty cause:
for the corruption of man's nature through the instigation of the devil,
causes every one almost to do all good works for wrong ends: why do many
men toil themselves so much in their ordinary callings? is it not partly for
honor, partly for pleasure, partly for profit? and do not the most men
propound this end to themselves herein, to maintain their families? But
though this be a good and commendable thing, yet neither that, nor the rest are
the right ends for which man should labor and travel: the right end of all,
is the glory of God in man's good, or the good of man in Gods glory; now when
our good works proceed from an humble heart, which syncerely intends the
glory of God in man's good, then is the work pleasing unto God. Other ends or
beginnings do profane men's labors: and therefore Christ gives this caveat,
to look both to the beginning, and the end of our Alms deeds.

Thus much of the commandment; the reason of it is this: Or else ye have no
reward of your father which is in heaven: so the words are, ye have no reward;
and they are very significant, importing thus much: If you do your good works
from an humble heart, for Gods glory in man's good, then you have a reward
laid up for you in heaven; which though it appears not presently, yet it is
as sure as if you had it already in possession: but if you do not so, you
have no reward laid up for you by your heavenly father.

From this reason in general we may gather, that he which has grace to do, if
it be but one good work (as to give Alms) upon a good ground, and for a good
end, shall never perish, but shall receive eternal life: which may be a
notable motive to provoke every man to do good works: as also it proves that
the child of God can never perish or finally fall away; for nothing is lost
that is laid up with God.

More particularly, first observe that the word reward is not taken properly,
but by resemblance, thus; like as a labourer after he has done his work
receives his wages; so the child of God having don that which God commands
him, receives a reward. Secondly, it it is said of your father, to signify
that this reward is not merited, but is the free gift of a father unto his
children. Lastly, Christ says your Father, speaking to all his hearers, among
whom was Judas, whom els-where he calls a devil, and others, whom he knew to
be none of Gods children, and yet being here a preacher and Minister of
Circumcision (as the Apostle Romans 15. 8.
speaks) ^e leaves the secret judgment unto God, and following the
judgment of hope and charity, takes all his hearers, to be the children of
God: which is a notable president to all Gods Ministers, for Christ here
preaching of love, practices it; and so ought his servants do. This also
condemns the practice of those, that upon a little falling out will not stick
to call others damned wretches, or reprobates; there is no charity in such
censures, for love always hops the best. 1. Cor. 13.

v. 2. Therefore when thou give thine alms, thou shall not make a trumpet to
be blown before thee, as the hypocrites do in the Synagogues and in the
streets, to be praised of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward.
Here Christ propounds by way of prohibition, a particular example of the
corrupt manner of Almes-giuing, proceeding from pride of heart and ambition,
borrowed from the practice of the Scribes and Pharisees; and withal he annexeth
in the end of the verse an effectual reason to move men to circumspection
about the ground and end of their Alms deeds.

The Expos. The original is this: Thou shall not blow a trumpet before thee; so
that our translation does also expound the words of Christ, according to the
common rule of Divines; that words of fact, are oftentimes put A rule of
interpretation.
for words of speech: which being well observed, will clear many places from
false interpretation. Exo. 13. 2. God says to Moses, sanctify unto me all the
first borne: and to Josh. 5. 2.
Joshua, Make thee sharp knives, and circumcise the sons of Israel, that is,
command them to be sanctified, and circumcised. Ier. 1. 10. I have set thee
over nations and kingdoms (says God to Jeremy) to pluck up, to root out,
to destroy, and throw down, to build, and to plant: that is, to preach, and by
preaching to pronounce that I the Lord will do these things. Ioh. 4. 1. Christ
is said to baptize, that is, (as the next verse imports) he commanded his
Disciples to baptize: and, Act. 10. 15. God is said to purify things; that is,
he pronounces things to be pure. As hypocrites do in the Synagogue* The word
hypocrite, betokens Hypocrite, that it signifies.
one that takes upon him to represent the person of an other, as players do,
who sometime represent mighty Kings, otherwhiles poor beggars, and to them it
properly belongs. Now by resemblance it is applied to any, that outwardly
faigne themselves to have that goodness and holiness which they have not: for
hypocrisy is nothing el^, but a show of that goodness outwardly, which indeed
is not in the heart. Now in this instance is included a second reason of the
former commandment touching the manner of Almes-giuing, serving to make all
Christ's hearers circumspect, both for the ground and end of their good works:
and the reason stands thus: That which hypocrites do, you must not do: but
they do their Alms to be praised of men, as is plain in this example: and
therefore you are not to give alms to be seen and praised of men.

Out of this example we may learn these Instructions. First, that A property
of hypocrisy.
it is the property of an hypocrite to do good works for false ends; as, to
be seen of men, and to be praised of men: for indeed an hypocrite in his heart
makes choice not of God, but of men to be the Judges and approouers of his good
works. And this is gross hypocrisy, because hereby the honor due to God is
taken from him and given to men, for God ought to be the Judge and approouer of
all our actions.

Now as Christ lays this sin upon the Scribes and Pharisees, so We make men,
not God, the judge of our actions.
ought every one of us to lay it on ourselves, considering our selves as we are
by nature out of Christ; for so we make not God, but men the Judges and
approouers of our actions: this will hereby appear evidently, for when we do
a good thing, and yet thereby incur the dispraise of men, are we not more
grieved thereat, then when by sin we offend God himself? which could not be,
but that our hearts do more respect the censure of men, then of the Lord. And
to clear this point yet further; consider this, that the root of hypocrisy
and of Atheism is in our nature, whereby naturally we do these three things,
we Love, fear, and trust in men more then in God, and therefore do make men
the Judges of our actions. 1. for Love, are we not grieved when we our selves
or our friends are dishonored, and on the contrary, when we our selves or
our friends are praised, are we not glad and rejoice? but when God is
dishonored, who is grieved? or whose heart does leap for joy, when God is
glorified? which argues plainly that our affection of love is more inclined
toward our selves and to our friends then unto God. 2. for fear; are not most
men more afraid when they offend a mortal man like themselves, then when they
offend the everliving God? 3. for trust and confidence in the time of
affliction, most men are more comforted if some friend promise them help, then
they are by all the promises of God himself in his word. But men will say,
that they love and fear, and trust in God above all: This indeed is the
ordinary profession of ignorant people; but the truth is, that by nature we
refuse God to be our judge and our approouer, and appeal unto men: and
therefore we must labor to see and feel and to bewail this hypocrisy, and
to be endued with the contrary grace whereby we may simply and sincerely seek
to be approved of God in all our actions.

Secondly, in this example note one evident cause of the disorder A maine cause
of many beggars (...) the Jews.
which was among the Jews in respect of their poor: for they begged in the
high ways, in the streets of the cities, and gates of the Temple, flat
against Gods commandment, who would not have such a beggar in Israel: other
occasions there were of this abuse; but one principal cause is here noted;
namely, that private persons were permitted to give their private alms unto
the poor with their own hands in public places. This was a great disorder,
and the cause of many beggars: for private men could not discern the
particular wants of all that begged so; and therefore God had otherwise
provided for them in the old Testament, as he showed before. And in the new
Testament there were chosen faithful men called Dea^ons in every congregation,
who were to looke-vnto their poor, to collect for them, and to distribute to
every one according to their necessity. It is not unlawful for a private man
to give Alms in public place if need require: but where the poor are no
otherwise provided for, then by such private relief, it is a great disorder:
like as it is in a family, where the children and servants know not where and
when to have their dinners: for the poor are Gods children in his family, and
ought to be provided for in better sort then by such private relief: and
therefore where good order is wanting for provision for the poor, it ought in
conscience to be begun, and where it is begun, men must carefully maintain
and continue the same.

Thirdly, in this example of a corrupt manner of Almes-giuing, see the
concurrence of sundry sins. First, here is noted hypocrisy, which Sin
goes not alone.
were enough to condemn a man; but yet with this there goes ambition, and with
both, an open contempt and breach of good order in providing for the poor:
which shows evidently that no sin goes alone, but ordinarily has his
companions: for sins are so infolded one in an other, that he which commits
one, is not free from any other: this may plainly be showed by many examples.
In Adams sin there was the breach of the whole law in every commandment,
either directly or by consequence: for he showed evident want of love to God,
in believing Satan more then God; therein he chose Satan for his God; he
worshipped Satan, and took Gods name in vain; he showed also evident want of
brotherly love, for hereby he became a murderer not only of himself, but of
all his posterity: and thus do sins concurie in every wicked action, in
which regard it may be said with Iam. ^. 10.
James, that he which fails in one commandment, is guilty of all: which
must admonish us to make conscience of every sin: for we cannot live in any
one, but we must needs run into many other.

Uerely I say unto you, they have their reward. These words contain the reason
of the former prohibition, wherein we may see the vanity of this giving of
Alms: for the praise of men is all their reward; they have none with God, as
we showed in the former verse.

verse. 3. But when thou do thine Alms, let not thy left hand know what thy
right hand does:

4. That thine Alms may be in secret, and thy father that sees in secret, he
will reward thee openly.


These words contain Christ's second commandment touching the manner of
Almes-giuing, with the reason thereof. The commandment is in the third verse,
and it bears this sense; that if the left hand could ^he meaning.
understand, yet it should not know what our right hand gave; and therefore
much more must we conceal the same from men. Yet here Christ forbids not all
giving of Alms in open place, or in the sight of men, but his meaning is to
restrain the ambition of the heart after the praise of men: the giver must not
intend or desire that men should see him give Alms, that they might praise
him: but his heart must simply and sincerely seek to approve it self unto
God. This will appear to be the right meaning of our Savior Christ, by
comparing this verse with the first: for here Christ renueth the commandment
there given, and forbids the corrupt desire of the heart after vain glory
in the giving of alms.

Now for our better* understanding of this commandment, first, we will show
what is here forbidden; and secondly what is commanded. Here are two things
forbidden; first, all desire or intention of men's beholding of us, when we give
our Alms: secondly, all respect and intent to please our selves in
Almes-giuing: for the left hand must not know what the right hand gives: The
thing here commanded is this, that he which gives* Alms, must do it simply
intending and desiring only to please God, and to approve his work unto God
without all by-respects of men's praise or approbation.

Here then first is condemned the doctrine of the Church of Use. 1. Rhem. on
Matthew. 6. sect. 2.
Rome, which teaches men to do good works, with opinion of meriting life
everlasting thereby at the hands of God; for that is far more then to do
them for this end to get praise of men, which yet is here forbidden; and
therefore the other must needs be abominable.

Secondly, seeing in our weldoing we must simply intend to approve 2
our selves unto God, it shall not be amiss here to show, how we How to do
good works well.
may so do our good works that God may approve thereof. Hereunto four
things are required; faith, love, humility, and sincerity or simplicity. For
the first, in every good work there must be a twofold faith: Justifying
faith; and a general faith. Justifying faith, whereby 1. in faith.
the person doing the work must be reconciled to God, and stand before God a
true member of Christ: for of this it is said, Heb. 11. 6.
without faith it it is impossible to please God. And Christ says, Ioh. 15. 2.
5.
every bra^ch that bears not friute in me, the father takes a way: and
without me ye can do nothing: where it is plain, that whosoever would do a
work acceptable to God, must first be in Christ: and the reason is evident;
for first the person working must be acceptable to God, before his work can be
approved: but no man's person is approved of God, before he be in Christ; and
therefore justifying faith whereby we are united unto Christ is cheifely
necessary. By general faith I mean that, whereby a man believes that the
work he does is pleasing unto God. Hereof Paul Romans 14. 23
says, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. A work may be good in it self,
and yet sinful in the doer, if he want this general faith. Now unto this
are two things required: first, a word of God commanding the work, and
prescribing the manner of doing it: secondly, a promise of blessing upon the
doing of it: for every good work has his promise, both of the things of this
life, and of a better: these things must be known and believed: upon these
grounds we must pray* give Alms, and do every good work, and so shall they
be approved of God. Now by this double faith required in every good work, we
see, how those that are bound to practice good works, (as every one is more or
less) ought to labor to be acquainted with the word of God, that they may do
their works in faith: for else though the work be good, it may be sin in them
because it is not of faith; which is the miserable state of ignorant persons,
who through want of faith, cannot do good works in a good manner.

The second thing required, in the doing of a good work, is love; 2. in love.
love (I say) joined with faith; for faith works by love: Gal. 5. 9. indeed
faith does some things of it self; as apprehend, receive, and apply Christ
and his righteousness to the believer, which is the proper work of faith. But
other things it does by the help of an other: and so faith brings forth the
works of mercy, and performs the duties of the first and second table; not
properly by it self, but by the help of love: and therefore here I say, that
in every good work is required that love whereby faith works. Now the kinds
of love, required in weldoing are two: first the love of God in Christ, for as
we know God in Christ, so must we love him: secondly, the love of our
brethren, yea of our enemies: for howsoever in our understanding these two may
be distinguished, yet in practice they must never be severed: but must always
go hand in hand, to move us to do the works of mercy, and all the duties
of our calling; as Paul says of himself and the rest of the Apostles, The
love of God constrains us to preach the Gospel, 2. Cor. 5. 14.

The third thing required in doing a good work well, is humility, 3. in
humility.
whereby a man esteems himself, to be but a voluntary and reasoable
instrument of God therein. This virtue will make a man give the honor of the
work to the principal Agent, that is to God himself: who works in us both
to will and to do of his good pleasure.

The fourth thing required in well-doing, is simplicity, or singlenes 4. in
simplicity.
of heart; whereby a man in doing a good work intends simply and directly to
honor and please God, without all by-respects to his own praise, or the
pleasing of men. This is a special virtue directing a man to the right end in
every good work, which is the obedience and honor of God in man's good. This
virtue was in Paul, 2. Cor. 1. 12
who in simplicity and godly pureness had his conversation in the world: thus
he preached the Gospel: and so ought we to do every good work. Now that this
sincerity may show it self, we must take heed of a special vice which is
contrary unto it, namely, the guile of the spirit, mentioned Psalm. 32. 2.
Spiritual guile in weldoing.
which makes a man intend and propound false ends and by-regards in doing good
works; as his own praise and delight, or to please men thereby. And that we
may avoid this spiritual guile, we are to know, that it may and does usually
prevail with men in four cases: I. when It preuailes in 4 cases.
those do practice virtue in whom God only restraines the contrary 1
vice: thus civil honest men that have no religion, may practice justice,
temperance, mercy, and other moral virtues, because they are not inclined to
injustice, intemperance, and the contrary vices: but these actions in them are
no good works before God, because they proceed not from sanctified hearts,
sincerely intending to obey and glorify God hereby. II. When men do good
works for fear of divine justice, and the 2
penalties of men's laws: and such for the most part is the repentance of the
sick: I grant indeed that some do truly repent in this estate, but commonly
such repentance is unsound, and proceeds not from a single heart, but from
fear; whereby, being under Gods hand, they seek to avoid his judgment. Such
also are the outward duties of religion performed by our common Protestants,
who come to Church, and receive the Sacraments chiefly for custom sake, and to
avoid the danger of men's laws. III. When men do good works for the honor
and praise 3
of men. This is a dangerous thing: upon this ground a man may preach the word,
use prayer, and profess the Gospel; yea, and be zealous for Gods glory as
I^h^ was: and hence it comes, that many fall away to loosenes of life from a
strict profession of religion, because they received not the truth in
simplicity of heart, with purpose only to obey and please God, but rather to
get the praise of men. IV. When men do 4
good works from some corruption of heart prevailing in them; as when a man is
both proud and covetous, yet more proud then covetous: covetousness bids him,
not to give to the poor; but yet pride desiring the praise of men prevailing
in him, causes him to give to the poor: And so when covetousness preuailes in
a proud man, it will cause him to abstain from riot and proud apparel, which
yet his pride would persuade him unto. In all these cases spiritual guile
corrupts the work that otherwise is good in it self: and therefore we must
have a watchful eye unto singlenes of heart in our well-doing, and to the rest
of the virtues before named, that so we may be able to say with good
conscience, that our works are such as God approoueth.

verse. 4. That thine Alms may be secret, and thy father that sees in secret,
he will reward thee openly.
Here is the reason whereby Christ enforces the former commandment; and it
has two parts: the first is drawn from a special property in God, to see in
secret: the second is from his bounty, in rewarding openly.

For the first: the words are thus in the original, and thy father which is a
seer in secret: for the word there used signifies a discerning seer: whereby
Christ would teach us, that God sees and beholds things that God the secret
seer.
no man can see, even the secret thoughts and desires of man's heart.

Hence we must learn three things: I. to examine our selves strictly Use. 1.
not only of our gross and open sins, which all the world may see; but also
of our most inward and hidden corruptions, and when we cannot see them, yet we
must suspect our selves of our secret wants: for though men know them not, no
nor we our selves, yet God the secret seer beholds them. II. Never to hide
our sins within our selves, but freely 2
to lay them open before God to our own shame, yea to confess our unknown
sins: we must not like Adam, sew fig-leaues together to cover our nakedness,
or fly from God thinking to hide our selves from his sight: for he discerns
in secret. III. To be careful not only to do 3
good works, but also to do them in an holy manner, from good grounds, and to
a right end: for God sees secrets, and will not be shifted off with false
shows. Psalm. ^^9. 1^8.
David says, I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies, because all my
ways are before thee. And the rather must we be moved hereunto, because God
knowing what is in man's heart, does oftentimes prove men with temptations,
that he may discover the guile of their hearts: and therefore that we may escape
the judgments of God due unto hypocrisy, we must labor to do all good
duties in singlenes of heart.

The second reason drawn from Gods bounty unto the^ that in singlenes of
heart do good works, is in these words; he will reward thee openly: wherein he
preuenteth this objection, which some of his hearers might make against his
former precept. If I may not do good works to be seen of men, then shall I
loose my labor: Christ answers: Not so: for God the father will reward thee
openly, if thou do goods from a single heart, only respecting the praise and
honor of God in man's good. If it be asked, how this can stand with that saying
of Christ, Ioh. 5. 21. that the father judges no man, but has committed all
judgment unto the son: I answer, that in regard of deliberation, of
authority and consent, the last judgment shall be executed by the whole
Trinity: but yet in regard of immediate execution, the father judges not, but
Christ only: for he alone gives the sentence both of absolution and
condemnation.

Of pr^^se.
This second reason teaches us sundry things concerning praise. 1
First, that God himself is the sole author of true praise: Paul The A^t^o^ ^
^. Cor. 10. (...).
says, he which praises himself is not allowed, but he whom the Lord
praises: where he compares the world to a Theater, wherein men are Actors,
and men and Angels be spectators; but God alone is the Judge, who gives praise
and good name to every one that deserves it, not only in this life, but in
the world to come: in regard whereof, we must endeavor our selves so to do
all our good works, that God himself may approve thereof; to seek the praise
of men, is a fond thing, seeing that not man, but God, is the author of true
praise: yea, this must teach us not to depend upon man for praise and
commendation for the good things we do, but upon God himself, from whom all
true praise comes.

Secondly, that God as he is a father, is the sole author of true praise, 2
The ground.
for Christ says, your father will reward you. Now God is our father, only in
Christ, and therefore our union with Christ is the ground of all true praise:
He is a true Israelite (says Romans 2. 29*
Paul) which is one within, and the circumcision is of the heart, in the
spirit, not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God. This then
discovers the error of the world, in seeking after praise and reputation;
for some seek it in the comlines of their body, some in apparel, and some in
learning, etc. but all these are wrong means; the right way to get true
praise, is to be in Christ, and to have an humble and sanctified heart, set
purposely to keep Gods commandment: Psalm. 119. 22. David prayed God to
remove from him shame and contempt, because he kept Gods testimoneis: as
though the keeping of Gods commandments, had been the only means to avoid
contempt, and to procure true praise and fame.

Thirdly, that the life to come is the only time of true praise, for Christ 3
here says, he shall reward thee openly: that is, in the last day: 1. Corin.
The time.
4. 5. When the Lord shall come, then shall every one have praise of God. This
must teach us, not to care for the contempt of the world, which follows our
profession, so that our conversation be godly; but to rest patiently
contented, because it is the lot and portion of Gods children, and our sins
deserves greater reproach, always remembering, that the time of our praise is
yet to come. Yea, hence we must learn, not to aim at our own praise, in the
things of this life, but wholly to seek the glory of God in all things; for
if we seek his glory now, the time will come when he will glorify us.

Fourthly, that the praise that God shall give his children in the end 4
of the world, shall be op^n and manifest, before all men, and all angels, both
good and bad, when they shall stand to be judged by Jesus Christ: and this is
true praise which shall never have end, whereunto the praise of men is not
comparable; we count highly of applause and reputation with earthly princes,
and all* men honor him whom the Prince commends; how much more then shall they
be advanced, whom God himself shall vouchsafe to praise and commend?

verse. ^. And when thou pra^^st, be not as the hypocrites: for they love to
stand and pray in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, because
they would be seen of men: verily I say unto you, they have their reward.
In this verse and the rest to the fourteenth, Christ entreats of the duty
of prayer, wherein he deals as in the former point touching Of prayer.
Almes-giuing: for first he forbids a twofold vice in prayer: hypocrisy, and
babbling; and then teaches the contrary virtues, and the right practice of
prayer. The vice of hypocrisy in prayer is forbidden in this fifth verse, and
the contrary virtue enjoined in the next.

The Exposition. When thou prayest* To pray, properly is to entreat of God the
gift of some good thing concerning our selves: and in this sense, it is only
one part of that holy worship of God, which is called Invocation: for, 1. Tim.
2. 1. the Apostle makes four kinds or parts ^^^^s of in vocation.
of invocation: to wit, I. Supplication, when we entreat God to remove some
evil from us. II. ' Prayer, whereby we beg at the hands of God the gift of
some good thing unto us: and these two concern our selves. The III. is
Intercession, when as we entreat the Lord to grant some good thing unto our
brethren, or to remove some evil from them. The IV. is thanksgiving, whereby
we give laud and thanks to God for blessings received, either by our selves, or
by our brethren. Now in this place Prayer is not to be taken strictly for one
part of invocation, but generally for the whole worship of God by invocation;
as it is commonly taken of us, and often used in Scripture, one part being put
for the whole. Be not as the hypocrites that is, do not as they do in prayer;
by hypocrites he understands principally the Jewish teachers the Scribes and
Pharisees, for at them he aims in this part of his Sermon. For they love to
stand and pray in the Synagogues and in the streets. We must not here
conceive, that Christ condemns altogether this gesture of standing in prayer
as unlawful: for himself prayed standing, when Ioh. 11. 41.
he raised up Lazarus* and the primitive Church in their assemblies called Orig
hom. ^. in ^^umer.
Stations, prayed standing: but he reprooueth here the abuse of this gesture in
these Jewish teachers. For first, they used this gesture to a wrong end,
namely, thereby to get the praise of men: because standing is the fittest
gesture which a man can use in prayer to make him be seen of others. Secondly,
these Scribes and Pharisees thought themselves more righteous then all other
men, and therefore judged that they had no need to humble themselves so much
either in soul or body, as the Publicans and sinners did. Again, Christ here
condemns not the action of prayer in these places, the Synagogues and the
streets: for no man was ever forbidden of God to pray in any place. The
Patriarks were not tied to any place: and under the law howsoever the Temple
was the place appointed for Gods outward worship in sacrificing, and such like,
yet even then it was lawful for the Jews to pray in any place* and after
Christ's coming Paul ^. (...) ^* ^*
wills, that men pray every where lifting up pure hands unto God* but here is
condemned this gross fault of these Scribes and Pharisees, that they minded to
pray no where else, but in these open and public places, which is expressed by
this phrase, they love to stand and pray: So that in a word this is the meaning
of this verse; You my hearers, when you pray* take heed of the hypocrisy of
the Scribes and Pharisees, for they regard only the praise of men, and
therefore do use such gesture in prayer, and choose such places to pray in,
that they may best be seen of men. Where we see, he directly condemns their
hypocrisy, as well in respect of the ground thereof, which was the pride of
their hearts, and not Gods grace* as also in regard of the end thereof, which
was the praise of men, and not the glory of God.

The use. 1. Whereas Christ says, When thou praiest: he takes it for
granted, that all men of years must pray: and whereas he condemns the false
manner of prayer, and sets down the right form and manner thereof, he
teaches us that it is a most necessary thing for all that have discretion, to
exercise themselves religiously in this duty of prayer. And because our
Savior here urges this duty so much, I will here show the necessity of
prayer; which may appear unto us by sundry The necessity of prayer.
reasons. I. Prayer is one of the most principal parts of Gods worship: 1
for herein we acknowledge him to be the giver of all goodness, the searcher and
knower of our hearts; and hereby we testify the faith, hope, and confidence we
have in God. And prayer is called Hos* (...). ^.
the ^alue^ of our lips, because it is a sacrifice well pleasing unto God.
II. By 2
prayer we do obtain, and also continue and preserve unto our selves every
good grace and blessing of God, especially such as concern eternal life: for
God promises his spirit to them that ask it by prayer: ^^k* (...). (...).
and the first conversion of a sinner, howsoever it be the free gift of God,
yet by Gods grace moving and inabling a man thereunto* is obtained by prayer;
and so are all the good graces following our conversion, both gotten and
increased. III. The true gift of prayer is a pledge of the 3
spirit of Adoption: and therefore (...) (...)
Zachary calls the spirit of prayer the spirit of grace. And R^^ ^. (...).
(...).
Paul says, the spirit helps our infirmities* even the spirit of our Adoption,
which teaches us to cry* A^ba, father. IV. 4
By prayer we have spiritual communion and famili^^tie with God: for in the
preaching of the word, God speaks to us; and in prayer we speak to God, and
the more we pray, the nearer and greater fellowship we have with God: which one
reason (if there were no more) is sufficient to persuade us of the necessity
of prayer, and to move us unto diligence therein.

But sundry objections are made against the necessity of prayer: 1. Object. 1.
It is said God knows our thoughts before we pray, and therefore it is
needless to express them by prayer unto him. Answ. We pray not, to acquainte
God with our suites, or with our hearts, as though he knew them not, but to
perform obedience unto his commandment, who requires this duty at our hands.
Again, we pray unto God, to honor him, in acknowledging him to be the knower
of our hearts, the giver of all goodness, the stay of our faith and hope, in
whom only we put all our trust and considence.

Object. 2. Whether we pray or not, God will give us the blessings which he
means to bestow on us. Ans. This is ^lat Atheisine: and yet we must
distinguish of Gods blessings, for some are common blessings which God often
gives to men without their asking, because they serve to preserve nature: as
rain and fruitful seasons, food, raiment, etc. Act. 14. 16. and yet even
these common blessings must be prayed for: Phil. 4. 6. In all things let your
requests be made known to God: and James Iam. 4. 1.
says, Ye lust and have not, because ye ask not: Psalm. 106. 23. Moses prayer
saues the people from destruction. Others, are special blessings of the Elect,
and these must always be sought and obtained by prayer.

Object. 3. God has decreed all events, and every thing shall so fall out as
he has appointed, and therefore its needless to pray, and oftentimes its but
the crossing of Gods will. Ans. This reason is naught: for as God has decreed
the event of all things, so likewise he has appointed the means whereby his
decree shall be effected: and prayer many times, is a principal means to
bring Gods will to pass: 1. King. 18. 1. God showed to Eliah that he would
send rain in Israel after that long drought, and yet the ^^^s 42.
Prophet crouched unto the earth, and put his face between his knees; no doubt
humbling himself in prayer to God for it, as S. Iam. 5. 18.
James says. Where we may see, that prayer is not contrary to Gods decree,
but a subordinate means to bring the same to pass: and therefore we must
rather reason thus, that because God has decreed the event of all things, and
has appointed prayer as a means to effect sundry of his decrees, therefore
we must use it.

Considering then that prayer is necessary, notwithstanding all that Use.
Diligence in prayer.
can be said against it, we must learn with special ^euerence to give our
selves unto this duty, both publicly in the assemblies of the Saints, and
privately in our families, being masters and governors: for no family ought
to want this morning and evening sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving; yea, we
must pray by our selves particularly in regard of our particular wants. Indeed
the most do thus plead for themselves, that they use to pray often: but the
truth is, that the common practice of our people in prayer, is nothing else but
lippe-labour and a mocking of God: for what be their prayers, but the saying
over the ten Commandments and the Creed, which are no prayers: yea, their
repetition of the Lords prayer without understanding or devotion, is no prayer
with God, when they do it only of custom, and rest in the work done. But
here is required an other manner of prayer then this. And to incite us unto it,
let us consider the worthy examples of Gods servants herein: Moses prayed for
the saving of the Israelites forty days and Deuteronomy 9. 1^, 19. Psalm. 119. 1^4
Luke 6. 12*
forty nights without meat or drink: David prayed seven times a day! and
our Savior Christ spent whole nights in prayer. Now these examples were
written for our learning, to teach us to addict our selves to this holy duty
wherein our hearts speak unto God. The want hereof is the cause of the common
Atheism that is in the world, of injustice, and cruelty in men's callings, of
swearing, pride, and backbiting in men's lives: for if men would often set
themselves in the presence of God, by unfeigned invocation, the remembrance
thereof would still be before their eyes, and cause them to abstain from all
these iniquities: for who being stained with such transgressions durst present
himself before the majesty of God, who is a consuming fire against all sin
and wickedness, having Rev. 1. 13, 14.
fiery eyes to see their sins, and feet of brass to bruise them in pieces
that will not repent.

Secondly, in this prohibition against hypocrisy in prayer we may see, that to
conceive a prayer, and to make profession of religion, may for the outward
work, as well be performed from pride of heart as from the grace of God:
carnal men may do it in pride, which Gods children do by grace, as we showed
in the former point of Alms giving: that therefore which Christ said of hearing
the word, take heed how you hear, must be conceived to be spoken to us of
prayer and the profession of religion, take heed how you pray, and how you
profess religion. And indeed before we pray, we ought to enter into our
hearts, and there to search out our corruptions diligently, that we may be able
to discern in our selves between pride, and Gods grace; and so perceive upon
what ground we pray, that it be not from a damnable pride, but from the saving
grace of Gods holy spirit.

Thirdly, in this prohibition Christ condemns this false end of prayer, when
men do it to have praise of men; whereby we may see, that it is a thing
incident to the professors of the Gospel, to do the duties of religion, for
the approbation of men: which notably bewraies the hypocrisy of our hearts,
which naturally have more respect to men, then to the Lord, even then when we
have to deal with God himself. Thus did the Scribes and Pharisees, and it is
to be feared, the same fault is common among us; for men are far more forward
and careful to perform the public duties of religion, in the assemblies of
the Church, then private duties, either in their families, or by themselves:
Many will pray in the Church, that never regard private prayer at home.
Again, in performing public duties, men have more care of the outward action,
then of truth and sincerity in the heart; and many study more for fit words
to delight men's ears, then for good affections, which God approoueth; for what
is the cause that many ancient professors, when they come to die, know not how
to commend their souls to God? Surely, this especially, that in the whole
course of their profession, they more respected men then God; and therefore in
the time of death, when they must needs deal with God indeed, they know not
what to do, nor how to behave themselves.

Lastly, Christ here reprooues their behavior in prayer, which was Vnreuere^ce
in prayer.
standing, without all humbling of themselves, either in soul or body. This
is a thing incident to many in our congregations, who use to show no manner of
reverence or humility in the time of prayer; but either stand, or fit, as
though they had no need to humble themselves; or else intended only that men
should see them. But we must know, that howsoever the word of God prescribes no
peculiar gesture in this action, yet it is not a thing indifferent, either to
use, or not to use, some seemly gesture of humiliation in this worship of God;
but some must needs be used, to express and further the humility of the
heart, which is chiefly required: Isay, 6. 2. the S^raphims standing before
God, cover their feet and faces with their wings, in regard of Gods presence:
and the poor Publicane that prayed with the Pharisie, howsoever he prayed
standing, yet Luke 1^. 13
he cast down his countenance, and smote himself on the breast, to testify
his humiliation. Yea, Christ Jesus our Lord, when he bare the punishment of
our sins in the garden, fell down upon his face, and prayed: thus also did
Number. 16. 45
Moses, and Aaron, 1. Ki. 18. 42
Elijah, (...). 9. 5.
Ezra, and D^^. ^. 10.
Daniel, humble themselves. And it has always been the practice of Gods
servants in prayer, by some convenient gesture of the body, to express the
humility of their hearts; which checketh the custom of our common people in
prayer, who are so far from bringing a broken heart to God, which is the
thing he chiefly requires, that they know not what to ask; and many there be
that will not submit themselves to such outward gesture, as might express
their inward humiliation. These things are far unseemly for Gods people, and
therefore let us learn to humble our selves at Gods footestoole, first in our
very hearts, and withal, we must be careful to testify the same, by some
convenient outward humiliation.

Verse 6. But when thou praiest, enter into thy chamber, and when thou have
shut thy door, pray to thy father which is in secret; and thy father which
sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.
Christ having forbidden hypocrisy in prayer, in the former verse, Sincerity
in prayer.
does here command the contrary virtue; namely, sincerity* setting down the
right manner of prayer to God in that behalf. Now because the words are not to
be taken in that sense, which at the first reading they seem to bear;
therefore for the better understanding of them, I will here lay down two
grounds: 1. That in this place our Savior Christ does not forbid public
prayer in the congregation, or in public places; for public prayer is Gods
ordinance, where two or three (says Math. 1^. 19, 20.
Christ) be gathered together in my name, there am I in the middle among them:
and whatsoever they shall desire, shall be given them of my father. Again,
public prayer serves for most worthy uses, for The excellent use of public
prayer.
which it must be maintained; as first, to make men's prayers unto God more
fervent and effectual; as in the common wealth, a private man's supplication is
not so much respected, as when a whole incorporation, 1
or a whole shire make petition to the Prince. Secondly, by public 2
prayer a man professes himself to be a member of Gods Church, and one that
seuereth himself from all profane societies and companies of men in the
world. Thirdly, public prayer serves to stir up zeal in 3
them that be cold and backward; for herein they are made acquainted with Gods
blessings, they are left to see their own wants, and they have the good
example of Gods children. 2. Ground. That private prayer (though it be Gods
own ordinance) is not here directly commanded: for look what was forbidden in
the former verse, the contrary thereto is here commanded; but Christ did not
simply there forbid public prayer, he aimed at an higher thing therein;
namely, hypocrisy, and therefore here he commands not private prayer
directly, but intends the right manner thereof, for sincerity, whether
public or private.

Having laid down these two grounds, I come now to the true meaning of the
words. When thou praiest, that is, either thy self alone, or with others,
enter into thy chamber, and when thou have shut thy door, pray, etc. that is,
be as though thou did pray in thy closet, intending only to approve thy
self, and thine heart unto the Lord, having no respect to any creature in the
world; for this Christ means by praying in a chamber, or closet; namely, that
a man in prayer should not respect himself, or any creature, but simply intend
and approve himself unto God only.

In the words thus explaned, we are to observe two things; a commandment, and
a reason thereof: the commandment in these words, When thou praiest enter into
thy chamber, and when thou have shut the door, pray unto thy father which is
in secret. This commandment inioyning the right disposition of the heart to
God ward in our prayers, does prescribe the true and perfect manner of prayer;
whereto that we may the better attain, I will here show how the same is
performed.

That a man in prayer may approve himself and his actions unto How to pray
aright.
God alone, three kind of duties are required; some going before prayer, some
in the act of prayer, and some after prayer.

Before prayer four duties are required. 1
1. A man must have knowledge 4. duties before we pray
of three things concerning prayer (for every prayer must be made in faith,
and in obedience to God, which without knowledge cannot be done) to wit, of
Gods commandment to pray: of the things we ask in prayer, and of the manner
of asking; which is this, spiritual* blessings concerning life eternal; as
remission of sins, sanctification, and other necessary graces must be asked
simply without condition: but temporal things concerning this life, as health,
wealth, liberty, and such like, must be asked with condition of Gods will, as
they serve for his glory, the good of our selves, and of our brethren. 2
2. A man must labor to find himself converted unto God, having a true purpose
of heart not to live in any sin; for Ioh. 9. 31.
God hears not sinners: and David says, Ps. 66. 18.
If I regard wickedness in my heart, God will not hear my prayer. When men
come to the Lords table, they forsake their sins and turn unto God; which
must also be done before we pray, for therein we are to deal with God, who
cannot abide iniquity. 3
3. A man must seek to be in Christ, that would pray with comfort; Ioh. 15. 7.
If ye abide in me* and my words abide in you, ask what ye will, and it shall
be done to you. In the old Testament the sacrifices were to be offered only
upon the altar of God, in the Temple, or in the Tabernacle, which prefigured
this unto us, that in the new Testament, our prayers, which are our sacrifices,
must be offered only in Christ Jesus, who is our ^^u. 8. 3.
incense altar in heaven, and our spiritual Temple. 4
4. Before prayer a man must, sever himself* from all creatures, in his
thoughts and desires, and being himself before God* with fear and reverence,
that every power and faculty of the soul, may say as Cornelius did to Peter,
Act. 10. 33.
we are all here in the presence of God: for this end, his mind and memory
must be taken up with divine and holy thoughts, and his heart possessed with
holy desires; God in Christ must be his whole delight, and all by-thoughts must
be banished. Our Savior Christ used to pray in the night, and in solitary
places apart from the societies of men; this he did (no doubt) for this end,
that he might set himself wholly before God, and be free from all occasions of
distraction in that divine duty.

Duties in prayer are especially five. 1
1. We must labor to have a 5. duties in praying.
true sense and feeling of our wants, of our sins and corruptions, and be
inwardly touched in conscience for the same; for as the beggar sits still at
home, and never goes to beg relief, till he feel himself pinched with
hunger and want, so it is with us, till we feel our own wants and miseries by
reason of our sins, we can never put up an earnest and hearty prayer to
God. 2
2. We must have an inward fervent and unfeigned desire toward God, for the
supply of all our wants and miseries; this is a special thing in prayer, which
makes it not only to be a petition of the lips, but a true request of the
heart. This the Prophet David expressed, when he said to God, Ps. 143. 6.
My soul desires after thee, as the thirsty land does after rain: and Hanna
also, when she told Elie 1 Sa. 1. 15.
that she powered out her soul as water before the Lord. 3
3. Every petition must be made in obedience, that is, we must have a
commandment inioyning us to ask the thing we pray for, and a promise to
assure us that it shall be granted unto us: and yet here this special caucat
must be remembered, that we leave both the time, and the manner of accomplishing
our requests, to the good pleasure and wisdom of God. 4
4. Every petition must be presented to God in the Io^. 16. 23. 26.
name and mediation of Christ: for in our selves we are sinners, and Isay 59 2.
our iniquities make a separation between God and us; so that we cannot have
access unto the father, save only by the mediation of Jesus Christ. If we
would come with boldness into the holy place, it must be by the new and living
way, which Christ has prepared for us, through the veil, that is, his flesh. 5
5. In prayer we must have faith, whereby we believe, that the thing we ask
shall be done unto us: Mark. 11. 24. whatsoever ye ask in prayer, believe that
ye shall have it, and it shall be done unto you: now the ground of this faith,
must be Gods commandment and his promise, which I mentioned before.

The duties after prayer, are chiefly two; 1. We must call to remembrance 2.
duties after prayer.
the prayer we made to God; if one man talk with another, he will be so
attentive, that as near as may be, he will remember the words that passed
between them; and much more ought we so to do when we talk with God: now we
must thus meditate on our prayers, for this end, that we may the better do
the thing we ask; as we crave in prayer the pardon of our sins, so we must
after prayer endeavor to leave the practice of them. What a horrible shame is
it for men to beg at Gods hands the pardon of sin, and when they rise from
prayer, to fall again to the practice of it? This is with the 2. Pet. 2. 21.
dog to return to his vomit, and with the desperate thief to stealing,
after he has entreated favor of the Judge. 2. After prayer, we must be 2
careful to be as plentiful in thanksgiving for blessings received, as we
were in petition to crave them. This indeed may be done in the beginning of
our prayer, though here I mention it last, but omitted it may not be. Ordinary
men have this humanity, that where they find friendship, they will be more
plentiful in rendering thanks, then in making new requests; and if we deal
thus with men, shall we not much more do it with God, with whom true
thankfulness for one blessing, is a special means to procure many more? Now
this thankfulness must not be only in word, but in deed testified by due
obedience, in life and conversation: and these are the duties whereby a man
shall avoid all carnal ostentation in prayer, and approve his heart unto God
therein.

By this description of the true manner of prayer, we may learn three Uses 1.
Popish errors in prayer.
things; First, that the Romish Church does neither know nor teach, nor
practice the duty of prayer aright; they pray not in knowledge, for they pray
in an Rhem. on 1. Cor. 14. sect. 13.
unknown tongue, and allow of Ibid sect. 14.
ignorance, as the Mother of devotion; they commend doubting, Rhem. on Iam. 1.
sect. ^.
by speaking against assurance, and so pray not in faith nor obedience; they
pray not in humility, for mercy for their sins, for they think to Bellar.
de bonis oper. in parti^. l. 1. c. 3.
merit by their prayers: and which is worst of all, they direct not their
prayers to God only, in the name of Christ; but to God and his Saints, making
the in offic. beat. Mar. a P^o 5.
virgin Marie, their Mediatresse: yea, they in offic. sanct. crucis ibid.
pray to the wooden cross, which is most horrible Idolatry. Secondly, that
our common people come far short of their duty in this part of Gods worship:
for their prayers consist chiefly in the bare repetition of words, which is
only a lip-labor, they pray without knowledge and feeling, and so must needs
fail in many other duties. Now this bewraies the manifold wants that be in the
prayers of the best Christians, for besides their ignorance of many duties in
prayer, their doubting and distrust, their dullness and deadness of heart, and
their by-thoughts, do all show that their hearts are not wholly taken up with
Gods glory, as they ought to be. Lastly, Against spells and charms
hereby we may see the gross ignorance of our common people, about spells and
charms; because they consist of good words, and many strange things are done
thereby, therefore they think them to be good prayers: but herein they are
deceived, through ignorance in the right form of prayer; for they that make
them and use them, are either graceless persons that have society with the
devil, or grossly deluded through palpable ignorance: and they cannot set
themselves before God, to approve their hearts unto him in this action: nay,
the worship that is done herein, is to the devil, and the cure that is wrought
thereby, is his work; for these charms are his watchword, to stir him up
to such exploits.

Furthermore, in this clause, Pray unto thy Father which is in secret, that is,
an invisible God, is couched a reason to induce men to the obedience of this
commandment, to this effect; He to whom thou praiest, i^ an invisible God,
therefore thou must endeavor to approve the hidden Images of God abominable.
man of thy heart unto him. Hence I gather, first, that it is an horrible
thing, to make an image to represent the true God, or to worship God in it; for
God is invisible. The second commandment condemns the^ both, as Moses
himself does so expound it, Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16. Ye saw no Image in the day that
the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, therefore corrupt not your selves by making
you a graven image, or representation of any sign. Secondly, that there should
be no outward pomp in prayer, either for gesture, or for garments; for prayer
is made to an invisible Father. This overthrows the whole worship of the
Popish Church, which stands in outward shows of carnal pomp; if there be any
pomp, it must be inward, in the graces of the heart, among which, humility is
the first ornament. Thirdly, that all places are alike, in respect of Gods No
difference of place in regard of Gods presence.
presence, and of his hearing; for he is a God in secret, wheresoever a man
has occasion to pray, there God is: which confuteth them that make the Church
a more holy place for prayer, then other-where, and therefore reserve all their
prayers till they come thither; for now difference of place, in respect of Gods
presence, is taken away: God is as well in the field, and in the private
house, as in the Church: and yet Churches are ordained and used in a godly
policy, because a congregation may more conveniently there meet, to their
mutual edification, in the public exercise of the word and prayer; otherwise
private houses were as good places for Gods worship, as Churches, if they were
so decent, and convenient for edification: for in all places men may lift up
pure hands unto God, as the Apostle 1. Tim. 2 ^.
teaches.

And thy father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly. These words
contain a twofold reason, whereby Christ persuades his hearers, and in them
all others, to the careful practice of the former duty, of sincerity in
prayer. The first reason is drawn from Gods All-seeing property: the second,
from his bounty. Gods all-seeing property is set out in these words; and the
father which sees in secret: that is, though the father himself be invisible,
yet when thou praiest in secret, that is, as though thou were in secret,
intending only to approve thine heart unto God in prayer, then thy father
sees thee, he knows thine heart, and hears thy prayer. This is verefied by
the example of Jonas, who was heard praying in the Whales belly; of Daniel,
praying in the Lions den; and of Moses, Exodus 14. 15.
who is said to cry unto the Lord, when as he prayed only in heart.

The use of this point is manifold. 1. It serves to admonish us that Vse^ 1.
when we pray, we must in singleness of heart, bring our selves into Gods
presence, and heartily and truly put up our requests unto God, so as we may
approve unto him, both our hearts and our prayers; for there is nothing in our
prayers that can be hid from God: and therefore we must not content our selves
with the thing done, but labor so to pray, that God may be well pleased with
the manner thereof.

Secondly, hereby we are taught to make conscience, not only of our 2
doings and speeches, but even of our very thoughts, and that in secret places;
for though we may conceal the same from men, yet we cannot cover them from the
eyes of God: he is invisible, and yet Heb. 4. 13.
all things are naked before him.

Thirdly, this proves that no prayer can lawfully be made to the 3
Prayer to Saints unlawful.
virgin Marie, or to any other Saint departed; for he alone is to be called
upon in prayer, who sees in secret: but God only sees in secret, neither the
virgin Marie, nor any other of the Saints can see in secret; and therefore
prayer is to be made to none but to God alone. The Papists Rhem. on Luke 15.
sect. ^.
answer, that Saints departed see in secret, though not of themselves, yet by
God, and in God; but that is false: the Angels before their fall saw not their
own future fall, nor the fall of man. The blessed Angels in heaven, know not now
the time and day of the last judgment; yea, and the Saints departed lie under
the Altar, crying, Leu. 6. 9. 10.
how long Lord? being ignorant of the time of their full redemption: and
therefore the Saints departed see not in secret.

The second reason drawn from Gods promised bounty, is in these words, shall
reward thee openly; that is, shall repay thee for thy prayer in the day of
judgment, before the Saints and holy Angels, as we expounded the same words in
the fourth verse. This is a notable reason to induce men to pray in a true and
holy manner; wherein we may see the endless mercy of God, vouchsafed to them
that pray aright: if any subject put up a supplication to his earthly Prince,
he takes it for a special favor, if the Prince vouchsafe to admit him to his
presence: behold here the King of Kings, will not only vouchsafe us access
unto the throne of his grace, when we put up our supplications unto him, but
if we pray aright, he does hold himself indebted unto us for the same, and
promises one day to reward us openly. This far^e exceedes the love of all
creatures in heaven and earth, no Prince is so kind and gracious to his best
subjects, as the Lord is to all that call upon him in spirit and truth.

From this place the Papists would gather, that prayer is a work Rhem. on this
cha. sect. 2. Bellar. de bonis oper* in parti. l. 1. c. 3.
that merits at Gods hand eternal life, for thus they reason; Where there is
repaying by way of reward, there is something done which meriteth: but unto
prayer there is a repaying, therefore it does merit at Gods hand. Answ. Reward
is due to man two ways, either by desert, or of free gift and promise; now in
this place God will reward man for his prayers, not for their desert, but of
his own free will and grace, because he has promised so to do. That this is
so, may thus appear; If a Beggar should ask an alms of any man, it were
absurd to say, that the beggar by asking did deserve the alms: and so stands
the case for the merit of our prayers; thereby we beg things at Gods hands, and
therefore can no more merit thereby, then the beggar can deserve his alms by
asking: nay rather, we may gather hence, that Gods rewarding them that pray,
proceeds from his own free grace alone; for prayer properly, is a work of
man unto God, wherein* man gives nothing unto God, as the Jews did in the
sacrifices, or as is done in some other spiritual sacrifices of the new
Testament; but only asks and receives some thing from God, and therefore
cannot hereby merit any thing at Gods hands. And by this may all other places
be expounded, where reward is promised to man's work.

Lastly, note the phrase here used; he shall reward thee openly: that is, at
the last day: whence I gather, that till the day of judgment, no servant of
God shall fully reap the fruit and benefit of his prayers. This must be well
considered, of all that have care to call upon God unfeignedly; for many times
after long and earnest prayer, we feel little or no comfort, whereby we may be
brought to dislike our estate, as though God had no respect unto us: but we
must know, that God does often long defer to reward his servants that pray
unto him: not doubt but Zachary and Elizabeth prayed for (...) in their younger
age, and yet they were not heard till they were both olde^ and David says, his
eyes failed for waiting on God, when he would accomplish his promise made unto
him: this we may also see in the petitions of the Lords prayer, for they be all
according to his will, yet the full fruition of the benefits there asked, is
reserved to the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ*

Verse 7. And when you pray* use (...) vain repetitions, a^ the heathen, for
they think to be heard for their much babbling.
Our Savior Christ having de^lt against hypocrisy in prayer, does Against
babbling in prayer.
here come to the second vice, which he intends to reform therein, namely
babbling, consisting in the outward form of prayer. The words contain two
parts* ^ commandment; and a reason thereof; The commandment, When ye pray use
n^ vain repetitions* a^ the heathen do* where first we must know, th^^ Christ
reproues not repetition in prayer simply, but needelesse repetitions only; for
Psalm. 51. David does sundry times repeat his requests, for the pardon of
sin, and for sanctification: also Moses* El^^* and our Savior Christ, prayed
forty da^es together, and in these long prayers (no doubt) used many
repetitions; much less can we pray one day together without many repetitions.
Here then by vain repetitions is meant babbling; that is, a desire and
affectation to use and speak many words in prayer: and under this one vice,
are condemned all sins of the same kind* that is, all superst^ous
multiplication of words in prayer, as the heathen, that is, such, as were not
Ephesians. 2. 12.
the people of God, but al^^ns from the common wealth of Israel, and strangers
from the covenant of promise.

In this commandment are condemned many abuses in the manner Abuses in prayer.
of prayer; 1. Mere babbling, when words are used for prayer, which contain
neither requests unto God, nor giving of thanks; such are many 1
Popish prayers; and such is the use of the Aue Maria; among our common people,
for it is the s^^ut^tion of the Angel Gabriel, to the virgin Marie, calling her
by commission from God, to be the mother of Christ; which words, none since
that day, had warrant to use to the virgin Marie, only they are to be read as
a part of that history: yea, the rehearsal of the ten Commandments, and of
the Creed for prayers, is but mere babbling. 2. Prayers made in ignorance are
here condemned* 2
thus the Popish sort offend; who use to pray unto God in an unknown tongue;
and thus many sin, that use the Lords prayer without understanding of the
words. 3. Cold and d^ll praying is here condemned, 3
when the lips draw near unto God, but the heart is no whit* affected
therewith (...) this is a common vico* and some ^aint hereof may every man
find (...) his own* (...)* ^^w Superstitious^ prayers* 4
H^rae Virgini^ Mariae ad vsum Sa^^sb. Eccles.
when a^ Gods worship (...) measured* ou^ by see numbers. This is the Popish
practice answerable to their doctrine; that the rehear^ing of so many Pa^er
^osters, Au^^s, Dirges, Masses, and such like, are effectual with God, to
procure such and such things: this opinion takes place with our common people*
for they think God is served by the work done, if the words be said, all is
(...). Rash praying* without 5
due preparation, is here conden(...), wh^^ men pray only on the sudden, by
the motion of the spir^^* (...) they use to speak: too many are of this mind,
allowing no set form of prayer to any sort; but howsoever conceived prayer be
most comfortable, yet without* due preparation of the heart, it is most subject
to vain repetitions. 6. Rash 6
vows, especially of things not lawful* ^or above our power* 7. Rash 7
wishes of good or evil, being frame^ according to ou^ carnal affections,
and not by the word of God. And in a word* all vain and s^perfluous speech in
any manner of invocation, wherein the heart is not affected according to the
will of God: all which must be remembered, for they show plainly, that ou^
common prayers are far short of that which the Lord requires and allows.

Here ^ome will say* If so many things be dis^llowed in prayer* how How to
speak aright in prayer.
shall we speak aright in prayer? Answ. As the Apost^^ Paul said of singing,
so say I of prayer; it must be Col 3. 16.
with grace in our hearts* and all our words, both for measure and number* must
be tempered thereto, and no more ought to be used in prayer, the^ may serve to
express and further in o^^ selue^* or others, some (...) ward grace of God* a^
^^^h, repen^^n^^, ^^ale of Gods glory, etc. Eccles* 5. ^. Be not rush (...)
thy mouth* ^^^let thine heart be hasty to utter a thing before God; for God i^
i^ heaven* and thou art ^n earth, therefore let thy words be ^e^e? where we
have express command, not only to prepare* our hearts; but our words also,
when we come before God in prayer, that they be such as may express some grace
of our hearts*

As the heathen.* In this instance we may note* that (...)hon had some ^n*
sight into matters of religon; for first, they know there was a God, and that
the same God must be worshipped* Secondly, they practiced many excellent
virtues of the second Table; as Justice both in word and deed* liberality,
con^^^en^^e* ^^delit^e* and such like ^ ye^, they cared to ^o some duties of
the first Table, as here, we see they prayed unto God: and some of them (...)
this (...) they obtained hereby some temporal* blessings. Ion. 1. 14.
The heathen Mariners that carried I^^^^ toward Tarshish, prayed unto God and
obtained safety: and Ahab, a wicked Idolater, 1. Ki. 21. 28.
humbled himself unto God in prayer and fasting* and obtained a temporal
freedom from a fearful judgment. Now the consideration of this point,
serves to check many among us, who think that God will hold the^ excused,
because they mean well, and do no man harm; they plead that they are no
adulterers, thieues, nor outrageous offenders: but all this the heathen man can
do, and yet he is but in a damnable case; for though these be good things, yet
they will not bring any man to salvation: we must therefore get faith in Christ,
and from th^^ce practice all Christian virtues.

For they think to be heard by their much babbling. These words are a reason of
the former commandment, wherein we may note 3. opinions 3. opinions of the
heathen concerning God.
of the heathen concerning God. 1. They thought that God was like and earthly
man, who might be instructed and persuaded by words. 2. They 1
denied Gods providence, and were not persuaded, that God saw the^, or 2
regarded their estate; and therefore they used many words to acquaint him
therewith. 3. They thought by the force of words to prevail with God. 3


Hence we may learn these instructions. 1. That though the heathen knew there
was a God, yet they turned him into an idol, when they worshipped him; and
therefore Paul says, Ephesians. 2. 12.
they were without God in the world for they made him like unto man, without
any providence, and perswa^^^^ also by m^ns reason, and by many words.

2. By these opinions of the heathen touching Gods, we may gather that there
was not always in the old Testament, an universal grace given to all,
whereby they might be s^ued, if they would* for if they had had any such grace,
they would never have thought so grossly of God as they did: one spark of true
knowledge of the M^ssi^s, would have exp^lled all these carnal conceits of God
out of men's hearts; and therefore howsoever the heathen had so much knowledge
of God, as made them without excuse, yet we are to hold, that before Christ's
coming, they were left to themselves, and forsaken of God in his just
judgment, in regard of his special grace and favor.

^. By ^^^se heathen we may see what be our natural conceits Men's natural
conceit of God.
of God, (...) our nature is the same with theirs; and therefore of our selves
we think God to be like some old man, sitting in heaven, without any regard of
us at all; and when, w^^ have all things needful we will trust in God* but
when means fail, we forsake him straight: and th^^ w^^ show, by using
unlawful means to help our selves in the time of distress* as by ^^^king to
wit^^^s, etc. Lastly, naturally we think we can prevail with God by our
words: The Papists teach, that the saying of five words, na^ hoc est corpus
meum, will turn the bread and wine in the Sacrament into the body and blood
of Christ: ex vi verborum: Council* ^rident. sess* 13. (...). ^.
and it is the common opinion of our ignorant people, that the saying of words
pleases God* they think that the words of Scripture written or spoken, have
virtue in them to do strange things, and this is one maine ground of all the
practices of sorcerie which be so common among us: but we are to know that
there is no such virtue in any words, it is only faith in the heart that makes
Gods word effectual, for our good. Words of themselves can do no more but
signify, and that they do not of themselves, but by the pleasure of men: and
therefore we are to renounce the use of all spells and charms; for be the
words never so good, they are but the devils watch word, and the ceremonies
used therewithal, are his sacraments to cause him to work wonders. We
therefore must learn by the word of God to conceive better of God then nature
can teach us, as of an heavenly invisible God, governing all creatures by his
providence, and not persuaded by man's reason, but working all things according
to the counsel of his own will.

verse. 8. Be ye not like them therefore: for your father knows whereof you
have need before you ask.
In this verse our Savior Christ repeateth the former commandment touching
prayer made after the manner of the heathen: and withal annexeth a second
reason to enforce the same. The commandment is repeated from the former reason
in these words: Be ye not like them therefore; as if he should say, considering
that the heathen in their prayers look to be heard for the multitude of their
words, therefore ye must not pray in that manner which they do. This
repetition of the commandment serves to imprint the same more deeply in the
hearts of his hearers, to cause them, and so us in them, to be more careful to
avoid needless repetitions in prayer.

Now having handled this commandment in the former verse, I Distinction of
people before Christ's death.
will here only observe this point of doctrine touching the distinction of
people before the death of Christ: for here Christ says unto the Jews: Be ye
not like them: that is, like the Gentiles: where he puts a plain difference
between the Jews and all the Nations of the world besides. And therefore when
he first sent his Disciples to preach, he forbad them Math. 10. 5* 6.
the way of the Gentiles and the cities of Samaria: commanding them to go to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And this distinction was not only in
Christ's time, but had been from the beginning for the space of 4000. years.
In the first age of the world there were Gen 6. 2.
the sons of God, and the daughters of men: after the ^^ood the Gal. 4. ^9.
children of the flesh, and the children of the promise. And under the law, a
Hos. 1. 10.
people of God, and no people. This distinction stood in two things. 1. In
regard of the grace of adoption, and of the special favor of God; for in this
Text Christ says, the Jews had God for their Father, which the Gentiles had
not, for they were strangers from the covenants of promise, Ephesians. 2. 12. 2. In
regard of Gods true worship, for concerning prayer, a special part thereof,
Christ here says to the Jews, Ye shall not be like the Gentiles: If any
shall here think that this preferment of the Jews before the Gentiles, in
regard of Gods special mercy, came from this, that God foresaw something in
them, which was not in the Gentiles, let them hear what Moses says to the
Jews; Deuteronomy. 7. 7* 8
The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you for your multitude, but
because the Lord loved you, and would keep the oath which he swear to your
fathers.

From this ground of doctrine touching the distinction of people, The promise
of life not v(...)sall to all.
in regard of Gods special mercy, follow three weighty points to be known
and believed. First, that the promise of remission of sins, and life
everlasting in the Messiah, is not (...)ll to all* but indefinite to many of
all sorts, kinds, and estates; for if the promise perta^^ed to all, then there
could be no distinction of man and man, of people and people, in regard of
mercy: and therefore the opinion of universal grace, is false and errneous.
Secondly, that though Christ died for Against universal redemption.
all (for so the Scripture says) yet he ^^^^d hot alike effectually for all;
for if Redemption by Christ had been (...), then had* mercy belonged alike to
all, which is against the Text: and therefore the opinion of universal
redemption is also a forg^^^^ of man's brain. Thirdly, Against universal
vocation.
that God calls not all men effectually to salvation by Christ, for then should
every one have God to be his Father in Christ* and the Jew had no privilege*
before the Gentile, in regard of mercy, and the grace of adoption: but here we
see, that God ^o^ many hundreds of years, was the Father of the Jew, and not
of the Gentile, ^n regard of grace and adoption. And by this doctrine we may
clear that place of the Apostle Saint Paul, 1* Tim. 2. 4. where he says, God
would have all to be saved: for he means hot a^^ men in all times, but in
this last age of the world, after the ascension of Christ, when as the
partition wall was broken down, and the distinction between Jew and Gentile
taken away in regard of mercy, and the grace of adoption.

For your Father knows whereof ye have need before ye ask of him. These
words are a second reason against the heathenish manner of prayer, to this
effect; It is needless for you to use vain repetitions in your prayers,
because God knows your wants before you pray: and therefore few words well
ordered are sufficient.

The exposition. Your Father knows. This knowledge of God, is not a bare
notice taken of our wants, but such a knowledge as does withal include a
special care to make supply unto them; for this is a A rule in expounding
Scripture.
rule in the expounding of Scripture, that words of knowledge are oftentimes
put for words of affection: as Psalm. 1. 6. The Lord knows the way of the
righteous, but the way of the ungodly shall perish: where the opposition of
knowledge to destruction, shows plainly, that by knowledge there is meant,
the Lords due regard and respect unto the ways of the godly; which is a point
full of all comfort to the children of God: and for the clearing of it three
questions are to be scanned, which may well be moved out of this Text.

1. Question. If God know our wants before we pray, why then Why we prai^
seeing God know^^ our wants.
should we pray at all* Ans* We pray, not to inform God of the things we
want, as though he knew them not; but for other causes: as 1
1. To stir up our hearts* to seek unto Gods presence and favor. 2. To
exercise our faith in the meditation of Gods promises. 3. To 2
ease our woeful hearts, by pouring them out unto the Lord. 4. To testify 3
our obedience unto Gods commandments, and our trust in his 4
providence, for the receiving of every good thing we desire.

2. Question. If God know our wants, and have care to make supply Why God
delays his grant to our Prayers.
thereof, why then does God oft-times delay to grant the prayers of his
servants? Answ. God deferreth to grant the request of his children for many
respects, tending to their great good; as 1. Thereby 1
to kindle their faith, and to stir up their zeal in prayer, that they may
more earnestly beg the things they want: for this end our Savior Christ
reasoned with the woman of Canaan, before he would cure her daughter. 2. To
keep them in humility, and to prevent 2
spiritual pride* thus he denied to remove from the Apostle Paul, the
buffeting of Satan, though he prayed for it, least he should be puffed up
through multitude of revelations. 2. Corinthians. 12. 7, 8, 9. 3. To 3
make them esteem more highly of the blessings of God, and to stir them up
to more thankfulness for the same; for it is commonly true, that things
lightly gotten, are lightly set by.

3. Question. How falls it out, that God does never grant some Why God never
grants some men's requests.
men their requests? Answer. 1. Because they make their prayers, but not
according to Gods will, either failing in the time, as did the foolish virgins,
who cried, Lord, Lord, open to us, when the doors were shut: Matthew. 25. 11,
12. or in the things they ask, and so the Mat. 20. 22
sons of Zebedie had not their request, because they asked they knew not
what. 2. Because they doubt and waver in prayer, for such shall not receive any
thing of the Lord, Iam. 1. 6, 7. 3. Because they pray for wrong ends; Ye ask
and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that you might consume it on your
lusts, Iam. 4. 5.

The Use. 1. This provident eye of God over all our wants, teaches Christian
behavior in distress.
us what to do when we are assaulted by any enemy, either of body or soul;
we must first of all make God our refuge and tower of defense, by getting
assurance of our adoption; for if we be Gods children, he is our father,
knowing, and weighing our wants, and he is most careful to make supply
thereto, before we pray. Genesis 25. 22. When the two twins strove together in
Rebek^aes womb, she sent to ask the Lord thereof, no doubt by Isaac her
husband, who before had prayed for her, verse 21. So when Iehosaphat was beset
with many enemies, he cried unto the Lord for help, and was delivered, 2.
Chron. 18. 31. and Chap. 20. 12. And it was the Prophet David's practice to have
recourse to God in all his troubles, for which cause he calls the Lord his
rocks, his resting and hiding place.

Secondly, hereby we are taught to have a moderate care for the A ground of
contentatio.
things of this life, for we have a father in heaven, who cares for us,
knowing all our wants, and ready to make supply thereof, before we pray. In
these days, most men set their hearts upon the world, and trust to outward
means more then to God himself, which comes from this; because they want a
true persuasion of their adoption in Christ: for if they knew that God were
their father, then surely this persuasion would take place in their hearts; God
knows my wants, and is careful for the supply thereof, and therefore I will
trust in him, and obey him.

Thirdly, this teaches us, in any necessity or affliction, to subject
Christian behavior in ^^^^^ction.
our selves to the will of God, laboring to be thankful for that estate, as
well as for prosperity, and studying to please and honor God therein; for he
is a father who sees all our wants before we complain, and is careful for
our good, knowing that affliction is better for us then prosperity, or else
he would send us deliverance: for it is all one with him, and he delights not
in the affliction of his people.

Fourthly, this serves to arm us against all carnal and slavish fear,
whereby men's hearts are oppressed, either in regard of death, or of the day of
judgment; for though the devil rage against us, yet when death comes, God
is our father, who knows our wants, and the way to comfort us, and is both
willing and able so to do. In a word, this meditation serves to stir us up
to all dutiful obedience in the whole course of our lives; for who can but be
thankful unto such a father, as knows all his wants, and as he is able, so
also he is willing and ready to make supply thereto: this therefore should
enlarge our hearts to bless God that is such a father unto us in Christ.

Verse 9. After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name.
Our Savior Christ having forbidden his Disciples all carnal and
superstitious kind of praying, does here prescribe unto them a most holy form
of true prayer; but before he come unto it, he gives them this commandment,
After this manner therefore pray ye: Saint Luke has it thus; When you pray,
say Our father, etc. In which words Christ inioynes his Disciples to use a
right and holy form of prayer, the pattern whereof is after set down. Now
because this point is controuersall, How far forth the Lords prayer is
prescribed.
I will briefly set down how far forth this prayer of Christ is prescribed
unto us; to wit, for matter and form we must imitate and follow it in all our
prayers, but we are not tied to the very words of this prayer, but may freely
use them, or other words at our pleasure* for our Savior Christ oft-times
prayed in other words, and so did the Apostles, as we may see by Paul's praters
in his Epistles, wherein he observes the matter and manner of this prayer,
but yet uses other words: yea, S. Luke setting down this very form of prayer,
does somewhat alter from the words of S. Matthew.

Upon this commandment it may well be demanded, whether it be Of a set form
of prayer.
profitable and necessary to use a set form of prayer, either privately or
publicly in the service of God? Ans. I take a set form of prayer, either
publicly or privately, to be both profitable and necessary; set (I say) both
fer the matter and manner, and if need require, for the very words Reasons for
it.
also: my reasons are these; I. That which God has ordained is both profitable
and necessary: but God has ordained that men should use 1
set forms of prayer, for the Priests were enjoined a set form of prayer in
blessing the people, Number. 6. ^3, 24. and the 92. Psalm. is a set prayer for the
Sabbath day: yea, all the Psalms of David (some few Psalms of doctrine only
excepted) are set forms of prayers to be used of the church of God for ever:
and in this place Christ prescribes a set form of prayer, not only for the
matter and manner, but also for the words: and the like did John Baptist when
he taught his disciples to pray. II. Reason. In man there be sundry wants in
prayer, as ignorance in the understanding, 2
distractions in the mind, oblivion in the memory both of Gods commandment
and promises; in the heart is much deadnes, dulnes, and distrust; in the tongue
many times, is want of such convenient utterance as should be in him that would
speak unto God; and in most men there is that bashfulnes, that they cannot
utter and dispose the desires of their heart before others in that order which
were meet. Now to make supply of all these wants, a set form of prayer is to
be used, whereunto all the powers of body and soul may be well fitted. III. 3
Reason. The ancient Church of God, long before the time of Popery, used a set
form of prayer: indeed for the first three hundred years after Christ, by
reason of continual persecution, they could not do so, but after those times
there was a set form of prayer used in all Churches, in so much as the
soldiers in the field had their set prayers. And in many Councels it was
decreed, that no Church should use any form of prayer, but such as was allowed
and appointed, and that for these causes: first, that there might be an
uniformity in the solemn worship of God: and secondly, that the ignorance and
negligence of many Pastors might be prevented, who otherwise would have omitted
this duty in their congregations: and therefore there was then set down a
general form of Confession of faith, of prayer, and thanksgiving, and of
administration of the Sacraments.

Now considering set prayer is Gods ordinance, and the imperfections of man
require it, and the same has been so long used in former ages, I doubt not to
affirm the same to be both profitable and necessary; whereby we may see how
blind and rash they are, who term set Barrow and Greenwods re^ut. p. 48.
prayer an abominable Idol: and as loathsome unto God, as swines ^lesh was to
the Jews. These be loathsome and irreverent terms; but that we may know
their folly and error the better, let us here scanne their principal Reasons
against set prayer; and they be two. I. To read a sermon penned by an other is
no preaching, and therefore to repeat a set prayer is no prayer. Ans. The
reason is naught: for in reading a penned sermon a man cannot express the gift
of prophecy; but in reading a set prayer he may show the gift of prayer; as
namely, a touched heart for his sins, an hungring desire after grace, and a
thankful heart for Gods mercies; and herein does prayer consist, and not in
the words. II. Reason. We must pray freely as the spirit mooues us; and
therefore to use set forms of prayer, is to stint and quench the good motions
of the spirit. Ans. This reason were somewhat, if every one received such a
portion and measure of the spirit as did enable him hereunto: but seeing in
this life we have but the first fruits thereof, and not the tenths (as one
says) we are to use all good helps to make supply unto our wants: for in the
practice of holy duties we are like unto a man that is newly recovered of some
grievous sickness, who can walk in his chamber, yet not by himself alone, but
either with his staff, or leaning upon an other man's shoulder: even so we
being weak and feeble in prayer, had need of the help of set forms of
prayer, to hold up our feeble hands unto God: and therefore it is requisite for
men to use set forms of prayer, at least for the matter and order thereof in
their own hearts; yea and many times it is needful for some, to use set
prayers for words: for many that have true grace in their hearts, want
utterance to express it: and if they might not use set forms of prayer, they
should be deprived of many great comforts, especially when they pray with
others. So that if the heart be rightly prepared thereto, set prayer does not
quench but help the weak gifts of the spirit both in the heart and tongue.

By this then we see, that neither our Church, nor any other, where a set form
of divine service is established, is therefore to be blamed; because the same
is both necessary and profitable. Secondly, here we see, that it is meet and
necessary we should have some set form of prayer in our hearts according to
our peculiar estates, whereby we may express unto God our particular wants,
and crave supply thereof particularly: some think we must only pray upon
extraordinary instinct and motion of the spirit: but so many be our wants,
that unless we prepare our selves before hand, we cannot pray aright: and
therefore to avoid many distractions and lets in our mind, heart, and utterance,
it shall be sound needeful to prescribe unto our selves a set form of prayer:
we are content to keep a set order for our diet and apparel, and why should
we not do it in prayer which concerns the comfort and refreshing of our
souls.

A second thing to be gathered from this commandment is this; The Lords prayer
a most excellent form of prayer.
That the Lords prayer is the most excellent form of prayer that is, or can be
made by any creature: for it was indicted and propounded by the son of God,
who is the wisdom of the father. Now the excellency of it stands in these
things: I. in the pithie shortness of it: for in 1
few words it compriseth endless matter: II. in the perfection of it: 2
for it contains in it whatsoever is to be asked in prayer: in which respect
Breviarium Euangeli^: ^ertullian.
it is well called of one the abridgement of the whole Gospel: III. in the
order thereof, which hereafter we shall see in the resolution of it: 3
IV. in the acceptance it has with God the father: for it contains 4
the words of Christ his son, in whom the Father is well pleased.

Use. 1. The excellency of this prayer shows plainly, that if any set form
of prayer may be used, then this may, being indicted by the Mediator of the
Church. And therefore the Anabaptists of our days are foully deceived, who
deny the use hereof for a prayer, when as before this time for the space of
fifteen hundred years after Christ, there was never any that disallowed it.
Secondly, hence we see that the practice of those preachers is commendable, who
use to conclude their prayers with the Lords prayer: for hereby, as by a most
perfect and excellent prayer, the wants and imperfections of our prayers are
supplied. Thirdly, whereas some would gather from the perfection and
excellency of this prayer, that it alone is sufficient to be used, they are
deceived; for Christ's intent was rather to commend this prayer unto us for
matter and manner, then for the words thereof. Again though it be a most
perfect prayer, yet it is only general; but every true believer must have
particular prayers, whereby in special form and manner his particular estate
and condition may be made known unto the Lord; yet so, as they be always
suitable unto this form here prescribed. And thus much of the Commandment:
Now follows the prayer it self.

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, etc. This prayer has
three parts: I. a preface: II. the petitions: III. the conclusion. The Preface
in these words: Our Father which art in heaven. In the handling whereof, as
also in the rest of this prayer, I will first propound the Meaning; then the
Instructions.

I. The Meaning. Our Father] This title Father, properly belongs to God, who is
a father simply, by creation giving being to all things, and preserving them
by his providence. Men indeed are called fathers, but that is only
secondarily, because in some properties of fatherhood they resemble God. Now
this title is given to God, sometime simply considered without personal
relation; as Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Do ye s^ reward the Lord, O foolish people? is not
he thy father that has bought thee? Orherwhile it is given to the particular
persons in Trinity; as first and principally to the first person, who is
commonly called the Father. And the second person in Trinity is sometime
called Father, as Isa. 9. 6. the father of Eternity: because he is the ground
of our adoption, whereby we become eternally the sons of God: and therefore
he is brought in thus complaining of reproach; Behold, I, and the children
which the Isa. ^. 1^.
Lord has given me, are as signs and wonders in Israel: for the author to the
Hebrews expounds that place of Christ, Heb. 2. 13. and he is said to have
seed, Isa. 53. 10. And the holy Ghost may proportionally be called Father,
because with the Father and the Son he gives being to all things. But in
this place by father, is meant properly the first person, who is first and
chiefly the father of Christ, and in Christ our father. He is the father of
Christ, first by nature, begetting him as he is the Son, of his own
substance before all worlds, by communicating unto him his whole essence or
Godhead. Secondly, he is the father of Christ, a^ Christ is man, by the grace
of personal union: for the manhood of Christ does wholly subsist in the
Godhead of the second person, and therefore Christ as he is man (I say not his
manhood, which is a nature, not a person) may well be called the Son of God.
And in this relation of himself to the first person, Christ says, My Father
is greater then I, Ioh. 14. 28. God the father is our father, not by nature, or
in regard of personal union, but by the grace of Adoption in Christ: for God
sent his S^^ne made of a woman, (that is, incarnate) that we Gal 4 4, 5.
might receive the adoption of sons. And this grace we receive, when we truly
believe in his name, Ioh. 3. 12. and, Gal. 3. 26. God for Christ's sake being
content to receive us for his sons and daughters.

Which art in heauen] God is said to be in heaven, not as though he were
included in the circle of the heavens: for the heavens, and the heavens of
heavens, are not able to contain him, 1. king. 8. 27. and indeed he is
neither included nor excluded any place, being infinite, and so every where;
but because his majesty and glory is most eminent in the highest heavens to
his Saints and Angels; and thence does he manifest himself unto us in his
power, wisdom, justice, and mercy, while we are on earth: for heaven is his
throne, and the earth his footstool, Isa. 6^. 1. So that the meaning of this
preface is this: O Lord God, thou art the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
in him our most merciful father by Adoption and grace, thou art a most
glorious God, who do in heaven and from heaven manifest thy glorious power,
and mercy, thy wisdom, justice, etc.

^. The Instructions.

I. This title Father, here given to God, teaches us to whom we To whom we
must pray.
must direct our prayers; not to Saints or Angels, or any other creatures, but
to God alone. Reasons. I. This is a perfect pattern of true prayer, wanting no
direction for the right performance of this part of Gods worship; now this
directs us only unto God in prayer. II. God only is the author and giver of
all good things, Iam. 1. 16. and therefore we must ask them of him alone. III.
The Lord only who is infinite and omni potentican hear all men's prayers at
all times, and in all places: and therefore he alone is to be prayed unto, and
not Saints departed, as the Papists teach.

II. By this title we may see* in what order we must direct our p^a^ers The
order of p^^i^r to God.
unto God: for as the word of God reuealeth God unto us, so must we pray unto
him; now the Scripture reuealeth God unto us, to be one in essence and three in
person, vz. the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost; whereof the Father is
first, the Son is the second, the holy Ghost the third in order, though no^
in time o^ greatues. Thus and no otherways must we conceive of God, neither
seuering the Godhead from the persons* nor the persons from the Godhead. And
thus also must we worship him, even one God in three persons, and three persons
in one God. And yet seeing the Father is first in order, the Son the second,
and the holy Ghost the third, therefore when we pray to God, we must observe
this order, directing our prayers to God the Father, in the mediation of the
Son, by the assistance of the holy Ghost, as Christ here teaches us to say,
Our father.

Quest. May we not direct our prayers to the Son, or to the holy Ghost by
name? Ans. Yes: for Stephen prayed to the Son, Act. 7. 59. Lord Jesus receive
my spirit: and Christ bids hi^ Disciples, Go teach Math. 23. 19.
all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost: that is, calling upon the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.
Object. But in this perfect platform, we are taught to pray to the Father
alone. Ans. Though the Father alone be here named, yet the other two persons
are not hereby excluded: the Father indeed is most usually named, because he
is the first in order* but yet with him always is implied the Son, and the
holy Ghost: for as all the three persons subsist in one and the same divine
nature or Godhead, and are not severed in will, in counsel, or in outward
actions, as creation, preservation, and redemption, save only that they are
distinguished in the manner of working: so likewise must they be all conceived
in our minds together when we pray, and none severed out though they be not
named: we must pray to all, though we name but one, having in that one relation
to the rest in our mind and heart. And if we conceive aright of the order of
the persons in Trinity subsisting in the unity of essence, we may safely name
in our prayers which person we will, so that withal we include the rest in our
mind, and may also (if we name all) place them in such order as best fitteth
our present occasion, as the Apostle does in his benediction 1* ^* Cor. 13. 13.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ^* and the* love of God the father, and the
communion of the holy Ghost (...) with you all^ A^en. where he places the
second person before first* because by the grace of Christ we come to be
partakers of the love of God the father.

III. In this title Father, see the true ground of that boldness wherewith
Whence we have bold nes with God in prayer.
Gods children come before God in prayer; namely, their interest in the
covenant of grace in Christ, in whom God becomes their father. The Scripture
mentions two covenants; one of works, which says, Do this, and thou shall
live: the other of Grace, concerning reconciliation by the Messiah through
faith: for it says, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved. Now
the covenant of works thorough the corruption of our flesh, drives us from
God, and throws us to hell: but the covenant of grace shows our
reconciliation to God in Christ: for ^. Cor. 5. 19.
God was in Christ, and reconciled the world unto himself, not imputing the^^
^i^^^s unto them* for which the first covenant would have condemned them. And
when we truly believe in Christ, we perform the condition of this covenant,
and so through Romans 5. 1.
faith in him have peace with God; yea, Ephesians. 3. 12.
boldness, and entrance with confidence. And therefore when we come to God in
prayer, we must ground upon this covenant in Christ, and so shall we go boldly
to the throne of grace: bring faith in Christ, then is God thy father* and so
thou shall be welcome ^* hence it was that the Prophets and holy men under the
Law do so often entreat the Lord in their prayers to remember his covenant
made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob* which was the covenant of grace; as the
Apostle shows, Gal. 3. and Romans 4.

IV. In this title Father, we are taught how to dispose our selves How to
dispose our selves toward God in prayer.
toward God when we pray unto him; namely, as children toward their father
for our whole behavior both outward and inward. And this stands especially in
four things: I. in due reverence both of heart and gesture, like as gracious
children come before their awful parents: II. in true humilltie, from our
hearts renouncing our own meritts and our own wills, and relying wholly on
Christ's righteousness; and on the will of God in him: III. in true contrition
and sorrow of heart for our own sins, whereby we have offended God, who has
been so gracious and merciful a Father unto us in Christ: IV. in a sound
purpose of heart to break off the course of all sin, and to walk before God
in new obedience to all his commandments. This is such behavior as bese^neth
Gods children in prayer; and hereunto must we labor to conform our selves
when we come before God, or else we show our selves not children but rebels and
traitors: beware therefore of all irreverent behavior in prayer; beware of
pride, of hardness and wickedness of heart* as having the least purpose to live
in sin* for as David says, If I regard wickedness in my heart, God will not
hear my Psalm. 66. 18. Psalm. 16. 6.
prayer: but (says he) I will wash my hands in innocincie, and so will I
compass thine altar: with a contrite and broken heart, Psalm. 51. 17.
disclayming his own righteousness, v. 1. and Psalm. 115. 1. and in all reverence
of behavior, Psalm. 95. 9.

Thus much of the title Father. Now let us see how we must apply it to our
selves in prayer; Our Father, that is, my father in Christ, and not mine only,
but the father of all that truly believe in him.

Hence we learn sundry instructions:

I. That when we pray, we must apply to our selves all the promises Applying
of Gods promises to our selves.
of God in Christ, touching righteousness and life everlasting: for he that
makes them is our father, and therefore they belong to us that be his children.
These promises are many and excellent. And that they must be applied to our
selves in prayer, is granted on all parts; but how, there is the controversy.
The Papists say, we must apply them to our selves by hope; we say, by faith,
which is the ground of things hoped for, laying hold on them for our selves
particularly, as Thomas did on Christ, Ioh. 20. 2^.
My God, and my Lord: which I prove thus: Whatsoever we ask in prayer, we
must Mark. 11. 24. Iam. 1. 6.
believe that God will grant it for his sons sake: but this we cannot do,
unless we believe that God is our father in Christ, and Christ our redeemer:
and therefore we must first by faith lay hold upon the maine promise of
righteousness and life everlasting in Christ, which is the ground of all other
blessings we receive from God. Oh (will some say) this is hard to do* Ans. Yet
we must do our endeavor herein, and strive against doubting, using the means
whereby we may come to that measure of grace, to say with Paul; I live now by
faith in the son of God, who has loved me, and given himself Gal. 2. 20.
for me; doing this in sincerity, God accept the will for the deed, even our
desire and endeavor to apply Christ and his benefits, for application it
self. And if we continue in this use of means, he that has begun in us
this good desire, will finish it in the fruition of grace and full assurance.

II. This teaches us when we pray, to be mindful of Gods whole We must pray
for other^.
militant Church and people: for we must say, Our father. Indeed it is not
unlawful to apply this title in prayer to our selves particularly, for God
says of every one that truly believes, Thou shall call me my father, Ier. 3.
19. and so did Mat. 26. 3^
Christ, and his 1. Cor. 24. 1^.
Apostles apply to themselves this title in their prayers. But yet Christ
would have us always to pray for our brethren, being assured from this his
direction that they likewise pray for us. This was David's usual practice no
doubt, for when he prayed Psalm. 51. ^.
most earnestly for the pardon of his own personal sins, he then forgets
not Zion, but prays the v. 1^.
Lord to do well unto it, and to build the walls of Jerusalem. Now if in every
prayer we make, we must have respect to the Church of God; then undoubtedly in
the course of our lives we must employ our selves to seek the good of others,
especially of Gods Church: for our conversation must express the truth of our
devotion. Every one will say, this is the Ministers duty: which is most true;
but yet it is not his only: for as in the natural body every member imployes
it self for the good of the whole body, so must it be in the mystical body
of Christ: for the meanest Christian has some gift of the spirit; and the
manifestation of the spirit (wheresoever it is) is given to profit withal. The
common saying is, Every 1. Cor. 12. ^.
man for himself, and God for us all; but this is a graceless saying, flat
against the communion of Saints, wherein every one seeks an others good.

III. Hence we learn, how we must come affected toward our Brotherly love
needful in prayer.
brethren when we pray to God, namely, lovingly and peaceably, as to children
of the same father: when we come to the Lords Table we make conscience of love
and amity with all men; and so should we do in prayer, for therein we bring a
spiritual sacrifice unto God, and therefore we must be Mat. 5. 23.
reconciled to our brethren when we offer it: for when men's hearts be full of
malice, or their hands full of blood, Isa. 1. 15.
God will not hear them, though they make many prayers. If therefore we call
upon God as on our father, we must be sine to love his children as our
brethren; for 1. Ioh. 4. 21
this commandment we have of God, that he which loves God, should love his
brother also; and he is not of God, that loves not his brother, 1. Ioh. 3. 10.

IIII. Here we see that all true believers whether high or low, Fatherhood in
God, is equal toward all true believers.
poor or rich, are in an equal condition in regard of God; for God is no
respecter of persons: and here Christ teaches every one to say, Our father. In
earthly kingdoms there be differences of estates and degrees; some be noble,
some base; some rule, others serve and obey; but with God in Christ there is
neither bond nor free, etc. Coloss. 3. 11. The believing shepherd may call God
his father, as well as the believing King, and have as good a place in Christ's
kingdom. Which serves notably both to encourage the poor to embrace the
Gospel in sincerity, seeing their mean outward estate can nothing prejudice
or hinder their high acceptance with the Lord, if they be faithful: as also to
admonish the rich and noble in this world, not to be puffed up with these
outward things to contemn the poor; for these things give them no title to
the kingdom of God: nay, 1. Cor. 1. 26.
not many noble, nor mighty after the flesh are called: but God has chosen
the poor of this world, that they should be rich in faith. Iam. 2. 5.

Which art in heauen] These words show toward what place we must dispose our
selves in prayer: our father to whom we pray is in heaven, and therefore
thither must we direct our hearts, our eyes, our hands, and all that is in us.
Indeed the Jews under the law looked toward the Temple, and in the Temple
toward the mercie-seat, because the Lord had there promised the manifestation
of his presence, and therefore Dan. 6. 10.
Daniel turned his face toward Jerusalem when he prayed in Chaldea: but now
in the new Testament difference of place in respect of Gods presence, is taken
away, and we are not tied in prayer to look, East or West, North or South, but
men may now every where and every way lift up pure hearts and hands unto God:
toward heaven thou must dispose thy heart, because thy father to whom thou
praiest is there: and look which way thou will, or go whither thou will,
heaven is not nearer nor further off. Which shows evidently two notable and
gross Popish fooleries in the matter of Two popish fooleries.
Gods worship; the first is, their going on pilgrimage from place to place to
serve God the better: for God whom thou must worship is in heaven, in respect
whereof all places are alike, go whither thou will thou art not nearer, and
stir no foot, thou art not further off. Their second foolerie, which is also
abominable before God, is to worship God in an Image, at Crosses, and in
Crucisixes, etc. these they use to put them in mind of God, and of Christ; but
this they learn by the precepts and traditions of men, and therefore it is but
mere vain and foolish worship in the sight of God: Christ teaches us to set
our hearts toward heaven, and not to po^^e on dumme Images here on earth.

II. Instruct. Is God in heaven; then when we pray we must come Reverence
required in p^^^^r.
before God with all reverence, fear, and trembling; for he is in heaven a
most glorious God, full of all majesty and power: Eccles. 5. 1. Be not rash
with they mouth, nor let thine heart be hasty to utter a word before God why
so? for he is in heaven and thou art upon earth, therefore let thy words be
few. Now this reverence must show it self, How it must be showed.
first, in the holy disposition of the heart and affections toward the Lord,
when the mind is not carried away with by-thoughts, but applies it self
wholly and only to the present service it has in hand: secondly, in the
comely gesture of the body beseeming so holy an action, done to so high a
majesty. Thirdly, in the humble and reverend uttering of our requests, having
before hand well considered the things we are to utter before God. But goes the
case thus with men in their ordinary prayers? nothing less; for beside the
multitude that pray without understanding, even the better sort in the time of
prayer, have their minds running upon other matters, some about their profits,
others about their sports, or such like: now is not this pharisaicall prayer,
wherein the lips draw near to God, but the heart is far removed? Again,
many show no reverence in gesture or in speech, some disdain to bow to God in
prayer, and others do rush upon God in many words without premeditation: But
all these sin grievously, for howsoever vnreuerent praying troubles few men's
consciences, because it is not easily discerned, being against the first
table, yet it is to be esteemed as a disgrace unto the Almighty: and being
carelessely practiced, when it is once known, it is plain mockery of Gods
majesty, worser then mocking of father or mother: and therefore we must with
all carefulnes avoid it, and set our hearts with all reverence toward God in
prayer.

III. Hence we must learn to ask of God in prayer heavenly What we must ask
of God in prai er.
things especially: these earthly blessings may be asked, so far forth as
they are helps to further us toward our everlasting inheritance in heaven,
to which we are called, 1. Pet. 1. 3, 4. But to be ever groueling in the earth,
is against the nature of him that has a father in heaven.

IIII. Our principal care must be how to come to heaven, for Our affection
toward heaven.
there our father is: ordinarily a child desires to be with his father, and is
best pleased on his mothers lap, or in his fathers arms: herein therefore we
must testify our selves to be the sons and daughters of God, by our unfeigned
desire to be in heaven where our father is. It is unnatural for a child not to
be delighted with his fathers house, and so it argues them to be void of grace,
that have no affection toward heaven and heavenly things: let us therefore
delight to pray, whereby we may creep into our fathers bosom, and though our
bodies be on earth, yet in affection and desire let our souls mount up to
heaven: here we are but pilgrims, if God be our father, our hearts must be
upon our home which is heaven where our father is.

Now the words of this preface thus opened, contain a twofold notable A double
pro^ to our prayers.
ground and proppe to all our prayers: to wit, that God is both able and
willing to hear and help when we pray: for his being in heaven, imports that
he is almighty, and therefore can hear and help us: our God is in heaven,
and be does whatsoever he will. And being a father, Psalm. 215. 3.
yea our father in Christ, he must needs be willing and ready to grant our
requests: for no father is so tenderly affected toward his natural son, as
the Lord our God is toward all his children in Christ: Psalm. 103. 13. As a
father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on all that
call upon him: Luke 11. 13. If you that be evil can give good things to your
children, much more shall your heavenly father give the holy Ghost to them that
ask him: and hence it is that Christ says, Whatsoever you ask the Father in
my name he will give it you, Ioh. 16. 23. Of these two must every one be
persuaded that prays aright: every one will grant that God is able to hear
and help; but of his willingness thereunto none can be assured but he that is
the child of God, who knows God to be his father. Yet here must none deceive
himself, to think that whatsoever he asks on his own head, God will grant
it, for if we ask amiss we shall not receive; and therefore we must carefully
mark and observe the direction of Gods word both for the things we ask, and
for our manner of asking.

Hallowed be thy name. Thus much of the preface: here begin the petitions, which
are six in number; whereof the three first concern God, the three latter
concern our selves. Again, of those which concern God, the first concerns
Gods glory it self, the other two the means whereby Gods glory is
manifested and enlarged among men: for Gods name is the^ glorified among men,
when his kingdom does come, and his will is done.

Now this petition for the glorifying of Gods name, is rightly set in the first
place: for Gods glory is the absolute end of all things: Prove. 16. 4. The Lord
made all things for his own sake, yea even the wicked for the day of evil:
and therefore it must be preferred before all things: before life it self, yea
before salvation which is life eternal: Ioh. 12. 27, 28. our Savior Christ
preferres the glory of his fathers name before his own life. And Paul
preferres it before his own salvation: for he professes that for Gods glory
in the salvation of the Jews, he could wish himself separate from Christ,
Romans 9. 3.

In this petition, as in the rest, we are to observe this order: first show the
meaning of the words; then propound the uses.

I. The meaning. Name The word ascribed to God is here taken generally; first,
for God himself; as Psalm. 20. 1. The name of the God of Jacob Gods name.
defend thee: that is, the God of Jacob defend thee: Romans 10. 13. Whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved; i. upon the Lord. Secondly,
it here betokens any thing whereby God may be known, as men are by their
names: and thus it comprehends, ^. his divine attributes; as Justice, mercy,
power, wisdom, etc. II. his word, the holy scriptures which reveal to me^ the
true knowledge of God. III. Gods Judgments, public or private; for thereby he
makes known his presence, his power, and justice. IV. his works and
creatures; for all these bear a stamp of Gods name, and in them may the
invisible things of God be seen, Romans 1. 20.

Hallowed, or sanctified To halow Gods name, is to glorify Gods name, as Ioh.
12. 28. and this we do, when we give unto him the highest honor that may be:
the highest I say, because there are two kinds of Two kinds of honor. 1.
Religious.
honor; First, the honor of religion, when we give our hearts to God, loving
him, fearing him, trusting, and delighting in him above all; which we testify
by all outward adoration prescribed in Gods word: this is the highest honor of
all. Secondly, there is the honor of society, 2. Civil.
which passes between man and man, in common wealths; and it consists in
the acknowledgement of pre-eminence and superiority in another, either by word
or gesture, ciuilly: thus Subjects honor Princes and Magistrates; and
inferiors, their superiors. This is due to the creature; the former to the
Creator only, and that is the honor we here pray for.

That we may yet the better understand the meaning of this petition, How we
halow Gods name. 1. in himself.
we must know that Gods name is hallowed or sanctified of us 2. ways; either in
God himself, or in his works: In himself by 3. actions; 1. when we conceive
of God in our minds, and acknowledge him as he has revealed himself in his
word; to wit, creator and governor of al things, most holy, most wise, just,
merciful. etc. 2. When we 1. Pet. 3. 15.
sanctify the Lord in our hearts: that is, when we love him above all, and
fear him above al, and put our trust in him in him in all estates. 3. When we
praise and laud the name of God, for his goodness; yea, though we should never
taste of his special favor, yet for his general mercy, justice, and most
wise providence, we ought to extol the Lord with our mouths.

Gods name is hallowed or sanctified in his creatures, by three special 2. in
his creatures.
actions: 1. When we acknowledge the wisdom of God, and his powerful hand in
every creature. 2. When we have a reverend estimation of the creatures, and use
them in Christian sobriety, in regard of the stamp of Gods power and
wisdom, which appears in them. 3. When we sanctify our moderate use of
them, by the word and prayer, as God requires, 1. Tim. 4. 5. See the practice
hereof in the word of God, which is his own solemn ordinance, whereby he
makes himself known unto his Church: Therein we sanctify and halow Gods
name: I. when we acknowledge the wisdom, mercy, and power How we sanctify
God in his word.
of God in it: II. when we have a reverend estimation of the word in regard of
the glorious Image of God which appears in it. III. when we use it in a
sanctified and holy manner, coming unto it reverently with prepared hearts,
hungring after the graces of God which are wrought thereby, and giving our
selves in heart and life to be framed and ruled thereby. And thus we sanctify
God in afflictions (for they are his work) when we labor to see the hand of
God therein, in justice, mercy, and great wisdom chastening us, when we have
a reverend regard to the hand of God appearing in them; and labor to be
humbled thereby for the increase of our repentance, and the exercise of our
faith and patience.

Thus then in this petition we desire in mind, in heart, and life, to glorify
God both in himself and in his works: and the meaning of it may be thus
expressed: O Lord, open our eyes that we may know thee aright, and may discern
thy power, wisdom, justice, and mercy; and enlarge our hearts that we may
sanctify thee in our hearts, by making thee our fear, love, joy, and
confidence: and open our lips that we may bless thee for thine infinite
goodness: yea, O Lord, open our eyes that we may see thee in thy work^, and
strike our hearts with reverence of thy name appearing in them: and grant that
when we use any one of them, we may honor thee in our sober and sanctified use
thereof.

The uses. I. Wants to be bewailed.

I. Here we are to call to mind our wants, and to humble our souls Sins
profaning Gods name.
for those sins, whereby we have hindered Gods glory or profaned his name.
And these especially are four: I. Pride of heart; a vile affection whereby we
seek our own praise and glory, and not Gods. This is natural, and so the
more hardly discerned; but while it is nouri^hed Gods glory is neglected, and
therefore when we desire to glorify Gods name, we must acknowledge and bewail
this inward corruption. II. Want of zeal, coldness of heart toward God. This
is an inward corruption which debaseth the Lord in our hearts, and takes away
that high esteem of God which ought to be in us. This causes us to omit to
glorify God, and to defend the causes of God, and the honor of his name, when
wicked men disgrace and reproach the same: he that has any insight into his
own estate may perceive this in himself: now it mightily hinders the glory
of God, and therefore we must unfeignedly bewail it in our own hearts. III.
Hardness of heart, whereby we are hindered from the true knowledge of God in
his word, and from discerning his wisdom, power, justice, mercy, etc. in his
works, though we have them before our eyes: hence it comes, that ei^^er we
neglect the word, and pass by the works of God without consideration; or if
we use them, yet it is without glory to God, or profit to our souls. Mark. 6.
5. Christ's own disciples considered not the matter of the loaves, because
their hearts were hardened; they discerned not, or at least remembered not the
power of God in that miracle, though themselves were instruments about it, and
they might perceive the food to increase in their hands. IV. Profaneness and
impiety in life: for God is glorified, when we bring forth the fruits of
grace, Ioh. 15. 8. and our good works cause others to glorify God, Math. 5.
16. And therefore our profane life is a reproach unto the Lord, and causes
others to dishonor and blaspheme his name, Romans 2. 24. Now this prophannesse
appears, either in men's speech, by blaspheming the name of God, abusing his
tides, attributes, his word, his creatures, or any work of his providence; or
in their conversation, when they dispose the whole course of their lives to
wrong ends, seeking themselves and not Gods glory.

These are the special sins against Gods glory, which we are to see and to
bewail in our own hearts: if we see them not in our selves our case is the
worse, and we must suspect our selves the more: if we porceiue them in us, we
must be humbled for them, yea ashamed and confounded in our own hearts,
thinking evil of our selves by reason hereof: and then shall we be able to say
with some truth of heart, O Lord, hallowed be thy name. And indeed till we be
inwardly humbled for these corruptions in some measure, the heart can never
speak these words as a son and daughter of God ought to do.

2. Use. Graces to be desired.

Secondly, this petition teaches us, earnestly to desire of God those Graces
enabling us to glorify God.
spiritual graces whereby we may glorify his name in our selves and others.
The graces enabling us hereto, are these especially. I. The true knowledge of
God, as he has revealed himself in his word, and in the works of his power
and providence: for he that knows not God cannot possibly glorify his name.
II. To sanctify God in our hearts; by loving, fearing, and tru^ting in him
above all. This makes greatly for his glory, when we depend upon him in
soul and body for all good things. III. The calves of our lips, which is a
sacrifice of praise to God for all his mercies; Psalm. 50. 23. He that offers
praise shall glorify me. IV. To see Gods hand in all his works, how mighty,
wise, just, and gracious the Lord is. V. To reverence the works of God for his
justice, mercy, power, etc. appearing in them. VI. To use all his creatures
reverently, sanctifying the same unto our selves by the word and prayer.

These graces we must hunger after, and labor to have a lively feeling of in
our own hearts, and so shall we sanctify Gods name, and honor him in all his
works. And hereby we shall know our selves to be the sons and daughters of
God: we may indeed belong to God in his secret counsel; but without these
sanctified affections and holy actions, we are not effectually called, and so
indeed not actually become Gods children.

3. Use. Duties to be practiced.

Thirdly, whatsoever we ask of God in prayer, we must unfeignedly III. Vs^.
endeavor to practice in our lives: as therefore we pray that Gods name may
be hallowed, so we must be careful to sanctify D^^ies whereby we may glorify
god.
the same in our conversation. For this end we must have regard to three
things:

I. That our lives be unblameable, not tainted with any sin, that as 1
Paul said of earthly servants, They must count their masters worthy all 1.
Tim 6. 1.
honor, that the name of God be not evil spoken of; so the same may be
verified in every one of us toward the Lord our master in heaven. Away
therefore with all Idolatry, blasphemous oaths, and cursed speaking, with
Sabbath breaking, and all other sins against the second table: for a profane
life brings great reproach upon the name of God which men profess.

II. We must propound the right end of our life every day in our 2
calling and conversation, to wit, Gods honor and glory, and not our own
praise, wealth, pleasure, or dignity.

III. When God offers occasion by any work of his providence, 3
we must endeavor therein to glorify and magnify God: example; say God
sendes a gricuous dearth and famine of bread among us, or the plague of
pestilence, as he has done sundry times; then must we strive herein to
glorify and praise Gods name: first, by laboring to see the hand of God
smitiag us for our sins: secondly, by reuerencing the work of God, esteeming
it as his hand upon us: thirdly, by humbling our selves unto God, and renewing
our repentance for our sins, that have brought Gods judgments upon us. Thus
should we glorify God in his Judgments; but alas, such is our blindness and
security, that though Gods hand be upon us, yet few lay it to heart; where is
he that says, Ie^. 8 6.
What have I done? nay, though God himself call unto weeping and mourning. And
to girding with sack cloth (as the Prophet (...). (...). 12, ^^.
speaks) yet behold, joy and gladness -- eating, and drinking; so as Gods
name is dishonored in his judgments. So when Gods blessings are upon us, we
should glorify his name, by laboring to see his hand of mercy; and esteeming
of them reverently, with praise and thanksgiving to God that is the giver: but
herein also men dishonor God, by poaring upon the means, praising their own
wit and industry, and so sacrifice to their nets, as the Hab. 1. 15, 16.
Prophet says.

Now because this duty is of great weight and importance, I Motives to
glorify god.
will add some special reasons to move us hereunto: I. from the necessity 1
hereof in Gods Church and children: for Gods name is dishonored over all the
world. In the great dominions of the Turk, God is acknowledged, but yet out of
the Trinity: And the Jews confessing God, deny Christ: The Papists in word
confess and acknowledge the Trinity; but yet by their Idolatry they greatly
rob God of his glory, they rob Christ of his offices, and give divine
worship unto creatures. And in the bosom of the Church are many Atheists,
blasphemers, oppressors, drunkards, adulterers, and voluptuous persons, whose
belly is their God; all which, though they will profess God in word, yet by
their works they deny him; so that unless Gods children seek to maintain
and advance Gods glory, it is like to be trampled and trodden under foot. II.
There is great danger to Gods children in omitting and neglecting 2
this duty; for by calling they are brought near unto God: now God will be
glorified in all that come near him: if we do not honor him according to our
profession, his hand will be upon us for his glory in our confusion: hence it
was, that God slew Lev. 10. 1, 2.
Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron, for offering strange fire before the
Lord: and he debarred Moses and Aaron out of the promised land, Numb. 20. 12.
because they glorified him not at the waters of strife. This made the wrath of
God to burn like fire against the house of El^, for 1. Sam. 2. 29. 31. and 3.
^3.
the iniquitic of his sons, which their father saw in them, and yet stayed
them not, and so honored them above the Lord. We had need therefore to look
unto our selves, that we glorify God in himself and in his works, else his
hand will be upon us in soul or body, goods, or calling, or some other way
for the glory of his justice: for God will not loose his glory. III. If we
say, Hallowed be thy name with our 3
mouth, and seek not his honor in our life, we bewray in our selves damnable
hypocrisy, and make profession of that sin which the Lord utterly detesteth:
we esteem very basely of dissemblers among men; but much more edious is this
sin in the matters of God: and therefore let the practice of our lives, show
the sincerity of our hearts, when we pray for the glorifying of Gods name.

Fourthly, this petition teaches us, that we our selves must be hallowed 4.
Use. We must labor to be sanctified.
and sanctified, for else we cannot halow Gods name: They that bear the
vessels of the Lord, in his sanctuary, must be clean, Isay 52. 11. How much
more ought they to be holy, that bear the glorious name of God? When Ananias
doubted of going to Paul, the Lord tells him, Act. 9. 19.
he is a chosen vessel unto me to bear my name: alluding to that state of
sanctification, whereto the Lord had lately called him, whereby he made him a
fit instrument for the glory of his name, in the ministry of the Gospel. And
the same state must we labor after, if we would be answerable to that we seem
to desire in this petition. We must therefore labor to be new creatures,
changed in mind and heart, for an unholy person cannot truly desire the
glory of God; but when we once feel the grace of sanctification, then will
the desire of Gods glory breed in our hearts, and we shall know how worthy the
Lord is to have all glory given unto his name.

Fifthly, if we compare this petition with the reason wherewith Christ 5. Use.
More plentiful in thanksgiving, then in petition.
concludes this prayer, we shall see that the praise and honor of God, is the
beginning and end of Christ's prayer, and so as it were the first and last thing
with Christ: whence we learn, that we ought to be more frequent and
plentiful in thanksgiving unto God, then in petition and request. Thus we
deal with those that be bountiful unto us on earth, we give them many thanks
for one good turn; and therefore should we much more abound in thanksgiving to
our heavenly father, from whom we receive every good gift that we enjoy. It
beseemes not the child of God to be always and only begging, as though he
had nothing; but withal, he must be plentiful in thanks and praise, for that
argues he has a taste of Gods mercy toward him: this made David say, Psalm.
147. 1 ^ Psalm. 33. ^.
Praise is a comely and pleasant thing; it well becomes upright men to be
thankful. Our life of glory shall be spent in praising God, and therefore we
should invre our selves thereto, in this time of grace: and indeed, according
to our thanksgiving is our grace; little praise, little grace; but he that
abounds in thanksgiving, abounds in Gods blessings. Again, hearty
thanksgiving for that we have, is an effectual prayer for more increase.

Lastly, the place wherein this petition is set in this prayer, teaches Gods
glory must be sought absolutely.
us to seek the glory of God simply and absolutely before all other things.
This ought to be the affection of Gods child, though he should receive no
blessings from God; for look what God preferres in his direction, that must we
always prefer in all our actions, though no good should follow unto us
thereupon: for this end, God gives us time to live in this world, that we
might glorify God in our places and callings; and he that imployeth himself
otherways profaneth Gods name, and transgresses this heavenly order here set
down by Christ, who is the wisdom of his father.

Verse 10. Thy kingdom come.
The Coherence. Christ having taught us to pray for the sanctifying of Gods
name, in the former petition, does in this, and the rest which follow, as it
were expound the same, by directing us to the means whereby Gods name is
hallowed of us: for then do we glorify Gods name, when he sets up his kingdom
in us, and we suffer him to rule in our hearts, when we do his will, depend
upon his providence for the things of this life, trust in his mercy for the
pardon of our sins, and on his power and strength against temptation. Now of
them all, this second has the nearest dependence upon the former, as being an
especial means thereof; for men ought to glorify Gods name on earth, but of
themselves they cannot do it, till God rule in their hearts by his word and
spirit, and so set up his kingdom in them.

The meaning. Gods kingdom is twofold; General, and Special. Gods kingdom
twofold. 1. General.
Gods general kingdom, is his absolute power and sovereignty, whereby he
rules all things in heaven, in earth, and in hell, even the devils themselves:
Psalm. 103. 19. The Lord has prepared his throne in heaven, his kingdom rules
over all: and this we acknowledge in the end of this prayer, For thine is the
kingdom. Now this we pray not for, because it is always every where, no
creature can hinder it, no not all the devils in hell; for every creature is
subject hereunto, and can do nothing but that which God either wills or
permits: Dan. 4. 32.
according to his will he works in the army of heaven, and in the
inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand, nor say unto him, what
do thou?

Gods special kingdom, is that, whereby he rules his elect and chosen 2.
Special.
people, working his will not only by them, as he does in his general
kingdom, by the devils themselves; but in them also, by his holy spirit: and
it is called special, because it is not exercised over all the world, but
only over the elect, whom he has ordained to eternal life.

This special kingdom of God is two-folde; either of Grace, or of Gods
kingdom of grace.
Glory: The kingdom of grace, is a spiritual estate, wherein God makes men
willingly subject to his written word, by his spirit. I call the kingdom of
grace, a spiritual estate, both because it is principally exercised in the
conscience, and also because this regiment in the conscience, is by the spirit
of God. Secondly, I show wherein it consists; namely, in a voluntary
subjection of the whole man in soul, and body, and spirit, to the will of
God, revealed in the word: Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people shall come willingly in
the day of assembling thine army, in holy beauty. And this subjection stands
in three things; in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.
17, 18. In Righteousness, that is, First, in Christ's righteousness imputed; and
secondly, in the righteousness of a good conscience, the ground whereof, is
sanctification by the spirit, which Christ gives to them, whom he does
justify. In Peace, that is, peace of conscience toward God, and peace with
Gods Church; yea, with all creatures, so far forth as is needful for them.
Now under peace, we must comprehend love, and all duties of love; for as
righteousness concerns the person in soul and body, so peace respects all
duties and actions of the life: Righteousness is the root, from whence
springs this peace, with every action thereof; for when the heart is
sanctified, the life is reformed. Lastly, in joy in the holy Ghost: this is a
fruit of both the former, respecting especially the state of affliction; for
when a man is justified and sanctified, and has peace toward God, then
arises in his heart a spiritual delight in God, in all estates: yea, though
great afflictions light upon him for Gods cause, yet he bears them with
inward joy and delight, knowing that the spirit of glory, and of God, rests
upon him, and that he shall be glorified with Christ, if he suffer with Christ:
which things, while he compares together, he little esteems the afflictions
of this life, in respect of the glory that shall be revealed; 2. Cor. 4. 17
for the light affliction that is but for a moment, causes unto us a far
more excellent and eternal weight of glory. These are the branches of this
spiritual subjection, which whosoever has, is a good subject in the kingdom
of grace; as the Apostle says in the next verse, To. 14. 18
he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable unto God, and approved
of men.

The kingdom of glory, is the blessed estate of Gods elect* in heaven, God,
kingdom of glory.
whereby God in Christ becomes all things unto them immediately, 1. Cor. 15.
28. This estate of glory is a subjection also, but yet such a subjection, as
is indeed a glorious regiment; for there we reign with Christ, in whom, and
through whom, God himself becomes honor, peace, health, food, raiment, and
all things needful to the perfection of felicity. Now these two being Gods
kingdom, differ thus; The state of grace is the beginning and entrance to the
state of glory; and the state of glory is the perfection of the state of
grace. This state of glory is the city; and the state of grace, as it were,
the suburbs of it. In this life, we live in the kingdom of grace; but the
kingdom of glory, is reserved for the life to come: and this special
kingdom of God in both these estates, do we here pray for.

Thy kingdome] This imports that there is another kingdom, even the kingdom
of Satan, which is a kingdom of darkness, full of all disorder and confusion,
through sin, which greatly hinders and annoyeth Gods kingdom of grace
especially.

Come] That is, to us men in the world; and then it comes, when Gods kingdom
comes by degrees.
God does erect and establish the same in their hearts: now unto perfection it
comes by 5. degrees; 1. When God gives unto men the outward 1
means of salvation, wherein he does reveal his grace and favor in Christ;
as the Gospel preached, which is therefore called the word of the kingdom,
Matthew. 13. 19. And so Christ (having relation to his preaching, which he
confirmed by miracles, among the Jews) says, The kingdom of God is come unto
you, Luke 11. 20. and being demanded by the Pharisees, when the kingdom of
God should come? he tells them, it was among them, Luke 17. 21. meaning, that it
was brought unto them, by the ministry of John Baptist, of himself, and of
his Disciples; although indeed, it were without profit to many of them. 2. When
the 2
word preached inlightens the mind, so as a man knows and understands the
mystery of the Gospel, which is the law of this kingdom. 3. When a man is
thereby regenerate, and so brought into this kingdom; 3
for by regeneration we have effectual entrance into the state of grace,
wherein Christ rules in us by his word and spirit, and we yield subjection
unto him. 4. At the end of this life, when the body goes 4
to the earth, but the soul to God that gave it, being translated to the
joys of heaven, in the glory of this kingdom. 5. At the last judgment, 5
when body and soul being united again, are both made partakers of the
glory of this kingdom: and this is the full and perfect coming of it.

So then our request to God in this petition, is to this effect; O Father, let
thy kingdom come to us that be pilgrims and strangers here on earth, prepare
us for it, and enter us into it, that be yet without; renew us by thy spirit,
that we may be subject to thy will, confirm us also in this estate, that our
souls after this life, and both soul and body at the day of judgment may be
fully glorified: yea, Lord hasten this glory to us, and to all thine elect.

The Uses. 1. Wants to* be bewailed.

The wants we are taught to bewail in this petition, either concern our
selves, or others. First, we must lament and mourn for our own Man^ natural
bondage under sin.
miserable estate by nature, whereby we are the servants of sin, and so in
thraldom and bondage under Satan: sin leads us into bondage, Ioh. 8. ^4.
for he that commits sin, is the servant of sin: and where sin
reigns, there the devil has dominion. And hence it comes that we rebel so
much against the kingdom of God, and refuse to stoop to the scepter of his
word. Indeed this bondage is weakened in Gods children, but none is wholly
freed from it in this life, as Paul's complaint declares; Romans 7. 14. The law is
spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin. The natural man is dead in
sin, and feels it not; we therefore must labor to feel in our selves this
spiritual bondage under sin, and when we feel it, we must bewail it, and
so show some life of grace to be in us. This Paul did, Romans 7. 24. O. wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! Look as the
prisoner feels his bolts and fetters, so sensibly should we feel the chain
of sin, wherewith our souls are kept in bondage; and till we feel it, and
bewail it, the kingdom of Christ does not come unto us: we must therefore
every day, cry unto Christ our Lord, that he would show himself to be our
Redeemer, by breaking the fetters of sin, wherewith our souls are kept in
bondage, and giving us that free spirit, which may fully erect his blessed
kingdom in our hearts; for where the spirit is, there is liberty, 2. Cor. 3.
17.

Secondly, we must bewail the sins of all the world, in the transgression
Bewail the sins of the world.
of Gods law, whereby God is dishonored, and his kingdom hindered, and the
kingdom of darkness furthered: 2. Pet. 2. 7, 8. Just Lot vexed his righteous
soul with the unclean conversation of the wicked of his time. 1. King. 19.
10. When Elias saw the children of Israel forsake Gods covenant, break down
his altars, and slay his Prophets with the sword, then he became very zealous
for the Lord of hosts. Psalm. 119. 136. Mine eyes (says David) gush out with
rivers of water, because they keep not thy Law. Verse. 139. My zeal has even
consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy law. Mark. 3. 5. Christ
mourned for the hardness of the hearts of the people. and Luke 19. 41, 42. He
wept over Jerusalem, for that they knew not the day of their visitation. Now
look how these were affected with the reigning sins of their times, so must
we also mourn for their sins that reign among us; as Atheisine, and
profaneness, contempt of Gods word, blasphemy, sabbath breaking, oppression,
cruelty, and pride: all good subjects are grieved much when they see foreign
enemies displaie among them banners of victory; how much more then ought the
godly to grieve, when they see impiety practiced with an high hand, which is
as it were a flagge of defiance in the kingdom of Christ, and a special
ensign of Satan's triumphing in the increase of his kingdom of darkness? When
the devil sees one that has lived in sin, but cast a look toward the
kingdom of Christ, he rages greatly, and labors by all means to turn him
back: and when we see those that have made profession of religion, return
again to the lusts of their former ignorance, O it should grieve our souls,
and cause us to pray, thy kingdom come. Do we perceive the Turk, or Pope, or
any instrument of Satan, either by subtlety or tyranny, to hinder the Gospel
preached, which is the scepter of Christ's kingdom, and the aim of God,
whereby he pulls men from the kingdom of darkness? O then we should mourn!
Or do we see the want of Gods ordinance in preaching, sacraments, and
discipline, which serve for the furtherance of Christ's kingdom; or the Lords
people committed to ignorant or idle Ministers, to scandalous teachers, either
for life or doctrine? In all these we have cause of mourning, and they should
stir up our hearts to cry unto the Lord, Thy kingdom come.

Use 2. Graces to be desired.

As we must mourn for the wants and hindrances of Christ's kingdom; so we
must hereby learn to have our hearts inflamed with spiritual desires after
all helps and furtherances unto Gods kingdom, both in our selves and others:
as First, for the preaching of the Gospel, 1
and all other divine ordinances, whereby Gods kingdom is erected and
maintained: our hearts desire to God must be, that these may be set up and
continued, where they are wanting, and that God may bless them, where they are
vouchsafed. Secondly, that God would enlighten 2
the eyes of our minds, that we may see the wonders of his Law, as Psalm. 119.
18.
David did, that so the Lords ordinance may be blessed unto us. Thirdly, 3
that we may be wholly subject unto Christ, and that of conscience, not only
in our outward behavior, but in mind, and heart, in will, and in all our
affections: we must make sure this holy desire be in us indeed, and therefore
must deny our selves, and subject our selves wholly unto God, as a willing
people to serve him, and none but him; and then we may be sure his kingdom is
come unto us. Fourthly, we must 4
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ in the kingdom of glory, for
this end, that we may make an end of sinning, and become more obedient
subjects unto Christ; yea, wholly ruled by him, though for the good of others,
we must be content to live. Fifthly, that Christ would 5
come in judgment, when all things shall be subdued unto God, and all his
obedient subjects shall be fully glorified. This we may desire in heart,
though we must leave the time to Gods good pleasure, still waiting for it by
faith in his promise. Sixthly, that God would enlarge his 6
sanctuary here on earth, gather his elect more and more, and still defend and
maintain his Church in every place in the world: when these desires affect our
souls, then do we truly say, Thy kingdom come.

3. Use. Duties to be practiced.

Whatsoever we ask in prayer, that must we endeavor after in life Duties
furthering gods kingdom.
and conversation, else we mock God, saying well, and doing nothing; First
therefore, as we say, Thy kingdom come, so must we seek to meet 1
it, and strive to enter into it; for this end God gives us time to live in
this world, that here we might enter the gate of grace, and wait for the
fruition of glory: and therefore we must diligently frequent the suburbs of
this heavenly Jerusalem, even the preaching of the word, and therein labor
both for true humiliation and conversion, or else we cannot enter into this
kingdom, Math. 18. 3. John 3. 5. First, we must have the pride of our hearts
pulled down, and become as little children, being humbled in our selves
through the knowledge of our sins, and the feeling of that misery which is
due unto us for them: yea, we must confess them unto God, and cry unto him
for mercy, and by this means lay aside this burden, which hinders our
entrance into the gate of grace. Secondly, we must be converted and changed by
the renewing of our minds, our hearts must cleave unto God, and we must carry
therein a resolute purpose not to sin: when these things be in us, we enter
into Gods kingdom; but till we endeavor after them in some truth, we say in
vain, Thy kingdom come.

Secondly, we must be careful to bring forth the fruits of Gods 2
kingdom; for therefore does he send it among men, and for want hereof, does
he take it from them, Matthew. 21. 43. Now these fruits are Righteousness,
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. whereof we have In the meaning
of this petition.
spoken before: all which, we must labor to find in our hearts, and to
express in our lives, else this kingdom shall be taken from us, and we shall
never see the glory of it.

Thirdly, hence we must learn to be contented in all estates of this 3
life whatsoever, the hope of the glory of this kingdom which we pray A ground
of contentatio^.
for, must swallow up all the sorrows that earthly calamities can bring upon
us: This it was that made the Patriarks to walk contented in the state of
Pilgrims and Strangers here on earth, Hebr. 11. 13, 14. Yea, this renues ^.
Cor. 4. 1^. 18.
the inner man, it cheeres the heart, and keeps it from fainting, though the
outward man perish, to look after the joys of this kingdom, which are the
things not seen: and therefore Christ herewith comforts his Disciples against
the sorrow of affliction, saying, Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers
good pleasure to give you the kingdom, Luke 12. 32.

Fourthly, we must all labor in our places and callings, to bring 4
one another into this kingdom, one neighbor another, and one friend another;
Ezekiel. 18. 30. Return, (says the Lord to the house of Israel) and cause one
another to return. This the Prophet Isay notes as a practice of the subjects
of this kingdom, that they shall say one to another, come, let us go up to
the mountain of the Lord, Isay 2. 3. But masters Duty of Masters of families.
of families especially, must look to the practice of this duty, and labor
to bring Gods kingdom into their families: for this end they must see to
these things; First, that there be no manifest or open sin permitted in
their families; rid thy house of such a person, if thou can not reform
him, Psalm. 101. 7. Secondly, instruct thy family in the way of the Lord, that
they may know to live righteously and uprightly both before God and man.
Thirdly, set up and maintain the private worship of God in thy family, join
thou with them in holy duties, especially in daily calling upon the name of
God. In regard of these and such like duties it is, that the Luke 19. 9.
Scripture ascribes salvation to a family, where the master or the governor
of the house is converted to the faith. And for the practice hereof, the holy
Patriarchs are commended to all posterity: God says of Abraham, Genesis 18 1^
I know him that he will command his sons, and his household after him, that
they keep the way of the Lord: and Genesis 35. 2.
Jacob commands his family to put away their strange gods, and to cleanse
themselves: and Ios. 24. 15.
Ioshuah prosessed publicly, that he and his family would serve the Lord.

Fifthly, hence we must learn, every day to prepare our selves to 5
die, for by death our souls enter into the glory of this kingdom, Prepare
to die.
which we pray may come unto us; and therefore we must be ready to receive it
every day, that whenever our King comes unto us, either by death, or in the
last judgment, we may pass from grace to glory. And indeed we cannot with
comfort make this petition, unless we be in some measure prepared for death,
and that every day. Now being prepared, we must wait, as Job Job. 14. 14 Luk
2. 25.
did, every day till our changing come. Look how the godly in the old
Testament looked for our Savior Christ's first coming in the flesh; so must we
wait for his coming to us, either by death, or judgment, neither must any
thing dismay us in this waiting, no not death it self; for the sooner we die,
the sooner we may enter into glory. And here we may take a view of the
monstrous hypocrisy of the world, for who will not say these words, Thy
kingdom come? but yet the most men neglect to prepare themselves for entrance
into this kingdom; nay many contemn the word and prayer, which are the means
whereby we have admittance into the state of grace, and are prepared for the
kingdom of glory.

Sixthly, we may here learn of our Savior Christ the practice of 6
humility, and in all things to give all glory to God; for though this
kingdom pertain equally to him (as he is God) with the father; yet because
he has it from the father, as he is the son, therefore he will have it wholly
attributed unto him; for he teaches us to say, Our father, thy kingdom come.

Lastly, here observe the necessity of this petition, in respect of 7
our outward estate; for the coming of this kingdom to any estate, Gods
kingdom brings prosperity.
is a special cause of prosperity and happiness unto it: for where this
kingdom is, Gods hand of blessing and protection is in a special manner: here
the Lord reigns, and his glorious and blessed Angels, which are mighty in
strength and power, keep watch and guard in that kingdom, and about that
people who have the Lord for their King and God. Hence it is, that this our
Kingdom has so long enjoyed peace and protection from many dangerous
assaults, because we embrace and profess the Gospel, which is the scepter of
Gods kingdom; and if we could do it in sincerity, and walk worthy of the
Lord our King, our prosperity should be as the stoods, and our peace as the
Sun and Moon in heaven. And therefore they that love the peace of this
kingdom, must embrace and obey the Gospel, and pray for the happy and
flourishing estate thereof, for therein stands our peace.

Thy will be done, in earth as it is in heaven. The Coherence. This petition
depends on both the former thus; as a means whereby we do that which we
desire in the first petition; for Gods name is glorified, when his will is
done: and as a manifestation of that which we desire in the second petition,
for there we pray, that Gods kingdom may come unto us, and he rule in our
hearts by his word and spirit: now here we crave that we may do his will, and
so testisie our selves to be his loyal subjects.

The meaning. This petition is propounded in a comparison, which naturally
stands thus; As thy will is done in heaven, so let thy will be done in
earth: And it has two parts; The first respects the grace of obedience which
we pray for, Thy will be done in earth: The second shows the right manner of
performing it, as it is in heaven.

For the first, Thy will, etc. Gods will is only one, considered in it self,
as God is one; yet for our understanding, it may be thus distinguished: It is
either absolute, or revealed. Gods absolute will, is the will Gods absolute
will.
of his good pleasure, whereby according to his eternal counsel, he
determines of all things, what shall be done, or what shall not be done, and in
what manner. This absolute will extends over all creatures, and over all
their actions: Ephesians. 1. 11. We are predestinate according to the purpose of
him that works all things after the counsel of his own will. Roman. 9. 19.
Who has resisted his will? Matthew. 10. 26. Without this will of God, a sparrow
cannot fall to the ground. And this absolute will of God is hidden from us,
till God reveal it by the event. Gods revealed will, is the sacred doctrine of
God in his word, Gods revealed will.
whereby he signifies unto man, so far as concerns his happiness and
salvation, what he ought to do, or what he ought not to do. This is not Gods
absolute will, but rather an effect thereof concerning man, revealing unto him,
not what he simply and absolutely wills to be done, for that must needs be
done; but what is pleasing or displeasing unto him, done by man, and what he
will have man to do, or not to do, if he desire to come to life, and would
not be condemned. And this revealed will comprehends both the Law and the
Gospel, with all their commandments, prohibitions, threatenings, exhortations,
promises, and such like, whereto the Apostle has relation, when he says,
Prove what is the good will of God, and acceptable, Romans 12. 2.

Now this distinction of Gods will being according to the Scripture, has his
use in this place; for when we say, Thy will be done, we mean not the
absolute, but the revealed will of God. Reasons. I. The absolute will of God is
always done, and cannot be resisted; My counsel shall stand (says Isa. 46. 10.
the Lord) and I will do whatsoever I will: and again, Rom 9. 19.
Who has resisted his will? that is, his absolute will; for his revealed will
is generally transgressed by men, and men do that which seems good in their
own eyes, notwithstanding God reveal his will to the contrary. II. A man may
sometime dissent from the absolute will of God without sinning, so be it he
still submit himself to the will of God, resting therein, when it is revealed.
Thus Abraham Genesis 18. 23, 27.
prayed for the safety of Sodom (yet submissiuely) which God willed and
decreed to destroy: and David 2. Sam. 1^. 16* 14.
prayed for the life of his child, which God would have to die: and our Mat.
26. 39
Savior Christ, prayed for the remooual of that cup which God had absolutely
decreed he should drink of, yet submitting his will unto his fathers. And Act.
16. 7.
Paul according to his Apostolic function, desired to preach the Gospel in
Bythin^a, but the spirit suffered him not; which shows plainly it was not
the will of God that he should preach there, and yet he desired it religiously
without sin, as did the rest before mentioned. And as in will, so in
affection a man may dissent from Gods absolute will without sin: Christ as
the son of God, knew his Fathers will, concerning the destruction of
Jerusalem, and yet Luke 19* ^1
he wept for it, in a tender compassion over their misery to come: and so the
brethren at Cesarea, Act. 21. 13.
wept and lamented for Paul's going to Jerusalem, though Agabus prophesied that
God would have it so: neither must this seem strange unto us, for two things
may remain both good, and yet differ one from the other; and so may man's
created will differ from Gods absolute and uncreated will, and yet both remain
good.

Having found that this petition must be understood of the revealed Branches
of Gods revealed will.
will of God, we now come to search out the special branches of Gods revealed
will; which we shall find in several places of the holy Scripture. The
first, is the conversion of a sinner, Ezekiel 1
33. 11. As I live (says the Lord) I will not the death of a sinner, but that
the wicked turn from his way and live. The second, 2
is that we deny our selves, and rely wholly on our Savior Christ Jesus for
life and salvation: John 6. 40. This is the will of God, that he that sees
the son, and believes in him should have everlasting life; and I will raise
him up at the last day. The third, is our sanctification in 3
soul, and body, and spirit: 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. This is the will of God, even
your sanctification. The fourth, is that every one that lives in the church 4
of God, beside his general calling of a Christian, should have a particular
calling to live in, wherein he must seek the glory of God, in the good of
others: 1. Cor. 7. 20. Let every man abide in the same vocation wherein he is
called; and therein walk with God, v. 24. The fi^t part 5
of Gods will, is to subject our selves unto the hand of God in all crosses and
afflictions whatsoever: when the brethren at Cesarea saw Paul's resolution to
go to Jerusalem, notwithstanding the bonds that there remained for him, they
said (as it were expounding this petition) the will of the Lord be done, Act.
21. 14.

Be done] According to the Scripture there be two degrees of Obedience
twofold. Fuangelicall
doing Gods will; the first is prescribed in the Gospel, to wit, a sincere
endeavor and strife according to all the power of grace that God has given
us, to do the will of God; and this especially is here meant. The second is
commanded in the Law, and it is a fulfilling of Gods Legal.
will, doing that which God commands in that manner of perfection which he
commands: but this is not attained unto in this life: and therefore our
desire of God in this petition is, that he would give us grace, sincerely to
endeavor to do his whole will here on earth, and to hasten that time and
state unto us, wherein we shall do it perfectly as the Law requires.

1. Use. Wants to be bewailed both in our selves and others.

I. This petition teaches us to bewail our natural disposition Hindrances to
obedience.
whereby we are prone to rebel against the will of God, being wholly bent to
disobedience in doing that which is evil. II. We must bewail our natural
hypocrisy, even that which remains in us after grace received: for though we
may say these words, yet we can not possibly have our hearts affected with such
a perfect desire after obedience to Gods will, as we ought to have. III. Though
we have never so much grace, yet here we must lament and bewail our want of
obedience in all good duties: for though we give our selves to do good things,
yet the best of us all fail in the manner of doing them, as in hearing the
word, in receiving the Sacraments, and prayer; so as we must be humbled for our
wants, and confess that we are unprofitable servants, when we have done all
that is commanded us, Luke 17. 10.
Secondly, we must bewail the sins of others, whereby they disobey the will
of God, and so rebel against him; hereby God is dishonored, and therefore in
zeal of Gods glory, and love to our brethren, we must be grieved when others
sin. Thus was David affected, Psalm. 119. 136. and Paul, 2. Cor. 12. 21. I
fear least when I come unto you, my God abase me among you, and I shall
bewail many of them that have sinned already.

2. Use. Graces to be desired.

As we must bewail the wants that hinder the doing of Gods will Desires
furthering our obedience.
in our selves and others; so we must stir up our hearts unto heavenly
desires after those graces whereby Gods will may be done. As first, 1
that we may have grace to deny our selves, our own wills and affections; for
naturally we are herein unlike God, and like the devil: and this must every
one learn that would be Christ's disciple, Luke 9. v. 23.

Secondly, that God would incline and dispose our hearts toward his holy word,
that we may not only know, but obey Gods revealed 2
will. This was David's usual request, Psalm. 119. 27. Make me to understand
the way of thy testimonies: and 36. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies. For
how should we do the will of God, unless we know it? and how shall we know
it, unless our hearts affect the means of grace and of obedience.

Thirdly, that God would hasten that time and state unto us, wherein 3
we shall perfectly do the will of God, that is our state of glory.

Fourthly, that under every cross which God shall lay upon us, we 4
may possess our souls with patience, and so subject our selves to Gods
absolute will. Thus Paul prays in behalf of the Colossians, that God would
strengthen them by the power of his might, unto all patience and long suffering
with ioyfulnesse, Colos. 1. 12.

Fifthly, that God would turn the hearts of men from sin, and bring 5
them every where to the obedience of his will.

3. Use. Duties to be practiced.

Because we must seek to practice that which we ask in prayer, Duties
furthering our obedience.
therefore hereby we are also taught to endeavor our selves after these good
duties; First, to prove what is the good will of God, and acceptable: 1
Romans 12. 2. We must by often trial of our actions by the word of God, become
expert in Gods will; use in all things makes perfect, and therefore in all our
affairs we must consult with God, whether the things we go about be
agreeable to his will. Most men will have an eye to the laws of the land in
their civil affairs, as in buying and selling; and why should we not be as
wife for our souls, in the matters of God? Do we not dissemble with God, when
we say with our tongues, Thy will be done, and yet in life and conversation,
have no regard to square our works thereby?

Secondly, we must be strict in the matter of sin, making conscience 2
of every evil way; yea, even of the first motions unto sin, that never come
to consent: for this petition for obedience, respects not only our words and
deeds, but our secret thoughts; for even they must be brought to obedience to
God, 2. Cor. 10. 5.

Thirdly, we must seek to cut off all things that hinder us from doing 3
Gods will, we must mortify and crucify the lusts of the flesh, and all
sinful motions of our corrupt hearts; for these make us rebels against God
in transgressing his will. This is a hard thing to do, and unto a natural man
of himself altogether impossible, and therefore we must use spiritual means,
for the deeds of the flesh must be mortified by the spirit, Roman. 8. 13. Now
the ground of this work is the death of our Savior Christ, applied by faith
to our corrupt heart; for the old man is crucified with him, (as the Apostle
Paul says) that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin, Roman. 6. 6. This therefore must we do, if we think
our selves to have part in Christ; we must persuade our hearts, that when our
Savior Christ was upon the cross in our room and stead, bearing the
punishment of our sins, then were we, in regard of the old man, crucified
with him; the virtue and efficacy whereof, we shall undoubtedly find in our
selves, for the mortifying of sin, when we do truly believe; for our
fellowshippe with Christ, begins in his death; and if we be dead to sin,
how can the motions thereof yet live and reign in us? When a malefactor is
put to death, he cease from his badde courses; and so, if our corruption be
crucified with our Savior Christ, it must not reign in our hearts, to bring
forth the fruits of sin. Let us therefore meditate on the death of our
Savior Christ, and apply it to our selves by faith, and consider the vileness
of our sins, in the bitterness of his passion; and then no doubt we shall be
moved to strive against evil motions: for if we be Christ's, we have crucified
the flesh with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5. 24.

Fourthly, we must not live inordinately, but in that sort which God 4
An orderly life.
inioyneth Christians in his word: every one must have a double calling; the
general calling of a Christian, common to all that live in the Church,
concerning the service of God, in righteousness and holiness; and a
particular lawful calling, in some set state of life, tending to the good of
the Church, common wealth, or family, wherein a man must glorify God in the
good of men: this is to live in order, and he that wants both, or one of
these, lives inordinately; for God would have every man to abide in that
vocation wherein he has called him: every one therefore according to his gift
and grace received of God, must live in a lawful calling, and he that does
not so, resists Gods will. Whereby we see, that wandering beggars are not to
be suffered in Church or common wealth; for they live without any calling, and
so transgress Gods will: yea their course of life is here also condemned, that
spend their life in sports and gaming; for such a life is rebellion against
God, who will be glorified in works done by virtue of our lawful calling.

Fifthly, it is the will of God, that through manifold afflictions we 5
should enter into his kingdom; and therefore when any cross befalls us
walking in our lawful callings, we must endeavor to subject our Patience
under the cross.
selves patiently, to the will of God therein: in prosperity we are cheerful
and thankful, but when affliction comes, our nature would repine: O remember,
we say in all estates, Thy will be done: and therefore in the most bitter
crosses that can befall us, we must labor to say with Job, The Lord gives,
and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the Lord, Job. 1. 21. So did
the Prophet David, being banished his kingdom by his own son, 2. Sam. 15.
26. But if he thus say, Behold, I have no delight in thee, behold, here I am,
let him do to me, as seems good in his eyes: and Chapter 16. 10, 11. when
Shemei cursed him, he stayed Abisna^ from revenge, upon consideration of Gods
will to have it so; saying, Suffer him to curse, for the Lord has bidden him.

In earth as it is in heaven. Having spoken of the grace of obedience desired
in this petition, we now come to the manner how it must be performed; to wit,
In earth as it is in heaven: that is, of us men living on earth, as the blessed
Angels and glorified Saints do it in heaven: for P^. 103. 20.
the Angels that excel in strength, do Gods commandments, in obeying the
voice of his word. And because this exposition is generally received, I will
not stand to prove it; this only we must remember, that here we pray not to
perform obedience equal in measure and degree, to the obedience of the Saints
and Angels in heaven, but such as is like unto it; for Resembla^ce of man's
obedience to the Angels.
this note of comparison here imports a likeness and resemblance, and not
equality.

Now this likeness here stands in 4. things; First, in cheerfulness and 1
willingness, for the holy angels obey the commandment of God freely, and
readily, without murmuring or constraint: for this cause they are said to come
and stand before God, Job. 1. 6. and to behold his face, Matthew. 18. 10. to
express their voluntary service unto God: and so should Gods children obey
God, as Paul speaks of Phil^m 14
Philemons beneficence, it must not be as it were of necessity, but willingly.
As in the case of Almes-giuing, 1. Cor. ^. 7.
God loves a cheerful giver, so in all obedience, he likes a cheerful
doing; and therefore he says, 2. Co. ^. 1^.
if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man
has. In this regard, Peter besought the Elders, 1 Pet. 5. 2.
to feed the flock of God, depending on them, and to care for it; not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: and the
Apostle Paul says, 1 Cor. 9. 17
If I do it willingly, I have a reward. This virtue the Prophet David
expressed notably, Psalm. 40. 6, 7, 8, when God as it were bored new ears in
his soul, then he said, L^^ I come, I desired to do thy will.

Secondly, in Prioritie, for the Angels prefer to do the will of 2
God, before all other things; and therefore they are said to stand in his
presence continually, as it were waiting upon his pleasure: and the like
affection for obedience unto God, must be in all his children. This Ge. 22. 16.
Abraham notably testifies, when at Gods command he would have killed Isaac;
testifying thereby, that he preferred obedience unto God, before the dearest
thing in the world: this also we may see in David, Psalm. 119. 14. I have had
as great delight in the way of thy testimonies, as in all riches: and verse
127. I love thy commandments above gold, yea above much fine gold: and in our
Savior Christ, who said, when he was weary and hungry, My meat is to do
the will of him that sent me, and to finish h^^ work, John, 4. 34.

Thirdly, in speed, and quickenesse; for the Angels do Gods will 3
without all delaie or slackenesse, which the Scripture signifies by their
wings and flying, which it ascribes unto them: and the like alacrity should
Gods children show in their obedience unto God, Psalm. 119. 60. I made have and
delaied not to keep thy commandments.

Fourthly, in faithfulness; the Angels do not Gods will by halues 4
or peace-meale, but thoroughly and perfectly, wherein soever God imployeth
them; and so should we be faithful in doing Gods will, endeavoring to yield
sincere obedience, not to some, but to all Gods commandments which concern
us, Psalm 119. 6. I shall not be confounded when I have respect unto all thy
commandments. 2. Kings 23. 25. King Josias turned to the Lord, with all his
soul, with all his heart, and with all his might, according to all the law of
Moses: an example to be followed of all Gods children, that so they may be like
to the blessed Angels.

The 1. Use. Wants to be bewailed.

First, this pattern of Angelical obedience here propounded for 1
our imitation, must teach us to acknowledge and bewail the natural
hardness, deadness, and untowardness of our hearts, in yielding obedience
unto the will of God: if we feel not this dull and untoward heart, we may
suspect our selves of the want of grace, for every gracious heart feels it,
more or less, and bewailes it unto God: and so must we do, if we say in
truth, Thy will be done, in earth as it is in heaven.

Secondly, we must here also bewail the want of sincerity and 2
faithfulness in doing Gods will: our maimed and halte obedience, shows how
far we come short of this Angelical example: many content themselves with the
outward service of the body, and never regard Isa. 29. ^3.
the inward worship of the heart; and others have respect to outward duties of
piety, that concern God, but for vprightnes and mercy toward men, they
little regard: this the Angels do not.

2. Use. Graces to be desired.

Hereby also we must learn to pray for the spirit of freedom, whereby we may
be delivered from the bondage of corruption, and so may the more freely, and
cheerfully, and heartily endeavor to do Gods will: Psalm. 51. 12. Restore to
me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me by thy free spirit: the holy Ghost
is therefore called the free spirit, because it gives liberty from the bondage
of sin, and makes the heart free, and forward, and cheerful in Gods
service: for where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. 2. Cor. 3. 17.

3. Use. Duties to be practiced.

Because we must practice the good things we pray for, therefore Imitation of
the Angels.
here we are taught to frame our lives to an holy Imitation of the blessed
Angels. Though we cannot attain to the measure of their obedience, yet we must
endeavor after their manner of obedience, in readiness, etc. and so by
following them begin our heaven in this world. This will not stand with their
humor who account zeal in religion, affected preciseness: but such as call
God father in sincerity, must set before them the obedience of the holy
Angels, as a pattern for their imitation. Now in them we may obscrue these
things for us to follow.

First, they desired before Christ's incarnation, to look into the mystery 1
of our redemption wrought by Christ, 1. Pet. 1. 12. although it concern them
not as it does us: for they never fell, and they are established by another
grace then of redemption: now herein we must follow the Angels, or (if it were
possible) go beyond them, for Christ took not the Angels, but the seed of
Abraham: his redemption concerns us, and therefore we much more must be
diligent searchers out of this mystery in the Gospel.

Secondly, the Angels are maintainers of true religion, and of the 2
worship of God: for the law was given by Angels, Gal. 3. 19. The most of
Daniels visions were showed by an Angel; and so was the revelation unto John,
Revel. 1. 1. the Angels brought the Apostles out of prison to preach the Gospel
Act 5. 19. and 12 7. ^. and 16. 26.
sundry times. They are enemies to Idolatry; for, Apoc. 19. 10. when John
would have worshipped the Angel, he forbad him, saying, See thou do it not,
worship God: herein also we must be followers of Angels, by furthering the
Gospel and true worship of God to the uttermost of our power; by hindering all
Idolatry, and showing our selves enemies to all the enemies of God and of his
truth.

Thirdly, the Angels were always serviceable unto Christ; they 3
brought the tidings of his birth to the shepherds, Luke 2. 9, 10. they
ministered unto him in his temptation, Mat. 4. 11. in his Agony, Luke 22. 43.
in his resurrection, Math. 28. 2. and ascension, Act. 1. 10. and so should we
perform unto Christ all the service we can.

Fourthly, they spend their time in praising and lawding the name of 4
God: and so should we labor to have our hearts enlarged for his glory, and
our mouths filled with his praises.

Fifthly, they be serviceable for our good, if we be Gods children, 5
though they be far better then we are; Heb. 1. 14. They are ministering
spirits sent forth to minister for their sakes which shall be heirs of
salvation. Psalm. 91. 12. They are as nurces to bear Gods children in their
hands: Psalm. 34. 7. The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear
him: And all this they do unto us of love, as though it were not enjoined
them: So we after their example must employ our selves in soul and body,
calling, credit, and all we have for the good of men.

Sixthly, the Angels are joyful when sinners are humbled and converted 6
from sin unto God: Luke 15. 10. and they are grieved when men by sin
dishonor God. And the like affections should be in us, we should mourn for
all sin in our selves and others, whereby God is dishonored; and have our
hearts to leap for joy, when sinners repent and turn unto God. In the world
to come we shall be like the Angels of heaven in glory, Math. 22. 30. let us
therefore here testify this hope by beginning our heaven upon earth, in
becoming like to the Angels, though not in glory yet in obedience.

Here lastly observe, what honor we are to give to the Angels 4. Use.
of heaven, namely the honor of Imitation, becoming like unto them in
obedience, and treading in the steps of their virtues: but for the honor of
invocation, that is due to God alone, and we must not give Bellarm. de sanct.
beat. l. 1. c. 19. miss^le Romans a Pi^ quinto. p. 304.
it to Angels: damnable therefore is the doctrine and practice of the Church of
Rome, who pray unto the Angels, and give unto them the honor of God in
religious worship.

verse. 11. Give us this day our daily bread.
The coherence. Hitherto we have handled the petitions that concern Gods
golrie; now we come to the petitions that concern our selves, as the word Us,
does plainly show, in these three which follow: and they depend upon the
former, as an explication of the manner of our obedience; for there we asked
grace to do Gods will; and here we pray for those blessings and mercies
wherein we may express our obedience; for we do Gods will, when we depend
upon his providence for the blessings of this life; when we rely upon his
mercy, for the pardon of our sins, and trust in his power for strength
against temptation and deliverance from evil. Now then to come particularly to
this fourth petition; having in the former craved grace to do Gods will in our
particular callings, here we pray for such sufficiency of all temporal
blessings, whereby we may glorify God therein.

In the handling of this petition, six points are to be considered: 1. what we
ask; Bread: 2. what bread we ask, daily bread: 3. whose bread, ours: 4. for
what time, this day: 5. to whom, to us: 6. whence we would have it: by gift
from God, give us.

For the first: The thing we ask is Bread. But what is meant by Bread, is not
agreed upon: some expound it spiritually of Christ's body ^rasmus.
and blood, the food of the soul in the word and Sacraments. But the
unfitness of this exposition we shall see by the weakness of their reasons
alleged for it. First, they say, it is not meet that in so heavenly a
prayer, we should ask so base a thing as material bread of our heavenly
father. Ans. If God command us to ask him bread, and to depend upon him for
it, we must not judge basely of it: now in this v. 25. 26. ^1.
chapter God commands us to depend upon him for food to eat: yea, 1. Pet. 5.
7. we must cast all our care on him: and Jacobs practice in praying for bread
to eat, Genesis 28. 20. and Agurs praying for a competencie in outward things,
Prove. 30. 8. declare plainly the lawfulness thereof. Secondly (they say) we
must first seek Gods kingdom and his righteousness, and then all these
things shall be cast upon us, v. 33. Ans. Distrustful and distracting care is
there only forbidden, but a moderate care is there allowed, and therefore
prayer for them is undoubtedly lawful.

The second opinion touching Bread is of the Papists, to wit, that Rhem on this
place.
here we ask not only all necessary sustenance for the body, but much more
all spiritual food, namely, the blessed Sacrament, which is Christ the bread
of life. But neither is this so fit: for first, we prayed for spiritual things
directly in the second petition. Secondly, sacramental bread cannot here be
meant, because it was not ordained when Christ taught his Disciples this
prayer. Thirdly, their exposition is against their own practice: for if by
bread, were meant Christ in the Sacrament, then the people should be fed
therewith every day, which they bar them from.

The third opinion is, that by bread is meant corporal food and blessings
necessary to temporal life only: and this I take to be the truth for these
reasons, which also make against the former expositions. First, What is meant
by Bread.
S. Luke, the best interpreter of our Savior Christ, expounds the words, of
bread that serves for the day: that is, for every day, Luke 11. 3. and
therefore it must needs be bodily: for spiritual food once truly received,
serves not for a day, but for ever, Ioh. 4. 14. Secondly, this is a perfect
platform of prayer, and therefore must contain petition for temporal
blessings, else it were not perfect: now we cannot comprehend our requests for
temporal blessings under any other petition but this only, and therefore
Christ here propounds them.

Now properly, bread imports that sustenance made of grain which is fit and
convenient for man's bodily nourishment, such as Melchisedek brought out to
Abraham and his company, with wine for their refreshing, Genesis 14. 18. and such
is meant in Scripture where bread is opposed to wine or water. But more
generally it is taken for all kind of food whatsoever, whereby life is
preserved: in which sense goats milk is called bread, Prove. 27. 27. and the
fruit of trees, Ier. 11. 19. and all things that pass too and fro in
traffic, Prove. 31. 14. Now in this place it must be taken in a general
sense, not only for bread, but for all other necessary food, and for raiment
also, with health, peace, liberty; and all other things that are meet and
needful for the good outward estate of man, of family, or common wealth.

The uses. 1. In that Christ bids us pray for bread and not for dainties; 1
hereby he would teach us to beware of covetousness, the common Beware of
covetousness
sin of our nature whereby we are discontent with our estate, and murmr
with the Israelites, if we have no more but Manna: but we must strive against
this corruption, and say with David, Lord, incline my heart unto thy
testimonies, and not unto covetousness, Psalm. 119. 36.

Secondly, we must hereby also learn to practice sobriety and moderation 2
in diet, apparel, and all other things appertaining to this life, Learn
sobriety.
using them so as we may be the fitter for our callings, and the service of
God, and so bettered thereby and not made worse.

Thirdly, this must teach us contentation with that place and state of 3
li^e, and measure of wealth which God gives us: for we must ask bread
Contentation.
only, that is, things necessary, and therefore if God give us things
necessary we must be therewith content: and our corrupt mind must not be judge
herein, but what God bestows upon our sober use of lawful means within our
calling, that must we judge to be our portion: 1. Tim. 6. 8. If we have food
and raiment, let us therewith be content. This was Paul's practice, I can be
abased, and I can abound: every where in all things Phil. 4. 12.
I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, to abound and to have want.
The Numb. 11. 3^. 33.
Israelites in the wilderness were not content with Manna, but would needs have
flesh to eat, and God gave them their desire, but while the flesh was in their
mouths, his wrath fell upon them: therefore let us lust after no more then God
gives upon our sober use of lawful means, least in seeking more, we draw Gods
curse upon us. But, alas, few are content with their estate, the yeoman will be
like the gentleman in attire and diet; and the gentleman like the noble man;
and hence comes usury, oppression, injustice, and much ungodliness; hence it
comes that Gods judgment in dearth is increased upon the poor, because men
make no conscience of the means, so they may benefit and enrich themselves,
and get aloft: but beware of Gods curse with thine advancement; unless God
change thine estate, rest contented with that which is present, and be
thankful for it: for better is a little with the fear of God, then great
treasure and trouble therewith, Prove. 15. 16. now what trouble like the wrath
of God, and therefore be content with that which God sends in the use of
lawful means.

Fourthly, must we ask of God every bit of bread we eat? then away 4
with all chance and fortune, and let us learn to acknowledge Chance confuted.
Gods providence in all things.

Fifthly, must Gods children ask of God their daily food and receive 5
it as a gift of mercy from the hand of their father? then away Merit consated.
with merit by man's works, for if bread be of mercy, life everlasting cannot
be of merit on man's part.

Lastly, this petition ministers unto us a notable ground of contentation 6
against distrustful care, for that which Christ bids us ask, God undoubtedly
will give, because it is according to his will: and therefore the child of God
may assure himself of things sufficient for this life, in the sober use of
lawful means; and look if temporal blessings fail, for a good supply in
spiritual graces.

Here a question may be asked, seeing we ask of God but bread Of using Gods
creatures to our delight.
only, that is, things necessary for this life, whether may we use the
creatures of God for our delight? Answ. We may use the outward blessings of God
for our honest delight, Eccles. 5. 17. Behold what I have seen good, that it
is comely, to eat and to drink and to take pleasure in all his labor wherein
man trauelleth under the sun: yet three caueats must be remembered, lest we
abuse our liberty in this delight: I. we must see God to give us not only
things necessary, but for delight: II. in our delight and pleasure we must so
moderate our affections, that they be not taken up with these earthly things,
nor hereby withdrawn or hindered from things heavenly and spiritual: III. Our
principal joy must be in spiritual food, even in Christ crucified, and in
our true communion with him in his body and blood: all our delight must stoop
to this, and out of Christ we must count nothing joyous.

II. Point. What bread: daily bread. The word in the orginall signifies (...)
bread put to our substances day by day; that is, such bread as serves to
preserve health and life from day to day: this Agur calls bread or food
convenient for him, Prove. 30. 8.

The use. In this second point we learn two things. First, that it We may pray
for te^porall blessings.
is lawful to ask temporal blessings at the hands of God, for he is our
merciful father and bids us so to do; which serves to confirm the former
exposition of this article. Secondly, that we ought to have a A moderate care
for te^porall things lawful.
moderate care to preserve our bodily life and health, in the diligent use of
all lawful means; for what we pray for we must endeavor to do. The sixth
commandment says, Thou shall not kill; wherein the Lord inioyneth us by all
good means to preserve our own and our neighbors life. And this we must do
for two causes especially: first, that we may do all the good we can to that
Church, Commonwealth, and family whereof we are members: secondly, that we may
have a sufficient time to prepare our selves for heaven: for death will come,
and the day of judgment; and after death there is no wisdom, nor counsel,
Eccles. 9. 10.
work, nor invention: therefore now must we prepare our selves for God, that
we may be ready to receive him at his coming; and he that is prepared for the
Lord has lived well and long enough, but without this our life is spent in
vain.

III. Point. Whose bread do we pray for, our own, not other How temporal
blessing* become ours.
men's. But how does bread or any other temporal blessing become ours? Ans.
First, when we have true right thereto before God: secondly, when we have
lawful possession thereof before men. Our right before God is needful, for
we lost all in Adam, and have recovery of our right in the creatures only in
Christ Jesus, when by says we become his members: 1. Cor. 3. 22. All things
are yours, and you are Christ's. And yet for all this, the child of God may not
use all things as his own though he have right thereto in Christ, unless by
Gods providence he have also lawful right thereto or possession thereof before
men, as by lawful gift, purchase, labor, or such like. Indeed right in
Christ is the chief title, but yet right before men is also necessary: for
Christian liberty does not abolish good orders in civil estates, but
establish them rather: Christ is no enemy to Caesar; and therefore the
Scripture inioynes every man to eat his own bread, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12. that is,
such whereto he has right in Christ by faith, and also inioyeth by Gods
providence in some honest means allowed of men; for by good orders established
among men, we are put into possession of those things whereto we have right in
Christ.

The use. I. Here we learn to receive our bread from God, or any ^^^ov all in
Christ.
other temporal blessing we enjoy as a fruit of Christ's passion; and indeed
Christ crucified is the foundation of every good gift and blessing of God. As
for infidells and wicked men who possess and use many temporal blessings, it
must be granted that they have right thereto before men; but yet having no
part in Christ crucified, they want the true foundation, and so are no better
then usurpers before God, for which one day they must be called to reckoning.
If this point were learned, men would show more conscience in getting, and more
reverence and thankfulness in using Gods temporal blessings, then usually
they do: there would be less riot and excess in diet and attire, and less
abuse of all Gods creatures: for the meditation of this price of our
restitution, would restrain us from dishonouring God in any of his blessings.

II. This petition for our own bread, teaches us that every one A lawful
calling necessaric.
should have a lawful calling, and therein so employ himself that he may eat
his own bread, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12. No man ought to live out of a lawful calling,
nor yet idly therein; the master must banish idleness out of his family; and
the magistrate out of the commonwealth: vagrant persons ought not to be
tolerated, for such eat not their own bread.

III. Here is condemned all fraud, injustice, and cruelty, in the getting Ill
getting condemned.
of temporal blessings, for we pray for our own bread; but that which is so
gotten, is not our own, but others: neither will the gamesters gain, nor that
which is got by lotterie, stand with this petition: for this is not to labor
the thing that good is, as the Apostle requires, Ephesians. 4. 28. neither are they
sanctified means of getting. Quest. If this bread be our own, what need we
to ask it? Ans. We ask it for good causes though it be our own: for in bread
there be two things; the substance of bread, and the blessing of God therein,
which in Scripture is called Isa. 3 1.
the staff of bread, which is that virtue and power therein, whereby it
nourishes: for herein it fares with bread, as it does with an old man, take
away his staff and he cannot stand but falls; so take away Gods blessing
from bread, and it becomes unprofitable, and nourishes not. Now because we may
have the substance of bread, and yet want the blessing upon it; we may have our
garners full, and yet be poor: we Hag. 1. 6.
may eat, and not be satisfied; fill our bellies, and yet be hungry,
therefore we pray to God for bread; that so we may have not only the
substance, but the blessing of God therewithal: for which cause Princes must
as well make this petition as the poorest beggars.

IV. Point. For what time do we ask bread: not for a month or a year, but
for this day, or as Luke has it, according to the day, Luke 11. 3. that is,
meet and convenient for this present day.

The use. In this circumstance of time, we are taught; first, to bewail our
distrustfulnes in Gods providence for temporal blessings, as food, raiment,
etc.

Secondly, to acknowledge Gods particular providence upon us from day to day,
whereon we must depend and cast our selves continually for all things
needful, though we see no reason thereof. Thus did Abraham, when he was
about to sacrifice his son; for when Isaac asked, where is the sacrifice?
Abraham answered; my son, God will provide, Genesis 22. 8. and so he did, verse.
13. whereupon Abraham in memory of this singular work of Gods providence,
called the name of the place, Jehovah ijreh, God will provide, v. 14. A most
worthy president for every man in the way of obedience, to depend upon Gods
providence for all things needful, endeavoring to see his disposing hand in
all things that fall out good or bad.

Thirdly, to moderate our care in seeking for the blessings of this A moderate
care for this life.
life: we must have care to provide things honest and necessary; and for this
end must exercise our selves in the use of lawful means, otherwise we shall
tempt God; but yet our care must be so moderate, that we still depend upon our
heavenly fathers care and providence for us, who biddes us ask him bread for
every day: and thus we shall have enough, when as distrustful and immoderate
care shall help us nothing. When the Exodus 16. 18. 19.
Israelites lived by Manna, which God gave them from heaven, they were
commanded to gather but for one day, and to reserve none of it till the
morrow; whereby God would teach them to depend upon his daily providence:
which while they did, they had sufficient, and that which was good; but when
through covetousness they would needs gather more then for the day, and so
reserved of it till the morning, Gods curse light upon it; v. ^4.
for it was full of worms and stanke: and afterward when they began to
dislike Manna, and were not content with his providence, but Number. 11. 4.
lusted after flesh, he gave them their desire, but withal his wrath fell upon
them while the flesh was between their teeth before it was chewed, v. 33. and
so it will be with us if we distrust in God: but if we learn and practice this
dependence on Gods particular providence, we shall have experience of his
goodness, though ordinary means fail, either by supply, as 1. king. 17. 6.
or by patience to bear the want.

Fourthly, here we have a good ground of that holy practice of Gods
Sanctification of our food^.
children in sanctifying their meat and drink by prayer and thanksgiving:
for here we are taught to pray for temporal blessings, and therefore when we
have them and use them, we should glorify God by prayer and thanksgiving for
his blessing upon them: the reason hereof is great: for first, hereby we are
distinguished from bruit beasts, who live upon Gods blessings, but yet cannot
praise him as man may do: secondly, hereby we testify our right and interest
into Gods creatures by Jesus Christ, which we lost in Adam, for true prayer is
a fruit of faith, and by faith we are made partakers of Christ Jesus: thirdly,
such is our corruption by nature, that we are prone to abuse all Gods
blessings, and therefore we must pray for grace to use them moderately and
thankefully.

Fifthly, here we may learn how to frame our daily prayers to God, for this
circumstance of time must be referred to every petition; and therefore this
must be our practice, every day to pray for grace to glorify Gods name, to
yield obedience to his will, to have our sins forgiven, and so for the rest.

V. Point. For whom do we ask bread; not for our selves alone but for our
brethren; Give us: which serves to teach us brotherly love, which seeks not
her own things only, but is bountiful toward others seeking their good
also. And indeed here we are but stewards of Gods temporal blessings, and
therefore may not employ them as we will, but for his glory who is our
absolute Lord: now his direction is How to glorifi^ God with ou^ temporal goods.
to this effect; that first, we should glorify God with our temporal goods,
employing them for the maintenance of his worship and of true religion.
Secondly, that we should employ them for the common good, in the relief of the
poor, and other necessary duties for the commonwealth. Thirdly, that we
should provide for our own, especially them of our family, that we may live in
peace and quietness, and so the better prepare our selves for the life to come.

VI. Point. From whom must we look to receive our bread; namely from God; for
we say unto him that is our father in Christ, Give us: which teaches us, that
though we be his children, and so have right to temporal blessings, yet
whatsoever we have, we must know it comes from God, and must receive and use
it as from his hand. And this we shall do if we sanctify the creatures of God
unto our temporal use: for every creature of God is good if it be sanctified
in his use. Now the creature is sanctified not as man is, when the spirit of
How the creature i. sanctified.
God works in him, abolishing corruption and renewing grace; nor yet as the
elements in the sacraments are sanctified, which are set apart by God to an
holy and spiritual use, to be seals and pledges of grace; but when it is made
fit to our temporal civil use, which is done by the word and prayer, 1. Tim.
4. 4. Where, by the word is meant; first, the word of creation, whereby God in
the beginning fitted the creature for man's use, and gave him power and
sovereignty over it: Genesis 1. 29, 3^
secondly, the word of restitution, whereby after the fall and after the flood
he granted unto man the use of his creatures, Genesis 9. 3. thirdly, the word of
the Gospel concerning our Christian liberty wherein he has enlarged our use
in the creatures of God, Act. 10. 15. And by prayer, we desire God to give his
power unto the creatures, and his blessing upon them to serve for our good and
comfort; as also to give us grace to receive them as from his hand, and to use
them to his glory. If we could learn and practice this duty, we should have
more comfort in the creatures then yet we have; yea it would restrain us from
fraud, oppression, cruelty, and from pride and vanity in getting and using
all Gods blessings: for if we were persuaded that all temporal blessings came
from his hand, how durst we sin against him either in getting or using of
them?

Secondly, in that after our labor and diligence in our callings we The order
of causes in te^porall blessings.
must still pray to God to give us bread, we must learn to observe that order
of causes which God has set in the producing of all temporal blessings for
his life: for not only food and raiment, but our labor and diligence
thereabout are secondarie causes, depending upon the blessing of God, which is
the first cause of all, disposing and ordering all things unto goodness: for
it comes from God that meat does feed us, and clothes do keep us warm. If
he say unto stones, become bread, they shall feed us, Matthew. 4. 4. yea, in the
want of bread he can preserve strength for many days, Exodus 34. 8. and 1.
king. 19. 8. yea, if he speak the word, poison shall become bread and nourish
us: but without his blessing nothing can do us good: Psalm. 127. 1, 2. Except
the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it: we therefore
must learn to rely upon Gods providence for a blessing on all our labor and
study, and wait for his blessing in all the means we use for our good and
comfort, for he is our life, our health, and preservation.

verse. 12. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.
I. The Coherence. Christ having taught us in the former petition to pray for
temporal blessings, and for grace to rely upon Gods provident dispensation
for the things of this life, does in this petition and the next, direct us to
ask spiritual blessings for our selves, to wit, remission of our sins, and
strength against temptation: and the reason of this order is this; Christ makes
the former petition a step unto these: for a man must rest upon Gods
providence for the preservation of his body, that will rely upon his mercy
for the salvation of his soul: he that can not be persuaded that God will give
him bread, will hardly be resolved that he will forgive him his sins.

Where, first we may note what is the faith of worldlings: they Worldlings want
(...).
do not trust in God for food, raiment, and other temporal blessings; how
then can we say that their faith is sound for eternal mercies? Isa. 28. 16. He
that believes will not make have, but will stay Gods leisure, waiting for his
blessings whereof he stands in need: But is this the practice of the world? no
verily; for let a cross come, and men will not stick to use unlawful means
for their deliverance: and so they deal, when hope of gain is offered, making
little conscience of fraud, lying, oppression, etc. and so making have to be
rich, they ouerrunne the provident hand of God, that would lead them by
ordinary lawful means.

Secondly, hence we learn how to enjoy and use all temporal Right use of
temporal blessings.
blessings, food, raiment, and such like; namely, as helps and means to draw
us toward Gods mercy in Christ. Thus did Jacob, Genesis 28. 20. 21.. If God will
be with me, and give me bread to eat and clothes to put on, -- then shall the
Lord be my God: Ioh. 6. 27. Christ bids those whom he had fed miraculously,
when they sought him afterward for outward things, that they should not labor
for that food which perishes resting therein, but for that which endures
unto everlasting life; leading them from bodily care and labor, to that which
is heavenly and spiritual.

To come to the petition, wherein we will handle, first the necessity of it;
then the meaning; and lastly the uses.

For the first: This petition may seem to be needless; for they that make it
are Gods children, who have all their sins forgiven them, both past, present,
and to come. Ans. This indeed must be the daiely Why Gods children must daily
pray for pardon.
petition of all Gods children in this world, and the necessity of it is
great; for howsoever in the purpose of God all sins are pardoned to true
believers; yea, all sins past repented of, are so forgiven, that they shall
never be again imputed: yet sins present, and to come, are not actually
pardoned, till they be repented of. This experience teaches, for who can feel
the assurance of mercy for any sin committed, before he have repented of it?
and though true repentance once had set us for ever in Gods favor, yet it must
be daiely renewed for our daiely falls, or else we cannot know it to be true.
Hence it is, that Paul entreats the Saints of God in Corinth (though they had
truly repented at their conversion) to be reconciled unto God, 2. Corinthians. 5.
20. meaning, by renewing their repentance. And David was the true child of God,
yet being left unto himself, he fell into two grievous sins, wherein he
lay almost a whole year without repentance; during all which time, he had not
pardon of them actually; for Nathan rebuked him to bring him to repentance, and
upon his confession, pronounced them pardoned: yea, and David himself
afterward, for the fuller assurance of mercy to his soul, most earnestly
entreated pardon hereof at the hands of Gods, Psalm. 51. So that this petition
is most necessary, as well for actual pardon of sins present, as for the
more full assurance of sins past.

The meaning. This petition is propounded in the form of a comparison, which
naturally stands thus; As we forgive our debtors, so forgive thou to us our
debts: and it has two parts, a request for pardon, and a reason thereof. Our
request for pardon is this; Forgive us our debts. In the word debt is a
figurative kind of speech, taken from bargaining, wherein God is resembled to
the Creditour, Man is the debtor: the Law is the bond or obligation; and sin
is that debt of Sin a debt*
ours, for which we stand bound to God by the law: this appears by this, that
in the Evangelists the word sin and debt are used promiscuously; as Luke 11.
4. compared with this of Matthew, and Luke 13. 4. Now sin makes us debtors unto
God, not for that we owe it unto him, for we are bound by the law to yield the
contrary obedience; but because upon default of obedience unto God whereto we
are bound by the law, we are bound for our sins unto punishment, which is as it
were a second debt. Even as a man that is bound in an obligation to another,
through default of performing the condition thereof, is bound to pay both the
principal and the forfeiture: the punishment of sin which is eternal death,
being that forfeiture whereto we stand bound before God, for want of obedience
which is as it were the principal.

The consideration of this resemblance for which sin is called a debt, serves
to direct us in some points of religion: as first it confutes Remission of
sins is not our whole justification.
their opinion, who hold that our whole justification consists in the remission
of sins, and that the same is wrought by the shedding of Christ's blood alone:
for we owe to God a double debt, first obedience, and for default thereof we
stand bound to punishment: these two debts are different and distinct one from
an other, and they must both be paid, and Gods justice satisfied either by our
selves or by a furetie, before we can be accepted as righteous unto life. Now
we our selves can discharge neither; therefore Christ our surety must do
both: and so he has: for our second debt of sin whereby we stand bound to
punishment, Christ discharged by his death and passion, wherein he made his
soul a sacrifice for sin: and our debt of obedience in perfect love to God
and man, he also paid to God in fulfilling the law for us: whereupon it is
true, Romans 8. 4.
that the righteousness of the law is fulfilled in the^ which walk not after
the flesh, but after the spirit. But (say they) the Scripture every where
ascribes our whole redemption and justification to Christ's bloodshedding, and
to his death and passion. Ans. Christ's bloodshedding must be considered two
ways: first, as a part of his passion whereby we are discharged from
punishment: secondly, as a part of his obedience, wherein he testified singular
love both to God his father, and unto mankind: for in suffering he obeyed, and
in obeying he suffered: now because his bloodshedding is a part of both,
therefore is our whole redemption ascribed thereunto, not excluding, but
including his actual obedience therein, it being a part thereof.

Secondly, debt in this place betokening sin as it binds unto punishment,
shows plainly that sin and punishment go always together: Rhem. on 1.
Ioh. 1. sect. 5.
and therefore the Popish doctrine is false and erroneous which parts them
asunder, by making some sins venial, not deserving the punishment of death,
which is the wages of sin.

Forgive vs] This forgiveness here asked is a free and full discharge
Forgiveness of sin described.
from sin and the punishment thereof, without any satisfaction on our part:
and this God does, when he is content for Christ's sake, not to impute sin
unto us, but to account it as not committed, and the punishment thereof as not
due unto us; being fully and freely contented with the all-sufficient
satisfaction made by Christ in his death and passion. This forgiveness
Hezekias expressed when he said to God, Isa. 38. 17.
Thou have cast all our sins behind thy back: and Michah, saying, Mich. 7.
19.
He will subdue our iniquities, and cast all our sins into the bottom of the
sea. So that our request to God is this, that whereas our sins bind us unto
punishment, the Lord would be pleased for his Sons sake, freely to remit all
our sins, and never to impute them unto us, and to be fully contented with
the suffering of Christ, that the punishment of our sins be never laid upon
us.

Quest. But of what sins do we here ask pardon? Ans. Both of sins past
and present: for howsoever the child of God has his sins past fully pardoned
at once on Gods part, upon his true repentance; yet he is not able so to
receive pardon as God gives it, but must receive it by little and little, and
as it were drop by drop: this we may see in David, who had the pardon of
his sin pronounced by 2. ^am. (...). 13.
Nathan the Prophet; and yet after that he penned the 51. Psalm, wherein he
begges mercy and forgiveness most earnestly for that sin which God had
already pardoned, aiming no doubt at a more full and comfortable assurance of
Gods pardon in his own heart: for this cause also in his old age he prays
for the pardon of the sins of his youth, Psalm. 25. 7. Again, here we pray
for the pardon of sins present, both that they may be actually forgiven; and
also that our hearts and consciences may be settled in the assurance thereof.

The uses. First, by this petition, we are taught to bewail our carnal Wants
to be bewailed. S^cu^itie in sin.
security; for naturally we go on from day to day, in following the pleasures
and profits of this world, and never think of our debt to God by sin, till
the evil day of death or distress approach unto us; like to desperate
bankrupts that never regard their debt, till the sergeant be upon their back.
This is that sin which Christ foretold should reign in the latter days,
Math. 24. 39. and I appeal to the conscience in the veiw of all estates and
conditions, whether it be not so: for though iniquity do abound, yet no man
says, what have I done? Ier. 8. 6. yea, this is the sin of many professors,
for the nature of man is prone to incroach upon Gods favor. But we must know
that this security cannot stand with this petition, for here we are taught to
call to mind our sins, every day praying for the pardon of them.

Secondly, here we see whereon we must rely and setle our hearts Our rest in
distrust.
in all estates, in affliction, temptation, and death it self; namely on the
mere mercy of God in Christ, by faith in his blood for the pardon of our
sins: Look to the prayers of all the Saints of God in Scriptures, and we
shall find that they made this their rock, and ankor of stay in all
distress. Dan. 9. 18, 19. O Lord, hear and behold, -- not for our own
righteousness, but for thy great tender mercies: defer not, for thy own
sake, oh my God. This we must observe to arm us against the damnable doctrine
of the Church of Rome, for they will grant that in his first conversion a man
must rely only on Gods (...) de (...). l. 5. c. 7.
mercy in Christ's blood; but after a man is made the child of God; he may
rest upon his own good merits, so it be in modesty and sobriety. But this is
the right way to hell, flat against this petition: for how can we dream of
any merit, when as we must every day ask mercy and forgiveness: for to ask
mercy and to plead merit, are contraries: now by our daily sins we add
debt to debt, and so must still plead mercy and not merit, even after we are
converted and sanctified; ever praising God that has delivered us from the
slavish bondage of that proud Synagogue.

Thirdly, here we see what we must do in respect of our daily sins Dul^
humiliation.
whereunto we fall; we must not lie in them, but renew our-estate by true
humiliation and repentance. Also if thou be crossed in the things of this
world, the way of comfort and deliverance is to be learned here: for as thou
do daily ask bread, so thou must ask forgiveness for thy sins, and when
they are pardoned thou have title and interest to al Gods blessings. Now this
daily humiliation stands in three things: 1. in examination of our selves for
our debt unto God by sin: 2. in confessing our debt unto our creditour,
yiedling our selves into his hands: 3. in humbling our selves unto him, craving
pardon and remission earnestly for Christ's sake, as for life and death: herein
the children of God are presidents unto us: Psalm. 32. 5, 6. David in great
distress found no release while he held his tongue, but when he humbled
himself and confessed against himself, then he found mercy and ease:
whereupon he professes that he will be a pattern to every godly man for their
behavior in the time of distress.

Fourthly, here we have a notable remedy against desparie, wherewith Remedy
against despair.
the devil assaults many a child of God, when through infirmity they fall
into some grievous sin, or commit the same sin often, which greatly wounds
the conscience: for here Christ bids us ask forgiveness of our daily sins
whatsoever they be, or how often so ever committed. And no doubt, he that bids
us forgive our brethren that sin against us, though it were Luke 17 4.
seven times in a day, if they seek it at our hands, will much more forgive
us. This must not embolden any to sin presumptuously, for the Lord has
said, He will not be merciful unto that man, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. but if any fall
through infirmity, hereon he has to stay himself from despair.

Fifthly, hereby we see that no man possibly can fulfill the law, for the No man
can fulfill the law.
Apostles themselves were commanded to ask pardon of sin every day; whereby
it is plain they could never fulfill the law, and therefore much less can any
other.

Sixthly, that which we pray for we must in all godly manner endeavor Endeavor
to get pardon.
after. And therefore as we pray for pardon of sin every day, so must we
daily use the means wherein God gives assurance of remission to his children;
as hear the word, receive the Sacraments, and pray unto God publicly and
privately; endeavoring to resist all temptations, and to glorify God by new
obedience: for it is gross hypocrisy to ask the pardon of sin, and still
to live in the practice of it.

Lastly, here we see we must pray not only for the pardon of our own We must be
careful of the salvation of others.
sins, but of our brethrens also: Forgive us; whereby Christ would teach us,
to be careful of the salvation of our brethren and neighbors; the good estate
of their souls should be dear and precious unto us: and if this were so,
happy would it be with the Church of God; but, alas, men are so far from
care of the salvation of their neighbors, that men of the same family are
careless of one an others souls; masters regard not their servants, nor
parents their children: indeed they will provide for their bodies and outward
state, but for their souls they have no care: wherein they bewray themselves
to be cruel and merciless, having more care of their hogs and bruit beasts
then of their children and servants: for when their hogs have all needful
provision, their children and servants souls shall want instruction.

As we also forgive our debtors.] These words are here propounded as a
condition of the former petition; and they include a reason thereof, as Luke
11. 4. Forgive us our sins, FOR even we forgive every man that is indebted
unto us. And this Christ adds for weighty causes, even to cross the fraud
and hypocrisy of our corrupt hearts, who would have forgiveness of God, and
yet would not forgive our brethren, nor yet leave off the practice of sin our
selves. But this condition imports, that we must exercise mercy toward our
brethren, and so break off the course of our sins, if we look for mercy at
Gods hands. Now the words here used are comparatiue, betokening a likelihood
and similitude between Gods forgiving and ours: which must be rightly
understood, because our forgiveness is mingled with much corruption through
want of mercy: and therefore we must not understand it of the measure of
forgiveness, nor yet of the manner simply, but especially of the very act of
forgiving, for thereto sometimes must similitudes be restrained; as Mat. 9. 29.
According to your faith be it unto you. And the force of the reason stands in
the circumstance, thus; If we who have but a drop of mercy, do forgive
others; then do thou who art the fountain of mercies forgive us: but we
forgive others; therefore do thou forgive us.

Touching our forgiving others, three questions must be scanned: How man
forgiues.
I. How can any man pardon a trespass, seeing God only forgiueth sins?
Answ. In every trespass which one does to his neighbor, be two things: the
loss and damage whereby man is hindered in body, goods, or name; and an
offense against God, by a practice of injustice against his law. Now as a
trespass is a damage unto man, so may a man forgive it; but as it is a sin
against God in the transgression of the moral law, so God only pardons it: as
when a man has his goods stolen, that damage done to him, a man may remit;
but the breach of the eight commandment therein, God only can forgive.

II. Quest. How far is a man bound to forgive others that trespass How far
we are bound to forgive.
against him? Ans. There is a threefold forgiveness; of revenge, of punishment,
and of judgment: Forgiveness of revenge, is when a man is not desirous of
revenge from an inward grudge, but forbeares to render like for like to those
that wrong him: this is principally here meant, for we must Mat. (...). 25.
always forgive our brethren, in respect of revenge; for vengeance is mine,
says the Lord, and I will repaie, Romans 12. 19. Forgiveness of punishment, is
the remitting of that punishment which another man's wrong-doing justly
deserves: this is not always to be granted, especially in the case of offense,
which may tend to the public hurt; for then were the state of magistracy
unlawful, whose office it is to punish offenses. The forgiveness of judgment,
is the remitting of that censure which an evil deed does justly deserve;
neither is this here meant, for being lawfully called thereunto, we may
freely censure that which is evil done.

III. Quest. Whether must we forgive those that wrong us, if they How we must
forgive the obstinate.
will not confess their fault, nor ask us forgiveness? Ans. We must forgive
them freely, in respect of revenge. Object. But it is said, If he repent,
forgive him, Luke 17. 3. therefore, unless he repent, we need not to
forgive him? Answ. That place is meant of Ecclesiastical censures, that those
must proceed no further after the party offending does repent.

Debters] Hereby is not meant such as we count debtors in the civil How we
become debtors against our neighbors.
state; that is, such as owe us money grain, etc. but any one that does us
injury, or wrong: for no man's estate is so low, but in some degree God has
given one or more of these 4. things; honor, life, goods, or good name; and he
that hinders his neighbor in any of these, is a debtor before God, and so
stands, till he make recompense to the party, and repent toward God: yea
further, we must know that besides the endammaging of our neighbor in these
things, the very omission of preserving and furthering our neighbors life,
honor, goods, and good name, makes us also debtors before God.

These words thus understood, must be conceived as a reason drawn, not from the
cause, or like example, but from the sign and pledge of Gods forgiveness; for
God has made a promise to forgive us, if we forgive our brethren their
trespasses, Mark. 11. 25. From whence merciful men may gather assurance of
pardon with God, from that inclination to compassion and readiness, which they
find in their own hearts, to forgive others that wrong them; for Christ
teaches them to reason thus: If we be those to whom thou have promised pardon
when they ask it, then Lord pardon us: but we are such, for we feel our
hearts inclined to mercy; therefore Lord pardon us. So that this reason serves
to move us to pray to God for pardon with confidence and assurance: yea
further, they include a profession to God of new obedience in amendment of
life; for under one duty of mercy toward our neighbor, is comprehended the
whole practice of repentance, and the performance of our vow made in baptism.

Uses. I. Mark here, that asking pardon of God, and testimony of Remission
and repentance go together.
repentance go together; he that receives the one, must express the other:
for where God gives pardon, there also he gives grace to repent, and mercy is
not granted, but on condition of repentance. Act. 2. 37, 38. when the Jews
that were pricked in conscience at Peter's sermon, asked what to do to find
mercy; Peter said, Amend your lives, etc. And therefore when he perceived want
of repentance in Simon Magus, he tells him, Act. 8. ^3. v. 13.
Thou art yet in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, though
he had formerly baptized him. Whereby we see, First, with what affection we
must come to God, when we pray for the pardon of our sins; namely, with
humble and contrite hearts, having a true purpose not to sin wittingly and
willingly, but to obey God in all his commandments: and the want of this, is
the cause of that small comfort in prayer, which many find in themselves; for
the promise of pardon is not given, where the condition of repentance is not
performed. Secondly, this shows the gross and fearful error of the blind
world, who sing this song while they live in sin, to their own hearts; God
is merciful: Christ is a Savior: but thus trusting to Gods mercy they
deceive themselves, for they trust to nothing; for mercy is not due, where
repentance is wanting: nay, the Lord has said, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. 20.
He will not be merciful to that man that shall bless himself in his heart,
saying, I shall have peace though I walk after the stubbornness of mine own
heart, etc. Let us therefore see to this, that we practice repentance, when we
pray for pardon; and look to the purpose of our heart against sin, when we
wait for mercy to our souls. We may not sever those things which God has
joined, but look how heartily we desire mercy, so earnestly must we hunger
after grace to repent: if we truly seek both, we shall have both; but if we
let slip repentance in our selves, we shall come short of mercy with the Lord.

II. The joining of this condition, implying repentance, to the petition, and
the dependence of it on the former, teaches us, every day to renew our
repentance, and to humble our selves for our sins, seeking for a new supply
of grace, that so our purpose not to sin, may be more and more confirmed in
our hearts, which is the infallible sign of a new creature.

III. Here we see wherein the practice of true repentance stands; The
practice of true repentance.
namely, in exercising mercy, love, peace, reconciliation, and forgiveness;
for though forgiveness be only named, yet under it all other fruits of
repentance are understood. Indeed to hear the word, to receive the Sacrament,
to preach and pray, be excellent works; but yet the heart of man may more
easily dissemble in them, then in the duties of the second table: the most
infallible mark of true grace, is the practice of the love of God in works of
love and mercy to our brethren; Iam. 1. 27. Pure religion and undefiled before
God, is to visit the fatherless, etc. Iam. 3. 17. The wisdom that is from
above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of
mercy and good fruits. And hence it is, that love is called the fulfilling of
the law, Romans 13. 10.

IV. Christ knitting our forgiving our brother, with Gods forgiving A true
sign of pardon of sin.
us, does here affoard unto us a notable sign of pardon of sin; namely, a
ready and willing mind to forgive our brother offending us: our inclination
to mercy in suppressing the desire of revenge when we are wronged, gives
assurance to our conscience that we shall find mercy at Gods hands: whereby
it is plain, that the child of God may know his own estate toward God, in
regard of his mercy in Christ, even by descending into his own heart, and
there finding the affection of mercy, in forgiving those that have wronged
him: and this we must labor for, if we would know Gods mercy in Christ to
belong unto us.

V. Hereby we are admonished, to beware in our selves, of the common Desire of
revenge must be avoided.
sin of this age, ingraffed in our nature; to wit, desire of revenge, spite,
and grudging upon every occasion: for when we pray unto God with such malicious
hearts, we do in effect desire the Lord to exercise his wrath, and to revenge
his justice on us. And undoubtedly, many a man does searefully curse himself
in his own prayers, while he is cruelly minded toward his brethren; and God
oftentimes says Amen to such curses most deservedly, seeing men are so cruel
to their own souls to curse themselves: and therefore we had need to look to
our hearts, when we pray to God, that we forgive men, if we would be forgiven
of God.

VI. Here note a general gross abuse in this age: most men will seek When we
ought to seek reconciliation with our brethren
to be reconciled to their brethren, with whom they are at variance, when they
come to the Lords table: but at all other times thy take their pleasure,
thinking they may well enough perform all other duties of religion, though
they retain malice and enmity toward their brethren. But here we may
observe, that we ought to be reconciled with our brethren, whenever we go to
God in prayer; for else, if we come in malice and envy toward our brethren,
we curse our selves, and sin against our own souls. In prayer we bring the
sacrifice of our hearts, and the calves of our lips unto God; but before we
offer it, we must reconcile our selves unto our brethren, as we Chap. 5. 23,
24. An evidence of our hypocrisy.
heard before.

VII. Here also we may see the gross hypocrisy of our nature, for so often as
we make this petition, we make profession of reformation of life in new
obedience, (for this one branch of brotherly reconciliation here professed,
does presuppose our conversion from all sin, since that true repentance for
one sin, cannot stand with a purpose to live in any other.) And yet behold,
though men say this prayer often, yet still they continue in their old sins,
as in blasphemy, drunkenness, whoredom, oppression, lying, fraud, etc. as
though it were nothing to dissemble with God: but God is not mocked, either
amend thy wicked conversation, or leave off to make this holy profession.

VIII. In that Christ tieth our duty of forgiving our brethren, to so Man's
natural cruelti.
weighty a condition, as is our forgiveness with God; hereby he would
acquaint us with the horrible cruelty of our nature, and pronenesse to
revenge: we must therefore take notice of it, and labor to see and to bewail
this corruption of our hearts; and on the other side, to hunger after love,
mercy, gentleness, meekness, and to endeavor to practice the same
continually.

Lastly, join both parts of this petition together, and they show us a way how
to keep true peace of conscience for ever; namely, First, we must call upon
God for the pardon of our sins every day. Secondly, How to get and keep
peace of conscience.
we must follow after peace with men, in the practice of forgiveness and
reconciliation when offenses grow; for when we are at one with God and man, we
have a blessed peace: and hence will follow peace in our own hearts, which is
that peace which the world cannot give; which while we retain, we need not to
fear any evil, no not death it self; for if God be with us, who can be
against us?

Verse 13. And lead us not into temptation: But deliver us from evil.
These words contain the sixth and last petition, which is not needelesse
Coherence.
as some may think, but for weighty causes set after all the former, though a
man had the fruition of all the graces there desired: to Gods children most
tempted.
wit, First, to teach us who they be that are most troubled with temptations;
namely, the children of God, that set themselves to seek his glory, to
advance his kingdom, to do his will, to depend upon his providence, and to
rely upon his mercy for the pardon of their sins; these of all other are
most subject to temptation, for being escaped out of the devils snare, he
bestirres himself by all possible means to bring them in again: grievous
temptations do always accompany remission of sin, which is joined with
endeavor to glorify God, as both the word of God, and Christian experience
do fully witness: which must be well observed, both to stay the mind of
those that are deeply humbled through Satan's temptations, thinking that they
are not the children of God, because they are so troubled with sin and Satan,
when as the case is clean contrary: for spiritual temptations, if they be
resisted with godly sorrow, are rather a sign of Gods love, because the devils
hatred is most toward them whom God loves best; and on whom God shows mercy,
toward them will the devil exercise his malice. As also this discovers the
folly of those that sooth up themselves in this fond conceit, that God surely
loves them, and they are deep in his favor, because they are freed from
temptations; when as indeed they ought rather to suspect themselves to be
under the power of Satan: for when the strong man armed keeps the hold, the
things that he possesses are in peace, Luke 11. 21. Whereby is signified, that
the wicked of the world being possessed of Satan, are at peace in themselves,
in regard of temptations; for what needs he to trouble them which are
already at his command? but let them begin to repent, and to seek mercy
for their sins, with endeavor to leave them, and they shall soon find that
Gods favor is not enioied without the devils malice.

Secondly, this petition is joined with the former, to teach us, that as we
must be careful to beg mercy and pardon for our sins already Watchfulnes
against sin.
past, so we must be watchful to prevent sins to come: he that says,
Forgive us our trespasses, must pray also, not to be lead into temptation: and
therefore as we would not have our consciences pricked with the sting of our
old sins, so we must be careful we fall not into them again, neither be
overcome with new temptations.

The meaning. The words themselves contain one only petition, (though some
have thought otherwise) consisting of two parts; the first is the petition it
self, And lead us not into temptation: the second, is the exposition thereof,
But deliver us from evil: for in effect it is thus much, That we be not lead
into temptation, deliver us from evil.

For the first, that we may rightly understand it, we must search out
Temptations two fold.
two things: First, what a temptation is: Secondly, what it is to be lead into
temptation. There be two sorts of temptations, Good, and Evil. I call that a
good and holy temptation, when as God tempts a man, and 1. Good.
it is an action of God whereby he proves and tries man, to make manifest
unto man himself and unto others, what is in his heart, for God knows well
enough before he try him. Thus he tempted Abraham by the offering of his
son, Genesis 22. 1, 2. and the Israelites, by sending false Prophets among them,
Deuteronomy. 13. 3. And in this sense afflictions are called temptations, Iam. 1. 2.
because God tries man by affliction, as gold is tried in the fire: and all
these are good, both in respect of the author, which is God; and of the end,
which is the good of his servants: Job. 23. 10. He knows my way and tries
me, and I shall come forth as the gold. An evil temptation, is a wicked
motion, allurement, or 2. Evil.
persuasion, whereby man is provoked to sin against God in the transgression
of some commandment. Example: When a man is in distress, he shall find
prouocations to impatience, distrust, and murmuring against God; as also to use
unlawful means to help himself: and in prosperity, he shall find sundry
allurements to presume upon Gods mercy in some evil course, to neglect the
ordinary means of grace and salvation; as the word, prayer, etc. all these
and such like, are evil motions, arising partly from our own corruption, and
partly from the suggestion of the devil, who by himself, and by his
instruments, thus seeks to draw men from their duty to God: and these evil
temptations be they, which in this petition we pray against.

II. Point. What is it to be lead into temptation? Answ. A man is To be lead
into temptation.
lead or carried (as the word imports) into temptation, when the temptation
possesses him, and holds him after it has assaulted him; for we must know
that in every temptation there be two actions; one of God, whereby in his just
judgment he leaves a man to himself, or to the malice of Satan: another, of
man himself, whereby being left of God, he enters into the midst of the
temptation, as it were plunging himself into it. For the better conceiving
hereof, we must know that a temptation 4 Degrees in Temptation.
has four degrees, by which it proceeds, til it bring a man unto
destruction, unless it be cut off; to wit, Suggestion, Delight, Consent, and
Perfection, Iam. 1. 14, 15. Suggestion, is when the mind conceiueth a wicked
thought, put in by Satan, or arising from natural corruption* Delight, is when
the evil thought conceived, and for a time retained in the mind, descends
to the heart, and there pleases the will, and delights the affections:
Consent, is when the will yields to the evil motion, and the heart resolves to
practice it: Perfection, is when a sin is often committed, and by custom
becomes as it were ripe, whereupon follows destruction. Now in the first and
second of these degrees, a man is said to be tempted only; for suggestion and
delectation do not defile the heart, but when the will consents, then the
temptation takes hold upon him, and possesses him: and by often practice he is
plunged into it, entangled and ensnared, and held captive under it. Now then
(to apply this to the point in hand) a man is lead into temptation, when he is
left of God to an evil motion suggested into his mind, so as he gives
consent unto it, and goes on to the practice of it. See this in Judas, Ioh. 13.
2. Satan cast this evil motion into his heart, Judas betray thy master: this
he thought upon, and was delighted with the gain that he hoped to reap
thereby: and here God left him to himself for his hypocrisy and other sins,
and then Satan entered into his heart, got consent of will, and so carried him
to the practice of this treason. Hereto also the Apostle seems to allude, 1.
Tim. 6. 9. They that will be rich fall into temptations and snares, being
left of God to their corruption in covetousness.

But some will say, that Gods own children have been thus carried Whether
Gods children be lead into temptation.
into temptation, as David in the case of his adultery and murder, 2. Sam.
11. and Peter in denying his master, Math. 26. 70. 74. Answ. It may seem they
were carried into temptation, for their evil motions were not only received
with delight, but consented unto and practiced: yea, David lay in his sin
almost a whole year. But we must consider, that they were the children of God
by adoption and regeneration, and therefore howsoever God left them to be
tempted, yet he forsook them not wholly or finally, but still loved them, so
as they were not carried into temptation with full consent of heart: but Gods
saving grace remained in them, which when God stirred up, they were recovered
by repentance. Indeed they went as far as they could, and in regard of
themselves, far enough to have cut off their salvation; but that was laid up
with God in Christ, for his foundation remains sure, and whom he loves, he
loves to the end, his gifts and calling are without repentance. So then, to be
lead into temptation, is to be carried into it with full consent, being left
of God unto the malice of Satan, and the powerful working of a man's own
corruptions: and Christ's meaning is, as if he had taught us to say thus; O
Lord, we are every way subject to temptations, and by our sins we deserve to
be left therein, to the malice of Satan, and to the power of our own
corruptions, yet we beseech thee not to forsake us in any temptation, but give
an happy issue thereto, still upholding us by thy grace.

Quest. How can God lead a man into temptation, and yet not be How God leads
into temptation.
the author of sin? Ans. Well enough, for as temptation is a punishment of
sin, so God may lead a man into it by permission, leaving the party to
himself, and Satan's malice, for some former transgression. Again, God never
puts any evil motion into the mind, but yet he suffers Satan to do it; and
though the devil be a most wicked instrument, yet such is Gods power and
wisdom, that he can use him without sin, in a good manner, and to a good end.

Uses. 1. This petition serves to confute a gross error of the Papists,
Bellarm. de iustif. l. 3. c. 14
who teach that a man truly justified before God, may finally fall from grace,
and be condemned: as also the opinion of some Protestants, who though they
will not say that the child of God may finally fall away and perish, yet they
hold that he may wholly fall The child of God cannot wholly fall from grace.
away for a time, and that every grievous sin which he commits, cuts him off
totally, till he do repent; for look what the child of God asks in
prayer, according to Gods will, that shall be granted him: but in this
petition he asks preservation from total and final apostacy, and that
according to Gods will, by the reaching of Christ himself, Lead us not into
temptation: and therefore it shall be granted. Indeed it stands with the will of
God, and the good of his children, that sometime they should be buffeted by
Satan in temptation: and therefore we pray not here to be freed from all
assaults, but that we be not wholly left unto our selves, nor forsaken of God,
but so preserved by his grace, that we be not swallowed up in temptation: and
this petition being according to Gods will, shall be granted to him that a^ks
in faith, 1. Ioh. 5. 14. And hence it is, that he that is once the child of God
indeed, shall so remain for ever, and cannot finally or totally fall away from
grace. David's fall and Peter's were great and fearful, but yet therein they
were not wholly forsaken of God, unless it were in their own feeling for a
time.

Object. But David by his two sins became guilty of Gods wrath, and so lost
his right of this prerogative in being the child of God. Answ. If we consider
the desert of those sins, that undoubtedly should have been his estate; but
yet in regard of Gods election and free grace of adoption, wherein God changes
not, as also in regard of the inward seeds of Gods grace in his heart, he
remained still the child of God, though the signs of Gods favor were changed
into the signs of his anger and displeasure. Object. But by such sins a man
loses the graces which formerly he had. Answer. The graces of God in man are
of two sorts; some are necessary to salvation, as faith, hope, and charity,
without which a man cannot be saved: others be very excellent and profitable,
but not of like necessity with the former; as the sense and feeling of Gods
love and favor, peace of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, alacrity in
prayer, courage and boldness with God: and these latter may be lost, but the
necessary graces cannot, howsoever they may be greatly weakened; for so it
was with David, by his fall he lost for a time the feeling of Gods favor, the
joy of the spirit, etc. but faith, hope, and love, were not extinguished, but
sore weakened and covered, as fire in the ashes.

2. Use. Wants to be bewailed.

Here also we are taught to mourn for the corruption of our nature, whereby
we are prone to yield up our selves to every temptation of sin and Satan, and
be slack and negligent in resisting: we do not watch and pray against
temptations diligently, nor shun the occasions of sin, as we ought to do:
nay, we offer our selves into temptation, and minister occasion unto Satan, and
to our own corruption to assault us often. This we shall find to be true in
our selves, if we search out thoroughly our own estate; and therefore it should
grieve our hearts when we feel the law of our members rebelling against the
law of our minds, and leading us captive into sin.

3. Use. Graces to be desired.

Here also we must learn to desire of God all such graces as may Graces
helping against temptation.
help us against temptation, and they are many: I. Spiritual heed and
watchfulness to prevent temptations, and to avoid the occasions thereof. II.
Grace to pray in the time of temptation, that God would lessen and moderate the
violence and force thereof. III. That in temptation God would be so far from
withdrawing his grace from us, that he would then add grace to grace, even new
grace unto the former. IV. That in the continuance of temptation, when it
abides long upon us, God would strengthen us to hold out. V. That he would
give us patience to bear the irkesomnesse and burden of it. VI. That in the
end of it, God would give a comfortable issue, for his glory, and our own
good.

4. Use. Here also we are let to see, how great our weakness is, even when
we be Gods children, and have true grace; for we must daiely pray, that God
would not lead us into temptation: whereby we import, that of our selves we
are so far from withstanding a temptation, that if God should leave us, we
would give up our selves as slaves unto the devil. Here then behold thine
estate and condition whosoever thou art, considered in thy self; if God leave
thee, thou can not stand in any temptation, but must needs fall into the
bondage of Satan: yea, so exceeding great is our weakness in our selves, that
in temptation there does scarce appear any difference between the child of
God, and a wicked one; for both are subject to the temptations of Satan: nay,
the child of God is usually more assaulted then the wicked: when the evil
motion arises, or is suggested into the mind, the wicked receive it, and
delight therein: so did David, and so do we all: the wicked give consent of
will, so do the godly, if God leave them: the wicked fall to practice sin,
and so do the godly, if God keep back his grace from them: the wicked lie in
sin, and so do the godly, till the Lord by grace do raise Difference
between the godly and wicked in temptation.
them up. Where then is the difference? Surely the persons themselves do
differ in temptation, for the wicked is carried with violence into sin, and
without resistance in temptation; but the godly has some resistance in
himself, when he gives consent to sin, the evil that he does, he would
not do: Romans 7. 19. But the maine difference, is Gods grace and mercy,
vouchsafed to the child of God, but denied to the wicked; for if we escape
temptation, it is of grace and mercy; if we stand in temptation, and yield
not to evil suggestion, if we deny consent of will, or be kept from the
practice of sin, it is all of grace: and if we be fallen into sin, and
rise again by true repentance, that also is Gods special grace, without which
undoubtedly we should run on with the wicked unto destruction. Here
therefore we must learn to renounce all confidence in our selves, and to
walk in all humility before God, relying wholly upon his grace and mercy in
Jesus Christ: we must make his arm our strength, and his grace our shield, to
defend us from temptation. This was David's practice, who in all trouble and
distress had recourse to God, calling him, his hope, fortress, and deliverer,
Psalm. 91. 2, 3. his secret or hiding place, who preserves him from trouble,
and compasses him about with joyful deliverance, Psalm. 32. 7. and when his
enemies increased, yet the Lord was his buckler, his glory, and the lifter up
of his head, Psalm. 3. 2, 3. And thus should we rest upon God, considering that
if we receive a good thought, we can hardly retain it; and when evil motions
come, we cannot of our selves resist them.

5. Use. Hence we also learn, that in temptation Satan can go no Satan is
li(...) his (...).
further then God permits him: he could not touch Jobs goods, his children,
nor his body, till God gave him lea^e, Job. 1. 12. and 2. 6. neither could the
legion of devils enter into the heard of swine, til Christ Mat. 5. 12, 13.
b^de them go: we therefore must be patient in temptations, and bear them
as coming from Gods hand; neither must we fear the devil overmuch, though he
pinch our souls by his violent assaults, nay though he should torment and
possess our bodies really, for whatsoever he does, is by Gods permission: only
we must be careful to please God, and to rely on him, who will shortly tread
Satan under the feet of all his children, Romans 16. 20.

6. Use. That which we ask of God in prayer, we must sincerely endeavor after
in life; and therefore as we pray to God not to be carried into temptation, so
must we seek to arm and furnish our selves with grace, that we may be able
to encounter with our spiritual enemies, and to withstand their assaults. This
is the Apostles counsel, Ephesians. 6. 11. 12, 13. etc. Put ^ee on the whole armor
of God, that ye may be able to stand against the assaults of the devil, etc.
then after he names those Christian virtues, which as spiritual armor, the
child of God must The Christian armor against temptation.
take unto him, and arm his soul withal, if he would persevere in grace
unto the end. The first part of this armor, is truth or verity, wherewith
the loins must be girt about: and this is an excellent grace, 1
whereby a man professes true religion, and endeavors himself in the
practice of all the duties of religion in sincerity: his speeches and his
actions are suitable, proceeding from an honest heart, that truly means
whatsoever the tongue utters, or the members of the body do practice. The
second part, is justice or righteousness, when a 2
man leads his life so unblameably and uprightly, that he can truly say with
the Apostle Paul, I know nothing by my self, 1. Corinthians. 4. 4. Indeed the
best Christian has his faults and falls, but yet he must not live in known
sins; for then he cannot say, I know nothing by my self. The third, is the
preparation of the Gospel of peace, wherewith the feet must be shod. By Gospel
of peace, is meant the glad tidings of 3
salvation by Christ revealed in the Gospel, which promises pardon of sin,
and life everlasting by Christ, and commands us by way of thankfulness, to
deny our selves, to take up our cross and to follow Christ: now when we find
our affections thus cleaving unto Christ, though it be through tribulation,
then have we put upon our ^eete this spiritual furni^ure. The fourth, is the
shield of faith, by which a man 4
lays hold on the mercy of God in Christ for his salvation, and under it
shrowds himself against the fiery darts of Satan. The fifth, is ^ope, by 5
which we wait for that salvation which we apprehend by faith. The sixth, is
the word of God, which we must make a rule and square to all our 6
thoughts, words, and deeds, seeking to subdue thereby all contrary motions
that would take place in our hearts. The last is prayer, whereby 7
we betake our selves to God in all estates, craving mercy for the pardon of
our sins, and strength of grace to resist temptation, and an happy
deliverance out of the midst of it. And he that can take to himself these
excellent virtues, and put upon him this complete armor of Christianity, is
ready and fit to meet with any temptation whatsoever; and howsoever he may be
assaulted, yet he cannot be overcome, neither shall the gates of hell ever
prevail against him to hinder his salvation.

But deliver us from evil. These words contain the second part of this
petition, which is added as an exposition of the former: for then are we not
lead into temptation, when God delivers us from it, giving strength to
withstand, and a good issue out of it.

The meaning. Some think, that by evil here is meant Satan only, ^^ill
com(...)th ^ll(...) (...) all enemies.
that evil one, as he is called, Matthew. 13. 13. But we are to enlarge it
further to comprehend all our spiritual enemies: for first, this title evil
is not only given to Satan, but to sin also, Romans 12. 9. Let us abhor that
which is evil: 1. Pet. 3. 11. Eschew evil. And to the world: 1. Ioh. 5. 19.
The whole world lies in evil. Gal. 1. 4. Christ gave himself, to deliver us
from this present evil world. And to the flesh: that is, the corruption of our
nature, for that is the evil treasure of the heart, Matthew. 12. 35. Secondly,
that advantage which the Devil has against us, is by the world, the flesh,
and sin; and therefore with that evil one the Devil, sin, the world, and
the flesh must be understood. Indeed the Devil is that maine and principal
evil, and great tempter against whom we pray chiefly; but yet we also p^ay
against sin, the flesh, and the world, because they are Satan's agents and
instruments in temptation against us. We pray not to be delivered from Satan's
presence, for that is not possible, while we live in this vale of tears,
where the devil is a Prince, with an infinite multitude of wicked spirits, all
which bestirre themselves most busily to get advantage against Gods child;
neither is his presence so dangerous, though it were visible. But here we have
a greater matter in hand which we pray against, even Satan's sleights and
policies which he exercises against all men, but especially against Gods
children for their ruin and destruction: they indeed are many, but here I
will propound six most dangerous policies of Satan, which we are to watch
against.

I. Policy. When men have many good things in them, as knowledge Satan's
polici^s against God^ children.
in the mystery of salvation, beside other moral virtues; as temperance,
justice, etc. then the devil labors that concupiscence may still reign in
their hearts, by their lying and living in some one sin or other, whereto
they are naturally inclined. Caine no doubt was brought up in the knowledge and
service of God, as well as Abel; for he offered sacrifice unto God (though not
with the like truth of heart that Abel did) but herewith all the devil so
wrought, that the horrible sin of hatred and malice should possess his
heart, which brought him to kill his brother, and so to destruction: so Judas
no doubt had excellent gifts of wisdom and providence, and therefore among
all the Disciples he was made as it were the Steward of our Savior Christ's
family; he had questionless much knowledge, and his carriage was such in his
profession, that the Disciples knew not he should be the traitor, but every
one was afraid of himself, when our Savior Christ said, One of you shall
betray me, John 13. 22. yet for all this, the devil so wrought in his heart,
that the concupiscence of covetousness should reign in him, which moved him
to betray his master, and so brought him to perdition. And this course Satan
holds to this present day in the bosom of the Church of God; he labors by
might and maine to hold the professors of religion in some one sin or other:
and therefore we must always pray as here we are taught, that this natural
concupiscence may be daiely mortified and made weak, so as it budde not forth
in any branch of sin reigning in us.

II. Policy. When Satan cannot procure some gross corruption to reign in the
child of God, then he labors to get him commit some offense and sin,
whereby the name of God may be dishonored, his profession disgraced, his
conscience wounded, and Gods children offended. Thus he dealt with David in his
sins of adultery and murder, 2. Sam. 11. and chapter 12. 9. and with Peter in
the denial of his master, Mat. 26. 74. We therefore must pray according to this
petition, that we may 1. The. 5. 23
be sanctified throughout, and that our whole spirit, and soul, and body, may
be kept blameles unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: and that 2. The. 2.
1^
our hearts may be established in every good word and work: God delivering us
from every evil work, and preserving us unto his heavenly kingdom, 2. Tim.
4. 18.

III. Policy. When the child of God is fallen into any sin, then the devil
labors to cast him asleep therein, that he might lie in it without remorse,
and so never repent of it: thus he dealt with David, who lay in his sin of
adultery and murder without repentance, one whole year almost: and thus he
has dealt with the nation of the Jews, blinding their eyes, and hardening
their hearts, from the knowledge of the Messiah, whom they crucified, even unto
this day: and thus he deals with many Christians in the Church of God. In
regard whereof, we must pray in temptation as David did, that he would not
forsake us ouer-long, Psa. 119. 8. but though in justice he may leave us to
our selves for a time, yet he would please to renew his mercies toward, and
repair us by his grace.

IV. Policy. When the Lord vouchsafes to men the means of salvation, as the
word and sacraments, and chastisements for sin, then Satan labors to make
the same void and of none effect, that so they may not only miss of salvation,
but be condemned more deeply for the neglect and contempt of the means
vouchsafed unto them: this Paul knew well, and therefore he sent Timothy to the
Thessalonians to know their faith, lest the tempter had tempted them, and so
their labor upon them had been in vain, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5. For this cause he is
called that evil one, who steals away the seed of the word from out their
hearts, Math. 13. 19. and that envious man who sows tares among the seed, v.
28. Here therefore we must pray against this practice of Satan, that as the Lord
vouchsafes the means of grace unto us, so he would give his blessing withal,
that they may be profitable unto us; for without this, the means will turn to
our deeper judgment.

V. Policy. When he cannot work his will in their souls inwardly, as he
desires, then he assaies to do them mischief by some outward satanicall
operations; as possession, witchcraft, or striking their bodies with strange
diseases, or abusing their dwelling places with fearful noises and
apparitions: thus he plagued Job. 1. and 2.
Job in his goods, and in his body, when he could not prevail against his
soul: and when he could not prevail against Christ by temptation, then he
vexed him by transportatio^, Mat. 4. 5. 8. and thus he bound a daughter of
Abraham eighteen year, Luke 13. 16. Here therefore we pray for the comfort of
Gods providence, and for the presence and assistance of the good angels, that
we may be preserved, though not from temptations inward in mind, yet from
such bodily and outward abuses and injuries, as the devil would inflict upon
us; for herein he is curbed and restrained ordinarily, in respect of that
malice and cruelty which he bears to the children of God: whereupon How far
w^^ may pray against cr^ss^^
(I take it) the child of God may lawfully pray against all outward crosses
and afflictions, so far ^orth as they are evil, and proceed from that evil
one, the devil; for this is Gods promise to the godly person, Ps. 91. 10. There
shall none evil come unto thee, neither shall any plague come near thy
Tabernacle; that is, so far forth as it is evil: for otherways it is most
true, that many are the troubles of the righteous, because it is many Psalm. 34.
19.
times good for them to be afflicted, Psalm. 119. 71.

VI. Policy. Lastly, Satan labors to bring Gods children to some fearful
and miserable end; not so much for the bodily death, as in regard of the
inward horror and terror of conscience: for though he seldom spares any man,
yet he reserues the extremity of his power and malice to a man's last gasp.
Indeed he is many times restrained, so as many a child of God can say at his
end, in despite of Satan, Luke ^. 29.
Lord, now l^ttest thou thy servant depart in peace: but where he is not
restrained, there he labors to bring men either to presumption, or despair.
Here Pray for a comfortable death.
therefore we are taught to pray to God for a good and comfortable death in the
Lord, and that we may be so pres^rued therein, and i^abled by grace, that our
end may neither be evil to our selves, nor in appearance; but that we may
have both time and grace to prepare our selves, so as though our death be never
so sudden, yet we be not unprepared: for though sudden death be very
uncomfortable, yet it is never dangerous to him that is ready for the Lord:
but the unprepared death is the plague of plagues, for after it there is no
time nor means allowed unto man to alter the state of his soul, Eccles. 9. 10.

Uses. 1. That which we here pray for, we must endeavor to practice; Resist
the d^^^l.
and therefore our special care must be to resist the devil, and to keep our
selves from the assaults of Satan unto sin, whether they come from our own
corruption, or from this evil world: 1. John 5. 18. He that is borne of God
sins not, but keeps himsef^ that the ^icked one touches him not. This we
see may be done, and it is a notable The way h^^ to (...) (...).
sign of our adoption and regeneration: now the way to do it is set down by
the Apostle Paul, 1. Tim. 1. 18, 19. Fight the good fight: which he expounds in
the words following, which prescribe 2. duties; having faith and a good
conscience: To have faith, is to hold and maintain true religion in life and
death, renouncing all heresy whatsoever, whether of Jews, Turks, Papists, or
any other: which, whosoever How to keep the faith.
would do, must not content himself with a show of godliness in profession,
but must get the power of religion fast rooted in his heart, which he must
express* in his conversation. And for this end these rules must be
remembered: First, we must have in our 1
hearts sincere love to God in Christ, and to his Church, and true religion:
Christ must have the chief place in our hearts, and our love to God in him
must be so strong, that it must ouerwhelme all other affections, so as we may
truly say with Paul,* I count all things loss, and doc judge Phil. 3. ^.
them to be dongue, that I might win Christ: and this must be the order of our
love, we must love God and Christ for themselves, and the church of God, and
true religion, for Gods sake. Secondly, we must not only 2
know and believe that Christ died for our sins, and rose again for our
justification; but we must labor to feel the power and efficacy of his
death, killing sin in us, and the virtue of his resurrection, raising us up
to newnes of life: he that has only a show of religion, may make profession of
faith in Christ's death and resurrection; but herein stands the power, when we
be made conformable unto his death, in regard of the death of sin, and know
the virtue of his resurrection, by our holy endeavor in new obedience, and do
frame our selves to his example in all such things wherein he left himself a
pattern unto us. Thirdly, we 3
must not content our selves to know and profess that God is merciful, but
withal we must take observation of his loving favor toward us particularly,
adding one observation to another, that so our hearts may be rooted and
grounded in the love of God. A man may make profession of Gods grace and
mercy, from a mere general conceit and apprehen^ion, of it in his brain^*
but herein stands the power and p^^h of true religion, when a man by
observation and experience in himself, knows the love of God in Christ
toward him. And thus is ^aith and ^^ue religion held and maintained.

To have a good conscience (which is the second du^^e in this Christian fight)
is to preserve and keep o^^* conscience so, as it may excuse us, and not
accuse us unto God, in respect of living in any (...)* (...) ever there may be
infirmities in us* to this end we must observe these rules.

First, we must have a double, calling; the general calling of a Christian,
How to keep a good conscience.
wherein we must serve God; and a particular calling, according to our place
and gifts, wherein we must exercise our selves for the good of men. These two
must not be severed so as either be wanting: but he that would keep a good
conscience, must practice his general calling in doing the duties of his
particular calling: it is an easy thing to profess Christianity in the
Church, and many a man does so, that keeps no good conscience in his private
calling at home: but this is the evidence of a good conscience, when a man
shows himself a Christian in his calling at home, and conversation among his
brethren.

Secondly, we must always be exercised in doing some good duty, either of our
general or particular calling, or in some commendable furtherance thereunto:
for idleness is the devils pillow, whereon men Idle^e^ Satan* pillow.
either plot and devise some evil, or are lulled asleep in security: but
diligence in our calling is our way, wherein we have promise of protection by
Gods Angels from the devil, Psalm. 91. 11. but if we be out of our calling, we
lie open to the hurt of the enemy: when Peter without warrant from his calling
general or particular would needs go warm himself in Caiphas hall, what
fell out? upon a small assault by a silly maid, he denied Christ in most
fearful manner. Ioh. 18. 25, 26.

Thirdly, in every estate of life we must labor to see a special providence
of God, and therein to rest contented be it better or be it worse. It is an
^asie thing to see and acknowledge Gods mercy in health, peace, and plenty,
and to rest contented therewith: but if we would have peace toward God in our
own hearts, we must labor to quiet our selves with his disposing hand in the
day of trouble, sickness, or any other distress of life or death.

Fourthly, whatsoever we would do when we die, that we must now begin, and
continue doing it every day while we live; to wit, repent of our daily ^innes
and leave them, desire earnestly to be reconciled to God in Christ, and
steadfastly to believe all his gracious promises: he that has these graces
shall die in peace; and therefore if we would live in peace of conscience, we
must labor for them every day.

Fifthly, in all our societies and conuersings with men, we must be Re^^^ (...)
(...) (...) (...).
careful either to do good unto them, or to receive good from them: for where
neither of these is, there Satan shows his presence, and therefore we must
shun such company as give themselves to plot or practice some iniquity: for
evil conuersings corrupt good manners.

Sixthly, we must lead our lives not after our own fancy, but according to the
rule of Gods word: we must live by faith and not by ^ight: when we see no
signs of Gods favor, but rather of his anger and indignation, yet then must
we trust in him, and rely upon his mercy: this is against reason, yet a work
of faith, which is the evidence of things which are not seen, Heb. 11. 1.

2. Use. If we pray God to deliver us from evil, then we must beware of all
satanicall practices, as means of help in any distress, this is gross
hypocrisy to pray against the evils of Satan, and to give our selves to the
practice of them: herein many offend; for the Papists say this prayer, but yet
their religion in many things is a gross practice of magic and sorcerie: for
first, the consecration of their host in the mass is plain coniuration: and
so are their exorcismes in halowing salt, bread, and water, their casting out
of devils by certain words, by the sign of the cross, the application of
relics, and such like: nay, come to our selves, what is more common among us
then to use charms and Amuletts, to seek to witches and sorcerers when any
Charms and Amulets, d^abolicall.
strange affliction does befall us? And the setting of a figure though it be
not gross magic, yet therein is a close and privy work of the devil, his
hand is deep therein: and the Church in former times has condemned it for
witchcraft: for charms, characters, and amulets, be but the devils watchword
and sacraments to set him a working: what though the words used be good, yet
therein is Satan's deeper policy, who turns himself into an Angel of light,
under fair shows 2. Cor. 11. 14.
working the greater mischeife. But what horrible impiety is this, that when
God gives us occasion to come unto him, we leave, him and run for help to
his professed enemies.

3. Use. This branch of the petition serves to direct us what to do Places
haunted by evil spirits must be shunned.
in this case: say that a dwelling house or some other place is by Gods
permission, haunted and abused by some evil spirit, whether may a man
lawfully frequent or abide in such a place? Answ. By this petition is plain he
may not; for here we pray to be delivered from evil, and therefore we may not
voluntarily thurst our selves into such a place as is haunted by the devil:
would we come within the compass of the lions paw, or within the chain of a
mad dog, or of an hungerbitten bear? why then should we rashly thrust our
selves into the danger of the devil, who like a roaring lion seeks
continually whom he may devour. Many ignorant people are so bold-hardie, that
they will rai^e upon, and defy the devil, and command him to be gone. But
without a calling thereunto we may not so do. Indeed, if by Gods providence
we be called to live in such places necessarily, then this we may do, we must
not reason with the devil, but betake our selves to God by humble and earnest
prayer, and complain of Satan's vexation, making God our shelter and defense
both for soul and body: else if we presume to meddle with him without a
calling from God, we may justly be foiled and abused by him (as the sons of
Sceva were) Act. 1^. 14. 16.
because we have no promise from the Lord to be protected from him.

For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever: Amen.
These words contain the reason of the former six petitions: touching which we
must observe two things in general: first, that they are not a reason to move
God whose will is unchangeable; but to persuade the child of God that prays
thus, that God will grant his requests. Secondly, that this reason is not
peculiar to the last petition, but generally belonging to them all: as, hallowed
be thy name, because thine is the kingdom, power, and glory, and so for the
rest.

The meaning* Kingdome] This here imports three things in God: first, What Gods
kingdom imports.
that he is all-sufficient of himself to do all things whatsoever, needing no
help nor instrument beside his sovereign will: Genesis 17. 1. I am God
all-sufficient. Secondly, that he has a sovereign right and title to all
things in heaven and earth, as a King has to those things which belong to his
territories and jurisdiction. Thirdly, that he has sovereign rule and
authority over all things in heaven and earth, governing them as he pleases
and bringing them into an absolute subjection.

Further, the kingdom of God is twofold: The kingdom of his providence, Gods
kingdom twofold.
whereby he rules and gouernes all things in heaven and earth, even the devil
and all his angels and instruments: and the kingdom of grace, whereby he
gouernes his Church by his word and spirit: and both these are here to be
understood. Thine] The kingdom is here called Gods, for two causes. First, to
show that God has his kingdom of himself and from himself alone: thus the
kingdom of grace and of providence are both his. Secondly, to distinguish God
from earthly kings, for though they have a kingdom, power, and glory, as
Daniel tells Nebuchadnezzer; yet they have all these from God, not of
themselves; but God has them of himself alone, and not from any other.

Now because our nature is blind in the things of God, I will here Proofs of
Gods sovereign kingdom.
propound some reasons to prove that God has such a sovereign kingdom, as
also to show the excellency of it. First, this appears by that excellent
order which God has set in all his works by their creation: for how fitly do
times and seasons, as spring time and summer, autumn and winter, succeed one
an other? how sweetly do the heavenly creatures, the sun, moon, and
stars, serve for the creatures here below, as herbs and plants? how do
these serve for beasts and fowls? and all of them for the use of man? as this
proves against the Atheist that there is a God, so it shows the sovereignty
and most wise regiment of his kingdom. When a man sees a great army in good
array, and every one keeping his place and standing constantly, he will
presently commend the wisdom and authority of the leader: why then should we
not acknowledge the power and souerangntie of the almighty, in that constant
station of the creatures in that sweet order which they observe from the
creation?

Secondly, the terror and accusation of a guilty conscience does argue 2
evidently the absolute sovereignty of Gods kingdom: for when a man has
committed some grievous sin, either against the law of nature or the written
word of God, though it be so secretly that no man know of it, yet will his
conscience accuse and fright him; which it would not do, unless he were to
answer for that fact to God the sovereign Lord of al.

Thirdly, men of death, that is, such as by some notorious crime deserve 3
death, though through the ignorance or negligence of magistrates they be let to
escape, yet ordinarily they are overtaken with some fearful judgment, and
one way or other meet with their desert: which is a special work of Gods
sovereign providence.

Fourthly, the Gospel preached is as contrary to man's corrupt nature, 4
as fire is to water; and yet has it in all ages won men unto it, to
profess it, and to love it so, as they have been content for the Gospels sake,
to forsake house and lands, wife, and children, yea and life itself. This no
word of man could ever do, and therefore it argues plainly that some
supernatural power works with it, which draws the heart of man unto it.

Here some may say, that the Devil has a kingdom contrary to Gods kingdom
wherein he reigns; and therefore Gods kingdom is not absolute. Ans. If we
regard the malice of Satan, or the practice of the wicked, it may seem Gods
kingdom should not be absolute, because they continually rebel against his
revealed will: but consider the power of God, which ouerruleth Satan and all
his instruments, disposing most wisely of all their works, to his own glory,
the good of his Church, and their own ruin, and then we shall plainly see that
God rules over all: for howsoever the devil and his angels, and all other his
instruments oppose themselves unto the word of God, which is the law of his
kingdom of grace, yet God willingly permits all such works, and restraines them
all at his pleasure; so as that which comes to pass against Gods revealed
will, is not contrary to his absolute will.

Thine is the power] By power is meant an ability in God whereby he can do
whatsoever he will, and more then he will do: for the better Gods power.
conceiving of it, note these two things. First, that God is not only
powerful, but even power it self in regard of his nature as he is goodness
and wisdom, etc. Men and Angels are called powerful, as receiving power from
God; but God only is power it self, because his nature is infinite in power,
as in all other properties. Secondly, that power and will in God are one and
the same: for our better conceiving of them, they may be distinguished, but in
themselves they differ not, for Gods willing of a thing is the effecting and
doing of it. It is not so in us, for we will many things which we cannot do:
but whatsoever God wills that he does, and that which he cannot do, he
cannot will. The Scripture says, God cannot lie, nor deny himself, nor die,
etc. now as he cannot do these things, so neither can he will them: for they
are no works of power, but of weakness and frailty, and therefore is God
omnipotent because he can neither do nor will the same. Thine is, etc. Here
also we say Gods power is his own, that is, of himself alone, not received
from any other, as is also said of kingdom, and glory, to distinguish the
true God from all creatures who have not power, and kingdom, and glory of
themselves, but from God, whereas all these in God are of himself alone.

And the glorie] By Glory is meant excellency and majesty: and Gods glory.
this property rightly arises from the two former; for seeing he has an
absolute sovereignty over all things, and power answerable to dispose and
govern them at his pleasure; therefore of right all glory, and majesty, and
excellency belongs unto him: yea, the glory of all creatures is from him: so
that sinful man must say with Daniel, Unto us belongs shame and confusion,
Dan. 9. 7. but unto God be honor, and glory, and power, and dominion for
evermore.

The use. I. This reason thus conceived and understood, contains a A ground of
trust in God.
notable ground of trust and confidence in God, and of prayer to God in all
distress of life and death* for we have a father whose is kingdom, power, and
glory: now his power assures us that he is able to help us: and is he our
King, and we his subjects? then he is willing to help us. Is glory his? why,
what can make more for his glory then to show mercy to his people, in hearing
their prayers, and helping them in distress? Psalm. 50. 15. I will hear thee
and thou shall glorify my name.

II. These words are a notable form of giving thanks and praise to God: for
when the heavenly creatures are said to give thanks to God, they do it to this
effect, Rev. 4. 9. 11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive honor, and glory,
and power. Again, Phil. 4. 6. Be distrustful in nothing, but in all things
let your requests be made known to God with giving of thanks; where we see
prayer and thanksgiving must go together. Now this being a perfect form of
prayer, must needs comprehend thanksgiving with petitions; as therefore in the
six petitions Christ taught us to ask all needful things of God; so in this
reason he teaches us how to give thanks: for these three, kingdom, power, and
glory, do generally comprehend all matter of praise and thanksgiving unto
God: yea, it is a sum of all the Psalms of praise: and therefore when David
blessed God, it was to this effect, 1. Chron. 29. 11, 12. Thine O Lord is
greatness, and power* and glory, and victory, and praise: for all that is in
heaven and earth is thine: thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou excellest as
head over all: both riches and honor come from thee, and thou raignest over
all: and in thine hand is power, and strength, etc.

This point well observed, directs us in two Christian duties: first, We must
be frequent in praising god.
that we must be earnest and frequent in giving praise and thanks to God; for
the first thing we ask, is grace to glorify Gods name, and How to praise God.
the last thing we here do, is to ascribe glory to God indeed. Secondly,
here we see in what manner we must give thanks to God, namely, in every blessing
we must ascribe kingdom, and power, and glory unto God: as in the use of
meat and drink, first, therein labor to see, and accordingly to ascribe the
kingdom to God; that is, acknowledge Gods sovereignty in that creature; that
the right and interest thereto belongs to God, and that thou have it from him
and not of thy self. Secondly, see and acknowledge the power and providence of
God in that creature: his providence in that thou have it; and his power in
that it serves for thy good, and comfort in thy nourishment and refreshing.
Thirdly, when thou art comforted therewith, give honor and glory to God, so
thou shall be truly thankful. And thus must we be thankful to God for his
word, and all other blessings that we enjoy. Yea, this direction must we
observe for our behavior in affliction: we must labor to see and acknowledge
Gods sovereignty and power over us as we are his creatures, and that he has
right to dispose of us at his pleasure, and therefore we must humble our selves
under his hand, desiring grace so to behave our selves therein that we may
glorify his name. And thus shall we honor God even in affliction.

III. Here we see a way whereby we may obtain the things we How to obtain our
requests in prays.
ask of God: namely, we must confess our own unworthiness, taking shame and
confusion to our selves, and give all praise and honor and glory to God. Thus
did Jacob, Genesis 32. 10. I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and
of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant: so, Dan. 9. 7. To
thee, O Lord, belongs righteousness, but unto us open shame. And thus coming
in humility of heart, renouncing our selves and all that we can do, and
endeavoring to give all glory to God, we shall find mercy with the Lord for
the obteining of all our requests.

IV. Is kingdom, power, and glory Gods? then is he to be feared above all
creatures: for howsoever Satan and earthly Monarchs have dominion and power,
yet it is not of themselves, but from God: they can do nothing but by power
and permission from God; but God of himself can punish and destroy.

Lastly, hereby we must be moved to love God and to yield obedience unto him
in all good duties: for to such will he show his sovereignty and power for all
good things, that so they may give the glory of all to God that gives them*

Amen.] We have heard the preface, and the petitions of this prayer: Amen, what
it signifies here.
now we come to the third part of it, which is the Conclusion, in this word,
Amen: which is as much as verily, truly. It is commonly taken to be a word of
wishing in this place, importing as much as, So be it, I wish it be so, or such
like. But we must know that it has here a further use, to wit, not only to
express our desire of the things we ask, but also to testify our faith in
assurance of receiving them according to our desire: for so it is usually taken
in the new testament, where it is used to affirm or asseuere a thing with
vehemency and certentie. Again, our Savior Christ giving both direction and
encouragement to prayer, says thus, Whatsoever you desire when ye pray,
believe that ye shall have it, and it shall be done unto you, Mark. 11. 24.
where he shows two principal things required in prayer; the first, an earnest
desire of the grace and blessing we ask: the second, is faith whereby we
believe that God will grant us the things we ask. Now our desires were
sufficiently expressed in the six petitions: and therefore, this being a
perfect platform of prayer, here undoubtedly is propounded the testification
of our faith, to this effect: As we have craved these things at thy hands, O
Lord, so do we believe that in thy good time thou will for Christ's sake,
grant the same unto us. So that it is not here to be taken, as it is commonly,
only for a bare assent of the people answering the Minister in the
congregation; but for a part of the prayer belonging both to Minister and
people that pray in faith, whether publicly or privately: and that so much
more excellent then the former, by how much our faith excels our desire:
yea, it is the seal of our hearts which we must set to every petition, for to
ratify and confirm the same unto our selves; as when we say, Hallowed be thy
name, our hearts must say, Amen: that is, as I desire grace to glorify thy
name, so I believe Lord, thou will enable me thereunto: and so for the rest.

The use. I. From the union of this word with the petitions, we learn, Pardon
of si^n^ must* be believed particularly. Council. I^id. (...). cap. 9. and can.
14.
that every child of God must believe particularly and certainly the pardon of
his own sins, and endeavor by grace to attain thereunto, if as yet he
cannot be persuaded of it. This the Papists deny, teaching that a man must
only believe in general, that remission of sins belongs to Gods Church, and
hope well for himself; and they make it presumption for a man to arroga^e
particular certenty unto himself. But it is no presumption, because we must
believe to receive from God that we ask according to his will: now God bids us
ask forgiveness of our particular sins, and therefore we must believe it, and
so by faith may be assured of it: as for their general faith, it differs not
from the faith of devils, for they believe there is remission of sins in
Gods church. And to say we hope well when we are not assured by faith, is to
bewray both ignorance and negligence in the matter of our salvation: for faith
is the ground of things hoped for, and therefore their hope without faith must
needs be a blind presumption. And here further we may note, that by their
opinion they abolish a great part of the Gospel; for with the gracious promises
of mercy in Christ made therein, the Gospel commands every penitent person
that believes, to apply the same promises particularly to himself; and this
part of it they cut off, and so deprive the child of God of all Prayer in ^
known tongue.
true comfort. II. This testification of our faith joined to our requests,
shows that all prayer ought to be made in a known tongue, for else the assent
and affiance of the heart cannot be given together. Ob. The word here used is
an hebrew word, which was unknown to the Greek churches, now if one word of
maine use in prayer, may be in unknown tongue, why may not many, and so a
whole prayer. Ans. Though this word Amen be hebrew, yet by use it became as
familiar and well known in the Greek Church, and so in other Churches, as any
word of their own dialect; as many Latin words (as nisi prius, and other
terms of law) by common use, become familiar and well known in our English
tongue.

The use of the Lords prayer.

The principal use of this prayer is, to be a pattern and direction whereby
the Church of God, and every member of it, may frame their prayers to God on
any occasion. And because many through ignorance fail in this point, therefore
I will stand somewhat to show, how the Lords prayer must be made a pattern to
our prayers. For this end we must apply the several petitions of this
prayer, both to the special How to make the ^. prayer a pattern in praying.
times of prayer, as morning and evening; and also to the special occasions
whereupon we pray: which may be reduced to some of these three, to wit: 1. some
weighty business we have in hand: 2. some affliction we are in, or in danger
of: 3. or in regard of death.

Now to apply the petitions to each of these severally. I. In the morning. A
fit prayer for that time, before we set upon the duties of our calling, For
morning prayer.
may thus be framed from these petitions: 1. we must desire the Lord to give us
grace to seek the advancement of his glory that day following, in the duties
of our calling and in every thing we take in hand. 2. that he would rule in our
hearts by his grace, and guide us by his word that whole day: 3. enable us to
do his will that day and not our own, even with readiness and delight: 4.
strengthen us to depend upon his providence that day for all things needful
for this life: 5. that he would humble us in our selves for our sins, and
give us repentance for them and pardon in Christ Jesus, that so no judgment
light upon us for them, and that our hearts may be inclined to love and mercy
toward our brethren as we desire mercy with God for our own souls. 6. That
God would strengthen us against temptation, that neither the world, the flesh,
nor the devil prevail against us. And of all these we must gather assurance,
because all sovereignty, and power, and glory, belongs to God.

II. At evening also, we may fitly apply these petitions for the comfortable
Evening prayer.
commending of our selves to God that night: 1. entreating God to bless our
rest unto us, that thereby we may be fitter to glorify God. 2. That we may
rest and sleep safely as his true subjects, under his gracious regiment. 3.
That we may do his will as well in rest as in labor, in the night and
secretly, as in the day and sight of men. 4. That he would bless our rest and
sleep, that it may co^fortably serve for the preservation of our lives. 5.
That he would forgive the sins of the day past, that so no cu^se, terror,
nor fear meet with us for them the night following. 6. That he would keep us
in our rest from all sinful lusts, from all wicked motions and suggestions
either waking or sleeping.

III. When we enterprise any weighty matter or business of our callings, How
to pray in weighty affairs.
we may fitly apply these petitions in prayer to God for ability and good
success therein: for whatsoever we take in hand, we must do it in the name of
the Lord: 1. we must pray that in this whole business our hearts may be set
sincerely to seek the advancement of Gods glory. 2. That the Lord would
vouchsafe to guide and govern us in doing the work whatsoever it be. 3. That
in doing of it, we may make conscience to do the will of God and to obey him,
from the beginning to the end of it. 4. That we may by faith rely upon Gods
providence, for the issue and effect of our whole endeavor. 5. That none of
our sins may bring a curse upon us in the work. 6. That neither Satan nor
any other enemy of our souls, may hinder us by temptation, but that God would
deliver us from them all.

IV. When any affliction lies upon us or ours, we may hence frame holy How to
pray in affliction.
requests to God: Entreating, 1. that we may honor God by patience and
obedience in that affliction, and not dishonor him. 2. That God would show in
us the power of his gracious regiment in that affliction, and not suffer Satan
or our own corruptions to reign in us. 3. That we may obey God therein, as
well as in any other estate of peace or ^ase. 4. That we may see his providence
therein and be patient, relying also upon the same hand of God for our
deliverance. 5. That our sins may not turn it into a curse, but that we
having the pardon of our sins, may make good use thereof, for our humiliation
and reformation. 6. That we may* not in that our weakness be assaulted of
Satan above our strength, but that God would deliver us from all temptations.

U. In the hour of death we may most comfortably commend our In the hour of
death.
selves to God following these petitions: praying, first, that we may glorify
God in sickness and death, as well as in life and health. 2. That God would now
show the comfortable work and regiment of his word and spirit in our hearts,
even above all that we have felt in the time of our health. 3. That we may as
readily and cheerfully obey God dying as living. 4. That God would give his
blessing upon all means we shall use for our comfort or recovery, making us
contented with his providence even in death it self. 5. That we may be truly
humbled for our sins, and having comfortable assurance of mercy and pardon,
may with joy render up our souls into the hands of God in the moment of death.
6. That seeing Satan is most busy and malicious in our greatest weakness, it
would please the Lord to magnify his mercy in strengthening our souls
against all the assaults of sin and Satan. Thus we see how in all estates of
life and death, we may have sweet and comfortable recourse to God following
these petitions: we must therefore labor to know and understand this heavenly
prayer, that so we may use it on all occasions to the glory of our God, and
the comfort of our souls: we cannot give more evident testimony of the grace
of Adoption, then by the sincere exercise of the gift of prayer, when we can
come with boldness into the presence of our heavenly father; and therefore we
must give our selves to the serious and often imitation of this heavenly
pattern, and not content our selves to say over the words, but from a feeling
heart power out our souls before God, according to the meaning of this prayer
in all estates.

2. Use. These petitions may serve for a notable direction according to which
we may frame our whole lives: for what we ask of God in A pattern of a godly
life.
prayer, that must we endeavor to practice in our lives: and therefore
according to our requests in these petitions must we spend our time in a godly
endeavor after these six things: 1. our chief care and endeavor must be
every day to bring some glory to God. 2. We must every day yield up our selves
in souls and bodies unto God, submitting our s^^^es in all things unto his
godly regiment. 3. We must endeavor to do his will in all things, every day;
making conscience of all sin whereby we rebel against him. 4. We must apply
our selves faithfully to our callings, yet so as we still depend upon Gods
providence for a blessing in every thing we take in hand. 5. We must humble our
selves every day before God in regard of our daily offenses, still confessing
our sins and craving pardon for them at the hands of God. 6. We must daily
fly to God for help and succor in our spiritual combat with sin and
Satan, striving manfully against our own corrupt nature, against the world and
the devil.

3. Use. This prayer of Christ, ministers most heavenly comfort to every Notes
of Adoption out of the Lords prayer.
child of God, by certifying him of his Adoption: for out of every petition he
may gather a special note thereof. As, 1. an earnest and hearty desire in all
things to further the glory of God. 2. A care and readiness to resign our
selves in subjection to God, to be ruled by his word and spirit, in thought,
word, and deed. 3. A sincere endeavor to do his will in all things with
cheerfulness, making conscience of every thing we know to be evil: this is
an infallible note of the child of God. 4. Upright walking in a man's lawful
calling, and yet still by faith to rely upon Gods providence, being well
pleased with Gods sending whatsoever it is. 5. Every day to humble a man's self
before God for his offenses, seeking his favor in Christ unfeignedly, and so
daily renewing his faith and repentance. 6. A continual combat between the
flesh and the spirit, corruption haling and drawing one way, and grace
resisting the same and drawing another way: where this striving and resistance
is in mind and heart, there is the spirit, for else all would go full-sway with
corruption. Hereby then make search in thy self for these graces of God, and
if thou find the^ in thee, comfort thy self in assurance of thine adoption;
and though thou can not find the^ all, yet if there be an unfeigned desire
after them, when thou put up these requests unto God, comfort thy self,
for thou art the child of God: for without the spirit of prayer, which is the
spirit of adoption, we cannot call God father, nor say hallowed be thy name, from
a true heart, unfeignedly desiring Gods glory.

4. Use. Out of these petitions we may observe the plain marks of a Marks of
a carnal man.
carnal man: as, 1. to neglect the glory of God, and to seek his own praise
and glory. 2. To follow the sway of his own corruptions, suffering them to be
his guide, and to neglect to yield subjection and obedience to the word of God.
3. To make no conscience of sin, if it fit his humor, so his own will be
satisfied, he cares not for the doing of Gods will. 4. Not to rest on Gods
providence for the things of this life, but wholly to rely upon the means; if
they fail, his heart is down, and his hope is gone. 5. To go on in sin,
without remorse, or humbling himself unto God: this impenitence is a plain
mark of a carnal man. 6. To run headlong into temptation, without fear or
feeling, so as he finds no occasion to pray for deliverance from sin: he that
has any of these six things reigning in him, is a carnal man; therefore try
thy self, if thou find them in thee, turn unto God by true repentance.

And look what we have said of prayer, according to the pattern of the former
petitions, may also be said of thanksgiving, after the example of these words,
For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory. We have showed the use of
the^ before, and so accordingly in all Gods blessings and works of his
providence, for which we must give thanks; we must first labor to see therein
the sovereignty and power of God, and then we must ascribe the same to God,
with all glory, and praise, and thanksgiving. And not only give assent, but
with (...)ce of heart wait for the fruition of every grace and blessing we ask
of God, according to his will.

Amen.
verse 14. For if ye do forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly father
will also forgive you:

15. But if you do not forgive men their trespasses, no more will your heavenly
father forgive you your trespasses.


These two verses contain a reason of the fifth petition, concerning the Of
forgiving others.
forgiveness of our sins; which is propounded with a limitation and
condition of our forgiving them that trespass against us: the reason here is,
because in this behalf, we shall find such measure with God, as we mete out
unto our brethren.

For the meaning of the words, three points must be discussed. Who must forgive.
First, whom this reason does concern, namely, private men for private
trespasses: it reaches not to Magistrates and public persons in their
function, who be the (...).
Ministers of God to take vengeance on them that do evil: for to such the
Lord says, Thiue eye shall not spare the Deuteronomy. 1^. (...). 19.
offender: but according to the quality of the offense, must he execute
judgment upon offenders, for the remoouing of evil. And so must parents and
masters deal in their families, and Ministers in their public dispensation of
the word: for else offenses would so abou^d that there could be no living for
Gods people in the world.

II. Point. How does these depend one upon an other, our forgiving of men, and
Gods forgiving us? Ans. We must not conceive that our forgiving men their
trespasses, is a cause why God forgiues us: for we are by nature dead in sin,
and can not do any good thing of our selves, till we be enabled thereunto of
God: but our forgiving is a sign that God has forgiven us, being indeed a
fruit of our reconciliation with God: for it is a sign of true repentance,
which is a fruit of faith, whereby we apprehend the mercy of God for the
pardon of our sins in Christ.

III. Point. How should our forgiveness, go before Gods forgiving How our
forgiveness goes before Gods.
us: for so the words seem to import, If you forgive -- your heavenly father
will forgive you, etc. Ans. The pardon of sin which God gives must be
considered two ways: first, as it is given in heaven; secondly, as it is
revealed and assured to the conscience of man: now the pardon of sin in
heaven always goes before our forgiving others: but our assurance of pardon
with God, follows after our forgiving of men: for a man's sins may be
forgiven with God, and yet he may long remain without the assurance thereof in
his own conscience: this we may see in David, for when Nathan said, 2. Sam.
12. 13.
The Lord has put away thy sin, no doubt it was forgiven in heaven; but yet
his Psalm. 51.
^arnest prayer for pardon afterward, (...)was plainly that he did not upon
Nathans speech receive the comfortable assurance of pardon in his own
conscience. This then is Christ's meaning, that if we forgive men their
trespasses, God will assure us in our consciences that he has forgiven us;
otherwise, if we will not forgive, God will deny us that assurance.

The use of this point is first and chiefly this: we must learn to forgive
Private wrongs must be forgiven. Motives.
and forget all private wrongs and injuries done unto us whether great or
final, without desire of revenge. The reasons to move us hereto are these.
First, it is Gods commandment here expressly enjoined, 1
which must needs bind the conscience to obedience. Secondly, if we 2
will not forgive men, God will not forgive us: this Christ inforceth by
doubling the sentence: now without Gods forgiveness there is no salvation, and
therefore we must be ready to forgive, as we tender our own salvation.
Thirdly, the frailty of our nature is such, that we our selves 3
are subject to offer wrong to others: this is intimated in this phrase, except
ye forgive men their trespasses; so that every man is prone to trespass
against others; and therefore as we would be forgiven when we trespass, so
must we also forgive men their trespasses.

Now for the better performing of our duty herein, these rules must Rules of
forgiving.
be observed. I. We shall perceive in sundry men many wants and frailties,
which men's laws punish not; as in old men frowardnes; in others hastines; and
in some ambition and desire of praise: now these and such like we must in love
pass by, without taking notice thereof. Prove. 19. 11. It is the glory of a
man to pass by an offense. II. Rule. If men give us some light occasions of
offense, as vpbraid us with our ignorance, unskillfulness, baseness, poverty, or
such like, we must lightly pass them over, preferring the bond of peace before
outward reputation. III. Rule. Though a man do unto us that which is indeed
flat injury, yet if it do not manifestly hinder Gods glory, or too much
prejudice our good estate; by hurting our good name, our goods, or life, we
must cause our private grief and hurt to yield to public peace. IV. Rule. If
men do us such great wrongs as manifestly hinder Gods glory, and our good
estate in life, goods, or name; then we must use the help of the magistrate,
and the lawful defense of laws provided for that end. Always remembering that
in seeking to right our selves, we lay aside all malice, hatred, and desire of
revenge, and with a single heart propound Gods glory in the reformation of the
party that does us wrong.

Secondly, in this reason persuading to forgiveness, we may see that Remission
and reformation go together.
pardon of sin before God, and reformation of life go together: for here by
this one branch of a reformed life in brotherly forgiveness, is understood all
of the same kind: but where is no reformation of life, there is no pardon of
sin before God. Would thou therefore be assured in thy conscience of Gods
special favor toward thee in Christ? then reform thy life by every law of
God: for this will give thee assurance from God: but if thy life be unreformed,
thy hope of pardon is a mere conceit of thine own brain: and therefore if
thou want reformation now begin, and if thou have begun, then hold on, and
do it more and more, for thy more full assurance.

verse. 16. Moreover, when ye fast, look not sour as the hypocrites: for they
disfigure their faces, that they might seem unto men to fast. Verily I say
unto you that they have their reward.
Our Savior Christ, having rectified the abuses in Almes-giuing, Of Fasting.
and in prayer, does here come to a third Christian duty, namely, fasting:
wherein as in the former, first he seeks to reform abuses, and then prescribes
the true manner thereof. But before we come to these particularly, I will in
general handle the doctrine of fasting, for the better understanding of this
text, and exercise of this duty. And first we must know, that Christ here
speaks not of a civil fast, appointed by magistrates in their dominions for
civil respects; but of a religious fast, respecting the worship of God: which
appears by this, that he joins the doctrine of fasting to the doctrine of
prayer, which is a special part of Gods holy worship.

Now touching a religious fast, I will here handle six points. First, Of a
religious fast six points.
what kind of work a fast is. The Scripture speaks of two kind of works:
some commanded of God; others left indifferent. Works 1
commanded, be good works, and parts of Gods service, because he commands
What kind of work fasting is.
them, as prayer, thanksgiving, Almes-deedes, etc. Works indifferent, be in
themselves neither good nor evil, because they be neither commanded of God,
nor forbidden; as to eat, drink, buie, sell, etc. And to this kind of works
must we referte fasting: for it is not simply commanded of God, and so no part
of his worship in it self, more then eating is. And yet consider fasting in it
circumstances; to wit, as a means to further and to testify our humiliation
in repentance, and our zeal in prayer, and so it is a good work: for in that
use, and to that end God commands it, and it is a part of his worship. If it
be said, there is no commandment for it in the new Testament: I answer, if we
consider it How fasting is commanded in the new Testament.
in the forenamed use and end, there is: for the same commandment that
inioyneth prayer, and humiliation, inioyneth fasting; because it is a means to
further them both: for every commandment includes all necessary furtherances
to the maine duty. Again, we have in the new Testament examples of ordinary
fasting, which are without all exception, in our Savior Christ and his
Apostles, with the occasions thereof set down whereupon they fasted. Now this
is a rule in Divinity, that How examples are a rule.
the ordinary examples of the godly approved in Scripture being against no
general precept, have the force of a general rule, and are to be followed.

II. Point. How a religious fast is to be performed. In a religious fast In
performing a religious fast 3. things.
three things are required. First, Abstinence from meat and drink for one
day, at least til the evening: for abstinence from morning till noone is no
fast. When Hester required the Jews to fast for her, she forbids 1
them Hest. 4. 16.
to eat, or drink, during the fast. And when David fasted and prayed for his
child begotten in adultery, he would 2. Sam. 12. 16. 17. 20.
eat nothing till he had ended his humiliation perceiving that the child was
dead. This is a thing granted by all Protestants. And the very names of
fasting used in the old and new Testament, import a total abstinence for that
time: which must be observed, to discover the absurdity of Popish fasts,
wherein they allow men to drink often if they will, and eat also, so Tollet.
Instr. Sacerd. l. 6. c. 2.
it be not flesh: but in fasting, abstinence must be used from all meat and
drink so far as health and strength will suffer. Secondly, Abstinence from
all delights of nature, whereby the outward man may be cheered and refreshed,
as music, sweet smells, soft apparel, recreations, and such like. This
Daniel observed for three weeks of days; I ate (says Dan. 10. 3.
he) no pleasant bread, neither came flesh or wine in my mouth, neither did I
anoint my self at all: and the like may we see in many examples of the old
Testament. They cast Job 2. 1^.
dust and ashes upon their heads, in stead of anointing themselves with oil:
and for soft apparel, they put on Nehe. 9. 1.
sackcloath next their skin: they 2. Sam. 12. 16. Joel. 1. 13.
waked when they should have slept; and lay upon the ground in stead of beds:
the Joel. 2. 16.
bridegroom went out of his chamber, and the bride out of her bride-chamber:
for mirth there was mourning; and Joel. 1. 11. 13.
howling in stead of singing. Thirdly, a man must humble and afflict his body
in fasting; and therefore must be sparing in his diet and delights before the
day of fasting: for a man may so pamper and full himself, that he shall not
need to eat or drink for one whole day; but such persons fast not: the time
of our fast must be a Lev. 16. 29.
time of humiliation: men must afflict themselves therein, as Ezr. ^. 21.
Ezra says: they must beat down the body, and bring it into subjection, as
1. Cor. 9. 17.
Paul did: for though Ahabs fasting was but outward, yet thus he humbled
himself before the Lord, 1. king. 21. 27. 29. Gods children therefore must see
in their religious fasts, that their bodies be humbled with their souls. Here
indeed care must be had, that in humbling our bodies we destroy not nature, or
so weaken our strength that we difable our selves to serve God in our callings
afterward; such afflicting of the body the Apostle disaloweth, Coloss. 2. 23.

III. Point. Touching the right ends of a religious fast: which be The ends of
a religious fast.
four especially. I. To be a spur and provocation to true humiliation and
repentance: for this cause the Ion. 3. 7.
Ninevites did not only fast themselves; 1
but caused their beasts to be without food and water, that by hearing their
lowing and bleating for meat, they might more deeply be humbled by the
consideration of the desert of their own sins, and so more unfeignedly
repent. This stands with good reason: for a man's abasing and pinching of his
body, shows him his unworthiness of the comforts of Gods creatures by reason
of his sins; it leads him to see his desert of Gods wrath by reason of his
transgressions, and so his heart is more deeply stricken with conscience of
his own sins: whereupon he does more freely confess them unto God, and more
carefully turn from them afterward. II. A religious fast serves for an 2
outward testimony and profession of our humiliation and repentance: for by
our abstinence from the delights of nature, and the comforts of the creatures,
we solemnly profess our unworthiness thereof, and of all Gods blessings: for
this the Lord bids, proclaim a fast, when he would Io l 1. 1^.
have his people to testify their humiliation. III. It serves to subdue 3
the flesh, and the corruption of nature: this end is necessary, for the soul
works by the body, the inclination of the affections is greatly swaied by
the bodily constitution, and the soul is stained with many sins, by reason
of the distemper of the body. But yet this end is not so general as the two
former: for there be two sorts of men in Gods Church; some of so weak a
constitution of body, that their ordinary sobriety and temperance in diet,
does sufficiently subdue the rebellion of their flesh; now these need not to
fast for this end: others there be, whom ordinary temperance and sobriety
will not serve to tame the rebellion of their flesh, and these are they that
must use religious fasting, for the subduing of the flesh to the spirit,
besides their ordinary moderation in diet. IV. Fasting serves to prepare us
unto prayer, and 4
to further us therein; for first it causes watchfulness, and cuts off
drowsinesse, and so makes a man the more lively and fresh in prayer: whereupon
our Savior often ioynes these together, ^ar. 13. 33
Watch and pray. Secondly, it makes us feel our wants and miseries, and so
brings us to some conscience of our sins; whereupon the heart is more deeply
humbled, and so stirred up more fervently to call for mercy: and for this
cause the Scripture many times ioynes prayer and fasting together.

IV. Point. The causes or occasions of a religious fast, which may The causes
of a religious fast.
justly move us thereunto: and they be seven. First, when we our selves 1
have fallen into any grievous sin or sins, whereof our conscience accuses
us, and whereby we procure the wrath of God against us; then to resonne our
selves, and to escape the wrath of God, we had need to give our selves to
prayer and fasting: 1. Sam. 7. 6. The Israelites having fallen to Idolairie,
put away their strange gods, and turn unto the Lord with weeping and fasting:
and when they kept the feast of Expiation, which was a type of their forgiveness
by the Messiah, then they humbled themselves in fasting before the Lord, Leuit.
16. 29. Secondly, when 2
some among us fall into any grievous sin, though we our selves be clear
from it, yet then we must fast, because for the sins of others, Gods
judgments may justly fall upon us. Hence it was that Paul blames the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 5. ^.
because they sorrowed not for the sin of incest committed among them. And in
this regard, every godly person ought to humble himself, because of the
grievous sins of Atheism, blasphemy, oppression, etc. which abound among
us. Thirdly, when the hand of God in any judgment lies upon us: so did the
Judge. 20. 16.
Israelites, 3
when they fell in battle before the Beniamites: and so ought we to do for
many judgments of God that have laien long upon us. Fourthly, 4
when the hand of God in any fearful judgment lies heavy on others, among
whom we live, though we our selves be freo: in this case David often times
humbled himself, not only when his child gotten in adultery was sick, 2.
Sam. 12. 16. but even when his enemies were sick he fasted, Psalm. 35. 13.
Fifthly, when Gods judgments are imminent, and 5
as it were hang over our heads: so did I^hosaphat 2. Chro. 20 1, 3.
when his enemies came against his country: and in this regard we ought to
humble our selves, for the professed enemies of Gods grace, are daiely plotting
our 6
subversion. Sixthly, when we stand in need of some needful blessing of God,
especially such as concern salvation* thus Act. 10. 30.
Cornesius besought the Lord in prayer and fasting, when he desired true
resolution concerning the Messiah; and so ought we to do, to get assurance of
our reco^ciliation with God, in the pardon of our sins. Seauenthly, for Gods 7
blessing and good success upon the ministry of the Gospel; so did the
Church for Paul and Barnabas, when they sent them to preach, Act. 13. 3. and so
ought we to do at this day. These be the just occasions of fasting mentioned
in the word, whereto we may refer the rest: and when any of these befall
particular persons, families, congregations, cities, countries, or kingdoms,
then they ought to humble themselves in fasting, before the Lord*

U. Point. The time of a religious fast: this now is free in regard of The time
of a religious fast.
conscience. Indeed in the old Leu. 16. 29.
testament, they had a set time of fasting, to wit, the tenth day of the
seanenth month: but in the new testament, there is no set time which binds
the conscience; only men must fast as just occasion is offered. If it be said,
that diverse reformed Churches have set times of fasting: I answer, those fasts
are set for orders sake, and not to bind conscience, and they are civil fasts
and not religious, for the Church may al^er them at her pleasure. The time of a
religious fast, is the time of mourning, which is uncertain unto any Church,
and therefore the time thereof cannot be set; which must be marked, because
the church of Rome does herein err, in that they bind Bellarm de bon. oper. in
partic. l. 1. c. 7
men's consciences to their set times of religious fasts. Tollet. instr. Sacerd.
l. 6. c. ^.

UI. Point. The kinds of a religious fast: and they are two; private The kinds
of a religious fast.
and public. A private fast, is that which is performed privately, either by
one man alone, for some of the forenamed occasions peculiar to to himself, as
Cornelius did (Act. 10. 33.) when he desired to know the true Messiss; or by a
private family, upon peculiar causes moving them thereto, and so did Hester
fast with her maids, Hester, 4. 16. This fast was foretold by Zac. 1^. 12.
Zachary, The land shall bewail, every family apart, the family of the
house of David apart, and their wines apart, etc. A public fass, is that which
is performed publicly, by diverse families assembling, in one or in many
congregations: and this public fast is appointed partly by the Church, and
partly by the Magistrate: the Joel 1. 14.
Church must judge of the time and occasion thereof; and the Jonah. 3. 7. 2.
C^ro. 20. 3.
Magistrate must authorize and proclaim it. Again, a religious fast may be
distinguished otherways, in respect of the time of continuance, and manner of
abstinence therein: for sometime a religious fast is only from one meal for
one day, as Judge. 20. 26. sometime it is from one meal for many days
together, as 1. Sam. 31. 13. they fasted seven days together for Saul and
Jonathan; abstaining from their dinners, and taking some refreshing in the
evening: and so Daniel fasted for three weeks of days, that is, each day from
morning till night, Dan. 10. 3. And sometime it is from all kind of sustenance
for many days together; so Hester and her maids fasted three days, Hest. 4.
16. Now the two former may be used of us as occasion serves; but this last is
very dangerous; for it is not with us in this regard, as it was with the Jews;
they lived in hot countries, and so had cold stomachs, by reason whereof they
might fast three days without any great inconvenience: but we that live in
colder clymates, have hotter stomachs, and so have need of more and oftener
refreshing then they had; neither can we fast so long without endangering life
or health: now fasting must be to humble and afflict the body, but not to
destroy it.

Thus much of fasting in general: now I come to Christ's doctrine of fasting
here propounded. And first, of his reformation of the abuses thereof then used
among the Jews: When ye fast look not as the hypocrites, etc. Quest. How does
this agree with the commandment of God, Joel. 1. 13, 14. where he bids them
howl and cry in their fast, which cannot be without a mournful countenance;
and indeed in a true fast rightly celebrated, the sorrow of the heart must
needs be testified by some convenient signs and gesture in the body. Ans.
Christ does not here simply condemn a sorrowful countenance in fasting, when
as just occasion of sorrow therein is offered; for (...). 2. 2
Nehemiah looked sad: but only the hypocrisy of the Pharisees, who when they
fasted had a sad countenance, without a sorrowful heart; for all their heavy
looks, they had no broken spirits: this therefore Christ says, carry not a
sad and heavy look, when thou have no sorrowful mourning heart; mind not thy
outward countenance, in respect of thy heart and conscience. For they disfigure
their faces, etc. This also may seem not blame-worthie, for Gods children have
in their fasts diverse ways disfigured their faces, and been approved: Ezra
Ezra 9. ^.
plucked off the hair of his head and of his beard: and Io^h. 7. ^.
Ioshuah and the Israelites fell to the ground upon their face, and put dust
upon their heads, which could not but disfigure their faces. Answ. The
Pharisees are blamed for disfiguring their faces, in diverse respects, and that
justly; for first, this was the chief and only thing they looked to in their
fasts, even the outward show thereof, which God hates. Again, the word
translated disfigure, (...)
signifies the very abolishing of their favor and visage, which is far more
then the ancient Jews ever used to do; they indeed humbled their bodies, and
testified their sorrow, which God approved: but they sought not to deforme
their natural complexion, they pined not themselves to make their faces pale,
that so men might the better take notice of their much fasting, as these
Pharisees did: and such were they in Paul's time, who spared not their bodies,
Colos. 2. 23. Thus much for the meaning.

The words thus explaned contain two parts; a commandment, and a reason
thereof. The commandment forbids ^ained mourning in fasting, Look not as
the hypocrites: as if he should say, The hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees
when they fast, make an outward show of contrition and sorrow, when as indeed
their hearts are no whit humbled; but you shall not do so. The reason of the
former prohibition is drawn from the practice of hypocrites, which is set out
by the end and fruit thereof: their practice is to disfigure their faces,
therein is all their sorrow: their end is ostentation, that they might be seen
unto men to fast. And the fruit is answerable, verily I say unto you they have
their reward: that is, reputation and praise of men. Thus then we see that
Christ co^demnes not religious fasting, nor godly sorrow therein, no nor yet
the seemly signs of godly sorrow; but only hypocritical fasting, when men
have mournful looks, without humble and contrite hearts.

The Uses. 1. Here observe the practice of these Scribes and Pharisees in
Christ's time: they did not only fast often, Luk 18. 12.
as twice a week, but they were careful in observing all outward rytes and
signs pertaining to a religious fast: yet as in the two former duties of
Almsdeeds, and Prayer, so in this, the principal thing is wanting; that is,
truth and sincerity of heart; for their sour looks came not from sorrowful
hearts: they were whole and righteous in their own conceit, and so needed not
the Physician. Christ Jesus, nor amendment of life. Now in them we may see a
true pattern of the property of natural men in matters of religion, Man's
behavior naturally in matters of religion.
they more busy themselves about the outward work, then inward truth; they
content themselves with outward rytes and ceremonies, and little regard the
true worship of the heart. See this in 1. Kin. 21. 27
Ahab, who humbled himself outwardly in great measure, for fear of
punishment, but he contented himself therewith, and never came to true
humiliation of heart, in sorrow for sin, for he continued still in his old
sins: and the Israelites, both in the wilderness, and in the land of Canaan,
when God afflicted them, would humble themselves and seek his favor; but yet
not in constant sincerity and truth, for as David Ps. 78. 34, 36* 37.
says, They flattered him with their mouth: -- for their heart was not upright
with him: they performed the outward ceremonies, and Isa^, 29. 13
so drew near to God with their lips, but their heart was far from him. And
thus it goes generally with natural men: the whole religion of the Papists
stands in outward ceremonial actions, partly Jewish and partly heathenish; and
when they have observed them, they look no further. And so it fares with many
among us, that profess true religion; for the ^ sorts cor(...)n religion.
ignorant sort (which are very many every where) content themselves with the
outward actions of religion; as coming to Church, hearing 1
the word read, and sometime preached, and receiving the Sacrament, once or
twice a year; and when the work is done (though without understanding) yet all
is well, they think God is served well enough. Yea 2
many that have knowledge, do yet rest in the outward actions of religion; for
do not some esteem the conscionable endeavor of moral obedience to be but
preciseness? and so though they bear some show of religion, yet they reproach
the power of it in others. And another 3
sort do only so far forth maintain and profess religion, as it stands
with the good of their outward estate, and their peaceable fruition of wealth,
honor, and delights, and so make a policy of religion and piety. But let all
these take heed unto their souls, and betime repent, for these practices make
them hypocrites in religion, whose end will be damnation; and therefore bring
thy heart to God, with thy outward worship, and content not thy self with the
show of godliness, but get the power of it, and show it in thy conversation;
and embrace religion for it self, and not for the world.

Secondly, is the Pharisees fasting condemned of Christ, because they rested in
the outward work, and did it in ostentation, for the praise of Popish fasting
^s abominable* Reasons. 1.
men? then doubtless Popish fasting is abominable, because it abounds with
more abuses: for I. In their religious fasts, they allow one meal, so it be
not flesh; and besides that, drinking of any kind of wines, or drinks, taking
of electuaries, and strong waters, conserues, and such Aquin. 2. 2. ^. 147.
a^t. 6. 8. Nau^r. c. 2^. n. 13, 14, 15.
like, at any time of the day; which is a mock-fast, and nothing else. II. They
make distinction of meats necessary to a fast, and that not 2
for civil ends, as Magistrates may do; or for temperance sake, as private
Bellar. de bon. oper. in partic. l. 2. c. 5. and 7.
men may do: but for conscience sake, which is a doctrine of devils, as the 1.
Tim. 4 ^.
Apostle says. III. They bind men in conscience to many set days of fasting,
and make the omission thereof a deadly sin; wherein they take away our
Christian liberty: for there was no want 3
Tollet. instr. Saccr. l. 6. c. ^.
of care in our Savior Christ, to appoint all good means for the mortifying
of the flesh, and yet he prescribed no set fasts in the new Testament. IV. They
make fasting meritorious, teaching, that a man thereby 4
Tollet. instr. Saccr. l. 6. c. 2.
may satisfy Gods justice; whereby they do blasphemously der^gate from the
al-sufficiencie of Christ's obedience and passion. Now ^ith they have thus
defaced religious fasting, let us learn by Christ's command, not to fast as the
Papists do.

Thirdly, Christ saying to his Disciples, when ye fast, takes it for granted,
Christ requires fasting on just occasion.
that sometimes they fasted, and so ought to do: and here he blames the
Pharisees, not for fasting simply, but for their hypocrisy therein: whereby
we see, that Christ requires of all the godly, that when just occasion is
offered, they should fast, either publicly, or in private. And if Christ blame
the Pharisees for their bad manner of fasting, then much more will he blame them
that fast not at all, though never so just occasion be given unto them; for in
this case it is not a thing indifferent, but necessary, for the want whereof,
God does many times renew and increase his judgments, as we may see, I say
22. 12, 13, 14. Wherefore to Moti^es to fasting.
move our hearts hereunto, let us consider these reasons: First, we 1
have here in the worthy president of most holy men in time past, who carefully
performed this duty, when occasion was offered; as David, Daniel, Ezra,
Nehemiah, our Savior Christ, and his Apostles, especially 2. Cor. 11. 27.
Paul, who fasted often: now their examples must be a cloud of witnesses unto
us, for we come far short of them in many graces of God, and in obedience,
and therefore had more need to humble our selves. Secondly, we have among us
continual occasions of fasting, both in 2
Occasions of fasting.
public, and private: as I. Gods judgments present; for when have we been
free from some one of these, either famine, or pestilence, or 1
unseasonable weather? II. Gods judgments imminent and hanging 2
over our heads; for our professed enemies watch for our subversion, and we are
in danger to have the kingdom of heaven taken from us, in the power of the
Gospel, the comfort of prayer, and of the Sacraments, because we do not bring
forth the fruits thereof. III. We have our own corrupt natures to subdue, and
many sins to break off, with 3
particular judgments upon our selves to remove; for any one whereof 4
we have great need to fast often. IV. Though we had no such cause in regard
of our selves, yet the horrible sins that abound in our land, are cause
sufficient to bring us on our knees. Paul 2. Cor. 12. 2^.
feared he should be humbled at Corinth, in bewailing many that had sinned:
and shall not the common Atheism, the contempt of Gods word and judgments,
the blasphemies, oppression, and fearful security of this age cause us to
wail and mourn? V. We should often humble our 5
selves for the Church of God; and for the continuance of the Gospel in
sincerity among us, and to our posterity: hereby we shall best express
zeal for Gods house, which should ^^te us up, as it is said of Ioh. 2. 17.
Christ, and of Psa. 69 10.
David: Gods Jerusalem should be our Psa. 137. 6.
chief joy: and we must testify it by Psa. 122. 6.
praying for the peace thereof: Christ prayed and Luke 6. 12. 13.
fasted when he chose his Apostles for the planting of his Church: much more
therefore must we do it, for the continuance of it.

Fourthly, Christ here disallowes not only the affectation of praise in these
Pharisees, but the disfiguring of their faces by a kind of pyning of
themselves; whereby he would teach us, that a true fast stands not in the
afflicting and weakening of the body. Now albeit few offend this way at this
day, for most are given too much to pamper the flesh; yet here may fitly be
showed, what care men ought to have of their bodies. Of care for the body.
And first of all, a twofold care must be avoided; as well an immodera^ care
to pamper the body with meat and drink, for that makes the heart heavy, and
the head drousie, and hereby lust is kindled, and sin cherished; which the
Apostle forbids, Romans 13. 14. as also too little care, whereby the body is
pined and pulled down to overmuch weakness, which is one thing here reproved.
The care required, is that moderate regard unto the body, whereby it is so
sustained by meat and drink, that it may always become the temple of the
holy Ghost, and a sit instrument for the soul unto works of righteousness,
and the worship of God. Now he that would thus order his body, must do two
things: First, he must observe perpetual temperance in food and raiment,
taking that which may well suffice nature, but not fulfill the lusts thereof.
Secondly, if this will not serve to subdue the flesh, but that it will still
rebel against the law of the spirit of life, (as in some it will not) then
fasting must be used, in which the body is to be afflicted, and the soul
humbled, for the subduing of the rebellious flesh: but yet herin we must
beware, that we destroy not our health, our strength, or our constltution; for
thus we neglect our life, which is a sin of murder: wherein (though few) yet
some do offend, who in the mean time live in the practice of soul and gross
sins otherways.

Fifthly, here note how far the Pharisees go in outward humiliation: Outward
exercises more embraced then weighty duties.
they are content to afflict their bodies, even to the disfiguring of their
complexion; but yet they will not repent and leave their sins, no though Ioh.
Baptist, and Christ preach repentance unto them: wherein behold the property
of our corrupt nature in Gods service, if outward actions and bodily exercises
will serve the turn, we can be content to bestow much cost, to take great
pains, and to endure some affliction; but yet still we desire to live in our
sins. This is evident in Popery, for who are more au^tere to their own bodies,
in watchings, wandering, in whipping themselves, fasting? etc. and yet where is
more abominable filthiness then among them? and this makes that religion so
embraced, because in dispensing with sin, for the performance of these bodily
actions, it fits so well to our corrupt nature. Wherefore let us take notice of
this our corruption, and though we must not neglect the humbling of the body
upon just occasion; yet let us principally look to the mortifying of sin,
and the obedience of the heart.

verse. 17. But when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face,

18. That thou seem not unto men to fast, but unto thy father which is in
secret; and thy father which sees in secret, will reward thee openly.


Christ the true doctor of his Church, having in the former v. sought to
reform the exercise of fasting, from Pharisaicall abuses, does in these two
verses seek to restore the same to his right use; not so much intending to
command us to fast, as to bring us to the right manner of fasting.

The exposition. When thou fastest, etc. It seems that Christ here speaks
especially of a private fast, for besides that he uses words of the singular
number, Thou, Thine, etc. he inioyneth the concealing of it from others, which
cannot be done in a public fast: and yet the maine thing here enjoined, is the
approbatio^ of the heart unto God, which must be observed in all religious
fasts, as well public as private. Annoint thine head, and wash thy face: Here
Christ alludeth to the custom of the Jews, who to show their cheerefulnes,
used to annoint their heads with sweet ointments, and to wash their faces; as
we may see by Naomies command to Ruth. 3. 3.
Ruth, and by 2. Sa. 12. 10
David's practice, when he perceived his child was dead, and would testify that
he had ceased from mourning for it: as also by the speech of Christ, justifying
the woman that anointed his feet with oyntme^t, mine Luke 7. 46.
head thou did not anoint, but she has anointed my feet with ointment:
for as David ^aith, God gives oil to make the face to shine, Ps. 104. 15. But
yet these words are not to be taken properly, neither do they bind us to
anoint our heads when we fast, as may appear by these reasons: 1. If the
words should be taken properly, then should Christ condemn all the fasts of
holy men in the old testament, who used neither ointments nor washings, but
abstained from all such bodily delights for that time. 2. Christ should command
contraries, namely, the use of such things in fasting, as were more proper to
feasting, wherein me^ use to be joyful and cheerful. 3. He should inioyne
that to some countries, which were not in their power, or at least could not be
used of the^ without excessive charges; as in this or other cold countries,
where sweet oiles are rare and costly. The true meaning therefore, must be
gathered out of the circumstances of the place: now Christ's intent is here, as
in the former points of Alms-deeds, and prayer, to prescribe unto men the
approving of their hearts unto God in fasting, by avoiding ostentation therein,
and desire of the praise of men: and therefore he names such behavior, as does
no way intimate a fast unto others; meaning thereby, that we should conceal
our private fasts from men; as if he should say, when thou fastest privately so
carry thy self, that it may not appear to men thou fastest, and in all thy
fasts seek only to approve thy heart unto God.

The words thus explaned contain 2. parts; a commandment, and a reason
thereof. The commandment is twofold: First, that we should co^ceale our fasts
from men, intimated by wash thy face, and anoint thy head: secondly, that we
should seek to approve our selves, not to men, but to God in our relgious
fasts, in these words, That thou seem not to men to fast, but to thy father
which is in secret. In this first branch of this Private worship must be
concealed.
commandment we may learn, that the private worship of God must be performed
privately unto God, and concealed from men; for that which is here said of
private fasting, which is a means to further our prayers, is true of prayer it
self, and of every part of Gods private worship, for there is the same reason
of all: as may thus appear; First, in all actions of Gods worship, there must
be observed an holy comelines and decency, which is then done, when they be
performed with fi^ and convenient circumstances; that is, public actions of
worship, with public circumstances, and private actions with private
circumstances: as public prayer must be made of a public person, in a public
place, with an audible and loud voice; and private prayer must be made in a
private place, by private persons, with a still and low voice, and other
seemly private gestures. Secondly, when private worship is performed with
public circumstances, there are many occasions given to ambition, pride, and
hypocrisy; but being done privately, these occasions are prevented, and the
heart is more free to seek the approbation of God only.

This doctrine serves to direct our practice in Gods worship; as first, that we
must not reserve our private preparation to Gods public worship, (...) for us
in God^ worship.
til we come to the public congregation; but prepare our selves at home
privately in our chamber or closet: for though to pray every where 1
be lawful, yet because convenient circumstances must be observed in Of
private preparation to Gods public worship.
all our actions of worship, therefore private prayer in a public place is not
so seemly nor convenient; for public circumstances do not beseem private
worship. Quest. What if a man wanted time, or had forgot to prepare himself
before hand? Ans. Slight pretenses cannot justify any disorder in Gods
worship: and yet if a man will needs there perform his private preparation, he
must conceal all outward signs of prayer, and only lift up his heart unto
God; for a good duty may become offensive 2
by inconvenient circumstances. Secondly, this shows how Christian families How
private families must worship god
must order their private exercises of religion, namely, so privately for voice
and gesture, that they may conceal the same from others, beside their family
present: and so must particular persons praying alone, observe such
circumstances as may conceal their prayers from others; for all occasions of
ostentation must be avoided, that so the heart may apply it self wholly
toward the Lord.

That thou seem not to men to fast. This is the second branch of Christ's The
hear must be approved to God in fasting, and how.
commandment, wherein we learn a second duty in a religious fast; namely,
that therein we seek to approve our selves and our action only to God: for
which end, we must observe 3. things. 1. With our fasting we must join a
conversion of our heart from sin unto God: Joel 2. 12. Turn you unto me with
all your heart, and with fasting: there God has joined them together, and they
may not be severed. Now that our hearts may How the heart may turn to god in
fasting.
turn to God in fasting, we must have special regard to our behavior both
before, in, and after our fast, whether public or private. Before the fast, we
must prepare our selves thereto in an holy manner, by a serious consideration
of the causes and occasions of our fast: a worthy example hereof we have in 2.
Chron. 20. 3.
Iehoshaphat, who considering a fearful judgment to be at hand, in the
approaching of his enemies, was sore afraid, and thereupon set his heart to seek
the Lord, and proclaimed a fast. In fasting we must labor to have more tender
affections, and deeper humiliation then ordinary: 1. Sam. 7. 6. The Israelites
humbling themselves in fasting for their idolatry, in Mispah, drew water, and
powered it out before the Lord: which words import their deep humiliation,
whether it were by abundant weeping, (as some expound the place) or by pouring
out water indeed, to signify, that they powered out their souls before the
Lord. After the fast, we must labor for reformation and amendment of life,
that our behavior both toward God and man* may be every way better then
before. A notable example hereof, we have in the Jews, who having renewed
their covenant with God, upon their Neh. 9. 1.
humiliation, did not only Neh* 9* 38.
write it, and chap* 1^. 1.
seal unto it; but bound themselves thereto by verse. 29.
curse and oath. 2. That we approve our selves and our action to God in
fasting, we must be sure we propound unto our selves therein the right ends of
a religious fast* which we have before propounded; for if we fail therein, and
propound other ends unto our selves, we corrupt the whole action unto our
selves. 3. With our fasting we must join the duties of the second table, in
the works of justice, mercy, and love to our brethren; for without these, our
love to God is not sincere: nay, God reiects that bodily humiliation, which is
severed from the exercise of mercy and compassion, as we may see at large,
Isay 58. 3, 4, etc. I showed before that we had just cause to humble our
selves; which when we do, we must be careful thus to approve our hearts
unto God.

Thus much of the commandment: now follows the reason thereof, drawn from
the promise of Gods reward to them that fast in an holy manner: And thy father
which sees in secret will reward thee openly: that is, seeing thee intend
only to approve thine heart and action unto God in fasting, will give thee an
open reward at the last day.

This text the Papists do notably abuse, to prove 2. heretical conclusions
Popish conclusions.
touching fasting: First, that fasting in it self for any good end, is a I
part of Gods worship, because it has a promise of open reward, even life
Bellar. de bo^ oper. in part. l. ^. c. 6. and 11.
everlasting, made unto it, as before was made to prayer and almsdeeds; and
therefore must needs be of the same nature with them: for things indifferent*
and bodily exercises, profit little, that which has the promise is a part of
godliness, 1. Tim. 4. 8. Answ. This promise is made to him that fasteth, not
to the work; and that not simply for his exercise of fasting, but for his
repentance, conversion, and invocation, which go with fasting, and are
furthered thereby. But they allege, that Luke 2. 37.
Annath served God with fastings and with prayer. Answ. In the old testament,
fasting was a part of Gods worship; for it was commanded to be performed the
tenth day of the seventh month: and then also was the making and performing
of vows, a part of religious worship, commanded of God. Now in all likelihood
Annah had bound her self by vow to God, to that course of prayer and fasting,
and therefore was approved of God therein. But now in the new testament we
have no commandment for set fasts or vows, and therefore the case is not the
same, and so her example cannot prove the thing for which they allege it:
indeed we have the vow of moral obedience made in baptism, but that every one
is bound to perform that takes God for his God, though he should not vow it.
Again, a man may be said to serve God in prayer and fasting as Annah did,
because prayer is a true part of Gods worship, and though fasting in it self
be not the worship of God, yet being joined with prayer, it is a notable
furtherance thereunto: and being so performed upon just occasion, it is a part
of his worship, because he requires it.

The second conclusion which the Papists would gather hence is; that II. Popish
conclusions. Bell^^^* d^ bon. open. in part* l* ^. c. 11.
Fasting satisfies Gods justice, and merits remission of sins and life
everlasting; because this promise of open reward is here made unto it. Ans. We
must know, that the promises of God for remission of sins and life
everlasting, being grounded upon Christ, are only made to them that be
regenerate and believe in Christ; and so they are not made to him for his works
sake, but for his faith whereby he is in Christ, and so indeed are made unto
him for Christ's sake only, in whom we grant, that God of his free grace makes
himself a debtor by his promise to every believer that does any good work:
yet the debt is not due to us for any thing we do, but due to Christ who has
merited it, and in Christ due to us. But it will be said, that works are often
mentioned with Gods promises, and especially faith, which is a work. Ans.
True: but yet the reward promised is not given for works sake, nor yet for
faith; but for Christ's sake, whose merit imputed to us is received by faith,
which faith we testify by works: and so according to our faith and works, we
receive a reward of God, but not for them: as Christ said to the Centurion,
Math. ^. 13. How fasting shall have a reward.
As thou have believed, so be it unto thee. Thus then must we conceive of this
promise made to fasting; though in it self it be a bodily exercise: yet being
done in obedience to God upon just occasion, by him that believes in Christ,
and being joined with prayer and conversion to God, it is a work of faith,
and shall have a reward.

Now this gracious promise made to fasting in this holy manner, must stir us
up to a love of this exercise, and to the practice of it, so often as just
occasion is given. And undoubtedly one special cause of the continual renewing
of Gods judgments among us is, because we humble not our selves by prayer and
fasting under Gods mighty hand. It were therefore to be wished, in regard of
the manifold just occasions, that public fasts were more often commanded by
public authority, and private fasts more conscionably used in every family.

And thus much of the fourth part of Christ's Sermon, containing a reformation
of abuses in Alms, Prayer, and Fasting: out of all which we must learn this
one thing which Christ principally intends; to wit, in all holy duties to avoid
hypocrisy, endeavoring to do them with that simplicity and sincerity of
heart, whereby we truly desire to have God and not man the seer and approouer
of them. And so shall our works be not only good in themselves, but in us, and
acceptable unto God: otherwise, if we do them in ostentation, or for other
sinister respects, the hypocrisy of our hearts defiles our good works, and so
makes them unacceptable unto God* and unprofitable to our selves.

Verse 19. La^ not up treasures for your selves* upon the earth, where the moth
and canker corrupt* and where thieves dig through and steal.

20. But lay up treasures for your selves in heaven, where neither the moth nor
canker corrupts, and where thieves neither dig through nor steal.


Here begins the fifth part of this excellent sermon, and it continues (...)
of Christ* set (...).
to the end of this chapter; wherein our Savior Christ intends to reform
his hearers of covetousness, and to work in their hearts a moderate care and
desire of worldly things. Now the order of this discourse is this; First, he
lays down the substance of his persuasion, and then enforces and amplifieth
the same. The ground and substance of Christ's persuasion consists in a double
commandment: the first shows what we must not do in respect of treasures, v.
19. the second, what we must do, v. 20. both which he enforces by their
several reasons, in the same verses: as also with a reason common to them
both, v. 21.

For the first commandment, La^ not up treasures* etc. The meaning. The word
here translated ^a^e up, is more significant in the original, then (...)
our english does express; for it imports two things: First to gather
together: secondly, to hoard or heap up in store things gathered, against the
time to come: so Romans 2. 5. Thou ^eapest up unto thy self, etc. Treasures*
that is, worldly wealth in abundance, precious things stored up* as silver,
gold, pearls, etc. Upon earth: here Christ aims not so much at the place, as
at the kind of treasures; for heavenly treasures may be laid up while we are
here on earth: and therefore he forbids hoarding of earthly treasures. For
themselves* that is, respecting your private gain and benefit, all respect to
the good of the Church and common wealth laid aside. So then the words bear
this sense* Take heed that you gather not riches together, to hoard up here
below, for your own private use and benefit alone, making them your treasures
in which you put your trust and place your joy and delight.

But yet that we may not mistake the meaning of our Savior Christ, (...)
allowed about wealth.
I will distinctly set down what things Christ forbids not, pertaining to
the gathering or keeping of worldly goods; and then what it is which he does
directly forbid. There be 3. things respecting the world, which Christ
forbids not: viz. I. Diligent labor in a man's vocation, whereby 1
he prouides things needful for himself, and those that depend upon him; for
else he should be contrary to himself, inioyning man to eat his bread in the
sweat of his face, Genesis 3. 19. and commanding that he that will not labor
should not eat, 2. These. 3. 10. II. The fruition and possessing 2
of goods and riches; for they are the good blessings of God, being well used,
and have bin possessed of Gods children, as Abraham, Job, Solomon, etc. III.
The gathering and laying up of treasure is not simply forbidden, 3
for the word of God allows hereof in some respect, 2. Cor. 12. 14. The
father must lay up for the children: and the Disciples understanding of the
general famine, by the prophecy of Agabus, which should be in all the world,
gathered provision aforehand for the brethren ^ Act. ^1. 2^* 29, 30.
in Judea: and (...). 41 48. Act. 7. 10.
Joseph's provident wisdom is commended by the holy Ghost, for hoarding up the
corn in Egypt against the time of dearth, for the common good: and the 1. ^^n
7. 5*
temple of God had his treasury by Gods appointment* for the upholding and
repair thereof: so that Christ does not simply forbid all gathering and laying
up of treasure or wealth.

What is it then which Christ here forbids? Ans. Sundry practices of Practices
of couetous^^ here forbidden.
covetousness, whereof the first is, Excessive seeking of worldly wealth, when
men keep no measure nor morderation therein; although God give sufficient, yet
they are not content, their desire is so insatiable. And that we How far* man
may seek for worldly wealth.
may see the danger of this practice, I will here show how far forth a man may
seek for, and lay up worldly wealth: for the better understanding whereof, this
distinction of worldly goods must be laid down for a ground; They are either
necessary, abundant, or superfluous* Necessary goods are 3 degrees of
worldly goods. ^* Necessary.
of two sorts; either necessary to man's nature, without which no man can live,
nor family stand; as meat, drink, apparel, lodging, etc. or necessary to a
man's state and condition of life, without which he cannot exercise the duties
of his calling wherein God has placed him; as books to a student, tools to a
tradesmen, etc. Now here arises the question: How far ^orth things
necessary may be la^d up.
How much of these things are to be counted necessary, and so may be provided
for, and laid up? Ans. The opinion and judgment of the covetous man must be no
rule in this case; for his corrupt heart is insatiable, like the sea which
cannot be filled, and like Pro. 30. 16*
the fire, that never says, it is enough, Now because of the diversity of
men's estates, by reason of their difference in properties and conditions, there
can be no certain rule set down; for that which is enough for one, will not
suffice another: and therefore the judgment and practice of the godly wise,
who know how to use the creatures as blessings of Gods providence, must be our
rule to judge what is necessary: other rules we have not in the word, but
what they judge needful, according to the word, that must be esteemed
necessary, and accordingly provided. Yet further this may here be added, that
things must not be deemed necessary, only in regard of the present use, but
also with respect to the time to come, wherein they may be needful. Example. A
tradesman having nothing besides his trade to live upon, may provide for
things necessary while his strength continues, to maintain himself in old
age, when through decay of strength or ^ight he is not able to work. And so a
man having many children, may in the use of lawful means, provide for their
portions before hand, that when their age requires, he may therewith dispose
of them in some good state of life. The second sort of wordly goods is 2.
Abund^ce.
Abundance, whereby I mean that plenty and store, which serves not only for
necessity, but for holy comeliness and delight. The third 3. Superfluity
sort is Superfluity, whereby I mean such abundance, as a man has neither
use of for the present, nor in any likelihood shall have for the time to come.

Now these grounds thus premised, I set down this rule touching A rule for
provision of worldly things.
man's provision for worldly wealth. Things necessary for man's person and his
calling, a man may seek for and lay up; but for abundance, and for
superfluities, no man ought to labor or be careful: hereto Christ has put
this bar, Lay not up treasures for your selves: and Solomon prays as
directly against superfluity, as against poverty, Pro. 30. 8, 9. Give me not
riches nor poverty (says he) but feed me with food convenient for me: and he
renders this reason against abundance, lest I be full and deny thee, and say,
who is the Lord? Now hence I reason thus; look what we may ask of God, that
only must we seek for, and no more: but we may only ask for things
necessary; for to pray for abundance we have no warrant, and therefore we must
only seek for necessaries, and not for abundance. Hereto the Apostles rule
agrees well, 1. Tim. 6. 8, 9.
If we have food and raiment, let us herewith be content, for they that would
be rich or abound (as the word signifies) fall into temptation and snares.
Quest. If we may not pray for abundance, what must we do, if God give
abundance? Ans. If God bless us with abundance, upon our moderate labor and
care in our lawful callings, we must receive it thankfully, and as good
stewards lay it up to be bestowed on good uses, either in our families, or in
the church and common wealth, as God in his providence shall offer us just
occasion.

Now this being evident, that we must only seek for things necessary, and
no more; then we must all learn to beware of carking care, and be contented
with things necessary, when God gives the^. And to move us hereunto, consider
the reasons following: First, it is Gods commandment, that we should be
contented with things necessary, 1. Tim. 6. 8. Motives to co^tentation.
and therefore we must make conscience of obedience in the practice of 1
contentation. Secondly, they that are greedy after abundance, have 2
many temptations to bad dealing, and so can hardly keep a good conscience:
they fall into snares (as the 1. Tim. 6. 9.
Apostle says) and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in
perdition and destruction. Thirdly, 3
in time of persecution (which often accompanies the Gospel) the richer a man is,
the more danger he is in to forsake the truth; for the heart of man is
naturally so glued to the world, that without Gods special grace, it will
sooner forsake Christ, then worldly wealth: this we may see in Demas, who to
embrace the world, forsook Paul, 2. Tim. 4. 10. whereupon Christ says, g how
hardly can a rich man enter into the kingdom of Mat. 10. (...).
heaven. And thus much of the first practice of covetousness, which is excessive
care and labor after worldly goods.

The second practice of couetousuesse which Christ here forbids, is The second
practice of covetousness
when men seek only or principally for worldly goods, neglecting spiritual
graces in regard thereof. This appears by the opposition of the next verse
unto this, lay not up for your selves earthly treasures, but lay up for your
selves treasures in heaven. This was Esaus practice, who sold his birthright
for a mess of pottage, Heb. 12. 16. and the sin of the Gadarens, that upon
the loss of their swine, desired Christ to go out of their coasts, Luke 8.
37. And this is the sin of our age, wherein many things, nay almost every
thing, which may yield profit or delight, is cared for above the word; or else
how could there be so much preaching, and so little profiting, but that men's
thoughts and delights are taken up with earthly things? but this is a
preposterous and disordered care, which every one must labor to reform, as
Christ commands, v. 31.

The third practice of covetousness here forbidden, is to put trust and The
third practice of covetousness
confidence in worldly things treasured up: this is the Idolatry of the heart,
for look whereon a man sets his heart, that he makes his God, and therefore is
covetousness called idolatry, Colos. 3. 5. Hence it is that Christ makes it
so hard a thing for a rich man to enter into heaven, Mat. 19. 23, 24. because
they Mar. 10. 24
trust in their riches: and if we mark well, we shall find it commonly true,
that rich men are proud hearted and secure, not regarding Gods judgments, nor
the means of their salvation; for they Ps. 52 7.
take not God for their strength, that trust in their riches. David's counsel
therefore must be followed, Psalm. 62. 10 The fourth practice of covetousness
If riches increase, set not your heart thereon.

The fourth practice here forbidden, is when men lay up for themselves only,
without regard to the Church or common wealth, or relief of the poor. This is
a deuillish practice* for every one is but a steward of that he has, to
dispense the same for Gods glory to the good of others. The p(...)re are Gods
poor, and members of his family, and therefore he re(...)es, that every
steward in his family should see they have their portion* God ^ill call the
rich to their account, when this will not be taken for good disposing, to say I
kept my riches to my self: so much will the ^l^thfull servant say, that hides
his talent in a napkin. And therefore let us learn to make conscience hereof,
with the rest of these bad practices.

Where the moth and canker corrupt, and where thieves dig through and steal.
These words contain a special reason of the former commandment, to this
effect: Earthly treasures, as riches, raiment, etc. are subject to be corrupt
by the moth and canker, and to be carried away by thieves: and therefore we must
not excessiuely or principally seek after them, set our hearts upon them, or
hoard them up for our selves.

The exposition. The word translated Moth, signifies a worm that (...).
eats the finest cloth, and consumes the best garment: yet here it must be
taken more largely, for any worm that does destroy or consume any creature.
And so the word translated canker, must be largely (...)
taken, for any thing that by rust or fretting does eat into and consume
metal, or any other creature.

Here then Christ notes a twofold vanity of the creatures, both in The
vanity of the creatures.
respect of their nature, and of abuse for their nature, they are subject to
corruption by rust, moth, and canker, be the creatures never so pure and
costly, as gold, silver, pearls, etc. for the heavens themselves are subject
to vanity. And for abuse, they are subject to the injuries of ungodly persons,
thieves may steal them, and covetous persons may hoard them up that they shall
serve for no use. Now if all earthly creatures be subject to vanity both by
corruption and abuse, then we must not make them our chief treasures, but
seek for them and use them in a moderate and sober manner. Quest. But whence
came this vanity upon the creatures? Ans. God has subjected them unto it for
the sin of man. Romans 8* 20.

The consideration hereof must let us see the grieuousnesse of our use. 1.
sins, and the greatness of Gods anger due thereunto, in that he has
imprinted the stamp of his wrath upon every creature for the sin of man, by
subiecting it to this twofold vanity. And therefore when we see a moth upon
apparel, or rust and canker* upon metal or other creatures corrupting them,
we ought rather to be humbled for our sins, then to suffer our hearts to be
drawn to immoderate desire and delight after earthly things. Secondly, are the
creatures that never sinned, subject to vanity for man's sin? then how vain
a thing is man, that by his transgression brings vanity upon the creatures?
let us therefore in them behold our own vanity, and when we pity them,
learn to lament our own iniquities.

v. 20* But lay up treasures for your selves, etc. Christ having showed what we
must not do in respect of treasures here on earth, and knowing man's
inclination to be such, that he will needs have something for his treasure,
does here come to the second branch of his commandment; showing what treasure
we must lay up for our selves* and enforces us thereto by a special reason.
The treasures we must lay up are, treasures in heaven. Quest. How should we lay
up treasures in heaven, for we cannot of our selves come there; no man can save
himself, the beginning, progress, and accomplishment of our salvation is of
God in Christ wholly? Ans. It is usual with God in Scripture, to ascribe the
work of the principal efficient cause, to the instrument thereof. Thus in the
last ver. of Obadiah, Preachers, are expressly called Saviors: and, Obad. 21.
1. Tim. 4. 16. In doing this thou shall both save thy self, and them that
hear thee: and, 1. Cor. 4. 15. I have begotten you through the Gospel: and yet
both salvation and regeneration are the works of God alone, only Preachers are
the instruments thereof. So in this place, to make us rich with heavenly
treasures, is the work of God alone: for we rather treasure up unto our selves
wrath against the day of wrath, by our Romans 2. 5.
transgressions: and yet because we are instruments by his grace, in the use of
means to get this treasure, therefore he gives this commandment unto us, as
though the work were wholly ours, though himself be the principal author.

But yet that we may better conceive of, and practice this commandment, two
points are to be considered. First, what this treasure is: Secondly, how a man
must lay it up for himself: both these we must mark with reverence, because
they are points of great weight and moment, in the practice whereof stands
our salvation. For the first. In searching it out, we will first consider, what
is erroniously thought to be this treasure which Christ would have us to lay
up. The Church of Rome What the Papists make the true treasure. Aquin. suppl.
^d 3. part. Summae q^ 5. Tollet. instr. Sacerd. l. 6. c. 21.
has for many hundred years, abused the world hereabout, making the overplus
of Christ's merits, and of the merits of Saints and Martyrs, to be the treasure
of the Church, which being gathered together and put into a store-chest, is
(say they) in the Popes custody; and he alone has the plenarie opening and
shutting of this chest, and the ordering and disposing of these merits: by
virtue whereof he gives out indulgences and pardons, when and to whom he will.
And hereby indeed he maintains and vpholds his kingdom: for hereby comes
infinite wealth and revenues. But this cannot be the true treasure; ^ay, it is
corrupt Answer.
and deceitful for two causes: for first, hereby they abase the true treasure
which is Christ's merits, by adding supply thereto from the merits of Saints:
for if Christ's merits receive increase from the merits of men, then it is not
all-sufficient of it self, and so but a poor treasure. Secondly, hereby they
make the merits of Saints departed, to be the merits of others which live long
after them, by the Popes application; which is a thing impossible and absurd:
for no man can merit for himself: but say he could, yet should his merits be
for himself alone and for none other: for every man in regard of salvation is
a private man, and the reward of his works he does that way can only redound
unto himself: only Christ Jesus our Mediator, God and man, who was by God
himself made a public person for this end, can merit for others.

The true treasure then (to let the other pass) is in a word, the true The
true treasure.
God, that one only eternal essence in three persons, who made all things and
gouernes all things; in him alone is all goodness and happiness to be found.
Genesis 15. 1. I am thy buckler, and thine exceeding great reward, says God to
Abraham: and Psalm. 16. 5, 6. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance (says
David) -- I have a goodly heritage: which is as much as if he had said, The
Lord is my treasure. I will not stand on this, for men by the light of nature
have seen and said thus much. This rather is to be considered, how God
becomes our treasure. How God is our treasure.
And for this end we must conceive of God, as he has revealed himself unto
us in Christ: for out of Christ he is not our God, and so not our treasure; but
God incarnate is our true treasure: Coloss. 2. 3. In whom, that is, in Christ,
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Coloss. 3. 3. Our life,
even eternal life, is hid with Christ in God, as in a treasury. 1. Cor. 1.
31. Christ is made unto us of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption: and, Ioh. 1. 16. Of his fullness, as out of a full treasury, we
all receive grace for grace. Now we must not rest in his incarnation, but
conceive further of him as he was crucified for us in our nature, and is set
forth unto us in his word and Sacraments: for his obedience, death, and passion
is our treasure, which is revealed and applied in the word of promise, and in
the Sacraments: and this is that thing prepared of God for them that love him,
which eye has not ^eene, ear has not heard, neither ever entered into the
heart of ^aturall man to conceive. 1. Cor. 2. 9. But why (will some say) should
Christ crucified be called our treasure? Ans. Because he is the fountain and
storehouse of all true blessings conuaied from God to man. Would thou have
remission of sin, and righteousness with god? why, Christ was made sin for
us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2. Cor. 5. 21.
Would thou have life everlasting? This same Jesus Christ is very God, and
life eternal, 1. Ioh. 5. And he that has him has life, 1. Ioh. 5. 12.
Would thou have comfort in distress, and true delight in temporal
blessings? then get Christ Jesus, for he is life in death; and without him, the
good things of this life be no blessings unto us.

II. Point. Having found what this treasure is, let us now see how How to lay
up Christ crucified for our treasure.
every one must lay it up for himself: for so Christ here commands, lay up
for your selves, etc. That we may lay up Christ crucified for our treasure, we
must be careful to do five things, intimated in the parable of him that
bought the field wherein the hidden treasure was: 1. we must find this
treasure: 2. we must value it: 3. obtain and get it: 4. assure it to our
selves: 5. use it as a treasure.

I. Duty. We must needs find this treasure first of all, else we cannot How to
find the true treasure.
value it, nor obtain it, we cannot assure it to our selves, nor use it: And
thus much is employed in that parable, where it is called an hidden treasure;
for we cannot have a thing that is hid before we find it. Now the finding of
this treasure stands in Gods revealing of it unto us, letting us see that
naturally we want it, and making us feel that we are poor without it, and
therefore stand in great need of it, whereupon A twofold illu^inatio^.
we begin to seek it. Every revealing of this treasure is not the finding of
it, for God inlightens the mind of man two ways: first, generally, whereby a
man in reading the word is able to conceive the true sense and meaning of it.
Secondly, more specially, when beside the general sense, God makes a man feel
the truth and power of the word in his own conscience: and in this special
illumination stands the true finding. This indeed is a great blessing of God,
but not common to all: for our natural eyes cannot discern it, and the more
we are dazzled with the sight of worldly treasures, pomps, and vanities, the
blinder we are about this spiritual treasure: yea this treasure is hid from
many that are able to propound the word of God truly; as Christ says, Matthew.
(...). 25.
these things are hid (ofitimes) from the wise and prudent, and revealed unto
babes: for till the Lord give this special. illumination whereby a man sees
his own misery in himself and his great need of Christ's righteousness, Christ
is a hidden treasure unto him. In regard whereof we must descend into our own
hearts, and there try whether by the sense of our own misery in our selves,
and our own desire and hungring after Christ, God have revealed this treasure
unto us: we may say, Ioh. 9. 41.
we see, with the Jews, and yet be blind, unless we truly feel the want of
Christ in our own souls: oh therefore labor for this special illumination;
for the Doctrine of the Gospel will never be sweet and pleasant to us, till we
find this precious treasure hid therein.

II. Duty. Having found this treasure, we must highly prize and How to value
the true treasure.
value it, even above all that we have or can get; nay more worth then all the
world besides. So did the man in the parable, Matthew. 13. 44. esteem the
treasure hid in the field above all his goods: And Phil. 3. 8.
Paul so esteemed of Christ crucified, that he counted all things loss for the
excellent knowledge sake of Christ, and judged them as dung that he might win
Christ. This high esteem of Christ is needful, if ever we mean to lay him up
for our treasure; and then have we made good progress in this heavenly
purchase, when we truly value Christ in our hearts at so high a rate: and
therefore we must endeavor our selves hereunto, and labor so to frame our
whole conversation in speeches and in action, that they may testify at how
high a rate we value Christ. And because the word of God reueales Christ Jesus
unto us, in which regard it 2. Cor. 4. 6.
is called a treasure, therefore it also must be highly valued, even above all
carthly things. Thus David did, Psalm. 119. 72. The Law of thy How to va^ue the
word of God.
mouth is better unto me then thousands of gold and silver: verse 127. I love
thy Commandments above gold, yea above much five gold: hereof wisdom says,
Prove. 8. 19.
my fruit is better then gold, even then much fine gold, and my revenues
better then ^ine silver. It were happy for us if we did thus value the word
of God. Many hold there is but one truth, and so that be known it is no matter
whence it is learned, whether out of Gods word, or the writings of men: but
they are sarre deceived, for the Scriptures of God only, are that truth which
is according to godliness; and they alone discover unto us this heavenly
treasure, and therefore they must have the pre-eminence in our hearts, and be
esteemed far above all the writings of men: which if we would do, we should
feel that power and comfort of the word in our hearts, which naturally we
lack.

III. Duty. Having found out, and rightly valued this true treasure, How to
get the true treasure to our selves.
we must seek to get it for our selves, and make it our own: so did the man
in the parable (Matthew. 13. 44.) when he had found the treasure hid in the
field; and so Christ here commands, lay up treasures for your selves. Now
that we may get this treasure to our selves, we must conscionably use such
means as God has appointed for this purpose* to wit, I. hear the word of God
preached with all reverence, care, and diligence, laboring to mix it with
faith in our hearts: II. receive the Sacraments with all reverence and due
preparation: III. pray to God in faith earnestly and constantly for the pardon
of our sins, and the fiuition of this treasure. The reason hereof is plain:
for the word and Sacraments are as it were the Lords two hands, wherewith he
reaches out this heavenly treasure and all spiritual blessings unto us; and
our faith is the hand of our soul wherewith we receive them, now by our
prayers we testify this faith, and sanctify unto our selves the two former
means.

IV. Duty. Having gotten this treasure, we must labor to make it How to make
this treasure sure to our selves.
sure unto our selves? And to this purpose we must follow Paul's counsel and
charge to rich men: 1. Tim. 6. 17, 18, 19. Charge the rich men in this world,
that they be not high minded, neither trust in uncertain riches, but in the
living God: that they do good and be rich in good works --: laying up in
store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may
obtain eternal life: where mark how by trusting in God, and by liberality
and bounty, we are exhorted to lay a good foundation. What (will some say)
must we be saved by our Almesdeedes, and good works? Ans. Not so: for the 2.
Tim. 2. 1^.
ground of our salvation is Gods election and love in Christ, which he himself
has laid up in heaven for us. But the foundation which we must lay up for our
selves, is in our own consciences, for our assurance in Gods foundation: and
this we lay by our good works of love, mercy, and justice; all which be fruits
of faith: and being done in faith and with singlenes of heart to Gods glory,
they are sure testimonies of our portion in the true treasure Jesus Christ: for
hereby we know we are translated from death to life, because we love the
brethren. 1. Ioh. 3. 14.

V. Duty. Having got this treasure sure to our selves, we must use How to use
Christ as our treasure.
it as a treasure. Hereunto three duties are required: I. we must have our
conversation in heaven, for there Christ our treasure is: and where 1
our ^reasure is, there will our hearts be: and if our hearts be on Christ in
desire, in joy, and delight, it cannot be but our lives will be holy and
heavenly, though our bodies be here on earth: but let us beware that our
affections be not set on things below, for then is not Christ our treasure at
all. II. We must turn our earthly goods into heavenly 2
treasures. This we do by employing them in works of mercy, for he that gives
unto the poor, lends unto the Lord, Prou. 19. 17. so that the merciful man
has the Lord for his debtor, for the Lord sends the poor man as his messenger
unto the rich, to borrow of him such things as the poor man lacks; and the
Lords return of payment is in heavenly blessings: and therefore Christ
himself as it were explaning this point, Luk* 1^. 33.
bids; sell that ye have, and give alms: make you bags which wax not old, a
treasure that cannot fail in heaven, where no thief comes, neither moth
corrupts: This then is the Lords own direction, for this happy exchange of
earthly goods for heavenly treasures, then which, who can wish a better
increase. III. We must rather 3
part with all that we have then with Christ Jesus; friends, goods, country,
liberty, nay our own life, and dearest hearts blood must all go for this
treasures sake: so does the good purchasser part with all he has for to ^^ie
the field in which this treasure is, Matthew. 13. 44. but if we will rather part
with Christ then with some or with all of these, then we use not Christ as the
true treasure. Thus we see how Christ becomes our treasure; let us therefore
make conscience to practice these five duties so long as we live: for when
Christ becomes our treasure mark what will follow; we shall find in our
hearts such sweet content therein, that neither prosperity shall lift us up
too high, nor adversity cast us down too low; nothing shall daunt us while we
have this treasure sure; no kind of death, no not the day of judgment.

Thus much of the commandment, now follows the particular reason thereof:
where neither moth nor canker corrupts, etc. This reason is drawn from the
unchangeable certentie and safety of this treasure: earthly treasures are
subject to corruption, and to loss by stealth; but this heavenly treasure is
free from all such things, for the highest heaven is not subject to corruption,
nor to the violence of thieves and robbers; and therefore our treasure must be
there. Quest. Why ^ow the highest heavens is free from vanity.
should the highest heavens be free from that vanity, whereto all creatures
else are subject by the sin of man? Answ. The heavens above which we look
upon, and the earth below, with all creatures in them, belonged to man by the
right of creation, but the highest heaven is the throne of God: Now when man
fell, he was punished not only in his own person, but in all the creatures
that belonged unto him, which by his sin were made subject unto vanity: But
the highest heaven was free from that curse, because it did not belong to man
by the right of creation, but is a supernatural gift, whereto we have right
and title only by the grace of Adoption and redemption in Christ Jesus: now
since man had no right thereto by creation, it was not meet that the sin of
man should make it subject to vanity or corruption. If therefore the safety of
an enduring substance can allure our hearts to love and like, then let us set
our selves for this heavenly treasure.

v. 21. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
This verse contains a reason of the former commandments, common to them
both; tending to persuade us to the obedience of them both. The reason stands
thus: Where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also: But your hearts
should not be on earth, but in heaven: Therefore lay not up treasures upon
earth, but in heaven.

The exposition. By treasure (as we said before) must be understood things
precious and excellent in our estimation laid up for time to come, wherein we
repose our trust, and take a special joy and delight. By heart we must
conceive, not only the affections which are seated in the heart, as love, joy,
care, desire, and delight; but the more inward powers of the soul in thought
and imagination; yea and the effects hereof in action, as labor, study, and
endeavor: As if he should say; your treasure and your heart are joined
together, look where that thing is wherein you trust and take chief delight,
and thereon will your thoughts run; your love, fear, desire, and care will
draw unto it; and your chiefest pains, study, and endeavor will be after it.

The use. Do heart and treasure go together? Then here first we learn to
search out and try the state of our own hearts: for though it be a
bottomless gulf, Ier. 17. 9. How to try the state of our own: heart.
and deceitful above all things, so as none can thoroughly know it, yet if we
apply this sentence aright unto our selves, we shall be able to give true
judgment of the state of our own heart. An earthly treasure, and an earthly
heart; but heavenly treasure, and an heavenly heart; these cannot be severed:
therefore look whereon thou spendest thy thoughts, and set thy love, thy
care and delight, and bestowest thy wit, industry, and labor, and thereby
judge of the disposition of thy heart. If the thing be earthly and worldly,
then thy heart is earthly and carnal: thou may plead that thou hear the
word, receiuest the Sacraments, and praiest often; yet all this will not prove
thee to have Christ Jesus for thy treasure: for thine heart being set upon the
world, there undoubtedly thy treasure is, and that proves thy heart to be
earthly and carnal. And on the contrary, if thy principal thoughts, thy
chief love, joy, and delight be on Christ crucified, and thy special care and
industry be after his merits and righteousness, then is Christ thy treasure,
and thine heart is heavenly.

Secondly, hereby we may know whether we have any portion in heaven: The
knowledge of our title to heaven.
for look where our heart is, there our portion is: if our heart in thoughts,
desire, and industry, be set on earthly things, then is our portion upon
earth: But if we mind heavenly things, if we delight in them, and labor after
them, then is our portion in heaven. It is not the exercise of religious
actions now and then, but the settling of the heart either on earth or heaven,
that shows where our portion is.

Thirdly, this coupling of the heart and treasure together, teaches How to
esteem of the world in regard of heaven.
us, not to regard this world nor temporal life, in respect of heaven and life
eternal; nay, in this regard we must despise the world and temporal life, so
far forth as it may be done without ingratitude to God, and without hatred of
the work of his hands, and of his temporal blessings: for as earthly
creatures are the workmanship of God, so temporal life is his good blessing,
given us as a time wherein we are to prepare our selves for life eternal; and
therefore simply we may not despise it, but only in respect of life eternal.
Now we must show this high respect to heaven and to life eternal, above that
we have to this world and temporal life, by heavenly meditations, and by
spiritual desires, joy, and delight: for if heaven be our treasure, then must
our delights be drawn from worldly things, and set on heaven.

verse. 22. The light of the body is the eye: if thine eye be single, thy whole
body shall be light:

23. But if thine eye be wicked, then all thy body shall be dark. Wherefore
if the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness!


These two verses have sundry expositions, which we must discuss, before we
can see the scope and coherence of them in this place. Of sundry which I take
to miss the right scope of Christ in this place, I will only touch one, which
is the most probable; and then set down that which I take to be the best. By
single eye, some understand a liberal mind; and by the wicked eye, an ^^^ious
and covetous mind: and so they make Christ here to speak of liberality and
covetousness. Now it is true that the words will bear this sense, for Solomon
puts the good eye, for the liberal and merciful person: Prove. 22. 9. He that
has the good eye, he shall be blessed: for he gives of his bread unto the
poor: and the evil eye, for the covetous person: Prove. 28. 22. A man of a
wicked eye hastes unto riches. But though the words will bear this
interpretation, yet it is not (as I take it) the proper meaning of Christ in
this place: for here, the light of the body, the single eye, and the light
that is in us, be all put for one and the same thing. Now the light that is in
us, is the understanding and judgment of the mind. Again, the eye is here
called the light of the whole body: but the liberal mind cannot be the light
of the whole body for all actions, but for works of mercy and bounty only.

To come therefore to that which I take to be Christ's true meaning: The true
meaning.
The words contain in them diverse similitudes: In the first words, The light
of the body is the eye, is a parable taken from a candle in an house; for as a
burning candle set up in an house lights the house and all that be in it; so
the light of this eye (which is the understanding) lights the whole body and
gives direction to the whole man, in all his actions. In the next words, If
thine eye be single, etc. to the end of the 23. verse, is a second similitude,
which stands thus: If a man have a good and clear bodily eye, he can guide
himself i^ the right way, and keep his feet from stumbling and from falling:
but if his eye be dim and dark, then he cannot walk without stumbling: and
if he want an eye, or that his eye be stark blind, then of himself he cannot
walk without stumbling and wandering: so in like manner, if the understanding,
which is the eye of the mind, be sound and clear, able to judge of good and
evil, then is the whole life well ordered: but if the judgment be corrupt,
then is there much disorder in the life: and if it be clean put out, then is
there nothing but brutish confusion.

Thus stand the comparisons in these words: Now the meaning of them is this.
The first words are plain, The light of the body is the eye, that is, the eye
gives light for the direction of the body; as a light in an house directs the
householders in their affairs. If thine eye be single, etc. By eye here is
meant the mind, resembled by the bodily eye: and the single eye is the
understanding mind, able to judge of good and evil, of things to be done, and
not to be done. Thy whole body shall be light: by body is meant, the life,
and by light is meant, well ordered and directed: for the mind is to the life
for the directing of it, that which the eye is to the body for the ordering
thereof. But if thine eye be wicked, etc. the wicked eye is the corrupt mind,
having the understanding darkened, and judgment so depraved that it cannot
rightly discern of good and evil, what is to be done, and what is to be left
undone. Then all thy body shall be dark; that is, thy whole life in all thine
actions shall be full of sin and disorder. Wherefore if the light that is in
thee be darkness; that is, if the natural light of reason and judgment left in
man after the fall, be quite extinguished. How great is that darkness; that
is, wonderful shall his corruption and disorder be; yea so full of confusion,
that there shall be no difference between his life and the life of a brute
beast. And this I take to be Christ's proper meaning.

Now the words thus explaned, depend upon the former as an answer The coherence.
to a secret objection, which the heart of man might frame unto it self,
against those two commandments, to this effect. If there be such necessity of
laying up treasures in heaven, and of avoiding to lay up treasures in earth,
then why do not the most wise and learned men of our time do so; they seek
more for earthly treasures then for heavenly? Hereto Christ answers thus, as if
he had said; marvel not at this, for they want the single eye, the
understanding mind to discern of things that differ, they cannot judge aright
of the true treasure, and so not knowing the heavenly, they seek the earthly
treasure only. Now that we may preceiue the words of Christ thus to answer the
former objection, we must know that Christ does here presuppose thus much;
that every man's eye is either single, corrupt, or blind: and the single eye
which is a good understanding, befalls not all men, no not all wise and learned
men, but them only to whom God in mercy gives it. But the corrupt eye
befalls every man naturally. And some by sin put out the light of nature, and
so become senseless in spiritual things. And hence it is, that all men
naturally wanting the single eye, and having the corrupt eye, yea many having
the blind eye, do not discern of the true treasure: and so leave the heavenly
and give themselves wholly to the earthly.

Thus we see both the meaning and the coherence, leading us to the maine cause
of covetousness, which the blind eye of the mind not able to discern of true
spiritual treasure. Now in the words these three points are to be handled: I.
The single eye with the fruits thereof: II. The wicked eye with his fruits.
III. The dark and blind eye with the fruits thereof.

I. Point. The single eye is the mind of man endued with some portion The
single eye.
of true heavenly wisdom; and the fruit of it, is to give the body light. To
know this single eye the better, we must search out what true wisdom is. This
true heavenly wisdom is no common gift, which What is true heavenly ^isdome.
every professor may have, but a special gift of God in Christ, peculiar to
them that do truly believe in him. 1. Cor. 1. 30. Christ (...) made wisdom
unto us of God; not only because he is the matter of our wisdom, we being then
only truly wise, when we know Christ and him crucified; but also because he
is the root from whence all our wisdom springs: for being ingraffed into
Christ by faith, we become, as it were, ^ph. 5. 30.
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, and so a^^ not only made just by
the imputation of his obedience, but do also receive inherent holiness and
wisdom from him; our wisdom and holiness being derived from his, as the
branch is from the stock, and the fruit from the root. And this wisdom
^ef^ll^ not at all to the devil and his angels, though they know much, nor to
all that are Christians in name; but only to the members of his mystical
body by faith.

This heavenly wisdom has two actions: First, to discern ^right The action^
of true wisdom.
of things that differ, and to distinguish one thing from another spiritually;
this Paul prayed for in the behalf of the Philippians, Phil. 1. 9. that their
love might abound more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment 1
or (...).
sense, that so they might discern things that differ: that is, good from
evil, and heavenly from earthly; what to do, and what to leave undone, which
is a property of men of age in religion, who thorough long custom attain
herunto, Heb. 5. 14. And hence it is that the child of God can I. discern the
voice of Christ, the true shepherd, from the voice of all false teachers. II.
By this gift of discerning, he can put a difference between the water of
Baptism, and all other water; and between the bread and wine in the Lords
table, and common bread and wine. III. Hereby the Church, and every true member
of it, is enabled to judge rightly of crosses, distinguishing fatherly
chastisements, from Gods plagues and curses for sin. IV. Hereby he can
discern the things of God, even his own election, his vocation, adoption, and
justification; these and such like he can perceive in himself more or less.
V. In a word, hereby he can discern the true treasure, from worldly; hereby he
knows the (...) of heavenly things, above earthly. These things the natural
(...) cannot do, but the spiritual man discerns all things, 1. Cor. 2. 15.
look whatsoever befalls him, therein he can see the hand of God working for
his good, therein he can discern Gods wisdom, power, and providence: in all
which we may perceive the most excellent use of this heavenly wisdom.

The second action of this heavenly wisdom, is to judge, determine, 2. Action
o^ true wisdom.
and give sentence of things, what is to be done, what is not to be done; what
is good, and what is evil in practice and behavior. And here this one thing
must be remembered, that the principal point of this wisdom, It is true
wisdom to discern of true happiness.
is to determine of true happiness, whereto the whole life of man ought to be
directed: which happiness, is the love and favor of God in Christ. Herein
David shows his heavenly wisdom, far different from the wisdom of the
world, Psalm. 4. 6. Many say, who will show us any good? there is the worldlings
happiness; But Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us; there
is true happiness: so Paul, coming among the wisest of the Gentiles,
professes, that he esteemed to know nothing but Christ, and him crucified: 1.
Cor. 2. 2. for whose excellent knowledge sake, he thought all things to be
loss, Phil. 3. 8. And the same should be our wisdom; for though a man had
all humane learning and policy, yet if he fail in this, rightly to determine
of true happiness, all his wisdom would prove foolishness; for 1. Cor. ^. 18.
1^.
the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God: and therefore if any man
seem to be wise in this world, let him be a fool that he may be wise; that
is, a fool to the world, in esteeming the knowledge of Christ crucified only
true wisdom; and the favor of God in him, true happiness; that so he may be
wise indeed in the sight of God. Another chief part o^ this heavenly wisdom,
is a spiritual and Spiritual ^^ouidence.
godly providence, whereby we forecast by all means how to compass and come
by true happinesse^ herein the power of heavenly wisdom is showed. And without
this, though otherwise a man discern the right, yet his knowledge and wisdom
is imperfect and unprofitable. And thus we see the actions of this heavenly
wisdom, whereby we may describe it thus: It is a gift of Gods spirit to them
that are in Christ, whereby T^^e wisd^m des^^^bed.
they are enabled to discern of things that differ, and to judge and determine
what is that true happiness, whereto the life of man ought to tend; and
withal to forecast and provide by what good means it may be compassed. And he
whose mind is endued herewith in some true measure, has the single eye.

Now the fruit of this single eye is, to make the whole body light; that The
fruit of the single eye.
is, to bring the whole life into good order, guiding it in the paths of
righteousness, and making (...) abound in good works. Prove. 8. 19, 20. My fruit
(says wisdom) is ^^^ter then fine gold* -- I cause to walk in the way of
righteousness, and in the m^ds of the paths of judgment. Prove. 1^. 23. The wise
heart guides the mouth wisely, and adds doctrine unto his lips.

The use. 1. Considering the mind endued with this wisdom is thus We must
labor to get heavenly wisdom.
commended; we must hereby learn, to labor for it in a special manner: beside
this commendation of it by our Savior Christ, which should be a spur to
provoke us to this duty, the singular commodity that iedounds hereby to soul
and body must move us to affect it. Now that we may the better obtain this
heavenly wisdom, we must be careful of these two things especially. First, to
get the fear of God into our How it is gotten.
hearts, which is the beginning of this heavenly wisdom, Psalm. 111. 10. 1
Now this fear of God, is a reverend awe of the heart toward God, whereby a
man is fearful to offend, and careful to please God in all things. And this
we shall get, if we receive the word of God with reverence, and apply it to
our own souls when we hear it; trembling thereat when it touches our
consciences, and humbly submitting our selves unto it without raging or
repining; saying as Hezekiah did to the Prophets reproof, Isa. 19. ^. ^
The word of the Lord is good. Secondly, we must wholly close up our eyes, (the
eyes of our mind I mean) and suffer our selves in all things to be ouerruled
and ordered by the written word of God. This was Psalm 119* ^ 7.
David's practice: he gave himself to continual meditation in the word of God:
he made it a v. 105.
lantern to his feet, and a light unto his paths. And hereby he became v. 98.
wiser then his enemies, and got more understanding* then all his teachers.
Would thou then be truly wise? become a fool to the world, lean not to
thine own wisdom; but make Gods word thy whole direction.

Secondly, hereby we are taught to walk wisely in our whole conversation, that
so it may appear we have this single eye: hereto Col. 4. 5. Ephesians. 5. 15. How to
walk wisely.
Paul often exhorts us. And thus we walk when we prac^^se every action of our
life in wisdom, according to these four rules, which are to be observed in
every good action. I. The thing we do must be just. II. The means of effecting
it must also be just. III. We must keep our selves therein, within the
compass and limits of our calling. IV. We must do the thing with an honest,
upright, and single heart. And that we may work wisely according to these
four rules, we must ever have the word of God, to tell us what is just; what
means be just; what be the precincts of our calling; and when we work with an
upright and single heart: so doing, our works shall be in wisdom, and we
shall have the approbation and praise of God.

Thirdly, seeing this single eye of spiritual wisdom, makes our life How to
season* natural wisdom.
to shine with righteousness, we must learn to season our natural wit, with
this spiritual wisdom. Natural wisdom is a commendable gift of God, but
without this spiritual wisdom it is foolishness in the things of God, yea
very corrupt in natural actions; and therefore we must join therewith this
heavenly wisdom, which may season it and make it holy; and so shall the use of
it tend to Gods glory. It is the misery of this age, that men of excellent
parts for natural wisdom, have no regard to season the same with spiritual
wisdom: hereby come many aberrations in matters of great importance, for it is
justice with God to curse their proceedings, that despising the heavenly, lean
altog^ther to their own wisdom.

Fourthly, seeing spiritual providence in forecasting how to compass The
practice of spiritual providence.
true happiness, is a special part of true heavenly wisdom; we must become
careful practitioners hereof in our lives, that so we may attain to true
happiness. When the rich Luke 12. 17, 18.
man's ground brought forth much fruit, how provident was he to lay up store for
the time to come: yet God calls him but a fool, because he had no regard or
forecast to the state of his soul. And the fi^e virgins are therefore called
Mat. 25. 3.
foolish, because they contented themselves with blazing lamps, and had no
forecast for ^yle in their vessels: and so many at this day content themselves
with an outward profession, and do not provide for the graces of salvation.
But though a man had all the wisdom of the world, and by his wit could
compass upon earth what his heart could wish, yet if he fail in providing for
true happiness, all his wisdom is but madness ^ see this in 2. Sam. 16. 23.
Achitophel, whose counsel for worldly things was like the oracle of God, yet
wanting this spiritual wisdom to forecast for true happiness to his soul,
his end was both shameful and fearful: for in a discontent, 2. Sam. 17. 23.
he went and hanged himself. Let us therefore practice this wise forecast for
true happiness, and never be well till we get assurance hereof; then do we
show our selves truly wise. If we fail in this we fail in all; and therefore
like the wise Virgins, let us get oil in our vessels, the saving graces of
Gods spirit into our hearts, that when our bridegroom Jesus Christ shall come,
we may enter with him into glory. And thus much of the single eye, with the
fruits thereof.

The second point to be handled, is the wicked eye, with the fruits The wicked
e^e with the fruits thereof.
thereof; in these words, But if thine eye be wicked thy whole body shall be
dark. The wicked eye, is the mind of man having some light of understanding in
it by nature, yet maruelously blinded and darkened by the corruption of sin
through Adams fall. And for our better instruction The corruption of the mind
by Adams fall.
herein, we must know, that the mind of man by Adams fall receives a two fold
blemish: first, it has lost the gift of discerning and judging in 1
spiritual things, mistaking evil for good, earthly for heavenly, things to be
refused, for things to be chosen. This is plain by our blindness and
ignorance in the true knowledge of God, and of our selves. First, touching Man's
ignorance touching God.
God, howsoever the mind of man by nature know there is a God, yet naturally
man will not acknowledge the presence of God, for if he 1
did, he would not without remorse or fear commit those sins in Gods sight,
which he is afraid and ashamed to do in the sight of many men. Again, the
mind by nature will not acknowledge Gods 2
particular providence, for in the time of want or distress when means fail,
his heart is dead within him: and the promise of help from man does more
cheer him, then his hope in God; which shows plainly that he trusts more
in the creature, then in his creator. Thirdly, 3
the mind of man by nature does not acknowledge Gods justice, for naturally man
thinks, that though he sin, yet he shall escape punishment, as Deuteronomy. 26. 16.
Fourthly, though man know God must be 4
worshipped, yet naturally the mind dise^^eth not of Gods right worship; herein
the foolish heart is full of darkness, and turns God into an Idol; Romans 1.
21. 23. And in a word, the natural man perceives not the things of God,
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1. Cor. 2.
14. which shows plainly that herein he has a wicked eye.

Secondly, for our selves, the mind herein wants the gift of discerning: 2
for, I. no man naturally knows the blindness of his own mind, they The
blindness of ma^s mind in the knowledge of himself.
think Romans 1. 22.
themselves to be wi^e, when in the things of God they be stark fools: II.
man cannot discern aright of his own sins, nor see the vileness of the^
naturally, though his conscience often accuse him: for if he did he would not
sin as he does: III. man naturally does judge amiss of his own fradtie and
mortality, for there is no man so aged, but he thinks he may live longer.
This Moses saw when Ps. 90. 12.
he prayed God to teach them so to number their days, that they might apply
their hearts unto wisdom. IV. Naturaly men cannot discern aright of the scope
and end of their lives: for whereas we ought to aim at the glory of God and
the good of our brethren, to serve God in men's good: by nature we little think
on this, but wholly seek our own good, and our own praise. V. We cannot
naturally discern of our own true happiness; for do we not measure it by
outward things, esteeming the rich and honorable happy, and the poor man
miserable? By all which it is more then evident, that the mind has lost the
gift of right discerning.

The second blemish of corruption in the mind is, in respect of it II. Blemish
of the mind by nature.
slavish subjection unto those things which it should rule and direct: for
naturally it is subject to these three unmeet guides: I. to the corrupt will
and affections: II. to the wicked temptations of the devil cast into it, yea
and that so far, that such as the temptation is, such is the mind that is
tempted: III. to the world, and the ill examples therein: for naturally men
sway with the times, and think the common course the safest. And in this
respect also is it here called a wicked eye.

Now the fruit of it is, to make the whole body dark; that is, the whole life
of man full of disorder and unrighteousness. And how should it be otherwise,
when that which should discern between good and evil, and direct
accordingly, is disabled thereunto.

The use. 1. Seeing by nature we have this evil eye (for that Christ The fruit
of a wicked eye
takes for granted) we must labor diligently to discern it in our selves,
and to find that naturally we cannot judge a right of God and of our selves.
This is the first step to true knowledge, to discern of our own natural
blindness: and till we perceive it in our selves in some measure, we know
nothing as we ought to know. Also when we see it, we must bewail our misery
in this behalf, that we have a mind so corrupt, that it causes disorder in
our whole life; yea, we must tremble and fear at this wicked eye. Bodily
darkness causes fear, but far more dangerous is this spi^ituall darkness,
for hereby the soul is kept from the sight of God under the power of Satan. We
therefore discerning in our selves this wicked eye, must follow the counsel of
our Savior Christ, Revel. 3. 18. Buy of me eye salve, that thou may see:
that is, we must get of him the inlightning of his spirit, in the holy
ministry of his word; for this is that anointing which teaches us all things,
1. Ioh. 2. 27. which when we do truly receive, then does our wicked eye become
single.

Secondly, hereby we see that the course of the world, in regard of the Men
content themsel^es with a wicked eye.
state of their minds, is justly to be reproved; for every where both young
and old content themselves with this wicked eye: if they can say, there is a
God, and this God is to be worshipped, to be loved, and feared; and that we
must love our neighbor as our selves, and live well, they seek no further: and
yet if a man were brought up in the wilderness, he might see all this by the
light of nature; the wicked eye sees thus much: but we must not content our
selves herewith, for if there be no more, the life is full of darkness still;
and the soul may go to utter darkness with all this. We therefore must
remember to get the single eye, else we are no scholars in the school of
Christ. Indeed some plead, that Preachers can say no more in effect but this,
Love God above all, and thy neighbor as thy self: but these men know not what
they say, blessing themselves in their ignorance: they must know that grace
must be put to nature, and sanctify it; and spiritual knowledge joined with
natural, or else we remain with the wicked eye. If we have no more but a
general confused knowledge in moral points, that serves not to save us* but to
make us without excuse at the last day. Again, another common fault worthy
reproof is this, that men content themselves with natural reformation; they
will grant that God is to be worshipped, and loved, that we must live well,
deal justly, and love our neighbors: but the blind eye sees thus much. The
mere civil man will go thus far, and yet his life is nothing but
darkness: all this reformation is but natural. We therefore must labor for
renewed hearts, by the spirit of God, and reformed liue^ according to the
Gospel; for howsoever a civil conversation may commend us unto men, yet it
will not save us in the day of the Lord.

Thirdly, is this evil eye in every one by nature? then beware we be Be not
selfewittie in the matters of salvation.
not wise in our selves, and from our selves, in matters of salvation; herein
the word of God must be our wisdom: Deuteronomy. 12. 8. -- 11. -- Ye shall not do
every man that which seems good in his own ^ies -- but that which I command
you. Far be it therefore from us to appoint to our selves, how we will
worship God, or how we will be saved: and yet such is our blind presumption,
that we will be our own masters in these things. The Turk has his
religion, the Jew his, and the Papist his, all swaruing from the truth of God;
and yet every one of these look to be saved in their religion: each one of
these have a different manner of worshipping God, and all swaruing from the
true worship: and yet they all persuade themselves that God is well pleased
with their service. And thus it goes with natural men among v^, though
otherwise sufficiently wise for worldly things; they resolve upon their own
course for the salvation of their souls, let the preacher say what he will:
some think, if they repent at their end, and then commend their souls to
God, it is sufficient; others look to be saved by their well-doing, and others
by their faith (as they call it:) but in truth, by their own good meaning, and
intent to live well; for what faith have they that know not Gods word and
promises? Thus by their own wisdom will men be saved, and hereby the devil
destroys many a soul: but let God be wise and every man a fool, and let us
submit our selves in the things of God, wholly to be ruled and guided by his
written word, lest Iewishly and Popishly, we going about to stablish our own
conceits in the matters of salvation, do plunge our souls into the pit of
destruction.

Fourthly, is the eye of the mind naturally corrupt? then must we The eye of
faith must be sought.
labor for a better eye; that is, the eye of faith, by which we rely on Gods
mercy for our salvation, and on his providence for all needful things in life
and death. This eye makes supply to that which is wanting to natural
knowledge; hereby we discern rightly of God, and of our selves, this enables
us to see afar off: yea, hereby we see things invisible, for it is the
evidence of things which are not seen, Heb. 11. 1. hereby Abraham saw the day
of Christ, and was glad, Ioh. 8. 58. and all the Patriarchs saw the promise of
God afar off, Heb. 11. 13. This will enable us to walk in their steps
toward the heavenly ci^ie; and therefore let us get this faith* that so
becoming children of the promise, we may be counted for the seed. And thus
much for the wicked eye.

The third kind of eye, is the blind eye, which is set out with the fruits 3.
The blind eye.
thereof, in these words; Wherefore, if the light that is in thee be
darkness, how great is that darkness? For the better discerning of the
state of man with this blind eye, we must see what is meant by light, and also
by darkness. By light is meant that knowledge of God, of justice, and of good
and evil, which is in the mind by nature: now though this cannot be quite put
out (for the most wicked wretch, and the veriest Atheist that lives, has some
conscience remaining, which is a work of this light) yet it may be so buried
and covered, that no light shall appear, nor any use be made of it, and then
is it said to be darkness; which is the state of those that are given up to a
reprobate sense, as when a man denies there is a God, or that the Scriptures be
the word of God, or such like; in these men natural light is become
darkness. And the cause of this change in them, is their corrupt will and
rebellious affections, which ouer-ruling natural knowledge and conscience,
cause men to give themselves to actual sins, whereby at length they come to
commit sin greedily and without remorse; yea, even against conscience, and
the light of nature, and so bury them both in such sort, that they have no
more use of them, then if they were quite put out.

Now where the light of nature is thus put out, the fruit of it is most The
fruit of the blind etc.
palpable darkness* How great is that darkness? that is, there is nothing in
that man's life, but brutish confusion in hellish actions, of pride,
covetousness, envy, blasphemy, and unnatural uncleanness; as Romans 1. 27,
29, etc.

The Use. Considering the light of nature may be thus put out, we A motive to
consider our natural vileness.
must hereby be admonished, First, to enter into a serious consideration of our
own vileness; for naturally we have in us (even the best of us all) such
rebellious lust, and damnable desires, as unless they be restrained, or
renewed by grace, will darken, and as good as put out the light of nature. This
should make us vile in our own eyes, that nourish such corruptions, and
esteem so of sin, which will put out that light which yet Adams fall left in
us.

Secondly, hereby we are admonished to have special care to mortify To
mortify corrupt desires.
our corrupt desires, and our unruly affections, that else will exstinguish in
us the light of nature. Before the fall, the mind ruled and directed the will
and affections; but now these inferior powers rule, or rather overrule the
mind, and utterly pervert the regiment thereof* they cast a mist, and a veil
over the eye of the mind, that it can see nothing in the ways of
righteousness: and therefore as we tender the salvation of our souls, we
must renounce our own natural wills and corrupt desires, and strive to bring
them into subjection unto the word of God. Many men think much to be crossed
of their natural desires and delights, but it is happy for the soul, when
God in his providence does break men of their wills; for the will unsubdued
carries the whole man headlong into all disorder. This must be considered of
them which have knowledge and learning, for unless the will and affections be
ruled by the word, all knowledge is made fruitless: out of the heart (says
Pro. ^. 4. 23.
Solomon) come the issues of life, if it be kept with watch and ward, and
ordered by Gods word; otherwise hence come the issues of death, when the raines
of the affections are let loose after the corrupt desires of nature: and
therefore as we respect woe or joy, so must we have regard to our will and
desires.

Thirdly, if the light of nature may be turned into darkness, then The
illumination at the Gospel may be put out.
may the illumination of the Gospel be put out and turned into darkness; for
the knowledge of the Gospel is not natural, and therefore not so deeply
imprinted in the understanding, upon the bare knowledge of it. Experience
shows this to be true, in all those temporizers which begin in the spirit,
and end in the flesh: and the author to the Hebrews shows Fine degrees of
apostacy.
5. degrees of apostacy, by which the illumination of the Gospel is turned
into darkness, Heb. 3. 12. saying, Take heed lest there be in any of you an
evil heart of unbelief, etc. where the first degree, is consenting 1
unto sin, being deceived with the temptation of it. The second, is 2
hardness of heart, upon many practices of sin. Thirdly, the heart being 3
hardened, becomes unbelieving, and calls the truth of the Gospel into
question. Fourthly, by unbelief it becomes evil, having a base conceit 4
of the Gospel. Fifthly, this evil heart brings a man to apostacy, and 5
falling from God, which is the extinguishing of the light of the Gospel. We
therefore to prevent this fearful estate, must embrace the Gospel, and
practice the counsel there set down; even by looking carefully every one to his
own heart and life, and by mutual admonition and exhortation one of another,
verse. 13. that so the first step of this apostacy, which is the deceitfulness
of sin, take not place in us.

Fourthly, seeing the light of nature may be put out, whether may Saving grace
cannot be lost.
not true faith, and other saving graces be quite lost? Answ. There is no grace
of God, but considered in it self, it may be lost; for it is a creature, and
so is changeable, for nothing is unchangeable in it self, but the Creator:
but in regard of the promise God, touching the preservation of saving grace
unto the end* in such as be in Christ: hence it comes that faith, hope, and
charity, cannot be lost; for the gifts and calling of God, are without
repentance in Christ. God indeed gave to Adam true and perfect grace, whereby
he might have stood if he would; but because he decreed to permit the fall, to
make a way for his mercy in Christ, therefore he left man in the hand of his
own counsel, and so he fell from his created integrity: but now in Christ
God works both the will and the deed, so as he which does truly believe,
Psalm. 125. 1
is as mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but stands fast for ever: for he
is built upon the Mat. 16. 16
rock Christ Jesus, and so can never fall: the gates of hell shall not
prevail against him: God gives a second grace unto the first, and by virtue
hereof it becomes unchangeable, though in it self considered, it might be
lost. Again, I answer thus; that as the light of nature is not quite put out,
but only buried, in such sort as it is without use, and seems exstinguished;
so the grace of faith, by the practice of sin may be hid and covered, so as
it shall not appear for a time: but yet it cannot be quite put out, where it
is once truly wrought. And thus much of the blind eye, with the fruit thereof.

Now to end this place, we must remember that the scope of Christ in these two
verses, is to show that the evil and blind eye of man by nature, whereby he is
disabled to discern rightly of things that differ, is the cause why in seeking
after treasure, he leaves the heavenly, and seeks earthly treasure only.
And hereby we must be admonished to labor for this gift of discerning, by the
illumination of the spirit in the word, as we showed before, that so the eye
being single, the whole body may be light: that is, so ordered, that with
peace and comfort we may walk on in the way of life: whereas otherwise, we
walk in darkness, and fear no danger till we fall into it irrecouerably.

verse 24. No man can serve two masters --: for either he shall hate the one,
and love the other; or else he shall lean to the one, and despise the other.
Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.
Here Christ meets with a second objection, which the carnal heart of man
might frame against the former commandments, verse 19, and 20. for whereas
Christ had forbidden the treasuring up of worldly riches, and commanded the
seeking of heavenly treasure; some man might flatter himself with this
persuasion, that he might well seek^ both, and lay up both treasures for
himself in earth, and in heaven also. To this Christ answers, No: that is
impossible; and he proves it thus: No man can serve two masters: But to seek
heavenly and earthly treasures, is to serve two masters; to wit, God and
Mammon: and therefore no man can seek them both. The first part of this reason
is fully set down, and proved in the text, by the effect of such service in
contrary affections and behavior; for either he shall hate the one, and love
the other, etc. The assumption and conclusion are necessarily implied in the
last words, Ye cannot serve God and Mammon: wherein Christ applies the former
argument.

The Exposition. No man can serve two masters. This may well be doubted of;
for experience shows, that by their mutual consent, one Factor may serve
diverse Merchants. Hereto some answer thus, that it is implied, the masters must
be of diverse and contrary qualities; as when one says, come and do this; the
other says, do it not: and then no man can serve them both: and thus the
words contain an holy truth. But yet because no clause is expressed, implying
contrariety in the masters; therefore I take it, the words must be taken as a
common proverb among the Jews, which Christ Iales down for the ground of his
reason. Now in a proverb it is not requisite it should be always true, but for
the most part, and ordinarily; as Luke 4. 24. No Prophet is accepted in his
own country: that is, ordinarily. For either he shall hate the one that is,
the one master commanding him; either disliking that he should be his master,
or displeased with his commandments: And love the other; that is, the other
master in whom he takes delight, and is well pleased with his commandments.
Or else he shall lean to the one, and despise the other. These words are an
explication of the former, showing how it may appear, that a servant hates one
master, and loves another; namely, his leaning to the one, declares his love
unto him: that is, his applying of himself to respect his masters pleasure,
and to do his commandment: And hic despising the other, declares his hatred,
when he has no regard to his commandments. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.
By mammon he means riches, lucre, and gain: now he says not, Ye cannot
serve God and have riches, for Abraham, Jacob, and Job, were very rich, and yet
served God sincerely: but ye cannot serve God, and serve riches; that is, give
your selves to seek riches, and set your hearts upon them, and serve God also.

In the words thus explaned we may observe sundry instructions: Instruct.
First, here Christ shows what it is to serve God: a point much spoken 1
of, but little known, and less practiced. To serve God therefore, is to What
it is to serve God.
love God, and to clean unto him. Every one will say, he loves God, and ever
has done; but beware herein of spiritual guile, for true love consists not in
word and tongue, but in deed, and in truth: and God must be loved, not only as
he is a bountiful father, but as he is a Lord and master, and does command us
service. The written word shows his will and pleasure, concerning us, what he
requires at our hands; and if we serve him indeed, we must love him in his
power of commanding, though he should bestow no reward upon us. This David
shows notably, Psalm. 119. 25. I am thy servant, grant me therefore
understanding that I may know thy testimonies. Again, if we serve God, we must
clean unto him, and thereby testify our love: now what is meant by cleaning
unto, is notably expressed in the parable of the prodigal son, Luke 15. 15.
where it is said of him, that having spent his portion, he claue to a citizen
of that country; that is, he resigned and gave himself to his service: So to
clean unto God, is to resign a man's self unto Gods service, in obedience to
all his commandments, and embracing all his promises: not suffering himself
to be drawn from any part of Gods word, by unbelief or disobedience, though
all the world should set against us. This David also professes of himself,
saying, Ps. 119. 31
I have cleaued to thy testimonies O Lord, and Ps. 119. 6.
I shall not be confounded when I have respect unto all thy commandments. On
the contrary, when a man withdrawes himself from God, by disobedience to his
commandments, and by unbelief, then he does hate and despise him. Indeed the
vilest wretch that lives, is ashamed with open mouth to profess hatred and
despite of God, but yet the bad practice in life, bewraies the bad affection of
the heart: Prou. 14. 2. -- He that is lewd or perverse in his ways, despises
God; and they that live in the breach of his commandments hate him, Exodus 20.
5. let them profess in word what they will.

Now the consideration hereof serves, First, to discover unto us the Use. 1.
The ignorant of the world
gross blindness and superstitious ignorance of the world; who think, that
if a man rehearse the Lords prayer, the Creed, and the ten Commandments, he
serves God well, let his life be what it will: but here Christ teaches us a
further thing; if we will be Gods servants, we must cleave unto him both in the
affections of our heart, and in actions of obedience in our life. Thus did
Abraham, when God said unto him, thou shall not kill, he kept himself from
murder; but when he said, Genesis 22. 2.
Abraham kill thy son, he addressed himself to do it, though he were the
son of the promise, and the only son of his old age. Secondly, this 2
shows how Atheism abounds in all places at this day; for to hate and
Atheism abounds.
despise God is flat Atheism: now they that withdraw their hearts from God,
and set themselves to seek the things of this world, neglecting obedience to
Gods holy commandments, are here accounted of Christ, despisers, and haters of
God; and the number of such is great in every place. I know such men do scorn
to be called Atheists, but how they be esteemed in the world, it skilleth not,
till they reform this wicked practice, they are no better in the sight of
Christ.

Secondly, whereas God and Mammon are here opposed as two masters; 2
hence we learn that Mammon, that is, riches, is a great lord and Mammon is
that Lord.
master in the world: this Christ here takes for granted, and therefore does
forewarne his Disciples of it. But how (will some say) can riches be a God?
Answ. Not in themselves, for so they are the good creatures of God; but to the
corrupt heart of man, which makes an ido^ of them to it self, by setting his
love and delight upon them, as on true happiness, and trusting in them more
then in the true God: and for this cause is co^etousnesse called idolatry,
Colos. 3. 5. and the co^etous person an Idolater, Ephesians. 5. 5. for look
whereon man sets his heart, that is his Lord and his God, though it be the
devil himself. Now that men do^ thus set up riches in their hearts, as an
Idol, and so become servants and slaves to that which God ordained to serve
them, I show plainly thus: For first, they neglect the worship and service of
God for lucre and Proofs.
gain, and spend more time with greater delight for earthly riches, the^ 1
they do for the true treasures of Gods heavenly graces. Secondly, let 2
a man have worldly wealth at will, and he is full of joy and delight, his
riches give him great contentment; but if he loose his goods, then vexation
and sorrow does more oppress him, then all the promises of God in the Bible
can comfort him. Thirdly, by transgressing 3
Gods commandments a man loses heaven; but who is so grieved for his
transgressions, whereby he incurres this loss, as he is for a small damage
in some part of his riches? Fourthly, I appeal 4
to men's consciences, whether they be not far more sharp and eager set upon
the means of gain, then on prayer and other parts of Gods worship, which
are the means of grace: all which do argue plainly, that they serve Mammon,
and honor riches for their God. So that howsoever by Gods blessing, out^ard
Idolatri^ be banished out of our Church, yet we have many Idolatours in our
Land; for every covetous worldling sets up the Idol of wealth and riches in his
heart for his Lord. And that these Mammonists abound every where, appears by
the common practices of oppression, extortion, and cruelty, in hard dealing
toward the poor, by greedy Landlords and Usurers; as also by the practices
of the rich in the time of dearth, for by their hoarding up of store,
engrossing of commodities, and enhauncing of the price, to the augmenting of
their private wealth, they mightily increase Gods wrath upon the poor. Indeed
God has his servants which have him only for their God, but the number of
them is small, in respect of those that set their hearts upon the world, and
make Mammon their God.

Here then first behold, the slavish baseness of a covetous heart, for Use. ^.
man was made to be the Lord of Mammon and wealth, and yet thorough
covetousness he subiecteth himself to become a slave and vassal thereunto.
Secondly, hereby let us learn to become faithful disposers 2
of worldly riches, and (as Christ says) to Luke 16. 9.
make us friends with this Mammon of iniquity, by good disposing of it to Gods
glory in works of mercy; and so shall ^e retain our right of creation,
whereby God made the creatures to serve us.

Thirdly, Christ opposing God and Mammon, and saying, No man can 3
serve them both, imports plainly, that he that seeks to be rich, setting
his heart thereon, forsakes God: I say not that every rich man forsakes They
that set their heart on riches forsake God
God, for when God gives abundance to a man's moderate labor and industry in
his lawful calling, he may lawfully possess it, using it to Gods glory: but
to seek to be rich is a denying of God, because so the heart is a servant unto
Mammon, and not to the Lord. This may appear by their whole behavior about
wealth, whether we consider their getting, their keeping, or employing of it,
in all which they sin against God. First, in getting, for God gives riches
to whom he will, Proof.
and has not tied himself by promise to make any man rich; and therefore 1
he that resolves with himself that he will be rich, cannot make conscience
of lying, fraud, injustice, sabbath-breaking, and such like, when the
committing of these things makes for his advantage. Secondly, 2
they sin in keeping; for he that resolves to be rich, will rather forsake
the truth, then his wealth, in time of t^iall: and for the saving or recovery
of his wealth, he will not stick to seek to blessers, wizards, coniurers,
etc. Thirdly, for disposing or employing; he that resolves to 3
be rich sins therein: for he cannot be drawn to works of mercy, a^ least
with any cheerfulness; and hence it comes that sometimes the poor do starve
before the rich man's door.

The consideration hereof, serves first to correct our judgment concerning
Use. 1.
covetous and worldly minded persons; our censure of them is too mild and
gentle, we judge them honest men, only somewhat hard and near themselves:
but mark Christ's sentence upon them, Worldly persons forsake God, and choose
Mammon for their Lord and master: which is a practice of Atheism, and therefore
not to be so lightly passed over, as men think. Secondly, hereby we see it is
a dangerous 2
and unlawful course, for men to make laws with themselves, how rich they
will be; as to have so many hundred, or thousand pounds in stock, or so much
lands, and rents, etc. for what follows upon this resolution? why surely they
must needs give the^^^lues to the compassing of their purpose, and so they fall
into manifold s^ares of Satan, by practices of injustice, lying, fraud, etc.
Thirdly, hereby we must be admonished 3
to content our selves with that portion of goods, more or less, which God
sends; knowing that a little is sufficient with Gods blessing upon it: Away
with covetousness (as the Apostle Heb. 13. 5.
says) and be content with that ye have, for he has said, I will not fa^le
thee nor forsake thee.

Fourthly, whereas Christ says, Ye cannot serve God and Mammon; 4
we learn, that the heart of man must not be divided between God, and the
world; the one half to God, and the other to the world: no, God will have all
or none, herein he will not part stakes with the creature: Man's heart must not
be divided from God. Use. 1.
Prou. 23. 26. My son give me thy heart.

The consideration whereof serves, First, to discover the hypocrisy and
spiritual guile of many, who think they may live in some one sin or other,
and yet be Gods servants still: this is the conceit of drunkards, adulterers,
covetous persons, and such like; for even while they live in these sins, they
will come to Gods worship, to the word, and prayer often, and to the
Sacraments, at least once a year: which they would not do, but that they
think God has respect unto them herein, like to the wicked Jews, Ier. 7. 9,
10. But they deceive themselves, for no man can serve two masters: while a man
lives in any sin the servant of the devil, he can never be accepted of God
for his servant. Secondly this 2
No sin reign h^^ Gods children.
shows, that the servant of God is so far forth delivered from sin by
regeneration, that no sin reigns in him; for so he should serve two masters,
for every reigning sin is a Lord and master: Romans 6. 16. Know ye not, that to
whomsoever you give your selves as servants to obey, his servants ye are to
whom ye obey, whether it be of sin unto death, etc. and he that commits
sin, is the servant of sin, Ioh. 8. 34. This therefore is a sure ground,
that no regenerate person lives in any sin. Thirdly, 3
hereby every one is taught to consecrate both his soul and body to the Lord,
indeauouring to serve him with all the powers and parts thereof; for God is our
only Lord and master, and therefore let all that is within us bow the knee to
him: Romans 6. 22. The servant of God is one freed from sin, who has his fruit
in holiness, and the end everlasting life. The 1. Kin. 10. 8
Queen of Sheba pronounced Salomons servants happy, that stood before Solomon
to hear his wisdom; how much more then are they happy, who in soul and
body are Gods servants, who for bounty and wisdom infinitely surpasses
Solomon? Here some will say, I would gladly serve God alone, and I desire I
might do it with all my heart; but the corruption of my nature is such, that
it makes me to rebel against the commandments of God, and I cannot do the
good I would, but the evil which I would not do, that do I; so as I fear I
serve two masters. Ans. This is the state of Gods children in this life; but
herewith A comfort to the^ that are troubled with corruption.
they must stay themselves: when they fail in obedience, they must consider
whether they do so freely and willingly, or against their wills; If they heart
can truly say, thou do unwillingly commit sin, thou would not do it,
and art truly grieved and displeased with thy self for it; then be of good
courage, thou do not serve two masters, for this service is voluntary. Now
though there be in thee the flesh and the spirit, the one haling thee one way,
and the other another; yet while thou striuest against the flesh, desiring and
endeavoring to be wholly subject to the spirit, though thou fail often in
action, yet in Christ be thy sins pardoned, and God accepts in thee the will
for the deed. Endeavor therefore to acquaint thy self more and more with the
will of thy heavenly master, and seek to please him in all things, and labor
to mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, and so shall thou know God to
be thy only master, and in due time perceive thy freedom from the bondage of
the flesh.

Verse. 25. Therefore I say unto you, be not careful for your life, what ye
shall eat, or what ye shall drink: nor yet for your body, what ye shall put
on. Is not the life more worth then meat, and the body then ra^ment?
Our Savior Christ having forbidden the practices of covetousness, and
prevented such obiectio^s as the corrupt heart of man might frame to excuse it
self therein, does here strike at the very root of covetousness, and seeks to
remove the cause thereof; to wit, distrustful and inordinate care for the
things of this life, though they be things necessary, as meat, drink, and
clothing; and in this argument he proceeds to the end of this chapter. Now
this verse depends upon the former, as a conclusion ^oherence.
inferred upon all that he had said before concerning covetousness from the 19.
v. to this effect: Seeing they that seek earthly treasures, neglecting the
heavenly, do want the single ^i^ of spiritual wisdom, to discern of the
true treasure, and also are themselves servants unto Mammon; therefore I say
unto you my Disciples, be not careful (no not for* thing, needful)
immoderately, and in a distrustful manner. And here again he meets with
another pretense of a covetous mind, wherewith it pleads for the service of
Mammon; to wit, that the things they seek for, are things necessary, without
which they cannot live. Hereto Christ answers, Yea, but I say, you must not
seek* no not for things needful to your life, immoderately and distrustfully.

The Exposition* I say unto you that is, I, that am your master, upon whom you
depend for all heavenly instruction, and direction in all things needful both
for your souls and bodies, I say unto you: by this he would prepare them to
attention and reverent observation of his commandment following* as being a
matter of great importance, whereon depends the life of all obedience, in
relying on Gods providence: in regard whereof, we also must with all good
conscience mark the same. Be not careful for your life, etc. Least we
should mistake Christ's meaning, we must know that there be two kinds of
care; a godly moderate* A twofold care.
care; and a distrustful carking care. The moderate honest care is enjoined us
by Gods commandment: Prove. 6. 6. Wisdom sends the sluggard 1. Moderate.
to learn diligence and providence for things needful, of the little Ant or
pismire: and Paul says, fathers must lay up for their children, 2. Cor. 12.
14. And he that provides not for his own, especially for them of his family,
is worse then an infidel, 1. Tim. 5. 8. So that there is a lawful care even
for the things of this* life. Now the practice of it stands in two things.
First, in the diligent walking in a man's lawful calling, dealing uprightly and
justly therein with every one, minding only to get things honest and
necessary in the sight of all men. Secondly, in leaving the success and issue
of all our labor and endeavor to God, for that belongs to him: we must use
the means soberly and honestly, and leave the blessing to God. This godly care
Moses showed notably in leading the children of Israel out of Egypt: for what
God commanded him to do, that he did; he goes which way God sends him,
although he met with many crosses; and uses the means that God calls him
unto, leaving the issue to God* as appears notably at the red sea, when they
were at a wonderful strait, having the sea before them, the Egyptians behind
the^, and woods and mountains on each side; yet being commanded to strike the
waters with the rod of God, he shows notable trust in Gods providence: Fear
not (says Exodus 14. 13.
he,) stand still, and behold the salvation of our God. And when Abraham at
Gods commandment went to sacrifice his son, Isaac asks him, my father,
where is the sacrifice? Gen 22. 8.
Abraham answers with words of faith, My son, God will provide. And thus 1 Samuel 23. 3, 4.
David went to fight against the Philistims to Keilah at Gods commandment,
though his own men discouraged him from it: whereby it is plain, he relied on
God for the issue of the battle. Now this godly moderate care is not here
forbidden, which has respect to obedience in the duty, and for the success
depends upon Gods providence.

The distrustful care is that, whereby men trouble themselves about 2.
Distrustful care.
the issue of their labors; and when they have done the work, do not rest
therewith, but vex themselves about the success; not relying on Gods The
effects of it.
providence for the blessing, but only on the means. This distrustful care
(for our better discerning of it) has these effects. First, it oppresses 1
the heart* making it exceeding hea^^e and pensive for fear of want* where
this fear is, there is this distrustful care, for this argues a man dares not
trust God, but would have the success of his labor out of Gods hand in his
own. Secondly, it allureth and draws men to use unlawful 2
means to got worldly things, as lying, fraud, injustice in false waights,
measures, etc. Thirdly, it makes men weary of Gods worship, i^ distracts 3
their minds in prayer, and hearing the word; and (as Christ Luke ^. 14.
says) it ch^akes the word that it brings forth no fruit: for when the mind
is wholly set upon the world, there is no respect to the matters of God. And
this is that care which is here forbidden, even a distrustful carking care,
which as the greek word signifies, diuides and distracts the mind, by
troubling and perplexing it about the issue and success of our endeauours.

The Use. That which Christ here forbids his Disciples, is the common
Distrustful care the sin of this age.
sin of our age and time, not in a few persons, but in many; for though this
distrustful care be the disease of the heart, yet it shows it self by
actions in the life: For first, what is the cause of so little fruit of Proof.
the word preached, as may every where be discerned? is not (among 1
many other) this worldly care one special cause? This we may see in the
parable, Luke 8. 14. for the seed^ that light among thorns, which choked it,
is the word preached to a heart possessed with worldly cares: let these men
observe themselves, and they shall find, that they can neither pray, nor hear
the word, nor meditate therein, without manifold distractions from these
worldly thoughts. Secondly, there is no 2
trade or calling without his conuaiances of craft and deceit, though it do
not appear so much in some callings, as in others; and hard it is to find
them that make conscience hereof, when gain and profit may come thereby; which
comes from this distrustful care in men's hearts, whereby they doubt of Gods
blessing answerable to their desire, in the use of lawful means only. But
since Christ forewarnes us of this sin, we must beware it take not place in
our hearts: and for the avoiding of it, we must follow the counsel of the holy
Ghost in Scripture, Psalm. 37. 5. Commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in
him, and he shall bring it to pass: which is often commended unto us, Psalm. 55.
22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee: and Pro. 16. 3.
Roll thy work upon the Lord: 1. Pet. 5. 7. Cast all your care on him, for ^e
cares for you. In all which places we have a most worthy instruction, to this
effect; not exempting men from doing the duties of their calling, but teaching
the^, that when they have done their endeavor, in the diligent, sober, and
upright use of means, then they must leave the event and issue for good
success to the blessing of God. Thus the tradesman, whose living stands by
buying and selling, must be careful and diligent about his business, without
deceit or lying: and in so doing refer the success of his bargain to the
blessing of God; and so must the husbandman plow and sow, and leave earing and
harvest to Gods good providence. This is the Apostles cou^fell, Phil. 4. 6. Be
nothing careful, that is, after a distrustf^ll* or distracting sort, (as the
word signifies) but in all things let your requests be made known to God,
with giving of thanks: where it is to be marked, that distrustful care is
opposed to prayer and thanksgiving, as an hinderer thereof; and therefore our
care must only be to use the lawful means moderately for any blessing, and
then to pray to God for good success and blessing, relying wholly thereon,
that when it comes we may give him thanks.

But some will say, it is hard for flesh and blood not to be careful of How to
leave the success to God.
success, how then should we be able to leave it wholly to God? Answer. We
must lay to our hearts the blessed promises of God, made to them that depend
upon his mercy and goodness, and labor to live by faith thereon: Psalm. 127.
2. It is in vain for man to rise early, and to lie down late, and to eat the
bread of sorrow, (meaning, while he trusts to himself, or in the means) but
God will surely give rest to his beloved, which serve him, and trust in him, in
the use of means. Psalm. 34. 10. The Lions do lack and suffer hunger, though
every poor beast of the field be a prey to his teeth; but they which seek
the Lord, shall lack nothing that is good. If we had no more promises in the
Bible, yet these were sufficient to cause us to rest upon his providence in the
sober use of lawful means. Again, this must be considered, how we shall
rely upon his mercy for the saving of our souls in the time of temptation
and hour of death, that dare not trust in his providence for the things of
this life. Quest. But what if all things go cross with men (will some say)
may I not then stick more to the means? Ans. Nay rather cleave the more to
God, for if the blessing were in the means, men would not be so often crossed:
God knows what is good for thee, better then thou thy self, and therefore
rest contented with his providence, though he cross thine expectation for
outward blessings: want is many times better for Gods children, then plenty;
and affliction, then peace and prosperity; as David found, Psalm. 119. 67, 71.
and therefore God lays it upon them: Did not good Josias fall before Pharaoh
Necho? which he should not have done, but that God would chasten him; for 2.
Chr 35. 22.
not regarding the words of Pharaoh Necho, which were of the mouth of God,
persuading him not to fight against him: and also 2. Chr. 34. 28.
that he might be taken away from seeing the evil to come: and was not
Hezekiahs heart puffed up in time of peace, in so much that wrath 2. Chr. 32.
25.
came upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem. Therefore learn to depend upon
Gods providence in the moderate use of lawful means, and whether he give thee
blessings, or take them away, bless his name; for it is good for thee it
should be so. And thus much for the maine commandment.

Now further mark in the words, how Christ distinguishes between life, and
the body* and applies meat and drink to life, and raiment to the body: and
yet we know, that apparel serves to preserve life also, especially in cold
countries. But Christ does thus distinguish them so: just cause; for though in
cold countries, apparel serves to preserve life, as well as meat and drink
do; yet the first and most general use of apparel, is another matter; to
wit, to hide the shame of nakedness, which the sin of Adam brought upon it:
Genesis 3. 7. 21. for before their fall, the man and the woman were both naked,
and were not ashamed, Genesis 2. 21.

Here then we are to learn, that the proper and maine end of apparel, The
proper end of ^pp^rell.
is for the body, to cover the shame of nakedness that sin has brought
upon us; which is so great, that if necessity would permit, both hands and
face should also be covered. The consideration whereof, as it shows their
immodestie and want of shame, that lay open the nakedness of their breasts,
or other parts of their body, more then need requires; so it teaches us,
never to be proud of our apparel, but rather humbled and abashed when we put
it on, or look upon it, for it is the cover of our shame, and so an ensign of
our sin: and the thief has as good cause to be proud of the bolts on his
heels, or of his bra^d in the hand, or hole in the care, as we of our
apparel; for as these are badges of misdemeanour, so is apparel a badge of our
sin. And on the other side, that we may have comfort in this ordinance of God
for our bodies, we must labor therein to express the graces of God in our
hearts; as modesty, sobriety, temperance, frugalitie, and such like.

Is not the life more worth then meat, and the body then raiment? Our 1.
Reason against immoderate care.
Savior Christ having given commandment against the immoderate care for
things needful to natural life, least the same should pass away without
effect, does here begin to enforce the same with diverse arguments: the first
whereof is in these words, taken from the creation, wherein God gives life and
the body, which are better then food and raiment; from whence Christ reasons
for his providence thus: The life is better the^ food, and the body then
raiment; but God by creation gives life and body: and therefore will he much
more give food and raiment for their preservation. Seeing God gives the
greater, we need not to doubt but he will affoard the less.

In this reason Christ teaches us, to make right use of our creation; Our
creation must teach us trust in gods providence.
namely, by the consideration of it, to learn confidence in Gods providence
for all things needful to our natural life: Job. 10. 8. Thine hands have made
me and fashioned me, and will thou destroy me? where Job Persuades himself of
preservation, because God created him: and 1. Pet. 4. 19. Let them that suffer
according to the will of God, commend their souls unto him in well-doing, as
unto a faithful creator: because God is a faithful creator, therefore in death
we must rely upon him. Experience teaches us, that every workman is careful
to preserve the work of his own hands, if it lie in his power; why then
should we doubt of this in our creator, who is almighty.

Verse 26. Behold the fowls of the heaven; for they sow not, neither reap,
nor carry into the barnes: yet your heavenly father feeds them. Are ye not
much better then they?
These words contain Christ's second reason to dissuade his Disciples 2. Reason
against distrustful care
from distrustful care for things needful, drawn from the consideration of
his providence over baser creatures then they were, for needful provision: the
reason stands thus.

If God provide for the fowls of heaven, then much more will he provide for
you: But God provides for the fowls of heaven, and feeds them: therefore
much more will he provide for you.

The first part of this reason is here confirmed two ways: First, because the
children of God have means of provision, which the fowls of the heaven want;
they sow not, neither reap, etc. Secondly, Gods children are better then
fowls, and therefore he will not suffer them to lack, since he provides for
baser things then they be: both which are so sensible and familiar, that they
may induce any man to depend upon Gods providence, without distrustful care.

Christ in propounding this reason, bids us Behold the creatures, that Gods
works must be considered.
is, take a serious view of them, look upon them wishly, and with
consideration, as the word signifies: whereby we may learn, that every
child of God ought seriously to consider the works of God, (for that which we
must do to the fowls of heaven, we must do to all the works of his hands) and
therein labor to behold the wisdom, justice, goodness, love, mercy and
providence of God. This is Salomons lesson, Eccl. 7. 15. Behold the work of
God. and Job. 36. 24. Remember thou magnify the work of God which men behold.
Why did God make the creatures distinctly one after another in six several
days, and take a particular view of the^ all after he had made them, with
approbation of their goodness, and also sanctify the 7. day for an holy rest,
both by his own example and express commandment? undoubtedly, among other
causes, this was one, to teach us to consider distinctly of all the works of his
hands: and among other holy duties, to meditate on the sabbath day, on the
glorious works of our creator. This was David's practice: for, Psalm. 19. 1. etc.
he resembles the heavens to a great book, wherein a man may read the glory of
God: and in the contemplation hereof did he exercise himself upon the Sabbath
days, as we may see in the Psalm which he penned for the Sabbath, Psalm. 92.
4, 5. -- I will rejoice in the works of thine hands: O Lord, how glorious are
thy works! And they which are negligent in this duty, are here called to
attendance by our Savior Christ.

But what must we behold in the fowls of heaven? How they neither Unreasonable
creatures depend upon Gods providence.
sow, nor reap, nor carry into barnes, etc. that is, they use not the means
of provision that man does, which shows they have not that care which man has.
Man may lawfully be careful to use these means, for God ordains them for
man's provision: but the fowls of the heaven go not so far to have care of
any means. And this privilege of man to the means, does strongly enforce
Christ's disswasion against distrustful care: for the fowls wanting such
means are free from that care. Quest. How then are they provided for? Ans.
They expect for food at Gods hand: Job 39. 3. The birds cry unto God,
wandering for lack of meat. Psalm. 104. 21. The lions ro^ring after their pray,
seek their meat at God. Psalm. 145. 15. The eyes of all wait upon God, and he
gives them meat in due season. Psalm. 147. 9. He gives to beasts their food,
and to the young ravens that cry. But how can unreasonable creatures cry to
God? Ans. They do not use prayer, as man do; but yet they are said to cry to
God, and to wait on God, because by a natural instinct given them by
creation, they seek for that food which God ordains for them, and are
contented therewith; so that by these phrases God would teach us, that they
depend upon his providence wholly for provision, and rest contented therewith.

Here then we are to observe, that the unreasonable creatures made Unreasonable
creatures more obedient then ^a^.
subject to vanity by the sin of man, do come nearer to their first estate,
and better observe the order of nature in their creation then man does: for
they seek for that which God provides for them, and when they receive it are
content: but man is deeply fallen from the state of his creation, in regard of
his depending on Gods providence for temporal things: though he have the use
of means which the fowls of heaven want, yet his heart is full fraught with
distrustful care, whether we respect the getting, or keeping, or employing of
earthly things. This shows that man is more corrupt then other creatures, and
more vile and base in this behalf then bruit beasts: which should humble every
one of us deopely under the serious consideration of our sins, that have so
depraved our nature, that we are more rebellious to the law of our creator, and
more distrustful in his providence then the bruit and senseless creatures.

And yet your heavenly father feeds them.] In these words is couched a
forcible reason, whereby Christ would persuade his disciples, and in them all
believers, to depend upon Gods providence without distrustful care. God (says
he) is your father, yea your heavenly father, and you are his children,
therefore depend upon him: for if Mat. 7. 1^.
earthly fathers will provide and give good things to their children, much more
will your heavenly. In this reason also is couched a means and way, How to
come to depend upon Gods providence.
whereby a man may come to rest upon Gods providence. In the word of God there
be two kind of promises: some of everlasting life and salvation by Christ:
others, of inferior gifts and blessings concerning this life. Now if we would
rely on God for temporal blessings, we must first labor to lay hold by faith
on his spiritual and eternal promises; get assurance of thine adoption in
Christ, and labor to know and feel that he is thy heavenly father; and then
thou will easily depend upon his providence for temporal blessings: if thou be
once persuaded truly that he will save thy soul, how can thou distrust him
for provision for thy body? If a Kings son know his father will make him
heir, he will not doubt but he will affoard him food and raiment in the mean
time.

Feeds them] That is, the fowls that neither sow, nor reap, nor carry into
barnes. Here we may observe Gods special and particular providence: for in
reason those creatures that make no provision in summer should sta^ue in
winter, wherein the earth affoardeth not such means of nourishment as it does
in summer; and yet experience teaches, that they are for the most part fatter,
and fitter for the use of man in winter then in summer: what argues this but
Gods special providence, attending upon the silly fowls of heaven, and
feeding them in the dead winter? oh then how should any child of God distrust
his providence? will he feed birds, and neglect his own children? it cannot
be. And yet this must not nuzzle an idle person, or bolster him up in the
neglect of lawful ordinary means for his provision: for God would have every
man to eat his own bread, deserving his provision by diligence in the duties
of some lawful calling: for he that will not labor should not eat. Howbeit
we may here learn, when all means fail (without our default) yet still to
rely upon Gods providence: for he feeds the fowls in the dead of winter, and
we are better then they.

Lastly, is God so merciful to the poor fowls of heaven, to provide for
them? then must we that profess our selves to be Gods children, show our
selves to be like to our heavenly father, in exercising mercy A mo^^^e to
mercifulnes. 1. Tim 4. 10.
toward all Gods creatures: God is the Savior of all men, but especially of
them that believe. And we must be followers of God as dear children, extending
mercy to the poor of mankind, because they be our own flesh: do good unto
all, but specially to them that be of the household of faith. This is needful
to be urged upon our souls, for in times of dearth men grind the faces of the
poor, by hard bargaining; the rich take advantage of poor men's want, and so
make themselves fat by sucking the blood of the poor.

v. 27. Which of you by taking care, is able to add one cubit to his stature?
Here Christ propounds his third reason, against distrustful and 3. Reason
against distrustful care.
carking care for worldly things, from the vnprofitablens and vanity of it in
man. The words of this reason are propounded by way of question: which kind of
phrase imports the affirming or denying of the thing spoken of with more
vehemence. And here it has the force of a more vehement negation: as if Christ
had said, Undoubtedly not any of you by taking care can add one cubit to his
stature. A cubit is a measure taken from a part of man's body, being the
length of the arm from the elbow, to the end of the longest finger. Now God in
framing man's body, brings it from this length in the mothers womb, by
continual increase adding cubit unto cubit, till at last it contain many
cubits in stature according as he has ordained and appointed. And look how
many cubits long God has ordained every man to come unto, of that stature and
tallness he is; and no man by all his wit, skill, and careful industry can
add one cubit unto his stature: for that is the proper work of the creator,
he that gives the body, appoints the stature, and by his providence brings it
thereto, by daily increase. Now hence Christ reasons thus, from the like: As no
man by taking care in all the means he can use, can augment his stature one
cubit, he cannot do the the least thing this way, as Luke 12. 26
S. Luke notes; no more can any man by his distrustful care better his
outward estate for things needful to this life any whit at all: and therefore
since it is vain and fruitless to vex our hearts herewith, we must beware of
this distrustful care.

From this reason we may observe and gather sundry instructions. Man's labor
vain without Gods blessing.
First, that man's labor, care, and industry, is altogether vain and
fruitless, without the blessing of Gods providence. Psalm. 127. 1, 2. Except
the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it: except the Lord
keep the city, the keeper watches in vain. It is in vain for you to rise
early, etc. 1. Cor. 3. 7. Neither is he that planteth any thing, nor he that
waters, (meaning, of themselves) but God gives the increase. This point the
Lord does notably express by Haggai, saying, Hag. 8. 6-9.
Ye have sown much, and bring in little: -- and he that earneth wages puts
it in a bottomless bag. Ye looked for much, and lo, it came to little, and
when it came home I did blow upon it. The consideration whereof must teach us
to commend all the sober care and labor of our lawful callings to God by
prayer for his blessing: for it is his blessing that makes rich, Prove. 10. 22.
If Paul and Apollos, two most worthy men, could do nothing of themselves,
what shall we think to do? and when we find Gods blessing upon our labor,
then we must give thanks.

Secondly, hence we learn that no man can better his outward estate Man's
outward estate is appointed of God.
in the world, for wealth and dignity by all his care and diligence, above
that which God has appointed him to come unto: for as God has determined of
man's bodily stature, which no man by taking care can add unto or alter, so
has he appointed in his decree what shall be man's estate, for wealth or
poverty, dignity or disgrace, which it lies not in the power of man, or any
creature to alter: indeed the diligent use of lawful means is an argument of
Gods blessing in outward things, and therefore must be followed and exercised
in sobriety and godliness of those that wait for such blessings, because
ordinarily God conuaies his blessings by such means: but yet the state of man
depends not on the means, but on Gods decree and pleasure: Psalm. 75. 6, 7. To
come to preforrement is neither from the East nor from the West: but God is
judge: he makes high, and he makes low: and, Prove. 22. 2. The poor and the
rich meet together, and God is the maker of them both. In regard whereof we
must learn, to depend upon God in the sober use of lawful means, and to rest
contented with his blessing thereupon be it more or less: for whatsoever it
is, it is that portion which God has allotted unto us.

Thirdly, hereby are sundry erroneous opinions confuted and overthrown.
Temporal life cannot be prolonged beyond the period set in nature.
As first, the opinion of them who think, that the temporal life of man may
be prolonged by art, above the period set by God in nature: but then there may
be addition made by art to the set period of man's stature; for the will and
providence of God does equally rule in them both: the prolonging of man's life
is no less an action of the Creator, then the augmenting of man's stature.
Indeed art may help to preserve life till it come to the period in nature, but
further to prolong it, is beyond the art and power of man: for man is not lord
over the spirit to retain the spirit, Eccles. 8. 8. God has herein appointed
his bounds which he cannot pass, Job. 14. 5.

Secondly, the opinion of some Magicians and witches is hereby also
^nchantments cannot turn man's body into another creature.
confuted, who think and avouch, that by enchantments they can turn their
bodies into the bodies of other creatures, as cats, hares, etc. and also make
their bodies to pass through a key hole, or such like narrow place. But this
were to change nature, which is more then to add to nature (which yet Christ
here denies to be in the power of man,) and therefore it is impossible: these
things are the illusions of Satan, whereby he bleares the eyes of such as
regard his lying wonders. As for that which is said of Dan. 4. 30.
Nebuchadnezzer, that he should be turned into a beast, because it is said, he
ate grass like an ox: this we must know and hold, that the substance of his
soul was not changed, neither the substance of his body, nor the shape
thereof into the shape and substance of a beast, but only the hand of God was
heau^e upon his mind, striking him with brutish frenzy and madness,
whereupon his behavior became brutish, and he lived among the beasts of the
field.

Thirdly, the opinion of the Alchemists is hereby also refuted, who Alchemists
confuted.
pretend that they can turn baser mettalls into better, as brass or lead into
gold: but this is to change the nature of creatures, which is more then to add
thereto by augmenting their quantity, which yet Christ denies and make
impossible to art in the stature of man.

Fourthly, the opinion of the Papists for their merit of works is hereby Merits
of glory above the power of man. Council. Trid. sess. 6. can. 32.
also confuted: they teach that by good works a man may merit for himself a
greater degree of glory in heaven: but consider, if a man by all that he can
do, cannot augment his bodily stature, nor his outward estate in this world
(as we have showed*) then much less can he add unto his estate of glory: if
the increase of nature be the work of God, then much more is the gift of
grace, and the increase of glory: as therefore he determines of the ^tature of
the body, so much more may we resolve, that the state of the soul for glory
is decreed of God, and man cannot add thereunto. Indeed the more we glorify
God by welldoing on earth, the more is our assurance of greater glory in
heaven, but yet the merit thereof is the work of Christ alone, and our
fruition of it the gift of God according to the good pleasure of his own will.

v. 28. And why care ye for raiment? learn how the lil^es of the field do
grow: they labor not, neither spinne:

29. Yet I say unto you, that even Salom^n in all his glory was not araied
like one of these.

30. Wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field, which is to day, and
to morrow is cast into the ^ven, shall he not do much more unto y^^, O ye of
little faith?


In these three verses Christ returns to his former commandment Distrustful
car. forbidden.
against distrustful care contained in the 25. verse: and here urges one part
thereof concerning care for raiment, and the other for meat and drink, in the
31. verse. Now what means Christ by this manner of handling this heavenly
doctrine, not only to propound it, and to urge it by strong and forcible
reasons, but again to repeat it, and urge it by peece-meale? Surely, hereby he
declares himself* to be the true doctor of his Church: for having a weighty
point of doctrine in hand, which the nature of man in unwilling to receive and
practice, he does beside the propounding and confirming of it, thus urge it by
peecemeale, that hereby it may the better take place in our heart, and be the
more effectual to b^ing forth obedience in our lives. And this fidelity must
every one show that is to teach the word of God to others: not only ministers,
though it be their duty specially, but also masters and parents, as Deuteronomy. 6.
7. thou shall whet them upon thy children (as the word signifies) that so it
may more deeply enter into the heart.

Thus much of the manner of prosecuting this argument. Now we come to the
words. And why care you for raiment? This interrogation has the force of a
prohibition; and so it is the same with this branch of the 25. verse, care not
for your body what you shall put on. Now all care for apparel is not here
forbidden; for there is a lawful godly care, whereby men seek and labor
uprightly and in a sober manner for such apparel as is meet for their
callings, and needful to the health and comfort of their bodies. But the care
here forbidden, is an Inordinate care for apparel.
inordinate and immoderate care for apparel, joined either with distrust and
fear of want, or else with a discontentednesse with that apparel which is
meet and necessary. And this is the common sin of this age, as the sundry
bad practices of men and women about apparel proceeding from this inordinate
care, do evidently declare: as first, the 1
affecting of superfluity and abundance in apparel, and the following of
strange and foreign fashions so soon as they are taken up. Secondly, 2
the wearing of too costly apparel, above their ability and degree: as when
servants are as ^ine as their masters, tradesmen like gentlemen; and gentles,
like nobles. Thirdly, the spending of much time in the 3
curious trimming and attiring of the body which might be spent in better
duties. This proceeds from some dislike in Gods workmanship, as though he had
not done his part thoroughly to their bodies, or they by their curiosity could
make themselves better.

Now that Christ might remove out of men's hearts this inordinate care, he
does here enforce his commandment by a fourth reason, taken from his
providence over the lilies of the field, and the reason is weighty, though the
subject of it be mean and simple. It may be framed thus:

If God c^othe the lilies of the field, then doubtless he will clothe you: But
God clotheth the lilies of the field: Therefore much more will he clothe you.

This reason is fully set down in these three verses, though the parts of it
be inuerted, by reason of their amplifications: for first, Christ propounds to
our consideration the subject matter whence his reason is drawn, learn how
the lilies of the field do grow. Where this must be marked, that Christ
speaks of field-lilies, which have not the help of man, as garden flowers
have; Then he lays down a proof of his assumption, that God clothes them, by
remoouing from them the ordinary means of clothing; They labor not, neither
spinne, v. 28. amplifying this work of God upon them by a comparison, wherein he
prefers the glory of them before the glory of Solomon in his princely araie,
verse 29. And then by way of inference propounds the reason, omitting the
assumption, verse 30. where the first part, and conclusion are both propounded
and amplified as we shall see when we come to the handling of them: for I will
follow the order observed by Christ.

Learn how the lilies of the field do grow. Here Christ makes the Insensible
creatures are our teachers
lilies and herbs of the field a schoolmaster unto man, yea to his own
disciples (for he spoke to them.) And this he does for special causes. First,
to teach them and us, that the silie creatures in the field do in their kind
yield more obedience unto God then man does, and that man is more rebellious
unto God then they are: hence Isa. 1. 2.
Isay calls heaven and earth to harken to his rebuke of the Jews for their
ingratitude: and the prophet rebuking Jeroboam for his Idolatry, cries, 1.
king 13. 2.
O Altar, Altar, thus says the Lord* Ierem^e rebuking Iechoniah, calls to the
earth to hear, Ier. 22. 29. and Ezek^el must prophecy to the mountains,
Ezekiel. 6. 3. By all which they would show, that if these insensible creatures
had reason as man has, they would be more obedient to the will of their
creator then man is. Secondly, hereby Christ would teach his disciples and us,
that though we have the creatures, and behold and use them daily, yet partly
through blindness and ignorance, and partly through negligence, we do not
discern in them, nor learn from them those good things which we ought to do:
for the invisible things of God, that is, his eternal power and godhead,
being considered in his works, are seen by the creation of the world, Romans 1.
20. This then is a check to our dullness and negligence in the things of God:
for what shall we do in matters of salvation, when in these inferior matters
we may learn of the insensible creatures?

But what must we learn in the lilies? How they grow. And this is a thing to
be marked, for in the winter season they lie dead in the earth as though they
were not; they are covered with frost and snow: and yet in the spring time and
summer, they spring up with stalks, leaves, and flowers of such glorious
colors, as passes the glory of Solomon in all his royalty. Now whence comes
this, is it of themselves, or from man? surely neither; for they are field
lilies, this only comes from the word of creation given out by God, when he
made the creatures, saying, Genesis ^. 11.
let the earth bring forth the green herbs, etc. from this working and
operative wor^ of God, comes the earth to have power and virtue to send out the
glorious lilies and every other herb. Now From fieldlilies learn to trust in
Gods providence.
then (to apply this to the purpose intended by Christ) the same God, that by
his operative word gives this glorious being every year to field-lilies, has
given out a word of providence touching his servants, that if they trust in
him, ^sing lawful means moderately, they shall have raiment sufficient, and
all things else that be needful to this life. Here then is nothing wanting but
trust in God in the sober use of ordinary means, for such shall be as sure of
raiment by Gods providence as lilies are to grow and blossom in spring time and
summer: and this were sufficient to persuade us unto moderate care though
nothing more had been said.

But he adds, they labor not, neither spinne: This denial of the use of
means unto them, whereby they should be araied, as it proves directly that God
alone arai^s them with glorious colors; so it strongly enforces the duty of
contentation upon us, relying on Gods providence, without distracting care:
because beside our title to Gods providence not inferior to the lilies of the
field, we have allowed unto us for our raiment the use of means which they
want: and therefore howsoever no man, under pertence of depending on Gods
providence, may hence take occasion to live idly, neglecting the ordinary
lawful means to procure things honest and needful; yet hereby Christ would
give assurance to all that trust in him and serve him, that though all means
should fail them, (so it be not through their default) yet will he provide
things needful for them.

29. And yet I say unto yo^, that even Salom^n in all his glory, etc. These
words contain an amplification of the second part of Christ's reason, to wit,
that God does not only cloth the lilies; but cloth them i^ most glorious
ar^^, even above the glory of Solomon in all his royalty. And this
amplification is to be marked, because Salomons glory was extraordinary, by
special gift from God, above his desire or expectation, as we may see, 1.
king. 3. 1^. And yet Christ says, that each field lilie is more gloriously
arrayed by Gods providence then Solomon was at any time.

This amplification serves; first, to chocke and control the folly of A
check to pride in apparel.
them that are proud in apparel, and nice and cu^ious in araying themselves.
This is the common sin of this age; wherein for attire every sort almost
exceed their ability and degree. But why should we be proud of any apparel,
for when we have done all we can to make our selves never so gay, yet we come
short of the flowers of the field in glorious array? for what cloth or ^il^e is
so white as the lilie? what purple is like the violet? what cri^^^^ or skarlet
comparable to diverse flowers of such colors? Art indeed may do much, but
herein it must stoop to nature. Now if we cannot come near the herbs and
flowers which we tread under our feet, and cast into the furnace, why should
we be pu^^ed up with any gayness in our apparel?

Secondly, this ^eacheth us that all worldly pomp is but vanity: for Worldly
pomp is all vanity.
in glory and beauty it comes short of the flower of the field, and yet what
is more ^raile and trans^torie then the flower, that is to day in the field,
and to morrow is cast into the oven? This the holy Ghost would teach us, by
comparing the glory of man to the flower of grass, 1. Pet. 1. 24. and seeing
that the fashion of this world goes away, 1. Cor. 7. 31. wherefore (as the
Apostle there says) we must use this world, as though we used it not for
Salomon's conclusion is true of all ^ar^hly things, Uanitie of vanities, all is
vanity, Eccles. ^. 2. And yet we must not here imagine that Christ condemns
the glory of Solomon, though he thus debase it below the flower of the field:
for it was the gift of God in extraordinary favor, 1. king. 3. 13. So that
ho^soe^es the word of God condemn pride and curiosity in attire, and
superfluity therein, yet it allows unto Princes, and personages of great
state, the use of gorgious and costly raiment: and therefore Joseph being
advanced to dignity, was araied in garments of fi^e linen, had a ring on his
singer, and a chame of gold ^^out his neck, Genesis 41. 42. And that which Luke
says of Agripp^ and Bernice, that they came in with great pomp to hear Paul,
Act. 2^. 23. may as well be taken in good part, as in evil.

30. Wherefore if God of cloth the grass of the field, which is to day, and
to morrow is cast into the ou(...) not do much more unto you, O ye of little
faith! Here Christ propounds and applies this reason to his disciples and
hearers; and in this application enforces it, by putting a manifest difference
between men and the hea^^s of the field, preferring man far Man's pre-eminence
above the h^a^^s of the field.
before them. The pre-eminence of man above the flowers of the field stands in
these things: first, the hen(...) made for man's use, and not man for them; for
besides oath(...)y serve for fe^ell to the oven, as Christ here notes.
Secondly, ^he h^a^b of the field is to day and to morrow is not, for being*
bu^n^ or ^^nsumed it cease to be at all: But it is not so with man, for
though he be burnt or consumed, yet he is not brought to nothing, but his
being remains still by reason of his immortal soul, which though it had
beginning, yet never shall have end. And herein he far excels them: for
though herbs and trees live for a time, yet their life arises from the matter
whereof they consist, and so vanishes with it, but the soul of man is a
different substance from the body, and vanishes not though the body perish.
This difference is plain in the creation: for God commanded Genesis 1. 11.
the earth to bring forth herbs and tr^es with their life and substance: but
when he created man, though he made his body of the dust of the earth, yet his
soul came from God* for G(...).
he breathed into his face the breath of life. And herein man excells not only
the herbs of the field, but all beasts and fowls, for though they, besides
life have sense and motion from their souls, yet their souls (whether they be
qualities or substances it here* kills not) arising from the matter whereof
their bodies subsist, are mortal and vanish to nothing when the body
perishes; so as a beast burnt up is no beast, but a dead man is a man though
his body be burnt to nothing, because his soul lives for ever; yea and his
body, though eaten up of beasts or consumed with fire, by virtue of Gods
ordinance shall one day rise again, and be reunited to the soul: yea the dead
bodies of the elect, by virtue of the covenant of grace, have not only
relation to their souls, but a spiritual union with Christ, for 1 Thessalonians. 4.
14.
they sleep in him, and by his power shall one day be raised up to glory. And
this pre-eminence Christ would teach us, when he calls God, Mat. 22. 32
the God of Abraham, who was dead in regard of his body long before, and yet
says he, God is the God, not of the dead, that is, which have no being at
all) but of the living: Now this preferment of man above the creature, does
greatly enforce the duty upon him to depend upon* Gods providence without
distrustful care, for if God cloth baser creatures with glorious array,
doubtless he will not suffer man his more noble creature to want, as the
conclusion following does declare.

Shall he not do much more unto you, O ye of little faith! That is, shall he
not much more cloth you. Now he amplifieth this conclusion by a reproof,
whereby he would enforce his reason more strongly upon them, saying, O ye of
little faith. In which reproof two points are to be considered: the persons
reproved, and the cause thereof. The persons are Christ's chos^^ Disciples,
whom he does not here reprove for want of faith simply, but for the weakness
and small measure of it, because their doubting and distrust in Gods
providence, was greater then their faith.

Here then we may observe a distinction of faith in regard of degree Two
degrees of faith.
and measure; to wit, that beside that full assurance, whereby a 1
man so rests on Gods promises, that he nothing doubts through unbelief,
as it is said of Abraham, Romans 4. 20. there is a weak faith 2
mingled with much doubting, such as was in Christ's disciples at this time. And
howsoever that doubting which is in weak faith be evil, and here reproved,
yet the faith it self is true faith, and such as brings a man to the state of
Adoption and of salvation: for Christ before this reproof, acknowledged of his
Disciples that they were Gods children, calling God their heavenly Father. If
any shall say or think that this weak faith cannot save a man, because his
unbelief being more then his faith, shall have more force to condemn him
then his faith to save him: I answer, that no man is saved by his faith,
because it is perfect without doubting, but because thereby he lays hold on
Gods mercy in Christ: now a weak faith may do this truly, though not so
perfectly and with such comfort as a strong faith does: and the doubting and
unbelief that is in weak faith cannot condemn us, if so be we bewail our
unbelief, and use means diligently to come by a full assurance: for by this
weak faith we are in Christ, and in him all our wants and sins are pardoned.
Which point must carefully be observed and remembered, A comfort to them that
have weak faith.
for the stay and comfort of their souls, that have in them but this weak
says, and are troubled much with distrust and doubting. And this is many a
true child of Gods estate, for every one cannot attain to Abraham's full
assurance: but be not discouraged, O thou of little faith; thy doubting and
distrust may trouble and grieve thee, but if thou bewail and lament it, it
shall not condemn thee; only labor diligently in the means for further
increase, and by thy weak faith desire to lay hold on Christ, and so shall all
thy wants be covered, and thy sins pardoned; for endless is Gods mercy in
this behalf, he will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking
flax^, Isay 42. 3.

II. Point. The cause why Christ does thus reprove them for their small faith,
is their distrust in God for raiment; as if he should say, whereas you doubt
whether your heavenly father will provide sufficient raiment for you,
notwithstanding you see he araies his baser creatures in glorious manner; even
for this cause are you to be blamed for small faith.

Here then we are to observe a special point touching the property A
property of saving faith.
of true saving faith; namely, that it does not only lay hold on the mercy
of God for the pardon of sin, and life everlasting in Christ's but on his
promises also for temporal blessings that concern this life. Neither must
this seem strange to any; and to make it plain, consider Gods p^^mises
twofold.
that the promises of God in Scripture are of two sorts; principal, and
inferior. The principal promise, is of Christ our redeemer, God and man, and
of remission of sin, and life everlasting by him. The inferior 1
promises, are of temporal blessings; as food, raiment, health, peace, 2
liberty, etc. and these depend upon the main promise of Christ, so farforth as
they are for our good; for 2. Cor. 1. 20
in Christ all the promises of God, whether they concern life eternal, or
this temporal life, are yea and amen, that is, sure and certain to Gods
children. And hence it is, that when by true faith a man lays hold on the
maine promise of God in Christ, he does withal apprehend the promises of God
for temporal blessings: the heart that says by faith, God will pardon my
sin, and save my soul, will say also by the same faith, God will give me
food and raiment, and all things sufficient for this life. Thus Abraham, Romans
4. 18.
by the same faith whereby he was justified, believed Gods promise, that he
should have a son in his old age: and Noah Heb. 11. 7.
believed Gods promise of his preservation in the Arc, by the same faith
whereby he was made heir of righteousness. This point must be observed, and
the order remembered, wherein faith lays hold upon the promises; First, it
apprehends mercy in Christ, and then providence for this life. Now hence Live
by faith
we learn, that as we look to be saved by our faith after death, so we must
live by faith in this world; if we rely upon his mercy for our souls, we
must depend upon his providence for our bodies: how this is done, we shall see
afterward; for how should we cast our selves upon Gods mercy for the kingdom
of heaven, if we cannot depend upon his providence for food and raiment.

Lastly, hereby we may try our faith what it is, true or ^ained; weak or
strong: for this Christ here tells us, that the more we are distracted How to
try our faith.
with worldly cares, the less is our belief in God: for distrustful care
comes from unbelief in Gods providence: and the less we trust in God for
temporal things, the less do we believe eternal mercies, for the same faith
lays hold on both: but if we can truly depend upon God for temporal blessings
in the sober use of lawful means, then we shall rely upon his mercy for the
salvation of our souls. This trial is not made in prosperity, for when God
sends abundance, every one will trust in him: but when want comes, then is the
trial of thy faith; if then thou ^el^e on God, though means fail, thy faith
is strong: but if thy heart be oppressed with sorrow and fear, and thou make
no conscience of unlawful means, so it may supply thy want; then suspect thy
self, thy faith is weak, or none at all: for the just shall live by faith in
all estates.

verse. 31. Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or what shall
we drink? or wherewith shall we be clothed*
Here Christ again repeateth his commandment against distrustful care given
in the 25. verse. The reasons of his repetition be these: First, to set an edge
upon the commandment, that so it may more sharply and deeply enter into their
hearts, as we said before. Secondly, to further his disciples in this practice
of faith, for by this often repetition he gives them occasion to meditate and
think upon the duty the oftener, whereby their faith must needs be much
confirmed: for this we must know for our direction to get and strengthen true
faith in our hearts, that a man is not a mere patient in the receiving and
strengthening of this grace; it comes not from God to us, as visions did to the
Prophets in a dream in the night, or as the print of the seal is set into the
wax, but God works it in the use of ordinary means. And therefore if we
would have faith wrought or increased in us, we must do that which by nature
we may do; to wit, hear the word preached, and read, we must meditate
therein, and labor so to urge the promises of God upon our own hearts; yea,
we must do what we can, to stir up in our hearts a desire to believe, and to
strive against doubting and distrust, and therefore must give our selves to
prayer with sighs and groans to God, for the working of his spirit in our
hearts.

Now touching this commandment against distrustful care, we handled it in the
25. v. showing how far our care must go for things needful, and where it
must stay. It must extend it self to the diligent use of lawful ordinary
means to procure things needful, and there stay; giving place to faith to
wait upon Gods providence for the blessing How distrustful care may be
discerned.
of our endeauours. The distrustful care which perplexeth the heart about the
success of our lawful labors, is that which Christ forbids, and it is that
evil sickness which infects most men's souls, as they may easily discern by
observing these things: What it is, that often breaks their sleep in the night:
what comes first into their thoughts when they awake; and what their minds
runne^ most upon all the day long; and whereabout they can take greatest pains
with most delight, and least weariness. If it be for the things of this world,
then distrustful care infects their souls, which we must strive against, and
learn to live by faith.

Here only obs^^^e how Christ describes this unlawful care by the effects of
it in distrustful persons, bringing them in, saying, What shall we eat? what
shall we drink? or wherewith shall we be clothed? And thus indeed they use
to complain, especially when they have great charges and slender means, or
else do* sustain any great losses, then, how shall we live? what shall we do?
and such like speeches of distrust: which Christ here justly reprooues, because
they blame God for his dealing toward them; as though he had no care of them,
or would not provide things needful for them. We therefore must here learn
to shut our mouths against distrustful thoughts, and beware we murmr not
nor complain of his dealing toward us. When Levit. 10. 2, 3.
Aarons two sons Nadab and Abihu were both slain for offering strange fire,
Moses tells him it was the Lords doing, who would be glorified in all that come
near him; then the text says, Aaron held his peace. And David notably
testifies his contentation in Gods providence, Psalm. 39. 2. I held my peace,
and said nothing: yea, v. 9. I should have been dumb and not have opened my
mouth, because thou Lord did it. Excellent is that saying of the Lord, Isa.
30. 15. In rest and quietness shall y^ be saved, in quietness and confidence
shall be your strength: meaning, that by patience and contentation a man shows
strong confidence in God: so that though Gods dealing seem never so hard, we
must beware of impatient words and murmuring thoughts, endeavoring to say with
1. Sam. 3 18*
Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what seems good in his eyes: and with Job
13. 15.
Job, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him.

v. 32. For after all these things seek the Gentiles: for your heavenly Father
knows that ye have need of all these things.
This verse contains Christ's fifth and sixth reasons, to dissuade his hearers
from distrustful care. The fifth is drawn from the practice of the Gentiles,
and it stands thus:

That which the Gentiles do which know not God, you must not do, 5. Reason
against distrustful care.
(they doing amiss:)

But the Gentiles seek thus distrustfully for things needful: Therefore you
must not do so.

The words in the original whereby Christ declares this behavior of the
Gentiles, be more full and emphaticall then our translation does express: for
they import that the Gentiles set themselves to seek, or (...).
seek with all their might. Which must be observed, because it is not a sin
simply to seek things necessary, but wholly to give our selves thereto, that
is, the sin; because it proceeds from distrust in God. Quest. Why did the
Gentiles thus wholly give themselves to seek things necessary? Ans. Because
they know not (...) true God, nor his providence; they were not acquainted with
his word, as David says* And this was the state of all the world before
Christ's coming, the Jews only excepted, and their forefathers, with some few
Proselytes, who by conuersing with Gods people were converted to true religion.

This point well observed; first, overthrows the opinion of universal Use. 1.
Universal grace confuted.
grace, as a mere devise of man's brain: for if the Gentiles knew not the true
God, how should they know the way to life? if God gave them not so much grace,
whereby they could depend upon his providence for the things of this life, much
less did he give them grace to believe and to be saved, if they would.

Secondly, this shows that they who set their hearts upon the world, 2
World^ings like Pagans.
and give themselves to seek earthly things, are as Gentiles and Pagans; they
have not yet attained to this principle of Christianity, to depend upon Gods
providence by faith: they see no providence, and so rely only upon the means,
whereby they sacrifice to their own pains and industry, and so make
themselves their own God. This is the state of many among us, who bear the
name of Christians* but indeed and practice are as Turks, and Pagans: and this
reason alone well waighed is sufficient to move any christian heart in a
moderate care to seek earthly things.

Thirdly, mark the ground of this reason; Christ's disciples had the 3
true God for their God, which the Gentiles had not, and therefore Christians
must in all things be unlike the heathen.
they must differ from the Gentiles in their behavior. This teaches us, that
in all things Gods children must be unlike the heathen, for in evil things we
must forsake them, and in all things that be good we must excel them. The
son of a prince will not show him self like a beggar in any thing* no more
should the child of God, in any thing conform himself unto the world. O then
how unworthy do we walk of ourvocation* for the very sins of the heathen
are rife among us, as uncleanness, drunkenness, slandering, and oppression;
nay many among us exceed the Pagans in merciless dealing toward the poor,
for they never knew that Christ came for relief in the person of his poor,
and yet many among them were more merciful, then many now a days that bear
the name of Christians: for do not the poor sometime die for want of relief?
and do not many among us make a game of Gods judgment upon the poor, selling
their commodities dearest when the poor have greatest want and need? well, if
we will approve our selves to be Gods peculiar ones, let us be ashamed to be
like the heathen in any evil, or not to go beyond them in that which is good.

For your heavenly father knows that you have need of all these things.
These words contain Christ's sixth reason to his Disciples against 6. Reason
against distrustful care.
distrustful care, drawn from Gods special providence over them: and it also
includes an answer to a secret objection against Christ's command: for some man
might say; If we may not be careful for things needful, who shall provide
them? Christ here answers; you must not be distrustfully careful, for you have
a father in heaven, who knows whereof you have need, and cares for you. Now
look whereof God takes care in your behalf, you need not trouble your selves
further then the sober use of lawful means: But God your heavenly father
takes notice of your estate, and will provide that which is best for you: and
therefore you need not to vex your minds there-about.

A most worthy reason, and alone sufficient to drive us from distrustful
care: for this acquainteth us with Gods particular and special providence over
us, taking notice of our estate whatsoever A notable ground of contentation.
it is, and disposing it to the best. In regard whereof we must learn
contentation in all estates of this life, in sickness, as in health; in
trouble, as in peace; and in want, as well as in abundance; for whatsoever our
estate be, it is according to the good pleasure of our heavenly father, who is
infinite in power and wisdom, both knowing what is best, and able to turn all
to our good, as we shall surely find by comfortable experience, if by faith we
depend upon him. This David knew well, and therefore says, Psalm. 2^. 4.
he will not fear though he walk through the valley of the shadow of death;
why? for thou art with me, thy rod and staff; that is, thy spirit, thy word,
and providence comfort me. If our hearts were settled in thy, point, we should
not be impatient in distress, nor dead hearted in want; nay it would make us
cheerful in the hour of death* for hereby we should be assured that these
estates were better for us, then peace, wealth, or life it self, because they
come by the will of our heavenly father, who knows whereof we have need: and
therefore let us labor by faith to be assured of our adoption, that we may
know God to be our father, and then by the same faith we shall be easily
assured, that he will turn all things that befall us, to our good.

Verse. 33. But first seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be ministered unto you.
Our Savior Christ having by six several arguments dissuaded his The
Christian m^^ care.
Disciples from distrustful care, does here show unto them, what care that is,
which ought always to possess their hearts; to wit, Care after the kingdom
of God and his righteousness. And this care he imposes upon them by express
command, saying, First seek ye the kingdom of God and his righteousness; and
then urges the entertaining of it, by an effectual reason, and all these
things shall be ministered unto you.

The Exposition. There be two things here enjoined us to seek* Gods kingdom,
and righteousness: and of both these Christ says, First seek, that is,
before all, and above all worldly things, let your principal What Gods
kingdom here is.
care and endeavor be, to procure these unto your selves. By kingdom of God
is here meant, a state and condition of man in this life, whereby in Christ he
enioyes the favor of God, and has right to everlasting life. This very estate
of man is in Scripture called the kingdom of God, and the kingdom of heaven,
because whosoever is in this estate, has sure right and interest to Gods
glory in heaven, and God here rules in him, as a king rules in his kingdom.
The kingdom of God is only one, and Gods kingdom in two degrees.
yet it has two degrees; the first in grace, and the second in glory. The
kingdom of grace, is that spiritual regiment which God exercises in man, or
in his Church, by his word and spirit in this life; and it is the first step or
entrance into Gods heavenly kingdom. The kingdom of glory, is the full
fruition of immediate fellowship with the blessed Trinity, by means of Jesus
Christ in the highest heavens, after this life. Now both these degrees are here
understood by the kingdom of God. The second thing to be thus sought for, is
his righteousness, that is, the righteousness of God, and not as some
translate it, the righteousness thereof, that is, of Gods kingdom; for the
words will not bear that translation. And the seeking of Gods righteousness
is here added for special cause; to let us see by way of explication, when we
have obtained for our selves the kingdom of God: for Gods kingdom stands in
righteousness, and then does God rule in man, when he makes him Gods
righteousness is Christ's obedience.
partaker of his righteousness. Now by righteousness of God* we must here
understand, the obedience which Christ our mediator performed for us, in
fulfilling the law, and in his sufferings. This is the very groundwork and
foundation of Gods kingdom among men: hereof Paul speaks often, Romans 1. 17.
For by it, that is, the Gospel, the righteousness of God is revealed from
faith to faith* and Romans 3. 21, 22. Now is the righteousness of God made
manifest, etc. and 2. Cor. 5. 21. God made him to be sin for us, which knew
no sin, that we might be made Why it is so called.
the righteousness of God in him. And it is so called for diverse respects;
First, because it is freely given us of God to be our righteousness in his 1
sight: and man cannot attain unto it of himself, by any work of nature, or
of grace, without the gift of God. Secondly, because God will 2
accept this obedience of Christ at the day of judgment, for his elect, as
satisfying his justice, and the rigor of the law, which no righteousness of man
can do. Thirdly, because it is the righteousness of that person 3
who is God; for Christ is both God and man, and though he obeyed the law, and
suffered death, as he was man, yet that obedience was performed by that person
who was also God. Adams righteousness by creation, was in himself, but he
lost it by his fall: but our righteousness is in Christ out of us, and therefore
he is said, 1. Cor. 1. 30
to be made righteousness unto us of God. But how should we get this
righteousness, seeing it is in Christ? Answ. It is made ours by imputation,
for when we truly repent of our sins, and believe in Christ, God accepts
the obedience of Christ for us, as if we had perfectly satisfied his justice,
and done his will in our own persons. Now with this imputed righteousness, we
must understand and join the fruit hereof in us, which is sanctification, or
renewed holiness, whereby we are enabled to walk before God in new obedience,
bringing forth the fruits of righteousness: for these two are never severed;
whom God iustifies by the righteousness of Christ, them he sanctifies by his
spirit. The full meaning then of Christ's The meaning.
commandment here is this* First seek* etc. that is, above all things in this
world, let your principal care be to procure unto your selves the kingdom of
God; that is, that state of grace, whereby you may enjoy Gods favor in Christ,
being justified by his obedience, and sanctified by his spirit, whereby you
walk in good works.

The use. First, by this commandment of Christ, to seek Gods kingdom, we may
gather, that by nature we are all out of Gods kingdom, destitute of the grace
and favor of God, and indeed under the power All are naturally out of Gods
kingdom.
of Satan, and in his kingdom of darkness. This the holy Ghost shows in
calling Satan, the god of this world, 2. Cor. 4. 4. and the prince of this
world, Ioh. 12. 31. because all the world naturally are vassals unto him,
yielding him homage in the works of sin: and therefore is he called the Ephesians.
^. 2.
prince that rules in the air, that works in the children of disobedience.
And this natural misery is justly come upon us, for seeing we refuse to yield
subjection unto God in his kingdom, are we not worthily left to the power of
Satan, to be made his slaves and drudges? Now that men live naturally out of
Christ's kingdom, may appear by the course of their lives; for howsoever most
men can be contented to bear the badge of Christ in outward profession,
hearing the word, and receiving the sacraments; yet in heart and life they do
homage to the devil, for they pull their necks from the yoke of Christ, and
run with greediness to the works of sin; they account a strict endeavor
after moral obedience to be curiosity and preciseness, and when they be
dehorted from unlawful gain and vain pleasures, they will not hear, not
consent; whereby in effect they say to God with wicked men in Job, Job. (...).
14.
Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: and with the wicked
citizens, Luke 19. 14
we will not have this man to reign over us.

Secondly, here Christ would teach us, that our principal care above To get
Gods kingdom must be our chief care.
all other things must be, to win for our selves the kingdom of God: I shall
not need to prove this to be our duty, seeing it is the only thing which
Christ here intends to commend unto us, and that by express command. But some
will ask, how we shall win and get for our selves The means
the kingdom of God? Answ. We must do three things for the obtaining of it:
First, we must come to the place where this kingdom is to be found. Secondly,
we must then enter into it. Thirdly, we must wait for the full possession of
it.

For the first: This kingdom is not to be found in all places, but there 1.
Come where it is.
only where God does manifest and reveal the same to the sons of men; and
that is in the assemblies of the Saints, where the public ministry of
reconciliation is dispensed; for there God holds out his scepter, and offers
himself to be a Lord and king unto men: and therefore David calls this
ministry of the word, the rod or scepter of Gods power, Psalm. 110. 2. and in
the parable of the sower, Matthew. 13. 19. the Gospel preached is called the word
of the kingdom, because hereby God reueales this kingdom unto men, and
translates them into it, Colos. 1. 13. And for the same cause, in the parable
of the field, Mat. 13. 24. is the same ministry of the Gospel called
expressly the kingdom of God. And therefore when the Church demands of
Christ, where she shall find him; he bids her follow the steps of the flocks
to the tents of the Shepherds: Cant. 1. 7. that is, the assemblies of the
Saints, to the preaching of Gods ministers* and therefore, if ever we look to
get this kingdom, we must diligently frequent the ministry of the word, and
labor to profit by it, because hereby God does not only reveal, but co^uaie
his kingdom unto men.

Secondly, when we have found this kingdom, we must seek to enter 2. Enter i^.
into it; for it is not enough to be where it is, or to have it among us, for
so the Pharisees had in the time of Christ, Luke 11. 20. Now we cannot enter in
of our selves, without the special work of Gods holy spirit; so says our
Savior Christ, Matthew. 18. 3. Except ye be converted and become as little
children, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of God: where two things are
required in him that would enter into this kingdom: To become as little
children; and to be converted. We become as little children in humility,
meekness, and freedom from pride and disdain; for we know the child of a
Prince will without disdain associate himself in play with a poor man's
child: and so we in conscience of our own sins, must be humbled in our
selves, and made base in our own eyes, laying aside our natural pride and
self-love, and disdain of others; for a heart swelling with pride and
self-love, cannot enter into the strait gate of this kingdom. Again, we
must be converted and regenerate by the spirit of God: for Ioh. 3. 3. What
conversion is.
except a man be borne again of water, and of the spirit, he cannot see the
kingdom of God. This conversion is not a change of the substance of the soul,
or of the body, or of the faculties or parts thereof, but only of their evil
qualities and actions; whereby the Image of Satan in sin and corruption is
abolished, and the image of God renewed, for knowledge, righteousness, and true
holiness both in heart and life. When this work of regeneration is truly
begun in us, then do we enter into Gods kingdom, even in this life; for
herein the ignorant deceive themselves, that think we enter not before the time
of death.

Thirdly, we must wait for the fruition and full possession of it: this 3.
Wait for full possession
we cannot get before the day of death, and therefore we must endeavor all
our life long after our conversion, to keep faith and a good conscience,
walking in righteousness and true holiness, before God, and in the practice
of love, uprightness, and mercy toward our brethren. When the question is,
who shall dwell in Gods tabernacle, and rest in his holy mountain; that is,
remain a true member of Gods Church for ever? Psalm. 51. 1; the answer is,
verse. 2. He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness. Hereby we
testify our selves to be already entered, for Gods kingdom stands in
righteousness, Romans 14. 17. And thus have Gods children done, that have waited
for this kingdom, Matthew. 25. 4. The wise virgins took o^le in their vessels
to light their lamps when the bridegroom came. And Joseph of Arimathea, that
noble counselor, who waited for the kingdom of God, was a good man and a
just, Luke 23. 50, 51.

Thus we see the way to get this kingdom for our selves: now the necessity of
our endeavor in these duties with all care and diligence appears by this, that
out of this estate, for true interest to this kingdom, is nothing indeed but
woeful misery, under the curse of God, and the power of Satan in the kingdom
of darkness: but in the fruition of this kingdom is true happiness: here is
R^. 14. 17.
righteousness, peace, and joy in the ^oly Ghost; yea, 1. P^t. 18.
joy unspeakable and glorious: for: the things that eye has not seen, ear
has not heard, neither ever entered into the 1 1. Cor. 29
heart of man to think, has God prepared for them that love him: and they are
all to be had in this his kingdom. Wherefore as we desire to escape the woe
and miseri^ of the devils kingdom, and to be partakers of the joys of
heaven, so let us look unto the performance of the former duties, showing
herein the resolution of the wise merchant; that parted with all he had, to
get that pearl of price, Matthew. 13. 46. This Gods kingdom like a citi^ with
suburbs and two gates.
kingdom of God, is here set out unto us, like a city with suburbs, and two
gates; the suburbs of this city, are those assemblies where the word of God is
truly preached and dispensed; and hereinto come not only the elect and godly,
but hypocrites and reprobates. The first gate, is the 1. Gate.
true state of grace, whereinto the elect of God alone do enter by
regeneration; in which estate they continue in this life, going on from one
degree of grace unto a greater, with endeavor in all things to keep faith and
good conscience both toward God and men, and so wait to enter the gate of
glory, which is set open unto them, and they enter in 2. Gate.
at the hour of death. And therefore let us not deceive our own souls, as the
foolish virgins did with their burning lamps, and content our selves, that we
come to Church, and live ciuilly; though these be good things, yet an hypocrite
may go thus far, all this while we are but in the suburbs of this kingdom:
but if ever we look for the glory of heaven, we must in this life enter the
gate of grace by regeneration, and become new creatures.

Thus much of the commandment: The reason to enforce it, is a gracious and
bountiful promise: And all these things shall be ministered unto you. The
words are very significant in the original, for the phraso which Christ uses,
is borrowed from bargainers, to this effect; (...).
as those who sell come, or other things by measure, or weight, use to give
some ouer-plus to better the bargain on the buyers part; even so the Lord
promises to those that seek his kingdom and righteousness, beside the
fruition thereof, to give, or cast unto them, as the word imports, food; and
raiment, and all things needful to this life. Qu^st. How is this true, seeing
we read that Gods children have been many times destitute of things necessary;
as Paul was often in hunger and thirst, in fastings, in cold and nakedness, 2.
Cor. 11. 27. and many whom the world was not worthy of, were destitute,
afflicted, and tormented, wandering up and down in sheep skins and goat
skins, Heb. 11. 37. Answer. Christ's promise in this place, and all other made
of temporal blessings, must be understood with the exception of the cross;
that is, they shall have such and such blessings, unless it please God by the
want thereof, to correct them for some sins, or to exercise their faith in
the trial of their patience.

The use. First, by this promise of Christ we have the most excellent How to
seek for t^mporal blessings.
direction of him that is wisdom it self, how to order our selves in seeking
for all temporal blessings needful to this life; namely, we must first seek
Gods kingdom and his righteousness, in the performance of those duties that
may bring us thereunto; and then all these needful things for this life, as
food and raiment, shall be cast unto us, in the sober use of ordinary means.
The reason hereof is plain, for Gods kingdom is man's chief good and
happiness, and all temporal blessings depend thereupon as appurtenances to
the principal, as it were intailed thereon; and therefore he that would have
these dependants, must get unto himself the kingdom of God, which is the
principal. While the arc of the covenant was in Obed Edoms house, God blessed
him and all that he had, 2. Sam. 6. 11. How much more then shall God bless
them, that receive his holy spirit to rule in their heart by grace? for as
David s^ith, the godly man shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water:
and whatsoever he does shall prosper. By the blessing of God we have had his
kingdom among us for many years in this nation, and God has given us with
it, peace, and protection, with great abundance of temporal blessings: Indeed
God has sundry ways corrected us, and laid his heavy hand upon us in sundry
judgments, as plague, famine, etc. and often shaken his rod at us in the
hand of our enemies, and all because we have not received the word of his
kingdom, nor yielded obedience to it as we ought; yea, and we may fear the
fullness of his wrath, unless we repent and amend of this sin especially.
But if we would set our selves to seek this kingdom, we needed not to fear
the want of any needful blessing; for so God promised to his people, to give
them abundance of all things, if they would obey his commandments, which are
the laws and statutes of his kingdom: Deuteronomy. 21. 1, 2. etc.

This point then is to be observed for our direction in particular. Art How
poor men may have sufficient.
thou a poor man, and would have sufficient food and raiment for thy
temporal life? then first, set thy heart to seek Gods kingdom, follow the
word, and labor therein for regeneration, and new obedience; and doubt not,
but if thou be upright and diligent in thy lawful calling, thou shall find
sufficient for this life. Quest. If this be the way to get sufficient, how
comes it that we have so many beggars that wander up and down from door to
door? Answ. They are (for the most part) a cursed generation, which have no
regard to Gods ordinances, either for their souls or bodies; they join not
themselves to any settled congregation for the obtaining of Gods kingdom, and
so this promise belongs not to them: but God suffers them to wander in an idle
course all their life long, destitute of this blessing, to eat their own
bread. Again, art thou a rich man, and would continue in that estate, How
the rich man may continue so.
to thine own confort, and for the good of those that depend upon thee? then
set thine heart to seek Gods kingdom with a special care seek to plant
religion in thy family, and thou and thine house shall flourish. Art thou a
student, and desire the blessing of God upon thy labors, with all things
sufficient to thy state and calling? then first seek Gods kingdom and
righteousness, labor for righteousness and true holiness, and God will lade
thee with his blessings. In a word, whatsoever thou art, magistrate, minister,
merchant, tradesman, etc. man or woman, young or old, and desire Gods
blessing for thy self, or any that belong unto thee, remember the practice of
this duty, and use the lawful means which God lays before thee in thy
calling; and nothing doubt, but (though all means fail) yet God will send
sufficient.

Secondly, this promise of temporal blessings upon the faithful seeking
Temporal blessings are dependants ^n Gods kingdom.
of the kingdom of God, lets us see, that food, raiment, and all things
needful for this life, are appurtenances and dependants on Gods kingdom;
that is, such things as over and besides his kingdom God will give to them
that principally seek his love and favor by the righteousness of Christ, and
labor for grace and sanctification by his spirit: for if he have given us
Christ, how shall he not with him give us all things also, Roman. 8. 32.

The consideration hereof serves for special use: I. To discover unto Use 1.
The preposterous course of worldli^g^.
us the preposterous course that men take in seeking for temporal blessings;
for most me^ generally neglect the maine good, which is Gods kingdom, and
wholly addict themselves to seek the things of this life: they take little or
no thought for the eternal state of their souls, but spend their wit and
strength in providing for their bodies; which is nothing else, but to gripe at
the shadow, and to let the substance go. Wherein we show our selves foolish
and simple, like to little children, who are better pleased with the gift of a
nut or an apple, then with the promise of rich revenues, or great inheritance.
II. This teaches us with what mind we must seek the temporal blessings of
this life; namely, with the same honest mind, wherewith we seek the kingdom
of God, for they are appurtenances thereunto, and depend upon it: and therefore
with an upright heart, we must only use lawful means moderately for the
getting of them. And when we have them, this may direct us in the right end
whereto we must use our temporal blessings; namely, to the furtherance of our
selves and others toward the kingdom of God; so we honor God with our
riches, as Solomon biddes us, Prou. 3. 9. III. This teaches us, that they
which have The wicked are usurpers in Gods blessings.
no right to Gods kingdom, nor part in Christ's righteousness, have no good
interest into any temporal blessings; as food, raiment, and such like, for
they are dependants upon Gods kingdom and righteousness. As for the heathen
before Christ's coming, and Turks, and Pagans, and all profane persons that
live in the Church at this day, who both heretofore, and now also, do enjoy
temporal blessings in great abundance: this we must know, that they have
thereto a civil right by Gods permission, so as it is sin, without good cause
to deprive them thereof; but yet of themselves they are but usurpers, in regard
of true title and sanctified use before God: for by Ada^s fall we lost our
right and sovereignty in the creatures, and it is only restored and renewed i^
Christ, so as they which have not part in Christ, cannot have this true title.
This we must observe, first, A branch of ma^^ natural misery.
to instruct our selves the better in the knowledge of our own miserable state
by nature; for what wretched creatures are we, that cannot make good claim
nor title before God, to the apparel upon our backs, nor to the meat we put
into our bellies? nay, of our selves we have not right to the breath we draw
in at our nosthrils. And out of question this is the state of every natural
man, though he be never so great a monarke in the world, while he is out of
Gods kingdom, wanting righteousness and regeneration by Jesus Christ. Secondly,
this also must persuade every one of us, to put in practice the former
instruction, endeavoring above all things to get Gods kingdom for our selves;
for till we have part herein, we can have no sound comfort in the use of Gods
creatures, which necessarily serve to our temporal life. This reason alone, if
there were no more, should spur us on to all diligence in this duty: what
shame and grief is it to eat our bread in the sight of God, as thieves and
usurpers do in the sight of men? and therefore let us give no rest unto our
souls till we attain to some good assurance in this blessed estate. The way
we must remember, is by true conversion and regeneration; and we shall
discern our selves to be regenerate, by these fruits of the spirit in us; to
wit, I. A true touch of conscience S^g^e, of regeneration.
for our sins, both original and actual. II. A godly sorrow and grief of
heart for offending and displeasing God by our transgressions. III. An earnest
desire, or true spiritual hunger and thirst after Christ and his righteousness,
testified by our constant and diligent use of those means, the word, prayer,
and sacraments, wherein God gives grace and assurance of mercy. IV. An
unfeigned turning unto God from all sin by new obedience, having a constant
purpose of heart not to sin, and a godly endeavor in life to please God in all
things. These are the marks of the new creature, who has true title to Gods
kingdom; which we must labor to find in our selves, for our comfort in the
use of Gods creatures: and if we find them in us, our title is good, not only
to his creatures, but to his kingdom, notwithstanding our own unworthiness
by our former iniquities.

IV. In this, that temporal blessings are dependants on Gods kingdom, 4
we must learn contentation and patience in all temporal losses A ground of
contentatio^ in losses.
whatsoever, though we loose friends, goods, lands, liberty, reputation, or
life it self, yet we must not be overwhelmed with sorrow or grief; for if we
be Gods children, and retain his favor, the kingdom of heaven remains sure
unto us: while a man's stock remains, though some appurtenances be taken from
him, he counts himself well enough; and so must we in all worldly losses,
while our title is good to Gods kingdom. Herewith our Savior Christ comforts
his Disciples, Luke 12. 32. Fear not little flock, for it is your fathers
pleasure to give you the kingdom. Now if God give us that with his favor in
Christ, we may be sure he would give us all temporal blessings, if he saw*
them to be good for us; for if he have given us Christ, how shall he not with
him give us all things also?

Thirdly, this promise of Christ, to give his kingdom to them that seek it,
and beside, to cast all temporal blessings unto them, if they seek his
kingdom principally, does notably commend unto us the bountiful goodness of
God; for here we see he gives to his children more the^ they God* bounty.
ask or seek. And this bounty of God Paul expresses as a ground of our
praising God, Ephesians. 3. 20. To him therefore that is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we can ask or think, according to the power that
works in us, be praise in the Church, by Jesus Christ: where we must observe,
that he speaks of Gods ability to be bountiful, as brought into actio^ in
his children, so as he is not only able, but willing hereunto: and hereof we
have daily experience in the blessings of God which we do enjoy, for when we
pray for spiritual graces, God gives them unto us, and many temporal blessings
also. This David confesses, Psalm. 21. 3. Thou did prevent me with liberal
blessings: and Solomon found it to be true, who asking only a wise and
understanding heart, received thereupon riches and honor besides his wisdom, 1.
Ki. 3. 13. And so did Jacob, Genesis 28. 2^
who asking only Gods protection with meat to eat, and clothes to put on;
though Genesis 32. 10
he went out but with a staff yet returned with two bands.

Now the consideration of this bounty of God must teach us these 1. Duties
from Gods boun ti^.
duties; First, to beware of all sin, whereby we do offend and displease our
God, who is so gracious and bountiful unto us* if our outward estate did
depend upon others, we would then be careful so to carry our selves toward
them, as that we would not willingly give them any offense, or cause of
dislike; how much more ought we then to seek the continuance of Gods favor
toward us by all good behavior, seeing on him depends our whole estate both
temporal and eternal? Secondly, to trust God with our lives, health, bodies,
and all we have, 2
for food, raiment, and protection, in the sober use of lawful means, for he
is a bountiful God. Thirdly, to seek for help and succor 3
from God in all distress and want, for he is bountiful; he gives to all
men liberally, and reproacheth no man, Iam. 1. 5. and therefore we must be
ready and forward to call upon him, and to make our moan unto him. Fourthly,
to love so bountiful a God, yea to enforce our 4
hearts to all duties of love toward him: Solomon says, Every man is a friend
to him that gives gifts, Pro. 19. 6. but none is to be compared to God for
the riches of bounty; and therefore our love to him should abound. Fifthly, to
be thankful unto God for all the good things we enjoy; 5
for whatsoever we have, comes from his bounty: and therefore we must say with
David, What shall I give unto the Lord, for all his blessings are upon me,
Psalm. 116. 12, 13. In a word, we must labor continually in 6
heart and life, to walk worthy of the Lord, and to please him in all things,
being fruitful in all good works (as the Apostle says) Colos. 1. 10.

Verse 34. Care not for the morrow, for the morrow shall care for it self: the
day has enough with his own grief.
Here Christ the third time repeats his commandment against distrustful care,
propounded first in the 25. verse; In which often repetition, he intends to
make us more careful and diligent, both to learn and practice the same. And
hereto he also adds a seventh reason to enforce and further our obedience,
drawn from the daily grief and trouble which accompanies every day of our
life.

The Exposition. Care not for the morrow: that is, for the time to come. This
may seem a strange commandment, tending to patronage sloth and negligence;
but we must know, that there is a double care for A double providence in man.
1. Godly.
the time to come. I. A godly lawful care. II. A distrustful and inordinate
care. The godly care is that, whereby a man prouides for in the time present,
such things as are needful in the time to come, and cannot then be provided:
this lawful care we may observe in our Savior Christ, for he had a bag to
keep provision for himself and his disciples, which Judas bare, Ioh. 13. 29.
and when Agabus foretold of a general famine, the Disciples provided
aforehand, to send succor to the brethren which dwelt in Judea, Act. 11. 28,
29. And thus may a tradesman provide for maintenance while his strength and
sight is good, against the time of his age, wherein he may be unable to follow
his calling. And thus do men in fit season provide for food and raiment. And
we may provide to day, that is, in the time present, for any needful thing,
when to morrow will not affoard it.

The inordinate and distrustful care for the morrow, is that whereby ^.
Inordinate providence
men vex their minds, and turmoile themselves, to provide aforehand for such
things as may well enough be had in the time to come: this parts and rents
asunder the mind, as the word signifies: and this our Savior Christ forbids.
It is indeed the common care of the world, and we may obscrue the practice of
it three ways especially: I. When men provide so much worldly goods for
themselves, as would serve for many families, or for many generations: there be
many such gather-goods, which scrape together as though they should never die,
and they scarce know any end of their wealth. This practice our Savior Christ
here forbids; If any in a land might seek for superfluity, it is the King,
whom bounty at all times well beseems; and yet God forbade the King over his
own people, to multiply overmuch his horses and furniture, his silver and his
gold, Deuteron. 17. 16, 17. II. When men seek to prevent all losses and
casualties, and so plot for themselves, that howsoever it go with others, yet
they shall feel no want; though others sta^ue and go naked, they shall be full,
and well clothed. III. when men provide or to day and to morrow together a
forehand, when as the morrowes provision may sufficiently, safely, and soon
enough be made on it own day: This Christ does chiefly aim at, as crossing
the practice of faith whereby we should daily depend upon his providence.

For the morrow shall care for it self; the day has enough with his own
grief. These words contain Christ's seventh reason against distrustful 7.
Reason against distrustful care.
care: the effect whereof is this, every day of man's life has care enough and
grief sufficient, through the business that falls out thereon and belongs unto
it, and therefore we are not to add thereunto another days care and grief,
for so we should bring upon our selves more care and grief then needs.

The morrow, that is, the time to come, shall care for itself. Here Christ
answers a question which might be made from the former commandment; for having
forbidden care for the morrow, some might say; How shall we do on the morrow,
and the time to come? Christ answers, This days care must be to day, and to
morrowes care to morrow, each day must have his own care: such care as is fit
and needful for the time present must now be taken, and such things as are now
needful must now be sought for: but such care as is fit to be taken in the
time to come, must be put off to his proper time; and things then needful,
must then be sought for, when their fit time salleth out: every time and every
day must have his proper care alone.

In this reason we have a most notable rule for the well ordering of A rule for
our life.
our lives: to wit; that every man must know the duties of his lawful calling,
and how the discharge thereof will yield him things necessary and convenient
from time to time, and so accordingly must walk therein; that is, doing only
such duties diligently as the present time requires at his hands, for the
procuring of things then meet and needful; and so proceeding by dependence on
Gods providence, in such care and labor, as is fitting for the present
occasion, time, and season: but for time to come lean on Gods providence,
respiting the care thereof till God require it at thy hands: The practice
hereof Samuel inioyneth Saul, 1. Sam. 10. 7. When these signs (of establishing
thee in the kingdom) shall come unto thee, do as occasion shall serve; that
is, do the present duties of a king that lie before thee, without troubling
and vexing thy self through fear or care of things to come, till God offer
them to thy hand. And this should be every man's practice in his calling; and so
should their present diligence testify their obedience, and clear the^ from
presumption, and their respiting of future care till time require it, argue
their faith in Gods providence: and thus they should neither foolishly feed
upon uncertain hopes, nor needlessly vex themselves with untimely cares.

The day has enough with his own grief* that is, every day by reason of man's
sins, has trouble and grief enough, through that care and labor for
provision which God thereon requires at our hands: and therefore we should
let every day content it self with his own care, and not add thereto another
days grief.

In this branch of the reason, Christ sets out the continued misery The
continued misery of man's life.
of man's natural life; Jacob said to Pharaoh, The days of my pilgrimage have
been few and evil, Genesis 47. 9. And Job says, Man that is borne of a woman is
of short continuance, and full of trouble, Job. 14. 1. But our Savior Christ
here goes beyond them both, saying, Every day of man's life has grief enough
of his own. This being well considered, may teach us these things: I. To
walk in our callings soberly, Duties. 1.
without intangling our selves in worldly cares; for the daiely discharge of
the duties of our callings, will bring sorrow and grief enough upon us, we
need not to add thereto by our carking care; for the more we care, the more
miserable is our life. II. To labor to 2
withdraw our hearts and to estrange our affections from delight in the things
of this natural life, or in this life it self, for it is full of grief; and
therefore we must so walk in our callings, that we may wait for a better
life in heaven, where we shall have freedom from all sorrow and grief. The
good prophet Elijah was weary of his life by reason of the miseries of it,
through the calamities of the time; and therefore intreates the Lord to take
away his soul, 1. King. 19. 4. And Paul cries out, one while upon the miseries
that he felt through the body of death, that was in him, Romans 7. 24. and at
another time, desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Philip. 1. 23.
not simply, but because there was freedom from all sin, and the miseries
thereof. III. Every day to commend our selves in souls and bodies, and all 3
that we have, morning and evening, to the blessing and protection of God; for
each day and night has grief enough, by reason of our sin, which of our
selves we cannot undergo without the help of God. When our Savior Christ was
to die upon the cross, he commended his soul into his fathers hands, Luke
23. 46. And none of us have assurance of our continuance in life, but though we
be well in the morning, we may be dead in the evening; or alive at night, and
dead in the morning: and therefore we must not forget the practice of this
duty: David did it in the time of trouble, though he were in health, Psalm.
31. 5. and though we were free from peril of death, yet our daiely vexations
should move us hereunto; for who can learn any good thing without labor and
pain? who can do a good work without let or opposition? If we would repent,
we are either clogged with corruptions, or overwhelmed with temptations: and if
we seek to walk in new obedience, we have the world, the flesh, and the
devil, all endeavoring to turn us back to our old course in sin. So that
if we would either avoid evil, or do good, or support with some comfort our
daily vexations, we must commend our selves, and all ours, into the hands of
God every day. And thus much of this reason, and of Christ's dehortation from
distrustful care.

Chap. 7. Verse 1. Judge not, that you be not judged.

2. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what
measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again.


IN these words, and so forward to the end of the fifth 6. part of Christ's
s^rmon.
verse, is contained the sixth part of this sermon of our Savior Christ,
concerning Judgment; and it consists of three parts: first, a commandment,
Judge not: then certain reasons of the commandment, in the words following,
to the 5. verse: and thirdly, a remedy of evil and rash judgment, in the 5.
verse.

Touching the commandment, Judge not] The meaning. This commandment forbids
not all kind of Judgment, but must be restrained to unlawful Judgment; for
there be four kinds of lawful Judgment, 4. kinds of lawful judgment.
two whereof be public, and two private. Of public, the first is civil
Judgment, belonging to the civil Magistrate, who is to enquire 1
into the manners of men, and according to the good positive laws of the
country to give judgment, either in punishing offenders, or rewarding them
that do well. The second kind is Ecclesiastical, belonging principally to
the minister, who in the public dispensation of the word 2
judges men's manners, by reproouing and condemning their sins, whether they
be thoughts, words, or actions. In this sense the unbeliever is said to be
judged, when his thoughts and actions are controlled by the word, 1. Cor. 14.
24. and thus Noah judged and condemned the old world, Heb. 11. 7. Of private
lawful judgment, the first is private admonition, 3
whereby one man does in Christian and loving manner, reprehe^d another for his
sins, and thereby judges him: this is also commanded in the word of God, and
therefore it is not here forbidden. The second 4
is just dispraise, when the gross faults of notorious persons are reproved
and condemned for this end alone, that others may take warning thereby: thus
Christ judged the Pharisees both for life and doctrine ^i^t 23 1, 2, 3
before his Disciples, calling them Hypocrites, that said, and did not: and
their doctrine leaven: and that most justly and wisely, that his Math. 16. 6.
Disciples and others might beware of them: and thus he called Herod a Fox, so
discovering his subtlety, for the admonition of others.

The thing then here forbidden, is rash judgment, which one man does unjustly
give of another; and the reason why we so understand this place, may be drawn
from the 3. verse, where instance is given of the judgment here forbidden, in
a quick espiall and sharp censure of small faults in others, not seeing far
grosser and greater in our selves: also Saint Luke setting down this same
prohibition, Judge not, expounds Luke 6. 37.
it in the next words, by condemn not: which must be understood of rash
censure, as is plain by S. Paul, Romans 2. 1. In that thou iudgest another, thou
condemnest thy self, because thou do rashly condemn him of that whereof
thou thy self art guilty. Now that we may better know the thing forbidden,
first I will show what rash judgment is, and in the second place make known
the common practices thereof. For the first:

Rash judgment, is when of an evil mind we judge amiss of others, Rash
judgment descrbed.
for some evil end. In this description, first observe the root and ground
of all rash judgment; to wit, an evil mind, whereby we love our selves too
well, and want the love of our neighbor: This we testify, by being sharp
sighted, to pry into the lives and behavior of others, and are blind as
beetles to see into our selves: as also by giving our selves exactly to censure
other men's sayings and doings, and with delight to hear their faults ripped
up; but for our own courses, we would not have them called into question nor
controlled. Secondly, here note the manner of rash judgment, which is to judge
amiss of others: and this they do which judge of other men's persons and
doings without a calling, or urgent necessity: secondly, which give out
sentence of men's doings, but not according to the law of charity, which binds
a man to judge and say the best of others always, so far forth as may stand
with good conscience, and the word of God. Thirdly, here note the end of rash
judgment; for as it is ill grounded and guided, so it aims not at the
reformation of the party, nor the detestation of sin in our selves and others,
but is directed to some wrong end: as first, to testify our hatred of the
party, and desire of revenge: secondly, to delight our selves with the faults
of others: thirdly, to defame our neighbors, and to bring them to an ill name,
that our names may bear away the praise without comparison: and lastly, that
we may seem more holy then others, by being much in censuring sin in
others.

The practice of rash judgment consists in two things: first, the evil The
practis^ of rash judgment.
mind of man prepares matter of wrong judgment: and secondly, gives sentence
accordingly of the sayings and doings of men, and likewise of their persons.
For the first, the evil mind prepares matter of rash judgment thus; it sets
it self to pry and inquire narrowly into the lives and behavior of men, and
to see if it can find any matter in word or action worthy reproof: Indeed
there is a virtue whereby one man does observe another in his ways, but that is
directed to a good end; namely, to rectify and reform him in his wants, and
to further him when he does well: but for one man to observe another for this
end, to find out matter of defamation and reproach, is a fault directly
forbidden by our Savior Christ in this place. Secondly, when matter is found,
the evil mind accordingly gives censure: this censure is given, first, of the
persons of men; then of their speeches and actions. Rash Rash censure of men's
persons.
censure of men's persons, is when a man thinks otherwise of the person of
another, then in conscience, and by Gods word he ought to do. Example of this
we have in Satan, for when the Lord commended Job for his fidelity, Satan
tells the Lord, that Job indeed served Job 1. 8, 9, 10, 11.
the Lord, but it was only for his own profit, for (says he) withdraw thou
thin^ hand from him, and thou shall see, whether he will not curse thee to thy
face: This then we see is a deuillish practice, and ought to be far from
every one of us. We must remember what an ancient Divine has taught
heretofore, that there are three things exempted from the judgment and censure
of men; the Scriptures, the Counsel of God, and the condemnation of any man's
person.

Rash censure of men's speeches and actions is given many ways: I. When things
are well done, to carpe and cavil at them without any Ras^ censure of men's
behavior.
just cause. Thus the profession of Religion at this day, is accounted of many
to be but counterfeit holiness, and the due obedience to the moral Law is
nicknamed and termed preciseness, and the professors thereof called Puritans
and Precisians, for this cause only, that they make conscience of walking in
obedience to Gods law. II. When actions or speeches indifferent, are taken in
the worser part. Thus was David's kindness ill accepted of Hanun king of Ammon,
when David 1. Sam. 10. 3, 4
sent his servants to comfort him after the death of his father: for his Nobles
told him and persuaded him, that David sent not unto him, because he honored
his father (though David undoubtedly sent with an honest and upright heart) but
as it were craftily to search out the city, and to spy it out, and to
overthrow it. Now hereupon David's servants were badly entreated, and shamefully
sent away; whence grew the war that ensued between them. III. When upon
light occasion and uncertain reports, we suspect and surmise evil of our
neighbor: suspicions indeed are sometime good, being conceived on a good
ground, and retained for a good end; as to beware of the party and of his
evil: but when they are conceived upon light causes, and for some sinister
respect (as the common practice is, upon no good ground to conceive most badly)
this is rash judgment. IV. When we see any want in our neighbors speech or
behavior, to make it worse then it was meant, or then indeed it is. V. When
we spread abroad and publish the wants of men, to defame them, which might
better be concealed, and in conscience and charity ought so to be. VI. When we
speak nothing but the truth of another, but yet withal do insinuate thereby
some evil of the party into the hearts of the hearers. This practice is as
pestilent and dangerous, as any of the former. Thus Doeg told Saul of the fact
of Ahimelec unto David, how he gave him victuals, and the sword of Goliath,
which was true: but withal he did therein insinuate, that David and Ahimelec
intended conspiracy against Saul. And this telling of the truth in that sort,
cost the lives of fourscore and five persons, that wear the liuen Ephod, as
we may read, 1. Sam. 21. 7. compared with the 22. chap. v. 9. and 18. VII. When
in hearing the word preached, and sins reproved in the congregation, some
hearers misapply the same* as for example, the minister reprooues the sin of
swearing, of drunkenness, or any such sin: then some one gultie hereof, does
not only surmise, but also break forth into this speech, Now the preacher
means me: he speaks this of me: he censures my facts and speeches; hereupon
follows spite and malice against the person of the minister, and also rash
censuring and condemning of his ministry. They also sin in this kind, that
apply the reproves of sin to the person of others: as when they say, now
such a one is touched: there is a good lesson for such a one if he would learn
it: yea others go further and say, now the preacher means such a man; now he
speaks against such a man: but* this also is rash judgment in hearing of the
word: they misconceiue of the purpose of the minister, for his manner is not
when he stands in the room of God, to rippe up the secrets and lives of some
particular hearers; but to deliver the will of God concerning such and such
sins unto all: it is the power of the word, not the mind of the preacher,
that causes: it to touch thy conscience: and therefore every one ought to
apply the word unto his own heart, and not to lay it upon others, or else take
it to be spoken of himself for his disgrace: for it is to misapply the word,
and to judge amiss of the preacher: and this is a common sin, which is the
cause why many men reap so little profit by the word preached as they do. The
VIII. practice of rash judgment is, when in towns and cities some persons are
wrongfully reputed and taken for witches: this is as common a sin throughout
the world as any of the former: one man will say, such a one is a witch,
because he in conscience is so persuaded; and yet the ground of this persuasion
is nothing but his bare conceit. Another man says, such a one is a witch,
because a wise man or a wise woman has so reported of him or her: and yet this
testimony is but the testimony of the devil, who is a liar, and the father
thereof: if he tell truth, it is with purpose to deceive. Again, another is
judged to be a witch, because coming to a man's house to borrow something, and
being denied thereof, he tooks it unkindly, and thereupon gave these or such
like threatening words; it had been as good you had lent it me, or, I will
meet with you: and hereupon some one in the family fell sick, or some cattle
died, and other things did miscarie. It is no question, but witches be too rife
among us, and ought to be sought out and severely punished; and there be
lawful ways of conuincing a witch: but upon these bare presumptions to judge
any one to be a witch, is an unchristian practice of rash judgment: for why
may not the hand of God befall thee in visiting some one in thy family, or in
the death of thy cattle, as well as the annoyance of the witch, after some
hard speeches of another. A witch therefore must first be lawfully convinced,
and then judged to be a witch, and not before. This thing especially Iurers
ought to look unto; else if they have but the ordinary discretion of common
people, to judge one for a witch upon these presumptions, they may easily
defile their hands with innocent blood. Thus much for the sin of rash
Judgment, and the practices thereof, which are condemned and forbidden in this
place.

Now because it is so common a sin in all places, and with most men counted
no sin: for the common talk in all meetings is of other men, and selfeloue
makes the heart glad to hear other men's faults ripped up, yea this sin will
take hold when other sins leave a man, which caused Christ to forewarne his
Disciples hereof in this place: therefore it is our duty to labor and strive
the more earnestly to be Reason^ against rash judgment.
purged from this evil mind, and preserved from these evil practices of rash
judgment: for which end let us lay to our consciences the reasons following.
I. The practice of rash Judgment cannot stand 1
with Christian charity: for charity binds a man to walk in love, and love
suspecteth not evil, but thinks the best always, and if it be possible,
thinks well of all. II. When thou see a man speak or practice any 2
evil, for which thou beginnest to think hardly of him, then consider well of
thine own self, how thou have both that and all other sins in thee, if we
regard the root of sin, and therefore do not rashly condemn him for his
fact, because thou thy self have done the like heretofore; or else in time to
come may do the like or worse, then he has done whom thou now condemnest.
III. Consider that God 3
the father has committed all judgment unto his Son: who now executes
public judgment by the Magistrate in the commonwealth, and by the Minister
in the Church; and private judgment of admonition, and just dispraise, by them
whom he calls thereunto: if therefore thou iudgest another, not being
called thereto, thou thrusts Christ out of his office, and robbest him of his
honor, which is a grievous sin, and cannot be unpunished. IV. Consider also
that thou 4
art unable, whatsoever thou art, to judge aright of other men's actions, being
ignorant of many circumstances thereof: for thou know not with what mind,
or to what end the action was done: thou know not the cause why he did it,
nor the state of his person, nor manner of his temptation thereto: and
therefore why iudgest thou rashly of him. V. He that gives rash judgment of
another, is worse then a thief 5
that steals away a man's goods: for he robbes him of his good name, which (as
Solomon says) is to be chosen above great riches, Prove. 22. 1. Again, riches
may be restored, so can not a man's good name being once blemished in the
hearts of many. Again, a man may defend himself from a thief, but no man can
shun an other man's evil mind, or his badde tongue: nay the backebiter is
worse then a murderer, for he kills three at once; first, his own soul in
thus sinning: secondly, his neighbor whose name he hurts: and thirdly, the
hearer who receives this rash and iniust report: and for this cause the
slaunderer is numbered among those that shall not inherit the kingdom of God,
Psalm. 15. 3. 1. Cor. 6. 10. and the Apostle charge Christians to account of
such raylers as of persons excommunicate. 1. Cor. 5. 11.

Here some will say; if we may not give our opinion of others freely Duties to
be observed when we speak of others.
as we have done; what must we do when we have occasion to speak of them?
Answ. Thy carriage toward others must be according to these rules: I. If thou
know any good thing by the party of whom 1
thou speak, when thou have occasion, think and speak of that: if thou
knew evil by him also, conceal it from others; and if thou may, admonish
the party thereof: or else tell it to those who have authority to correct his
faults; and thus shall thou win thy brother. Some will say, I do indeed
sometime censure my brother for his faults, yet only in detestation of his
sin; I love the party never the worse; and I only do it to some private
friend that will not tell it again. Answ. But this excuse, and all such like
are frivolous: no color of good intent can excuse rash judgment: if thou
love him, why do thou make known his fault to another, for love covers
a multitude of sins? And if thy conscience answer, it will tell thee that
either ill will to the party causes thee so to do, or self-love, whereby
through his defamation thou thy self seek to be advanced above him in the
thoughts of others. In thy censuring therefore look to thine heart, whether
malice move thee not thereto: and take heed to the end also; for if it rise
from a bad ground, or tend to a wrong end, the whole action is naught. II.
Duty. We ought to think as well of every man, 2
as possibly we can, yea of our enemy and of his actions: for love thinks
not evil; and in the practice of love toward our enemies we become followers
of God, Math. 5. 44, 45. III. Duty. If thou mark thy 3
neighbors life and behavior, do it for this end to withdraw him from
sin, and to further him in well-doing. Lastly, in all thy societies 4
and dealings with others, labor either to do them good, or to receive good
from them: and by this means thou shall eschew the sin of rash judgment.

Here two questions may be moved concerning rash judgment, and that
necessarily, because surmises will arise upon very small occasions.

I. Quest. When may a man doubt or suspect evil of another? Ans. In all
suspicion recourse must be had to the ground thereof, Of suspecting evil of
others.
whether it rise of just and sufficient cause or not. A sufficient cause of
suspicion is that, which in the judgment of wise men, being well considered
with all the circumstances thereof, is judged sufficient: and on the other
side, that is insufficient which wise men well waying with the circumstances
thereof, do judge insufficient: if then the cause of suspicion be thought
insufficient in the judgment of the wise and godly, we must suspend our
suspicion: as thus; suppose some evil is reported abroad of such a man; as
that he is a thief, an adulterer, or such like: yet this fame rises only of
some one man's report, which because it may proceed from an ill mind on a
private grudge, we are not to yield thereupon to suspect ill of the party:
this report may well cause us to search further into the case, and move us to
look unto our selves that we be not hurt by him. But if the cause be thought
sufficient in the judgment of those that are wise and discreet, then we may
without offense or breach of conscience, yield to suspect and judge evil of
another.

II. Question. How may we give upright judgment of all men with whom we live
and have to deal? Answ. This is as necessary to be Ho^ to judge of others
^ightly
known as the former, for as we are prone to think ill, so we are also
forward in judging rashly: therefore there are three things required in the
judging of others. First, we must have recourse to the cause of 1. Rule.
our judgment: for if the cause be insufficient, then our judgment is rash
and unlawful. Before the Lord brought upon the world the confusion of
languages, he is said to go down among them, to see their fact, Genesis 11. 6.
and before he destroyed Sodom and Gomorra with fire and brimstone, he is said
to come down from heaven to see whether they had done according to the cry
that was come up to the Lord. Genesis 18. 21. whereby the Lord would teach us,
that before he enter into judgment with any man, or any people, he first takes
good consideration of the fact, which causes his punishment.

Secondly, we must have authority and warrant by calling to give 2. Rule.
judgment, or else some thing which is answerable thereto, though the judgment
be private: as to give admonition or just dispraise; yet without a calling we
must not do it: he that gives judgment must be able truly to say, the Lord
has called me thus to do. The Magistrate, the Minister, the master, and every
superior has authority to judge those that are under him: and for private
men in private judgment, though they want this authority by calling, yet if
they have that which is answerable hereto, that is, the affection of Christian
love; so as they can say with Paul, the love of God constrains me, then they
may judge.

Thirdly, we must always have a good end of our judgment, as well 3. Rule.
as a good beginning: that is, the reformation and amendment, not the defaming
of our brother. And these three concurring in all hard speeches, they cease to
be rash and unjust censures. John Baptist calls the Pharisees and Sadduces, a
generation of vipers, Matthew. 3. 7. our Savior Christ calls them Mat. 23. 27
hypocrites, and painted tombs: and Luke 13. ^2
Herod, a fox: the Prophet Isai calls the Princes and people of Judah and
Israel, Isa. 1. 10.
Princes and people of Sodom: and the Apostle Paul calls the Galatians, fools,
Gal. 3. 1. and the Cretians, liars, evil beasts, slow bellies, Tit. 1. 12, 13.
All which are hard speeches, but yet no slanders; because they had all of them
a calling so to do: and likewise did this on good ground, and for a good end.

Thus much for the commandment. Now follow two reasons to induce 2. Reasons
against rash judgment.
us to make conscience of rash judgment. The former is laid down in these
words: That ye be not judged. And it may be framed thus:

If ye judge, ye shall be judged of men again with rash judgment:
But ye cannot abide to be judged of rashly: and therefore judge not.
The second part is understood, but yet necessarily collected. The conclusion
is the commandment it self, Judge not.

This reason does affoard unto us two instructions. I. It gives us a A taste of
m^s natural pride.
taste and view of our own natural pride and selfeloue: for when we hear God
dishonored by sweating, or our neighbors name defamed by slandering, we are
not only not grieved, but oftentimes are the cause thereof, and take great
delight therein, especially in hearing other men's faults ripped up to their
disgrace: but yet we can in no sort brook or suffer our own good name to be
called into question: if our selves be ill spoken of, we are presently filled
with malice and envy, and cannot be at rest till we be requited or revenged:
nay, though we be in a good manner admonished of our fault, even in love, and
after a friendly sort, yet we can very hardly brook it; though the party
admonishing make known unto us, that he does it only for our good, without all
purpose of disgrace unto our persons.

II. Instruct. Here also our Savior Christ affoardeth unto us a notable How to
know and judge rightly of our own sins.
way whereby we may come to the knowledge of our own sins, and of the
hainousnes thereof. When we behold sin in our selves we hardly judge it to be
sin: we must therefore look upon our own sins in the person of others,
and learn to judge of it in our selves as we judge of it in others. When we
consider of rash judgment in others against our selves, we count it a vile and
grievous sin, yea odious and intolerable: and in like sort ought we to think
of rash judgment in our selves toward others: and so for every other sin in
our selves, we ought to judge of it, as we do when we see it in the person of
others against us: otherwise if we look only to our selves, we shall sooth up
our selves in sin, making great sins, little sins; and small sins, none
at all.

verse. 2. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what
measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again.
This verse contains a double confirmation of the former reason, drawn from
the event. The first, in these words, For with what judgment ye judge, ye
shall be judged: as if Christ had said; If ye judge men rashly, then men
again, by the appointment of God in his wisdom and providence, shall
accordingly give rash judgment upon you: but if ye judge men righteously, then
men again, by Gods appointment and providence, shall judge well of you: for so
I take the words to be meant of men's judgment by Gods appointment in his
providence, and not of Gods judgment immediately.

Now in this proof, first, we may observe one true and maine cause A maine
cause of personal defamation.
of that personal defamation which is common in the world, and it is to be
found in the person himself that is defamed; he has rashly and unjustly
censured others, for which God in his providence, does most justly cause others
to defame him again: so as men themselves do most of all wound their own
good names, and by their bad carriage toward others, justly cause their own
disgrace. In regard whereof we must learn; first, to set a careful watch
before our mouths, to keep the door of our lips, governing our tongues by
the word of God* for when we censure others rashly, we do procure judgment
unto our selves. Secondly, to be patient under the rash censures and slanders
of others. For we must think, that we our selves have heretofore done the like
to others: and therefore it is justice with God to reward us in the same kind,
wherewith we have wronged others. This is Salomons ^ecles. 7. 23, ^4.
counsel, Give not thine heart to all the words that men speak, least thou
do hear thy servant cursing thee: for often ^imes also thine heart knows that
thou likewise have cursed others.

Secondly, in this proof we may also observe the right way how to get and
keep a good name: to wit, by judging others with Christian How to get a good
name.
judgment, carrying a charitable opinion of every one, speaking the the best of
them in all companies, so farforth as we can with good conscience, and never
judging hardly of any, till we be indeed lawfully called thereunto, having a
good ground for our action, and doing it for a good end: If thou would live
long, (says the Prophet) and see good Psalm. 34. 13.
days, refrain thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile;
that is, speak not evil of any man though thou know ill by him, till thou be
lawfully called thereto.

Thirdly, from the consideration of this providence of God, whereby he orders
and disposes, that defamers of others shall be rewarded in their kind, and that
by others; we may gather, that God knows every unadvised thought of the heart,
and every rash censure which we speak or think of others; else how could this
be true, that rash Iudgers shall be so rewarded in their kind, seeing men may
co^ceale their thoughts, and many times their words from the eyes of men. To
this purpose Solomon admonishes, not to curse the king, no not in thy Eccles.
10. 20
thought, nor the rich in thy bedchamber, for the foul of heaven shall carry
the voice, and that which has wings shall declare the matter. And this must
teach us to make conscience of all our speeches and thoughts that concern
others, yea then when we our selves are judged. When David was rayled upon by
wicked Shemei, he stayed himself with the consideration of this, that God knew
it, and had appointed Shemei to curse David. 2. Sam. 16. 10.

Lastly, here it may be doubted how God can be cleared from the guilt of rash
judgment, seeing in his providence he causes it by his decree. Answ. Though
he decree it, yet is he free from the fault thereof: for first, he decrees it
not to be the cause thereof himself, but to permit it among men, leaving them
to be the authors thereof: secondly, he decrees to dispose of it well, and to
order it as a just punishment of the rash judgment of others, and so in no
sort is the cause of the evil in rash judgment; howsoever he dispose hereof
for the just punishment of offenders in this kind.

The second confirmation of the first reason is contained in this parable,
which tends to the same end with the former sentence: And with what measure
you mete, it shall be measured to you again: That is, the Lord has ordained
that men shall be rewarded in their kind, like for like. Hence we may observe
this rule of Gods justice in the punishment Gods justice in punishing sinners
i^ their kind.
of sin: namely, to reward men in their kind, punishing them in the same
things wherein they offend. David sinned by committing adultery with
Bathsheba, the wife of Vriah; and God by way of punishment raised up evil
against him out of his own house in the same kind: for his own son Absolon
deflowred his fathers co^eubines in the sight of all Israel, 2. Sam. 12. 9. 11.
and 16. 22. And experience shows, that blood will have blood; for though the
murderer escape the hands of the civil Judge, yet the terror and vengeance of
God does ordinarily pursue him to destruction. A notable example hereof we have
in the holy league (as it is called) but indeed the bloody league; wherein the
enemies of Gods grace and truth did confederate themselves to root out true
religion, and the professors thereof from off the earth: but the Lord has
rewarded them in their kind, and turned their own swords against themselves,
causing them to spoil one an other; according to the prophecy of Isai, Woe to
thee that spoilest, and was not spoiled: and do wickedly* and they did not
wickedly against thee: when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled.
Isa. 33. 1.

This rewarding justice of God well observed, does discover unto us, A terror
to all oppressors.
yea and denounce a fearful woe, not only against all those that give out
rash judgment of others; but against all usurers and oppressors, who met^ out
hard measure unto others, even cruelty without mercy: but so shall they be
served again. Gods heavy hand has heretofore lain sore upon this land for
many years in dearth and sca^fitie, which also in some sort has bin made more
grievous upon the poor by hard hearted rich men, who are like to great fishes
that devour the lesser: for they grind the faces of the poor, and pluck off
their skins from the^, and their flesh from the bones by their wicked
covetousness, yea doubtless their cruelty costs many a man's life. Some in
higher place by enclosing* and racking of rents: others of meaner sort, by
engrossing and withholding the commodities of the land from the common good,
till a time of dearth come, wherein (as the Prophet says) they may make the
Epha Amos ^. 5.
small, and the Shekel great; that is, sell little for much, lessening the
measure, and enhauncing the price. And indeed such a time of dearth is the
worldlings day, wherein they do enrich themselves by the spoil of the poor:
but they must know that a fearful woe belongs unto the^: for the like
merciless measure shall be measured to them again; and when they cease to
spoil, then shall they be spoiled: for when the hand of God is heavy upon the
poor, then no doubt is vengeance preparing for hard hearted rich men, who
increase the same. The Lord forbids to trouble the widow or fatherles
child: Exodus 22. 22, 2^. etc. for if thou vex and trouble such, and so he call
and cry unto me, I will surely hear his cry: then shall my wrath be kindled,
and I will kill you with the sword: and your wives shall be widows, and your
children fatherles. This is Gods word, and it must stand. The Lord himself
foretold that toward the latter day, iniquity should abound, and charity
should wax cold: and are not these the times whereof Christ spoke? for what
power has the Matthew. 24. 12.
Gospel to withdraw men's hearts from iniquity? and when was there ever less
charity then is now? well, these are forerunners of greater judgments; and
therefore in the fear of God, let us make conscience of this and all other
sins even in consideration of this, that the Lord will pay us home in that
kind wherein we offend.

v. 3. And why see thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, and perceiuest
not the beam that is in thine own eye?

4. Or how say thou to thy brother, Suffer me to cast out the mote out of
thine eye, and behold a beam is in thine own eye?


These two verses contain a second reason to enforce the former commandment
against rash judgment. The meaning of the words is this: Why see thou that
is, upon what ground, forwhat cause, and with what conscience see thou. And
so in the 4. v. How say thou that is, with what face, with what honesty and
conscience say thou. So much these interrogations how, and why, import.
See sight, here is not a light or sudden beholding of the mote, but a seeing
with attention, a serious and considerate observation thereof. A mote the word
used in the original, (...)
may as well be translated a straw, or a piece of a straw, as a mote, as it
has been in former times; for it will bear either translation: yet the word
beam, seems rather to have reference to a straw, then to a mote: but which
way soever it be taken, it signifies small and little sins, as sins of
ignorance and infirmity, such as the best Christians do commit, and cannot be
free from in this life. Again, it signifies supposed sins; such as are not
indeed sins before God, but only in his opinion that gives rash judgment.
And perceiuest not this perceiving is properly an action of the mind, standing
in consideration and thinking, which follows after seeing. Thus the word is
used, Luke 12. 27. Consider the lilies of the field; that is, look upon them,
and then consider well thereof in your mind. And, Iam. 1. 23. He that hears
the word, and does it not, is like unto a man that BEHOLDS his natural face in
a glass: that is, to one that sees and considers of his shape. So that Christ's
meaning is, as if he had said, It may be thou see, but why do thou not
well weigh and consider with thy self of the beam that is in thine own eye?
By beam, is here meant great and notorious reigning sins in man's heart; such
as wound the conscience, which are like unto a beam in the eye: which does not
only blemish, but quite dash out the fight. Some may here ask, in what sense
this is spoken, seeing the eye is not capable of a beam? Ans. It is spoken by
way of supposition, as if i^ had bin said; if it were possible that a beam
could be in the eye, the rash censurers fault is as a beam in the eye: this
kind of spech is usual in Scripture; If I could speak with tongues of Angels,
says S. Paul, 1. Cor. 13. 1. that is, suppose Angels had tongues, and that I
could speak as eloquently as they. The words of the 4. v. are for substance
all one with the former in the 3. The difference between them is only this; in
the 3. v. Christ speaks only of rash judgment conceived in the mind; but in
the 4. he speaks of rash judgment uttered in speech, How say thou to thy
brother, etc. So that in both verses the words are a parable bearing this
sense: with what face, honesty, or conscience, can thou find fault with thy
brother either in thought or speech, thou thy self being tainted with greater
faults and offenses? And hence the second reason may be thus conceived:

He that has greater faults, must not censure him that has lesser:

But he that gives rash judgment, has greater faults then he whom he
censureth: And therefore no man ought to use rash judgment. The proposition or
first part is omitted: the Assumption expressly set down in the 3. and 4. v.
whereupon the conclusion follows against rash judgment.

Upon this form of speech, How see thou? why say thou? that is, Our word
and thoughts must have good ground.
with what face and honesty, and upon what ground? we may learn this
instruction; that our speeches, yea our very thoughts must be conceived and
uttered upon good ground, and in a good manner. Establish thy thoughts by
counsel, (says Solomon) and by counsel make war: teaching Prove. 20. 18.
us to have direction from the word of God, for the ground and manner of our
very thoughts, and for all our affairs. Our Savior Christ bids us take heed
how we hear Gods word: and Solomon would draw us Luk ^. 18.
to this heed and attention in prayer also; Be not rash with thy mouth, nor
Eccles. 5. 1.
let thy heart be hasty to utter a thing before God: now that which they speak
of divine exercises, is in this place by our Savior enlarged to every thought
of the heart, and word of the mouth that co^cerns our brother.

Further, in these words, See thou; that is, with attention and consideration
Man's cor^^pt prying (...) the f^^^ts of others.
beholdest our Savior Christ acquaints us with a common fault wherewith our
nature is generally stained and corrupted: to wit, that we are ouersharpe
sighted into other men's lives and offenses: this appears in that men can
easily discern small faults in others, and cannot see great offenses in
themselves, nay when they can find no just fault, yet they will make those
faults which indeed be none at all. Example hereof we have in the Scribes and
Pharisees, in their censures against our Savior and his disciples: they
themselves were hypocrites tainted with grievous sins, and yet they pried to
find motes in Christ's ^ies; for when he wrought miracles, cured the diseased,
and did good unto all, they blamed him as a breaker of the Sabbath day, and as
a companion of Publicans and sinners, though he conuersed with them for their
good: so they blamed his Disciples for eating with unwashed hands, and for
plucking up the ears of corn on the Sabbath day to satisfy their hunger; and
for their seldom fasting. This fault was in the Corinthians, who censured Paul
and his ministry, for want of eloquence and excellency of words, which was
in other Teachers among them, as may appear by his rebuking of them, 1. Cor.
4. And the Christian brethren among the Romans condemned one another in the
observation of days and times, and in the use of the creatures of God, Romans
14. which was nothing else but rash judgment. And this no doubt is a fault
which reigns in our congregations, even among the better sort at this day; for
deeply is our nature stained with this corruption, and so prone it is to this
sin, that even they which have received true grace, can hardly abstain from
the practices of rash judgment.

The consideration hereof must teach us these duties. First, to take knowledge
of this corruption of our nature, and of the want of brotherly love in us; for
why should we so soon spy a fault in another, but because we want love and
charity to his person? We may consider the vileness of this practice by
resemblance in some brute creatures, for we account most basely of those
ravening fowls which delight in nothing but in filthy carrions; and such for
all the world are these rash censurers, all their delight is in other men's
faults, which makes them so sharp sighted to spy them out.

Secondly, when we are about to censure any man, we must (in regard of this
corruption) suspect our selves, and our speeches, and call our selves back to
a view and consideration of that which we are to speak; for oft-times we see
that which we ought not to see, and thereupon speak that which we ought in
conscience to conceal. Physicians give this note of a frenzy, to begin to
take up strawes: Now when the mind looks not into it self, but pries into
other men's actions, then no doubt it is not right, but is corrupt and infected
with a spiritual frenzy, and therefore the danger of this disease must cause
us to look unto our selves.

Thirdly, here we may observe a reason of the strange behavior of men in
regard of sin; for this we may easily perceive, that men with open mouth will
condemn those things in others, which they like and approve in themselves:
now the cause hereof is, for that the affections do follow the mind, such as
the mind is, such are the affections: and man's mind naturally looks
outward, not inward, it sees very little faults in others, but will neither
see nor condemn the same faults, nor greater in it self: nay, rather it
causes man to love those sins in himself which he detests in others. And
therefore in the amendment of our lives, we must begin in our own hearts,
and turn the eye of our mind inward, to see our own sins, and labor first
to have our hearts touched with sorrow for them, and to hate them first in our
selves, and then to proceed to hate them in others. It is a preposterous
course, arising from the corruption of nature, to begin with the hatred and
dislike of sin out of our selves.

II. Doctr. Further, here in this reason our Savior Christ makes a (...) in
degree.
difference of sins: some are as motes, some as beams: every sin indeed
is death and condemnation, and yet all are not equal, but far different in
degrees* as some men are drowned in the channel and middle of the sea, some by
the shore side, which places differ in depth and danger, though all is one in
regard of death: some men endure damnation in deeper measure, some in lesser,
yet both are condemned. But the Papists abuse these words, and would gather
hereon a distinction of Bellar. de amiss. great. and stat. p^cc. l. 1. c 9.
sins which God does not allow; to wit, that some sins are venial, which
deserve not death, and these are here called motes: some again are mortal,
deserving death, and those are called beams: But the moto and beam are both
mortal sins. A mote or a straw may sometime put out the eye, though indeed
the beam be more forcible to dash it quite out: and so do small sins wound
the conscience, and damn the soul, though greater sins do more deeply
wound the conscience and plunge the same into hell: small and great sins,
both destroy the soul, though in a different degree: the very mote is deadly
sin, though in nature the beam be more mortal. This distinction they borrowed
from former ages, but abusing the primitive Church from whence they had it: for
the ancient Fathers called some sins venial, not because they How the
fathers called some sins venial.
deserved not death, but because they were pardonable in regard of the censure
of the Church, and did not incur the censure of excommunication: and those
they called mortal or criminal sins which had the censure of
excommunication passed against them: so that the Papists abuse both Fathers and
Scripture in this distinction.

Thirdly, Christ naming the very eye, and not the face, or other parts Rash
judgment per^erts a man's good meaning.
of the body, would hereby give us to understand what is the property and
scope of rash judgment: namely, to deface the very intention of his heart of
whom censure is given. When David sent his servants to Hanun king of Ammon to
comfort him after his fathers death; the Princes of Ammon told their lord, that
David's servants were but spies that came to search out his city: thus they
judged rashly of David's fact, 1. Sam. 10. 3.
and their intent was to corrupt the honest mind of David: persuading the king
that David and his servants had an other intent and end of their coming then
they made known to the King. So that the rash censurer seeks to blemish the
good mind and conscience of his brother. And hence we may well be warned to
take notice of our natural corruption, how that without Gods special grace we
do plainly hate our brother; else we would never so suspiciously pry into his
ways as to deprave his good meaning. We must therefore content our selves with
the speeches and actions of our brother, and take heed how we deal about the
eye; that is, with his intent and meaning; that we must leave to God, who only
knows the heart: and for his actions and speeches (if it may be) we must
always expound them in the better part: if we cannot defend a man's doing, yet
we must excuse his meaning: if we cannot excuse his intent, yet we must think
the best of his conscience: if we cannot excuse his conscience, yet we must
judge it to be but a sin of ignorance: if we cannot so do, yet we must
think that it was done in some grievous temptation, and that if we our selves
had been in like case, we should have done far worse: we know not when God
may give grace to men, or when he leaves them to themselves, and therefore in
regard of the mind and conscience, we must comprimit our judgments at all
times.

And perceiuest not] that is, though it may be thou see it, yet thou do not
well consider of it. Hence our Savior notes out a second Man's carnal
security.
maine fault in man's nature to be thought upon; namely, carnal security,
whereby though in some small measure men see their offenses, yet naturally they
never think on them heartily and seriously as they ought to do: S. Paul
says, Awake thou that sleep, signifying, that by nature Ephesians. 5. 14.
we lie slumbering in sin: so as though we may sometime have a little
glimmering thereof, yet we never thoroughly behold and consider them as we
should: the Lord himself complains of this security in sin in his own
people: No man says, what have I done? Ier. 8. 6. This was the sin of the
old world; they kn^w nothing till the flood came, Mat. 24. 39. it may be they
had now and then some conceit thereof, but they thought not seriously thereon:
now as the days of Noe were, so shall be the days of the coming of the son
of man, in regard of security: and these are those days wherein we now live:
for howsoever we sometime think on our sins, yet we look not on them with
both eyes, as we do* on our neighbors faults. We must here be warned to take
heed of this sin: for it is a fearful case either not to see our sins;
or seeing them to pass them over without serious consideration. The Apostle
says, when men say, peace, peace, then comes sudden destruction: Now men do
then most fearfully cry, peace, peace, unto themselves, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.
when they either will not see their sins; or seeing them, do not well
consider thereof in their hearts. We therefore must labor for this grace to
have a clear sight into our sins, for without that we can never sorrow
according unto God, nor repent unto life as we ought to do.

Why see thou, etc. and how say thou to thy brother,] In both these Judges
of others should be blame^esse.
phrases consider how Christ would have all those which are to give judgment
of the offenses of others, to be themselves without reproof and blame: else
they are no fit persons to give censure of those that be under them. And
therefore the Magistrate in the town and commonwealth, the Minister in the
Church, the master in the family, and every superior in his place must labor
to be unblameable: for if they be tainted with gross sins, they can never
thoroughly purge them that be under them. A Minister (says Paul) must be
unreprovable, 1. Tim. 3. 2. and so likewise the Magistrate, who is Gods
vicegerent, and every governor in his place.

Lastly, in both verses observe the condition of those that are given to R^^h
censurer^, the vi^est persons.
rash judgment: namly, that of all men they are the worst: Christ makes them
to carry beams in their eyes, when others have but motes or strawes. The man
that is given to censure others would seem to be of all men most holy: but the
truth is, there is none so bad as he though he be a minister, yea be he what he
will, nay the better is his place, the wors is his fault: and the more he is
given to this sin of censuring, the worse he is, for the less he sees his
own sins: nay, let him live unblameably before men, yet he has a heart full
of pride and selfeloue, and full of disdain toward his brother. And therefore
let us take heed of this sin, even when it begins to creep upon us.

verse. 5. Hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye: and then
shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye.
This verse conteines a remedy against rash judgment: it depends The remedy
of rash judgment.
upon the former verses as an Answer to a secret objection that might thence
arise, for whereas Christ had said, Judge not: and why see thou a mote in thy
brothers eye, etc. some man might say, belike then it is not lawful to correct
my brother by speech, and by reproof to seek amendment of his fault. To this
Christ here answers; that he forbids not brotherly correction and admonition,
but the evil, corrupt, and unchristian manner of giving admonition and
correction; when as men take a preposterous course in censuring, and do not
begin with themselves in the first place, but with their brethren: as if our
Savior Christ had said, Hypocrite, thou have greater faults then he whom thou
iudgest: and therefore if thou will take a right course in thy correction,
begin with thy self, reform the great sins that be in thy self, and then
shall thou be fitter and better able, to correct and reform thy brother. So
that these words contain two parts: 1. the remedy of rash judgment,
Hypocrite, first pluck out the beam out of thine own eye: 2. the fruit
hereof, which is true wisdom, to be able to discern aright of our neighbors
fault, and also how it is to be cured, in these words, and then shall thou see
clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye. Of these in order.

The remedy against rash judgment, is for a man first to begin with
himself, reforming first his own offenses: which because it is here propounded
by our Savior Christ of set purpose, as a special remedy against this sin,
I will stand a little to show how a man may cast out the beam out of his own
eye. Hereunto four things are required: I. How to cast out a beam out of a
ma^s own eye.
A man must turn the eye of his mind inward, and cast his cogitations toward
his own life and conscience, that so he may see and know the principal sins
of his own heart and life. To this purpose serves the moral law, which is as
a glass to let us see our maine and principal sins, which be the beams in
our eyes here meant. And for direction herein I will note out some special
maine sins, which be in all men naturally; and which every one must well
consider of, that will cast this beam out of his own eye. The first common
sin of all 1
men, is a guiltiness in Adams first offense; that is, his sin made ours
Maine sins common to all.
by relation or imputation: for his eating the forbidden fruit was no
particular or private sin, but the sin of man's nature: and every one sinned
in Adam that was to descend of him by ordinary generation: for though we were
not borne when Adam sinned, yet by his sin we stand guilty of eternal death
before God.

The second common sin, is a natural disposition and pronenesse to 2
every thing that is evil, and against Gods law when occasion is offered, the
sin against the holy Ghost not excepted: for the same corruption and
pronenesse to evil which was in them that have committed this sin, is in all
men naturally; the difference stands only in this, that all do not fall into
it. And this pronenesse to evil is the second head of original sin.

The third common sin, is inward Idolatry: this is a most heinous 3
sin, and may be thus perceived: Every man by nature takes his heart
Idolatry of the heart.
from the true God, and bestows it on some other thing: now look whereon a
man bestows his heart, that thing he makes his God: and by nature we love our
selves, our sins, and the world, more then God, and yield obedience to the
devil rather then to the true God. The like may be said of our fear, joy, and
delight, and of our trust and confidence, all which affections we set upon the
devil, the world, and iniquity; yea upon the creature, forsaking the creator
who is blessed for ever: and he that sees not this in himself, has idolatry
as yet reigning in his heart.

The fourth sin is Hypocrisy, which naturally reigns in all men, 4
till grace expel it: This hypocrisy stands in this; when men are about
Hypocrisy.
any good thing, they are more careful to please God in the outward action,
then with the service of the heart. Again, they seek more to please men then
God. And lastly, they rather endeavor to perform the outward duties of the
first Table, then of the second. This is a huge beam in every man's eye
naturally, which each one ought to see in himself, as well as the former.

The fifth sin is pride, not outward in apparel, but spiritual inward 5
pride of the heart, which stands in this; that a man thinks himself out
Pride.
of Christ to have in him some natural goodness, whereby he stands in Gods
favor, and has in himself perfect love, and perfect faith: this sin all
men will condemn, and yet it cleaues fast to every man by nature. The Church
of Laodicea, Revel. 3. 17. said she was rich, and lacked nothing; whereas
indeed she was poor, and blind, and naked. This inward pride poisons Gods
grace in the heart, it is a maine sin, and the common cause of rash judgment.

The sixth sin is that particular sin or sins, wherewith every one 6
is most assaulted; for howsoever the corruption of nature does infect al men
alike, yet every one that is of years shall find himself more troubled with
some sins then with others, by reason that corruption is in part either
removed or restrained in him. Wherefore every one must enter into his own
heart, and there search and see what be those particular sins, which most of
all prevail against him, troubling his heart, and causing him to dishonor
God. These be his beams which keep Gods grace out of his heart, which we
must labor to find out in our selves.

II. Duty. After we have some sight of these our maine sins, we must in How to
perceive the gricuousnes of our sins
the next place labor to see them in our selves as beams, and to feel the
weight thereof: for commonly we either see them not at all in our selves, or
if we do a little perceive them, yet we see them not in their quantity as
beams, but rather like motes or strawes. Now we shall come to see these
sins in our selves as beams in their just quantity: first, if we compare
them with other men's sins, as with Adams first sin, 1. Rule.
for doubtless we have many particular sins in our hearts that be as great
or greater then Adams sin was, considered in the fact; and yet by that sin
Adam brought not only on himself, but on all his posterity mortality and
destruction, the first, and the second death. Again, 2. Rule.
we shall come to see the grieuousnesse of our sins, if we consider them in
the punishment thereof; that is, subjection to all woe and misery, yea and to
death it self in this life, and also to death eternal after this life, with
the devil and his angels: this is the reward of every sin in it self.
Thirdly, consider these thy sins, as they were laid upon the 3. Rule.
holy person of our Savior Christ, for which he endured not only outward
bodily torments on the cross, but inwardly in soul apprehended the whole
wrath of God due unto us for the same, which caused him to sweat water and
blood, and to cry, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. This being well
waighed, will let us see that our sins are no motes, but huge and great
beams, such as are able to crush us in pieces under the heavy wrath of God.
Lastly, have recourse to the last commandment, 4. Rule.
which forbids the very first thoughts and motions in the heart, that be
against our neighbor, and against God, though we never give consent of will
thereto; nay, though we abhor the fact it self: as when we see our
neighbors ox or his ass, to wish in our hearts, O that this were mine,
though we detest the stealing thereof: now if this first motion be a sin
deserving damnation, how heinous be the sins of our nature, and the
transgressions of our life, wherein we have given full consent to rebel against
God?

III. Duty. The third thing required to this casting out the beam How to judge
our selves.
out of our own eye, is that which is here intended by our Savior Christ;
namely, to surcease to judge others, and to begin to judge our selves for our
own sins; for if we would judge our selves we should not be judged, 1. Cor.
11. 31. Now we do then judge our selves, when in our own hearts we give
sentence against our selves, and condemn our selves in regard of our own
sins: Thus David judged himself, Psa. 51. 1. Have mercy upon me, O Lord,
according to the multitude of thy mercies: as if he should say, Lord, one mercy
will not serve the turn, so far have I plunged my self into hell by my
grievous sins; but in the multitude of thy mercies do them all away. And in
the words following, verse. 2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, he
confesses himself to be so deeply stained with the filth of sin, that a
little washing will not serve. So when the Lord had spoken unto Job, and made
him see and know himself, he cries out, Behold, I am vile, Job. 39, 37. and
again, Now I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes, for those things
that I have said and done, Chap. 42. 6. In such sort also did the Prodigal
son judge himself, crying out, that he had sinned against heaven, and
against his father, and was not worthy to be called his son, Luke 15. 21.
The Apostle Paul likewise confesses against himself, that he was the head of
all sinners, 1. Tim. 1. 15. And thus must we condemn our selves, and say with
Daniel in his prayer for the people, chap. 9. 7. Open shame and confusion of
face belongs unto us.

IV. Duty. After we have thus judged our selves, we must labor Reform our
ways.
to break off, and to amend our former evil ways, endeavoring by all
means, that sin may be abolished and weakened in us more and more: and this
is indeed the remoouing of the beam out of our own eyes, that so we may be
fitter to censure and reform others. Of this last duty the Apostle speaks,
Romans 14. 13. Let us not judge one another any more; but use your judgment
rather in this, that no man put a stumbling block before his brother: that is,
that he live without offense. These four duties Motives to all the duties.
ought every one to practice: and to move us hereunto, first let us consider,
that it is Gods commandment in this place, that we should 1
first reform our own selves. Secondly, that our state and case is fearful 2
and miserable, without this reformation; if a man have but a thorn in his
finger, he cannot be well till it be plucked out; what case then is he in, that
has a huge beam in his eye, the most tender part of the whole body: that is,
has his heart and conscience pricked with the sting of sin? and therefore it
nearly concerns every one to remove it. Thirdly, we shall never be able to
judge aright of our selves, of others, 3
or of the life to come, till we practice this duty: and therefore in the
fear of God let us seriously set our selves unto it.

Thus much of the remedy it self; now follow two circumstances therein
further to be considered: I. The party to whom the remedy is given; that is,
an Hypocrite: II. When this remedy is to be practiced; First, pluck out, etc.
For the party: by Hypocrite we must understand An hypocrite.
him, that in heart and speech is prone to conceive, and give rash judgment of
other men's sayings and actions: and good cause there is why he is so called,
for this man has the sin of hypocrisy reigning in him, he desires to seem
more holy then others, and therefore gives himself to censure others, that by
debasing of others, he may advance himself: see this in the hypocritical
Pharisie, I thank God that I am not as other men, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers: or even as this Publican, I fast twice in the week, etc. Luke 18.
10, 11. But they must know, that this censuring of others, is a fruit of
hypocrisy, arising out of an hollow heart.

The second circumstance, is the time when this duty is to be practiced; A
rule for brotherly correction.
namely, in the first place, First cast out, etc. Here then we have a notable
direction for the manner and order of giving brotherly correction; It must
begin with a man's own self, and end in a man's neighbor: and by
proportion, look by how much every one is nearer unto us, so much the sooner
must he be corrected and judged. If thou be a private man that art to give
censure, first begin with thy self; then judge thy kindred; thirdly, thine
acquaintance; and last of all, strangers. So a master of a family must first
judge himself, then his own family, and after he may judge his friends and
neigbours, and last of all strangers: and the like must every superior
practice in his place. Now by this order to be observed in brotherly censure,
we may easily see that the world is far wide in the practice of this duty,
for every one thinks well of himself, and also of his friends and
acquaintance, and therefore spares them and will not censure them; but for
strangers, them will he not stick to reproach and to condemn: but this is a
preposterous course, swaruing far from this direction of our Savior Christ.

And then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye.
This is the fruit of the former remedy; by curing himself first, a Reforming
our selves brings spiritual wisdom.
man comes to see clearly what his neighbors fault is, and how it is to be
cured and amended. Where we may note, that out of the amendment of our selves
follows a spiritual gift of judgment and wisdom, whereby we see aright how
to reform our brothers fault. Hence I gather this general doctrine, that
Right wisdom and understanding follows the reformation of our own hearts
and lives. The beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord, Psalm. 111. 10.
that is, true wisdom and good understanding comes from a reverent awe of God,
in regard of his word and commandment: so Psalm. 119. 100. I was made wiser
th^n the ancient, by keeping thy commandment: first David reformed himself,
and then he became exceeding wise. As it is said of 2. Chr. 33. 13.
Manasses, that when he repented and humbled himself, he knew that the Lord
was God: and after Nabuchadnezzer was humbled, his understanding was restored
to him, Daniel 4. 31. for, God teaches the humble his ways, Psalm. 25. 9. The
proud man is he that builds up his sins with posts and beams, and such a
one the Lord will not teach; but him that pluckes down these posts by
amendment of his life, will the Lord instruct in the way that he should walk.
Christ says to his Disciples, Ye are my friends if ye keep my commandments:
and to his friends will he make known all things needful that he has heard
of his father, Ioh. 15. 14, 15. by all which it is plain, that right judgment
follows true reformation of life.

Uses. I. Hereby we see how to come to understand the holy Scriptures How to
understand Gods word
read or heard; namely, by the amendment of our own lives: First, reform
thine own heart and life, and then shall thou have true judgment given unto
thee, to be able in reading or hearing, to understand Gods word, at least so
much thereof, as shall be needful for thee: and doubtless, the cause why most
men profit so little in the Scriptures, though they hear and read them much,
is for that they look not to the reformation of their own lives and
consciences, according to the word: Prou. 1. 23. Turn you at my correction
(says Wisdom) and I will power out my mind unto you, and make you understand
my words. The student therefore that must fit himself to get true
understanding in Gods word, for the edification of Gods Church, must remember
this direction, and labor first to pluck out the beam out of his own eye,
and then shall he see clearly to read with judgment the word of God, and to
discern the true way of everlasting life, for the good of Gods people: but if
thou come in thy sins, thou read without profit.

II. Use. Again, would thou know thy self to be the child of How to know
our adoption.
God? remember then to purge thy heart and life from all sin, for thence
flows true understanding, and thereupon God will certify thy conscience of
thine election and reconciliation: but if thou suffer thy self to lie in
sin, thou may long wait for this certificate, and yet never have it.

III. Use. Many men there be that will be of no religion, because How to know
true religion.
there are so many and diverse opinions about matters of religion in the world;
and therefore till some general Council have determined of the truth of
religion, they will live as they do: but these men must know, that they take a
wrong course: If they would come to know the truth of religion, they must first
reform their lives; but while they live in sin, they can never see what is
good, what is badde; what is truth, what is falsehood in religion. Ioh. 7. 17.
If any man will do my fathers will (says Christ) he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self: where he
plainly gives us to understand, that true judgment of religion comes from
obedience unto God. This is the right way to reform an Atheist; first, to
bring him to obedience. And in a word, whosoever thou art, that would in thy
calling, whatsoever it be, please God, and do good to others; first purge
thine own heart and life from sin, and then shall thou see clearly wherein
thou failest, and how thou art to amend thy fault, and afterward to do good to
others.

A II. general Point. Further, in this remedy our Savior Christ Brotherly
correction commanded
opposes Brotherly correction, unto rash judgment; and withal, prescribes
brotherly correction as a duty to be practiced among Gods people. Touching
this point, four things are to be considered: I. who is to correct. II. Who
is to be corrected. III. What is to be corrected. and IV. In what manner. For
the first: the party that must 1. Who must correct.
correct is a brother, that is, any member of Gods Church; so it is said, Then
shall thou see clearly to put out the mote out of thy brothers eye: and Leuit.
19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, but shall plainly
rebuke thy neighbor* and not suffer him to sin: and Math. 18. 15. If thy
brother sin against thee: that is, do thee any wrong; or else sin against
God, and thou be privy to it: (for that sin may be said to be against a
man, whereto he is prive, though the wrong be not against him because there is
an offense given unto him:) Then tell him his fault between him and thee
alone: that is, correct and admonish him privately. Again, every man is bound
in conscience to save his brothers soul, which oft-times may be done by
brotherly correction; and for want thereof, many times the soul may perish:
and therefore it is every man's duty to correct his brother; yet with this
clause and caution, that just occasion be offered, and time and place observed;
for there Exceptions in the case of correction
be certain particular exceptions, in which a man is freed from this duty,
and all because there is no just occasion of correction offered: as first, if
he be not certain of the fault committed, for all lawful correction, 1
is of faults certainly and truly known. Secondly, if the party 2
offending do repent for the end of correction is to bring the offender to
amendment. Thirdly, if there be no hope of his amendment, 3
Prou. 9. 8. Repro^^e not a skorner: that is, such a one as mookes thee for thy
labor. Fourthly, If it may in better manner, and to better purpose 4
be performed by others, which for place and ability may and will more fitly
perform it. But yet out of these cases, if just occasion be offered, every
one is to perform brotherly correction unto his brother.

Here I note one particular instruction; that not only the Minister of How
every Christian is a Pastor. Heb. 10. 24.
Gods word is our Pastor, but even every brother after a son is a pastor, in
regard that he must watch over the lives of his brethren for their good and
amendment. It is the sin of our time, that every one thinks he has no charge
laid on him in regard of his brothers life and estate: This was Cains sin
toward his brother Abel, he denied himself to be his brothers keeper: if any
man sin, the common speech is, what is it to me? let them look to it whom it
concerns. But this ought not to be, one man ought to observe another, and use
also brotherly correction for the reformation of faults certainly known. This
is a duty of love and mercy, tending to the good of our brother, and to the
salvation of his soul: in conscience we are bound to relieve the bodies of our
poor brethren that be in peril and want, much more then are we bound to look
unto their souls, that they perish not for want of admonition. We must turn
back our enemies ox or ass that wandreth, much more our brother from going to
perdition.

II. Point. Who is to be corrected? out of whose eye is the mote to Who must be
corrected
be taken? to wit, a Brother; out of thy brothers eye: By a brother here Christ
means not every neighbor, for that is every man; but every one that is a
member of that Church, whereof we are members, and professes the same religion
which we do, being admitted into the Church by the same sacrament of
baptism, whereby we were admitted. This is plain in the exhortation of
Christ, Math. 18. 17. If thy brother sin against thee tell him his fault,
between him and thee: and so proceed (if he hear thee not) til he come to the
censure of the Church: which were in vain if the party were no member of the
Church. If any one that is called a brother (says S. Paul) be a fornicator,
covetous, etc. with such a one eat not, 1. Cor. 5. 11. and he adds, what
have I to do to judge them that are without? do ye not judge them that are
within? Now here the former order must be observed; that first a man must
correct himself, secondly his family and kindred, next a brother of the same
congregation with him. And if good order be observed, he may admonish a brother
that is a member of another particular Church; but beyond this we may not go,
though we must carry our selves so to them that are without, that by our good
conversation we may win them to God. And further this is to be known,
Outward dignity frees none from correction.
that in the Church of God, authority and dignity frees no person from
brotherly correction; whereupon Paul biddes the people of Colossa, to say unto
Archippus their Pastor, Take heed to thy ministry, which thou have received
of the Lord, that thou fulfill it, Coloss. 4. 17. And hence we may learn this
duty; when we offend in word or deed, we must submit our selves willingly to
brotherly correction; we must not say, as one of the Israelites that strove
with his brother, said unto Moses for reproouing him, who made thee a judge and
a ruler over us? but being Exodus 2. 14.
faulty, we must submit our selves to the correction of our brother, though we
be above them in place. It is better to hear the reproof of a wise man (says
Solomon) then the song of a fool, Eccles. 7. 7. It may be the song of a fool
will more delight us, but sure it is, the wise man's reproof is far more
profitable. This David testified, by desiring that the righteous might smite
him, Ps. 141. 5. accounting it as a precious balm upon his head, which he would
never want: yea, nature it self does teach us this, that it is better to be
reproved even of an enemy, then to be praised of a friend: according to that
of Solomon, Open rebuke is better then secret love, Prou. 27. 6.

III. Point. For what is a brother to be admonished or corrected? The matter
of reproof.
not only for great offenses, but for lesser sins: we must pull out not only
beams, but strawes and motes out of his eye; for here lesser sins are as
strawes and motes to greater sins, which be as beams and posts. The reason
why we must correct our brother for s^al offenses, is because every great sin
has his beginning of some little and small sin; and therefore it is a duty of
brotherly correction, to cut off sin in the head, before it grow out to the
full. Thus the Lord dealt with Caine, Genesis 4. 6. he reproved him for his wrath
and malice against his brother, testified by his sad countenance, before he
slew his brother; but Caine not yielding to the Lords reproof, came at last to
the grievous sin of murder.

In this third point we may take a view of that heavenly order which Christ
has left in his Church, for the reformation, not only of greater crimes, but
of lesser sins; for there be many sins committed which cannot be corrected by
the sword of the Magistrate, neither yet by the public censure of the Church;
as lying, foolish lesting, and other offenses in behavior and attire; yet
these will not Christ permit to be in his Church, and therefore has provided
brotherly correction to cut them off.

IV. Point. How is brotherly correction to be performed? Although The manner
how to reprove.
the manner of brotherly correction be not here expressly set down, yet it is
implied, where it is said, Then shall thou see clearly, etc. I will stand a
little to show how this duty is to be performed. In brotherly correction these
things are required; 1. Christian wisdom to see clearly into the fault, and
also how it is to be amended. The author to the Hebrews makes Heb. 10. 24.
it the duty of every Christian to observe his brother: not for this end, to
vpbraid him with his faults; but that he may rightly discern thereof, and also
know how to correct him. And here comes a common fault to be reproved, many
are forward and hasty to correct their brethren, but yet it shall be upon
bare rumors and uncertain grounds, they will not stay till they know the fault
thoroughly and certainly, whereupon it comes to pass many times, that the
reprouer bears the blame; for the party reproved says, there is no such
matter, the thing is otherwise, and so the other becomes a rash censurer. 2. In
christian correction, there must be observation 2
of fit circumstances; as time and place; else the good admonition may be less
effectual. We shall see the practice of this in the word of God, Abigail
observed a fit time to reprove her husband for his churlish answer 1. Sam. 25.
36. 37.
to David's servants, and therefore told him not of it till his feast of
sheep-shearing was ended, and the wine gone out of his head. 3. The manner 3
of our brothers offense must be considered, whether it proceed of humane
frailty, or otherwise; if his fault proceed from humane frailty, then Paul's
lesson may be practiced, Gal. 6. 1. Ye that are spiritual restore such a one
with the spirit of meekenes. The phrase there is borrowed from Surgeons, who
being to deal with a broken joint, will handle the same very tenderly; and so
must they be dealt with in reproof, that sin of humane fiailtie. Example of
this mildenes in reproof we have in Nathan, who reproved David in a parable,
and so brought him to condemn 2. Sam. 21. 1, 2. etc.
himself: and the Apostle Paul reproouing the Co^inthians in the beginning of
the first Epistle, does include himself and Apollos in the same reproof, as
though they had bin guilty of the same crime, 1. Cor. 4. 6. And giving
direction to Timothy how to carry himself in the Church of God, though he
allow him to use rebuke and reproof, 2. Tim. 4. 2. yet he bids him, Exhort an
Elder, therein giving good direction for ^. Tim. 5. 1.
admonition: if the party be an Elder, though reproof be not unlawful, yet
it is not so fit as exhortation: and the like mildness must be used toward
all those that sin of humane frailty. But if the offense proceed from
wilfulnes and obstinacy, then the judgments of God must be denounced against
them to drive them to repentance. 4. Every one 4
that is to correct another, must consider himself, and his own estate,
knowing that of himself he may fall into the like offense. So Paul bids them
that are to seek the restoring of such as are fallen, to consider themselves,
Galat. 6. 1. 5. Brotherly correction must be delivered with 5
Doctrine and instruction: 2. Tim. 4. 1, 2. I charge thee before God, to
reprove, exhort, and rebuke, with all long suffering and doctrine. He that
will admonish, must first himself be resolved, that the thing done is a sin,
then he must propound it to the party, as a sin out of Gods word; and
deliver the reproof, not in his own name, but in the name of God; so as
hereby the party may know himself to have offended, and also say, that he is
reproved of God himself rather then of man. This ought all superiors to
practice, in correcting and admonishing their inferiors; they must not go
thereto in rage, but in long suffering; nor rudely, but with doctrine, that the
party offending may see his fault. And thus much for this duty of brotherly
correction.

Verse. 6. Give not that which is holy unto dogs: neither cast ye your pearls
before swine: least they tread them under their feet, and turning again all to
rent you.
Hitherto the Evangelist has set down the several heads of Christ's 7. part of
Christ's sermon.
Sermon more at large; but from this verse to the end of the Chapter, he
handles briefly the points which follow. This verse depends not upon the
former, but herein our Savior Christ lays down a new point of instruction,
directing his Disciples, and in them all ministers, unto that Christian
discretion which ought to be observed in the dispensation of the word of God.
And his direction is here propounded in a prohibition of giving holy things to
dogs, or casting pearls before swine: which is enforced by a double reason,
least they tread upon you, etc.

Now for the better understanding hereof, first I will speak of the words,
because they are hard and difficult; and then come to the doctrines.

In the words four things are to be sought out. 1. What is meant by holy
things. 2. What is meant by pearls. 3. What is meant by dogs: and 4. what is
meant by swine. For the first, by that which is holy, we must understand, first
and properly, the word of God, written in the books of the old and new
testament, in his right and holy use; that is, read, dispensed, and preached:
and consequently, by holy things, are meant the Sacraments, and Christian
admonition. Gods word is called Gods word is an holy thing.
an holy thing for sundry causes, but principally for these two; first, because
it is holy in it self: and secondly, in effect and operation. It is holy in it
self, because it is set apart by God, to be in the Church in stead of his own
lively voice unto his people, for the reucaling and determining of all things
to be believed and done in his Church. In the old testament, God himself spoke
by a lively voice unto the Patriarchs, and after the giving of the Law, he
gave answer to the high Priest at the Mercie-seat and yet we are not inferior
to them, though we want that lively voice; for we have the written word in
stead thereof, which is answerable every way thereunto: for look what the
written word says, is as much as if the Lord from heaven should speak by a
lively voice: and so consequently, it is to us in stead of the Ark of God, a
pledge of his presence. And thus it is holy in it self. Secondly, Gods word is
holy, in regard of operation; for it is the instrument of the spirit, set apart
by God himself, to be the means whereby he sanctifies and reformes the hearts
and lives of his children. And consequently, the Sacraments are holy things,
for they are the word made visible; so likewise is Christian admonition
grounded upon Gods word.

From this doctrine sundry duty (...) to be learned; First, we are often
commanded in Gods word, to draw neer^ v^ ^o God, to seek him, to fear him,
and to walk before him in his pr^^^nce: how shall we do these things, seeing
God is invisible, and in glory and majesty is in heaven? Surely we must
consider the word of God, which is that holy thing set apart by God, to be in
stead of his own lively voice; and therefore we need not seek for him that
is invisible, but we must have recourse unto the word, and labor to have it
present with us in our hearts, in our lives, and consciences. Enoch walked
before God, not only in regard of his infinite majesty, which though it be
invisible, is every where present; but principally in respect of his word,
setting that before him wheresoever he was. When we are commanded to fear God,
we must know that that is done, not only when we stand in awe of his
glorious majesty, but principally when we fear to offend God, commanding us
in his word. The Apostle says, that the holy Ghost dwells in Romans 3. 11.
our hearts: which must not be thought to be meant of that infinite substance
of the holy spirit; but of the dwelling of the word, which is made effectual
by the holy spirit: for says ever has relation to the word, and being
believed, it dwells in the heart, and makes the spirit, which works by the same
word present also. In which regard Paul says, Now I live Gal. 2. 20.
not, but Christ lives in me; which he expounds after, saying, I live now by
faith in the son of God: because the word of Christ was present with him, and
the grace of says that lives by that word.

Secondly, seeing the word of God is of this holiness, we must learn Use the
word holily.
to use the same publicly or privately, with all reverence, carefully
sanctifying our selves thereunto. When the people came to receive the Law in
Mount Sina, they were sanctified three days before; and the same preparation
for substance, ought we to make before we hear the word of God: First, we must
wash our hands in innocence, and then compass Psalm. 26. 6.
the Altar of the Lord: the word and sacraments are holy in themselves, but not
so to us, out of their holy use; and therefore if we would reap profit to our
selves by them, we must prepare our hearts thereunto.

Thirdly, whereas the word is unto us the voice of God, and the means The pure
word alone ought to be taught.
of sanctification; we may learn that in the congregation of Gods people
ordinarily, the pure word of God alone ought to be heard, without the mixture
of the words of men, be they never so holy: for it is not said of the words of
any man, that they are that holy thing. The Lord himself alone had the
appointment of the making of the holy oil, which was Exodus 30. 32, 33.
to anoint the Kings and Priests under the law: neither might any man add any
thing thereto, though it were never so pure and good, nor Exodus 30. 32, 33.
make any oil like unto it: so likewise the trumpets that served for the
Tabernacle to assemble the people, the Lord himself alone had the appointment
of them; and none might use any other, though it were made of most pure gold.
Had the Lord this care over his Sanctuary under the law, to take the
appointment of these things to himself alone? and shall we think that the
trumpet of his holy word, which now by his appointment sounds in the
congregation of the Saints, may admit a mixture with the words of men, humane,
or divine, be they never so holy? The ancient Church was far from this
mixture: and therefore Synod. Laodic. ca. 59
forbade the public reading of the Apocrypha, which yet are more excellent
books then the writings of men published since the Apostles. But it is said,
that they only find fault with this kind of preaching which cannot attain
unto it. I answer, it is no point of the greatest learning to use the sayings
of Fathers and Poets in preaching: and they which use it not, refrain
therefrom, not because they cannot do it, but because they dare not mingle the
sayings of men with the word of God, which is that holy thing, serving in stead
of Gods own glorious voice in all matters that concern our faith and
obedience; and being the only sufficient instrument of our sanctification:
and therefore it were to be wished, that in the congregations of the Saints,
the pure word of God might sound alone unto Gods people; that as they are
begotten alone of this immortal seed, so they might be fed alone with this
sincere milk.

II. Point. What is meant by pearls? Ans. The wholesome doctrines Doctrines of
Gods word are pearls.
and instructions of Gods word, contained partly in commandments, and partly
in sweet and heavenly promises: so, Matt. 13. 46. the Gospel preached is
compared to a precious pearl. And further we are to note that these wholesome
instructions are called your pearls, (Christ speaking to his Disciples and
other hearers:) now they are so called in two respects. First, in regard of the
Apostles and other Ministers their successors; because they are the Lords
stewards, to dispense the word and the doctrine thereof to Gods people.
Secondly, in regard of all true believers and servants of God, that have care
to know and to obey the word of God: for every believer has a special right
unto Gods word above other men: to which purpose the Lord says, Bind up the
testimony: seal up the law among my disciples, Isa. 8. 16. that is, commend
and commit my word unto my disciples; there giving a special right and interest
unto them in the word of saluation^ for they have the true judgment and meaning
thereof: they keep it in their hearts, and express the power of it in their
lives: they have the use and benefit thereof in every estate in this world, and
unto their eternal salvation in heaven.

From this, that the doctrines of Gods word are our pearls, first, we How to
esteem of Gods word Prou. 3. 14.
are taught to place all our riches in the word of God, for that is our Jewel,
and our principal treasure: of this Solomon says, Her merchandise are better
then merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof better then gold. In the
valuing of this pearl, David's practice is notable, who made the testimonies of
God his heritage, and the very joy of his heart, Psalm. 119. 111. and esteemed
them above gold, yea above most si^e gold, verse. 127.

Secondly, we must hereby learn to content our selves in all casualties How to
cosu^^ our sel^^^ in (...).
and calamities of this lise, with this pearl of the word of God; for though
we loose friends, health, goods, or good name, yet this pearl of good
doctrines and sweet promises is not lost; if that were taken away with the
loss of outward commodities, then there were some cause of discomfort: but
seeing this jewel remains with us in all estates, therefore herewith we must
stay and comfort our selves, as David did, counting Gods promises his comfort
in trouble, Psalm. 119. 50. and his songs in his pilgrimage, v. 54.

Thirdly, this must teach us to use the doctrines and promises of Gods word,
as pearls; we must look them up in our hearts; and have them in faithful
keeping in our memories. A man that has an earthly jewel that is of any
worth, will be very careful to look it up in the surest chest he has; how
much more care ought we to have of these true pearls of heavenly*
instructions? As the Holy Ghost ^. Tim. 3. 9.
speaks of Deacon^, they must be such as keep the mystery of faith in good
conscience: so must every one of us be careful keepers of this heavenly
pearl. This was Mary's practice* Luke, 2. 51. She powdered the sayings of
Christ in her heart: and David hid the word of God in his heart, that he
might not sin against the Lord. Psalm. 119. 11.

IU. Instruct. The doctrines and promises in Gods word, are the Ministers must
preserve purity of doctrine.
pearls of the Apostles and ministers; therefore, they above others in all
ages and times, ought to have special care, by all good means to preserve the
purity of doctrine in the Church of God. This is Paul's charge to Timothy, 1.
Tim. 6. 2^.
keep that which is committed unto thee: that is, that whole some doctrine
which thou have learned of me: and this nearly concerns ministers at this
day, that as by the good means of others, they have received true doctrine,
purified from the dregs of Popery, so they should preserve and keep the same
from all ^int of corruption to their posterity.

The third and fourth things to be considered, are touching dogs and swine;
where these three points are to be handled: I. What are here properly meant by
dogs and swine: II. Who must give judgment of men to be dogs and swine: and
III. Where they are to be found. For the first: By dogs and swine, we must
understand the enemies of Gods word; yet not all enemies, for so every sinner
should be a dog and a swine: but only such as are malicious obstinate enemies,
manifestly convicted Dogs and swine are obstinate enemies.
of their enmity to Gods word and doctrine, of whose amendment there is no
hope. And that these are here to be understood, appears by these reasons: I.
From the text it self, which describes them by this, that treading the words
of instruction under foot, they do turn again, and all-to-rend the Teachers
thereof: that is, they do persecute them both by word and deed, in all
reproachful speeches, and cruel actions. II. Reason. In the word of God we
shall find that Christ and his Apostles preached to dogs (for such are all men
by nature:) The Scribes and Pharisees, a generation of Vypers came to John's
baptism vnrepelled, though not unreproved: Matthew. 3. 6, 7. and Christ
himself tells the woman of Canaan, that it was not lawful to give the
childrens bread to dogs: that is, to Math. 15 2^.
the Gentiles; and yet he sent his disciples to preach to all nations: and the
woman her self, by reason of her faith, was received to mercy, and made
partaker of the crumbs that fell from the childrens table. Again, our Savior
Christ preached to the Scribes and Pharisees, even then when he wept over
Jerusalem for their impenitencie; yea, this is a truth, that because men are
naturally dogs and swine, therefore they must have the word of God preached
unto them, to purify and sanctify them, unless they be obstinate and
irrepentant enemies to the word, of whom is no hope of recovery. III. Reason.
These obstinate enemies here are called dogs and swine, by allusion to unclean
beasts under the law; of which sort were dogs and swine, which were prohibited
the Jews to be eaten, or offered in sacrifice to God: Christ therefore here by
allusion to that ceremony, means such persons as are excluded from the holy
things of the Lord, and have no right or interest into the Lords word or
sacraments; such as both in heart and life be unclean as hogs and dogs, and
will not be purified. IV. Reason. Paul charge Titus, that after once or twice
Tit. 3 10. 11.
admonition he should reject an heretic, knowing that such a one is perverted
and sins, being damned of his own self: that is, sins wilfully and
obstinately, and in so sinning condemns himself in his own heart and
conscience: and such are meant by dogs and swine in this place.

Now the difference of these two may be this; By dogs are meant obstinate
Difference between dogs and swine.
enemies that maliciously revile the ministry of the word, the doctrine of
God, and the messengers thereof: such a dog was Alexander the Copper-smith, 2.
Tim. 4. 14. and such were many of the Jews become soon after Christ's
ascension, who reviled the Apostle Paul, and Barnabas, and blasphemed the
doctrine which they taught, Act. 13. 45. and of this sort are all convicted
obstinate heretlks. By swine, are meant obstinate enemies that do contemn the
word of God; either because they will not admit reformation of life by it, such
as Ahab and Her^d were; or because they scorn and mock at the word of God, as
they do, of whom Peter speaks, that mock at the promises of Christ's second
coming. 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4.


The second point touching these persons, is who must give iudgem^^ Who must
judge men to be dogs and swine.
of any man or any people to be dogs and swine: we must know that it is not in
the power and liberty of any private man to give judgment of another that he
is a dog or a swine; but it is a public duty belonging to the ministers and
governors of the Church to give judgment in this case. Matthew. 18. 17. Before
a man must be reputed as a Publicane, and as an heathen, the censure of the
Church must pass upon his behavior; and from the judgment of the Church must
private men hold other as Publicanes and Heathen. Indeed our Savior Christ
and his Apostles gave this judgment of men particularly and peremptorily; as
Paul of Alexander the Copper-smith: but we must understand, what authority,
and what spirit Christ and his Apostles had; which because we have not, we
cannot give such judgment upon men. Further, here we are to know, that
judgment upon others is twofold; Judgment of certainty, or judgment of
humane wisdom: The judgment of certainty, touching any man's state, belongs
only to God, and to them to whom God reuealeth the same. The judgment of
humane wisdom, is when the Church of God, in the fear of God, give judgment
as truly and as nearly as they can, who is a dog, and who is a swine: and
this only is the judgment of the Church, which also is conditional; as
namely, till they repent: because they know not the times that God has
appointed for the conversion of sinners. And by this we are taught, to
comprimit our judgment of any man, in regard of his final estate, though he
be an unrepentant sinner, refusing instruction; for most heinous sinners have
bin converted.

The third point, where these dogs and swine are to be found: It is Where
dogs and swine are to be found.
not in the power of any ordinary minister, or other man, to determine of any
one, that he is a dog or a swine; for in such do final impenitencie, and
wilful obstinacy concur; which we are not able to say certainly, are come
upon any man or woman while they live among us: and yet this may be said with
good conscience, that there is in many a fearful declination to the properties
of dogs and swine, even in this age of ours; for many will hear the word,
receive the sacraments, and profess that they hope to be saved by Christ; and
yet they will rail on his ministers, and speak against their ministry: yea,
the times are now, wherein many in open speech will not stick to revile and
condemn those that have bin the most excellent instruments of Gods mercy in
his Church: among many I will name one, M^. Ioh. Calum, that worthy instrument
of the Gospel, is in the mouths of many students condemned as an erroneous
person, teaching false and dangerous doctrine. Yea, many there be, that come to
the Lords table, and yet will not brook reformation of life; they will not be
drawn from their drunkenness, ignorance, adultery, and covetousness. A third
sort there are, that take occasion from Gods word, to live in their sins, and
to maintain their wicked lives; as from the doctrine of Gods eternal
predestination, because the Scripture teaches, that Gods decree therein is
unchangeable; therefore some say, they will live as they list: others, because
the word says, we are to be saved by faith alone, therefore they refuse to
walk in good works: and others look to be saved by Gods mercy alone, and
therefore they will not labor either for knowledge, or faith, as they ought to
do: and some, hearing the doctrine of the denial of our selves, do say, the
word of God is too strait a doctrine, barring men from laughter, and mirth,
and other recreations; and therefore they will none of Gods word: now though we
cannot call these men's dogs, because we know not what they may be hereafter;
yet we may truly say, thief be practices of dogs and swine.

And thus we see what is meant by holy things, by pearls, by dogs, and swine;
from whence the meaning of Christ may be plainly thus set down: Give not that
which is holy, etc. that is, have regard how, and to whom ye dispense the word
and sacraments, and if any person be openly convicted of obstinate enmity to
your doctrine, to such publish not my word, be they dogs in railing, or swine
in senseless contemning and scorning of the same.

The Uses. 1. Hence we may see what course is to be used of Gods How the word
must Be dispensed.
ministers in the preaching and dispe^sing of his holy word; they must first
preach and publish the word of God to al men without exception, grace must be
offered to all, good and badde; then they must observe what fruit and effect
the word has with them, whether it work reformation of life in them, or not:
and though as yet they see not that fruit thereof in them, yet they must not
condemn them as dogs; but rather wait and pray for their conversion, to see
if at any time God will give them repentance, according as Saint Paul charge
Timothy, 2. Tim. 2. 25. Thirdly, having waited for*their conversion, he must
labor to convince their very conscience of the truth which they in heart and
life deny: so as he may say with Paul, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that perish, 2. Cor. 4. 3. but if after all this, they give evident signs
of malicious and obstinate enmity against the word, scorning and railing on
the doctrine of God, and on the ministers thereof, then are they to be cast out
by the Church, and to be accounted as dogs, and to be barred from the word of
life till they repent. This was Christ's own practice toward the Jews: at the
first he preached unto them the Gospel of the kingdom by John Baptist, in his
own person, and by his Disciples, but when as he saw some of them maliciously
obstinate, then he propounded his doctrine unto them in parables unto them,
that they Matthew. 13. 15.
might be hardened in sin: and after expounded the same privately to his
Disciples. The Disciples likewise after the ascension of Christ, preached still
unto the Jews, even when they were persecuted by them: but at length when as
they saw that of obstinate malice they oppugned the truth, putting it from
them, and judging themselves unworthy eternal life, then they turned to the
Gentiles, Act. 13. 46.

Now in this that has been said, we may note two things: first, the long
suffering and great patience of God, that will not have a sinner living in the
Church condemned, till he have brought him through all the means of his
conversion, and till he be past hope. Thus he dealt with the old world,
expecting their repentance an hundred and twenty years, whereunto he then
called them by the preaching of Noah, Genesis 6. Secondly, hereby we must learn
to moderate our judgments concerning wicked men: a man must not be condemned
for a dog or for a swine, till he give evident signs of obstinate malice,
and wilful contempt of the word, and until he do even convict himself to be
such a one, by a wilful contempt of the means of his salvation. This serves
to show their rashness and indiscretion, that condemn our Church for no
Church, and our people for no people of God: judging them for dogs and swine,
when as they have not yet convicted them of obstinate malice in sin or error.
It will be said, they have admonished them by writing. I answer, that their
own books have more errors in them, then they do hold whom they admonish,
and so their writings can be no sufficient conviction.

Secondly, here observe that men become dogs and swine, by their wilful
repelling that holy doctrine of God, which should purge them and make them
clean. It is the natural property of a dog to return to his vomit, and of a
swine, to his wallowing in the mire, as the proverb is; and hereof they can by
no means be bereaved. And all men by nature return to the vomit and filth of
their sins like dogs and swine: and they which will by no means suffer
themselves to be drawn from their old sins, they have these properties of
dogs and swinerand look as those beasts were excluded the Lords tabernacle
and congregation under the law; so are these men debarred from the word and
sacraments, and all holy things under the Gospel; they are an abomination unto
the Lord: see Psalm. 56. 6. and Psalm. 50. 16. In this regard we are to be
admonished, to suffer our selves to be cleansed and reformed by the word of God.
Ye are clean (says Christ) by the word which I have spoken unto you, Ioh. 15.
3. where he makes the word of God the instrument of our purification: to which
effect he says in his prayer to his father, Sanctify them with thy truth, thy
word is truth, Ioh. 17. 17. And Saint Peter says, our souls are purified in
obeying the truth by the spirit. 1. Pet. 1. 22. Now we are by nature dogs and
swine, inclined to the filth of our own sins returning thereto with
greedines, neither can we of our selves be broken of this property, but when
occasion is offered we do naturally run to our old sins, as the swine and
dogs do to their filth and vomit. In consideration whereof we ought to
subject our selves to the word of God, laboring to see and feel our own
uncleanness, and to cry with David, Wash me thoroughly from my sins: and
with Peter, Not my feet only, but my whole body that so it may be said of
^s, We are clean throughout by Christ's word. If we see any uncleanness in our
hearts or lives, we must purge it out by this word, and return no more to the
filth of our former sins. It is the property of Christ's sheep to hear his
voice, and to obey the same: let us hereby testify our solues to be his
sheep, that so we may be distinguished from dogs and swine.

Here it may be demanded, whether we should make confession of our faith before
dogs and swine. Ans. Yes, if we be called thereunto we are bound to do it:
^e always ready (says the Apostle) to give an answer to every man that
asks you a reason of the hope that is in you. 1. Pet. 3. 15. And in this
place our Savior Christ speaks of the p^^ading and dispensing of the word,
not of confession. Now in preaching men acknowledge the word to belong unto
their hearers, but in confession they declare the word to belong unto
themselves alone.

Further, here we are to consider diuer^ points concerning Excommunication*
Excommunication is Gods ordinance.
First, the foundation thereof. It is an ordinance of God* for all dogs and
swine by Christ's commandment, must be kept from holy things ^ many that live
in the Church are open (...) of the name of Christ^; some others (...)
heret^^^es; and these ^^^^wi^e are to be barred from the word and sacraments;
yea, a man living in the Church may be worse in practice then an open enemy:
of such like the Apostle speaks, Tit. 1. 16. They profess that they know
God, but by their works they deny him. And such a one was Ismael, who for
mocking Isaac the son of the promise, was cast out of Abraham's family, that
is, out of the Church of God, Genesis 21. 10, 11. for Abraham's family at that
time was Gods visible Church.

Secondly, here also observe the end of Excommunication, namely, e end of^
excommunication.
to preserve the holy things of God from pollution, contempt, and profanation;
even the word, prayer, and Sacraments, which wilful enemies would trample upon
as swine will upon pearls. And herein we may see the abuse of this ordinance,
when it is used for politic and civil respects; especially in the Church of
Rome, where it is made an instrument of the unjust deposing of Christian
Princes, and of exempting Pius 5. pont. in Bulla co^tra Elizab.
their subjects from due obedience and allegiance.

Thirdly, here our Savior Christ notes out the principal persons Who must
execute this censure.
that are to execute this censure of the Church upon wilful and obstinate
enemies, that be as dogs and swine; namely, they to whom the disposing and
keeping of the holy things of God is committed, that is, the lawful ministers
of the word and Sacraments: for they must keep those holy things pure which
God has committed unto them; but that they cannot do without the exercise of
this censure which God has given unto his Church.

Fourthly, here also we may see, how far this censure of the Church How far
excommunication reaches.
extends against obstinate and wilful enemies: namely, to the debarring of
them from the use of the Churches Ministry in the word, prayer, and
sacraments. Indeed if the party be excommunicate for some particular crime,
and there be hope of his repentance, because he does not show himself a dog
or a swine, by wilful obstinacy in his sin and contempt of the Church;
then, although he be excluded from communion with them in the Sacraments and
prayer, yet he may be admitted to the hearing of the word, because that is a
means to humble him for his sin, and to bring him to repentance, which is the
end of all Ecclesiastical censures. And thus much of the prohibition* Now
follow the reasons to enforce the same.

Least they tread them under their feet, and turning again all to rent you.
Here Christ renders a double reason to enforce his prohibition, both drawn
from the dangerous events which would ensue by communicating holy things unto
dogs and swine* for first, they would ^read them (...) their feet: secondly,
turning against all to rent you.

For the first: by Treading under feet, he means profaning and ab^^ing. Now
because the holy things of God must not be profaned 1. Reason.
and abused, therefore they must not be communicated unto wilful enemies of
the grace of God.

In this reason see the singular care of our Savior Christ, to keep The holy
things of God must be kept from contempt.
the scriptures and other holy things of God from profanation: This care he
likewaies showed with great zeal when he whipped the buyers and sellers out of
the temple, because they made his fathers house, that holy place, a house of
merchandise and a den of thieves. Math. 21. 12. 13. And herein he must be a
pattern and example unto us all, to teach us care and zeal in keeping the
holy things of God from profanation: far must it be from us to do or speak
any thing which may cause the world to speak evil of our holy profession and
religion. This is Paul's charge to servants, that they so carry themselves
toward their masters, that the name of God, and his doctrine be not evil
spoken of, 1. Tim. 6. 1. for want of care herein was Gods hand heavy upon
David, for because by his foul facts of a Adultery and murder he had caused
the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, therefore the child borne unto him must
surely dye, 2. Sam. 12. 14. We must therefore pray (as the 2 Thessalonians. 3. ^
Apostle bids us) that the word of God may be glorified. This is Christ's
direction in his prayer, before all things to desire and seek that Math. 6. 9.
Gods name may be hallowed and glorified: Now Gods word is his name, for thereby
is he known unto us; yea his name is magnified above all things by his word;
Psalm. 138. 2. Excellent was David's prayer to this effect; Psalm. 116. 36. Take
away my rebuke which I fear; for thy judgments are good* that is, keep me
from doing that which may bring rebuke or reproach upon thy word, or upon thy
works, for they are good. Good king Hezekias is also commended for his care of
Gods 2. king. 1^. 36.
glory, in that he forbade his servants to answer to the railing blasphemies
of Rabshakeh, least thereby he should be provoked to blaspheme the more: as
also in that he greatly humbled himself before the Lord upon the hearing of
it: for he rent his clothes, and put on sackcloath, and spread the railing
letter before the Lord, thereby referring the revenge to God himself, chap.
19. 1. 14.

And turning again all to rent you. These words contain Christ's second 2.
Reason.
reason against communicating holy things to malicious and obstinate enemies,
drawn from the peril that may ensue thereupon to his disciples and ministers:
for these dogs and swine are not only prone to abuse the holy things
themselves, but also to annoy and hurt by reuiling and persecution those that
be the messengers of the word unto them.

In this reason Christ shows, that it is not only lawful, but necessary,
that Gods ministers should seek to avoid and shun the malice Ministers may
seek to avoid persecutions
and rage of obstinate enemies, by all lawful means which may stand with Gods
glory and the keeping of a good conscience. Hence he bad his disciples, with
the innocence of doves, join the wisdom of serpents; Math. 10. 16.
now the serpent is most wily and wary to save her self from harm.

Object. But it is the property of an hireling to fly from his flock Ioh. 10
11. Of flight in persecution.
when he sees the wolf coming: therefore it seems Gods ministers may not
fly in time of persecution. Ans. To fly in persecution is not always a
forsaking of the flock, but sometimes tends to their greater good: as when
persecution is intended directly against the minister, then he may with good
conscience fly for his safety, in hope of return for their future good, else
Christ would not have said to his disciples, If they persecute you in one city
fly into another, Matthew. 10. 23. Yea, not only the minister must thus look
to his own safety, but his people also must do what lies in them for his
preservation. So did the believers in the primitive Church for S. Paul: When
his life was sought in Damascus, the disciples let him down at a window in a
basket through the wall, and he escaped, Act. 9. 25. And at Ephesus when the
great tumult was about Diana, Paul would have thrust himself in among the
people, but the Disciples seeing it would be dangerous unto him, kept him
back, and would not suffer him. Act. 19. 30.

verse. 7. Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock,
and it shall be opened unto you.
In this verse and those which follow unto the twelft, is laid down ^. Part of
Christ's sermon.
the third part of this chapter, concerning prayer: and it consists of two
branches: a commandment to pray, and effectual reasons to persuade us
thereto. The commandment is propounded in three several teannes, Ask, seek,
and knock: each whereof has his promise annexed thereto, Ye shall have, ye
shall find, and it shall be opened unto you. Now for our better understanding
of Christ's meaning herein, two rules must be observed. I. That Christ here
speaks not of every kind of asking in prayer, but of that only which himself
commands and allows: for we may ask and not receive, because we ask
amiss, as Iam. 4. 3.
S. James says: but he that asks, according to Christ's direction in this
place, shall receive.

Now in all acceptable prayer to God, four conditions must be observed. 4.
Conditions in acceptable prayer.
I. We must ask while the time of grace and mercy remains: for if the day
of grace be once past, we may ask, seek, and knock, but all in vain: this
is plain by the five foolish virgins, who asked and sought for oil, but found
none, yea they called and knocked, but it was not opened unto them, Matthew. 25.
8. 9. 12. Now the time of this life, while God offers mercy unto us in his
word, is the acceptable time and the day of grace, 2. Cor. 6. 2. and therefore
herein must we ask, seek, and knock. II. We must not ask as seems good
unto our selves, but according 2
to Gods will, and as his word allows. The sons of Zebedie were denied
their request, because they asked they knew not what, Matthew. 20. 22. But this
is our assurance that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to
his will he hears us, 1. Ioh. 5. 14. III. We must ask in 3
faith, that is, believe that God will grant us those things which we ask
according to his will: Iam. 1. 5, 6. If any man lack wisdom let him ask of
God -- but let him ask in faith, and waver not: for the wavering minded man
shall receive nothing of God: therefore says Christ, Whatsoever ye desire in
prayer, believe that ye shall have it, and it shall be done unto you. Mark. 11.
24. IV. We must refer the time and manner 4
of Gods accomplishing our requests to his good pleasure. It was the sin of
the Israelites that they limited the holy one of Israel, by prescribing him
what they would have for their provision, and when they would have it: Psalm.
78. 41. we therefore must wait on God, as David did, Psalm. 40. 1. I waited
patiently for the Lord, and he inclined his ear unto me, and heard me. God
deferres the granting of our requests, because he would try the affections of
his children. Cantic. 3. 1. The Church seeks Christ, but cannot find him,
that is, where and when she will. And indeed herein do we show forth faith
when we refer the time and manner of receiving our request, to the good
pleasure of God: for he that believes will not make have. Isa. 28. 16.

The second rule to be here remembered concerning prayer, is: That 2. Rule. Gods
promise to hear and respect the person in Christ.
these promises are not made directly to the work of prayer, but to the person
that prays; and yet not to him simply, as he does this good action of prayer,
but as he is in Christ, for whose merit sake the promise is accomplished: and
therefore Christ here speaks to them, whom he takes for granted to be the
true members of his mystical body which is his Church. This rule must be
remembered for the right understanding of the promises of God concerning prayer;
for hereby it is plain that our prayer is not the cause of the blessings we
receive from God, but only a way and instrument in and by which God conuayeth
his blessings unto his children: for a true prayer is a fruit of our faith in
Christ, in whom alone all the promises of God are yea, and amen, that is, sure
and certain unto us.

Now having found Christ's meaning, let us come to such instructions as are to
be gathered hence. First, observe that Christ does not barely propound this
commandment to pray, but repeates the same by a kind of gradation in three
distinct words, Ask, seek, and knock; Zeal and serueacie in prayer.
whereof the latter imports more vehemence then the former. And this he does to
check the slacknesse and coldenesse of our prayers, and to stir us up to
fervent zeal and diligence in this duty both in public and private. And to
move us to godly zeal and diligence in this duty, consider the reasons
following. I. Christ's own example, which in moral duties is a perfect rule:
Now though he had little need to pray in respect of himself, for he did never
sin, yet how often, and how long, and with what feruencie did he give
himself to this duty? he spent whole nights in prayer, Luke 6. 12. and in
prayer in the garden he swet water and blood. We have also Moses example, who
spent forty days and forty nights in prayer and fasting for the people,
when they had sinned, Deuter. 9. 18. 19. If he were thus fervent in prayer for
their sins, how earnest would he be for his own? And Daniel humbled himself
many days, and prayed fervently for his people, Dan. 9. 3. 4. etc. David
prayed seven times a day, and rose up at midnight to give thanks to God, Psalm.
119. 164. 62. And Paul wills the Romans that they would strive or wrestle
with him by prayer to God, Romans 15. 30. All these are worthy examples unto us;
and if we compare our selves with them we shall see we have much more cause so
to do: for our sins abound above theirs, and therefore we had need to pray
for the preventing of Gods judgments which our sins call for against us.
Also we come far short of them in grace, and therefore had need to pray for
supply thereof against the time of need; for our days of peace will not
always last, we have enjoyed it long, and therefore must look for days of
trial, for the state of Gods Church is interchangeable. II. Reason. All of us
must come to deal with God, both in the day of death and at the day of
judgment; at both which times all worldly helps and comforts will forsake us,
and by no means can we shun that account; therefore it will be good for us
while we live often to set our selves before the Lord, that so we may make our
selves familiar and acquainted with him against that day: But if now we
estrange our selves from God in regard of this exercise of prayer, then at our
end we shall find the Lord to be strange unto us, and to profess that he
knows us not, which will be woe unto us. III. Reason. Every good thing we have
or stand in need of, comes from the mercy and bounty of God in Christ: and
prayer is an ordinary means for the procuring of Gods blessings; we therefore
must give our selves to the faithful practice of this duty. Indeed if grace
and other blessings were our own, or from our selves, we might well spare this
labor, But what have thou (says Paul to every 1. Cor. 4. 7.
Christian) that thou have not received? be not therefore secure and idle, for
Gods blessings come not when we snort upon our elboes, but in the use of
means; and happy are we that may use those means: for in asking we receive,
in seeking we find, and in knocking it is opened unto us.

Secondly, our Savior Christ by trebling this commandment to Causes why w^
should be seruent in prayer.
pray, would give us to consider that there is some weighty cause we should be
instant in this duty; and that is, in regard of the great miseries and
manifold dangers whereunto we are subject in this life: for as Peter says, the
righteous shall hardly be saved: and no marvel, for we ^. Pet. 4. 18.
have without us, the Devil and all his Angels plotting our destruction, and
the world a dangerous enemy whereby the Devil works: within us we have our
own corrupt hearts, daily drawing us to the practice of sin, the bane and
poison of our souls. Now what is to be done in this case? surely our only
refuge, is constant and seruent prayer to God, as Christ here implies by this
threefold command: for in all things we must let our requests be made known to
God, Philip. 4. 6. This has always been the practice of all the faithful,
as we may see in Gods book. But if we had no example, this commandment were
sufficient to persuade us unto this duty. Also do thou want any grace of
God, as faith, repentance, knowledge, zeal, patience, strength against
temptation, or assurance of Gods favor? why, ask and thou shall have, seek
and thou shall find. And this must be our course in outward wants, and for
temporal blessings, as health, peace, liberty, plenty, etc. Indeed the
wicked worldlings seek to wise men and wise women in their miseries, but this
is to forsake God, and to go to the Devil: Gods people must go to their God,
Isa. 8. 19.

Thirdly, the trebling of this commandment in diverse terms must We must be
vrge^t in prayer.
teach us, to be instant and urgent with God in prayer: this is an holy and
acceptable importunity, when the Christian heart gives God no rest: Ierem. 29.
12, 13. the Lord promises to his people, That they shall erie unto him, and
go and pray unto him, and he will hear them: they shall seek him, and find
him, because they shall seek him with their whole heart. Isa. 62. 7. The Lords
remembrancers are commanded not to keep silence, nor to give the Lord any
rest. Matthew. 15. 22. The woman of Canaan is commended, because she will take
no answer nor repulse from our Savior Christ, till her daughter was cured: and
Luke 18. 5. The poor widow by her importunity prevailed with the unrighteous
judge: which parable Christ propounds to teach us to be constant and earnest in
prayer. We therefore must shake off our natural coldness and negligence in
prayer, which is the common sin of the world in regard of this duty. And we
must labor for knowledge both of our own sins and miseries, and of Gods
mercies, that so we may pray with understanding, and in zeal and feruencie as
Christ here requires. Alas, many pray not at all, and others know not what
they ask, though they say the Lords prayer, or some other set form of prayer.
And most men that have knowledge, suffer their minds to wander from God by
vain imaginations: now all comes for lack of that feeling in prayer which
Christ here requires.

Thus much of the commandment in general. Now out of the words more
particularly we may observe two points. First, where Christ bids us Ask,
seek, knock, he speaks not particularly to some, but generally to all his
servants, so that all must pray; which plainly implies that his best and
dearest servants are during this life in want of The best are not here perfect.
some grace or blessing. And indeed when God gives most excellent gifts and
blessings to his children, yet then he leaves them in some notable want or
trial for their humiliation and provocation to prayer. Paul was taken up into
paradise, and there heard words that cannot possibly ^. Cor. 12. 4.
be uttered by man in this life: this was a great grace and prerogative: but
yet to humble him, least he should be exalted out of measure, there was given
him a prick in the flesh the messenger of Satan to buffet him: hereby he was
brought to pray most earnestly for deliverance, but yet he must rest contented
with Gods grace; for God will make perfect his power through the weakness of
his servants, v. 8. 9. This point must be observed, to discover to many secure
persons their miserable state, who feel no want of grace in themselves, and
therefore think all is well. But what meanest thou to profess Christ, if thou
have no need of him nor of his graces? oh know it, when thou say in thine
own heart, thou art rich and lackest nothing; then thou art poor, and ^ev. 3.
17.
blind, and miserable, and wretched. And indeed if thou knew the corruption
of thine own heart, thou would cry out with the Apostle, in respect of thy
wants; Oh miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death! Romans 7. 24.

Secondly, Christ saying not only Ask, but seek and knock; does God
withdrawes himself sometime from his children.
hereby imply what is Gods dealing many times with his own servants: namely,
that he forsakes them for a time, and in part, and in some sort hides himself,
and as it were locks himself from them. Now thus he deals for two causes:
First, hereby to chaste(...) and correct them for their sins: for iniquity
separates between God and his people, and their sins hide his face from
them, Isa. 59. 2. Secondly, to make trial of his graces in his children, to
see whether they delight in his love, to show them their own weakness, and to
move th(...)aue unto him more inseparable. By all which we see it stands
(...)and to pray earnestly and continually, for God may forsake us for our
sins: and he may justly take occasion to try what we have profited by his
Gospel, which we have long enjoyed with abundance of peace.

Thus much of the commandment to earnest prayer: Now Christ Reasons of the
commandment to pray.
enforces it by two reasons. First, by a promise, infolded in this verse with
the commandment, and confirmed in the next. Secondly, by a comparison, verse
9. For the first, The reason from the promise in this verse may thus be framed:

If they which ask, shall receive; if they that seek, shall find; and they
that knock shall be let in, then do you ask, seek, and knock:

But they that ask, shall receive, they that seek, shall find, etc.
Therefore do you ask, seek, and knock.

In this reason our Savior Christ teaches us, that when we pray to A special
faith required in prayer
God, we must bring a special faith whereby we are assured that the particular
things we ask according to Gods will shall be given us. So says Christ, Mark.
11. 24. Whatsoever ye ask in prayer, believe that ye shall have it, and it
shall be done unto you: and, Iam. 1. 6. Let him ask in faith: for he that
doubts of Gods promise defraudeth himself of the thing he asks. Now if we
must bring this special faith, then of necessity must we have a special
knowledge of the will and promise of God for the things we ask: for as without
faith we cannot pray aright, so without knowledge, no faith: And therefore we
must be careful to accquaint our selves with the will and promise of God, that
by Gods commandment we may know what to ask, and by faith may also ask in
assurance; for if we pray without this knowledge and faith, our prayers are but
lip-labor and unprofitable.

Secondly, hence we learn that the Papists err grossly, which teach Rhem. on
Iam. 1. sect. 6. Bellarm. de iustif. l. 3. c. 13
that this special faith is not necessary in prayer; this is a doctrine of
Devils: for we ought to bring in prayer a particular faith to apply to our
selves the promise of God concerning that thing which we ask in prayer. But
this we can never bring, unless we first have a special saving faith whereby
we believe our reconciliation with God in Christ: for therefore do we believe
that God will grant our particular requests, because by faith we know our
selves to be in Christ, in whom he loves us and therefore will make good his
promise unto us, as the Apostle says, This is the assurance that we have in
(...)t if we ask any thing according to his will he hears us, 1. Ioh. (...).

Thirdly, hence we learn how to carry our selves in all dangers; troubles and
afflictions; namely, we must settle our hearts by faith upon the promise of
God, who has said he will not forsake us, but be with us in trouble and
deliver us, Psalm. 92. 15. This is necessary, for without faith in great
afflictions our own natural passions will confound us: Hence Habakkuc
speaking of grievous times of affliction says, The Just shall live by faith.
And this David testified, Psalm. 62. 1. Yet my soul Hab. 2. 4.
keeps silence unto God: of him comes my salvation. Psalm. 23. 3. Though I
should walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none
evil: for thou (Lord) art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

Fourthly, this must stir us up to great diligence in prayer. We being A
moti^e to diligence in prayer.
Gods creatures, and our God requiring this service at our hands, ought to pray
upon his commandment, though he had made no promise unto us. But now fith he
has made a gracious promise to hear and grant our requests, this must stir
us up to all diligence and alacrity in prayer: see the practice hereof in
David, upon Gods promise he incourageth himself to pray, 2. Sam. 7. 27. 28,
29. Thou, O Lord of hosts, have revealed unto thy servant that thou will build
him an house: Therefore now O Lord God (for thou art God, and thy words are
true, and thou have told this goodness unto thy servant:) Therefore now let it
please thee to bless the house of thy servant that it may continue for ever:
for thou O Lord God have spoken it. So Daniel perceiving by the prophecy of
Jeremy, the promise of God for the return of the people from the captiultie,
does set himself to most earnest prayer to God, for the accomplishment of that
promise, Dan. 9. 2. 3. And so must we do in all our wants, first search out
Gods promise for the supply thereof, and then go boldly and diligently to God
by prayer in the name of Christ.

verse. 8. For whosoever asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to
him that knocks, it shall be opened.
Here Christ confirms the former reason ^^^t was included in the former verse
with the commandment to pray. In effect and substance they are all one; only
here the reason is (...) more generally, without limitation to Christ's hearers,
thus; Whosoever asks, receives; whoseuer seeks, finds, etc. that is,
observing the due conditions of prayer, which Gods word requires.

I. Ob. Here some may see, that God often hears those that pray without How God
hear^th the wicked.
faith; as the cry of the poor, when they curse their oppressors, Exodus 22.
23. And so the Lord heard the Israelites when they asked Quails in their lust,
Psalm. 78. 18. 27. Answ. True it is, God sometimes graunts the requests of those
that pray without faith, but his hearing is not in mercy, but in anger and
wrath, and is a means to execute his judgment upon them. Thus he gave the
Israelites a King in his wrath, Hos. 13. 11. and so he gave them Quails, for
while the meat was in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon them, Psalm.
78. 30, 31. Thus the devils had their request granted, to enter into the heard
of swine, Matthew. 8. 31, 32. and so God permitted him to afflict Job, Job. 1.
12. but all was to his own shame, to manifest his absolute subjection unto
God, that beyond his will he cannot go, no not to hurt the basest of Gods
creatures.

II. Object. Ahab prayed and humbled himself and was heard, though he did it
only hypocritically, for fear of punishment, 1. Kings 21. 29. Answ. That was
a grant of a temporal benefit only, which God often gives to the hypocrites;
but for spiritual blessings, which pertain to salvation in Christ, whereof
this text is principally to be understood, they are not granted to the wicked.

III. Object. Abraham prayed directly against the will of God, for C^n. 18.
the saving of Sodom, which God was purposed to destroy. Answ. Abraham no doubt
had in him a special motion to make that prayer, and withal he asked leave of
God to pray for them; neither did he pray absolutely, but with submission to
Gods will, and so he sinned not, though he obtained not his desire: otherwise,
without these cautions he had done amiss: and we must not make the
extrordinarie practices of the faithful, ordinary rules for our imitation. So
that Gods promise here is firm, whosoever asks those blessings of God which
he has promised to give, in that manner which God approoueth, shall be sure to
receive.

The Use. In this reason we learn, that God is most ready and willing Gods
readiness to hear.
to hear his children when they pray: Isay, 65. 1. I was found of the^ that
sought me not, I said behold me, behold me, to a nation that called not upon my
name: and v. 24. Before they call I will answer, and while they speak I will
hear.

This then is first (...)ne proof that the Lord whom we worship, is the true
God; bec(...) he is so able to help, and so ready and willing Use. Our God
the only true God.
to hear, being near to all that call upon him in truth. Thus Moses
reasons with his people to prove that they only had the true God for their
God: Deuteronomy. 4. 7. What nation is so great unto whom the gods come so near unto
them, as the Lord our God is near unto us in all that we call unto him for.

Secondly, this must persuade us to love God unfeignedly and heartely who is so
ready and willing to grant our requests in prayer, A moriue to love God.
specially considering we are by nature his enemies. A rare thing it is to see
any resemblance of it in the world; and indeed among m^n this dealing is able
to draw love from an enemy when we show our selves willing to do him any good
we can: this heaps coals of fire upon his head, to consume his malice and
kindle in him love to us: oh then how should Gods gracious bounty and
readiness to hear us, draw our hearts to God in all love and thankfulness!

Thirdly, this serves to be a notable stay and comfort to all those Comfort to
the afflicted.
that are cast down in soul with the sight and burden of their sins: for
behold if they ask mercy at Gods hands, they shall have it; if they can call,
he will hear; and if they will but knock at the door of his mercy, he is
ready to open unto them. Here they use to plead that they have long called,
and cried, and knocked, but they find no comfort. Ans. O consider the usual
dealing of God with his own children, for a time he will hide his face, and
seem to lock up his mercy and compassion from them, as we may see by David's
complaint, Psalm. 77. 7. Will the Lord absent himself for ever, and will he
show no more favor? v. 8. Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise
fail for evermore? v. 9. Has God forgotten to be merciful? etc. But his
intent herein is to humble them deeper, to make them knock more earnestly,
that they may be more thankful for Gods mercy when they find it; and more
careful to keep themselves from sin whereby they may loose again that
assurance. Indeed it is a most heavy cross* and the deepest grief that can
be fall a man, to have the conscience apprehend the wrath of God without any
feeling of his favor: yet in this case here is comfort, let this poor soul
out of the depth of his horror cri^ unto God with David, and out of the belly
of this whale of desperation with Jonas, endeavoring against all feeling to
lay hold upon the promise of mercy in Christ, and he shall find the Lord in
due time ready to hear and to send comfort, yea the sweetness of his love
shall distill most joyfully into his poor soul.

v. 9. For what man is there among you, which if his son ask him bread would
give him a stone?

10 Or if he ask him fish, will he give him a serpent?

11 If ye then, which are evil, can give to your children good gifts, how much
more shall your Father which is in heaven, give good things to them that ask
him?


These words contain a second reason of the former commandment to pray, as
also a confinnation of the promise annexed thereunto for assurance to be heard;
and it may be framed thus:

If earthly parents, though they be evil, can give good gifts to their
children, when they want them, and ask them at their hands; then much more
will your heavenly father give good gifts to those that ask him: But earthly
parents though they be evil, will give good gifts to their children: Therefore
much more will your heavenly father give good things to them that ask him.
This reason stands in a comparison of vnequalls, drawn from the less to
the greater; from the care which is ordinarily seen in natural parents over
their children, to prove undoubtedly the most tender care of our heavenly
father over us. And this kind of reasoning is usual with God in Scripture:
Isay 49. 15. Can a woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the son
of her womb? Though they should forget, yet will not I forget thee. Psalm. 103.
13. As a father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on
them that fear him. Mal. 3. 17. -- and I will spare them as a man spares his
own son that serves him.

In the framing of this reason behold a special favor of God vouchsafed A
prerogative of parents.
to godly parents: They may take a taste of Gods love and care over themselves
by the consideration of that natural care and tender affection they bear
toward their own children. And indeed they may more easily then other,
apprehend and apply to themselves the loving favor and tender care of God over
them, by the like affections in themselves toward their own children. Now
this favor and privilege God vouchsafes for special cause: first, to incite
and stir up those parents* which yet have not tasted of Gods love, to embrace
his word and promises whereby God reueales his love to men, that so they may
taste of Gods love toward them, whereof they have so notable a pattern in
their affection toward their own children. Secondly, to provoke them to
labor to have their hearts rooted and grounded in the love of God. And
thirdly, that they having experience of Gods love in themselves, may bring
their children and posterity to the fruition of the same love and mercy.

Now to come to the comparison: The first part whereof is this, that it is a
natural property in all parents to give good things unto their children. This
is a principle binding conscience, that parents should be careful of their
children: He that provides not for his own (says 1. Tim. 5. 8.
the Apostle) especially for them of his family, is worse then an infidel:
for infidells do not put out this light of nature, but provide for their
children.

Here then those parents are to be blamed, who spend their substance in gaming
and ryote, and so leave their children and family Riotous patent* reproved.
destitute and in want. These spend upon their own lusts those good things
which they should bestow upon their children, and so show themselves
unnatural; but the Magistrate, who is the public father ought to look unto
them, and to restrain them from such disorder.

Secondly, here those likewise are to be blamed, which for food and Also such
as neglect religious education.
raiment will provide and give sufficient to their children: but in the mean
while they give them not godly education, in the instruction and information of
the Lord, which is a good thing indeed unto the soul, for which the godly in
Scripture are commended: as Abraham toward his family, Genesis 18. 19. and Lois
and Eunice toward Timothy, 2. Tim. 1. 5. who brought him up in faith
unfeigned.

Thirdly, by this we may see, the state of those that kill their own Most
unnatural parents.
children, (for so we may read, that some parents have eaten their own
children) namely, they are such as become unnatural, being in Gods just
judgment left unto themselves to be ruled by the Devil, who fills their
hearts with this unnatural and savage cruelty. Now Christ speaks here of the
light of nature not extinguished, and so it is true even among the heathen.

verse. 11. If ye then which are evil, etc. Here is the application of the
comparison, the ground whereof was laid down in the two former verses. And by
evil, he means not every sinner, but such as are stained with malice, envy,
and self-love, being bent to seek their own good only: for so says the
Master to the envious labourer, Matthew. 20. 15. Is thine eye evil, because I am
good? that is, art thou envious because I am bountiful?

In these words Christ gives us to understand, that it is the note of A note of
an evil man to seek himself.
an evil man to be given wholly to seek his own good, though otherwise he
live ciuilly; for this is a fruit of evil covetousness and selfeloue.
Experience shows the gricuous(...)se of this sin: for thence come the
manifold practices of injustice, cruelty, and oppression that be in the world,
hence it is that times of dearth are made more heavy upon the poor then
otherways Gods hand has sent them, because the rich seek their own good and
commodity only at such times, hence come engrossing, deceiving, and enclosing
to the spoil of the poor. We must therefore beware of this sinful
practice; and on the otherside give our selves to practice goodness toward
others, setting our selves to the practice of love, which seeks not her own
things, but is bountiful, that so we may show forth our love to God by
well-doing to our brethren; as the Apostle bids us, Gal. 5. 13. Do service one
to another by love; and Phil. 2. 4. Look not every man on his own things, but
every man also on the things of other men. This was good King Josias his
practice, for which cause among many particular virtues, all his goodnesses are
said to be recorded, 2. Chron. 35. 26. And Saint Paul likewise became all
things to all men, that he might win some; and though he were free from all
men, yet he made himself servant unto all men, that he might win the more. 1.
Cor. 9. 19. -- 22.

You that are evil can give good gifts: that is, bread, fish, and such Evil
men may do good things.
like, as Luke 11. 11, 12. Here it is plain, that an evil man may have some
kind of virtues in him, whereby he may do some good works. Quest. How can this
be, for an evil man wants faith, and so whatsoever he does is sin? Answ. We
must know, that the gifts of Gifts of the spirit twofold.
the spirit are of two-sorts: some are common, whereby the corruption of man's
nature is only restrained and limited, for the maintaining of civil
societies, that man with man may live in some order and quietness: And hence
it was that among the heathen, some were just, some mild, some liberal, etc.
All these came from the spirit, yet not renewing the parties, but only
restraining their natural wickedness: And of this sort of gifts is the love
and care of parents toward their children, and the love of children again
toward their parents. And these and such like evil men may have, for they are
not sanctifying virtues, but rather shadows thereof. The second kind of the
gifts of the spirit are more special gifts and graces, whereby the corruption
of man's nature is mortified and in some part abolished, and the graces of Gods
image are renewed in man, whereby they become loving, meek, just, temperate,
etc. which in the regenerate are true christian virtues, and the exercise
hereof is the doing of good works indeed.

How much more shall your heavenly father give good things to them that ask
him? The(...)ords contain the second part of the comparison, wherein Christ
does amplify and set out the bountifulnes of God in his gifts to his children:
and Saint Luke specifieth these good things, Luke 11. 13.
to be the gift of the holy Ghost, in regard of grace and operation.

Here then three points are to be handled; I. Who gives these good things. II.
What is given. III. To whom. For the first: the author of these good things is
the Father: for of him, and from him, comes every good gift, and every
perfect giving. Quest. But this gift is the holy How the father giu^^ the holy
Ghost.
Ghost, now the holy Ghost is God, how then can he be given, this seems to
imply inequality in the Trinity, for the person giving must have power and
authority over the person given? Answ. We must know, first, that this action
of the father in giving the holy Ghost, is not by virtue of superior power and
authority, but by consent; the holy Ghost is freely willing to be given of the
father: for all three persons being one and the same God, must needs have one
and the same will, as in all things, so in this gift. Secondly, this giving is
not in essence or person, but in regard of operation and grace; as love, joy,
peace, etc. in the hearts of Gods children.

II. Point. What are these good things given? Answ. The holy Ghost. Quest. Why
should the father give the holy Ghost, and not the holy Ghost as well give the
father, seeing they are equal? Answ. The reason is, because of that order
which the divine wisdom manifests in the Trinity; for though all three
persons be equal in all* properties of the godhead, which is one and the same
in them all; yet they are distinct in order, the father being the first
person, the son not the first, but the second; and the holy Ghost not the
first person, nor the second, but the third: and hence it is, that the father
gives the son, both the father and the son give the holy Ghost; yet not in
person, but in regard of gifts and operation, and that by free and equal
consent, not from superiority, or by constraint.

III. Point. To whom does the father give this gift of the holy (...)gian. vi.
de August* ^. 4 in Iulianu^. cap. 8.
Ghost? Answ. To them that ask him. Hence some would gather, that man has
free will by nature in his conversion, because he must first ask, and then
comes the gift of the holy Ghost. Answ. We must know, that by the holy Ghost
here is meant; not the beginning of grace, but the increase thereof, and a
greater measure of gifts, with a more sensible feeling of them: for this
promise is made to Gods children that ask, which no^e can be, but by the holy
Ghost. See this in the Disciples, Ioh. 20. 22. Christ said to Disciples, who
had true grace before, Receive the holy Ghost: and yet also after that, the
holy Ghost came down upon them in the form of cloven tongues of fire, Act.
(...). Now these latter giuings, were in regard of greater measure, as it is
said, they were filled with the holy Ghost, v. 3. Again, by them that ask, is
not meant every one that utters words of request to God; but those that ask
in faith, and pray aright by graced-as Romans 10. 14. How can they call on him,
in whom they have not believed? and Romans 8. 26. We know not what to pray as we
ought, but the spirit helps our infirmities -- and makes request for the
Saints, according to the will of God, v. 27.

Use. 1. Hence we learn, that grace is given not to the idle, but to How to
get grace.
them that use the good means ordained of God for the obtaining of grace; as
the holy exercises of the word, in hearing, reading, meditation, and humble and
earnest prayer: and therefore, if we would have grace, we must diligently
exercise our seluos in these means; for faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. 17.
And Gods children in all ages have used the means to get grace: Lament. 5. 21.
Turn thou us, O Lord, unto thee, and we shall be turned: and David is
plentiful in the means, whereby he abounded in grace: Psalm. 119. 33. Teach
me, O Lord, the way of thy sbatutes: and verse 99. I have b^d more
understanding then all my Teachers, for thy restimonies are my meditation. So
Christ's Disciples did not only hear him preach, but desired to be instructed
in those things which they knew not, Matthew. 13. 36. Declare to us the meaning
of the parable: also they prayed him to increase their faith, Luke 17. 5. Here
then we may see the cause of that ignorance and want of grace which abounds in
the world; namely, contempt or negligence in the means which God has ordained
for the obtaining of grace: for the heart of the negligent is like the field of
the sluggard, that has no corn in it, Pro. 24. 30, 31
but is ouer-growne with briers and th^^nes.

Secondly, this serves for the comfort of those that have as yet but A comfort
to the weak in grace.
the beginnings of grace, in small and weak measure; they must not be
discouraged, for God has plenty of grace in store: if they can but find and
feel their want of grace, and lament it unto God, using the means of the word
and prayer to get supply; here is a promise of the holy Ghost, who is the
storehouse and fountain of all grace.

Thirdly, this serves for a good ground to confute sundry ^rrours; as
Universal grace confuted.
first, the opinion of universal grace, whereby some hold, that every man may
be saved if he will; for the promise of the holy Ghost (without which none can
be saved) is not universal, but here made with restr^int to those that ask
according to Gods will, which none can do without the spirit, which must teach
us to pray in faith, without which we receive nothing from God, Iam. 1. 7.
Secondly, this overthrows the Anabaptists and familist^.
fond conceit of Anabaptists and Familists, which look for the spirit by
revelation, and not in the exercise of the word and prayer. But we must look
to the means, in which God gives the spirit, and out of that means, we are
more subject to the delusions of Satan, then to the operation Aqui^. 1. ^. ^.
(...). art. 3.
of the holy Ghost. Thirdly, this also confuteth the error of the Church of
Rome, who teach, that a man by the good use of the gifts of nature, may come to
obtain the gifts of the holy Ghost. But there is no larger promise then this
in all the Scripture, where the gifts of the holy ghost are promised to the
exercise of the gift of prayer in faith, which we cannot do by nature, but by
grace. And besides, when we ask in faith by grace, this is no cause of the
gifts of the spirit which we receive, but only a discharge of our duty in
the exercise of the means which God has appointed* whereupon follows the
increase of grace, yet no way of our merit, but from Gods free mercy and his
bounty.

Verse 12. Therefore whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so
do ye to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets.
This verse contains the fourth part of this Chapter, concerning equity 9.
part of Christ's sermon.
and instice. And it consists of two branches; a commandment, Whatsoever ye
would, etc. and a reason, for this is the Law and the Prophets. For the first:
The meaning. The commandment is propounded in a form of speech that has
reference to some thing going before; Therefore whatsoever, etc. and yet it
seems very hard, that it should depend either upon the doctrine of prayer, or
of dispensing the word, or (...).
of rash judgment. Why then is it said therefore? etc. Some think it is to be
referred to the doctrine of Justice, which was delivered in the fifth Chapter,
but that is scarce probable, because so many different points of doctrine are
handled between. Others think that it does not depend of any thing that went
before, but that the word ( therefore) does abou^d; and this is more probable,
for such particles do sometimes abound: (...)
Ioh. 1. 20 he denied and said, because ^ I am not the Christ: where the word (
because) does abound. Now though the word therefore do abound, yet it is not
without his use; for it imports that the doctrine here delivered is a special
doctrine, and a maine conclusion inferred upon diverse particular duties of
Justice before delivered in the whole Sermon.

Whatsoeuer] It may seem that this ought not to be so, for many desire and
wish evil unto themselves; as children, that they may have their wills to take
their pleasure, and not be held in subjection unto their parents, or held to
good education: and so idle persons wish evil unto themselves, for they would
not be set a work. We are therefore to know, that this must not be
understood of evil wishes, but of a will and desire well ordered, either by
grace, and according to the written word; or at least, by the light of natural
knowledge, and conscience: so that Christ's meaning is this; as if he had said,
Whatsoever thing, either by the light of nature, and conscience, or by
direction from Gods word, you would wish that men should do to you, that do
ye unto them.

The commandment thus explaned, contains two things; I. The thing to be
ruled and ordered; namely, our actions to other men. II. The rule it self that
must order all our sayings and doings toward others; to wit, that desire of
justice and equity, which every man by nature would have others show to him in
all things.

In this commandment our Savior Christ would let us see a notable A
property of our corrupt nature.
property of our corrupt nature; namely, that we are forward and diligent to
exact justice and equity at other men's hands toward us, but flacke and
backward to yield the same to others again. In other men's doings toward our
selves, we are masters able to teach them what they ought to do; but in our
own dealings toward others, we are scarce scholars that will learn their
duty: we our selves would be reverenced and commended, but we hardly do the
like to others.

Secondly, here we are taught, to avoid all practices, whereby we We should
do no hurt to ourneighbour.
might hurt our neighbor, either in body, goods, or good name; as lying,
slaundering, usury, oppression, and such like: this natural reason might
teach us, for would not thou have others to defame, hurt, or oppress thee?
then do not this to them* for the rule is not, do as men do to thee, but do
to others, as thou would have them do to thee: and it is the corruption of
nature, that mooues men to seek their own advantage and preferment, by the
loss and debasing of others.

Thirdly, here we learn, that in common injuries wherein we are wronged by
others, we must not requite like for like; but do good for evil: we must not
look at that which they do to us, but at that which we would they should do.

Fourthly, henee we learn, that in matters of commodity whereabout How to
deal in bargaining.
we deal in the world, we must not only look unto our selves, but also seek
the good of our neighbors: it is the manner of men to seek themselves only in
their affairs, and each man will ^el as dear as he can, according to the
proverb, Every man for himself, and God for us all: but neither the saying,
nor the practice is from God; he would have us according to the law of nature,
to seek the common good, and to do as we would be done unto.

Fifthly, this rule of equity cuts the throat of all those pretenses, whereby
Pretenses for badde dealing cut off.
bad dealing is smoothed over in the world; for ill minded persons use to
color their doings with these and such like sayings: the gripple seller says,
The thing is mine, may I not make of mine own what I can: the deceiuer says,
he thrusts his ware on no man: the usurer says, he bids no man hire his money,
but others entreat it of him, and give him thanks: but these pretenses are
naught, these men follow a crooked line, they ought to see in their own
hearts, whether they would have other men deal so with them: the usurer may
pretend he pleasures the poor, but his help is no better then his is, that
gives a draught of cold water to him that is in a burning fever, which seems
pleasant at the first, but after turns to his great annoyance.

Sixthly, we would have all men to show forth their love unto us, we How to get
love.
then must be as careful to show forth our love to others, by the practice of
all good duties. This is against our nature, but yet being the commandment
of Christ, we must endeavor our selves to obey the same*

Lastly, here we have direction how to keep a good conscience, in How to keep
a good conscience.
all our dealings with men in the world; for such things as are expressed in
the word, we must follow the direction thereof: but where we want a particular
commandment, there we must order our actions by this general rule: enter into
thy conscience, and there search how thou would have other men deal with
thee, and follow that in thy dealings with them: and so shall thou keep a good
conscience. For want of this, come so many disorders as are in the world; and
therefore happy were our times, if men would do as they would be done to. Thus
much for the commandment, now follows the reason.

For this is the Law and the Prophets.] The meaning. By the Law we The reason.
must understand the five books of Moses, which were the first Scripture that
ever was written* so Luke the 16. 31. They have Moses and the Prophets. By the
Prophets, we must understand, all the rest of the books of the old testament,
besides the five books of Moses, the Prophets being put for the books of the
Prophets: as Matthew. 2. 23. It is written the Prophets that he shall be called a
Nazarite: which testimony is taken out of the book of Judges, and it shows
that the book of Judges is to be numbered among the books of the Prophets:
and they are called the Prophets, because they were written by some Prophet.
And here this commandment touching i^stice, is called the law and the
Prophets, because it is the sum of the Law and Prophets: yet some may ask
how this can be true, seeing this commandment only concerns things to be
practiced; and the Law and Prophets besides moral duties, contain matters of
faith to be believed? I answer, this commandment must be understood to be the
sum of the Law and the Prophets, not for all things, but for that which they
prescribe touching this point of justice and equity, and the practice hereof.
To do as we would be done to, is the fulfilling of that which is set down in
the Law and in the Prophets, touching equity in all humane actions. Now the
meaning being thus opened, the reason stands thus, being drawn from divine
testimony.

That which is the sum of the Law and of the Prophets touching equity, must
be done.

But to do as we would be done to, is the sum of the Law and the Prophets:
therefore we must so do.

From this reason, we may gather a rule whereby to judge concerning How to know
the Scripture of the old Testament.
the old Testament, what is Scripture, and what is not: all Scripture of the
old Testament, is either the Law, or the Prophets; that is, was either penned
by Moses, or by some of the Prophets, who were extraordinarily moved and
enabled thereunto. And therefore all the books from Genesis to Malachie, are
Canonical Scripture, because they are written by some of the Prophets. To this
purpose S. Peter says, 2. Pet. 1. 19. We Apocrypha books, not Canonical.
have a most sure word of the Prophets, etc. But for the books of Apochrypha,
they are not Canonical Scripture, because they were not penned by Moses or any
of the Prophets: which is plain by this, that all of them were first written
either in latin, or in Greek, and none in Hebrew originally; where as all the
old Prophets sent from God, writ their books in the Hebrew, in the language of
that people to whom they were sent; ^aue only that some part of Daniel, Ezra,
and Nehemiah, were in Chaldie, which language the people learned in the
captivity. Secondly, the Prophets could not err, either in judgment,
memory, o^ understanding, by reason of the immediate assistance of the holy
Ghost: as Act. 15. 28. It seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us: and Peter
calls their word most sure. But the Authors of the books of Apocrypha erred,
as may be showed in them all; Tobit. 6. Raphaels counsel for driving away the
devil by the smell of the liver of a fish, is a mere fabulous device; for the
devil is by nature a spirit, and cannot be affected with such things. The
story of Iud^h is fabulous, which says, Nabuchadnezzar was king of Assy^^a
when the people returned from the captivity, and Ioaki^ was high Priest. In
the addition to Hester, Chap. 16. 11. Haman a is said to be a man of Macedonia;
but the true Scripture says, he was an Agagite, coming of Agag. The author
Ecclesiasticus confesses his Eccl. ^. 6.
inabilitie in writing those things; but the true Prophets were all sufficient
to this work, and freed from error by the immediate assistance of the holy
Ghost. And Chap. 46. 13. that author writes, that Samuel prophesied after his
death, and showed unto Saul his death: but the true story Canonical says,
God had forsaken Saul and would answer him, neither by dream, nor Vrins, nor
by Prophets, 1. Sam. 28. 6. The book of Maccabees commends one for killing
himself, which is the most cruel and dangerous murder that can be; and the
author also excuses his insufficiency in penning of it, which beseems not
him that is guided by Gods spirit. In the song of the 3. children it is said,
the flame ascended 49. cubits above the furnace; which seems incredible,
especially that still they should then cast in fuel, or approach so near, as
to put any man into it. Likewise, in the story of Susanna, it is said, verse.
45. that Daniel was a young child when he executed judgment upon the two
false witnesses, which was in the end of Astiages reign, immediately before
the reign of Cyrus: and verse 64. Daniel by this means is said to grow
famous: which cannot possibly accord with the true story of Daniel, neither
for his age, nor for his fame and reputation. And the like may be said of the
rest; whereby it is plain, these books cannot be canonical Scripture. And
yet they are not to be rejected, but reverently esteemed of, as the books of
worthy men.

Here some may say, If Moses and the Prophets comprehend all Scripture that
has divine testimony, then the books of the new Testament shall not be
Scripture, because they were not written by the Prophets? Answ. They were
either penned by the Apostles, or by other New Testament divine scripture.
Apostolic men, and allowed by the Apostles; as Saint Lukes Gospel, and the
Acts, were written by Luke a Physician; and Saint Mark that writ that Gospel,
was not an Apostle; yet those books were approved by Apostolic authority,
which is all one as if they had been written by the Apostles* and the Apostles
in speaking and writing were of equal authority with the Prophets, having the
infallible assistance of the holy Ghost, as well as the Prophets: for Acts 15.
28. they say, It seems good to the holy Ghost, and to us; and Ephesians. 2. 20.
the Church is said to be built on the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles;
where the Apostles are made equal with the Prophets.

II. Point. This reason also does give us to understand, what was The books of
Moses the 1. Script.
the first Scripture that ever was penned; namely, the books of Moses* before
which, there was no word of God written, which was for the space of 2400.
years. It may be asked, what was then the book of the wars of the Lord,
mentioned Numb. 21. and the book of the Righteous, spoken of by Ioshuah,
Chapt. 10. 13. Answer. These were the writings of men, humane stories, like to
our books of Chronicles. Yet it is said, Jude 14. Enoch the seventh from Adam
prophesied. Answ. That prophecy was not penned, but went from hand to hand ^y
word of mouth: and if it were penned, yet it was not done by Enoch himself,
but by some Jew in his name long after Moses; for it cannot be proved that
Enoch ever penned any part of Scripture. Some will ask me, how the people of
God did for that space of two thousand and four hundred years, before the Law
was written, what guide had they for to know the will of God? Answer. They had
the word of God immediately taught them by word of mouth, from God himself; as
we may see in the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: and they to whom it
was delivered, did also conuaie the same from man to man by tradition. And
because it may seem strange, how religion could for so long time be preserved
pure without writing, we are to know, that before the law was written, the
Church of God from the beginning, was the most part in one family only, as in
Adams, Enochs, Noes, Abraham's, etc. whereby it was a more easy thing to
preserve Gods word among them. Again, those men that first received the word
of God without writing, were of long continuance, living near to a thousand
years space, whereby they might better see the word preserved and continued,
without writing, by tradition. Besides, when religion was corrupted, God
himself restored the purity thereof, revealing his will again, and renewing
his covenant unto his servants, as he did to Abraham and the rest of the
Patriarchs.

Here then behold, how the heads of families preserved Gods word, and true
religion, in the beginning of the world; namely, by teaching it to their
posterity: and from them we may learn, what is the duty, and ought to be
the practice of every governor of a family at this day: they must not think
themselves discharged, for that the word is written in the Church, and every
man may read and hear the same; but they must see the same be taught unto
their children, and to the rest of their family, that so it may be preserved
among them. So God commands his people, to teach their children the service
of the Passover, Exodus 12. 26. 27. and to whet the words of the Law upon their
children, Deuteronomy. 6. 7.

III. Point. In this reason our Savior Christ takes for granted, that the
writings of Moses and of the Prophets are of infallible certainty; Certainty
of Scripture.
for it is all one as if he had said, this must needs be every man's duty, to
do as he would be done to, for this is the Law and the Prophets: and so
answerable to them, all other books of Scripture contain doctrine of
infallible truth and certainty. Here some may ask, how we should be persuaded
hereof in our consciences? Answ. By these Arguments, How it may be known.
which are all drawn from Scripture it self, (for as every Science and Art
has his grounds and principles, so has the holy Scripture, which is not the
Church, but Scripture it self) 1. from the causes: 2. from the effects: 3.
from the properties: 4. from signs: 5. from the contraries: 6. from the
testimony that is given hereof.

The 1. Argument. Among the causes, the first and principal is the ^ from the
causes.
Author thereof, which is God himself, to him do Scriptures refer
themselves, and also show how God is their Author. In Scripture we read that
God spoke to Adam, to Enoch, Noe, Abraham, and the rest; and of Christ, the new
Testament gives most lively testimony, making him the Author and subject
thereof. Now nothing is falsely ascribed to God, but God in time will bring the
same to naught; and therefore if Scripture had not been Gods word, it would
long agone have vanished. Again, the cause conversant must be considered; the
devil by wicked men and heretics has labored to take away Gods word from
men's hearts and hands: but yet it is still preserved in the Church, which
argues that it is kept by a greater power then is in all men and all angels:
that is, by the power of God. Thirdly, the penmen, the isntrumental causes,
they were holy men of God, Prophets, and Apostles, who for virtue and piety
far exceeded other writers: and if they had been mere politicians, their
writings would have showed it; for the penmen of holy Scripture, have there in
faithfully registered their own faults, which no politic person would have
done. Again, consider the matter of holy Scripture, which stands in doctrine,
and style; the doctrine of Scripture is the Law and the Gospel: now the Law is
set forth in most excellent purity, nothing therein is against right reason,
or common equity. In the laws of men are many things found against reason and
equity; they command such things as common reason would condemn, and omit
many things which reason and equity would command. And for the Gospel, in it
is set down doctrine altogether above man's reason; touching Christ's
incarnation, and man's redemption by his death: and although these things be
above nature, yet we find them true, wholesome, and good, in experience of
conscience; which also proves that they are the word of God. Men may devise
things above nature, but they can never be wholesome to the conscience.
Further, for the style of Scripture, the phrase is plain and familiar, and yet
in any one speech there is more majesty, then in all the writings of men.
Lastly, the end of Scripture proves the same to be Gods word; for the
Scripture sets up Gods worship and man's salvation, and yet gives nothing to
men or Angels, but all to the glory of God: but for the writings of men, they
do either directly, or by insinuation, ascribe some thing to the writers
thereof.

II. Argument. From the effects, one work of Scripture is this; It 2. From the
effects.
is against our corrupt nature, crossing and condemning the same; and yet it
wins men to the love thereof, and to obedience thereto: which could not be,
unless it were the truth of God; for we abhor and detest the words of men,
that be against our nature. A second effect is this; Gods word serves notably
to comfort a man in all distresses whatsoever, even in the pangs of death, when
no word of any man can do him the least good, but only his word, that is the
Lord of our soul, and the God of our life.

III. Argument. From the properti^s of Scripture; the first whereof 3. From the
properties of Scripture.
is Antiquity. The Scriptures of all writings are most ancient, and evermore
truth is most ancient: among humane writings, we have none of certainty in
the things they record, before the times of Nehemias and Ezra; but Scripture
sets down things done from the beginning. A second property, is mutual
consent; for though the books of Scripture were written by diverse men, in
sundry ages and times, yet all agree within themselves, no contradiction is in
Scripture: but the writings of men have not this consent, no not in the same
Author.

IV. Argum. From the signs and miracles thereof. The doctrine of 4. From
miracles.
Scripture teaches and records true miracles; as the parting of the Sea, the
staying of the sun and moon, the taking away of barrenness, and the
incarnation of the son of God, a miracle of all miracles; all which being
wrought by the power of God, show that the Scripture which records them, is
the infallible truth of God.

V. Argum. From the contraries. Contrary to the word of God, is 5. From
contraries.
the will of the devil, and man's corrupt nature; the devil hates Scripture,
and man's sinful nature repines thereat, when it is checked and controlled
thereby: now that which is contrary to these to, must needs be holy and true;
and that is the word of God.

VI. Argument. From testimony. There be two kinds of testimonies touching
Scripture; one of holy Martyrs, who in all ages have 6. From testimonies. Of
Martyrs.
sealed the truth thereof with their blood, preferring the word of God before
their own lives. It will be said, that Heretics have died for falsehood.
Answer. There is great difference in their ends; the Martyrs have unspeakable
joy in the spirit in their torments: but Heretics have no such joy, but a
natural senseless blockishnesse, whereby they undergo these tortures. A
second testimony is most principal, Testimony of the spirit.
and that is the testimony of Gods spirit; for when men begin to learn and
obey the word of God, then the spirit of God setles their consciences in the
persuasion of the truth of Scripture: whereupon it is called the sealing of the
spirit of truth, because it assures a man in conscience of his reconciliation
with God; which assurance none can have, till he be first resolved of the
certainty of Scripture, which is the ground thereof.

Question. How may a man find this seal in himself? Answer. When he finds
the Scripture imprinted in his heart, as the sign of the seal is in the wax;
and his heart is transformed into Scripture, as the wax is into the similitude
of the seal; then does the spirit out of the holy Scripture, seal up
assurance of the truth thereof unto his soul. None other writing of any man
has the like work in the heart of man; and from these grounds, especially
from this last, may we resolve our selves that the Bible is of infallible
certainty.

And yet for further resolution, let us see what objections are made Objections
against scripture answered.
against it. I. Object. It is said that Scripture is against all reason. Ans.
This is not true, for the Law is perfect reason, and the Gospel is above
reason, not contrary to reason: nay, holding this principle of nature, that
God is almighty, even the Gospel it self may stand with reason; as that the
son of God should be incarnate, and that by his death we should receive life,
which is the sum of the Gospel.

II. Object. There be falsehoods in Scripture* for the passage thorough the red Sea was no miracle, but might be done in the ebbing of the Sea, as in
other countries there is oft-times passage through the Washes. Answer. The
Scripture says, the water stood as walls on each side the passage, which could
not be by an ebb: again, reason shows that it could not be by natural
course* for their passage over was at the full of the Moon, when all Seas are
most full, and do not ebb and flow as they use to* do at other times.

III. Object. The greatest part of the world reject the Bible, as Turks and
Pagans; and the Jews care not for the new Testament. Ans. We must reverence
Gods work in this withholding his mercy in Christ from some, to whom he
denies the means, which is his holy word: for hence it comes that some reject
the Bible, because God in his secret, yet most just judgment, withholds this
blessing from them. And therefore though Atheists bark, yet the truth is,
Scripture is the word of God.

Uses. 1. Seeing the word written is the certain truth of God, we Popish twofold
Scripture. Andrad* orthod. explic. l. ^.
must take heed of being seduced by Popish teachers: who say there be two
kinds of Scripture; Inward, and Outward. Inward Scripture, is a consent of
doctrine written by the holy Ghost in the hearts of all Catholics, and this
(say they) is right Scripture. The outward Scripture* i^ written in paper and
parchment, which has no certain sense, but as the present Church determines
thereof. But this is a deuillish doctrine abolishing written Scripture, the
true word of God, and setting up the opinions of their own hearts, making
Scripture what themselves will: we must therefore hold the written word to be
right Scripture, and the ground of that which is in the heart: for the word
written carries a most certain sense being both text and gloss: whereas their
inward Scripture varieth as men do, unless it be grounded on the written word.

II. Use. The certentie of Scripture must teach us to believe Gods word, and
not to fear to rest our selves upon it. The Author of Scripture by his
providence preserues his own word, so as all the men in earth, for substance
cannot corrupt the same; and therefore whatsoever it says we need not doubt
but it is the will of God.

III. Point. From this reason we may also gather the Authority Authority of
Scripture.
of Canonical Scripture: for we must do, as we would be done to, because the
law and the Prophets say so: and hence it follows that the law and Prophets
have an high, sovereign, and absolute authority. This authority of Scripture
stands in two things* I. in power to give judgment: II. in the
all-sufficiencie thereof in and of it self; and both these are noted here by
our Savior Christ in this reason.

For the first, the power of giving judgment, is that whereby Scripture The
power of Scripture in giving judgment.
does fully and absolutely determine of all things needful to salvation
concerning faith and manners: and for this cause the laws of God are often in
Scripture called judgments. There be diverse judgments ascribed to sundry
sorts of persons in Scripture. First, it gives a judgment to every private
man. 1. Cor. ^. 15
The spiritual man discerns or judges all things: and Saint 1. Ioh. 41.
John biddes the believers in the Church p^^^^^ the spirits: that is, try by
judgment the doctrines delivered. Secondly* the Scripture gives judgment to
public persons, as to Pastors, Ministers, and to the governors of the Church;
Let two or three propheci^ and the rest judge: 1. Cor. 14. 29. and the spirit
of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets, v. 32. Thirdly, Judgment is
ascribed to the Prophets and Apostles in Scripture, Act. 15. 28. It seemed good
to the holy Ghost and to us: and this is an high Judgment which befalls not any
private man, or any ordinary minister, or general Council ordinarily, but is
peculiat to extraordinary Prophets, that were the penmen of holy Scripture.
And these three kinds of Judgments must be distinguished; the two first
kinds, are inferior and ministerial kinds of Judgment, depending on an
higher and more sovereign Judgment: for private men and ordinary ministers
and Councels give Judgment, yet not of themselves, but by their rule, which is
the word of God; and this Judgment is nothing else but a ministry,
pronouncing and declaring the meaning of the will of God revealed in his word.
But besides this, there is a sovereign kind of Judgment you c^safed to the
Prophets and Apostles, determining absolutely in matters of faith and
conscience* what is to be done, and what is not; and this is the Judgment of
God himself, whereupon the Apostles might say, It seem^th good to the holy
Ghost and to us, Act. 15. 28. And that this their Judgment is absolute,
appears by Scripture, He that hears you, hears me; (says Christ to his
Apostles) and he that ref^s^th you* refuses me, Luke 10. 16* and Paul
delivering the Gospel of Christ to the Galatians, bids them hold him accursed
that teaches the^ otherwise, Gal* 1. 7. and the promise of sending the spirit
of truth, Ioh. 16. 13. was directly intended to the Apostles, and only in them
fully accomplished. For our better conceiving hereof, we have a resemblance of
this sovereign judgment in the common wealth: the high Court of Parliament
gives judgment of matters in law, and so do Lawyer^ and Judges in common
Courts; but yet there is great differen^e between these two: the court of
Paliament makes the law, and determines absolutely in civil matters, without
controlement, what must be done, and what not: but the Lawyers make not the
law, but pronounce the meaning of the law unto men. Now the Scriptures, the
Prophets, and Apostles, they are like to the cour^ of Parliament in giving*
judgment; private men and ordinary ministers give judgment like unto the
Lawyers, which is not absolute, but ministerial, depending on an higher
judgment.

Uses. 1. If the Prophets and Apostles have sovereign power to give absolute
judgment in matters of faith and manners; then we must here What judge we must
choose.
learn to make choice of a right Judge: for unto one must we appeal in
matters of faith and conscience: and this right Judge is Gods word, which we
must stick unto, and to none other. The commandment is plain for matters of
difficulty that concern the conscience: Isay 8. 20. To the law, and to the
testimonio: and our Savior Christ referres us to Scripture for all matters
that concern salvation; Ioh. 5. 39. Search the Scripture. If you would know
what is true in religion and what is erroneous; what is equity in any matter
of conscience, we must have recourse to Scripture. It will be said, Scripture
is an unfit Judge, it cannot speak? I answer, It speaks sufficiently to
determine of all matters of faith and conscience: we see in common experience,
a man may resolve his friend in matters of doubt, as well by letter, as by word
of mouth; why then may not the word of God sent from heaven unto his Church,
resolve men's consciences in all matters of doubt for faith and manners? And
indeed, let any man come in humility, and seriously search the Scripture, and
he shall find resolution therein for any matter of conscience whatsoever.

Use 2. By this authority of Scripture in giving sovereign judgment, The
Church an incompetent judge.
we are taught to take heed of an incompetent Judge, which men for many hundred
years have set up in their hearts, to rely unto in matters of faith and
conscience: and that is to put the Church in room of the word, for sovereign
judgment. The Church of Rome teaches, that the Conc. Tri* sess. 4.
Church must judge of the Scripture; yea, without Scripture ^ckius Enchir. loc.
com. tit. 1. d^ Eccles. and eius author.
give sovereign determination in matters of conscience, as having more
authority then Scripture, because it gives authority thereunto: but this is
the ground of Atheism, and heresy, and the path way to Popery: the true
Church of God must have the honor of Christ's spouse; but yet the authority of
sovereign judgment must not be given to her, but only to the word of God
himself.

The second part of the authority of Scripture, is that every part of
Scripture is authentical.
Canonical Scripture is Authentical: that is, of sufficient authority of it
self, though it be not confirmed by any other testimony; for Scripture is
the word of God, and the testimony of Scripture is the testimony of God
himself, then which none can be greater: as Saint John says, If we receive
the testimony of men, the testimony of God i^ greater, 1. Ioh. 5. 9. For the
better conceiving of this point, confer all the books that are or ever were,
together, and thereby it will appear, that the Scripture is of it self
Authentical. There be three sorts 3. sorts of books* 1. Divine.
of books, Divine* Ecclesiastical, and Humane: Divine books are the books
of God penned, by the Prophets and Apostles; and they are all the word of God:
for whether we regard the matter of them, or the manner of revealing them, they
are all from God, the Prophets and Apostles were only Gods hands and
instruments in penning them, the holy Ghost gave the matter, the order, and the
very words: from whence it must needs follow, that they are of all-sufficient
authority of themselves. Ecclesiastical books, are books of divine matters,
penned ^. Ecclesiastical.
by learned men in the Church; and they are either general books, or
particular: General books Ecclesiastical, I call those which were either
made or confirmed by the whole Church; as the Creedes of the Apostles, the
Nicene, and of Athanasius: and the four first general Councels, and these
have Catholic allowance, yet not absolute authority, but depending on
Scripture. Particular books Ecclesiastical, I call the Catechismes and
Confessions of particular Churches, made by them, or by particular members
thereof; which have not authority of themselves, but from the Scripture, or
from general consent. Now both these kinds of books may be called Gods
word, so far forth as they agree with Scripture: and yet they are also the
word of men, because they were penned by men, and have both order and style
from men: and in this regard, that they were partly men's works, they are not
authentical of themselves, but depend upon the authority of 3. Humane books.
Scripture. Humane books, are books penned by men, either of the Church, or
out of the Church, concerning humane things; as books of natural Philosophy,
of Policy, and other Arts: and these are not the books of God, but of men
alone, having both matter and style from men: many of them contain excellent
truths in their kind, yet gathered only from experience and common reason;
but they have not in them that truth, which is truth according to godliness,
serving to build up, and to bind the conscience; unless it be in one case,
to stop the mouths of Atheists and Epicures, and to convince their
consciences. And thus by conference of all books, we see that Scripture alone
is authentical in it self, and no books beside.

Uses. 1. This teaches us, that ministers in the dispensing of Gods ^* Gods
estimony alone in prea^^ing.
word should content themselves with the testimony of Scripture alone; for the
end of the ministry is to work and confirm faith, and to settle and build
up the conscience in the truth of religion, and matters concerning salvation;
which no other word can do, save only the word of God in Scripture, that has
sufficient authority in it self, from which conscience cannot appeal* and
for which cause our Savior Christ the true Prophet of the Church, contents
himself with the testimony of the Law and Prophets alone; and after him his
Apostles did the like. See this notably confirmed by Paul, who in his preaching
to the Jews, professes himself to have said none other thing Act. 26. (...).
then that which the Prophets and Moses said should come. Other writings have
the^^ good use in their time and place, but not in the public ministry* for
authority and testimony from Scripture is authentical: This the Scripture
says, therefore it is so; but authority from Councels and Father ^is
sophistry: as, Austin says so, therefore it is so; this is no good reason,
for it implies that all that Austin said is true, which indeed is false, ^ee
being as all men are, subject to error.

2. Use. This also shows, that we cannot believe unwritten traditions,
Unwritten traditions, not authentical. Andrad. orthod. explic. l. 2 page 63.
thoug^ they be called Apostolical. The Church of Rome intend to decei^e us,
when they would bear us in hand that half of those things t^^t are to be
believed, are not written in Scripture, but received by tr^dition: but these
traditions we cannot believe by a divine faith, hovsoeuer by a common humane
faith we may; for they are contained in the books of Councels and Fathers,
which were worthy men, yet subject to error.

3. Use. Th^^ also shows, that we must submit our selves with fear and
trembling to the word of God; for it has absolute authority to judge us, and
to con^ince our conselence in all matters of faith and manners that pertain to
salvation.

IV. Point. Wh^^eas Christ alleges Moses and the Prophets to Whether the
authority of Christ and the Prophets be equal.
confirm his minist^^ie, it may be demanded, whether there be any difference
for authoriti^, between Christ and the Prophets; for he that alleges another
m^^s authority seems to be inferior thereto? I answer, if we compare Christ
and the Prophets, we must distinguish between their doctrine, and their
persons: The doctrine of Moses and of the Prophets is equal to the doctrine of
Christ 2. ways; First, in certainty of truth, for it is as vnd^ubtedly true,
as if Christ himself had taught the same. Secondly, in e^ficacie and
authority for the power of binding conscience; for the doct^in of the Prophets
binds conscience as fully and truly as if Christ himse^fe had spoken it. And
yet the person of Christ is above the person of Moses, and of all the Prophets;
for he is the Son of God, both God and ^an; they were men, he is the author
of truth; they only the instruments and pen-me^ thereof: and from hence it coms
that Christ's doctrine does more bind us to obedience then the doctrine of the
Prophets, because the person delivering it is of more authority and excellency:
and for this cause Christ alleadges Moses and the Prophets, not for that his
word is inferior to theirs, but that in regard of our obedience he might
increase the authority of Moses and the Prophets, because a greater measure of
obedience is required to Christ's word in regard of the dignity of his person.
And this shows that we now are more bound to obedience under the Gospel then
the people vere under the law: for we have Christ's doctrine which in regard of
^is person is of more authority then Moses and the Prophets: see the point
plainly laid down by the Author to the Hebrews: in the irst Chapter he
says, God in times past spoke to hi^ Church by his Propets, but in these last
days he has spoken to us by his son: and in the second chapter, verse 1. he
lays down the use of this that now we have Christ for our teacher; namely,
that therefore we ought more aboundanly to give heed to the things that we
have heard, least at any time we le them slip, etc. showing that our
disobedience now shall be more seue^ly punished.

V. Point: Ignorant people abuse this text, to persvade themselue*s The
ignorant abuse this ^ule.
that preaching is needless, because no man can say more then this; do as ye
would be done to, for this is the sum of the law and the Prophets. But we
wust know, that this is not the sum of all tht the Prophets say, but only
touching the matter of justice and equi^e: and indeed that we may attain to
salvation more is needful: for ve must not only know Gods word in general,
but in particular, seeing that we may fail in the particulars of that which we
know in ^enenll. Again, preaching serves not only for the remoouing of
ignorance and the increase of knowledge, but to erect and build up good
conscience and honest lives, by the in increase of faith, repentance, bue of
God and man, and of obedience: and this use the most learned and godly man that
ever was may make of the public ministry, though dispensed by one that is
far inferior to him in knowledge and p^tie.

Lastly, it may be demanded how this can be ^e sum of the law and the
Prophets, to do as we would be done to, vith men: seeing we are further bound
by the law to perform duties of love and obedience to God? Answ. This rule is
the sum of all: for our love to God must be showed in the practice of the
duties of love justice, and mercy toward men: for God is invisible and it
please th^im to make himself seen in our visible neighbor, requiring that
our love to himself should be showed in the works of mercy, justice, and
goodness toward men. Men may flatter themselves and say they love God, but if
it be not showed in the love of their neighbors, they deceive themselves,
there is no love of God in them. And therefore they are deceived that think
all is well with them, when they come to Church, and receive the sacraments:
for religion stands not in the outward service of God, unless it be showed forth
in the duties of justice, love, and mercy commanded in the second table: see
James 1. verse. 27. pure religion and undefiled before God, is to visit the
fatherless and widows in their aduerstie: and to keep himself unspotted of
the world.

v. 13. I Entern at the strait gate: for it is the wide gate, and broad way
that ^adeth to destruction: and many there be which go in thereat.

11. Because the gate is strait, and the way narrow that leads unto life, and
few there be that find it.


These two verses being the fifth part of this chapter, contain the 10. Part
of Christ's Sermon.
tenth point of Doctrine in this Sermon of our Savior Christ: wherein he
ex^^rteth his hearers and us all effectually, to an earnest care in seeki^^
everlasting life: and withal admonishes us in the matter of Salvation not to
follow the multitude, because most men go the broad ^ay to destruction.

The words contain two parts. A commandment, Enter in at the strait gate: and
a reason in the words following, for it is the wide gate. Yet for our further
edification and instruction, I will consider and handle five points, which are
here set down by our Savior Christ: I. that there be two contrary cities or
kingdoms, in one of which every man and woman must abide for ever after this
life: and further, that these afford unto men a contrary estate, the one life,
the other death and destruction. II. That there are two distinct ways to these
two cities or kingdoms: one leading to destruction; the other leading unto
life. III. The condition and property of these two ways: The way of life is
strait and narrow: The way of destruction is broad and wide, and that from the
beginning to the end. IV. What men do in these ways; namely, that many walk
in the broad way, and few can find the strait and narrow way. V. What men
ought to do touching these ways, namely, pass by the broad way and enter
into and walk in the strait way: which is the scope of Christ's exhortation
and instruction in this place. Of these in order.

For the first: These two cities are two distinct places ordained of Two
distinct places for men's final abode.
God for the final and eternal abode of all mankind after this life,
according to that which every man has done in his body. These are termed
diversely in Scripture: one, the kingdom of heaven: the other, utter darkness in
the chapter following, verse. 11, 12. The one Abraham's ^osome: the other, hell
fire, Luke 16. 23. and in the 21. and 22. Chapters of the Revelation they are
notably described, the one is called the city of God: the other the burning
lake: and usually the one is called heaven, the other hell. And as these are
distinct places, so they afford unto men two distinct estates: The one life*
the other destruction: as Men's different estat: in heaven and hell.
it is said, the narrow way leads to life: the br^^dway to destruction. By
life here is meant, a blessed state of man in whi^^ he lives in fellowship with
God, and has his heart filled with the vnbreakable love and goodness of God,
and with endless joy from Gods im^^diate presence. And this indeed is the only
true life: our natural life i^ ^ut a shadow thereof. By perdition or
destruction, we are to understand cursed state of man, in which he is without
all fellowship with God i^ respect of his favor, mercy, and love; and yet in
body, soul, and ^nscience does apprehend the bitterness of Gods wrath and
fury for ^^^more: having no fellowship save only with the devil and his
angel^ and damned souls. This is no life but eternal death, though soule^ and
body live together eternally.

Uses. I. In that Christ does here mention but two cities or plac^^ No
purgatory.
to the one whereof every man must resort after death; we may gather that there
is no middle place or condition between life and destruction. A third place or
state the Scripture knows not, and therefore there is no place of purging the
souls of men after this life, which the Papists call Purgatory: if there had,
the word of God would have revealed it. But the Bellarm. de purgat. l* 2. c. 6.
Papists say, it is the upper part of hell near to the hell of the damned; I
answer, If that were so, then there is no salvation for them that are in
purgatory: for there is no returning out of hell to heaven by reason of the
great gulf between them, Luke 16. 26. and they that are in any part of hell
are but damned persons.

II. Use. If there be but two places, and in them two estates only according
to that which men have done here on earth either good or Strive to escape hell
and get to heaven.
evil; then we must be admonished with all care and conscience to use all good
means, whereby we may escape the one, and attain to the other; to be freed
from destruction, and to gain salvation. In the massacre and sacking of a
city, in which some are slain and some escape alive, every one has care to
shift for himself, to save his temporal life: much more then ought we to
provide for eternal life, seeing at the last day wherein the whole world shall
be ransacked, every one must undergo either salvation or destruction: if we
had our deserving we should be confounded every moment; but God in mercy
grants unto us length of days for this very end that we should seek Gods
kingdom and life everlasting: and therefore this must be our principal care
and study, that we may be always ready, whenever we shall be called hence;
and the rather, because we know not when Christ will call us hence: Luke 12.
40. Be ye also prepared therefore* for the son of man will come at an hour
when ye think not.

II. Point. As there be two diverse estates in two distinct places; so there be
two sever all ways that lead thereunto: the one, the way of life, Two ways.
verse* 14. the other, the way to destruction, verse. 13. First, I will speak
of 1. The way of life.
the way of life, and thereby shall we see what the way of destruction is; in
which regard it stands us all in hand to know what is the way of life. Now none
has better noted it out unto us, then the Prophet Habaccuk, chap. 2. v. 4. in
these words, But the just shall live by faith: in which place he foretells the
afflictions of the Jews by the Chaldeans: whereupon the Jews might say,
whereby then shall we stay our selves? he answers, by faith; The just man
lives, that is, leads his life by faith. Some give this meaning to the
Prophet, The just by faith shall have life everlasting: but the Apostle
expounds it otherwise, Gal. 3. 11. So then to walk in the way of life, is to
lead our lives by faith in Christ: as Heb. 10. 39.

Here two points must be considered: I. what faith that is by which men must
live in this world; namely, true justifying faith, the very same by which they
are to be saved in the day of the Lord. I* live by faith (says Paul) in the
son of God, who has loved me, and given himself for me, Gal. 2. 20. where
he does notably expound this text, showing, that faith in Christ our redeemer,
is that faith whereby we must lead our lives in this world: for they which will
be saved by their faith, must first live by their faith: he that believes well,
lives well: and that faith will never save the soul, that cannot guide and
order the life: many men think it is sufficient to salvation to believe the
promise of life: but faith has a further work in them that it saves; for it
also causes them to live thereby. Now a man lives by faith, when he rests
himself on God, and suffers himself wholly to be lead and guided by Gods
written word. Example hereof we have in Abraham, Heb. 11. 8. who by faith for
sooke his own country, and at Gods commandment went be knew not whither.
More particularly; a Christian man's life is twofold: spiritual, A Christians
life is twofold.
and temporal: both which he must live in this world, for heavenly life
begins before we die: and both these kinds of life must be preserved by
faith. The spiritual life of a Christian, is that whereby he 1. Spiritual.
has true fellowshippe with God: this begins in this life; and it stands in
reconciliation with God, wherein a man is accepted to the right of eternal
life. This reconciliation is life, and it is held by faith: and faith only in
Gods word and promise in Christ alone is it that makes us lay ^old of, receive,
and keep this our reconcillation. We must give God this honor to believe his
promise of remission of sins, and life everlasting in Christ; and upon our
faith God vouchsafes unto us remission of sins, and life everlasting. Here
some may ask whether every thing that we believe be made ours, as riches,
honor, and such like? Ans. No: but only that which God promises in the
Euangelical covenant of life everlasting, upon our faith. Here also some will
say, If this be all, I am well, for I believe Gods promise. But herein many
deceive themselves, believing the promise falsely. True faith is this; men must
seek the pardon of their sins, and in seeking believe it: but they that
believe without using the means deceive themselves, seeing God has joined his
promise to the means. We offend God daily, and therefore must daily re^ue our
repentance, and by faith believe the pardon of our daily sins.

Further, this spiritual life has his fruits. It is no dead life, for he
Fruits of spiritual life.
that has remission of sins lives in Christ, and this life shows it self
in the fruits of good works: as mercy, love, goodness: and in every good work
we must live by faith, for to the doing of any good work there is a double
faith required: first, a general faith, whereby we are persuaded that the
work is allowed and required of God: secondly, a special faith, whereby we
are persuaded that the particular work done is accepted of God. In the
acceptance of the worker, God first accepts the person in Christ, and then
the work in and for the person. Yea, we are moved to every good work by
faith, for it brings to mind Gods love, mercy, and goodness to us: and so
moves us to perform the like duties of love and mercy toward our brethren.

Thirdly, spiritual life shows it self in resisting and enduring
temptations: Spiritual life is seen in temptation.
for every child of God has many and gricuous assaults, so as the righteous
shall scarce be saved: and in all and every one of these, we must live by
faith, and thereby rely on Christ, not on our selves. Example hereof we have
in Christ upon the cross, who even then when he felt the wr^th of God upon
him, and his indignation against him, did yet cry unto him as to his God, My
God, my God: and Job in grievous temptation and affliction, said unto the Lord,
Lo, though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, Job 13. 15. and so must we
even then lay hold on Gods mercy when we feel no comfort in our selves: so
did David, when he felt no comfort, yet he did cleave to God in his meditation,
Psalm. 77. 7, 8. 10, 11. In disputations in schools it is a fault to stick
always to the conclusion: yet in this combat with Satan it is no fault, but a
good practice of true faith.

Temporal life stands in the practice of some particular calling: How
temporal life is lead by faith.
and some men be of one calling, some of another: and every one has or ought
to have some one lawful calling or other wherein to lead his temporal life.
Now the works of a man's particular calling they must be practiced by faith,
even the duties of the bas^st calling that is, as of the shepherd. And that a
man may do the duties of his calling in faith, he must first have a grounded
conscience that his work is allowed of God, and accordingly he must do his
work. Again, every man in his calling must have a care of his own life and
of those that belong unto him, to provide for them things necessary, as meat,
drink, and clothing; and this care must be ruled by faith, that is, a man
must use the lawful means to get these things, and yet so as he leave the
issue and event unto Gods blessing: we may provide for necessaries, but we must
go no further but use the lawful ordinary means, and sanctify them by
prayer, leaving the blessing unto God. Cast thy works on God, says Solomon,
Prou. 16. 3. and S. Peter bids us cast all our care on God, 1. Peter 5. 7.
Lastly, every calling has his crosses: no life is so quiet that it wants all
vexations. Now when crosses come upon any man in his calling, then must he
bear the same by faith: he must rest on Gods word, and quiet his mind with the
good will and pleasure of God. He that believes (says the Prophet) shall not
make have, Isay 28. 16. that is, he shall not be carried headlong with a desire
to satisfy his own pleasure and appetite either in seeking to be freed from
evil, or to enjoy some blessing, but shall content himself with the good
pleasure of God. And thus we see what it is to live by says, which is the
right way to life eternal.

Uses. I. This shows, that a great number are far wide, which A eiuill
l^^nest life not sufficient to salvation.
think that if they live uprightly among men, then all is well: this honest
life is ever commendable among men, but it is not sufficient to salvation. It
is but a work of nature, for a man by natural reason may lead a civil
upright life, as many have done among the heathen: but the life that must bring
a man to heaven must be lead by faith: and therefore they that would walk the
way to life, must walk by faith, not by reason only.

II. This also shows that they are deceived which live by sense, We must not
live by sense
measuring Gods love and hatred by outward blessings and crosses; and therefore
when God takes away the means they will no longer trust on him: but we count
it a point of dishonestie, not to trust our honest friend without a pawn: much
more then is it a dishonor to God, when we will not rely upon him, without
outward pledges of his favor: and therefore we must rely on God when all
means fail: for no man knows love or hatred by all that is before him.
Eccles. 9. 1.

III. Many that profess religion are deceived, that measure their Measure not
gra^^ by feeling.
grace and goodness in religion by feeling in their own hearts: but we must not
rely thereon, for true faith may be in the heart without inward sense: again,
the devil may put false comforts many times into a man's heart: the bad man
receives the word with joy, Luke 8. 13. look to thy faith by Christ's word, and
thereby judge thy self: and rest not in thine inward feeling.

IIII. This teaches us to acquaint our selves with all the commandments
Learn to know Gods ^^ll.
of God that be in the Bible; and with all the promises that concern the
pardon of sins and life everlasting: for without this knowledge there can be
no faith: and therefore we must abandon all ignorance of these things, and
instruct our selves and those that belong unto us in the word of God, that they
and we may live by faith.

V. These are happy days of peace and of many temporal blessings How to live
in afflictions.
wherein we now live: but we must not live always in this peace, God has
begun to set his judgments among us, and if we do not repent we must look
for further and more grievous judgments, as the loss of his word, and a sword
upon our selves, our friends, and children: what if these days come, how must
we then live? namely, by faith in the word and promise of God, lay hold on
this, and though thou loose friends, goods, and thine own temporal life, yet
hold fast thy spiritual life by faith cleave unto Christ, and then in the
midst of swords and weapons of death thou shall walk the way to eternal
life. And thus much of the way of life.

The second way is the way to destruction: which is called the way of sinners
and of the ungodly, Psalm. 1. 1. 6. This way has many paths, which tend all to
one end, and meet in the same period; and they may all be reduced to these
three heads: I. the way of nature: II. the way of false faith: III. the way of
faith and nature, joined both together.

The way of nature, is when men live only by the light of nature: 1. The way
of nature.
of this S. Paul speaks, Act. 14. 16. God suffered all the Gentiles to walk in
their own ways: wherein they were void of God in Christ, and so not under
mercy. The way of false faith, is some thing more then the 2. The way of false
faith.
way of nature; but yet it leads to destruction, because their faith is false
and profession vain: and this is the way of false religion, whereof there be
these three maine and principal at this day, to which all other may be
referred. The religion of the Turks: of the Jews: and of the Papists. The
Turks in their religion acknowledge Christ for a great Tur(...)e.
Prophet, but not to be God, neither do they look for any salvation by him.
The Jews in their religion acknowledge but one God, yet out Iudaisme.
of Christ: they acknowledge not his incarnation past, but expect it yet to
come: they wait for an earthly kingdom: they hold the old Testament only,
and deny the new. Now both these refusing Christ, have not the Father, and so
can have no salvation in their religion. The Papists Popery.
acknowledge much truth formally, but then again they ouerturne it: for they
hold only that general faith, which the Devils may have: but for that
special justifying Council. T^id. sess 6. cap. 9. and can. 11. etc.
faith, whereby a man is to believe his own salvation; the remission of his
sins, and his own reconciliation with God in Christ, that they renounce.
Again, the Christ of the Papist is no true Christ: for they make him but half
a Savior, or not so much; even only an instrument to make men saviors of
themselves: for Rhem. on 2. Tim. 4. sect. 4.
by his grace they do works properly meritorious, and fully worthy of
eternal life. They rob him also of his manhood, saying it is every where in
his quantity, where mass is said: Rhem. on Matthew. 26. s^ct. 4.
for they have the self same body that was crucified. Also they deny his
offices: I. his Kingly office: for they part stakes with him, and give it to
the Pope, in saying, Bellar. de Romans (...). 4. cap. 1^, 6.
he has power to make laws which bind the conscience, as Gods laws do. II.
his priesthood, because Rhem. on Heb. 9 sect. 10.
every mass Priest offers Christ anew: and they make Saints M^ss^le Ro^. a^^^
5. in ^^itan. p. 30^.
intercessours, especially the Virgin Marie. III. his prophetical office,
saying the C^nsur. Col ^^f 22^.
Scriptures are imperfect without tradition; Ibid. s. ^^7.
uncertain without the sense and meaning of the Church: the C^^us. l. ^. c. 13.
original copies are corrupted; and the (...) (...) de hi^^. ^^^les. c. 2.
Church is above them in authority.

3. The way of nature and grace.
The third way, is the way of faith and nature together: this is the common way
wherein most Protestants walk: for we hold the right faith in word; our
profession and judgment is right: but yet our lives are lead according to
nature. And these three paths are all in the broad way to destruction. And
therefore as we hold true doctrine, and right faith in word; so let us lead our
lives accordingly, and testify the same by our works, especially in the times
of dearth, when God lays his hand on the poor, and thereby tries the hearts
of the rich.

III. Point. The property of these ways. The way to life is narrow and
strait: the way to destruction is broad and wide. For the first: The way of
life is narrow and strait, from the first entrance to the last p^^sage: (...)
why so? First, because the way of life is only one single path: (...) the way
of death is manifold, containing sundry paths. Secondly, (...) that walk in
the way of life, contain themselves within the bonds and lists of Gods word:
for the words of the wise are as nails and pales to keep us in, Eccles. 12.
11. Thirdly, in the way to life there are many afflictions and offenses, as
Act. 14. 22. Through manifold afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of
heaven: and, Hos. 2. 6. I will stop thy way with thorns: meaning, that by
sharp afflictions he would hedge them in the way of obedience. But some may
say, why then does Christ say, his yoke is light, Math. 11. 3. and S. John,
his commandments are not grievous, 1. Ioh. 5. 3. and David, I will walk at
large or liberty, Psalm. 119. 45. I answer, they way is strait and narrow in
respect of our nature: but yet broad and ca^e by his assisting grace and help.
Here the^ we see what course we must take if we mean to come unto Christ;
namely, we must tread in this narrow way, and become like unto him in suffering
afflictions: for this way he went here on earth, and so entered into his glory.

The property of the way of death is breadth. Now the way of death Way of
death broad.
is broad: first, because the way of sinning is manifold; even as truth is
only one, and error manifold. Secondly, they that walk in this way break out
of the bounds of Gods word, and do not contain themselves therein. Thirdly,
herein they meet with few crosses and impediments: as David says, They are
not in trouble as other men: they prosper always and increase in riches, Psalm.
73. 5. etc. 12. And the reason is, because they seek by all means to satisfy
their hearts desire whether by right or wrong; saying with the fool in the
Gospel, Soul, soul, take thy rest, live at ease. Luke 12. 19.

IU. Point. What men do in these ways: namely, the greatest part of men walk
in the broad way; but few in the narrow way.

Hence we learn sundry instructions. I. We must not be offended or
discouraged when we see most men live either in a false religion, or in gross
impiety: for the greatest part walk in the broad way. II. We must not follow
the multitude in matters of religion, but those that follow Christ, the
Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles: for the most go wide, and the fewest hold
the right way of life. III. That universality is no mark of a true Church:
for the true Church is in the strait way, but therein the smallest number
walk. IV. Universal grace, is a Universal grace con^^^ed.
devise of man: for few fiade the way of life, and therefore it is hid and
unknown. If it be said, that all might find it if they would: I answer, they
can not: for the word finding, does presuppose a seeking; as if Christ had
said, though many give themselves to seek the way of life, yet few they be
that find it. The like phrase we have, Matt. 24. 38. In the days of Noah they
ate and drank; that is, they gave themselves to eating and drinking. Again,
Saint Luke has it thus, and shall not be able to find it: why then do not
the most find the way to life? Is it because they seek it not? no verily:
Saint Luke denies that: Why then is the way hid to the most, and revealed to
few? this Christ teaches us; because it so pleases God, Matthew. 11. 25, 26.

U. Point, What must we do in regard of these two ways? we must Our duty
(...) r guard of these two ways. Luke 13. 24.
enter, yea (as Luke has it) strive to enter into the strait way: and to
pass by the broad way. This is the commandment of our Savior Christ: wherein
three things are enjoined us: first, that we must come into this strait way,
and eschew the broad way: secondly, we must not be discouraged for the
straitnes of the way: and thirdly, we must strive to enter in.

The first is a necessary duty in these times: for we are like unto I. Charge.
mariners which pass by many pleasant countries, and stately buildings, and
do only behold them a far off, but not enter into them nor land upon them.
We must therefore cease only to talk of the way of life, How to walk in the
way of life.
and begin to walk in it. If any shall ask, how we may come to walk in
this way: I answer, read Ier. 6. 16. see there a notable lesson: First, we must
inquire which is the old way, for the old way is the right 1
way. But where shall we learn out the old way? Answ. In the holy Bible: there
shall we see the way that the Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles went. Secondly,
having found the right way we must labor 2
to know all the turnings of it. We must see what things we are to believe and
do, having the mystery of faith in a good conscience, 1. Tim. 3. 9. Thirdly,
we must walk in this way, Ier. 6. 16. for it is not 3
sufficient to know the will of God, and to make profession of religion, but we
must put in practice the things which we know. And lastly, we must be
circumspect to keep our selves in the right way. Hagg. 1. 5. Set your hearts
on your ways: Psalm. 119. 59. I considered my ways, and turned my feet unto
thy testimonies.

The second charge, in this commandments, that when we walk II. Charge.
in the way to life, the straitnes of the way must not discourage us from going
forward therein. This is the principal point intended by our Savior Christ in
this commandment, even to arm us with courage How to get courage against the
straitnes of this way. 1. Duty.
and perseverance against afflictions, crosses, and temptations which might
dismay and daunt us in this way. And in this charge we are taught sundry
weighty duties to be practiced in the profession of Christ's true religion. I.
Duty. That we are not to give to our selves the liberty of heart which nature
desires in all of us; but we must restrain our selves thereof, and bring our
minds, our thoughts, affections, our wills, speeches, and actions into the
straites of the word of God. This restraint of our natural desire is twofold:
by the law, and by the Gospel. In the Law every commandment ministers his
particular restraint, as we shall see in their order.

The first Commandment concerns the having of the true God for How the law
restraines our natural desires. 1. Commandment.
our God. By nature we take liberty to our selves to conceive of God at our
own pleasure: for commonly men conceive of God out of the Trimtie, and worship
the persons, one out of another: the Jew, the Turk, and all the heathen will
not be restrained of this liberty: but the people of God who submit themselves
to his word, they by this law are restrained of this natural desire, and are
taught to choose and have to themselves the true God for their God; and to
conceive aright of this God; namely, that he is one in essence and three in
person, and that the persons must be worshipped in the unity of the godhead:
for as they are one in nature, so we must unite them in one and the same
worship. Again, by nature we take liberty to our selves to forget the true
God, and in our own hearts do set up a false god unto our selves: some make
riches their God, some honors, some pleasures: for look whereon a man
bestows his heart and his affections, as his love, his fear, and confidence,
that he makes his god: and hence it comes that some in judgment hold the true
God, and yet have a false god unto themselves in their hearts: but the first
commandment restrains us of this liberty also: and it inioynes us to bestow
our whole heart, and all our affections on the true God: loving, fearing, and
trusting in him above all. Thirdly, our nature is to exalt our selves, and to
ascribe some thing unto our selves, esteeming the good things that be in us, as
of our selves; and as though they were our own: whereby we take to our selves
some thing that is proper to God, becoming like to the prodigal child which
would have his portion to himself severed from his father. With this natural
pride was David puffed up, when he numbered the people. But the first
commandment restraines us of this also, perscribing unto us the duty of
inward adoration; which we perform, first, when we give unto him all the
honor that we can, esteeming our selves but dust and ashes, and ascribing unto
him all the good that is in us, as from him: secondly, when we subject our
selves unto him wholly as to our creator, and do submit our hearts, wills,
and conscience to his holy word: and these be the strait ways which this
commandment perscribes us.

The 2. commandment concerns Gods outward worship: and it Restraints in the
2. Com.
puts unto us many restraints. Our nature desires to conceive of God in some
form, and to represent him in some image; but the Lord is a spirit, and this
commandment inioynes us to worship him in spirit and truth, and to conceive of
him in his works and properties, restraining our natural desires of
conceiving and representing God. Secondly, it is our nature to perform outward
worship unto God only, but for any further thing we would take liberty to
our selves; we would give him only the outward bodily worship, as come to
Church, hear the word, pray outwardly, and receive the Sacraments: but the
Lord in this commandment gives us charge, that with as great care and
conscience, we should give unto him the inward worship of the heart; for god
must be served with the whole man, our love, and fear, and trust in God, must
be comfortable to our outward worship. Further, every man almost can be content
to profess religion, and to perform so much as the laws of his country
require for the service of God; but yet they would take liberty in their
callings, to live as they list: but Gods commandment restraines this desire
also. We must hold religion not only in the Church, but also show the same in
our lives and conuersations; and therefore is the second table joined with the
first, to teach us that we must perform duty to God in the service of man.

The third commandment concerns the holy use of the holy things Restraints in
the 3. Com.
of God, especially of his word and Sacraments. Now for the outward work of
hearing the word, and receiving the Sacraments, we are content to perform
them; but we would have God think himself satisfied with the work done. But
this commandment restrains us of this desire, inioyning us not only to use
his holy things, but also in an holy manner; that is, with repenting and
believing hearts: for they are not holy to us, unless we use them in and by
faith and repentance. Again, we take liberty to use Gods name in oaths, and
specially in vows, as in baptism, which we renew when we come to the Lords
table: but herein we ordinarily abuse this his holy name, not having like care
to make good our vows unto God, as we have to make them.

The 4. commandment concerns the time of Gods worship: we our Restraints in
the 4. Com.
selves would have all times in our own disposing, and we think it hard to be
restrained of any time; but this commandment restraines us of this desire,
binding us in conscience to give one day in seven to the honor of God in his
public and solemn worship.

The 5. Comm, concerns the giving of honor and reverence to Superiors:
Restraints in the 5. Com.
and it restraines us of our natural desire, which is to seek for, and to
take honor unto our selves alone; for this inioyneth us to give honor one to
another, especially to them to whom it belongs, as to all superiors in
authority, in gifts or age: let this be your honor, says Paul, to give
honor to whom it belongs, Romans 13. 7.

The sixth Commandment concerns murder; and it restrains our Restraints in
the 6.
natural desire, which is, upon small occasion to conceive malice and to bear
grudging against our brother, forbidding all thoughts, words, deeds, and
gestures, which tend to the impairing or destroying of our neighbors life and
person.

The 7. Commandment concerns chastity: and it restraines man's Restraints in
the 7.
nature, which desires to take liberty in uncleanness and fornication both of
heart and life: and it binds us to abstain from all speech, action, or
gesture, which tends to the hindrance of our own, or of our neighbors
chastity: for God is holy and pure, and so ought our bodies and minds to be,
which are temples of his blessed spirit.

The 8. Commandment concerns our neighbors goods: and it restraines
Restraints in the 8.
our corrupt nature, which desires to have liberty by all means good and bad
to intich our selves. And it inioyneth us both in will and word, and in
traffic also, to seek the common good, and the good of those with whom we
live. Again, this also restraines our natural desire of abundance, inioyning
us to seek only for necessaries, as food and raiment: for we may not seek
to be rich, yet if God give us more then things necessary in the labors of our
calling, then we are to bless God for them, and to use them to his glory:
this is a strait way to the worldly man, but it must stand, and we must walk
in it, if we would enter into life.

The 9. Commandment concerns our neighbors good name: and Restraints in the
9.
it restraines us of our natural desire, which is to conceive and speak unto
others, as also to receive from others, evil report of our neighbor: and on
the contrary it inioynes us, by all good means to seek to preserve our
neighbors good name and credit.

The 10. Commandment is touching lust. When as we hurt no man in word or
deed, then we take it for granted, that we may think Restraints in the 10.
what we will, no laws restrain thought; that we hold to be free. But this
Commandment restraines the very first motions of our hearts, which tend to
hurt our brothers life, chastity, goods, or good name, though they nouer come
into practice, yea though we never give consent of will thereto. And these are
the restraints of the Law, whereto we must conform our selves, if we would
enter into life.

Now follow the restraints of the Gospel, which is a part of Gods word touching
remission of sins and salvation. By nature we desire Restraints of man^
desires by the Gospel. Math. 19. 26.
to stand upright and righteous before God by some good thing in our selves: as
the rich man in the Gospel, he demands of Christ, What good thing shall I do
to be saved* Again, it is our nature not to look to be saved by any thing out
of our selves; if we have nothing else, our good meaning and good hope must save
us: but the Gospel restraines us of these desires, and enioyneth us to renounce
our selves in the matter of salvation, and all that is in us: and to depend on
a righteousness out of our selves in the person of Christ, which is his
obedience and suffering. Again, we naturally desire to enjoy Gods mercy by
sense and feeling; but the Gospel restraines us of this kind of assurance,
which comes by sense and feeling, and enioynes us to hold and keep Gods mercy
by believing only, both in life and death, though we have no sense thereof at
all.

Further, the Gospel renues the law for the manner of loving: for the moral
law required that we should love another as we do our selves, but the Gospel
requires us to love one another as Christ loved us; which is a greater measure
of love then the law required. For Christ loved us more then himself: for he
gave himself for us: and so ought we to love even our enemies. And thus we see
how the Gospel also restraines us from following our own natural desires, and
inioyneth us to walk in the narrow way to life: whereto, as also to the
restraints of the law, we must apply our selves, our thoughts, words, and
deeds: so doing we walk in the strait way that leads unto life: but if we
any way exempt our selves according to our natural desire from any of these
restraints, we then walk in the broad way that leads to destruction.

II. Duty. Seeing we must be content with the straitnes of the way, Su^fer
afflication patiently.
we learn, that when God lays any crosses or afflictions upon us, we must not
repine or grudge, but bear the same with patience, and suffer God to break us
of our own wills, resting contented in our selves with the will of God alone:
for this is grace and a sure testimony that we walk in the strait way to life.

III. Duty. In the case of confession and profession of true religion, Our
duti^ in profession of the tr^d^*
when we be called thereto, we must be content to forsake goods, friends, yea
and life it self, rather then by inioying them suffer our selves to be driven
out of this strait way to life: my life (says Paul) is not dear unto me, so
that I may fulfull my course mith joy, Act. 20. 24.

Lastly, whosoever is puffed up with the pride of his own heart, is too
stately to stoop under the strait^ ^^o^e that leads to the way of life* he
therefore that would walk (...) this strait way, must cast away all pride of
heart, and humble himself for his own sins, making himself nothing in
himself: Math. 18. 3, 4. Except you be converted and become as little children
(who are not proud and hawtie) ye cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven: But
he that humbles himself as this little child, the same is the greatest in the
kingdom of heaven.

The third charge given us by our Savior Christ concerning the III. (...).
St^^^^ to enter.
strait way of life, is noted by S. Luke; that we must strive to enter into it.
From whence we are taught, that our principal care must be above all things to
come into the way of life everlasting, so much the word striving imports. It is
said, that when John first preached, the kingdom of heaven suffered violence,
and the violent took it by force: that Man ^. 11. 12.
is, their was such forwardnes and zeal in them that heard John preach, to
procure to themselves the kingdom of heaven, that they strove most earnestly
to get in. David swear unto the Lord, and vowed a vow Psalm. 132. 2, 3, 4, 5.
unto the mighty God of Jacob, that he would not enter into the tabernacle of
his house, nor come upon his bed, nor suffer his eyes to sleep, till he had
sound a place for God's Ark: where he with the rest of his people might come
and pray unto the Lord, and receive answer from him again. Now look what
zeal was in them that heard John, and what care was in David for the outward
place of Gods worship, the like must be in every one of us for the obtaining of
reconciliation and life everlasting.

Uses. I. Hereby many that live in the Church of God may justly be (...)
^^demned.
reproved: for a number there be that though they may partake of the word and
Sacraments, yet are most negligent of their salvation, using no means to
obtain reconciliation with God, and to come by life everlasting: and this they
do profess, that they will leave all to God, relying wholly on his mercy
without using any means on their parts to attain thereto. But these men sin
most grievously, and are their own deadly enemies: for they ought to consider
this commandment, which condemns their security, and straightly inioynes
every one, to strive to come into the strait way, and to walk therein.

And because this duty is so necessary, I will use some reasons to (...) to
(...). 1. The danger of ^e^ur^^i^. ^^d. ^6. 29. 30
persuade them hereto. I. Consider this: when the Philistims were assembled,
and had Samson in the midst among them to make them sport, if they had known
what he was about to do, when he leaned to the pillars of the house where they
sat, they would have preassed to the doors and windows, and there have
striuen to have got out, because of the imminent danger that was unto their
bodily lives: well, all those persons that are cold in their profession, and
careless of religion, they have the wrath of God hanging over their heads; and
while they walk thus dissolutely in the broad way, their condemnation sleeps
not, but makes post have upon them: and if they continue and go forward in
this carelsse course, they shall as certainly perish in Gods wrath as the
Philistims did by the hand of Samson: and therefore as they desire to escape
damnation, so let them be careful to cast off this damnable security.

II. Reason. If an Angel from heaven should come and assure us The assurance of
the pe^^tent.
from God that life everlasting did belong unto us; oh we would count it a
blessed message: well, look when we turn from the broad way, and walk in
this strait way of life, we have as good security of our salvation, as if an
Angel from heaven should certify us thereof: for true repentance is an
infallible note of a child of God, to whom belongs the kingdom of heaven. The
consideration whereof ought to stir up all careless persons to return from
their evil ways, and to strive to come into this strait way, and to walk
therein unto the end.

And yet to enduce them further to this duty, I will seek to take Excuses of
secure persons removed.
from them those excuses which they make to themselves. First, they say, God is
merciful, and therefore they will rely thereon, and take no further care for
their souls. Answ. God indeed is merciful: but his mercy is only found of
them that strive to enter in at the strait gate; as for those that walk in
the broad way it belongs not to them: Deutr. 29. 19, 20. And if the righteous
scarsely be saved, where shall the ungodly appear, 1. Pet. 4. 18. Secondly,
they say, at least in heart, 2. Excuse.
that it is the easiest matter in the world to come by life everlasting: if
they can call on God when they are dying, all is well: and therefore they will
not lend their outward ^ares to hear, nor apply their minds to conceive and
learn that which they may do by nature: and if they do come to the
congregation, yet it is for custom, or for fear of punishment, not for
conscience. But these men deceive themselves, they consider not what Peter
says, that the righteous shall hardly be saved: and what S. Luke adds to
this exhortation of Christ, that many shall seek to enter into the door of
life, and shall not be able; because they neglected the time of grace and used
not good means in due season. Thirdly, they make this common objection, that
either they are elect 3. Excus^, from Gods predestination.
or reprobate: if they be elect, then let them live as they list, they shall be
saved: but if God have eternally rejected them, though they live never so
religiously, yet they shall be condemned: and many deceive themselves with
this reason. But they must know, that they judge amiss of Gods decree; and the
wickedness of this reason may appear by the like: God has decreed the
certain tea^^e of every man's life in this world, as well as his future estate
after this life. Now if any man hereupon should reason thus; If God have
decreed that I shall live longer, then I shall surely live: if he have decreed
that I shall live no longer, then I shall surely die, for Gods decree must
stand; and therefore I will neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep, nor use
means to preserve my life: if any should thus do upon this ground, would not
all men judge him to be a murderer of himself? And surely, he is no less a
murderer of his soul, that upon Gods predestination, will take occasion of
liberty, to live as he list; for Gods decree of the end, includes the
ordinary means that bring thereto. Again, they are to know, that there is a
double will of God; his revealed will made known in his word; and his secret
or unrevealed will, whereby he has determined with himself what shall be the
eternal estate of every person, which is not known to us ordinarily, but by
the event. The revealed will of God must be the rule of our obedience, and
according to it must we frame and square our lives; but his secret will we must
honor and reverence, not making any rules from it, whereby to frame our lives.
Now these persons they leave the written word, and betake themselves to his
unrevealed will, and out of it will make rules how they will live; but herein
they sin greatly, in framing to themselves new rules, leaving his word,
whereby they should order and guide their lives. Thirdly, I answer, that this
reason has in it a plain falsehood; for they that are predestinate to life,
are chosen to live a godly life, in faith, repentance, and obedience, that they
might be like to the image of his son, Romans 8. 29. And indeed, it is
impossible that he which lives in wickedness all his life long, and so dies,
should be saved; as also that he which lives a godly life unto the end, should
be condemned: for God has decreed the means, as well as the end.

II. Use. This charge of Christ, for striving to enter in at the strait The
better sort are slack i^ striving.
door, corrects also a second sort of men, which are of the better sort; for
commonly the best men are too careless in regard of this duty of striving:
and it may be said of us, as Christ said of the Church of Laodicea, Revel. 3.
15. we are neither hot nor cold: we strive not to go one before another in
holy duties, worldly cares and pleasures do dull us and make us faint in this
duty of striving. But we must take heed of security, and revive our
obedience to this commandment, making this our principal care, to come to
life eternal: and all worldly care must come under this; for consider the
fearful judgment that hangs over such as are slack in this duty; it is
destruction, as well as to those that are profane: because thou art neither
hot nor cold I will spue thee out of my mouth; for seeing that God continues
his Gospel unto us, we ought answerably to increase in knowledge, in faith,
and in all obedience. David professes that his heart brake in sunder for the
desire that he had to Gods judgments always, Psalm. 119. 20. We commonly spend
our wit and strength about worldly affairs, in matter of commodity and
delight: but David's practice ought to be a pattern unto us, for our chiefest
strife must be to attain eternal life.

Verse 15. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves.
From this verse to the twentieth is contained the sixth part of this 11. part
of Christ's sermon.
Chapter, and the eleventh part of Christ's sermon, concerning the discerning
and avoiding of false Prophets. And it has an excellent dependence on the
former point of exhortation; for having given commandment to walk in the
strait way, now like a careful guide he forewarnes us of the principal
impediments in this way, which be false Prophets and Seducers, who are like
thieves and Pirates to hinder us in this way. Touching them three things are
here set down by Christ; First, a commandment, to beware of them: secondly,
the danger that comes by them; they come in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they
are ravening wolves: and thirdly, the means whereby to judge and discern of
them; from the 16. verse to the 20.

For the commandment: Beware of false Prophets: that is, of false What mak^^ a
false Prophet.
Teachers. In a false Teacher two things are required; First, he must
maintain some error that ouerturnes true faith and religion: for every
erroneous opinion which a man holds will not make him a false Prophet, but only
a fundamental errors. Secondly, besides the holding of some damnable error
in his own heart, a false Prophet must also be a seducer, such a one as
labors to make a faction, withdrawing men from true religion, and from true
faith, and persuading them both in private and publicly, to receive his
error. And that both these are required to make a false Prophet, the Scripture
is plain; There shall be false Teachers among you (says Saint Peter) which
privily shall bring in damnable heresies, 2. Pet. 2. 1. There is the first
property: and for the second, that they must be seducers, Christ himself
teaches us, Matthew. 24. 24. There shall come false Christ's, and false Prophets,
and shall sh^we great signs and wonders, so as if it were possible, they
should deceive the very elect. And of both these properties jointly S. Paul
speaks, Romans 16. 17. I beseech you brethren, mark them diligently which
cause division and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have received,
and avoid them; for they that are such, serve not the Lord but their own
bellies, and with fair speech and sl^ttering deceive the hearts of the simple.
So then The meaning.
Christ's meaning in this commandment is this; You shall be troubled with many
false Prophets, which shall bring in damnable doctrines among you, and withal
labor to seduce you from the truth, and therefore take heed of them.

And these two notes we must mark in a false Teacher, to distinguish False
Prophets di^f^r from schismatikes.
him from a schismatike, and from an hypocrite; for every false Teacher is a
schismatike, but every schismatike is not a false Teacher. If we would have
examples of false Teachers, behold the Jesuits and Jesuits and Priests are
false Teachers. Familists and Arrians.
Romish Priests, for they come among us, and bring false doctrine, with intent
to deceive and seduce our people. Such likewise are the Family of love, and
such were the Arrians in time past, that denied the godhead of Christ: as for
others that hold private errors, not rasing the foundation, neither seeking to
seduce others, they may be hypocrites, schismatikes, and bad Christians, but
they are not false Prophets. Thus much for the meaning of the commandment.

The Uses. 1. By this caveat Christ would teach us, that the devil Satan's
malice against the Church.
shows his exceeding great malice against Gods Church and people, in these
last times of the world; he subornes false Teachers to bring in damnable
doctrine, and mooues them to seduce men from true religion. This thing Christ
did plainly foretell, Matthew. 24. 24. and Saint Paul charge the Elders of
Ephesus, to take heed unto themselves and to their flocks; for I know (says
he) that after my departing shall grievous wolves Act. 20. 28, 29, 30.
enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Moreover, of your own selves
shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw Disciples after them. And
Saint Peter foretells of the like, as we heard before, 2. Pet. 2. 1. The The
abundance of he^etikes in the primi^iue Church.
truth hereof is verefied by experience; for in the first four hundred years
after Christ, which were the prime and chiefest times of the Church, there
arose fourscore and eight several kinds of false Prophets, which seduced men
from the faith, and true religion, and prevailed greatly. And no doubt in the
end of the world Satan will now show his malice as great against the Church, as
he did then: and therefore Christ bids take heed of them. And for this cause,
when we see men that profess religion, fall away to heresy, and be corrupted,
seeking also to seduce others, we must not much marvel at it, or be thereby
discouraged; but rather watch more carefully, for the devil will stir up
false Prophets daiely to deceive the Church of God.

II. Instruction. From this commandment we may also see, that Our weakness
in the faith.
we are feeble, full of weakness in the faith, so as a little thing will
easily make us forsake our faith and true religion; if this were not so, what
should we need this exhortation? who was more courageous and forward in
profession then Peter? and yet the voice of a silly damsel made him deny his
master, and to forswear his faith and religion. The Galatians received the
Gospel so gladly from Paul at the first, that he Gal. 4. 15.
professesseth, they would have plucked out their own eyes to have done him Gal.
1. 6.
good; and yet when he writ unto them, he wonders they were so soon fallen to
another Gospel, receiving the doctrine of justification by works. Yea, this
shows, that we have itching ears, whereby we will readily Our itching humo^r
in matters of religion.
and willingly receive wholesome doctrine for a time, but soon after, desire
new doctrine again; like unto the Jews, who for a while delighted in the
light of John's ministry, Ioh. 5. 35. and to the old Israelites, who liked
Manna at the first, but after a while were weary of it, and complained that
their soul dried away, whereupon they lusted after the fleshpots of Egypt
again. So we at the first did willingly receive the Gospel of Christ; but now
many wax weary with it, and begin to like of Popish doctrine, preferring
their corrupt writers, before those that have been the restorers of true
religion unto us.

III. Instruct. We must labor to maintain faith, and good conscience, We must
be constant in the faith.
and not suffer our selves to be drawn therefrom: by Gods mercy we have had
the Gospel of truth among us a long time, and do still enjoy it: for which we
have great cause to praise the name of God, and in this regard we must labor
to be constant in holding it, yea to live and die with it. This is the
principal point which Christ here aims at, and therefore we must carefully
learn it: and for this purpose let us remember these particular directions
which follow. First, that God Directions to maintain the truth.
having restored unto us true religion, does require we should love it as the
chiefest treasure that ever this kingdom enjoyed. Wicked Ahab could not abide
1. Ki. 21, 20
Elias and Cha. 22. 8.
Michaiah Gods true Prophets, but hated them; for which cause God left him to
himself, and suffered him to be seduced by four hundred false Prophets of
Baal, and thereby brought him to destruction. And the Apostle speaking of the
kingdom of Antichrist, says, that God therein gives men up to strong illusions
that they should believe lies, because they have not loved the truth, 1. These.
2. 10. 11. Now this love we must show by our obedience in duties of piety to
God, and in the exercise of justice and mercy toward our brethren, else God
will translate his Gospel from us, and give it to a nation that will bring forth
the fruits thereof.

A second rule to be observed for the maintaining of true religion is 2. Rule.
Restorers of religion ought to be had in account.
this; that ministers especially, and those that intend that calling, should
highly esteem and reverently account of those men and their writings, which by
Gods mercy have been the means to restore unto us pure religion; for though
they were men subject to error, and in some things might slip, yet they were
the worthy instruments of Gods mercy, for the planting of his Gospel among us,
which since their time has been sealed with the blood of many Martyrs, in
England, Germany, and elsewhere: in which regard, though we must only depend
on the pure word of God for certainty of truth, yet we are to give much unto
them, and be followers of them, for the substance of religion, wherein they do
most soundly consent in one truth. This I note, because they begin to be in
disgrace with many, and corrupt Popish writers are far better accounted of.

Thirdly, if any among us doubt of any point in religion, let him do 3. Rule.
How to know the truth in religion.
these two things for his resolution, which are the ordinary means to know
the truth; First, let him search the holy Scriptures diligently, not by private
study only, but by conference with the godly. Secondly, let him in true
humility of heart pray unto God for the illumination of his spirit, whereby he
may in mind rightly conceive of the truth, embrace it by faith in his heart,
and honor it by obedience in his life: thus doing constantly, and in
sincerity he shall be sure to be preserved from error, both final and
fundamental, and in due time shall know the truth; for the promise is, Ask
and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, verse 12. and Saint James says,
If any man lack wisdom, necessary for Iam. 1. 5.
his salvation, let him ask of God, using withal, other lawful means to
come thereby, and it shall be given unto him. Hereto may be added this good
help for satisfaction in this case of doubting; namely, to have recourse to the
general confessions of reformed Churches, which may be had in that notable
book, The Harmony of Confessions: for although private men may err, as also
particular Churches, not only severally, but jointly in some things in this
world; yet the general consent of reformed Churches may be a good direction to
the knowledge of the truth, and a good persuasion to constancy therein.

Fourthly, we must keep a good conscience, if we would preserve the 4. Rule.
truth and purity of religion; for faith and good conscience go always
together, whereupon Saint Paul persuading Timothy to this duty, bids him have
faith and a good conscience, which some have put away, and as concerning faith
have made shipwreck, 1. Tim. 1. 19. where a good conscience is resembled to a
ship which saileth over the sea of this world, being laden with faith, that
is, with true religion, and other spiritual graces needful to salvation. Now
if the ship of our conscience be crazie and unsound, then is our faith and
salvation in great danger: and therefore we must endeavor in all things to
have a clear conscience both toward God and toward men.

IU. Instruct. This commandment of our Savior Christ, to beware Society with
false Prophets is unlawful.
of false Prophets, does bar the Church of God, and every member thereof,
from conuersing with false Prophets, after they be convicted to be such. It
was Eues fault to admit conference with the devil in the serpent, and all of
us feel the smart thereof at this day. It was Paul's counsel to the Romans, to
mark them diligently which caused Romans 16. 17.
division and offenses among them, contrary to the doctrine which they had
learned, and to avoid them: and Saint John plainly forbids this society with
them, 2. Epist. verse 10. Receive not him to thine house, neither bid him God
speed, that comes to teach you, and brings not this doctrine: yea, though we
(says Paul) or an Angel from heaven teach you otherwise then that which we
have preached unto you, hold him accursed, Galat. 1. 8. In the histories of the
Church, it is recorded, that S. John E^seb. Recl. hist. l. 3. c. 25.
would not wash himself in the same bath wherein Cerinthus an heretic was
washing himself, nor abide under the same roof, but leaped out, and persuaded
others so to do. And indeed by Eues example we may see the danger of
conference with false Prophets; for the same evil spirit speaks in them.

Now this shows, first, that the practice of many students is dangerous,
Delight in Popish writers unlawful.
and against this commandment, who take delight in popish Commentaries and
postils, ascribing to them more learning and Judgment, then can be sound in
those writers that were the restorers of true religion unto us: and hence it
is, that they labor more in them, then in the Scripture it self, or in other
sound writers thereupon. But if there be any false Prophet at this day, it is
the Papist, and their writings are dangerous to be read of those that are not
well grounded in the truth; for by reading we have a kind of familiarity with
them, and indeed many suck out of them at unawares, much venim in weighty
points of doctrine and religion. We ought rather to do with them, as the
believers of Ephesus did with their books of curious Arts; namely, bring Act.
19 19.
them out and burn them, then take such delight in them: albeit this must be
granted, it is both lawful and necessary, for the defense of the truth, that
men of sound judgment and piety do labor in them.

Secondly, hence also it may appear, that it cannot be but a great Free sale
of heretical books is dangerous.
hindrance to true religion, that heretical books may be publicly sold to
any one that will buie them, without due consideration whether the party have
gifts to discern of truth from falsehood; in the Popish Church they are more
careful, they permit not a man to read an heretics book (as they call us
Protestants) without leave, and that under a great penalty, which is severely
inflicted upon offenders that way.

V. Instruct. This commandment also shows that it is not lawful Toleration
of false religion unlawful.
to grant to any man, or to any people, the liberty of their own conscience
in the matters of religion, permitting them to profess what religion they
will; for how should false Prophets be avoided, when every man may freely
profess what he will in religion? All governors therefore must follow the
practice of good king Josias, who assembled all Judah, and caused all his people
to hear the word of the Lord, and to stand to that religion which the book of
God made known unto them, 2. Chro. 34. 32.

V. Doctr. We have from this commandment, an answer to the To separate from
Rome, no schism.
false charge of the Church of Rome, who accuse us of schism and apostacy,
because we separate from their Church. But we must know, that the schism and
apostacy is there where the cause of departing is, which indeed is not in us,
who do no more herein but obey this commandment of Christ: the cause is in
them, who are become false prophets, whom we must avoid.

Here yet two questions may be demanded: I. Whether a false Whether a false
Prophet should be put to death.
Prophet may be put to death, seeing Christ bids only to beware of them? Answ.
Christ here speaks to his Apostles, and to other of his auditors, that were
private men, whose duty raught no further; but yet the truth is, that a false
Prophet being iudicially convicted, is to be put to death: the word of God
elsewhere is plain, Leuit. 24. 14. there is both a commandment and a
practice, Every blasphemer must die. This wicked Iesabel knew well, who under
pretense of blasphemy, caused 1. Kin. 21. 10. 13.
Naboth to be put to death: and hereupon the Jews sought to put Christ to
death. Yea, Nabuchadnezzar an heathen king, having but a Dan. 3 29.
taste of this, that the God of Israel was the true God, made this law, that
whosoever blasphemed the God of Israel should die. And it stands with equity,
for he that reuiles his lawful Prince must die, and that justly; how much
more then ought he to die, that blasphemes the living God, who is king of
kings? Now every false Prophet is a blasphemer; for his opinions are
blasphemies against the truth of God: and therefore he ought to die. The
express will of God herein is manifest, Dout. 15. begin. A Prophet comes and
works miracles, and shows signs that come to pass, yet if he thereupon
entice the people to idolatry, he must be slame: and this is one way whereby
the civil Magistrate must help the people to avoid a false Prophet.

II. Quest. Why does God then suffer such to live in his Church, Why God
suffers false Prophets.
as do seduce men? Answ. For two causes; First, that such as hold the truth in
sincerity, may be known, 1. Cor. 11. 18. Secondly, for the punishment of the
wicked and ungodly, who receive not the love of the truth; to seduce them by
strong illusions, and to cause them to believe lies. 2. Th* 2. 11, 11


The second point. The danger of false Prophets: They come in sheeps Danger of
false Prophets.
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. In these words Christ
alludeth to the practice of false Prophets in former times, who counterfeited
the true Prophets in their attire; for the ancient Prophets were usually
clothed in rough and course attire: Elias in regard of his garments, is called
an hairie man, 2. Kin. 1. 8. and John Baptist had his garment of Camels hair,
Math. 3. 4. And the false Prophets did counterfeit the true Prophets in their
attire, for this end; that they might the more easily deceive the people; as
is most plain, Zak. 13. 4. where the Lord says of false Prophets, that they
shall not wear a rough garment to deceive: for when they wore such course
attire, made either of sheep skins, or sheeps wool, wherewith the true
Prophets were usually clothed, they sought hereby to persuade the people, that
they had the hearts of the true Prophets; when as indeed they were full fraught
with damnable errors. Now Christ's meaning in this allusion, is to show that
false Prophets have plausible pretenses for their damnable doctrine, and
therefore are the more dangerous. Yet that we may the better perceive the danger
7. Pretenses of false prophets 1. Allegation of scripture.
of false Prophets, I will a little stand to describe their clothing; that is,
their pretenses of deceit. They may be reduced to 7. heads: the first is
allegation of Scripture, which they will as often use as the true Prophet; and
hereby they blind the eyes of many. But the truth is, that in alleging
Scripture, they deprave and change the sense, and either add to, or detract
from the words, following rightly their master Satan, Mat. 4. 6. who alleged
Scripture to Christ, but left out the principal point whereto the promise was
made; namely, walking in thy ways. And thus deal the Papists as this day,
sometimes they mangle the text, and alter the sense, sometime they leave the
Scripture and go to traditions, to Councels, and Fathers. This also is the
practice of the family of love, and of the Anabaptists, who turn the natural
sense of scripture into mystical allegories.

The second cloak or pretense, is the depth of their learning. Reuelat. 2.
Deep learning.
2. 24. The heresy of the Nicolaitans was by themselves called profound
learning, but by the holy Ghost, the deepenesse of Satan. So play the Papists
at this day for sundry points of their religion; for they hold, that because
the church in the Apostles time was weak in knowledge, Rhem. on Heb. ^ sect. 8
and feeble in faith, therefore the Apostles omitted sundry deep points,
especially concerning the mass, which yet the Church receiving by tradition,
does now teach plainly and fully. But though they match Co^c. Trid. sess. 4.
decr. 2.
these doctrines of the Church with the holy Scripture, yet we need not to
trouble our selves therewith; for in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles
all things necessary to salvation are made known, and we must not receive any
doctrine that cannot be confirmed thence: and therefore in the parable, Luke
16. 3. Abraham prefers Moses and the Prophets, before visions and revelations
from the dead.

The 3. cloak and pretense. To assume to themselves the persons and 3. Goodly
ti^^es.
titles of most worthy men: 2. Cor. 11. 13. Paul speaks of such deceivers that
took to them the name of the Apostles of Christ, therein following their
master Satan, who can transform himself into an angel of light. See this in
the Papists, especially in the Pope, ho will be Christ's v^car* Peter's
successor, and the servant of servants. The doctors call themselves
Ceraphicall and Angelical doctors, and the Church of Rome must be the true
Church: but all this is but counterfeit deceit, for succession in place only
from Peter and from Christ himself, is no certain note of truth. The Scribes
and Pharisees had their succession from Aaron appointed by God, and yet Christ
bids his Disciples take heed of the leaven of their doctrine, Matthew. 16. 12.
and cal^ them the blind leaders of the blind. Succession then in true doctrine,
is the only and sure note of true religion.

The 4. cloak or pretense, is forged and counterfeit humility: this 4. Fai^ed
humility. Colos 2. 18. and 23.
Paul notes in false Apostles among the Colossians; First, they would not
worship God directly, but in and by the Angels: Secondly, they used much bodily
exercise, afflicting their own bodies: and thirdly, their worship was
^il-worship, devised by themselves. If we would have a lively example hereof,
behold the Romish Priests; they come to God in the mediation of Saints; their
whole religion stands in bodily exercises, so as many of their orders are
famous for their whippings and such like trumperie, and their worship of God is
will worship, devised by men.

The 5. pretense is, working miracles: hereby they labor to confirm ^.
Working miracles.
their doctrine, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. The coming of Antichrist that ^an of sin is
with signs and lying wonders, through Satan's working, and of such God
forewarnes his people, Deuteronomy. 13. that they should not be d^a^ne to Idolatry
for a miracle; for either they be false miracles and lying ^onders, or if they
be true miracles (as God may suffer such to be wrought by false Prophets, for
the plague and punishment of the unthankful world) yet their end is to
deceive, and to draw men into error from the truth. We have ordinary
experience of this pretense among the Romish Priests, who by ^orcerie cast out
devils, and cure strange diseases, and so delude the simple: but this must not
draw us from the truth. A miraculous work truly done, is not a sufficient
warrant of a doctrine in religion; for true and sound doctrine may want this
confirmation, Ioh. 10. 41. and false doctrine may have it, as Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2.
etc.

The 6. pretense, is fair speeches and blessings, pretending the good 6 Fair
speeches.
and salvation of those to whom they come: see this Romans 16. 18. With fair
speech and flattering (^aith Paul of false Apostles) they deceive the hearts of
the simple: so dealt Satan with Eve, he made show that he had some good thing
to tell her, whereby their state might be bettered, but it turned to theirs and
our destruction. So did the four hundred 1. King. 22. ^.
false Prophets of Baal, contrary to the true Prophet Michaiah, prophecy good
success to Ahab in his war against the Aramites; but his harkning to them cost
him his life. And so dealt Hananie with the Jews, when they were besieged by
the King of Babels army, contrary to Ieremies counsel he prophesied peace
and safety; but it turned both to his own and to their destruction, Ier. 28.
1, 2. etc.

The 7. pretense, is boldness and constancy in suffering for their opinions*
7. Boldness in suffering.
for a man in obstinacy may live and die for error, as well as the child of
God may do for the truth. Constancy in opinion is no sure note whereby to
judge a true Prophet; for many heretics have suffered death confidently for
the maintenance of their damnable heresies.

Thus we see the pretenses of false Prophets; now hereto we must add this
second point, to wit, that for all this, they be but wolves, because by their
damnable doctrine, they seek to poison and corrupt the souls of simple men.
If it be said, they have no such intent, they themselves think it to be the
truth: I answer, that may be true in some, but this clears them not from
being wolves; for the devil that has deluded them, who is their Lord and
master, does by them dangerously delude and deceive the simple.

The Use. 1. Considering this danger of false Prophets, we must practice Be
wise as serpents.
Christ's lesson, Mat. 10. 16. Be simple as doves, that is, be innocent and
harmless, thinking evil of none, neither intending evil or offense to any,
in thought, word, or deed: and yet we must be wise as serpents, who have great
subtlety in saving and defending their head from harm: so must every one that
looks to be saved, labor for so much wisdom, whereby he may preserve
himself from the hurt of false prophets. Now the beginning of this wisdom,
is to fear God in hi^ word, believing his promises, and obeying his
commandments. The true fear of God is not without knowledge; and therefore
every one must labor to be instructed in the principles of religion: for
without knowledge we cannot fear God, and so shall want true wisdom to eschew
false Prophets.

II. In that the false teacher by so many fair shows seeks to bring We must
preserve the purity of the truth.
in false doctrine, it is every man's duty in his place to labor to preserve
wholesome doctrine, and the purity of true religion. This duty is necessary,
for we must be as forward for the truth, as the enemy is for falsehood, and do
as much for God, as they do for the devil. Again, no poison is more deadly
to the body, then false doctrine (...) to the soul; therefore seeing God has
long blessed us with his truth, let us esteem it above all outward blessings,
and by seeking to preserve the purity thereof, show our selves thankful to
God for the same.

Verse 16. Ye shall know them by their fruits; do men gather grapes of thorns,
or figs of thistles?
This verse, and those which follow to the 21. contain the third point* which
Christ lays down concerning false prophets; namely, the means whereby we may
discern and judge of them. And herein he observes this order; First, he gives
us a notable rule to direct us in judging of false prophets, Ye shall know them
by their fruits. Secondly, he explanes the same rule by a similitude drawn
from trees, Do men gather grapes of thorns, etc.

For the rule, that we may understand it the better, we are to search what is
meant by the fruits of false Prophets. A false Prophet must be considered two
ways* First, as he is a man taking upon him the name and profession of Christ,
for so false Prophets use to do: and secondly, as he is a false prophet: in
both these respects he has his fruits. As he is a man taking upon him the
profession of Christ's religion, he may bring forth many outward duties of
external obedience unto the moral law; but these fruits are not here meant, for
a false Prophet may dissemble much, and go far in the outward duties of
religion, so as he cannot be discerned by his general profession, or by the
works of his civil conversation. There be other fruits which come from him as
he is a false prophet; and by them must he be discerned: these therefore are to
be considered. Now we shall know them the better by searching out the fruits of
a true Prophet, (...) he is a man of God appointed to teach Gods people.

The fruits of a true Prophet be principally three: I. He teaches Fruits of a
true Prophet.
and preaches in the name of God by virtue of calling from God, and otherwise
dares not presume to teach: Romans 10. 14. How shall he teach unless he be sent:
and the author to the Hebrews says, Christ took not the honor of being the
high Priest and Prophet of the Church to himself: but was called thereto by
his father, Heb. 5. 5. And this stands with reason, for every true Prophet and
teacher stands in Gods room, and is Gods ambassador to deliver his will to
his people; which thing none can do but he whom God calls and sends for
that purpose. Yet the calling of Prophets and teachers by God is diverse. Some
are God calls Prophets diversely.
called by voice from God immediately, as were Abraham, Moses, and Samuel: and
all the Apostles in the new Testament by the immediate voice of Christ: for
Paul was called by the voice of Christ from heaven, Act. 9. 4, 5, 6. Again,
others have their calling from God, by the special message of some Angel, or
some men. Thus was Aaron called by Moses; Elisha by Elias; and Philip by an
Angel to preach to the Eunuch, Act. 8. 26. Thirdly, others be called by the
instinct and motion of Gods spirit: so, Act. 8. Philip was by ordinary calling
a Deacon, but by extraordinary instinct he became an Evangelist, and a
preacher of the Gospel for the building of Gods Church. These three kinds of
calling men into the ministry were extraordinary, and are now ceased, and
not to be looked for: neither are they to be regarded which say they are thus
called at this day. A fourth way whereby God now calls Prophets and teachers
into his Church, is by his Church: for God has given to particular Churches, a
particular ministerial power and service whereby they may design a place unto
the teacher, and also make manifest that God has called him. Now this
authority is but ministerial, to design and manifest whom God has called,
for the principal calling is from God: for Act. 20. 28. the Elders of the
Church of Ephesus, are said to be made overseers by the holy Ghost: when as
they were designed thereto by men. And by one of these four ways are all true
Prophets and Teachers called.

Here some may demand, what kind of calling had they, who were How the
restorers of religion from Popery were called.
the first restorers of true religion unto us in this our age, for they were by
profession either Popish Priests, or School doctors. I answer: their calling
was partly ordinary, and partly extraordinatie: for in the ministry of a
Prophet there be two things; his office, and the using or exercise of his
office. Our first ministers that restored the truth unto us, had but an
ordinary office, being either Readers in Schools, or public preachers: also
they had their outward calling thereto, from the church of Rome, so as if there
be any part of good calling in that Church, then was their calling good; which
may serve to stop the mouths of all Papists, that carpe at our Church, as
though our ministers had no calling. But for the using of their office, they
were extraordinarily raised and stirred up to do that which they did, in
regard of the manifold abuses wherewith the ministry of the Church was
generally corrupted in their time: for God gave unto them grace and knowledge
to discern to teach, and to maintain the right and true use of the
ministry. And that they were thus extraordinarily stirred up by God, may
appear by the extraordinary gifts and graces where with they were endued; for
God that has always a care over his Church, when he saw the same so
fearfully corrupted by Antichrist* did stir up these men to reform the
same: and besides their singular gifts of knowledge and wisdom, he gave them
extraordinary graces of true piety, whereby they were enabled to seal and
confirm with their own blood, the truth of that doctrine which they did
prosesse and teach, which was an evident argument they were called of God.

Now opposite to this, we must make the first note of a false Prophet; 1. Not^
of a false Prophet.
namely, to come on his own head, and to preach not being sent. And by this
mark are false Prophets noted, Ier. 14. 14. I have not sent them, neither did
I command them -- yet they prophecy in my name. And no less do these words
of Christ import, when he says here, they come unto you, that is, of
themselves, without a calling from God, though they pretend a calling, which is
one of their cloakes: and therefore by Saint Jude, verse. 4. they are said to
creep into the Church: as also Acts, 20. 29. grievous wolves shall enter in
among you, without calling from God, or from the Church.

Here some may ask, how shall we judge of such, and know that they 2* Note of a
true Prophet.
have no calling. Answ. For this purpose, I add a second note of a true
Prophet, which is the most principal, and it stands in the right and wholesome
ha^dling of the Scriptures of God. This is the prope^ fruit of a true Prophet,
1. Cor. 14. 3. He that prophecies speaks unto men edificatio^, exhortation,
and comfort: and 2. Tim. 2. 15. Show thy self a good workman, by dividing the
word of God aright: and 2. Tim. 3. 16, 17. the scripture used in teaching,
co^^incing, correcting, and instructing unto righteousness, serves to make a man
fit to every good work of a Prophet. Now this wholesome handling of the word,
stands in two things; in a right interpretation and opening of the true sense
of scripture; and in a due and sound collection of wholesome doctrine from the
fame, for the edifying of the Church both in sound judgment, and Christian
life.

On the contrary, the second fruit of a false Prophet is, to deliver and 2.
Note of a false Prophet.
maintain corrupt doctrine, contrary to the wholesome doctrine of holy
Scripture: and by this principally he is to be known for a false Prophet,
that intrudeth himself. For the better conceiving of this note, we must know,
that in the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, there are two things
principally to be considered; the scope, and the parts thereof: the scope of
all their doctrine tendes to maintain Christ Jesus God and man, the alone
perfect Savior of the Church. And indeed, he which teaches any doctrine
tending to overthrow Christ, either in regard of his natures, or of his
offices, the same is a false Prophet: 1. Ioh. 4. 3. Every spirit that
confesses not that Jesus is come in the flesh, is not of God. The parts of
Prophetical and Apostolic doctrine, are the comma^dements of the Law, and the
promises of the Gospel, and he which ouerturnes, either directly, or by just
consequent, any commandment of the the Law, or article of faith, must needs
be a false Prophet: so that a false Prophet must be tried by the analogy of
faith, comprised in the articles of the Apostles Creed, and in the Decalogue
which contains the sum of all the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles; and
he which goes against them, is a false Prophet.

The 3. fruit of a true Prophet, is noted by our Savior Christ, namely, 3 Note
of a true prophet and of a false.
in his ministry to seek Gods glory, Ioh. 7. 18. Where also he notes out a
false Prophet, who in teaching and preaching seeks not Gods glory, but his
own. The same note does Paul give, Phil. 3. 19. calling them earthly minded,
seeking their own honor, wealth, and glory, and not the things of God: and,
they serve not the Lord; but their own bellies. Romans 16. 18.


Thus we see the notes of a false Prophet, among which the second is the
principal whereby he is to be tried, as we may see plainly, Deuteronomy. 1^. 4. If
a false Prophet come and work a true sign, yet he must die; If by his false
doctrine he seek to withdraw Gods people from the true God. So when the Jews
asked Christ, by what authority he did those Luke 20. 2, 3.
things? that is, what warrant and calling he had to do as he did; he answers
them by another question, touching John's ministry; thereby showing, that that
which he did was warranted by the testimony of John, and John's testimony was
true, because his calling was from God: and his calling he iustifies, because
his doctrine (signified by his baptism) was from God. So Galat. 1. 8. He which
teaches otherwise then they had learned out of the Prophets from the Apostles,
let him be accursed, though he were an angel from heaven. And thus much for
the meaning of this rule.

Uses. 1. From this rule we have to answer the Papists, and all popish
persons, who use to plead in defense of their religion, after this sort; If our
religion be false, show us the time when it was corrupted, D^r^i Confu^ resp.
Whita^* ad 10. ^at Cap. p. 70.
the man* that corrupted it, and the manner how it was corrupted; for once we
had the pure religion. We might answer them by the like, that a man might say
as well of a ship that is sunk on the sea, that it is not sunk, because no
man can tell* where, and when, and by what means it took water. But yet
further we have here to answer; that though we knew not when their religion
was corrupted, and by whom, yet seeing their teachers and people have in them
and among them the necessary fruits of Antichristian Prophets and people, we
can thereby assure our selves they are corrupt: and though we cannot see the
shadow of the sun move, yet we may perceive that it does moo^e. Now by
their fruits it is clear they be corrupt; for they reuerse the doctrine of
the Prophets and Apostles, both in the Commandments of the Law, and in the
Articles of faith: First, they disanull the first commandment, by making to
themselves other Gods beside the true God; for they Miss. Romans a Pio 5. in
Li^an. p. 304
pray unto Saints, and therein acknowledge a divine propriety in them, and also
give unto them the honor due to God alone, and so set up unto themselves the
creature, in the room of the creator. The second they reuerse by worshipping
Rhem. on Heb* (...). sect. 9. and
God himself, and dead men, in images, and Christ himself in the crucifixe;
yea, in a piece of on Mat. 2. sect 3.
bread, wherein they match the grossest idolatry a^ong the heathen: and the
best learned among them teach, that the Rood, the Aquin. 3. Sum. q. 25. (...).
3. 4.
Cross, and Cruci^ixe, are to be worshipped with the same worship wherewith
Christ himself is worshipped. In the 6. Command* touching murder, they
condemn the killing one of another; but yet if a priest come from the Pope,
and kill a Protestant Prince, the Lords anointed King or Queen, that is not
only no sin, but a Xixti 5. Po^^t. orat. de morte Hen^. ^* habi^a a^. 1589.
^^^t notable, rare, and memorable works. Against the 7. commandment they
maintain ^^llar. de ^l^r. l. 1. c 19.
the vow of single life necessary in their religious orders whereby, as also
by their stues, they cause all filthiness and (...) nation to abound among
them. And for the tenth commandment, they say Rhem on Romans 6. sect. ^.
that concupiscence after baptism is no sin properly. In the Articles of
faith they ouerturne those that concern Christ, making him no Savior, but a
divine instrument whereby we save our selves; for they Rhem. on 2. Tim. 4.
sect. 4. Chap. (...). p. 5^.
^ake men's good works (...) by Gods grace, after the first instification truly
and properly m^ritorious, and fully, worthy of everlasting life. And his
offices they have parted from him; his kingly and prophetical offices,
between him and the Pope: and his Priesthood, between him and every popish
priest, as we have showed before: so that by these fruits we plainly see their
apostacy, which is enough, though we know not when, and by whom it came.

2. Use. Here also we have to answer such among our selves, as renounce Our
church defended against the Brownists.
our Church, as being no true Church of Christ; because say they, we want true
ministers, and so have not a right ministry among us. But hence we answer,
that we have the true Church of God, and our ministers be the true ministers of
God; for proof hereof, our ministers have the outward calling of the Church of
England: they say indeed, our calling is naught, because they have power from
God to call, in whose hands it is. But to omit that question for this time,
sufficient approbation of our ministry may be had from the fruits of our
ministers, as they are ministers; for to leave the fruits of their lives, as
sufficient means to judge them by, our ministers teach through Gods blessing;
the true and wholesome doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, and are alloued
and called hereto by the governors of the Church, and accepted of their
people, whose obedience to the faith is the seal of their ministry: and this
is sufficient to confirm the calling of our ministers; if it had not, Christ
would not have said, Ye shall know them by their fruits.

3. Use. Whereas Christ says, Ye shall know them, speaking to all his The
people ought to be able to judge of teachers.
hearers, he takes it for granted, that every believer may be able to judge
of false Prophets: and therefore every one in the Church of God ought to labor
for so much knowledge, whereby he may be able to know a Teacher by his
fruits and doctrine. This then shows, that every one ought to know the sum
of true religion, comprised in the Articles of faith, and in the commandments
of the Law, both for their true meaning, and right and profitable use unto
themselves: which thing I note, because I know many deceive themselves herein,
thinking that God will excuse them for their want of knowledge, because they
are not booke-learned* But let us consider, we have every one this care, to be
able to judge of meats which concern our bodies, which be wholesome, and
which not* should we not then have much more care of our souls, to be able to
discern of doctrines in religion, which be either the poison, or salvation of
our souls.

4. Use. Whereas wholesome doctrine out of Scripture is a note We may use the
ministry of wicked livers.
of a true Prophet, it teaches us that we may lawfully use the ministry of
those men, whose lives and conuersations be evil and offensive, if so be their
doctrine be sound and good. The Disciples of our Savior Christ must not do
according to the ways of the Scribes and Pharisees, but yet they must hear^
them when they sit in Moses chair: that is, when they teach Moses doctrine.
And Paul is glad when Christ is Math. 23. 2, 3. Philip. 1* 18.
truly preached, though it be not in sincerity of affection, but of envy.
When the Disciples saw a man that was not called by any special calling ^^k.
9. 49.
to follow Christ as themselves were, and cast out devils in the name of
Christ, they thought it intolerable, and therefore forbad him; but Christ said,
Forbid him not, for he that is not against us, is with us: And the like may be
said of them that preach wholesome doctrine, though their lives be still
offensive: for in doctrine they be with Christ, and so farre-forth must be
approved. Again, consider that the virtue and efficacy of the word and
Sacraments administered by men, is not from the minister, but from God: a letter
is not the worse because it is brought by an dishonest or unfaithful carier.
Neither does the evil conscience of the minister, defile the good conscience
of the honest hearer, and worthy receiver. This must be remembered, because
many take offense at the life of the minister, so as they will not hear his
doctrine, if his conversation be scandalous.

V. In that a Prophet is to be known by his fruits, and the maine The maine
duty of students in divinity.
fruit of a true Prophet stands in the good handling of Gods word for the
edification and salvation of his hearers; hence the children of the Prophets,
and those that are set a part for the ministry of the word are taught, that
they must make this the maine and principal end of all their studies, to be
able to bring forth the fruits of a true Prophet: that is, to interpret ^^ight
the word of God, and thence to gather out wholesome doctrines and uses for the
edification of Gods people. And for the enforcing of this duty let us
consider, first, that it is Gods commandment so to do: 1. Cor. 14. 1. Seek
for spiritual gifts, but specially to prophecy. Again, the greatest skill of
a Prophet stands in the true expounding and right dividing of Scripture, so as
it may become food for men's souls. 2. Tim. 2. 15. Show thy self a workman
that needs not to be ashamed, in dividing the word of truth aright. And
lastly, this true fruit of a minister serves to build up Christ's kingdom, to
beat down the kingdom of sin, and to feed the souls of men with the
food of everlasting life. It will be said, this course is good among the
common people; but this is not the learning which is required in the handling
of the word in the schools of the Prophets. I answer, It is the greatest
learning that can be in a minister to be able thus to divide the word of God
aright: it goes beyond the gift of tongues and of miracles. 1. Cor. 24. 1, 2. I
de^^^ not but that it is a part of learning used of the learned, to take a text
of Scripture, and to make a scholasticall discourse upon the same: But yet the
work of a Prophet stands rather in expounding Scripture by Scripture, and in
dividing the same aright, giving thereout wholesome doctrine for the edifying
of the people of God that hear. In former times when the study of Scripture
was neglected, men betook themselves to expound the writings of men, and so
prophecy was banished, and all sound knowledge in the truth of God: and hence
arose diversity of opinions, and multitudes of foolish questions. And so will
it be with us if prophecy fail: for to leave the right handling of Scripture
is the way to bring in all error and barbarism in religion.

VI. Every minister of the Gospel is hereby taught, that he ought What commends
a minister.
to be answerable to his calling, walking worthy of the same; for a good
minister is known by his good fruits, and therefore he must be faithful in
performing all those duties which his calling does bind him unto. The titles
and calling of a minister be high and excellent, but yet they will not commend
any man for good unless he bring forth the friuts of a minister in the faithful
discharge of his ministerial duties.

Lastly, hence we must learn, not to take offense though the minister fails
in his life and conversation, yea though there be contentions in the ministry
about matters of Doctrine: for these are not the friuts of the ministry which
is Gods ordinance, but of sinful men who bewray their imperfections in this
holy calling.

Thus much of the Rule. Now follows the proof and explication thereof, by a
comparison drawn from nature, in these words, verse. 16. Do men gather grapes
of thorns or figs of thistles: verse. 17. So every good tree brings forth
good fruit, and a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. verse. 18. A good
tree cannot, etc. The comparison stands thus, As a tree is known of every
one by his fruit, so is a Prophet by his teaching. More particularly, As a good
tree brings forth good fruit, and cannot bring forth evil fruit: and as an
evil tree brings forth evil fruit, and cannot bring forth good fruit: even so
a true Prophet teaches wholesome doctrine, and cannot teach false doctrine: and
a false prophet teaches false doctrine, and cannot teach true doctrine.

Touching this similitude: first, observe in general from the ground of this
comparison, that our Savior Christ here makes two kind of trees: a good tree,
and an evil tree: by an evil tree meaning that which in regard of any fruit
is as a rotten tree, as is the briar, the thorn, and thistle: for though they
live and grow, yet they are void of good fruit, and so are called evil. Now
here it may well be demanded, whence this difference of trees does come, for
all were good by creation, Genesis 1. 31. God saw all that he had made, and lo^ it
was very How some ^^ces become evil.
good. Answ. Whether thorns or thistles were created of God I will not now
dispute: it is not certain that they were: but now it is plain there remains
this difference among plants; some are good: some are bad: the goodness that
is in some comes from Gods blessing: but the badnesse and barrenness of others
comes from the curse of God upon the earth and upon all creatures for the sin
of our first parents, as we may see, Genesis 3. 17. 18. The earth is cursed for
thy sake: thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth unto thee. And by this
we may see the grieuousnes of our mother sin, it has made the earth barren
and cursed, and many a goodly plant to become fruitles, and vnprofible: and
therefore when we behold these things in the world, we must take occasion
hereof to consider our own sin, and blame our selves and not the creatures,
for they were cursed for our sakes.

Now more particularly: This comparison is here specially applied unto
Prophets: but if we compare this place with S. Luke, Chap. 6. 44. and 45. we
shall see the holy Ghost their restrains not this saying to Prophets alone,
but inlargeth the same unto other men, saying, a good man out of the good
treasure of his heart brings forth good things, and an evil man out of the
evil treasure of his heart brings forth evil. Now by comparing these
together we may see that this comparison reaches both unto Prophets and to all
other men: from whence we may gather these instructions.

I. What we are to conceive and think of a man that is not regenerate: The
state of the unregenerate.
we are all by nature branches of the wild olive, and therefore as a thorn
cannot bring forth a grape, nor a thistle figs; no more can a man
unregenerate bring forth a good work. And this we may more plainly conceive,
if we consider a little the works of man: they may all be reduced to three
heads: some are evil, as works forbidden of God; some are things indifferent,
being neither forbidden nor commannded; and some are good works, as outward
duties of the moral law. Now for evil works, they cannot possible be good in
any man. For works indifferent, as eating, drinking, buying, selling, etc. they
are sins, not in themselves but in him that uses them being out of Christ:
and for the outward duties of the moral law, as evil justice, liberality,
and such like, they are good works in themselves, because God requires them,
but yet in the unregenerate they are sins: To the pure all things are pure:
but to them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, Tit. 1. 15. and,
Without faith it is impossible to please God, Hebr. 11. 6. It will be said, that
liberality, chastity, etc. be the good gifts of God. Ans. That is true, and
they be good works as they are given and commanded of God: but as they are
received and used of the natural man, they are sins: for he fails from the
right use of those actions; both for the beginning of them, (for they proceed
not in him from a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned) and also
in the end; he does them not for the glory of God simply, but withal he
aims at his own praise and reputation, or some such sinister respect.

The use of this Doctrine is this: I. it teaches us to consider and The
greatness of original sin.
acknowledge the greatness of our original sin. Our natural corruption is
most grievous and fearful; it makes us to sin in whatsoever things we do,
though in themselves they be things indifferent, or else good works.

II. This overthrows the conceit of popish writers, which teach Saving grace
is not universal. Bellarm. de great. and lib. arb l. a. c. 5. G^b Bi^* l. 2.
did. 27. d^b. 4.
that God gives to all men an universal common grace or help sufficient by
which they may be saved if they will: And for them which want the means of the
word of God, they say, that if they use that common grace of nature well, God
will give them further grace whereby they may come to salvation. But here we
see, a natural man having a good gift of God cannot of himself use it well:
the best things he does, though they be good in themselves, yet they be sins
in him.

III. Here also we may see what a miserable case we are in while The misery of
the unregenerate.
we remain unregenerate, for we can do nothing but sin: we be like to
thorns and thistles which either bring forth no fruit, or else bad fruits and
therefore we must labor to become new plants in Christ's orchard, being
ingraffed into him by faith, and made new creatures by regeneration, having
believing hearts and good consciences, that so we may bring forth good fruits
unto the praise and glory of God.

IV. We may hence learn a general rule touching a righteous man: Good works
follow justification.
namely, that a man must first be truly justified and sanctified before he can
do a good worke^ first, a tree must have the sap and nature of a good tree,
and then it brings forth good fruits and not before. And this Council. Trid.
sess. 6. cap. 7. and can. 32.
ouerturnes a point of natural and popish religion, that a man may be
justified and saved by his good works; but that which follows cannot be a
cause of that which went before: the fruit cannot make the tree to be good, but
only declare and manifest that it is good, from whence it comes that the fruit
is good, and so good works they proceed from justification. They say
justification twofold: one, whereby a man of an evil man is made a good man;
the second whereby of a good man one is made better: the first they say is of
works, but the second justification ^eli^r. de ^us^i^. l. 4. c. 14
is of grace. Ans. But this is false: for the fruit makes not the tree a better
tree, but if the tree increase in goodness, it proceeds from some other cause,
not from the fruit thereof.

verse. 19. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewne down and
cast into the fire.

20. Therefore by their fruits shall ye know them.


These words contain a conclusion gathered from the former similitude, which
is here also continued; wherein is set down a grievous The punishment of sa^e
prophets.
threatening of eternal damnation, the deserved punishment of all false
prophets. As if Christ had said; look as in an orchyard every tree that
brings not forth good fruit i. hewn down, and cast into the fire to be
burnt: so in the Church of God the false prophet shall not always be reputed
for a true Prophet, but at the length shall be discovered, cut off from the
Church, and condemned. Answerable to this is that saying of our Savior Christ,
Every branch which bears not fruit in me, Io^ 15. 2. 6.
is taken away, cast forth, and withers, and men gather them, and cast them
into the fire and they burn. And S. Peter says; Their damnation sleeps not,
2. Pet. 2. 3.

The use. 1. This serves to comfort Gods children in regard of false prophets,
for though Gods Church be troubled with them for a Comfort against false
prophets.
time, yet it shall not always be so: the time will come wherein they must be
cast out, and receive their due and deserved destruction. And this especially
must be remembered, to stay and comfort our hearts in regard of the Popish
religion which does most of all molest and trouble us: first, because it is
natural, and so readily embraced: secondly, many among us do much affect it:
and thirdly, it is maintained by mighty Monarchs. But yet for all that it must
down, for it is a plant which God never set nor planted. Matthew. 15. 13. And
the chief vpholders of it shall be destroyed.

II. Use. This teaches us to eschew and shun false teachers: and therefore
does Christ ad^^ this exhortation, Matthew. 15. 14. Let them alone, they are the
blind leaders of the blind: and, Revel. 18. 4. Come out of her (that is,
spiritual Babylon which is Rome) my people, for if you partake with her in her
sins, ye shall suffer of her punishments.

III. Use. The words of this threatening being further applied unto all men (as
they are in S. Luke) do ^each us, that it is not sufficient for us to abstain
from committing gross sins, and to do no man h^rm^, but beside eschewing
e^ill we must do good. In the last judgment, the sentence of condemnation
shall be pronounced against the wicked, not for robbing the poor, but for not
releeuing of them, and for Matthew. 25. 42. 45.
not visiting and clothing them. Which does notably confute that vain opinion
of many ignorant people, who think, that if they live an innocent and
harmless life, God will hold them excused, and save them; but the tree that
brings not forth good fruit must be burnt.

verse. 20. Therefore by their fruits ye shall know them. Here Christ repeats
again the Rule he delivered in the 16* verse, which sh^ws, that it is a
special rule to be observed of us all: for there is no idle word in Scripture,
neither any thing repeated in vain. The meaning thereof we have heard: and the
means whereby a false prophet may be discovered, with the uses thereof: among
which we showed that every true believer in Gods Church may be able to discover
a false prophet, whereto these three caueats must be added: I. The pai^ie that
would discover Duties of him that would discover a false prophet.
a false prophet, must humble himself before God, and have an heart in some
sort emptied of all pride and self-love: for the Lord will teach the humble
his ways, Psalm. 25. 9. yea, he does exalt the humble and meek, Luke 51. 3.
and in all things the humbled heart is preserved with the Lord. II. The party
humbled must yield himself to obey the will of God. If any man do my fathers
will; he shall know of my doctrine whether it be of God, Ioh. 7. 17. and David
professes of himself, that he was wiser then his teachers, and understood
more then the ancient, because he kept Gods commandments. Psalm. 119. 99, 100.
III. He must pray unto the Lord and ask wisdom in faith, and in humility,
and the Lord will give it unto him. Iam. 1. 5. If any man lack wisdom, let
him ask of God who gives liberally. Yet some will say, it is an hard matter
to discern a false prophet: I answer, we have ordinarily this capacity, when
we read or hear read, the last will and testament of our Ancestors, we are
able to conceive and judge of the meaning thereof: well, our Lord Jesus has
left with us his will and testament in the holy Scriptures; which concerning
moral duties, and matters of faith necessary to salvation is so plain that
it may be understood of the simplest, ^ls Christ would never have sent the
Jews to the Scriptures for the certain knowledge of the M^ssias. Which notably
discouers the fraudulent dealing of the Romish teachers, who in matters of
controversy in religion send us for resolution to the Church, calling it the
stay Rhem. on 1. Tim. 3. sect. 9.
and pillar whereto we must lean in all doubts of doctrines. The church I
grant is to be reverenced, but yet we must not build our faith upon the
doctrine of men. Our Savior Christ sent the Jews unto the Scriptures: and
hereby the Bereans tried Paul's doctrine, and are commended: And indeed though
men be never so unlearned, yet if they come in humility to search the
Scripture, and in obedience unto God, praying for knowledge, they may be able
by Gods word to discern of false teachers.

verse. 21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but he that does my fathers will which is in heaven.
From this verse to the 24. is contained another portion of Christ's 12. Part of
Christ's Sermon.
sermon being the seventh part of this chapter; wherein he entreats of the
state of those that profess his holy name in his Church here on earth. And his
maine scope and drift herein, is to show that men must not content themselves
to profess religion outwardly, but therewith they must join true godliness
and sincere obedience. This point is as wayghtie and of as great importance as
any of the former, respecting the maine point of m^ns salvation: and it
contains two parts. A maine conclusion, in this verse: And a proof and
explanation of one part thereof, ver. 22. 23. The conclusion it self has two
parts: 1. that some men professing the name of Christ shall not be saved, which
part is afterward explaned and confirmed: the 2. part is this, that some
professors of religion shall be saved: which is not only propounded, but the
parties also are plainly described.

The first part is a most fearful sentence against many that live in the
Church, that notwithstanding their profession of the name of Christ, yet they
shall never be saved. And this is most true, being spoken by him that has the
power of life and of death, who is also the God of truth that cannot lie,
saying, Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, that is, that professes God to
be his God, shall enter into the kingdom What professor, shall not be saved
Three gross hypocrites.
of heaven. There be two kind of professors in the Church of God that shall
never be saved: the first are gross hypocrites, which profess Christ with
their mouth, and yet in heart and life they renounce him: of this sort is,
first the common Atheist, who only for fea^e of 1
the magistrates laws professes religion: secondly, the Epicure, that 2
is, such a one, who bears Christ's name for fashions sake, and yet his belly
and pleasure is his God: thirdly, the worldling, who spends the 3
strength of body, and mind, and all he has on the world for earthly things:
Now none of all these if they thus live and die can be saved. The second sort
are more close hypocrites, which profess the name Close hypocrites.
of Christ in some truth, and have in them some good gifts of God, by reason
whereof both before men and in their own conceit, they are reputed members of
the Church; and yet for all this they are indeed but hypocrites which shall
never be saved.

And that we may somewhat discern of them, I will note the What gifts a close
hypo crite may have.
gifts which they may have, whereby they may come to profess Christ truly:
they may be reduced to five heads. The first, is the spirit of 1
bondage to fear, Romans 8. 15. This is a certain gift of God whereby a man
does discern the right meaning, and judicial use of the law in himself
concerning sin and the punishment thereof: (for though a man by nature know
something of the law, yet he knows not all, nor the right use thereof:) now by
reason of this knowledge he sees himself in bondage, and in regard thereof
does fear; from whence may proceed many good things, as grief for sin,
confession and humiliation for the same, and prayer for pardon. Thus wicked
Pharaoh confessed the righteousness of God, and that he and his people had
sinned, Exodus 9. 27. And so did Ahab at the heavy message of God by Eliah, 1.
King. 2. 27. he rent his clothes, and put sackecloath upon him and fasted, and
lay in sackecloath. So Judas when he saw that Christ was condemned, he
repented of his fact, being g^ieued for it, and ashamed to look any man in
the face; and also confessed the same before God and men, Matthew. 27. 3, 4. A
second gift which a close hypocrite may have, 2
is faith; as had Simon Magus: for he believed, and was baptized* Act. 8. 13.
neither was it a false and dissembling faith altogether, but in some sort a
true, though not a saving faith: for he believed and yet was in the gall of
bitterness. So Ioh. 2. 23. it is said, certain believed in Christ, but he
durst not commit himself unto them. And that we be not deceived herein, we
must know that this faith of an hypocrite has in it three things; knowledge of
the truth, approbation thereof with assent unto it, and a kind of persuasion
that Christ is his redeemer. Of the second degree of this faith we have
example, 2. Pet. 2. 18. where some are said to be beguiled with wantonness
through fleshly lusts, who had clean escaped from them that be wrapped in ^rror:
that is, in idolatry. And of the third degree we have example in the same
chap. verse. 1. where some false prophets are said to deny Christ that bought
them; because for a time they professed themselves to be redeemed, and were
also persuaded in a general sort that he had bought them: yet herein they
failed, that they did not truly apprehend the merit of Christ, and apply it
effectually unto themselves. The third gift of a close hypocrite, is a taste of
Gods favor: Hebr. 6. 6. it is said of some that fall quite away, That they
were enlightened by Gods spirit, and had a taste of the good word of God, and of
the powers of the world to come, though they were never ^ed nor filled
therewith. The fourth gift, is good affections; good (I say) not in them but in
their 4
kind, and so far forth as we can judge: they have joy in the good things of
God: Luke 8. 13. They that are on the stones are they which when they have
heard receive the word with joy. They have zeal for Gods glory, as had Iehu,
2. king. 11. 15. and yet he departed not from the sins of his forefathers, v.
32. Thirdly, they have reverence to Gods Ministers, as Herod to John Baptist,
Mark. 6. 20. Herod knowing John to be a just and holy man, feared and
reverenced him. The fifth gift, is 5
an outward reformation of life: the stony ground receives the seed with joy,
and brings forth some fruit, but it lasts not: of such it is said, Hebr. 10.
29. They tread under foot the son of God, and count the blood of the
Testament an unholy thing wherewith they were sanctified: that is, according to
their profession and persuasion. And thus we see what kind of gifts an
hypocrite may have, and yet never be saved.

Uses. 1. The consideration whereof must move us to look unto our selves,
that we have better things in us then these are: for here we see we may go on
to perdition carrying the profession of Christ in our mouths. And the rather is
this to be considered of us, because many look to be saved who come short of
Simon Magus in knowledge, and of Saul, Ahab, and Judas in humility; yea and
for faith, far short of the devil himself, who is said to believe and
tremble: but how can thou look to be saved, that in regard of grace, come
short of those which are now condemned?

Secondly, hence we must learn to suspect our selves, and call our selves to a
reckoning about our faith and obedience, and we must not flatter our selves
herein: for these things before named will not save us: many have had faith in
some truth for some degrees thereof, and also good affections and other gifts,
as we have seen, who are yet for all this condemned.

Thirdly, seeing there be two sorts of men in the Church that shall be
condemned, the one whereof have many worthy gifts, this must move us not to
rest in these things, but to labor and strive to have our hearts rooted and
grounded in the love of God in Christ, and to become new creatures in
righteousness and true holiness; and then shall we be as the wise virgins
having the oil of grace in the vessels of our hearts, which will never be
quenched till we come into the marriage chamber with our Bridegroom Christ
Jesus.

The second part of the conclusion laid down by our Savior Christ is this,
That some men professing the name of Christ in the Church of God shall be
saved. And these persons are here described unto us What professors shall be
saved.
by their effect or action, to wit, The doing of the will of the Father. And
because this is an infallible note of them that shall be saved, I will briefly
show what it is to do the Fathers will. The Scriptures best expound
themselves, John 6. 40. This is the will of him that sent me, that every one
that has seen the Son, and believes in him, should have everlasting life.
1 Thessalonians. 4. 3, 4, etc. This is the will of God, even your sanctification: and
that you should abstain from fornication; and that every one should know how
to possess his vessel in holiness and honor, -- that no man oppress or
defraud his brother, etc. These two places of Wherein the doing of God will
stands.
Scripture laid together, show that the doing of the Fathers will stands in
three things, in faith, in repentance, and new obedience: faith is directly
expressed in the place of John: and repentance which is a fruit of faith, as
also new obedience the fruit of them both, in the words of the Apostle Paul:
for by Sanctification is meant repentance, and new obedience by the duties
following.

For the first; in true saving faith there are three things required. Saving
faith comprehe^ds 3. things.
Knowledge, assent, and application. By knowledge, I mean the right conceiving
of the necessary Doctrines of true religion, especially of those which
concern Christ our Redeemer. Assent, is when a man knowing this doctrine, does
further approve of the same as wholesome doctrine, and the truth of God,
directing us aright unto salvation. Application, is when we conceive in our
hearts a true persuasion of Gods mercy toward us particularly in the free
pardon of all our sins, and for the salvation of our souls: example of this
particular applying we have in the Apostle Paul, Gal. 2. 20. who professes
thus, Now live not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life that I now live is
by faith in the son of God: which what that is, he shows after, saying, who
has loved me, and given himself for me: and without this particular
application, neither knowledge nor assent can save us: in the 6. of John Christ
propounds himself unto us as the bread of life and water of life: now we know
that food unless it be received will not nourish the body: even so unless
we do by the hand of faith particularly receive and apply Christ unto our
selves, all our knowledge and assent will be as food uneaten and undigested.
It may be said that hypocrites have knowledge, assent, and a persuasion of Gods
favor, and therefore this is not a sure note of doing the fathers will. I
answer, an hypocrite (as Simon Magus) may have true knowledge of Gods word, and
give assent thereunto, and in regard of both these have true faith in some
degree; yea he may conceive a persuasion of Gods mercy in the pardon of his
sins, though falsely in presumption upon false grounds and insufficient. Now
that a Ho^ to know ^^r f^^^h to b^ (...).
man may discern the truth of his faith and persuasion of Gods mercy from
that which is in hypocrisy: he is to observe therein three things: the
beginning of his faith, the fruits, and the constancy thereof. The beginning
of true faith is hearing the word of God preached, especially the Gospel: the
law going before as an occasion or preparing means whereby a man comes to see
his sins and his misery thereby, and thereupon to desire reconciliation with
God in the pardon of them: and hearing the promises of mercy, to desire faith
whereby he may embrace the same, laboring against unbelief. This, though it
be not a lively ^aith, yet it is the beginning of true faith, and no hypocrite
has the same soundly wrought in him. The fruit of true faith, is a change of
the whole man both in heart and life: making the heart contrary to it self in
moderating the natural affections and passions thereof, and keeping them in
compass of true obedience, and causing a man in every estate to rest contented
with the will of God, as I say says, he that believes shall not make have.
Thirdly, constancy in true faith Isa. 28. 16.
is known by this, when a man relyes wholly on God even then when he feels no
taste of his mercy, but has all tokens of his displeasure. Every man will
believe when he has present signs and pledges of Gods loving favor: but true
faith being the evidence of things hoped for, will make a man believe above
hope as Abraham did: and being the subsisting of things not seen, will cause
a man to believe when he sees no tokens of Gods mercy: and indeed he that
lets go the hold of Gods mercy when he is in distress, may assure himself he
never had true faith: for the just shall live by faith in all estate, and will
with Job, trust in God though he kill them.

The second work wherein consists the doing of the Fathers will, The grou^^
^f repe^t^ce.
is to repent of our sins: and this is a fruit of faith. In true repentance
there be two things; the beginning, and the nature of it: The beginning of it
is a godly sorrow when a man is grieved properly and directly because by his
sin he has offended God, who has been unto him so loving a father in
Christ. This causes repentance unto salvation not to be repented of, 2. Cor.
7. 10. and it arises not so much from the fear of punishment, as from the
consideration of Gods mercy, making a man displeased with himself for
offending so loving a God, who has been so gracious and bountiful unto him
in Christ. The nature of repentance stands in the change of the mind: when any
person The nature of repentance.
lays aside the purpose of sinning, and by Gods blessing and grace takes to
himself a new purpose never to sin more. This is properly to repent, and if
this be in truth, hence will follow the change of the will, of the affections,
and of all the actions of the life.

It may be said, that an hypocrite may repent as Judas did, Matthew. 27. 3. and
therefore this is not a good note of doing Gods will. Answ. Judas did repent,
he was indeed grieved for his fact, wishing with all his heart that it had
never been done: but this was nothing, his sorrow was only worldly, causing
death, as the Appstle calls it, 2. Cor. 7. 10. arising from the horror and
fear of punishment, not from consideration of Gods mercy: it was without true
hatred of sin committed, without hope of mercy, or purpose to glorify God by
new obedience, and so was no true repentance.

The third work wherein consists the doing of Gods will, is new New
obedience.
obedience: and it is the fruit of both the former, whereby a man being
endued with faith and repentance, does according to the measure of grace
received, endeavor himself to yield obedience to all Gods commandments,
from all the powers and parts both of his soul and his body: and this I call
new, because it is a renewing of that in man, whereto he was perfectly enabled
by creation. But here it will be said, that many who shall never be saved,
have attained to reformation of life; and therefore this is not a true and
sufficient note of him that shall be saved. Answ. True it is, many hypocrites
have reformation of life, but yet they fail two ways; First, their
reformation is only outward not inward, their thoughts, wills, and affections
still remain wicked and corrupt. Secondly, their obedience is partial, only
to some of Gods commandments, not to all: so Herod, he would hear John
gladly, and do many things, but yet he would not leave his brothers wife. But
true obedience which proceeds from true faith, has these heads and branches;
First, the Branches of new obedience.
party must pro^ue what is the good will of God, Romans 12. 2. Secondly, he must
restrain his life from outward offenses which tend to the dishonor of God,
and scandal of the Church, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. 1. Pe^. 2. 11, 12. Thirdly, he
must mortify the inward corruptions of his own heart. Fourthly, he must
labor to conceive new motions agreeable to the will of God, and thence bring
forth and practice good duties; so performing both outward and inward obedience
unto God; and by these may a man discern the truth of his obedience* and thus
we see what professors they be which shall be saved.

Uses. 1. Now considering that salvation is promised to them that ^e doers of
Gods will, we must hereby be exhorted to become more cheerful in doing Gods
will by faith, repentance, and new obedience: and to further us in this duty
we must use these helps. I. We must How to become cheerful d^^^^ of the will
of God.
labor for a true persuasion of Gods mercy in the pardon of our sins, and
for the salvation of our souls: this being truly conceived will urge a man to
true obedience, whereby he may show himself thankful to God for so great a
mercy. II. We must consider that we are the temples of the holy Ghost, which
is a wonderful dignity to a sinful man: and in regard hereof we must stir
up our selves so to live that we make not sad the spirit of God which
dwells in us. III. We must consider the blessings of God bestowed upon us
both in soul and body one by one: and this will move us to love God, which
love we shall show in keeping his commandments: for this is the love of God
that we keep his commandments, 1. Ioh. 5. 3. IV. Let us consider the
threatenings of God against sin, and his judgments upon the^ that live in
sin, for every place is full of Gods judgments, and these will help to
restrain our corruptions that they break not forth into action. V. We must
meditate on the word of God, and use fervent prayer unto God for his grace: for
by this means David did notably stir up himself to faith, repentance, and
new obedience, as we may see at large in the 119. Psalm.

II. Use. In that many having faith, and repentance, and outward We must go
be^ond hypocrite^ in grace.
reformation of life in some degrees, shall never be saved, we must labor to
go beyond all hypocrites in these graces: in faith we must not content our
selves with a general persuasion of Gods mercy, but we must labor to
conceive the same to be true and sound touching the remission of our sins,
and the salvation of our souls: we must look that it have a sound beginning,
good fruits, and stead fast continuance. And for repentance we must labor to
see that our sorrow arise from the consideration of the goodness of God whom we
have offended; and that it breed in us a change of our minds in the purpose of
not sinning; whereto must be conformable the will and affections, and the whole
man. And for new obedience we must be as careful in mind, will, and
affections, as in the outward actions of our life, and to do the will of God,
and than in all Gods commandments.

III. Use. Many there be that think their case good, because they live a
civil honest life without wronging others openly or wittingly, which thing
indeed is commendable; but yet far short of that which is required for
salvation: therefore they must no^ trust to these broken st^^es of outward and
common honesty, though they be good things in their kind: for many there be
that shall never come in heaven which have had far more in them then these
things are: and therefore whatsoever these persons be they must not rest, till
they find some portion of true grace in their hearts, by virtue whereof they
may plainly see themselves gone beyond all hypocrites in the things that
concern salvation.

verse. 22. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not by thy
Name prophesied? and by thy Name cast out devils? and by thy Name done many
great works?

23. And then will I profess to them, I never knew you: depart from me ye that
work iniquity.


In these two verses Christ returns to explane and confirm the first
conclusion of the former verse, concerning those professors that shall not be
saved. The words contain two parts: First, a description of the persons by
their behavior, v. 22. Secondly, a declaration of their condemnation, v. 23.
For the first these professors are described by three arguments: I. by their
number, many: II. by the time in which they shall plead thus for themselves, and
stand on their profession of service done to Christ; in that day: that is, in
that great and terrible day of the last judgment: III. by their gifts and
qualities wherewith they were endued, have we not in thy name prophesied? and
by thy name cast out devils, etc.

For the first: the number of professors which shall not be saved is Of the
number that shall be condemned.
great: For many (says Christ) shall say unto me. Indeed we are not able to
say how many they be which shall not be saved, for that is a thing proper to
God: and yet the Scripture teaches us that the number of those which shall be
condemned, is greater then the number of those which shall be saved: for
besides that the greatest part of the world in former times did never hear of
Christ, here it is plain that among the professors of the name of Christ, many
shall be condemned: and v. 13. many walk in the broad way to destruction, few
in the narrow.

Whereby we are taught, first, that we must not frame our lives according to
the example of the multitude, to live and do as the most do, because the most
shall be condemned: but we must strive to enter in at the strait gate, and to
be of that little flock unto whom the kingdom of heaven is promised.

Secondly, hence we learn, not to content our selves to live as most men and
women do that profess the name of Christ, but we must labor to go beyond
the multitude in regard of the truth of our faith and repentance. It was not
sufficient for the wise virgins to bear the name of virgins, to have lamps
burning, and to go forth to meet the bridgroome: for all these things did the
foolish virgins also: but one thing more they had, which was the oil of grace,
whereby they were enlightened to go with the bridegroom into his chamber;
which the foolish virgins lacking were shut out of the dooers and not admitted
to come in. Matthew. 25.

The second argument whereby these reprobate professors are described, is the
circumstance of time when they shall thus plead for themselves, why they should
not be condemned, to wit, at the last day when they shall come to be arraigned
at the tribunal fear of Gods judgment. This is a point of great weight and
moment worthy all observation; that men not only in this life and in death,
but even at the last day shall thus plead for themselves.

Hence we learn, that many professing service to Christ shall conceive A
dangerous conceit of a man's good estate.
in their minde^ a persuasion that they are the true servants and children of
God: they shall live and die in this persuasion; and yet for all this at the
last judgment they shall receive the sentence of condemnation. A thing deeply
to be waighed of every one: And the consideration of it ought to teach us all
to take heed of spiritual pride and self-love, whereby men flatter and
deceive themselves in their estate, ouerweening the good things they have, and
falsely thinking that they have that blessing of God which indeed they have not.
This must move us not only to labor to be purged of this pride, but also
teach us to suspect the worst of our selves, and to judge our selves severely
in regard of unbelief and hollownes of heart: for this will be a means to
make us escape the judgment of condemnation at the last day, which Christ shall
pronounce against many of those that think themselves to be his servants.

Further, observe where Christ says, in that day, he singleth out the day of
judgment as a most terrible day. And saying, they shall say unto me, he makes
himself the Judge of all the world in that day; and further pointing out their
particular pleading for themselves, he gives us to understand that he is very
God, who knows long before not only the speeches and actions, but the very
secret thoughts and imaginations of all men that have been, that are, or shall
be, from the beginning to the end of the world.

These things laid together and well considered, must stir up in our hearts a
special duty which the Apostle had learned, 2. Cor. ^. 11. Even The terror of
the Lord.
to know the terror of the Lord: that is, not only in judgment to conceive,
but also in heart and affection to be persuaded of the terrible fearefulnes of
the last judgment; and in this regard not to content our selves with the gift
of knowledge and with an outward profession, but to labor for soundness and
sincerity of faith, of repentance, and new obedience, both in heart and life.
This was Paul's practice, in regard of the resurrection to this judgment, he
endeavored himself to have always a clear conscience toward God, and toward
man, Act. 24. 16. And this duty is most necessary: for such is our ignorance
and unbelief that we little regard the terror of this day, but either think
it shall not come, or though it do, we shall escape well enough.

The third argument here used is drawn from the gifts and qualities of the
persons which make this plea for themselves: they are such as have prophesied
in the name of Christ, cast out devils, and done many great works in his name.
To prophecy here signifies to teach the people of What it is to prophecy.
God, by expounding the Scripture, and applying the same to the consciences for
their edification: and this office is called prophecy, to grace and commend
the office of a minister, because it was the principal duty of the Prophets
themselves thus to handle the word of God for the instruction and edification
of Gods people, howsoever at some time they did foretell unto Gods people
things to come. And therefore he which has this office, and discharges the
same with good conscience, does a work no less honorable, then did the
ancient holy Prophets.

By thy name] The name of Christ here signifies two things: I. appointment
What it is to prophecy in Christ's name.
and commandment from Christ: men that preach the word of God being rightly
called thereunto, teach and preach in the name of Christ: for those whom the
Church calls lawfully, Christ himself calls, and they preach by virtue of
his name. Secondly, it signifies to preach in the room and stead of Christ,
to preach that which Christ would preach, and in that manner also which Christ
would use: 2. Cor. 5. 20. We are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us, etc. And here we may see a difference among the kinds of
teaching which God requires of men. Masters teach their servants; parents
teach their children; and one neighbor and friend another: but all these
differ from the teaching of the minister: for he teaches being called by
Christ and in stead of Christ: but the master teaches not by like virtue, but
only by the right of mastership: the father by virtue of fatherhood, and one
friend another by virtue of brotherly charity. And this shows the dignity
of the calling of a minister, and the weight of his office: no master, no
father, or ordinary professor has the like.

Cast out devils, and done many great workes] For the better understanding
hereof we must entreat something of the working of miracles: and first we are
to see what a miracle is. A miracle is not only a strange work done, but such
a work as is above the strength of all creatures, What a miracle is.
and beyond the whole power of created nature; for it is done by the power of
God himself immediately, which is above the strength of all creatures: such a
work was the staying of the sun, Joshua 10. 13. and the going backward of
the shadow of the dial, 2. King. 20. 11. Secondly, the Lord God alone is the
author of a miracle, who created God alone can work^ miracles.
heaven and earth; as David says, Thou art great and do wondrous things,
thou art God alone, Psalm. 86. 10. No angel, nor other creature in heaven or in
earth, no not the manhood of Christ, though exalted above all creatures, is
able to work a miracle. How then, will some say, How men work miracles.
do these men plead their working of miracles? Ans. Not as authors, but as
instruments and ministers whom the Lord used in the working of them; for men
work miracles by believing, on this manner: First, they receive a special
instinct and inward motion, that God will use them as instruments in the
working of a miracle, if they pray unto him, and command the work to be done:
upon this instinct, they believe that if they pray to God, and command in his
name, it shall be done: and lastly, they pray, and command according to
this* instinct, and so the thing they believed is done. And thus is this speech
to be understood, Have we not cast out devils? etc. that is, thou have put an
extraordinary instinct into our minds, that if we prayed unto thee, and
commanded the devils in thy name to depart, it should be done: this we have
believed, and accordingly practiced, and so have cast out devils, and done many
great wonders by thy name. This gift of miracles does not now befall the Church
of God; all that the Church now has (for ought Miracles now ceased.
I see) is the gift of prayer, joined with fasting, which also must be
conditional, depending on Gods glory, the good of Gods Church, and of the
party troubled: they may not pray absolutely for this work of casting out
devils, or for the doing of such like miracles, much less may they now give
peremptory command for the being of them. If it be said, that Gods Church
has all needful gifts, as well now as in former times: I answer, it has all
gifts needful to their salvation, and therefore prayer in the Church serves
now either to deliver the party troubled, or else to procure as good a
blessing as deliverance is, which is patience and repentance. And thus we see
what manner of persons they be that shall say, Lord, Lord, and make apology
for themselves at the last day, and yet be damned; namely, some that have been
excellent preachers of the word, and some that have had extraordinary power to
cast out devils: and lastly, others that have wrought many strange cures and
miracles by faith in Christ's name.

Now whence we learn, first, that most excellent gifts will not avail
Excellent gifts will not save us without faith.
to the salvation of any man or woman, unless they have true faith, sincere
repentance, and new obedience, whereby they do the will of God: for what an
excellent gift is it to be able to teach and preach the word of God? what a
rare thing is it to have heard Christ himself preach, and to have given him
entertainment? and yet neither of these can save a man: Christ says here, the
apology of preaching shall do men no good, and the privilege of eating and
drinking with Christ, and of hearing him teach in their streets will nothing
avail; Christ will say, I never knew you, Luke 13. 26, 27. It is likewise an
excellent earthly privilege to be allied unto Christ; and yet Christ
preserreth spiritual kindred by faith and obedience far before it, saying to
one that told him his mother and his brethren stood without, desiring to speak
with him, Who (says he) is my mother? and who are my brethren? and Mat. 12.
47, 48, 49, 50.
pointing to his 'Disciples, he said, behold my mother and my brethren; for
whosoever shall do my fathers will, the same is my brother, and sister, and
mother. And with reverence it may be truly said of the virgin Mary, that
howsoever it was a wonderful privilege unto her to be the mother of Christ
Jesus, yet if she had not as well borne him in her heart by faith, as she did
in her body, she had never been saud: and therefore Paul says, though we
had known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know we him no more; but if
any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, 2. Cor. 5. 16. and, in Christ
neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which
works by love, Gal. 5. 6.

The consideration whereof, must move us all to labor to become new
creatures, and to get the graces of Gods children who are regenerate, even true
faith, true repentance, and new obedience, and not to rest in other* gifts
though they be most excellent.

Again, students that have a great measure of knowledge and other excellent
parts, as memory, languages, etc. must learn, not to be puffed up therewith,
( for knowledge puffs up, 1. Cor. 8. 1.) but withal to get the saving graces
before named; for without a repentant and believing heart, all the gifts they
have will never save them: nay rather they must be abased thereby, for without
true saving faith, all other gifts be but as so many mil-stones, to press
them deeper into the pit of destruction.

Secondly, here note, that many learned preachers, who have soundly handled the
word of God for the conversion of others, shall yet themselves be condemned,
like to the Carpenters that built Noah's Arc, and yet were drowned in the
flood. The consideration whereof, must teach all Ministers, according the
counsel of the Apostle, Act. 20. 28. to take heed, first, unto themselves, and
then to their flocks: so Paul bids Timothy, Take heed unto thy self, and unto
learning, continue therein; for in doing this thou shall both save thy self,
and them that hear thee, 2. Tim. 4. 16. Secondly, to be followers of Paul in
the practice of mortification, who did beat down his body, and bring it into
subjection, least by any means after ^e had preached to others, he himself
should be a reprobate, 2. Cor. 9. 27. Thirdly, the people of God are here also
taught their duty; for seeing this fearful judgment shall befall some
ministers of the word, that notwithstanding their preaching they shall be
condemned; therefore Gods people must not rest upon the example of their
ministers lives, but cleave fast unto that wholesome doctrine which they gather
soundly and directly out of the word of God: his life and practice is no sure
rule to follow, further then it agrees with the word of God: and therefore
Paul says, Be followers of me, as I follow Christ, 1. Cor. 11. 1. But the word
is a true rule and square, and as many as walk according to this rule, Peace
shall be upon them, and mercy, Galat. 6. 16.

Fourthly, seeing some workers of miracles must also be condemned, Receive no
new doctrine though confirmed by a miracle.
this teaches us not to trust them which bring unto us doctrines, because they
are confirmed by wonders; for such as work wonders may deceive themselves in
the matter of their own salvation, and therefore much more may they deceive us
in this or that particular point of doctrine. Whereas therefore sundry points
of popery, as Purgatory, Pilgrimages, invocation of Saints, and such like,
are avouched to be confirmed by miracles (which no doubt were but forgeties,
and lying wonders) yet let it be granted that they were true miracles, that
proves not that we should believe them, because the word of God does not
confirm the same unto us; for beside that which is revealed and recor^ed in
Scripture, we must receive no doctrine in religion, be it never so miraculously
confirmed.

Verse 23. And then will I profess to them I never knew you: depart from me ye
workers of iniquity. Here Christ sets down the just condemnation of those men
which make an apology for themselves at the day of judgment, and wonder at
their condemnation: and withal he answers them in that wherein they shall
plead for themselves. The words contain three parts; I. A profession made by
Christ to these men, that he never knew them. II. A commandment of Christ unto
them, Depart from me. And III. a reason of the commandment, Ye workers of
iniquity. For the profession of Christ; Then, that is, in the day of
Judgment, at that time when men shall wonder at their condemnation, making
apologies of their service to God; even then, says Christ, will I profess.
etc. In this phrase Christ alludeth to the fact of these hypocrites, for they
professed the name of Christ, and did plead service done unto him; as if he
should say, Many in that day which have professed my name in the world, shall
plead their service done to me: but I will make another profession unto them,
that is, I will make it clear and manifest unto all the world, that I never
knew them, and that their profession of me was in vain.

The words of Christ's profession are of great weight and moment, Gods knowledge
of his creature.
containing some difficulty in regard of the sense, which must be searched
out. The knowledge of God whereby he knows his creatures is twofold;
General, and Special. Gods general knowledge is that, 1. General.
whereby he understands and sees all things, both past, present, and to come:
and in regard of this it is said, All things are naked and open before his eyes
with whom we have to do, Heb. 4. 13. And by virtue of this, Christ here
foretells what shall be the apology of some wicked men at the last day. And
in regard of this general knowledge, all men are known unto God, and the most
secret actions of wicked wretches, Ier. 32. 18. His eyes are open unto all the
ways of the sons of men, to give unto them according to their ways, and
according to the fruit of their works. The special knowledge of God, is that
whereby he acknowledges, 2. Special.
approoueth, and accepts of his creature to be his, vouchsafing unto it his
special favor: now this enlarges not it self to all and every man, for some
there be, on whom he will show his favor, and of them it is said, The Lord
knows the way of the righteous, Psalm. 1. 6. others there be on whom he will
not show forth his mercy, and of them it is said, The way of the wicked shall
perish. Which opposition shows, what is meant by Gods knowledge of the godly.
So likewise, Romans 11. 2. will the Lord destroy his people whom he knew before;
that is, whom he approved and loved: and of this special knowledge he
speaks in this place. Never* This word excludes all times, as if he should
say, I do not now, neither ever did approve and accept you for mine own; yea
even in that time when you professed me, preached, and wrought wonders in my
name, even then I say, I did not accept and approve of you.

From this form of confession we are to learn sundry points of doctrine;
Universal redemption confuted.
First, hereby is plainly confuted and overthrown the opinion of some
Protestants, who hold that Christ shed his blood for all and every man without
exception, and that in regard of Gods purpose and will he died for all men; for
Caine as well as for Abel, for Judas as well as for Peter, and for them which
shall be condemned, as well as for them which shall be saved. But mark what
Christ says here to them that shall be condemned, I never knew you, nor
approved of you for mine. But if Christ died effectually for all and every man
in the world without exception, then he bought all and every man without
exception, with the price of his blood; and if that, then every one without
exception is Christ's: and those which are truly his, Christ will undoubtedly
acknowledge for his own. But here we see Christ will not acknowledge all and
every man to be his, and therefore undoubtedly he did not purchase by the
price of his blood, all and every man to be his without exception. I deny
not, but that Christ died for all men in the sense of Scripture; but the word
of God never says, that on Gods part, and in regard of the purpose of his will,
Christ died for every man without exception. And whereas it is thought to be an
hard speech, to say God deals not hardly in denying redemption to some.
that God would have some particular men deprived of grace and redemption by
Christ, let us well consider this one thing, and it will not seem strange, no
not in man's reason. God created man in his own image, in righteousness and
true holiness, and he gave unto him a blessed estate in an earthly paradise,
and that not only for himself, but for all his posterity; for whatsoever he
received by creation, he received not only for himself, but for his
posterity, being then a public man, and bearing the person of whole mankind,
both in the state of his innocence, and in his fall: whereupon Adam falling
from that happy estate, all mankind being in him, fell with him, and so lost
Gods image, and that good estate which they enjoyed by creation in Adam. Now
consider this well, if God had never endued man with grace, nor given him
means to come by happiness, and yet had been excluded from all means of
grace and happiness, this indeed might have seemed hard; but considering that
by creation he gave man happiness, and likewise ability to persevere in the
same, if he would; is it any marvel, seeing all men have of themselves lost
their own felicity, that some should be deprived of it for ever? nay, rather
it is a wonder that all are not condemned which come of Adam; for God in his
justice without all cruelty might have condemned every man: and indeed it is
his endless mercy, that he has given Christ to be a Savior unto some, and
that any are made partakars of this salvation by Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Christ here says of some, I never knew you: yet speaking of others
he says, I know my sheep, Ioh. 10. 14. and again, I know whom Gods election
and reprobation proved.
I have chosen, Ioh. 13. 18. and Paul says, The Lord knows who are his, 2.
Tim. 2. 19. Now from these places we may gather, that there is an eternal
work of God, whereby he puts a difference and distinction between man and
man, angel and angel, acknowledging some to be his own, and denying the same
of others. If God himself had not avouched this in his word, no man might have
taught it; but being here plainly expounded, it is with all reverence to be
acknowledged and received: and that it may be the better conceived, two points
are here to be handled. First, upon what ground and reason God does know The
ground of Gods predestination.
some to be his, and does not know nor acknowledge others for his own.
Secondly, what is the fruit of this knowledge of God in man. For the first,
why God should know some to be his, and not others, no other reason can be
given, but Gods good pleasure alone: Matthew. 11. 25. Christ sets down this
distinction between man and man, saying, that his father has hid the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven from some, and re^ealed the same to other:
now what is the cause hereof? It is even so, O father (says he) because it so
pleases thee. So Romans 9. v. 13. and 18. In Jacob and Esau Paul shows this
distinction of mankind, I have loved Jacob and hated Esau, says the Lord:
neither did this difference come from their works, either good or evil, for
this difference God put between them, before either of them had done good or
evil: but it is wholly ascribed to the will of God, who will have mercy on
whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens. This must not seem
strange unto us: we permit unto men to use their own discretion in their own
affairs, and this is a sufficient reason to stop any other man's mouth; It is
mine own, may I not do with mine own what I will? Again, in Princes
Proclamations we submit our selves to this clause (It is our pleasure:) so
likewise, a man having a flock of sheep, may send some of them to the fatting
for the slaughter, and others keep for breed: this God permits unto man,
and it is not counted cruelty among men; now if we give this liberty unto man
over the creature, why should we not much more give it to the creator over man,
seeing the basest and least creature is something in regard of man, but man is
nothing unto God? and therefore though these mysteries cannot b^^ comprehended
by reason, yet even in reason we may see some ^^semblance of the truth and
equity of them, which must move us with reverence to submit our selves to the
sovereign will and pleasure of God herein.

Upon this ground of difference and distinction between man and man, we may
well be admonished to beware of the error of some divines, who thus define of
Gods will touching man's estate; they say it is For ^^ecne works are not the
ground of Gods decree
the first will of God, that every man in the world should be saved, if they
would, and therefore (say they) he ministers unto them all helps both of nature
and grace, whereby they may repent and believe if they will. And having laid
down this his first will, he then (say they) foresees that some men will not
believe, nor persevere in the faith: and hereupon it is (in their conceit) that
he will not know some men for his own. Again, foreseeing that others will
believe and persevere in faith, them he knows and acknowledges to be his;
dealing herein like unto a good father that has many sons, who would have
them all to do well, and to have each one a good portion; but yet seeing that
some will not become frugall and obedient, he changes his mind, and does
disinherite them: or like unto a good Prince, who would have all his subjects
to do well; but seeing some to be rebels, he is of another mind, and wills
their death. Answ. But this opinion is a mere invention of man's brain; for
whereas they say, that God by a second act of his will acknowledges some for
his own, and not others, upon the foresight of their faith and unbelief,
whereas by his first will he would have all men to be saved, it is not true;
for the first will of God, is to know some, and not to know others: the ground
whereof, is his good pleasure alone, and no foreseen works in them. And
therefore it cannot be, that he should will all men to be saved equally, Caine
as well as Abel* Judas as well as Peter. Again, their opinion confutes it
self, for God foresees men's faith and unbelief, because he has decreed the
same, and his decree depends upon his own will alone: and therefore unless we
make the same thing in the same respect, both the cause and the effect, we
cannot make foreseen works the ground of difference between man and man.
Then their comparisons are not fit: a father would have all his children to do
well, and to enjoy his portion: true; and more then that, he would make all his
children to do well, if it lay in his power; neither would he disinherite any,
if it lay in his power to make them good: the change of his purpose in
disinheriting his son, arises upon the impotencie of his will, that cannot
do that he would. And the same must be said of the will of Princes toward
their subjects: but if their should be such a will in God to have all men
saved, if he could save them; then undoubtedly all men should be saved, for
who has resisted his will? nay, whatsoever the Lord wills, that does he in
heaven, in earth, and every where, Dan. 4. 32.

A second point to be considered in the distinction of men, whereby God knows
some to be his, and does not acknowledge some others for his, is the fruit of
this knowledge of God. It is an effectual and The effect of Gods knowledge of
some to be his.
powerful knowledge, working mutual and strange effects in man's heart,
toward God; for from this, that God knows some to be his, there follows
another knowledge in man's heart, whereby he knows God to be his God. So
Christ says, Ioh. 10. 14. I know my sheep, and am known of mine: look as
the sun casts down his beams upon us, by means whereof we again see the
body of the sun; even so the knowledge of God, whereby he knows us for his,
works in our hearts a knowledge of God in us, whereby we know him for our
God. So Gal. 4. 9. Seeing ye know God, or rather are known of God: so that the
knowledge of God, whereby he knows us to be his, is the ground of our
knowledge of him to be our God. Again, in this knowledge of God, whereby he
knows his elect, is contained his love toward them, for he knows and
accepts of man, and therefore loves him: and this brings forth in man love
to God again. We love God because he has loved us first, 1. Ioh. 4. 19. So
likewise God by his knowledge chooses us to be his peculiar people: and hence
comes our choosing of God to be our God; for look, as the seal sets a print
in the wax like unto it self, so the knowledge of God brings forth such
fruits in us to Godward, as therewith God bears and manifests toward us.

On the other side, there he some whom God never knew, and the fruits hereof
in them, be the fruits of justice; God not knowing them, they know not God:
and the fruits of this knowledge, as love, and giving their hearts unto God,
they have not. Indeed the sins which men commit come not from this, that God
knows them not, but from the corrupt will of man: and yet these wants of
knowledge, of love, and faith to God, as they are punishments, come from this,
that God does not know, nor acknowledge men for his.

Now whereas this knowledge of God is powerful in his elect to A motive to
know and love God.
produce from the^ true knowledge, affiance, and love of God again; we are to
be admonished to labor to feel in our hearts these graces which are the
impressions and fruits of Gods knowledge of us, that by them we may be able to
say, I know God to be my God, and Christ my redeemer. Let us therefore labor
to know God aright, and to love God in Christ, and in his members, by true
love; and to choose the true God to be our God, bestowing our hearts and
affections on him: for by these graces we shall know certainly that God
knows us, loves, and chooses us for his sons and daughters in Christ;
because these graces in us are the proper fruits of the knowledge and love of
God toward us; even as we may know the Princes broad seal by the form of
it in wax, though we never see the seal it self. And on the contrary, we
must take heed of that heavy judgment of God, whereby men go on without
knowledge, love, and affiance in God; for these are fearful tokens of his
wrath, befalling those whom he never knew.

The use. 1. Whereas God knows some men for his own, and will not
acknowledge the same of others, and that only upon his will and pleasure, we
may see here a wonderful and unsearchable mystery; which first of all ought to
stir us up, not to plead with God, but in an holy reverence to wonder at, and
to admire his unspeakable power and sovereignty over his creature: Romans 11. 32.
God has shut up all under unbelief, that he might have mercy on all, says
the Apostle. Now he does not reason the case further, but there stays
himself, with an admiration of Gods wonderful power and wisdom, crying out,
O the deepnes of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! v. 33. 2. This
must strike 2
our hearts with fear and trembling toward God in regard of his judgments:
the Apostle Paul speaking to the Gentiles of Gods ancient people says, the
Jews are cut off through unbelief, and thou stand by f^^th; and thereupon
makes this use unto the Gentiles, Be not high minded but fe^re, To. 11. 20. 3.
Hence we are taught, not to sooth up our selves 3
(as usually we do) on hope of mercy in the death of Christ, without some
ground hereof through true grace; but rather with fear and trembling, so long
as we have time, to labor in the means of salvation, which is Gods word,
prayer, Sacraments, to become true members of Christ, because we may deceive
our selves with a vain profession: for though Gods mercy be endless in it
self, yet it admits restraint to usward; and indeed it shall never be
extended to all, nay not to many that in their life time made full account
thereof in their vain persuasions.

A third point here to be observed is this; that such as professed Christ's The
Reprob^te never had tr^e (...).
name here on earth, and yet after shall be condemned, never had true faith,
nor true repentance, sound love, nor hope; they might have some kind of faith,
I confess, and many other excellent gifts; but if they had had true faith,
thereby they should have pleased God, and bin approved of Christ, and so at
sometime also, have bin accepted and acknowledged of him for his own. For this
we must learn and hold as the truth of God, that where true faith, love, and
hope are truly wrought, there they remain for ever, at least in the root;
they may seem for a time to be lost, but yet never can be quite extinct, for
the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11. 29.

Fourthly, here it is plain, that those whom Christ will not save, he never
knew; hence it follows, that whom he knows to be his, them he will know to
be his for ever. This point must be remembered, because it is the true
foundation and ground of the salvation of men's souls: we are said to be saved
by faith, and by the word of God, yet only as by means, not as causes: but
the only cause of our salvation, and of the means that brings us thereto, is
this knowledge of God, whereby he accepts and approoueth us to be his own.

Hence we may gather, that those who are elect unto salvation, shall Elect
neue^ ^all away.
never perish; for whom God once knows to be his, them he knows to be his for
ever: and therefore Mat. 24. 24. it is made a thing impossible that the elect
should perish: and the Apostle takes it for granted, that the election of God
is unchangeable, Romans 9. 11. remaining ever, according to his purpose. This
knowledge of God, is that foundation which remains sure, 2. Tim. 2. 19. The
first grace of all is Gods favor, choosing some men to be his of his mere
good will; and this first grace, to whomsoever it is vouchsafed, remains for
ever, admitting no change nor alteration, nor interruption. This doctrine must
be remembered, as the stay of our faith, and a sure foundation of sound comfort
in any distress: for true believers in time of affliction find in themselves
much unbelief, and great pronenesse to fall away from God. Yet here they have
a sure stay whereon to rest, they must go out of themselves, and fasten their
faith on Gods election, knowing hence, that though they be frail and subject
to fall away of themselves, yet their salvation remains fast, grounded on the
knowledge and election of God. So the Apostle Paul comforts himself and the
godly, Romans 8. 32, 33. It is God that iustifies, who shall condemn? and verse
35. Who shall sever us from the Love of God in Christ, whereby he loves us?
And indeed, if a man have received true assurance of Gods favor, though but
once in all his life; yet by that one sign he may assure himself of his
salvation, upon this ground, that Gods love is unchangeable, though ever after
he live in temptation; for whom God loves, he loves to the end, Ioh. 13. 1.

Depart from me] This is Christ's commandment to those whom he never knew,
though they professed his name; and it is a most fearful commandment, being
all one with that, Matthew. 25. 41. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire.

Now hence we may gather, that the second death is properly a separation
Wherein the second death stands.
from the comfortable fellowship of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost;
and withal, a sense and feeling of Gods wrath in that separation. This
appears by the contrary, for life everlasting stands in fellowship with God
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Now here a question may be asked,
concerning the suffering of Christ; How Christ s^ff^red the sec^d death.
for our doctrine is, that he suffered the second death: whether then was he
severed from God in his suffering? Answer. Christ our Savior on the cross
stood in our room and stead, he bare upon him the sins of his elect, and
for substance, the whole punishment due to the same, which was both the first
and second death: but yet concerning the suffering of the second death, there
remains some difficulty. Touching it therefore we must hold this ground,
that our Savior Christ suffered the second death, so far forth as the
suffering thereof might stand with the union of his two natures, and with the
holiness and dignity of his person: and here these cau^ats must be marked.

I. Caveat. That in his manhood he endured a very true separation from the
Godhead, and from his Father; yet not in regard of subsisting and being, but
of sense and feeling only: and therefore he cried, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? having for a time no sense of Gods favor, but only the
feeling of his wrath and displeasure.

II. Caveat. In his passion he did endure the sorrows of the second death; he
did not die the second death, for then he should have been overcome and
utterly separated from his father in subsisting and being: but he suffered the
second death, and in suffering overcame it; as a man may be at the point of
death, and feel the pains of the first death, and yet recover.

III. Caveat. Christ endured the pains of the damned, yet not in that manner
which the damned do; for he endured them on the cross, they in the place of
the damned; Christ suffered the^ for a while, they endure them for ever; Christ
suffered the second death, yet so as it prevailed not against him; but the
damned are overwhelmed of it, it preuailes over them, and causes them to
blaspheme God: now their blasphemy increases their sin, and their sin
causes their torments to be multiplied for ever. This doctrine is suitable to
the word of God, and to reason: for in man's reason, the death of the body could
not be a remedy to such persons as are condemned to a double death both of
body and soul.

Uses. 1. Seeing the second death is a separation of man from God A monue to
get fellowship with God.
for ever, we must labor in this life to have some true fellowship with God
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost; that having it once, we may enjoy
the same for ever. This fellowshippe we shall come unto in the right use of the
word and Sacraments, and prayer; for in the word and Sacraments God condescends
to speak unto us, and to deal familiarly with us, and in prayer we talk with
God.

II. Use. Note also to whom this commandment is spoken, Depart from me;
namely, to such as come near unto God with their lips, but yet keep their
hearts far from him: in consideration whereof we must not content our selves
to profess the name of Christ outwardly, but we must draw near to God with
all our affections, our love, joy, fear, and confidence, and yield obedience
to his commandments; so shall we escape this fearful commandment of final
departure from him.

Ye workers of iniquitie] This is the reason of the commandment: for How
professors of religion may be work^^^ of iniquiti^^
the better understanding whereof, this question must be handled: How these
men, that make such profession, can be called workers of iniquity; many of
whom undoubtedly, lived a civil and vnblam^able life outwardly, and could not
be charged with any horrible capital sins. Ans. There be many great sins
for which men may be called workers of iniquity, and be as vile in the sight
of God as the murderer and adulterer, though for outward life they be
unblameable: as first hypocrisi^, which is proper to the professors of
religion, when as they content themselves to hold religion outwardly, but yet
do not bring their hearts nor conform their lives to their outward
profession. Secondly, to profess love and worship to God, and yet not to
perform duties of love and mercy unto men: for we must love and serve God in
the works of brotherly love. Thirdly, to have the heart addicted to this or
that sin or sins; whether secret or open in regard of the world it skilleth
not: for this is to be a worker of iniquity in Gods sight, when the heart
takes a settled delight in any sin. And they are not so called because their
iniquity is always outward and seen to the world. Lastly, all the sins of
the first table, especially the sins against the two first commandments, as
not to know God, not to love God, or to trust in him above all, not to worship
him in heart and life together; these are all works of iniquity, greater then
the sins of the second table in their kind: and in regard of these also,
professors are called workers of iniquity.

Uses. 1. Whereas Christ calls those professors, workers of iniquity, Christ
marks the most secret sins.
whose profession covered their sins from men's sight; we may note, that
Christ is a very ^^rict obseruer of men's ways, even of the most secret sins,
which appear not to the world: though men may be deceived by professors in
this world, yet Christ cannot be deceived; but at the last day of judgment he
will find them out what they be. Many deceive themselves with a persuasion of
mercy, because Christ is a Savior, and so presume to go on in sin; but
they must know, that Christ is also a severe judge, who does straightly observe
men's sins, and will condemn the workers of iniquity, as well as pardon them
that repent: and therefore we must not ^latter our selves to live in sin,
because he is a Savior; but rather fear to sin, because he is a severe
judge against all iniquity.

II. This shows that Christ preferres an honest and godly life above How
Christ esteeme^ a godly life.
most worthy gifts, even before the gifts of Prophecy* and Miracles; and
therefore our principal care must be, to frame our hearts and lives to true
obedience unto our God in all his commandments.

III. This must stir us up to true and unfeigned repentance. If we A strong
motive to repentance.
have not yet repented, it must move us to begin it: if we have repented,
we must do it more; for Christ will pronounce a fearful sentence of
condemnation upon many professors, because they live in sin, though they
have prophesied in his name, and cast ou^ devils, and done many great works;
yet because they have been in heart addicted to some sins, he shall say
unto them at the last day, Depart from me, and go ye cursed into everlasting
^^r^. The horror whereof, seeing Christ has so long before made it known
unto us, ought to move us to humble our selves, to turn unto God, and to
break off the course of our sins, even in the purpose of our hearts. And if
we will not now tremble and turn, the day will come when we shall hear a
fearful commandment, and obey it, and no^ be able to turn from it: but if
we shall now turn to God by true repentance and new obedience, we shall in
that day hear the blessed voice of absolution upon our selves, when as the
fearful sentence of condemna^ion shall be pronounced upon others.

IV. Whereas many men shall be condemned, because in heart they have been
addicted to some open or secret sins, we must in the fear of God labor to
purge our hearts from all sin, so as we Purge the heart from a ^u^pose of
sinning.
be not addicted to any one sin, with purpose to live therein: yea we must
labor to turn our selves from every evil way, from sins in thought, in
affections, in behavior, and actions. The purpose of our heart mu^t be, not
to live in any one sin, so as if we fall, we may yet truly say, it was
against our purpose and intent: and therefore we must labor to be renewed in
the spirit of our minds, even in the most secret part of our souls. It is not
enough to leave sin when it leaves us, by reason of weakness, or want of
opportunity: thus does many an aged man, who having lived in lewdness and
lust* all his youth, does at length, by reason of weakness in old age, leave
those sins in practice; but yet his heart is still addicted to them, and
therefore even then when he cannot go without a staff, will he take great
delight in rehearsing and remembering the tricks of his youth. Now this man
has no repentance, for his delight in the remembrance of sin past, is all
one before God, as if he had lived still in the practice thereof: our prayer
therefore must be with David, to the Lord continually, that he would incline
our hearts unto his commandments, and not to covetousness, or any other
sin, Psalm. 119. 36.

Verse 24. Whosoever then hears of me these words, and does the same, I will
liken him to a wise man which has builded his house on a rock.

25. And the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew and beat upon
that house, and it fell not; for it was grounded on a rock.


After the delivery of many notable instructions in this sermon of our
Conclusion of Christ's sermon.
Savior Christ, whereby he has sufficiently showed himself to be the true
Prophet and Doctor of his Church; in this verse, and those which follow, to the
28. he comes to lay down the conclusion of this excellent sermon, wherein he
does stir up his hearers to a notable duty; namely, that they should not make
light account of his doctrine, contenting themselves barely to hear, read, or
to learn the same; but further, to go about the practice thereof in their
lives and conuersations. And for the effecting hereof, he lays down here at
large, the fruit of true obedience to the word. In this conclusion are these
points contained: I. A maine duty to be done of all his hearers; that is, to
hear and do the words of Christ. Whosoever hears these my words, and does
the same. II. The property of this duty; it is a note of great wisdom. I
will liken him to a wise man, etc. III. The fruit of this duty; Safety and
security against all per^ls of body and soul, in the 25. verse: all which
are amplified by their contraries, in the 26. and 27. verses, as we shall see in
their place.

The first point is the maine duty of every good hearer, namely, to The duty
of every good hearer.
join practice with knowledge of the word of Christ. This duty is often urged
upon us by the holy Ghost, Romans 2. 12. Not the hearers of the Law, but the
doers thereof shall be justified before God: and Saint James stands long on
this duty, Iam. 1. 22. Be the doers of the word, and not hearers only,
deceiving your own^ souls: which after he enforces both by the vanity of
hearing without doing, v. 23, 24. and by the blessing that accompanies obedient
hearing, v. 25. and Luke 11. 27, 28. when a woman in admiration at Christ's
doctrine, pronounced her blessed that bare him; Christ answered, ^ay rath^r
blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it. And in the parable of
the sower, Mat. 13. there are 4. kinds of hearers, three bad, and one only
good, who do hear, know, receive, embrace the word of God, and withal bring
forth fruit plentifully. And natural reason may persuade us of the weight of
this duty; for the best learning that men have in humane things is too little,
or of no use, without practice* much less can divine doctrine then profit a
man, without obedience be joined therewith.

Use. The consideration hereof, must move us to pray to God the Father in the
name of Christ, that he would vouchsafe his spirit unto us, whereby our hearts
might be inclined, disposed, and bent to an unfeigned love and obedience of Gods
precepts, delivered in his holy word, because it is our duty to live in the
practice of that we hear. Yea, we must pray so to perform obedience in our
life, that our consciences may not only not accuse us, but also excuse us
before God in regard thereof; or at least, in regard of our true endeavor and
desire to obey. This duty being practiced, will minister true comfort unto us
in time of distress, yea in the fearful case of death it self. Hereby did
good king Hezekias comfort himself at his death, that he had walked before
the Lord with an upright and perfect heart, Isay, 38. And the word of God is
plain for this comfort, If our hearts condemn us not we have boldness toward
God, 1. Ioh. 3. 21. always provided, we have a good understanding of our duty
to God, for an ignorant conscience will falsely excuse.

II. Point. The property of this duty. It is a part of great wisdom, for
Obedient hearing is true wisdom
he that hears and obeys, is the only wise man. I will liken him (says
Christ) unto a wise man. This point is likewise with care to be remembered,
that the hearing and doing of the word of God, is a special part of true
wisdom: this is notably verefied in the 32. Psalm, which is entitled David's
learning; and indeed it is a notable psalm of learning, co^taining the sum
of all religion; which David brings to these two heads, his repentance, and
new obedience. So Deuteronomy. 4. 6. the peoples obedience to Gods commandments, is
counted by Moses, their wisdom: and for this cause he there says, they shall
be counted the wisest people under heaven, because they served and obeyed the
true God: to which purpose it is said, The fear of God is the beginning of
wisdom, a good understanding have all they that do thereafter, Psalm. 111. 10.

Hence we learn these instructions: 1. all superiors, magi^^rates, masters,
Superiors duty.
and parents, are bound to go before their inferiors in wisdom, as they are
above them in authority; and therefore considering obedience is true wisdom,
every superior ought to go before his inferiors in obedience to Gods
commandments: for this only is true wisdom, without which all other
wisdom is but folly and madness.

2. Hence all students that profess themselves to seek for wisdom Students
duty.
and learning, are taught especially to give themselves to learn and obey the
will and commandments of God; for this is true wisdom, both before God and
man. And it is a great blemish and disgrace for any man of knowledge to lead a
loose and dissolute life; this argues their want of Gods fear, which is the
very ground of true wisdom.

3. This gives a good caveat to ignorant persons, who persuade themselves they
may continue in their ignorance, because they are not book-learned; but they
deceive themselves, for obedience is true wisdom: and therefore they must
labor for so much knowledge as will bring them to this wisdom here commended.

Now to come more specially to this true wisdom, we must search out The true
wisdom of prof^ssors.
wherein it lies. This is expressed in these words, which has builded his
house on a rock: which S. Luke sets down more largely, chapter 6. 48. saying,
he dug deep, and Laid his foundation on a rock. In which words, 3. part^ of
this wisdom are propounded: 1. to dig deep: 2. to make choice of a rock for a
foundation: and 3. to build thereon. The builder is the professor 1. part of it.
of the name of Christ; and this digging deep to find out a fit foundation,
signifies thus much; that he that would make sure his own salvation, must
come to a deep search and examination of his own corrupt heart, that he may
know the iniquity thereof: also he must renounce himself and his pleasures;
and whatsoever may hinder him in this building he must cast out: for without
this deep search and ransacking of the heart, there can be no sure foundation
laid, nor certainty of salvation attained.

The second point of this wisdom, is to choose a foundation to lay our 2. part
of it.
salvation upon; and that is the rock Christ Jesus himself alone, God and
man, he is the chief corner stone, on which the whole building is coupled.
Ephesians. 2. 20, 21. neither is their salvation in any other: for among men there is
given no other name under heaven, by which we must be saved, then Christ
Jesus only, Act. 4. 12. and no other foundation can any man la^e, then that
which is already laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 3. 11. Christ is the
rock and corner stone, and true Christians are living st^nes built vp^ him, 1.
Pet. 2. 5. As for our works, they are fruits, but no part of this foundation,
unless to them that build on the sand, like foolis^ builders.

Thirdly, having found a good foundation we must build thereon. Our souls and
our salvation must be builded on Christ. This is done 3. Part. How we are built
on Christ.
by our faith in Christ: for as mutual love ioynes one man unto an other; so
true faith makes us one with Christ* Ephesians. 3. 17. the holy Ghost says, that
Christ does dwell in our hearts by faith: and, Psalm. 125. 1. He that trusts in
the Lord is as mount Sion that cannot be removed. Yet here two ca^^ats must be
remembered: I. That Christ is a rock, yet not every way that man frames in his
own heart, but only so as he has offered himself in the promise of the
Gospel, which is the word of the covenant of grace. And for this cause we must
labor that this word of Gods grace may be rooted and grounded in our hearts by
faith: for it is all one to believe in Christ, and to believe the word that
reueales Christ unto us: so says our Savior, He that refuses me and
receives not my word, has one that judges him, Ioh. 12. 48. And, If ye abide
in me, and my words abide in you, Ioh. 15. 7. We therefore must be like the
good ground: for as it receives and keeps the good seed, so does the good
heart receive and keep the word of grace, which being rooted in our hearts
keeps us united unto Christ, and therefore it is called the engraffed word,
Iam. 1. 21. which being mingled with faith in our hearts is profitable, for it
knits us fast to Christ, and makes us grow up in him unto perfection. II.
Caveat. We must set all the maine affections of our heart on Christ: for hereby
must we show forth our faith. We must so esteem and love Christ, as that in
regard of him we count all things loss, and dung, with the Apostle; yea we
must so delight in Christ, that we desire him wholly, and receive nothing into
our hearts but Christ alone. Thomas desired but to put his finger into his
side, but we must go further, and desire to have our souls washed in the
blood that issued thence, and to have our hearts possessed by his spirit, whom
he gives to his Church.

Use. Seeing Christ Jesus is the rock of our salvation, our duty is to have
our hearts rooted and founded on Christ. They which be as the stony ground,
hear and receive the word, and it takes some rooting in them, and brings forth
some fruit: but as the rooting is not deep, so the fruit is never ripe, and
therefore when heat comes it withers: so it is with professors; a man may
be one in name, and bring forth some fruit of the word which he hears, and yet
be deceived in the matter of his salvation, because he is not rooted and
founded in Christ. This is the point which Paul stands much upon in sundry of
his Epistles: Ephesians. 2. 20, 21. and 3. 17. Coloss. 2. 7.
for show of grace will not serve the turn. Indeed in these happy days of
peace any grace makes a man seem to be a Christian: but when the parching heat
of persecution comes, unless we be thoroughly rooted in Christ, we shall never
continue to the end, nor bring forth fruit with patience.

III. Point. The fruit of this true obedience in which men by The fruit of
true obedience.
faith build themselves on Christ Jesus, is Security and safety against all
temptations of the Devil, the flesh, and the world: meant by the standing of
the house that was built upon the rock^, notwithstanding the the falling of the
rain, the beating of the floods, and the blowing of the winds, verse. 25. A
most notable fruit which nothing else but true obedience can procure unto us:
wealth cannot minister this comfortable security; nay the more wealth, often
times the more trouble; and unto many, riches are the causes of a fearful
downfall. No strength of man, nor power of any Princes can procure this
safety, and yet Christ vouchsafes the same to them that hear his word and
keep it.

The consideration hereof must move us to be most willing and ready A motive
to obedience.
to perform obedience to that holy word of God which we read and hear: for
such a benefit comes by it as no creature in the world can procure besides:
and the rather we must inu^e our selves hereto, because our sins deserve an
end of these happy days of peace, and we may justly look for the black
days of persecution, which when they come will surely be our ruin, unless in
these days of peace we hear the word and do it.

Secondly, from this fruit of true obedience we may gather, that True faith
cannot be lost.
he which once has true says in Christ rooted in his heart, shall never loose
the same either wholly or finally, but shall continue therein unto the end and
enjoy the fruit thereof for ever. For by faith a man is truly built on Christ
as on a most sure foundation, so as neither temptations nor persecutions can
drive him off: though they may assault and shake him* yet they can never throw
him down: but if a man might quite loose his faith, then might he be beaten
down that is built on Christ, which thing this text denies.

Lastly, this teaches us that he that is built on Christ by faith, True
believers must have their trialls.
must look for fearful trials and temptations: for he is like an house
built one the sea bank, against which wind and rain and waves do all beat
and rage. Gods servants must not look to go to heaven in ease; but they must
wait for trialls and temptations coming hand in hand, as wind and rain, and
wind and wave commonly do: and therefore the more careful and earnestly must
we labor to be surely grounded on Christ, that though they assault us, yet
they may not throw us down.

verse. 26. But whosoever hears these my words, and does them not, shall be
likened unto a foolish man, which has builded his house upon the sand:

27. And the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat
upon that house, and it fell, and the fall thereof was great.


In these verses our Savior Christ lays down four other points contrary
to the former, belonging to an evil hearer. The I. is the fault and bad
practice of an evil hearer: to hear Christ's words and not to do the same:
II. the property of this vice: it is a point of extreme folly: III. the
practice of this folly: in building upon the sands: IV. the fruit and issue of
this building: fearful ruin and destruction. Of these in order.

I. Point. The practice of a bad hearer from which Christ would The practice of
a badde hearer.
terrify all men in this place is, To hear and not to do. This is no small
fault. The ground that receives seed and rain both in measure and season,
and yet brings forth either bad fruit, or none at all, is by all men
condemned for bad ground; the Apostle says, it i^ near unto cursing, whose
end is to be burned, Hebr. 6. 8. The waters that come and issue from under the
threshold of the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 41. 1. whereby is meant the word of God,
when they come into any ground they are of this nature, if they make it not
fruitful they turn it into barrennes, verse. 11. A subject that knows his
Princes will, and does it not, is indeed no better then a rebel: how much more
then is he that hears the word and Doctrine of salvation by Christ, and yet
makes no conscience to do the same, to be judged for bad and barren ground,
yea for a rebel against God himself. 1. Sam. 15. 25. Samuel tells Saul that
rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and transgression is wickedness and
Idolatry: And the reason is plain, for they How all hearers are bound to
obedience.
that submit themselves to hear Gods word, are sundry ways bound to perform
obedience: first, by the law of creation, as they are Gods creatures: Secondly,
by the law of redemption, as they are Christ's servants bought by his precious
blood: Thirdly, in regard of their Adoption, as they are, and at least hold
themselves to be his children in Christ: and fourthly, in regard of his
merciful providence whereof we have daily experience: in regard of all these
we ought by way of thankfulness, to show our selves obedient unto his word. And
therefore he that hears the word of God and will not do the same, sins
grievously against God, which in it kind God hates as the sin of witchcraft.
Now this sin of disobedience is a common sin: We are all hearers, but where
almost is the man that answerably is a doer? Men content themselves with the
bare action of hearing, like unto the Papists who think God is well served
with the work done: but the principal thing we omit, which is the treasuring
up of Gods word in our hearts, that upon just occasion we might practice the
same: yea, which yet is more lamentable, men are so far from yiedling
conscionable obedience to the word, that the endeavor thereunto is commonly
judged superfluous nisenesse and curious preciseness: but this sin of
hearing and not doing will bring many fearful judgments upon us, unless by
true repentance it be cut off.

II. Point. The property of this bad practice. It is a point of great The
folly of professors.
folly: he that hears and does not, shall be likened unto a foolish man.
This the author of all wisdom Christ himself avouches: and the holy Ghost by
S. James does notably describe this part of folly: They Iam. 1. 22, 23.
that be hearers and not doers, deceive themselves, being like unto a man that
beholds his natural face in a glass: either to spy out some spot, or
discern his own countenance; but when he has considered himself, he goes
his way, and forgets immediately what manner of one he was.

Again, this folly will further appear in this: if a man should show forth
great parts of wisdom in sundry things pertaining to his body, and yet fail
in the maine point of all, every man would count his wisdom but folly: Now
such are all they that hear the word of God and do it not: they show some
parts of wisdom in coming to hear, and in seeking to understand: and yet if
they come not to practice, they fail in the maine point of their salvation*
which indeed ought to be sought for in the first place.

I. By this we may see how to correct and reform our foolish Our common error
in judging men to be wise.
conceit we have of men in the world. We think of those that have worldly
wisdom to be able to go beyond others in the greater affairs of this life,
that they are the only men, deserving best place of government both in Church
and common wealth: But we must know, that these men, though they have never so
good heads for the things of this life, yet if they fail in the knowledge of
this duty to God, or in the practice thereof, are here by our Savior Christ
noted with the brand of folly. The rich man in the Gospel had notable forecast
for the augmenting of his wealth: when his substance increased, he could pull
down his barnes and make them greater, but yet because he failed in the maine
point of his salvation, he is noted for a rich fool, Luke 12. 20. And
therefore in all sorts and estates of men, he is the wisest, who has grace to
know and answerably to obey the will of God.

II. This must excite us to a careful endeavor after true obedience A motive
to obedience.
to God in all his commandments. We all desire to be freed from the reproach
of folly among men, and we take it for a great disgrace to be counted fools:
well, if we would avoid this ignominy indeed, let us be willing to hear, and
careful to obey the word of Christ, both in thought, word, and deed:
otherwise, let men judge as they list, God will account us fools.

III. Point. The practice of this folly, which consists in this; that he
builds his house upon the sands: whereby is signified another thing concerning
the soul; namely, to build our salvation upon insufficient foundation: and
that does every hearer of Gods word that makes not conscience of obedience: for
profession is as it were the erecting or rearing of an house: and the not
performing obedience withal, is the Who build on the sands. I. Papists.
Council. Trid. sess 6. cap. 7. 10. 16.
setting of this house upon the sands. There be three sorts of men that thus
build upon the sands. I. The Papist that will be justified and saved by Christ:
but yet withal he must have works of grace to concur for the increase of his
justification, and for the accomplishment of his salvation. Now this is to
build upon the sands, when we join works with Christ in the matter of
salvation: for though Christ be a sure rock in himself, yet if we will
fortify him by our works, we fall from this rock into perdition, and our
foundation is no better then sand. Gal. 5. 2. Behold I Paul say unto you, that
if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing: and, v. 4* Ye are
fallen from Christ whosoever will be justified by the law: in which ^laces the
Apostle labors to overthrow the opinion of the Galatians learned of the false
Apostles, which was, to join works with Christ in the matter of justification:
Romans 9. 32. Christ became unto the Jews a rock of offense, when as they would
be saved by the works of the law.

A second sort that build upon the sands, are the common Protestants: 2 Common
Protestants.
by whom I mean such as bear the name of Christians, and yet rest themselves
contented and satisfied with their civil lives; thinking, that because they
abstain from outward evil and gross sins, and do no man wrong, therefore
God will hold them excused: whereupon they profess religion more for obedience
to the laws of men, then for conscience to God. But this will not serve the
turn, these men though they profess Christ outwardly, yet in deed they deny
him* for by their course (though it may be they think not so) they will needs
become Saviors, and so Christ's unto themselves: which thing they do, when as
they stay themselves on their own civil life. The Scribes and Pharisees for
outward actions were very godly, and many of them lived unblameably: but yet
Christ says to his Disciples, Math. 5. 20. Except your righteousness exceed
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the
kingdom of heaven. 1. Cor. 4. 4. I know nothing by my self (says Paul) and
yet I am not thereby justified: this was a notable thing, for a man to walk so
uprightly in his calling, that his conscience could not accuse him of any
offense against God or man, and yet this is nothing in the matter of
Justification, because every man therein must answer to God.

The third sort of those that build upon the sand, is the Protestant 3 The more
forward Protestant.
that is more forward in religion then the former: I mean such as do hear
the word and receive it with joy, bringing forth some good fruit thereof. It
had been hard, I must confess, to have called such men foolish builders,
unless Jesus Christ had revealed them to be such: and yet that these do build
on the sand, it is plain in the parable of the seed that fell on stony
ground, Luke 8. 13. whereby are resembled such men as hear Gods word, and
receive it with joy, and bring forth some fruit, but yet in the time of
temptation do fall away: for though they professed Christ, yet they were not
founded on him, they wanted sound humility and true faith, which want in the
time of peace they could not epsy.

Uses. I. Seeing that men which hear and receive the word of God with joy, may
build on a fandie foundation, we must pray to God for this one blessing, that
he would write his word in our hearts by the finger of his spirit, as he writ
the law on the tables of stone in Mount Sina: for our hearts are deceitful,
and will counterfeit grace till the time of trial come: now God has promised
this blessing to his Church in the new Testament, and therefore we must pray
for it, that having his law written in our hearts, we may be the doers of it.

II. This must move us to look unto the deceitfulnes of our hearts: for fair
shows will not serve the turn in time of trial; and our hearts be deceitful
above all things: for when a man shall receive the word with joy, and bring
forth some fruit thereof, how should he not think himself to be in a good
case? and yet in time of trial this will disappoint him and deceive him.
Wherefore we must look that in our profession we carry a true heart unto God,
and to our selves: and for this cause must see that we be thoroughly humbled in
our selves for our sins, that we may make God and his fear to be our chief
treasure; for which cause we must remember that we are not our own, but Gods;
and so must not have the disposing of our selves, but subject our selves wholly
to his will in all things: and if thus we make him our treasure, we shall be
sure to make him our rock also.

III. We must not content our selves only to know Christ to be our Savior, and
to embrace religion in profession: but we must labor further to feel in our
selves the power of Christ's death to mortify sin in us, and the virtue of his
resurrection, to raise and build us up again in newnes of life, learning to
know Christ unto our selves by experience in our selves: for knowledge in the
brain will not save the soul: but he that is truly founded on Christ, feels
the benefits of his death and resurrection in some measure in himself.

IV. Point. The effect and fruit of bad hearing; that is, fearful ruin The
fruit of bad hearing.
and destruction, resembled by the issue of building on the sands: v. 27. The
rain fell, the floods came, etc. Where two things are to be noted; I. the
cause of this fearful ruin, the falling of the rain, and beating of the
floods and winds: II. the quality of this ruin; it is great and fearful,
The house fell, and the fall thereof was great.

For the first: Floods, and wind, and rain, do here betoken trialls Every
professor must be tried.
and temptations, which are here said to befall the professors of the name of
Christ. Whence we learn, that every one that does hear the word of God, and
profess true religion, must look for a day of temptation and trial. It is
Gods will that whosoever takes upon him the profession of his name, should be
tried what he is. Thus he permitted Adam presently after his creation to be
tempted and tried, the smart whereof we all feel unto this day: and God gave
Abraham a commandment of trial to kill his only son, Genesis 22. 1, 2. So he
left Hezekias to himself to try him, and to know all that was in his heart,
2. Chr. 32. 31. And John Baptist says of Christ, that he has his fan in his
hand, to sift and try the good corn from chafe, Matthew. 3. 12. and Luke 22.
31. the devil sought to winnow the disciples as wheat. And S. Peter makes it
a thing requisite, that the faith of Gods servants should be tried by
afflictions, as gold is tried in the fire, 1. Pet. 1. 7.

Use. We now have by Gods mercy true religion among us, and Our duty in
regard of trialls.
are freed from the bondage of the Turk, Jew, and Papist: we must therefore
stand fast in our profession, and not suffer our selves to be deprived of true
religion: for times will come when we must be tried: and therefore in this
happy time of peace and truth, which is to us the day of grace and mercy, we
must labor seriously to have our hearts endued with some good measure of
lasting grace, as of faith, hope, and love, which as good gold may abide the
trial of afflictions; otherwise we shall not stand: for all painted shows of
grace in time of trial will vanish away like dross and stubble before the
fire.

The second point in this effect, is the quality of this ruin and fall, it is
great and fearful; It fell, and the fall thereof was great. The thing
resembled hereby is most fearful, to wit, that such professors of religion as
in the days of peace did not join practice with their profession, shall fall
away in the time of trial, and come to most fearful perdition: this is the
principal point that Christ here aims at, whereby he intends to terrify men
from dissembled profession. And the consideration of it must work effectually
in our hearts, for we by Gods mercy and blessing have had the light of the
Gospel for many years together in such measure as never was in this land
before: and yet, though all of us be hearers, where is our obedience? alas,
some among us grow to be flat and peremptory Atheists, denying God and Christ
Jesus; others and the most, under the name of religion, root their hearts in
the world, some in profits, and some in pleasures, and none of these almost
regard religion: others profess religion, and yet live in gross sins, as
swearing, drunkenness, uncleanness, etc. making no conscience of gross
impiety in their lives: so that if we look into the general state of our
people, we shall see that religion is professed, but not obeyed: nay, obedience
is counted preciseness, and so reproached: but we must know that in the end
this profaning of religion will soon turn all Gods blessings temporal and
spiritual, into fearful curses both of body and soul. If ever any thing
bring ruin upon us, it will be the contempt of Gods word professed: and
therefore let us in the fear of God endeavor our selves not only to know and
hear the word of God, but to turn unto God from all sin, and especially in
regard of this sin of disobedience to the word of God.

Lastly, Christ notes the quality of this fall to be exceeding great, to
Danger of hypocrisy.
show unto us the great danger of hypocrisy: for there is great difference
between these three sorts of men: a sinner that makes no profession of
religion, an hypocrite that makes a great show of piety in profession, and a
true believer whose life and conversation is answerable to his profession. For
a true professor may fall into sin very fearfully, as Peter and David did,
and yet recover again. Also he that is a most notorious sinner, as Manasses
was, may be converted and repent. But when a professor that is an hypocrite in
religion is tried, he falls quite from Christ, and makes apostacy from his
profession; and in this regard his fall is called great. And therefore seeing
professors may thus fearfully fall away; let us in the fear of God labor in
some truth of heart to yield obedience to that we hear.

verse. 28. And it came to pass when Jesus had ended these words, the people
were astonished at his doctrine.

29. For he taught as one having authority, and not as the Scribes.


These two verses contain the issue and event of this Sermon of our Savior
Christ in his hearers. And in them we may observe two points: first, the good
fruit that came of this sermon, v. 28. secondly, the cause and reason thereof,
v. 29. The fruit was the astonishing of the people: which S. Matthew sets out
by three circumstances: I. of the time, when it appeared, to wit, after the
Sermon was ended: II. of the persons in whom it was wrought, the people, that
is, the multitude: III. of the matter whereat they were astonished, namely, at
the doctrine of Christ.

Touching this Astonishing of the people, in it many things are to The majesty
of Christ's ministry.
be observed: I. That though the person of our Savior. Christ were lowly and
base, yet his doctrine in preaching was of that force in the minds of his
hearers, for it did amase and astonish them. This caused the officers that were
sent to take him to return without him, alleging the majesty of his
doctrine for the reason of their fact, Never man spoke as* this man did* Ioh.
7. 46. and when the governors came with a band of men to apprehend him, so
soon as he did but tell them he was the Christ, they went backward, and fell
to the ground, Ioh. 18. 6.

This shows unto us, that the voice and sentence of Christ given at the last
day of judgment will be most fearful and terrible. For if his words were
thus powerful in his base estate of humility, what force will they then have,
when he shall come in glory and majesty in the clouds, accompanied with
thousands of Angels, when as his sight shall be so terrible, that men shall
call to the mountains to fall upon them, and to the rocks to grind them in
pieces, if it were possible? well, let the consideration hereof move us to be
obedient to his voice in the ministry of his word; otherwise, will we nill
we, we shall one day be subject to that fearful voice of condemnation, Go ye
cursed into everlasting fire.

II. Doctrine. This astonishment of the people argues some fear Astonishment
at the word no sure sign of conversion.
and reverence in them toward Christ, which is some commendation unto them:
and yet it proves not the truth and soundnes of their faith and conversion
(though no doubt many that heard him were hereby converted:) for a man may be
amassed at Christ's doctrine, and yet not be conue^^ed thereby. Luke 4. 22. the
people of Capernaum did maruelously affect the Doctrine of our Savior Christ
admiring at it, and yet they believed not in him, but took exceptions against
him, because he was so^^^to Joseph the carpenter. Pharaoh, Saul, and Ahab, when
they were reproved by Moses, Samuel, and Eliah, they were ofttimes much amassed
and confounded in themselves: and yet they did never truly turn from their
sins: And in this place, I take it, this astonishment of the people is
recorded, rather for the commendation of Christ's ministry, then to note out
the faith and conversion of the people.

This we are to observe for special cause: for it is the ordinary manner of
the most of our hearers to mark more or less what is spoken, to approve the
doctrine, and to speak well of the minister, which be good things in their
kind: but yet this is not enough: we must further labor to receive the word by
faith, to repent of our sins, and to conform our hearts and lives unto the
word: Luke 11. 27. when a woman, through admiration at Christ's doctrine,
pronounced her blessed that bare him, and the paps that gave him suck: Christ
took occasion thence to give unto her, and to the rest of the hearers this
lesson: nay, rather blessed are they that hear the word of God, and do it.
Act. 2. 37. at the first sermon of Peter after the giving of the holy Ghost,
the people were greatly amassed at his doctrine, and being pricked in
conscience, cried, Men and br^thren, what shall we do? now Peter suffers them
not to stand still in this astonishment, but labors further to bring them to
true faith and repentance, and to have the same by baptism confirmed unto
them, saying, Amend your lives, and be baptized, v. 38. And so Act. 16. 27. 31
dealt Paul with the Iayler that would have killed himself upon the sudden
sight of the prison door being open; for after he was truly humbled he
brought him to believe.

It may be here demanded, why our Savior Christ at this Sermon Quest. Why
Christ converted so few. Act. 2. 4^.
did no more to the most of his hearers, but caused them to wonder, when as the
Apostles converted many thousands at some one Sermon; and after brought the
whole body of the Gentiles to the faith. Ans. No doubt he was able to have
converted them all, and we may persuade our selves here were many converted
though it be not recorded, and though indeed the most were only astonished.
But this came so to pass that his promise made to his Disciples might be
verified, Ioh. 14. 12. which was, that they should do greater works then
Christ did; whereof this questionless was one, to convert more in their
ministry then Christ did. And the causes hereof were two: I. that our Savior
Christ might show himself willing to undergo that base estate of a servant
wherein he was borne and continued till his exaltation; therefore he was
content to restrain the power of his Godhead even from his ministry, until
he were exalted into glory: II. that he might make it manifest in his Apostles
times, that being ascended he did not only sit at the right hand of his
father, that is, rule as a king over all in his princely office; but also that
he did indeed govern his Church by his word and spirit: and this reason
Christ adds, Ioh. 14. v. 12. to prove that his Disciples should do greater
works then he did, because he went unto his father, there to rule and govern
his Church.

It may yet further be asked, why Christ did not convert them all, seeing he
was able being true and very God? Ans. No doubt (as has been said) many were
here converted, yet not all, because Christ was now the minister of
circumcision, (as the Apostle speaks) that is, ^om. 15. 8.
though in regard of his person he were the Prophet of the whole Catholic
Church: yet at this time in this action he was preacher only to the Church of
the Jews: in which regard he performed this duty as man only, and so could
do no more but deliver his fathers will unto them, and show himself willing
to convert them. And in this manner he speaks unto Jerusalem, Matthew. 23. 37. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, -- how often would I have gathered thy children, as a
hen gathers her chickens, I would, but ye would not: that is, as the
minister of circumcision in mine own person, and as God in the ministry of
my Prophets. Thus much of the astonishment it self. Now follow the
circumstances whereby it is amplified and set out, and they are three.

The first circumstance is the time when they were astonished, namely, when the
sermon was ended. No doubt they were amassed in the Silence in the holy
assemblies of the Church.
time of his delivery: but yet they were silent all that while and showed no
signs of their affection till the sermon was ended. And this good order ought
to be observed of all Gods people in the public ministry of the word. In the
bulding of the material temple, there was no noise or knocking heard so much
as of an hammer: whereby was signified that in the assemblies of the Saints
where Gods spiritual temple is bulding, there should be the like heavenly
order observed; men should hear with quitetnes and silence, and show their
affection^ afterward.

Secondly, we are here taught to labor not only to be affected in the Act of
hearing while the doctrine is delivered, but to treasure it up in our hearts,
that we may afterward be affected with it as this multitude was.

The second circumstance here noted, is the persons who were thus astonished: to
wit, the people or the multitude* for after the sermon was ended they gathered
themselves into companies, and make known one to another the affections of
their hearts toward Christ's doctrine. Hence we may gather, that our Savior
Christ delivered his dostrine Christ preached plainly.
plainly* unto the conscience of the meanest, and to the capacity of the
simplest; else they could not thereby have been brought to wonder. And this is
a president for all Ministers to follow in the dispensation of the word: so did
Paul, 2. Cor. 4. 2. 3. in such plainness deliver the word of God, that if it
were hid, he says, it was hid to them which perish.

The third circumstance, is the object of their astonishment; that is, his
doctrine: They were astonished at his Doctrine. This teaches us, that the word
of God must be so delivered, that the Doctrine it self Carnal preaching.
may affect the hearers. It is a carnal thing for a man so to preach, as the
consideration of his wit, of his memory, of his eloquence, of his great
reading may affect the hearers* many worthy parts (no doubt) were in our
Savior Christ, for which he might well be admired; and yet in the dispensation
of his word, he labors by his doctrine only to affect his hearers: and so
must all they do that will be followers of Christ.

II. Point. Thus much for the fruit of Christ's sermon: Now follows The
authority of Christ's ministry.
the cause thereof, which is Christ's authority in teaching, v. 29. for he
taught a^ on^ having authority, not as the Scribes. This authority in Christ^
ministry was caused from three things; I. From the matter Causes of it.
of his sermon. II. From the manner of his delivery. III. From the things that
accompanied his teaching.

I. The matter of his sermon was the incomparable excellency of ^. The matter.
heavenly doctrine; thus much his enemies the Scribes that came to tempt him
did confess, Mar. 12. 14. Master, thou art true, and teach the way of God
truly. And this was long before confirmed by Moses, who delivered the* promise
of Christ unto the people, into whose mouth God would put his word, Deuteronomy. 18.
18. and Ioh. 7. 16. Christ confesses, that his doctrine was not his own, but
his fathers that sent him.

II. The manner of his teaching was heavenly: and this showed it 2. The manner
of his teaching.
self in sundry things* for, I. Christ taught in his own name as a Lord of
his doctrine, and not as a messenger or interpreter thereof, as the Prophets
were: II. His speech and delivery was with special grace: Luke 4. v. 22. The
people wondered at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth, wherein
he expressed his humility, his meekenes, love, mercy, and compassion, plainly
showing by his speech that he was endued with all gifts of the spi^^^* above
measure: in this regard it is said, Isa. 50. 4. God gave him (that is, Christ)
the tongue of the learned, to be able to speak a word in due season, for the
comfort and appea^ing of a distressed conscience; which no man but Christ is
able to do. III. As he delivered the word vocally unto the outward ^are, so
he was able by the power of his Godhead, to make his hearers give attendance,
and to receive and believe that which he taught. And lastly, his zeal for his
fathers glory, and his earnest desire to bring the souls of men unto
salvation, which were principal ends of his ministry, did also add grace and
authority thereto.

III. The things that went with his doctrine did also cause authority 3.
things accompanying his ministry
in his ministry; and these were two: I. Miracles; as curing the sick, and
casting out devils; which did greatly confirm his doctrine unto his hearers:
Mark. 7. 37. when he had cured one that was both deaf and dumb, the people
were beyond measure astonished. II. An unblameable life; for he was Jesus
Christ the righeous, who performed all things that the law required, fulfilling
the will of God in suffering, and suffering in his obedience.

Further, note the phrase, in the original it is said here, He was teaching;
that is, it was his usual manner and custom, thus to preach with authority.
Herin Christ is a notable president unto us for sundry duties.

First, hereby every minister of Gods word is taught to maintain Mini^^er^
must maintain the credit of their ministry
the credit of his ministry, and to preserve the same from contempt;
especially in his own place, and in his own person: though Christ were here
in a mean and base estate, yet he would not suffer his calling to be
contemned, but gets grace thereunto. And Paul charge Timothy, to see that no
man de^pise his youth, 1. Tim, 4. 12. and to Titus he gives the like
commandment, Tit. 2. 15. These things speak, and exhort and rebuke with all
authority. See that no m^^ dispi^e thee. Now in the example of Christ, we
shall see how this is done; not by outward pomp and estate, or by earthly
means: but by truth and soundness of doctrine, by zeal for Gods glory, and
for the good of men's souls, and by an unblameable life.

Secondly, hence also Gods ministers (if they will be followers of Right manner
of preaching.
Christ) must learn not only to ^each sound and heavenly doctrine, but to
observe therein a divine and spiritual manner of teaching: 1. Cor. 2. verse. 4.
and 13. Paul says, his preaching was not in humane wisdom, but in the plain
evidence of the spirit; comparing spiritual things with spiritual things:
which is then done, wh^ the people may acknowledge the grace of God in the
teacher. As it is said of the ignorant man who is rebuked of the Prophets, 1.
Cor. 14. 25. He falls down on his face and says plainly. God is in you
indeedr. There is great difference to be made between discoursing in
Philosophy, which may be done by humane wit, and preaching in divinity. He
that can discourse well in Philosophy, cannot thereupon presently preach and
dispense the word of God aright; for preaching is a spiritual duty, which
cannot be performed by natural gifts only. The Prophet Isay must have his
tongue touched Isay, 6. 6, 7.
with a cole from Gods altar, before he could speak and utter Gods word unto
the people: and Paul the most famous of the Apostles, desires in all his
Epistles, to be prayed for, that his mouth might be opened: whereby he does
signify, that to deliver wholesome doctrine in spiritual manner, for the
glory of God, and the good of his people, is a great matter, and cannot by
natural gifts be attained unto. And indeed this is that teaching which saues
the soul, and affects the heart of him that belongs to God; which is the thing
that every minister of Gods word ought to labor for.

Thirdly, seeing Christ in his preaching does maintain the authority We must
maintain the dignity of our profession.
of his ministry, every man in his place is taught to maintain and preserve
the dignity of his profession. We are all of us by our profession Christians,
and by baptism the sons and daughters of God; now our duty is to walk
worthy this our calling, and to take heed we bring it not into contempt. It
is a most heinous wickedness for any man to bring a slander upon the name and
religion of God; and yet nothing is more frequent in this our age: for men will
needs ^e christians in profession, and therefore will receive the sacraments,
which be the highest top sails of all profession: and yet in their lives they
are profane, and live as they list; yea, and if others will not join with them
in their wickedness, they will not sp^r^ to scorn and revile them. But herein
they sin fearfully, in dishono^^ing their profession; and though they charge
others with hypocrisy, that endeavor in some truth to be answerable to their
profession, yet they themselves practice most gross hypocrisy, when as they
will bear the name of Christians, in profession, and communicate with the Lord
his holy ordinances, and yet make no conscience of sin, but scorn those that
do. Ephesians. 4. 1. Paul prayed for the Ephesians, that they might walk worthy
the vocation whereto they were called: and Titus 2. 7. he exhorts Titus
hereunto, that in all things he should show himself an e^sample of good works,
with vncorrupt doctrine, with gra^itie and integrity, etc. Yea verse 10. he
requires servants to show such faithfulness in their service, that they may
adorn the doctrine of God.

And not as the Scribes For first, they failed in the matter; they delivered
not the doctrine of God, but the traditions of men, about washings and
^ythings. Secondly, they failed in the manner; they taught coldly, and without
zeal. Thirdly, they failed in the end; they taught in pride and ambition,
seeking themselves, and not Gods glory. But Christ, as we have seen, taught
far otherwise: and although he misliked their preaching, both for matter,
manner, and end, yet he vouchsafed to hear them, or else how could he have
reproved these things in the^? Which shows that Christ would not separate
himself from their assemblies, whose doctrine he disliked, with the delivery
thereof. And therefore Separation f^^m our Church is unlawful.
no man ought to sever himself from the Church of England, for some wants that
be therein: we have the true doctrine of Christ preached among us by Gods
blessing, and though there be corruptions in manners among us, yea, and though
they could justly find fault with our doctrine; yet so long as we hold Christ,
no man ought to sever himself from our Church. And thus much for this Sermon.

(...)
A Table of the chief points and questions handled in this Commentary: the
figures note the page, the let ters b, the beginning: m, the middle: e, the
end of the page.
A
ADams fall decreed. 134. m Adoption, how known. 430. m. six notes of
Adoption out of the Lords prayer. 324. m Adultery described. 110. m. the
greatness of this sin. 111. m occasions of it forbidden. 113. e Affliction,
how to honor God therein. 262. b. 248. m. how to live therein. 480. m. comforts
to the afflicted. 12. e. 13. b. 438. m. 454. m Alchemists confuted. 382. m
Alms described. 189. b. Almesgiuing handled at large in eight points. 188,
189. etc. it is justice. 217. e. and a duty of the rich. 186. e. what makes
our giving to be Alms. 218. m. mo^^ues to Alms giving. 194. e. whether the
wife may give Alms without the husbands consent. 188. e Amen, what it
signifies. 320. m Anabaptists confuted. 460. b Angels, how they do Gods will.
280. m. our imitation of them. ibid. and 282. m. how we are to honor them.
283. c Anger advised is lawful. 94. b. notes of it. ibid. rash Anger a degree
of murder. 91. b Antiquity, no certain note of truth. 89. e Apparel,
wherefore ordained. 376. m. practices of inordinate care for Apparel. 38^. e
Apocrypha books not canonical. 463. m Apostacy: sieve degrees of it. 365. m
Armor of a Christian. 308. e Assault: what a man may do being unlawfully
assaulted. 182. b Asseueration in common talk unlawful. 171. m Astonishment
by the ministry of the word, no sign of conversion. 546. e Atheism
abounding. 368. m Authority of Christ and the Apostles, whether equal. 473. e
B
BAnishment, a comfort therein. 19. b Bargaining, how to deal therein. 461. e
Beggars, cause of many beggars. 223. m. lusty beggars must not be ordinarily
relieved. 191. m 192. e. 193 Blessings temporal how they become ours. 287. e
Boldness in prayer, how gotten. 255. b Books divine, Ecclesiastical, and
humane. 471. e. 472 Bountifulnes of God. 403. b. duties from thence. 403. m
Bread, what it signifies. 285. b Bruit creatures more obedient then man. 378. e
Builders on the rock. 538. b. on the sand. 542. m
C
CAlling each one ought to have a lawful calling. 28. our Callings should be
the instruments of mercy. 27. b. the duties of lawful Callings be good
works. 63. b Care twofold. 372. e. 404. m. the Christian man's care. 394. m.
289. e. the practice of moderate care. 373. b. distrustful care with effects
and signs thereof. 373. e. 404. e. 391. b. reasons against it. 1. from the
creation. 376. 2. from Gods providence. 377. m. 3. from the vanity of it* 380.
m. 4. from Gods providence. 384. b. 5. it is heathenish. 392. b. 6. God cares
for us. 393. m. 7. from the burden of it. 405. m Censurers commonly the vilest
persons. 424. m Ceremonies, when abrogated. 103. m Chalenging the field
unlawful. 181. m Charms condemned. ^99. b. 315. m Chastity, how it is
preserved. 117. b Children of God, their happy estate. 38. e. true note of Gods
child. 205. e Children of wrath. 173. m Christ's righteousness. 86. e. how
Christ fulfilled the law. 71. m Church of God may be hid. 56. e. how God taught
his Church before Scripture was written. 465. m. Gods Church must be under the
cross. 41. m. why the world hates it. 42. m. Church an incompetent Judge.
471. m. a sure note of the true Church. 136. b. our Church defended against the
Brownists. 136, 137. 168. b. 505. b Civil honesty insufficient to save any.
85. e. 210. m. 479. e Comfort from God 4. ways. 13. e Comforts in sundry
temptations. 21. b. 371. e Commandments briefly handled. 484, 485, 486.
Commandments negative bind more then the affirmative. 187. e. man's conceit of
keeping the Commandments. 90. m. third Commandment restored. 149. m. sixth
Commandment restored and expounded. 89, 90. etc. our examination by it. 96. ^.
the 7. Commandment restored and expounded. 110. b. etc. our examination by it.
116. b. the general commandment of lou^ restored and expounded* 199. ^. etc.
Communication: a rule for it. 170. e. Invocation of God therein unlawful. 171.
b Communicants duty. 102. m. we may communicate with the wicked. 140. m
Community of all things not required of God. 195. m Conscience, how to keep
good conscience. 313. e. 462. m Consent to sinners two ways. 121. m
Contentions beseem not Christians. 183. b Contentation: grounds thereof. 248.
m. 272. e. 285. e. 286. 385. e. 393. e. motives to contentation. 345. b
Conversion described. 397. m. why Christ converted so few. 547. e Correction,
or reproof handled in four points. 431. b Covetousness, the maine cause
thereof. 356. m. practices of Covetousness forbidden. 343. m. 345. m. disswasiues
from Covetousness. 285. m Creatures insensible, made our teachers. 384. m
D
DAmnation, of the number that shall be damned. 519. m Death: preparation
thereto. 273. e remedy against the fear of it. 14. m. the second death. 531.
e. how Christ suffered it. 532. b Debt, why sin is called a debt. 293. e. how
we become debtors to our neighbor. 298. e Decree of God depends not on
foreseen works. 528. b Defamation; a maine cause thereof. 416. m Delight;
whether we may use the creatures for delight. 286. e Desertio^, how God uses
it toward his children. 450. e Despair, comfort against despair. 22. b. 296.
e Devil; why called that evil one. 127. e. he is always about us, though
unseen. 172. m Difference of people before Christ's death. 245. e Dispensation
against Gods law by Papists. 75. m Divorce only for Adultery. 145. m. 146
Doctrine corrupt breeds bad manners. 200. e Dogs and swine who? 439. b.
decliners thereto among us. 440. e
E
ENchanters can not turn one creature into an other. 382. b Enemy described.
201. e. to love an enemy what it is. ibid. Popish doctrine thereof. 240. m
Enemies must no^ be wronged. 204. e. kind usage toward an enemy. 212. m
Equammity in our dealings. 107. m Estate: man's outward estate determined of
God. 381. m A dangerous conceit of a man's own good Estate. 520. m Evil, what
it signifies. 309. e. a note of an evil man. 456. ^. whether an evil man may
do a good work. 457. m Examples of the godly, when they become rules. 328. e.
the force of bad Examples. 122. m Excommunication is Gods ordinance. 443. e.
the end of it. 444. b. who must execute it. ibid. how far it reaches. ibid.
wrongful Excommunication no curse. 44. m. Expounding of Scripture: rules
thereof. 118. m. 155. ^. 221. e. 247. b. fraudulent Expounding of Scripture.
111. b
F
FAlling from grace. 305, 306 Fast: a religious fast handled in six points.
328. etc. popish Fasting showed abominable. 334. e. the necessity of Fasting.
335. m. motives thereto. ib. e. whether Fasting be a part of Gods worship. 340.
m. whether it merit. 341. b Faith only justifies. 135. m. it does not always
minister present comfort. 14. m. true Faith cannot be lost. 539. m. trials of
true Faith. 125. e. 390. b. 516. b. degrees of true Faith. 388. m. it
comprehends three things. 515. m. it apprehends Gods promises. 389. m. how to
keep faith. 313. b. Father: this title handled. 252. e. how it belongs to the
first person. 253. b. Fatherhood in God equal to all believers. 257. e Faults:
corrupt prying into other men's faults. 420. e Fear of God, grounds of it. 165.
^. 166. e. remedy against the fear of the devil. ibid. remedy against
carnal fear. 248. e Feeling, not necessary in the case of grace. 480. b
Fighting unlawful. 181. m Flight in persecution, when lawful. 43. b Food how
it is sanctified. 290. b Forgiveness of sin described. 294 b. how man
forgiues. 298. b. how far we are bound to forgive. ibid. m. rules of
forgiving. 327. b
G
GEhenna. 92. m Gesture in preaching. 4* e. despiteful gesture, a degree of
murder. 94. e Getting ill, condemned. 288. e Gifts of the spirit of two
sorts. 457. e Glory: motives to glorify God. 265. b God: how to conceive of
God. 163. m. how he may be seen. 31. ^. Gods name what it signifies. 260. e.
of sanctifying it. 261. m. etc. whereto Gods titles serve. 206. m Gods
omnipresence. 165. m. power. 3^8. b Good, what makes a man good. 210. b Goods
temporal distinguished. 189. e. how to glorify God therewith. 290. e Gospel
described. 69. e* how it differs from the law. ibid. how it restraines our
natural desires. 487. b Grace, how to get it. 459. m. whether by the good use
of natural gifts. 460. b. whether true grace may be lost. 306. b. 465. m.
comfort to the weak in grace. 459. ^ Grudges in heart forbidden. 205. b Guile
of spirit what it is, and when it preuailes. 226. e. and 227
H
Hair of the head, how abused. 169. e Happiness: how to know our happiness
before God. 23. b. it is accompanied with the cross. 7. b. worldlings err in
judging of it. 11. b Hatred of our brethren is in us naturally. 423. b. of
hating an enemy. 202. e. 205. b Hear: Gods readiness to hear. 453. e. how
God hears the wicked. ib. b Hearers of Gods word: duty of good hearers. 535.
e. all hearers bound to obedience. 540. e. obedient hearing is true wisdom.
536. e. bad hearers. 540. m Heart largely taken. 353. b. how to know the state
of the heart. ib. m heart purified two ways. 29. e. it must not be parted
from God. 371. b. who have hollow hearts toward God. 79. e Heathen: their
insight into religion 239. e. their co^ceits of God. 244 Heaven: how it is Gods
throne. 162 ^. how the third heaven was exempted from corruption. 352. e. how
to know our title to it. 353. Heretics, the abundance of them in the primitive
Church. 492. e Herodians. 84. e Hoarding of corn. 96. m Honor twofold,
religious and civil 261. m. Humanity described. 37. b Humility. 36. e. daily
humiliation. 296. m. a ground of it toward God. 166. ^ Hypocrite, what it
signifies. 222. b. kinds. 512. e. properties. 222. m. 426. b. 428. e. danger*
545. what gifts an hypocrite may have. 513
I
Idolatry of the heart. 425. e Ignorant persons their excuse is removed. 162.
m. 474. m. man's natural ignoranc^ of God. 360 Illumination twofold. 349* m.
illumination of the Gospel may be lost. 365. b Images of God abominable. ^39
Imputed righteousness defended against the Papists. 86. e. 87 Itching humors
in matters of faith 493. m Iuda^s^e a false religion. 481. b Judgment of
others twofold. 440. m. four kinds of lawful Judgment. 407. e. Judges of
others should be unreprovable. 424. b. rash Judgment* described. 408. ^. the
practice of it* 409. m. reasons against it. 412* m* 415. m. 420. b. remedy of
rash Judgment. 425. m. how to Judge rightly of others. 414. m. 423. b* how to
Judge our selves for sin. 427. ^. a right Judge in matters of faith. 471. b.
what makes a man just. 210. b Justification consists not in remission of sins
only. 294. b
K
KIlling forbidden, and the kinds of it. 97, 98. when it is lawful to kill.
98. b Kingdom of God described. 316. m. 394. m. it is twofold, general and
special. 267. m. 394. c Kingdom of heaven. 10. b. it is twofold. 79. m. how
Gods kingdom comes. 269. m. proofs of Gods sovereign kingdom. 316. c.
hindrances to Gods kingdom. 270. furtherances. 271. m. 272. b. all are out of
Gods kingdom naturally. 396. b. our duty to get in. ib. m. Knowledge, trial
of our knowledge. 125. b. Gods knowing of some to be his. 525. m. the fruit of
this knowledge in them. 529. b
L
LAw in general described. 68. c the parts of it, Ceremonial, Judicial,
Moral. 69. b. the Law is perpetual. 74. m. no creature can dispense with it.
75. m. integrity of the Law. 76. c. how the Law restraines our natural
desires. 484. b. privilege of Gods Law above man's. 101. b. 144. c. Laws of
toleration. 142. b League between people two-folde. 36. m Lending handled at
large. 196, 197, 198. how it becomes a work^ of mercy. 187. m Life eternal
described. 476. b. a Christian life lead by faith. 477. 478. a pattern of a
godly life. 279. m. 324. b. rules for it. 359. b. 405. b. temporal life has
his certain period. 381. c. misery of man's life. 406. m. how Christ esteems
a godly life. 534. b Light twofold. 54. b. all Christians should be lights. 57.
m Logycke approved. 200. c Long-suffering. 36. c Looking to lust, or idle
looking. 112 c. how to look to Gods glory. 119. c Losses: a ground of
patience in losses. 402. c Love described. 201. c. examples of love in
practice. 202. m. a rule of loving our neighbor. 211. m. brotherly love
wanting. 421. m. how to get love. 462. m. Lust in heart is sin. 114. c. it is
twofold. 115. m. motives to subdue it. 116. m Luthers conversion. 77. m
M
Magistracy approved. 109. c. 176. c. Magistrates duty in keeping the Law.
78. b Manslaughter is murder. 98. m Marriage after divorce for adultery. 146.
c Masters of families duty. 273. c. 465. c Meditation on Gods creatures. 161.
c Meekness described. 15. b. and handled by the fruits and ground thereof.
ib. and 16. b. motives to meekness. 16. c Mercy described. 24. b. duties of
mercy. ib. c. a merciful man described. 25. b. motives to mercy. 25. ^. 380.
b. rules for the exercise of mercy. 26. m Merit of works confuted. 28. m. 45.
m. 225. b. 286. m. 382. m Mind: how corrupted by Adams fall. 360. m Ministers
office twofold. 58. b. 82. m. the end thereof. 67. c. his duty in preaching.
47. m. 441. c. he must preserve the purity of the word. 438. c. and the credit
of his ministry. 550. m. the ministers peculiar sin. 49. c. four kinds of
unsavory ministers. 50. b. their dangerous estate. 51. b. whether ministers
making apostacy from the truth, may be received into the Ministry. 52. c.
how ministers are lights, and their duty thereupon. 54. b. their conversation
should be blameless. 56. c. 82. c. a ministers comfort, against his peoples
untowardness. 83. b. what commends a minister. 507. m. of ministers calling.
501. m Ministry of the wicked may be used. 505. c. Christ's ministry full of
majesty, and yet planie. 546. m. causes thereof. 549. m A Miracle described*
522. b. God only works them. ibid. how man works a miracle. ibid. Miracles
are now ceased. ibid. c. miraculous works no sufficient ground of n^w doctr^^e.
499. b. 524. m Moses writ the first scripture. 464. c Moral law described in
3. points. 69. m. how it differs from the Gospel. 69. c. Popish error in
confounding them. 70. b. wherein they consent. 73. b Murder in three degrees.
91. b
N
NAme, how to get a good name 416. c Natural corruption makes us unsavory.
48. c Neighbor taken two ways. 200. b Noah his Arc: of the quantity of it.
129. b
O
OAth: two things in an oath. 154. c. the strait bond of an oath. 153. b. a
constrained oath binds. ib. m. an oath gotten by error binds. ibid. m. and
indamaging our estate. ib. c. the popes dispensation from a binding oath. ibid.
c. the Pharisees doctrine of oaths. 154. b. indirect oaths, or sivearing by
the creatures, forbidden. 159. b. 169. m. minsed oaths forbidden. 156. b
Obedience twofold. 276. c. branches of new obedience. 517. fruits of it. 539.
b. motives to it. ib* m. hindrances to obedience* 277. m. furtherances. ibid.
c. and 278. m. resemblance of our obedience to the angels. 280. c Occasions of
sins o^ offenses described. 1^0. c. kinds of offenses. ib. Offenses given
six w^^^s. 121. b. the way to avoid them. 12^. c. of offenses taken. 127*
four heads of offenses taken. ib. etc. the remedies. ib. Offenses should be
avoided. 120. m Oppressors: a terror unto them. 418. m Original sin, the
greatness of it. 509. b Own: we may not do with our own what we will. 187.
b
P
PArdon of sin, how God grants it. 293. b. a true sign thereof. 300. c. it
must be believed particularly. 321. b Parents duty to their children. 456. b.
their prerogative for apprehending Gods mercy. 455. c Pastor: how every
Christian is a pastor. 431. c Patience in affliction taught. 76. c 280. b. 487.
c Peace in general described. 34. c. kinds of peace. ib. how to get and keep
true peace. 36. c. 302. b. how to esteem it. 183. c Peacemakers, who. 34. c.
to Godward. 37. m Peace-breakers, who, and their estate. 38. m People ought to
be able to judge of teachers. 505. m. their duty to their ministers. 58. m.
when a people cease to be Gods people. 167. m Perfection, legal, and
Evangelical. 213. c. 214. Perfection in parts, and in degrees. 214. c. how
Gods child is perfect. 215. b Perjury described. 149. c. 150. the
grieuousnesse of this sin. 152. m. three kinds of perjury. ib. m. whether
sworn members of societies be perjured in breaking their statutes. 151. m.
whether he may be put to swear, that is thought will periure himself. 152. m
Persecution, and the kinds of it. 40, 41. of flight in persecution. 446. b
Pharisees described. 84. c Pilgrimage going confuted. 258. m Place: difference
of place for religious use abolished. 239. c Pomp: worldly pomp is vanity.
386. m Poor: what poor are blessed. 8. consolation to the poor. 11. c.
duties of the poor in regard of their poverty. 199. b. how the poor may have
sufficient. 400. b the degrees of poverty. 190. b. popish voluntary poverty
confuted. 9. c. 195. c Popery a false religion. 481. b. corrupted. 504. m. no
reconciliation with popery. 35. m. delight in popish writers dangerous. 495.
c. popes Bulls be Satan's instruments. 44. m Prayer: the necessity of it. 231.
objections against it answered. 23^ parts of prayer. 230. b. the right manner
of praying. 236. m. 254. b. of reverence in prayer. 258. c. 234. m. four
conditions in acceptable prayer. 446. c. of a set form of prayer. 249. c. of
public prayer. 253. m. why we pray notwithstanding God knows our wants. 247.
m. why God delays to grant our prayers. ibid. why God never graunts some men
their requests. ibid. c. of applying Gods promise in prayer. 256. m. 451. m. a
double proppe to our hearts in prayer. 259. c. of praying standing. 230. c. how
Papists fail in prayer. 238. c. prayer to Saints unlawful. 240. c. prayer
cannot merit. 241. m. sundry abuses in prayer. 242. m. we must pray for
others. 256. c. in love. 257. m. in zeal. 448. b. constantly. 449. c. Lords
prayer how far forth prescribed. 249. m. the excellency of it. 251. c. how
it is made a pattern to our prayers. 32^. b Praise: how to praise God. 319. m.
the author and ground of true praise. 228. c Preaching in a right manner. 48. c
54. ^. 436. c. 472. c. 550. c. carnal preaching. 27. m. Preachers may be
condemned. 52^. c Pride of mind and heart. 218. c. 426. m. the practice of
pride. 219. m. why pride must be avoided, and how. 219. m. pride in apparel
checked. 386. b Professors of religion that shall be saved. 515. b. professors
that shall not be saved. 512. c. the true wisdom of professors. 537. m. the
folly of some professors. 541 Prophet: how God calls Prophets and teachers.
501. m. notes of a true Prophet. ib. b. 502. c. what makes a false prophet.
491. c. society with false prophets must be avoided. 495. m. why god suffers
false prophets. 497. b. danger of false prophets. ib. m. the^r pretenses. 497.
c. fruits and notes of false prophets. 520. m. 503. punishment of false
prophets. 510. m. 79. m. of discovering a false prophet. 500. m. what it is to
prophecy. 521. m Prosperity a fruit of Gods kingdom. 274. m Providence of God
rightly conceived of. 164. m. 165. m. particular providence proved. 169. b.
379. m. preserving providence. 207. b. how to rest on Gods providence. 379. m.
a rule for provision of worldly things. 344. m. man's spiritual providence. 358
Publicans described. 201. b Purgatory confuted. 105. b. 476. m Pure in heart.
30. how it is gotten. 31.
Q
QVarelling a note of a badde man. 91. m
R
RAca. 91. m Rain a common blessing of God. 208. m. ^nseasonable rain is Gods
punishment. 209. c. of astrologicall predictions of rain. ibid. m. sorcerers
cannot cause rain. 209. m Reconciliation to God. 108. c. of brotherly
Reconciliation. 110. m. 301. b Reregeneration, signs of it. 402. m Religion:
how to know true religion. 430. e. and a truth in religion. 494. m. it must not
be tempered to men's humors. 175. b. natural men's behavior in religion. 334.
b. 337. b Remission of sin goes with repentance. 299. m Repentance: the
grounds of it. 516. e. the nature of it. ibid. the practice of it. 300. m.
motives thereto. 76. b. 534. m Repetition in Scriptures implie importance. 118.
e Reprobation how we maintain it. 133. m. God is not cruel to his creatures
therein. 526. m. Reproba^es never have true faith. 530. e Reproof: of the
manner of reproouing. 429. b Restorers of true religion ought to be reverenced.
4^4. b. of their calling to preach the truth. 501 Restraint of our nature by
Gods word. 484 etc. Revenge twofold. 176. m. desire of revenge must be avoided.
301. b private revenge unlawful. 176. e* reasons against it. 177. e. kinds of
private revenge. ib. b. lawful revenge handled. 179. m. when revenge may be
sought by the magistrate. 180. m Reuiling forbidden. 95. e. it is a kind of
pe^sequution. 43. e Reward, whether it implie merit. 45. m. 221. m Riches a
great lord. 368. e. when rich men forsake God. 370. b. how the rich may
continue their wealth. 400. e Right to earthly things twofold. 18. m
Righteousness true, and saving. 86. m. man's natural conceit thereof. 85. m gods
righteousness notes Christ's obedience. 395. b. how it is made ours. ib. ^ Rome
no true part of Chr. Church. 81. m. 168. m. separation from Rome no scisme.
496. m Rules of expounding the law. 93. ^. 110. e
S
SAbbath: of the change of it. 74. e. how trades men may sell thereon. 193. e
Sacrifice: what the giving thereof signified. 103. e Sadduces. 84. e Salt:
three properties thereof resembling the ministry. 47. m Salutation must be
friendly. 212. m Sanctification of the creature. 291. b. sanctification goes
with justification. 87. e. a comfort against doubting thereof. ^1. m Satan's
policies against Gods children. 310. m. his malice against the Church. 492. m.
he is limited in tempting. 308. m. how to resist him. 312. e Schools of the
Prophets approved. 5. and 200 Scismatikes differ from false Prophets. 492
Scripture excels all other books. 11. b. the certentie of Scripture handled.
466, 467, 468. authority of Scripture handled. 469. how it gives judgment.
ibid. and 470. how some take offense at Scripture. 127. m. popish distinction
of Scripture into inward and outward. 469. m Scribes what they were. 84. m.
Sects among the Jews. 84. e Security in sin. 295. m. 423. m. carnal
security condemned. 488. e. their excuses removed. 489 Selling how made a
work of mercy. 187. m See: God the secret seer. 228. b Senses: what senses
must be the instruments of mercy. 16. m. how to ground our senses. 119. b
Separation from our Church unlawful. 552. b Service: preparation to Gods
service. 104. m. what it is to serve God. 367. m. the error of the ignorant
herein. 368. m Silence in hearing Gods word. 548 Sins differ in degree. 422.
m. sin goes not alone. 224. b. it reigns not in Gods child* 371. m. maine
sins in all men naturally* 425. e. most secret sins known to Christ. 533. e.
purpose of sinning must be avoided. 534. e. how to perceive the grieuousnes of
our sins. 426. e. how to reform our sin in our selves. 425. m Slacknes in
the better sort reproved. 490. e Speaking of others, how to behave our selves.
403. m Spirits: whether we may go into places haunted by evil spirits. 315. e
Stews falsely grounded on laws of toleration. 142. m Students in divinity,
their duty. 537. b. study of Scripture should be diligent. 77. b Success:
how to leave it to Gods blessing. 375. m Suffer: how they that suffer
deservedly may be blessed. 43. b. suffering wrong: examples. 180. e. 182. e. it
is the state of a Christian to suffer. 185. b Suits in law, how lawful. 36. b.
common suits in law unlawful. 108. m. 183. m Sun: the benefit of it. 208. b
Superiors their duty. 537. b. a note of evil superiors. 184. e Suspicion:
of suspecting evil of others. 414. b Swearing how far forth forbidden,
diverse opinions. 155. b. ordinary swearing forbidden. ib. e and 171. m.
pretenses for swearing answered. 156. m. times and cases wherein an oath is
lawful. 157. m. the right manner of lawful swearing. 158. m. swearing by
faith, troath, etc. unlawful. 161. m
T
TEacher: properties of a badde teacher. 175. e. 200. b Temporal blessings:
how they must be sought. 399. m. how rightly used. 292. their dependence on
Gods kingdom. 400. e Temptation: kinds thereof. 303. m. degrees therein. 304.
b. it is the state of Gods children. 302. m. whether every temptation come from
Satan. 171. e. how God leads into temptation. 305. m. helps against
temptation. 306. e Testament: how to know the books of the old testament. 72.
e. 463. in. new testament is divine scripture. 464. e Thanksgiving should be
frequent with Gods children. 266. m. 319 Toleration of false religion
unlawful. 469. b Tongue: abuses thereof. 95. m Traditions unwritten. 473. m
Treasure heavenly: what it is. 347. 348. how we lay it up. 347. m. 349 Trees:
how some become evil. 508 Trust in God: a notable ground thereof. 318. e
Turcisme a false religion. 481. b Tyrant: private men may not kill a tyrant.
182. m
V
Vanity of the creatures. 346 Ueniall sins what they are with Papists. 93.
b. how the fathers called some sins venial. 42^ Uniuersall grace confuted.
244. m. 246. m. 392. m. 459. e. 482. e Unmerciful men: their number and
misery. 25* m Unregenerate: their estate. 508. e U^w of Baptism* the breaking
of it is a great sin. 151. e V^^ri^ condemned. 198. b
W
War: whether lawful to Christians. 35. e Watchfulnes against sin. 303. b
Way of life. 477. b. how to walk in it. 483. m. way to destruction with the
paths thereof. 480. e Wealth: erroneous seeking of it. 18. m. 401. b. three
things allowed about wealth. 343. b. of lawful seeking and treasuring up
wealth. 243. m. 344 Wicked are vsurper^ of temporal blessings. 401. m.
charity in judging of them. 168. m Will: Gods will absolute, and revealed,
handled. 275. b. special branches of Gods revealed will. 276. m. wherein the
doing of Gods will stands. 515. m. how to become cheerful doers thereof.
518. b Wisdom: true heavenly wisdom. 356. e. 358. b. how it is gotten. ibid.
e. the actions of it. 357. b. how to season natural wisdom. 359. m. the
common error in judging men wise. 541. e Witches: rash judgment concerning
witches. 411. m Word of God: how God is sanctified in it. 262. b. how to
understand it. 430. b. Gods word an holy thing. 435. m. how we should esteem
it. 438. b. we must preserve the purity of it. 500. b Works: a good work
described. 58. e. how to do good works. 225. m. works not commanded are no
good works. 59. b. the person that must do a good work. 60. m. a double
faith required therein. 61. b. the end and use of good works. 61. e. and 65.
m. 66. two sorts of good works. 62. e. extent of good works. 63. b. necessity
of good works. 63. e. how far necessary to salvation. 64. b. how far
good* 64. m. not perfectly. ibid. e good works follow justification. 509. e
Works of God must be considered. 377. e Worldlings want faith. 292. m. they
are as Pagans. 392. m Worship: degrees of duties therein. 102. e. directions
concerning Gods worship. 338. e. no difference of place for Gods worship. 166.
b. 258. m. to worship God in images abominable. 258. m Wrong doing the
property of an evil man. 178. e. 183. e. a diswasion from it. 461. m. our
duty when we are wronged. 186. m. 461. e. private wrongs must be forgiven.
326. e
The end of the first Table.
A Table of places of Scripture, which are either expounded, vindicated, or
whereout some special doctrine or duty is observed.
Genesis.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 11 385. 387 31 508 2 7 387 3 17, 18 508 19 343 4 6 94. 433
5 24 166 6 2 246 11 6 414 13 9 108 15 1 348 17 1 32. 166 18 21 414 27 275 32 38
20 11 166 21 23 158 22 1, 2 544 8 373 28 20, 21 292. 403 31 53 169 32 10 403 33
3 167 34 1, 2 113 42 16 160 Exodus.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3 7, 8 26 9 27 513 13 2 221 14 15 240 16 18, 19 289 21 24
174 22 2 182 32 19. 27, 28 15. 152 33 11 32 Leuiticus.
Chap. Verse. Page. 7 16 59 10 1, 2 53. 265 16 29 329 19 12 149 24 14 496 25 35
191 26 23, 25 38 Numbers.
Chap. Verse. Page. 6 22, 23 249 12 3 15 21 14 465 25 7, 8, 9. 179 26 21, 24 209
35 31 98 Deuteronomie.
Chap. Verse. Page. 4 6 536 7 454 15, 16 239 5 11 149 6 13 160 7 2 203 7, 8 246
9 18, 19 233 11 14 208 12 8, 11 362 13 1, 2 498 15 8 217 9 16 17 16, 17 404 18,
19 78 18 18 549 24 1 142 25 7, 8, 9 65 27 26 75 29 19, ^0. 300. 489 Joshua.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3 19 153 5 2 221 10 13 465 Judges.
Chap. Verse. Page. 6 45 49 16 29, 30 488 I. Samuel.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 15 237 2 25 104 34 53 3 18 391 7 6 339 15 9 24 23 540 22 9
373 23 34 373 25 12, 32 151 22 153 23, 24 166 36, 37 434 26 10 18^ 31 13 332
II. Samuel.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 9, 16 198 7 27, 28, 29 452 10 3 410, 42^ 11 2, 3 113 12 11
418 13 326 14 24 213 16 10 417 23 360 21 17 57 I. Kings.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3 13 386, 403 10 8 112 15 34 67 18 40 59 42 232 19 12 56 20
41 24 21 9, 10, 13 156 27 513 28 244 29 453 22 6 II. Kings.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 8 497 2 4 160 3 14 121, 212 6 5 157 14, 19, 21 20^ 31 155
10 16 514 19 1 156 23 25 281 II. Chronicles.
Chap. Verse. Page. 15 17 214 17 6 215 19 2 36 32 31 544 33 13 13, 429 34 32 496
35 26 457 Ezr^.
Chap. Verse. Page. 7 1, 5, 7 84 Nehemias.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 3, 4 26 8 1, 2 84 10 189 10 1, 22 340 Job.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 5 131 8 9, 10, 11 409 12 308 10 8 376 13 15 391, 478 14 1
406 5 382 19 26, 27 23 31 1 113 16 109 32 20 5 Psalms.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 6 247. 525 4 6 357 11 4 164 15 1 398 4 1^5 16 5, 6 348 20
1 260 21 3 403 22 8 289 23 4 393 24 4 29 25 9 4^9. 511 32 2 226 33 1 266 34 13
417 37 5 374 11 16 25 196 38 12, 13, 14 15 39 9 15. 391 43 1 182 50 12 207 51
1, 2 427 12 282 52 7 345 55 22 374 62 1 452 66 18 236 73 13, 17 140 75 6, 7 381
77 7, 8, 9. 454* 478 78 18, ^7 453 41 447 90 12 126, 361 91 10 312 92 5, 6 162,
378 94 6, 7 166 103 13 260, 455 104 16 131 106 30, 31 59, 98 109 10 196 6, 9
203 110 3 268 111 10 358, 4^9 119 6 281 31 368 36 39 445 45 48^ 50 438 60 281
100 429, 511 136 270 139 16, 2^0 125 1 365, 538 127 2 375, 380 132 1, 2, 3 488
139 7, 8 165 14 161 21, 22, 202 143 6 137 Proverbs.
Chap. Verse. Page. 4 23 364 24, 25. 119 5 15, 16 191 6 6 373 8 8 77 14 2 368 16
3 374, 479 4 260 18 23 199 19 6 403 11 107, 317 17 195, 351 20 18 420 22 2 381
9 354 2^ 22 ib. (...) 195 Ecclesiastes.
Chap. Verse. Page. 5 1 243, 258 17 286 7 7 433 15 377 23, 24, 416 8 8 381 9 2
141, 480 10 109 10 20 417 Canticles.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 7 397 3 1 447 5 160 Isaie.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 2 384 11, 12 101 2 3 273 3 11 288 6 6, 7 551 9, 10 83 8 10
437 19 449 9 6 252 11 4 17 6, 7 179 22 12, 13, 14 335 ^8 15 1^6 16 292, 479 30
15 391 31 1 418 38 5 133 42 3 389 46 10 275 49 4 83 15 455 50 1 143 4 549 52 11
266 55 1 20 57 15 8 58 10 25 59 10 50 6^ 7 449 66 2 7, 8 Jeremy.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 10 222 4 2 158 14 6 16 537, 483 7 10 102 31 92 8 6 423 16
5, 12 38 17 9 3^3 22 29 384 23 16, 17 50 24 165 28 1, 2 499 29 12, 13 449 32
17, 19 206 Lamentations.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3 27, 28, 29 16 Ezekiel.
Chap. Verse. Page. 12 27 126 13 10, 12 50 18 13 273 34 12, 13 52 46 10 101 47
1, 11 540 Daniel.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3 29 496 4 24 186 30 382 32 267, 528 6 10 258 9 2, 3 45^ 4
20^ 10 3 332 Hose^.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 9 35 2 6 482 4 16 53 11 ^ 24 Joel.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 13, 14* 332 2 12 339 Amo^
Chap. Verse. Page. 4 7 209 9 10 126 Obadiah.
Chap. Verse. Page. 21 347 Jonah.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 14 243 3 7 329 Michah.
Chap. Verse. Page. 6 8 60 Habakuck.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 16 265 2 4 452, 477 Zepha^.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 8 170 Haggai.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 6, 9 289, 381 Zachary.
Chap. Verse. Page. 13 4 497 Malachi.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 9 53 15 111 3 17 455 Matthew.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3 2 79 12 544 4 3 171 6 497 8 31, 32 453 10 16 446, ^99 26
275 34 34 11 12 79, 488 8 25, 26 3^9. 227 30 582 12 35 309 47 48 13 19 269, 396
44 350 57 51 14 14 ^6 15 3 80 5 10^ 13 510 22 449 16 16 365 23 123 17 26 108 18
3 59^ 15 431, 432 17 440 19, 20 235 19 6 148 9 143 23, 24 345 29 145 20 15 456
22 447 21 12 16, 445 22 32 387 23 1, 2, 3 408 2 140 20 169 21 160 27 415 3^ 51
37 548 24 24 291, 531 39 423 25 3 35^ 11, 12 248 41, 42 186 45 511 26 7 59 27
3, 4 513, 517 20 121 ^2 1^4 39 94 Mark.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3 5 270 5 12, 13 308 6 5 26^ 20 514 7 37 550 9 4, 5 51 10 11
147 11 24 256, 320 12 14 549 Luke.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 37 340 3 11 190, 192 4 22 546, 549 24 367 6 23 46 8 13
514, 543 14 374 9 23 132 54, 55 180 10 14 36, 37 200 11 13 260, 458 20 269 21
302 27, 28 547 12 17, 18 359 20 541 32 273, 402 33 352 13 26, 27 523 32 415 15
15 3^7 16 9 3^9 25 14 30 4^8 17 3 298 21 269 18 5 450 10, 11 428 19 9 273 41
27^ 20 2, 3 503 21 2, 3 188 19 185 22 31 544 23 43 14 John.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 16 348 19, 24 85 3 3 397 4 14 285 5 17 207 21 228 35 54,
137 39 77 6 27 292 40 515 7 17 430, 511 18 503 37 20 46 540 9 31 236 10 12 446
14 529 41 499 12 48 538 13 22 310 29 404 14 12 547, 548 28 235 15 7 236, 538
14, 15 430 1^ 19 42 18 22, 23 18^ 19 30 103 Act^s.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 37, 38, 547 41 135 4^ 138 3 7 415 4 12 537 32 195 34 190 5
4 195 6 3 192 7 51 4^ 8 13 513 19 203 9 16 266 21 179 10 15 222 30 331 (...) 3^
237 12 22, 23 130 13 3 3^1 14 16 480 17 161 22 7^ 15 9 29 28 483, 464 16 14 1^5
17 28 165 20 26, 27 96 28, 29 501 21 13 276 14 276 24 16 521 26 5 84 18 54 22
130, 473 27 ^1, 24 134 Romans.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 17 395 20 384 22 361 2 13 535 29 229 3 21 77, 395 31 73 4
5 70 18 389 20 388 5 3 14 6 16 371 7 2 148 8 15 513 18 45 20 346 23 30 25 231
32 400, 531 9 1 154 13, 18 527 19 275 32 542 10 8 73 17 135 11 2 525 20 530 29
530 32, 33 530 12 2 275, 517 18 35, 36 19 177 20 205 14 13 428 15 96 17 10, 268
23 61, 225 15 8 ^, 548 16 17 492 18 499 I. Cor.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 26 258 30 86.356 31 348 2 2 357 9 348 13 550 15 357 3 18,
19 357 21, 22 17.195 4 4 543 5 229 15 347 5 1, 2 121.330 11 432 6 6, 7
36.124.183 7 4 143 10, 11 148 12 145 15 146 8 11 436 9 22 155.179 10 13 13 11 3
143 19 137.497 31 427 13 1 420 3 40 12 32 14 3 502 25 550 15 31 161 16 1, 2 139
22 203 II. Cor.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 4.5.8. 14 20 389 23 155 2 15, 16 83 3 7.9. 69 4 2, 3 549 3
55 6 54.350 16.18 273 5 11 520 20 293.521 21 86.395 6 2 447 10 17 7 1 31 10
516.517 8 2 28 3 190 13 192 9 6 195 10 18 228 11 13 498 27 399.5^4 12 4 450 14
343.373 21 277.336 13 13 254 Galatians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 8 503 2 20 477.51^ 3 1 41^ 4 9 529 29, 30 44 5 2.4. 542 9
226 14 61 6 1 434 10 191 16 524 Ephesians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 11 275 2 2 396 20, 21 537 3 12 255 17 538 20 403 4 1, 2.
66.551 3 36 20 464 28 188 31 95 5 5 369 8 55 14 423 30 356 6 19 5 Philipp.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 9 357 2 12 213 15 57.213 3 19 503 4 4 131 6 374 Col^ssians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 3 348 18 498 3 3 348 5 345.368 11 257 12, 13 16.24 4 6 49
17 432 I. These.
Chap. Verse. Page. 4 3, 4 515 17 164 II. These.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 9.11.12 497.498 3 10 191.343 12 288 I. Tim^^h.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 18, 19 312.49^ 2 1 230 4 246 8 239 4 2 4 291 12 58.550 13,
14 52 16 347.524 ^ 1 434 8 25.191.375 6 11, 12, 13 308 16 31 17, 18, 19 351 2.
Tim.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 15 ^02.506 ^ 19 1^9.527 ^ 16, 17 502 4 1, 2 4.434 14 203
Tit^^.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 12, 13 415 15 508 2 15 550 ^ 7.10 551 3 10 145.439
Hebrews.
Chap. Verse. Page. ^ 1, 2 474 (...) 12 365 ^ 13 525 ^ 13.16 160 7 12 74 8 8 187
9 9 217 19, 20 73 10 24 433 11 1 363 6 225.509 7 389 13, 14 272 25, 26 120.138
27 399 12 7 132 James.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 2 303 5 494 6 451 9 199 14, 15 304 ^ 5 199 10 214 16 192
19 157 21 66 I. Pet.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3 15 ^61.44^ 4 15 43 18 449.489 5 7 374.479 II. Pet.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 5 66 2 1 491 3 510 7, 8 270 14 111 3 17 188.191 18 201 I.
Ioh.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 19 138 27 362 3 2 32 17 24, 25 4 1 470 12 31 5 9 471 14
447.452 16 204 II. Ioh.
Chap. Verse. Page. 10 212 Jude.
Chap. Verse. Page. 4 50^ Ap^calyps.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 24 497 3 18 187.362 13 10 185 18 4 510 21 6 2

FINIS.
ERRATA.
(...) P. 1. l. 8. read two next. p. 37. 28. their ministry. p. 67. 36. in
his com(...). p. 123. 8. must we. p. 176. marg. Ier. 23. p. 181. 39. then
revenge, (...). curse* p. 188. 39. did know p. 220. 2. our. p. 228. 27. good.
p. (...)* ^0. p. 3^9. 33. expound. p. 378. ^2. men doc. p. 400. 5. Deuteronomy. 28.
(...)3. 23. H^^^ our. p. 458. 40. to his disciples. p. 462. 35. in the
Pro(...). 21* consen^^^^ p. 474. 2^. ^el. in p. 4^8. 23. the work. p. (...).
498. (...). their docto^^. l. 2^. ^^l. and. p. 50^ ^ 10. no (...). l. 13.
insufficient. p. ^11. 1^. preferred. p. 5^8. 33. lif^ ^0. p. 516* (...)d
excluded him.


