SATAN'S SOPHISTRY ANSVVERED BY OUR SAVIOVR CHRIST, AND in diverse Sermons
further manifested by that worthy man Master William Perkins. To which is
added, a Comfort for the feeble minded: wherein is set down the temptations of
a Christian.

In that he suffered, and was tempted, he is able to succor them that are
tempted. Heb. 2. 18. LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for E. E. and are to be
sold at the sign of the Swanne in Paul's Churchyard. 1604.

To the right Honorable Sir William Russell, Lord Russell, Baron of
Thornehaugh, younger son to that most Christian and Honorable Earl, Frauncis
Earl of Bedford, with the virtuous Lady his wife: Grace and Peace.
RIGHT Honorable, as John the Baptist was in one desert, Mat. 3.
so our Savior Christ he was in an other: Mat. 4. 1.
but as these two differed in their being in the world: so did they not accord
in their being in the wilderness. John was with some men, Christ with none;
John was with wild men, Christ with wild beasts; John was preaching, Christ
praying; John was baptizing, Christ fighting; John was feeding, Christ fasting;
John was encountering with Devils incarnate, Christ did encounter with the
Prince of those Devils. From John preaching in the desert, learn we diligence
in our callings: from Christ tempted in the desert, see we troubles at our
calling: Psa. 34. 19
Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of
all.

If it please you to give these after-lines the reading, you shall see set
down that monomachie or single combat, which was hand to hand betwixt Christ
and the Devil. And as for Christ Jesus, you shall see him fasting, fighting,
conquering. Fasting and an hungry, to show he was man: fighting and
encountering, to show he was Messiah; and conquering and triumphing, to show he
was God. And as for the devil, you shall see him obiecting, answering, flying.
Obiecting, that Mat. 4. 3.
Christ might despair; Mat. 4. 6.
answering, that he might presume; and Mat. 4. 11
flying, when he could not overcome.

In Christ's temptations, we see the estate of the 1. Pe. 2. 21
Church; in Satan's assault, we see his malice to the 1. Pet. 5. 8
Church. Is Christ tempted? think it not strange if we fall into Ioh. 15. 20
temptations. For the grief of the head, is the grief of the 1. Cor. 12* 26.
members: and the temptations of Christ, show the temptations of Ioh. 15. 20*
Christians. It is true of Christ, that Act. 14. 21
by many tribulatio^s he did enter into the kingdom of God: that Heb. 2. 10
our High Priest was consecrated by afflictions, that so he must suffer and
enter into his Luke 24. 26.
glory.

He is no sooner borne into the world, but he is Mat. 2. 14
hunted by Herod; baptized at Jordan, Mat. 3. 16* 4. 1.
but Satan sets on him; a Preacher for repentance, but the Ioh. 7. 1.
Scribes proscribe him; to Luke 11. 15.
work miracles, but the Pharisees slander him. He is no sooner to suffer, but
Ioh. 12. 27
the Devil assaults him; apprehended, but the Ioh. 18. 28
Jews deliver him; delivered, but Luke 23. 11.
Herod derides him; derided, but Luk 23. 24.
Pilate condemns him; condemned, but the soldiers Mat. 27. 27.
abuse him. Is he on the cross? the Mat. 27. 39.
people will not pity him: is he risen? the high Priests will Mat. 28. 15.
belie him. In a word, is he upon earth? he is tempted in his Luke 11. 16.
person; is he in heaven? he is Act. 9. 4.
tempted in his members. Thus the life of Christ was a warfare upon earth, and
the life of Christians must be a warfare upon earth. We live here in a sea of
troubles: the sea is the world, the waves are calamities, the Church is the
ship, the anchor is hope, the sails are love, the Saints are passengers, the
haven is heaven, and Christ is our Pilot. When the sea can continue without
waves, the ship without tossings, and passengers not be sick upon the water,
then shall the Church of God be without trials. We begin this voyage so soon
as we are borne, and we must sail on till our dying day.

We do read in Gods word of many kinds of temptations: God, Satan, Man, the
World, and the Flesh, are said to tempt. God tempts man to try his
obedience, Satan tempts man to make him disobedient: men do tempt men to try
what is in them: and man tempts God, to try what is in him. The world is a
tempter, to keep man from God: and the flesh is a tempter, to bring man to the
Devil. So God tempted Abraham Genesis 22. 1
in the offering of his son: Satan Job. 1. 18
tempted Job in the loss of his goods: a 1. King. 10. 1.
Queen tempted Solomon in trying his wisdom: men Ex. 17* 3.
tempted God by distrust in the desert: the world tempted Demas, 1. Tim. 4. 10.
when he forsook the Apostles: and the flesh tempted David, 2. Sa. 11. 4
when he fell by adultery. Does God tempt us? take heed of hypocrisy: does
Satan tempt us? take heed of his subtlety: does man tempt man? take heed of
dissembling: does man tempt God? take heed of inquiring: does the world tempt
man? take heed of apostacy: does the flesh tempt man? take heed of carnalitie.
But do we so? are we wary of these tempters? No, we are not, and therefore we
fall. We fall on the right hand, by temptations in prosperity, and we fall on
the left, by temptations in adversity. Of the one it may be said, it has
slain 1. Sa. 18.
thousands: of the other, that it has slain ten thousands.

When we come and see cities dispeopled, houses defaced, and walls pulled down,
we say, the soldier has been there: and when we see pride in the rich,
discontent in the poor, and sin in all, we may justly say, the Te^pter has
bin there.

Now of all other temptations, it pleases God to suffer his Church to be
tempted with afflictions. It is never free either from the sword of Ishmael:
which is Genesis 21. 9
a reuiling tongue: or the sword of Esau, a Genesis 27. 41.
persecuting hand. Neither was there yet ever Christian man found, who had not
his part in the cup of affliction. We must drink of the Mat. 20. 23.
same cup our master did: Mat. 10. 24.
the disciple is not above his master.

The reasons why God does visit us thus with afflictions, Reasons why God does
afflict his children*
are: 1. To humble us. 2. To weane us. 3. To winow us. 4. To prevent us. 5. To
teach us. 6. To enlighten us. 7. To honor us. 8. To cure us. 9. To crown us.
10. To comfort us. 11. To protect us. 12. To adopt us. And last of all, to
teach and comfort others. To Ec. 3. 10.
humble us, that we be not proud: Psalm. 119. 67.
to weane us, that we love not this world: Luke 22. 31.
to winnow us, that we be not chafe: Psalm. 119. 71.
to prevent us, that we do not sin: Psalm. 39. 9 40. 1.
to teach us, that we be patient in adversity: to Ge. 42. 21
enlighten us, that we see our errors: to Iam. 5. 11
honor us, that our faith may be manifest: to cure us, that we Deu* 32 15.
surfeit not of security: to 2. Tim 4. 7.
crown us, that we may live eternally: to Ioh. 6. 33
comfort us, that he may send his spirit:: to Act. 12. 7
protect us, that he may guide us by his Angels: to He. 12. 7.
adopt us, that we may be his sons: 2. Pet. 2. 5
and to teach others, that they seeing how sin is punished in us, they may take
heed it be not found in them: that they 2. Cor. 1. 6
seeing our comforts in troubles, may not be discouraged in the like trials.

Thus a Christian man's diet is more sour the^ sweet: his physic is more
aloes then honey: his life is more a pilgrimage then a progress: and his death
is more despised then honored. This if men would think of before, afflictions
would be as welcome to the soul of man, as Ruth. 2. 8
afflicted Ruth was to the field of Boaz. But because we look not for them
before they come, think not on Gods doing when they are come, and do desire to
be happy both here and hereafter: therefore we can away with the name of Naomi,
but in no case would we be called Ruth 1. 20.
Mara. We Ion. 1. 15.
see the sea, not the whale: the Exodus 14 11.
Egyptian, not the salvation: the Dan. 6. 16 22.
Lions mouth, not him that stops the Lions mouth. If we could see God in our
troubles, as 2. King. 6. 16.
Elisha did in his, then would we say: There are more with us, then there are
against us. But because we do not, therefore at every assault of the Assyrians,
we say, as the servant to 2. King. 6. 15.
Elishah did: Alas master, what shall we do? and with the disciples: Mar. 4. 38
Carest thou not master that we perish? Yet it is good for us to suffer
affliction. Iam. 1. 12. Job. 5. 17
Blessed is the man that endures temptation: for when he is tried, he shall
receive the crown of life which the Lord has promised to the^ that love him.
It is Pro. 3. 11
commanded by God, Mat. 4. 2.
practiced by Christ, 2. Tim. 3. 12.
yielded to by the Saints, Psalm. 119. 71.
assigned by Gods providence, and good for us each way. We are Gods Psalm. 1. 4.
trees, we shall grow better by pruning: Gods pomander, smell better by
rubbing: Gods spice, be more profitable by bruising: and Gods conduits, we are
the better by running. Let us suffer afflictions, they are 2. Cor. 4. 17.
momentanie in respect of time: Phil. 1. 29
favors, if we respect Gods love, and a means to bring us to the kingdom of
God. If they did consume us, we might wish them an end: but they do purge us,
let us be content. They Act 14. 21. 1. Pet. 1. 5.
are Gods fan, we are Gods wheat: they are Gods boulter, we are Gods meal:
they are Gods Exodus 3.
flame, we are Gods bush: they are Gods Ge. 22. 9.
cords, we are Gods sacrifice: they are Gods f^rnace, we are Gods gold. The
wheat will not be good without the fan, nor the meal without the bolter, nor
the bush without the flame, nor the sacrifice without the cords, nor the gold
without the furnace: they are trials, not punishments, if we be sons:
punishments, not trials, if we be slaves. Let us then bear the^, they Psalm.
37. 37.
will have an end: joy Ps. 126. 5
will follow: they Isa. 38. 10
show us our weakness: they Hos. 5. 15.
move us to pray: they Luke 24. 26.
show we are in the path way to heaven: and Ecc. 1. 2.
make us contemn this present world. By them we 2. Sam. 24. 17.
learn to repent us of sin past, Ge. 39. 9
to take heed of sin present, and to foresee sin to come. By them we Act. 2.
2.
receive Gods spirit, Phi. 3. 10
are like to Christ: are acquainted D 23. 17
with Gods power: have Exodus 15. 1.
joy in deliverance: know benefit of prosperity: made more hardy to suffer:
and 1. Pet. 1.
have cause to practice many excellent virtues. They cause us (as one says) to
seek out Gods promise: the promise to seek faith: faith to seek prayer: and
prayer to find God. Mat. 7. 7
Seek, and ye shall find: Job. 22. 27.
call, and he will answer: Hab. 2. 3
wait, and he will come. I am to write an Epistle, I must not be long. Jobs Job
2.
messengers came not so fast on him: but Jobs afflictions may come as fast upon
us. Has David slain 1. Sam. 17. 37.
a Bear? he shall encounter with a Lion: has he killed a Lion? 1. Sa. 18. 27.
he must fight with Goliath: has he subdued Goliath? he must make a r^ad upon
the Philistims: are the Philistims conquered? 1. Sa. 21.
Saul will assault him. Remember David's troubles, and foresee what may be our
troubles. The more righteous we are, the more manifold are our troubles: and
the better we are, the better we may endure them.

But as our troubles are many, so are our deliverances many: God will deliver
us out of all. He that delivered Genesis 7.
Noah from the flood, Genesis 19.
Let from Sodom, Genesis 33.
Jacob from Esau, Genesis 41. 14.
Joseph from Potiphar, Moses from Pharaoh, Exodus 9.
Exodus 12*
Israel from Egypt, 1. Sa. 19.
David from Saul, 1. King. 21.
Eliah from Acab, 2. Kin. 6.
Elysha from the Syrians, 2. King. 5.
Naaman from his leprosy, Isa. 38.
Hezechiah from the plague, Dan. 3.
the three children from the fire, Dan. 6.
Daniel from the Lions, Mat. 6.
Joseph from Herod, the Apostles Act. 5.
from the Jews, Mat. 4.
and Christ from the Devil: he, even he will either deliver us from trouble,
or comfort us in trouble, or mitigate troubles when they come upon us.

He, To. 4. 21
he has promised to do it, and he that has promised, is able to do it. And
this he does sometimes by no means, sometimes by small means, sometimes by
ordinary means, sometimes by extraordinary, sometimes contrary to all
means. By no Ioh. 5. 9.
means he cured a creeple at Bethesda: by Ioh. 6. 12
small means he fed five thousand in the desert: by Mat. 4. 7
ordinary means he was brought from the pinnacle: by means extraordinary he
was provided for in hunger: Mat. 411*
and contrary to all means were the Dan. 5.
three children preserved in the furnace of fire.

I have good cause to think of Gods gracious deliverance, being my self
delivered from a great trouble. Saint Andrews in Norwich.
Since the time I was unkindly dismissed from my poor charge, where I would
have continued, if malice had not hindered me, I have lived in an end of this
City: dangerously in respect of the sickness; poorly, in regard of
maintenance; and painfully, in respect of my ministry: yet ti^ this time has
the Lord delivered me: and (...) Paul said: 2. Tim. 1 18.
he will deliver me, if that he se^ it be best for me.

Let man therefore 1. Sam. 30. 9.
comfort himself in the Lord: Hos. 6. 2.
after two days he will revive us, and the third day he will raise us up
again: Psalm. 30. 5
Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy will come in the morning. Psalm. 58.
11.
Doubtless there is a reward for the righteous: verily, Mica. 7. 8.
God retains not his wrath for ever. Could he overcome the world, and can he
not overcome many troubles in the world? Yea, let one plague follow another, as
one quail sings to another: yet as the Act. 28. 3
viper leaped on Paul's hand, and forthwith leaped off again, so one trouble
shall leap upon the righteous, and anon leap off again: Ps. 37. ^4.
though he fall, he shall rise again, the righteous shall not be forsaken for
ever.

If he has delivered us from the guilt of our sins, he will deliver us from
the punishment of our sins. Let us then therefore be patient in trouble,
constant in hope, rooted in love: let us wait (...) he will come, call and he
will hear, believe and he will perform, repent us of our evil committed
against him, and he will repent of his evils intended against us. He is over us
by his providence, about us by his Angels, in us by his spirit, with us by his
word, under us by his power, and upon us by his Son. In him is our help,
from him is our comfort, by him is our victory, and for him is our trouble.
Psalm. 25.
In thee have I trusted, says a king: Job. 5.
who ever was confounded that trusted in the Lord, said a friend? and as
El^anah was to 1. Sam. 1. 8.
Hannah in stead of many sons, so God is to his in stead of many comforters. Of
other comforters, we may say as Job did of his friends: Job. 16. 2.
Silly comforters are you all. They will leave us, as mice do a ruinous house:
but the Lord (like Ruth 1. 16.
Ruth to Naomi) will never leave us, nor forsake us. Especially in the hour of
death, Ecc. 41. 1.
which is in remembrance bitter to great men: in that hour of death he will be
with us, and command his Luke 16. 26.
Angels to take charge of our souls, the Isa. 57. 2.
earth to be as a bed for our bodies: that so the one Luke 23.
may go into glory, the other reserved in hope of like glory, Phil. 3. 20
and be made one day like unto the glorious body of Christ Jesus. Thus right
Honorable you have seen the righteous in afflictions: as Psalm. 137.
Israel was in Babylon: and that the Lord like Zac. 4. 6.
Zorobabel is ready to deliver them. Though in trobles Christ seems as in the
Mat. 8. 24.
ship to sleep, yet in deliverance he awakes as a man out of sleep, and as a
Giant refreshed with wine. He will rebuke the waves and winds of trobles and
persecution, and they shall fly before him as Sysera did before ^ud. 17. 4
Debora, and the 1. Sam. 14.
Philistims before Ionath^ and his servant. And as Christ asking the wom^^ of
her accusers, she answered: Ioh. 8.
There was none: (...) in the end ask a Christian of his troubles, and h^ will
say, There are none. He is a buckler for ou^ left hand, and a sword in our
right: he is an helmet on our head, and harness for our body. We shall look
upon troubles, as Exo. 14.
Israel did on the Egyptians, as the 1. Sam. 17. 52.
Jews did on Goliath, and as the Grecians did on Hector, to triumph over them:
and as the Angel said to Joseph: Mat. 2. 20
They are dead that sought the child's life, so the Spirit shall say to the
afflicted, They are dead that did seek your life. A day of deliverance, a
year of Iubile will come, and then Genesis 41.
Joseph shall be out of prison, Genesis 31.
Jacob out of servitude, and Job 41. 12
Job shall lie no more in the dust of the earth: 1. These. 4. 18.
Let us comfort our selves with these words.

I have exceeded an Epistle, especially to such a small book. If the walls
seem too great for this city: abundans cautela non nocet. It is usual for
Students not only to present their own labors, but also other men's to great
personages, especially such Works wherein they have been either Translators or
overseers. It were infinite to instance this point. I am bold to do the like to
your Honor at this time. This Copy it was brought unto my hand, I have
conferred it with another, I have perused it at the Press, I heard diverse of
the Sermons, I have added nothing of mine own: and I desire, that of those
Ioh. 6. 22
many baskets full of most delicate diet, which this worthy man has now left
behind him, there may not so much as any one be lost. If any such come unto my
hand, surely they shall not be lost. By his life had I much comfort, and I will
seek to honor him after he is dead. I was twenty years acquainted with him:
The Golden chain.
I at his request made the first fruits of his labors to speak English. And
now I am bold to present this his posthume to your patronage. The Earl of
Bedford. The Countess of Bedford.
Your honorable Nephew, his virtuous Lady, your worthy sister, have heretofore
accepted the labors of this man. If it shall please your good Honor to do the
like, The Countess of Cil^erland.
this Preface of mine shall remain as a perpetual testimony of my duty to
you: and the book following as fully armed against all such adversaries as
shall speak against it. The God of heaven, who has made you honorable in your
most honorable Progenitors, make you thrice honorable in your future
successors: that the memorial of the righteous may be everlasting, Pro. 10. 7.
when as the name of the wicked shall r^t.

Your Honors at commandment, ROBERT HILL, Fellow Of S. John's Coll. in
Cambridge.
London, S. Martins in the fields. Ian. 12. 1604.
The Printer to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, in the life of that worthy man Master Perkins, his books for
the most part were printed at Cambridge. The only reason was, his desire to be
Corrector to his own books. Since he departed this life, some good men have
brought me certain labors of his. I desire not to print them to make gain to
myself, but because I would not have his labors to be lost. He was heard of
many by his speech, read of many in his writings, and his works have been
translated into many languages. Mislike not this book, because it was printed
at London, his auditors can tell it was as he spoke it. If you say, it was hard
to write as he spoke: know this, that he observed his auditors, and so spoke,
as a diligent Baru^ might write verbatim all that was spoken by this Jeremiah.
Ier. 36. 18.
Use this, and communicate that which thou have of his.

SATAN'S SOPHISTRY ANSWERED BY OUR SAVIOVR CHRIST.
MATH. 4. 1. Then was Jesus led aside of the Spirit, etc.
IN the eleven first verses of this Chapter, are recorded and set down unto us
the several temptations of our Savior Christ: and in them we are to consider
three especial points: First, the preparation unto the combat* verse. 1. and 2.
Secondly, the combat it self in three several temptations, verse. 3. 4. 5. 6.
7. 8. 9. 10. Thirdly, the issue and effect of this combat, verse. 11.

The preparation has two parts: first, the going forth of Christ into the
wilderness, in the first verse. Secondly, his abode and conversation in the
wilderness, in the second verse.

The going forth of Christ into the wilderness, is set out by sundry
circumstances: first, the time, then. Secondly, the moving cause, whereby he
was carried thither, namely he was led of the spirit. Thirdly, the place, the
wilderness. Fourthly, the end, to be tempted of the devil.

Then was Jesus led] In the Chapter going before is set down the baptism of
our Savior Christ, as also the great honor of his Baptism. And it pleased
him to be baptized, to show that he was now installed into the office of a
Mediator: and for the greater solemnity of his baptism, he was proclaimed by
the voice of God the Father from heaven, to be the chief Doctor, and the true
Prophet of the Church of God: for chap. 3. 17. it is said: There came a voice
from heaven, saying, this is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
And also it is said, that the Spirit of God in the likeness of a Dove
descended and light upon him. Now so soon as Christ was installed into his
office of Mediator, and thus solemnly baptized, and proclaimed, even from
heaven, to be the sole Doctor and Prophet of the Church of God, presently
without delay, as is Mark 1. 12. he was led aside to be tempted of the Devil.

In that Christ is no sooner baptized, Doctr. 1.
but he is presently tempted, it shows us, that all those which have been
baptized, and given up their names to Christ, must make account to be tempted,
and look for temptations. For if Satan durst be so bold to set upon Jesus
Christ the head, who was not only man but very God; how much more will he be
bold to set upon us, who be but weak and sinful men? And therefore so soon
as we have truly given up our names to God, and become the faithful soldiers
of Christ, and refuse to serve sin and Satan, then will the devil encounter
us, and set upon us* and we must look for to be tempted, preparing our selves
to this spiritual battle, and put upon us the whole complete armor of God.
Ephesians. 6. 11.

But most men will say, this doctrine is not true: for they never felt any such
combat in themselves, though they have bin baptized many years.

I answer; such men whatsoever they be, they have only the outward baptism of
water, and never received the inward baptism of the Spirit: and such men do
indeed wear Christ's liuerie, but do service to the Devil his enemy. And
therefore let such persons reform them selves, turn from their wicked and
sinful lives, and seek to serve the Lord, and then they shall find this
doctrine most true. For the children of Israel so long as they lived under
Pharaoh in Egypt, they were not persecuted by Pharaoh: but when they did set
their faces toward the land of Canaan, then presently he pursued them with all
his malice and might. So all the while men live in Egypt* that is, in sin and
wickedness, and serve the devil, he will let them be at quiet: but if ever we
once set our hearts on that heavenly Canaan, and give our selves to the service
of God, then he will with open mouth pursue us, follow us with many armies, and
cast an hundred temptations in our way. And as a poor bird which comes to the
shop, and when she thinks to get away, then comes all her pain, and the net
is spread over her: so when men begin to leave their evil courses, and to set
themselves to serve the Lord, presently the Devil does spread his net to
entangle them. This must teach us to watch and pray, that we enter not into
temptation.

Secondly, Doctr. 2.
in that our Savior is no sooner baptized, and ordained to be the great Doctor
of the Church, but he is presently tempted and encountered by Satan: hence we
learn, that all those which be appointed of God to any special office in the
Church or commonweal, they must make account they shall be tempted, and look
for Satan's temptations one way or other: it was that which befell the head, and
therefore let us all that be his members reckon of it. Example of this we have
in Moses, Exodus 2. 14.
who so soon as he was new called to be the guide and deliverer of the
children of Israel, he was feign to fly when he had killed the Egyptian. 1.
Sam. 18.
And David was no sooner appointed by God to be King of Israel, but Saul did
persecute him. As soon as our Savior Christ had called the Apostles to that
office, he brought them to the sea, and there by his divine power raised a
storm, Math. 8. 23.
so as they cried out, Master, save us, or else we perish.

And this the Lord does in great wisdom: for by this means he shows a man
that he is not able of himself to execute the duties of his particular calling
without the special grace of God: and by these temptations and trials, the
Lord stirs up a greater love of his Majesty in the hearts of his children,
and with it many other graces, as prayer, patience, etc. and makes these
graces the better to show themselves.

Seeing that our Savior Christ begins his prophetical office of teaching the
Church of God with temptations: Doctr. 3.
this should admonish the Ministers of the word of God, that they of all other
men are subject to Satan's temptations, because they be the Lords
Standard-bearers, and his Lieutenants, against whom Satan and al his soldiers
bend all their forces, as soldiers often do against the standard bearer. When
as Iehoshua the high Priest stood before the Lord, Satan stood at his right
hand to hinder him, Zach. 3. 1. He was a lying spirit in the mouth of four
hundred false Prophets: 2. King. 22.
and this old red Dragon, Reu. 12. with his tail draws down the third part
of the stars of heaven: he desired to winnow Peter, and to try him by
temptations, Luke 22. And as the king of Aram said of Acab: 1. King. 22. 31.
Fight not against small or great, but against the king of Israel: so Satan
fights not against any so much, as the Prophets of Israel, the Ministers of
the Church.

So then we may see, that temptations are necessary for the Ministers of the
word, that they may both know what they be, and also learn how to comfort
others in time o^ temptation. Also to teach us the true use of the word of God,
and the force of it in resisting temptation. For certain it is, that
temptations teach men many things which they could never learn by bare study.
So that one said well: Reading, meditation, prayer, and temptations, these
four make a Divine.

The second point to be considered, is, what was the cause which moved our
Savior Christ to go into the wilderness: which was the leading of the Spirit:
Jesus was led aside of the spirit: Luke. 4. 1. or as the word signifies, he
was carried apart, Mark. 1. 12. not by a forced, but a voluntary motion. This
was not a local transportation of the body of Christ, as that of Eliah, and
of Philip from the Eunuch: but by the inward instinct of the holy Ghost he was
moved and made willing to go, (...).
as the word which Luke 4. 1. uses, shows plainly.

And by the Spirit here, is not meant the Devil or an evil spirit, but the
holy Spirit of God, even the third person in the Trinity. And so we see that
Christ may both guide the Spirit, and be guided by the Spirit: for Christ as he
is man is led and guided by the Spirit; but as he is God, he does guide and
send his Spirit.

Objection. Christ sends the holy Ghost, Objection.
therefore cannot be led by it. Answer.
Ans. As Christ was man he was guided by Gods spirit, as he was God he sent the
Spirit.

Hence we may behold the exceeding holiness of the manhood or humane nature of
Christ, Doctr. 1.
who as he was man was guided by the Spirit of God, even in his moving from one
place to another. And it is that which every one should desire, to be like unto
our Savior Christ in this, viz. to suffer our selves to be guided and directed
by Gods holy spirit in all our thoughts, words and deeds: for this is a true
note of Gods children, Romans 8. 14. but as many as are not led by the Spirit of
God, the same are none of his, Romans 8. 9. And therefore let us all become
pliable to the motions and directions of Gods blessed spirit, so as we can say
as David says: When thou saydst, Seek ye my face: Psalm. 27. 8.
my heart answered unto thee: O Lord, I will seek thy face.

Again, Doctr 2.
from this that Christ was led unto temptations by the spirit of God, we
learn, that temptations come not by chance, nor yet by the devils will and
appointment: for he could not touch Job or any thing he had, till he had leave
given him by the Lord: and he could not so much as enter into swine, till
Christ gave him leave; but they come by his ^ust permission, and the special
providence and appointment of God. For as God de^reed, that he which had
overcome all mankind, should be overcome by Christ: so he ^ath appointed this
combat by temptations ^o all men: 1. Cor. 4* 9.
the place where it is tried, is the world as a theater: the persons as
soldiers tried, are Christians: the person tempting, is Satan our adversary:
the beholders are men and Angels: the Judge or vmpire is the Lord himself, so
that the issue shall be good. And therefore when we be tempted, we must not
think it strange: but rather as Iam. 1. 2. Account it exceeding joy when we
are tempted for the trial of our faith and obedience. And also seeing they
come by Gods appointment, it should move us all to endure them patiently,
seeing they cannot be avoided.

Seeing Christ was led to be tempted: Doctr. 3.
hence we learn, that no man must wittingly of his own head, cast himself into
places of danger: for Christ went not into the place of temptation til he was
led by the spirit of God. And so indeed, if a man find himself moved by some
extraordinary motion and instinct of the spirit, he may offer himself unto
danger. So Paul went bound in the spirit to Jerusalem: Act. 20. 22.
that is, he did willingly follow the motion (...) Gods spirit, which enforced
him to go to Ie^rusalem. And so many of the Martyrs, thoug^ they might have
fled, yet being moved (...) the inward motion of the holy Ghost, di^^stand to
the truth, abide the danger, and en^dured the fire. But otherwise no man is
wittingly to cast himself into danger; yet if the Lord send any danger unto a
man in the performance of his calling and vocation, walking according to Gods
word, he is patiently to endure it, and may not seek to avoid the same.

Here may be demanded, Question.
whether a man may with good conscience and safely, abid^ in such places where
it is certainly known^ that evil spirits do haunt and use to be?

Although some be so venturous and bold that they fear nothing, Answer.
yet it is no wisdom neither is it lawful for men to frequent and abide in
those places, but rather to shunn^ them, seeing the Lord has delivered them up
into the power of the Devil. And therefore such men as frequent such places
know^ to be possessed, do wilfully tempt God, and cast themselves into
needless danger, unless they have extraordinary warrant from God.

This may serve to reprove those men who say they care not into what company
they come, for they persuade themselves that no company can hurt them: but let
such men beware; for how can it be but they shall be infected with the sins
of those whose company they usually do haunt and use? Pro. 14. 20. 1. 6.
He that walks with the wise, shall be wise: but a companion of fools shall
be like unto them. He that touches pitch, shall be defiled: and if sinners
entice thee, yield not unto them.

Again, Doctr. 3.
here we see that so long as Christ lived a private life at home with his
father in his trade, all this while the Devil lets him alone; neither has he
these gifts of the holy Ghost: but after he was once installed to the office of
a Mediator, presently the Devil sets upon him: and when he must now be another
kind of man in teaching the people of God, he is led now by the spirit of God,
and furnished for this high and excellent calling.

Hence then we must learn, that when we are appointed of God to any special
office, either in Church or Commonweal, we must then become new men fit for
those places, and carry our selves suitable to our callings. Thus when Saul was
anointed to b^ King, he became another man; thus when David became of a
shepherd a King, he be^ haued himself as a King; thus the Apostle at the
first were poor ignorant fishermen but being called to be Apostles, they le^^
their old trade and became new men, eue^ messengers of Christ to preach the
Gospel to all nations.

This confuteth those which plead extraordinary callings, Use 1.
as those men who ca^ themselves Elias, John Baptist, etc. for if these were
such men, and had such extraordinari^ callings, they should be endued with
extraordinary gifts fit for their calling; but they are not, nay we see they
be but ordinary men.

Luke, that he was filled with the holy Ghost, chap. 4. verse. 1. If any furthe^
object, that if he were so filled after his baptism, then he was not filled
before: I answer^ again, that as in his infancy he had a mea^ure of gifts fit
for that age; so from time to ^^me he increased in grace, and after his
bap^^sme had a greater appearance and measure ^f gifts then before his calling
to preach.

It follows, 3. Circumstance.
Into the wilderness. Here is ^he third circumstance, namely the place, into
^he wilderness or desert place: which place Christ did of purpose choose to be
tempted ^n. There be diverse opinions concerning this place, some think it to
be a little wilderness betwixt Jerusalem and Jericho; others judge ^t to be the
desert of Arabia, where Elias fa^ted forty days and forty nights, and where
^he children of Israel wandered forty years. But seeing the holy Ghost does
not show what wilderness it was, we are not curiously ^o inquire after it, but
only know it was a desert and solitary place.

Let us rather seek the reasons wherefore he was tempted in the wilderness:
Reasons why Christ went into the wilderness.
first, because Christ coming into the world to be ^ut Mediator, 1. Reason.
took upon him the base estate of a servant, and came in humiliation:
therefore when he was now baptized, he would not go to Jerusalem to publish his
honor, but he went into the desert, a solitary wilderness.



Another reason why Christ was tempte^ Eccl. 4. 9. 10
for when a man is alone and solitary, it is that which is fittest for the
Diuel^ purpose; for when the woman was alon^ how soon had the Devil overcome
her And therefore our Savior Christ in going in^^ the wilderness, graunts the
Devil that he (...) desired, to have him alone by himself.

Fourthly, 4. Reason.
Christ would be tempted in the wilderness, where was none to help him nor to
assist him, because the whole praise of the victory belonged to himself alone.

Lastly, 5. Reason.
Christ went into the wilderness, that so after he might return again with
greater authority and reverence to preach the Gospel: for we know that when
one has lived with us, and departs for a season, and after returns again, we
do receive him with greater reverence, and make more account of him.

From this practice of Christ his going into the wilderness, Against popish
eremits and Monks.
the Papists gather that men may live monastical lives, in cloisters, woods,
dens, cells, etc. from the society and company of men: but this their
collection ^is but fond, as may appear by these reasons: first, Christ did
this by the special motion and direction of Gods spirit: they go into their
cells without any warrant from God. Secondly, he went but once for a certain
time: they continue always there. Thirdly, Christ during his abode in the
wilderness fasted and abstained from all sustenance; but those amongst the
Papists that live monastical and solitary lives, enjoy all their pleasure and
delights in eating and drinking, And therefore though solitariness at some
times is commendable, to fit us for meditation, prayer, repentance, etc. yet to
live continually without the company and society (...) men, is neither
commendable nor warrantable.

To be tempted of the devil:] 4. Circumstance.
Here is the en^ wherefore Christ was led of the Spirit into the wilderness,
Temptation.
namely, to be tempted of the devil.

Now this action, to tempt, is ascribed t^ God, 1. Of God.
to man, and to the devil. The Lord (...) said to tempt, when he proves and
maket^ trial of his children, to make manifest wha^ hidden thing is in their
hearts, Genesis 22. 1. Abraham was tempted by God when he offered his son.

Secondly, 2. Of man.
man is said to tempt God, wh^^ as he shall by unlawful means try the
providence, power, mercy and justice of God.

Thirdly, 3. Of Satan.
the devil is said to tempt, when (...) he allures by some suggestion inwardly,
(...) by some object outwardly; and in this thi^^ sense it is understood here,
that the devil di^tempt Christ, that is, sought to allure him (...) some
means to sin. And though Christ could have confounded Satan by a word (...)
his mouth, yet notwithstanding he did wi^^lingly permit and suffer him to tempt
him, because now he stood in our stead: and this was a part of his sufferance
to be thus tempted of the devil.

But how could Christ be tempted, Question.
seeing he was most holy, Answer.
even as he was man? Ans. For all that he might be tempted, as our first
parents were before they had sinned.

The Devil tempts men either by conueying into their minds some secret
suggestion, or else moves them by some outward object, that he may put into
them some conceit of that sin which he would have them commit: as unto Judas,
the Devil cast this vile thought into his heart, Judas betray thy master, John
13. 27. So here the Devil suggests unto the mind of Christ these motions, to
move him to unbelief, idolatry and covetousness. But here is the difference:
first, that Christ his most holy heart withstands all Satan's temptations.
Again, as these wicked motions disquiet and trouble men's minds, and bring
molestations upon them; so it befell our Savior Christ, for he was moved with
these temptations, but yet without all sin. Thirdly, men when they are tempted,
though they do not altogether receive and approve of the temptations, yet they
be tainted with them: but yet Christ was never so much as any whi^^ tainted,
nor his holy heart did ever approve of them in any sort, but constantly
repelled them. As if a man cast a match into tinder, (...) will catch fire and
burn; but cast it into water, it will quench it: so temptations coming into
our hearts which be like unto tinder, we are easily tainted with them, though
we d^ not altogether entertain them: but the most holy heart of Christ was as
water to quench them at the first.

The Devil tempts men with sundry blasphemous, horrible, and unclean
thoughts. Now that we may discern them, and keep our selves from despair
when we find them in us, we must know that in the mind there be many
cogitations which arise of the flesh, and from our own corrupt hearts, and
these be sin. Besides these there be other cogitations conveyed and suggested
unto us by the Devil, and these be the Devils temptations* but no sins to
us, unless we entertain^ them, receive and approve of them: they b^ indeed
our crosses, but Satan's sins: for Christ was tempted by the Devil, but with
standing and repelling his temptations, an^ not giving the least approbation of
them, h^ was free from sin, and remained holy aft^^ he was thus tempted.

The causes wherefore Christ was tempted, Reasons (...) Christ was tempted.
are these:

First, because he was to vanquish the devil in his own kind, 1. Reason.
and at his own weapon: and as the first Adam was overcome by his temptations,
so now the second Adam Christ Jesus might vanquish him in the midst of all his
most fierce temptations.

Secondly, 2. Reason.
he was tempted, that by his example he might teach us how to resist
temptations, as also to show what temptations are, and the power of them. And
therefore that common opinion, that if any be grievously tempted, men think
they be notorious sinners, and having forsaken God, he now has forsaken them:
it is a false and erroneous opinion: for here we see, that the most holy Son
of God himself was tempted.

Again, seeing Christ the head was tempted, 3. Reason.
no member of Christ must look to be free from temptation, but we must even
make account to be tempted.

Lastly, 4. Reason.
our Savior Christ was tempted, that so feeling the weight and danger of
temptations, he might be a merciful high Priest to help us in our
temptations: as the Apostle does witness. Heb. 2. 18.


The next point to be noted, is the cause and author of his temptation: He was
tempted of the devil. This name Devil, signifies a cauililer, a slaunderer,
a privy accuser: for he accuses God to man, as he did to Euah. Genesis 3 ^. Has
God said indeed ye shall die? Genesis 3* 5.
Nay, but it is because God loves you not: for when ye eat of the tree, God
knows ye shall be like unto God.

Secondly, the Devil accuses man to God, and is therefore called the Accuser
of the brethren; Reu. 12. 9. 10
one which ceasseth not to put up bills of accusation against us, and to accuse
us unto God, as he dealt with Job.

Thirdly, the Devil accuses one man to another, by raising suspicions and bad
surmises and by backbiting one another. And seeing the holy Ghost calls Satan
an accuser, Doctr. 1.
let us all beware of accusing our brethren, of slaundering and backbiting: for
such men become like unto the Devil. Again, it must admonish al men to beware
that they do not by any accusations or slanders, seek to draw men from
embracing the Gospel: for they which take this course make themselves Devils
incarnate. Of this sort was Elyma^ the sorcerer, Act. 13. 10. whom Paul
therefore calls the child of the Devil. And thus much of the first part of
the preparation. The second part of Christ's preparation to temptations.
Now follows the second part, viz. the abode of Christ in the wilderness:
which is set out by three circumstances. First, by his fasting forty days and
forty nights. Secondly by his company there, namely, the wild beasts, Manke 1.
12. Lastly, by those temptations wherewith the Devil did encounter him within
the space of those forty days, Luke 4. 2. though the particulars be not set
down by the Evangelists.

The first point, is Christ's fasting in the wilderness the space of forty
days.

There be three sorts of fastings: Three kinds of fasts.
First, a daily fast, which is nothing else but the virtue of sobriety, or a
moderate using of the creatures of God with abstinence: and this kind of
fasting all men must use continually, and we must take heed of the abuse of
Gods creatures by surfeiting and drunkenness. Rom 13. 12.

The second kind of fasting is a religious Iud. 20. 26.
the Jews used sometimes for one meal, Hest. 4. 16.
sometimes for two or three, sometimes for many, as 1. Sam. 31. 13. they fasted
seven days.

Exodus 34. 28.
thus Moses fasted forty days and forty nights in the mountain; and so
fasted Elias. Now there is no man able to fast so long by the course of nature.
Indeed Paul did fast three days after his conversion; and those which were
with Paul in the ship in that dangerous voyage, Act. 27. 33. are said to have
fasted fourteen days, which though some think is not meant of abstaining
from all sustenance, but that they did eat very little; yet the words are
plain, that they did eat nothing for the space of fourteen days. And
though it be true that Physicians affirm, that a man may live seventeen days
without meat, yet he cannot endure longer, as twenty or thirty days. Now
our Savior Christ fasted forty days, and forty nights, and for all this his
complexion was not changed, nor the strength of his body weakened; nay he was
not hungry till the end: though men cannot fast a short time, but it will
weaken them and make them hungry, which does prove this fast of Christ was
miraculous.

Now there be some reasons why Christ fasted so long and no longer. Reasons why
Christ fasted so long.
First, that when he came to preach the Gospel, he might come with more
authority and reverence: as when Moses had fasted forty days, and brought
the two tables, the people received him with greater reverence. 1. King. 19. 8
So likewise Elias when he was to restore Religion, he fasted forty days and
forty nights.

Secondly, he fasted so long, that he might answer unto the time that Moses and
Elias fasted.

Thirdly, he fasted no longer, lest any man should call into question his
humanity, whether he was true man yea or no, if he had fasted threescore or an
hundred days.

From this miraculous fast of Christ, Against popish fast in Lent.
the Papists fondly gather their superstitious fast in Lent; being but an apish
imitatio^ of Christ: and in truth their fasting is no fast, but a plain
mocke-fast, seeing they eat as liberally, and fare as daintily then, as at any
other time of the year: whereas Christ abstained from all use of meat and
drink.

Secondly, Christ was moved thereunto by the instinct of Gods holy spirit; they
have no word to warrant them.

Thirdly, Christ did thus fast but once in all his life: but their fast is
continual, every year, and therefore these reasons prove that their
collection is frivolous.

The second special point to be marked in the abode of our Savior Christ in
the wilderness, is his conuersing with the wild beasts, Mark 1. 13.

Some say the cause of his conuersing among the wild beasts, Why Christ was
with vvild beasts.
was, that they might do him that homage which is due to the Creator: but this
opinion has no warrant out of the word of God, and little truth in it: for
though it be true that Jesus Christ is worthy of all homage, yet he came not to
this end into the world, but rather to take on him the shape of a servant.

But the true cause is this: whereas there be two kinds of wildernesses, one
which was inhabited, and where John Baptist did baptize and preach: and another
not inhabited, where lived all kinds of wild beasts, as Lions, Tigers, Bears,
etc. Christ made choice of that which was without the society of men, wherein
were only the wild beasts to bear him company, that so in this great combat
against the Devil, he might show he had no aid nor comfort of any man; but
that he overcame by his own power, and therefore (...) the honor and praise
of the victory belonged to Christ Jesus alone.

And besides, in the person of Christ we may behold the estate of Gods church
here upon earth, that she lives here with wicked men, which be no better then
wild beasts, as Esaias 11. 6. does testify.

The third circumstance whereby the abode of Christ in the wilderness is
described, 3. Circumstance.
be those temptaions which befell him within the compass of the forty days,
for before the three great conflicts, Luke 4. 2. there is mention made of other
temptations, which though they be not specified, yet it is very likely that the
Devil did set upon Christ by sundry, small, light and weaker temptations,
thereby making an entrance to his fiercer and stronger temptations. For it is
the devils manner to go on, and to proceed by degrees in his temptations. As
first he cast into Cains mind an angry thought against his brother Abel: after
he prevailed, and Caine had conceived displeasure against his brother, then ^he
proceeds to tempt him to murder, and there he did not stay till he had
brought him to utter despair. So he dealt with Judas, first he put into Judas
mind this thought; Judas betray thy master: which though Judas did receive at
the first, yet after he lets it ta^^ place, and then the Devil proceeds
by d^grees with him, till he had brought him to h^^ purpose. And it is the
devils subtlety, first (...) get if it be but a talent in, then he will thr^^
in his foot, yea his head, and wind in hi^ whole body.

Out of this subtle dealing of the Diuel^ that he begins with lesser
temptations, Use.
an^ proceeds by degrees, it must teach us to b^ wise, and to labor, that we
may stop the fir^^ motions and inclinations to sin, to resist the very
beginnings to evil. For if Satan preuail^ in them, he will proceed to more
forcibl^ temptations.

The fourth and last point in the abode (...) Christ in the wilderness, 4.
Circumstance.
is in these word^ He was afterward an hungry: that is, when h^ had by the
divine power and virtue of h^^ Godhead fasted forty days and forty night^ he
was at the last hungry. And this Christ di^ for our sakes: for though Christ
was the So^ of God, yet for our good he was content t^ take our nature upon
him, and became tru^ man like unto us in all things excepting sin^ and had not
only the will, mind, affection* and conscience of man, but also took upon him
the infirmities of humane nature, so far forth as they be without sin: and
therefore he was subject to hunger and thirst.

The causes wherefore our Savior Christ was hungry, Why Christ was hungry.
are these: first, that he might show himself to be true man, and that he had
^he infirmities of humane nature: and so we see he would stop the mouths of
such as should say, it was a small matter for him to last so long being the
son of God. But least we should doubt of his manhood, he is here ^s we see
touched with hunger, a true infirmity of man's nature.

Secondly, he was thus hungry, that by this means he might cast unto the
devil an ob^ect to work on, and give him occasion to be more fierce in his
assaults.

Then came to him the Tempter, Verse 3.
and said. Here begins the first combat between the Devil and Christ, The
first combat.
and in it we are to consider three especial points: First, the devils
preparation: Then came to him the Tempter, and said.

Secondly, the temptation it self, in these words: If thou be the Son of
God, command that these stones be made bread.

Thirdly, the answer and repulse of Christ, verse. 4.

In the preparation note, first the author, the Tempter: secondly, the time,
then: thirdly the occasion of this temptation, namely, the hunger of Christ:
fourthly, the devils coming unto Christ.

The author is here entitled the Tempter, Satan why a Tempter.
s^ 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5. and the cause why he is so called is, because it is his
desire, his study and continual practice to tempt men, and to seek as much
as he can, to draw men from God to his kingdom: and to this purpose he sparet^
no pains night and day, assaulting and tempting men to bring them to
destruction. He goes about as a roaring Lion, 1. Pet. 5. 8.
seeking whom he may devour.

Well then, seeing we know it is the devils study night and day to tempt us,
Doctr. 1.
it should teach us all, as we love our souls, to watch and pray continually,
least we be led into temptations, and so be overcome of Satan.

and to be more careful to seek the kingdom of God our selves, and to draw
others to the same.

We must beware, that we be no means to draw any from embracing of true
religion, and from the service and worship of God; for if we do, we become eue^
devils incarnate. When Christ went up to Jerusalem to perform the work of
man's redemption, Peter he begins to dissuade him from it, and bids him favor
himself: Mat. 16. 23
but Christ turns him back, and says, Get thee behind me Satan.

2. The second thing is the time when the Devil sets upon Christ, When Satan
assaults Christ.
Then, namely when he perceived Christ most weak, and as he thought, not able
to resist him. Herein appears the policy of Satan, when he sees Christ
most weak, the Devil takes occasion to lay his strongest assaults. So then
in the example of Christ we may see the exceeding policy of the Devil in
tempting of men, namely, he makes choice of the fittest time to broach his
temptations; for he marketh and prieth into men and women, and when he finds
us most weak and most unable to resist him, then is he the most strong in
tempting us, especially at the hour of death, and in the time of afflictions,
he bends the force of his temptations against us.

Oh then, Use.
how should this admonish us al to prepare our selves against the day of
affliction* and the pangs of death; to be steadfast in the faith, to make our
calling and election sure that so we may never finally fall away; and to
entreat the Lord that then when we seem to be most weak, he would aid and
strengthen us by his holy spirit, to resist Satan^ assaults.

The third point in the devils preparation, The occasion of Satan's assault.
i^ the occasion whereby the devil was especially moved to tempt Christ, which
was his hunger. Such was Satan's malice against the Lord Jesus, that when he
could find no sin in him* then he takes advantage of Christ's infirmity, and
seeing him now hungry, begins to tempt him to unlawful means to satisfy his
hunger.

Now then seeing the devil takes occasion to tempt Christ, even from the
infirmity of his humane nature, as he was man: hence we learn whence the
devil has the ground of all his temptations, namely from our selves* and from
our own nature, and we our selue^ afford him the matter of his temptations; h^
brings the fire and blows it, but we afford him the fuel to set it a work.
The devil observes the nature of men, their dispositions inclinations and
behauiours, and continually prieth into their dealings, and like unto a prudent
Captain, who besieging a city, marketh where it is most weak and of least
resistance, and there he bends all his forces, and places his greatest
ordinance, Even so the devil watches us and our behauiours, to observe unto
what sin we be most addicted, and by nature most inclined, and then he follows
our humor and feeds us in our own vain. As if a man be impatient of poverty,
he will egg him to stealing, and to unlawful shifts to help himself: if a
man be covetous, he will help to prick him forward that way, that he may by hook
or crook enrich himself: and so in other sins according as he finds men
affected, he will fit his temptations.

Nay, the devil is so skillful by the experience of so many hundred years,
that he will be prying into men's complexions, and the very constitutious of
their bodies; and finding what humor does most a bound, he can give a shrewd
guess, to what sin a man is inclined. As if he perceive a man to be of a
choleric complexion, then the devil will stir him up to quarrelling,
fighting and killing. If he find a man's complexion to be sanguine, then he
seeks to allure him to be delighted with vain and ungodly mirth and
wantonness, or at the least with immoderate mirth. (...) a man be subject to
melancholy, then he will fear a man with heavy and dumpish thoughts and great
fears and cares in his mind. And thus he dealt with the poor man that wa^
lunatic: Mat. 17. 15.
for the Devil took occasion by the course of the Moon, and the humor of hi^
body, to move him to cast himself into the fire and into the water. And in a
word, look^ how many infirmities and weaknesses we have we do as it were give
the devil so many dar^ to wound us withal: for we give him the matter of all
his temptations, and he taket^ advantage of our weakness and infirmities*

This being Satan's cunning and his dealing* it must warn every man to search
his own^ heart, Doctrine.
to find what be his special infirmities and corruptions, to which he is most
pron^ by nature: and when we know them, we mu^^ labor against them, to
repress and subdu^ them; otherwise they will be so many dart^ and weapons
which Satan will turn against our own selves, to hurt and wound us: and
therefore it must be our wisdom to weake^ these infirmities, and to labor by
all goo^ means to prevent the Devil in these hi^ temptations.

The fourth point in the preparation of the Devil unto his temptations, The
fourth point of Satan's preparation.
is his coming unto Christ. And by this that it is said, the Tempter came unto
him, it appears that he came in some visible form: as he did come to Euah in
the shape of a Serpent: so it is very likely he came in some bodily shape to
our Savior Christ, seeing it is said here, that he came and spoke unto him.

If thou be the Son of God, etc.] The Devil having made this solemn
preparation, and having made choice of the fittest place and time, and taken
advantage of the infirmity of our Savior Christ, now he sets upon him, and
incounters Christ with his first temptation: wherein the cunning Devil
disputes like a subtle Sophister, and disputes very syllogistically; and his
syllogism may be framed thus: If thou be the Son of God, then thou can
command that these stones be made bread; but thou can not make these stones
bread, therefore thou art not the son of God.

The maine scope of the devils disputation in this his first temptation, was
this, to bring Christ to distrust of his Fathers providence, to ouerturne the
faith of Christ, that is, that gift in Christ, whereby he as he was man did
believe in God his father, and depend upon him.

And in this dealing of the devil with Christ, we may behold what is the maine
and principal end of all Satan's temptations in the children of God, viz. he
labors to bring us if it be possible, to this, to make shipwreck of faith,
whereby we believe the word of God^ to be true: and thus he dealt with Euah.
Genesis ^ he did labor to bring her to call Gods word into question, and so to
deny credence to it* And thus he deals with all men, seeking to keep them in
ignorance and blindness, o^ else in errors and wickedness, that they may not
believe the truth of Gods word, and (...) perform obedience to it.

The special part of the word of God which the Devil aimed at, and which he
labored to^ bring Christ to deny credit too, is that voice of God the Father
coming from heaven: This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Mat. 3.
17.


And here let us see the practice of Satan against all the faithful children of
God; namely, as he dealt with our Savior Christ, to persuade him if he could,
that he was not the Son of God: so he labors to persuade God^ children that
they are not the sons and daughters of God: he labors to make m^ doubt of
their adoption.

And therefore seeing the Devil aims at this one thing especially, Use.
to ouerturne our faith in Gods promises, it should stir us all up to an
earnest care to make our calling and election sure, 2. Pet. 1. 10.
even to have it sealed up by comfortable assurance to our souls: and this
will be a most sweet comfort unto us in time of affliction, if we can find this
blessed and settled persuasion, that we are the sons and daughters of God. And
the devil he cares not what men profess no though they have all the common
gifts of Gods spirit, to hear the word, to understand, to give assent unto it,
so that they want this blessed assurance of Gods special love in Christ.

Again, in this first temptation the Devil them to shift for themselves, to
filch and pilfer from their neighbors, and to get bread by bad means. In time
of sickness, when men cannot find help in the lawful use of physic, then he
labors to draw them to seek to the devil for help, by sending men to wise
men and women (as they call them) and so by wicked means to seek recovery of
their health.

If thou be the Son of God] What moved the Devil to move this question unto
Christ rather then any other? Question.
Ans. First, Answer.
because the Devil knew right well, that if Christ were the Son of God, then he
was that promised Messiah and Savior of the world; and if he were that
promised Messiah, then he knew it was he that should bruise the Serpents head,
Genesis 3. 15.
Genesis 3. 15. Now of all things the Devil could not abide to hear of that, and
therefore he makes choice of this question before all other, to prove, or at
least to go about to prove, that Christ was not the Son of God.

This is my (...) beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: here the Devil
comes and contradicts the voice of God, nay, goes about to prove God a lier,
in that he would make Christ believe that he was not the true Son of God.

Hence we may by this practice of Satan learn to discern false teachers. Use.
There have been many both excellent and learned men, which have denied Christ
to be the son of God, as Ebeon, Cerinthus, and others, only affirming that
Christ was an excellent man, and a worthy Prophet. Now seeing they deny Jesus
Christ to be the true Son of God, they show themselves to be false teachers,
and such as be the devils scholars, for so says the Apostle John, 1. John 4.
1, 2, 3.

Again, in that the devil seeks to persuade If the Lord affirm a wicked man
to be out of Gods favor, and no child of God; the devil will labor on the
contrary, to persuade him that he is in good estate, and shall be saved, and so
fills his heart with extreme presumption, and makes him more bold then he ought
to be.

Commaund] That is, as if Satan should have said to Christ, Bid this, or do but
speak the word and it shall be done. And herein appears the marvelous
policy of Satan, who in these few words (the better to bring his purpose to
pass) touches three especial points of Divinity: First, that he which is
the son of God, is true God equal to the Father, which many heretics have
denied, and the Pharisees also did not grant; for to work a miracle, it is
the proper and peculiar work of God alone. Secondly, the devil confesses,
that God is able to make all things of nothing, and that without all means,
matter or helpers, by his almighty power. Thirdly, he confesses that God can
effect a true miracle, and that is proper to God alone, neither can any
creature whatsoever work a miracle.

Now when the devil acknowledged all this, one would have thought he should have
intended no harm in these words: but the truth is, we shall see that in the
propounding of these points, his policy was to overthrow the faith of Christ;
and he in propounding of the truth, does it not for any love or liking to it,
but that he might more easily deceive our Savior, to bring him to doubt
whether he was indeed that Son of God or not.

This must admonish us to take heed that we do not always give credit to the
devil, and listen unto him though he speak the truth: for such is Satan's
policy, that when he would seem most to speak the truth, then he means to
deceive us most; and by speaking the truth, he seeks most to overthrow our
faith in the truth. But as our savior Christ did refuse their testimony,
though the devils spoke the truth; Mar. 1. 24. 25.
and as Paul did not suffer the Devil to speak in the maid, Act. 16. 17. 18.
though he did acknowledge the Apostles to be the servants of the true God: so
we must beware how we listen to Satan, even when he speaks the truth; for he
never speaks the truth because he loves the truth, but that speaking the
truth he might be sooner believed, and more easily deceive us, and do us the
greater harm.

That these stones] S. Luke says this stone, Luke. 4. 3.
in the singular number. To reconcile these two places, whereas Matthew speaks
in the plural number of many stones, this we must understand that he speaks of
Satan's temptations, as he first set upon Christ, and then in the beginning of
his temptation, he bids Christ to turn all these stones into bread. Luke, he
saying this stone, speaking but of one, must be understood as the Devil urged
and enforced his temptation, the better to persuade Christ to yield unto it: as
if the Devil should have said, It may be thou think it too much to turn
all these stones (being so many) into bread, do but turn this one stone into
bread, because I would not trouble thee overmuch, that so I may believe thou
art the son of God.

By this dealing of the devil with Christ, Doctr.
we may learn, that when the devil has once begun his temptation, then he
will be more instant in urging of it, he is very loath to have the repulse, and
therefore will urge it and follow it: but if he can gain but a little ground,
at least in some smaller matter, he would be content; as here to persuade
Christ, though he would not turn many stones into bread, that he would turn
but this one stone into bread. And therefore we must learn, that as the devil
is very instant to enforce and urge his temptations, so we must be as instant
to resist them, and yield no not in the least matter that he tempts us to.

Verse. 4. But he answering, said, Man shall ^ot live by bread only, but by
every word that ^roceedeth out of the mouth of God. These words contain the
most wise and heavenly ^nswer of our Savior Christ to the first temptation of
the devil; and in this answer of his, note three points: first the answer it
self, And Jesus answering said: secondly, whence our Savior Christ took his
answer, It is written: thirdly the words of his answer, Man shall not live, etc.

First the Spirit of God sets down the answer of Christ, to show that he was
not only willing to encounter the Devil, but that he was most able to
vanquish and foil the devil.

Now what a singular comfort is this to Gods Church and children, Use.
to remember that our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, was in ^his base estate of
a servant when he lived here upon earth, able to encounter with Satan, to
overcome the devil, notwithstanding all his might and malice! how much more is
Jesus Christ able now being advanced unto the right hand of God his Father in
heaven, having all power and majesty, and being King of Kings, and Lord of all
Lords, how much more able is he now to confound Satan, and to destroy all the
works of the devil in his members! And this may be a great comfort unto every
believer in the midst of temptations.

It is written] Here we see whence our Savior Christ took his answer: though
that (...) could have confounded Satan by the lea^^ word of his mouth, and
could (if he had (...) pleased) called for many legions of Angel^ from heaven
to have guarded him, being the true and only son of God: yet he mak^ choice of
this weapon, It is written. And the he did to teach us, that the most
sufficien^ weapon to beat back all Satan's temptation^ and to quench all the
fiery darts of the diue^ is the word of God written: and therefore (...) bids
us take up the sword of the spirit, whi^ is the word of God, both to defend our
selu^^ and also to put Satan to flight, Ephesians. 6. 16.

Hence from the example of Christ we man learn sundry instructions: Use. 1.
First, seeing the he made choice of the word of God, as the most sufficient
weapon to repel Satan: it condemns that vain and vile practice of the Church
of Rome, who instead of this, (...) into men's hands other weapons not wor^ a
rush, as holy water, the sign of the cross^ etc. and affirms that these be
sufficient we^pons to skarre away the Devil. Alas, the Devil is not so
childish to fear a drop (...) water, or the shaking of a straw: but our
Sa^iour Christ shows what is that which is ab^^^ (...) a most sufficient
weapon to beat back all ^atans temptations which he can hurl against us. And
therefore wicked is the pra^tise of the Papists, who lock up the word of God
from the people, keeping it in an vn^nowne tongue, and so betray the poor souls
^f the people into the hands of the Devil.

We see here the miserable estate of all such

We may hence gather what is the cause why Hos. 4. 1. 3. The want of the
knowledge of the Gospel and the word of God, is the ^ery cause that sin so
abounds in all places: for ^he word of God should be unto us as Saul's ^eare
which he used to set at his beds head, (...) that if any enemy set upon us on
the sudden, ^ur weapon might be ever at hand in readiness that we might answer
the Devil in his instruments if he tempt us to any sin whatsoeu^^ that as here
Christ said, It is written; so (...) must say, I may not lie, swear, commit
ad^^tery, etc. for it is written. etc.

^eare the word continually, to study it, to lay ^t up in our hearts against
the time of need, ^o resist the devil when he assaults us.

It is lamentable to consider how poor ignorant people deceive them selves;
they ^ooth themselves, and say, they defy the di^uel, they spit at him: but
alas, what if two men that be enemies meet together, the one well appointed
with weapons of death, the other having nothing in his hand to defend himself,
but defies his enemy, spits at him; will this do him any good, will not the
other wound him and kill him? And so though poor ignorant people say they defy
the devil, and spit at him, he will show them no pity, but give them their
deadly wound, and they shall never know who hurt them till it be too late.

Now follow the words of Christ's answer: Man shall not live by bread only,
etc. This answer of Christ is taken out of Deuteronomy. 8. 3. where Moses shows the
children of Israel, who were now in great extremity, pinched sore with famine,
and had nothing to eat, that the Lord fed them with Manna, to teach them that
man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of God.

Man shall not liue] That is, man shall not preserve his natural or temporal
life in t^^ world: I say his natural or temporal life, for is not meant of his
spiritual life, by bread (...) that is, all things necessary for the naturall^
of man, as meat, drink, clothing, sleep, p^^ sick, etc. even all natural and
ordinary mea^ used of man for his temporal life, is meant b^ bread.

But by every word] He says not in genera^ by the word, but by every word. Now
(...) has diverse acceptions in the scriptures: first it is taken for the
second person in the Trinity John. 1. 1. Secondly, for the word of God, Is^ 40.
6. but neither of these is understood i^ this place. Thirdly, the word is taken
for the decree and will of God, for his providence (...) the good will and
pleasure of God: and so m^^ we understand it in this place, where our savior
Christ says, man shall live by eue^^ word, that is, every decree and blessing
o^ God for the life of man: so it is taken Heb. 1. 3* where Christ is said to
bear up all things by his mighty word, that is, as the Lord ha^ created al
things, so does he uphold and preserve them by his decree and providence.

Now Gods word and decree concerning the life of man, may thus be
distinguished* namely, that God has decreed that some men should live by
bread, that is, by ordinary means: secondly, some should live without ordinary
bread, that is, without all ordinary means: thirdly, that some should live
without any means at al, either ordinary or extraordinary, as Moses, Eliah, our
Savior Christ, in their forty days fast: fourthly, that some should live
against means, and contrary to the course of nature, as Daniel in the Lions
den, and the three children in the fiery furnace.

Which proceeds out of the mouth of God: That is, by every decree of God, by
every blessing and decree that God gives out concerning the life of man. So
then we see the meaning of the words.

If any say, Question.
It seems we must live only by the word of God, and without meat or drink,
even by the scriptures and the written word. I answer, Answer.
No: but we must live and preserve our lives by every word, that is, every
decree that God gives out to preserve the life of man: so that without the
special decree and blessing of God, nothing could preserve and maintain the
life of man: our meat could not norish us, our apparel could not warm us, etc.

Now let us see how this answer of Christ is applied to the devils temptation.
The devil had labored to prove that Christ was not the son of God, his
argument was this: If th^^ be the son of God, command that the^^ stones be
made bread; but thou can no^ make these stones bread, therefore thou (...)
not the son of God.

Our Savior Christ does allege this plac^ of Scripture, and does deny the
proposition or first part of the devils argument: for where^as the devil takes
this for granted, that if ^ man be hungry, he must have bread by an^ means to
preserve his life: Christ answers, (...) is not necessary, because a man's life
is no^ preserved by bread only, but it is maintained by the special decree and
blessing of God* And indeed this is a special point and wo^ thy lesson to be
learned, as may appear i^ that the Lord was no less then forty years
teaching it to the children of Israel, Deu. 8. 3.

The use of this doctine is manifold: Doctr.
first* hence we learn to consider aright of the creatures of God, namely,
that we do no^ content our selves to look upon the substance of them; but
besides the outward substance, we must consider the secret blessing o^ God upon
his creatures proceeding from hi^ word, that is his decree. As for example,
(...) must not only look upon the outward substance of bread, but besides
that, we m^^ consider the blessing and decree of God, that bread should be the
means to nourish man: for besides the bread, there is the staff of bread,
that is, that power and faculty whereby it nourishes and maintains life,
Ez^ch. 4. 16.
which it has from the decree and blessing of God upon it. And as we see an
old weak man, take away his staff and he will soon fall to the ground: even
so if the Lord take away the staff of bread, that is, his secret blessing,
though a man had all the dainties under heaven, his life would fail in the
midst of the^ all; for the weak life of man must needs fall and decay, if once
the Lord take away the staff of bread.

For what reason is there, that bread which has no life in it, should nourish
our bodies, give life and strength to us: and that that which has no heat in
it, as our clothes, should keep us warm, were it not for Gods word and
decree, and his blessing upon them? And that we may know, that it is not so
much bread that preserves man's life, as Gods blessing upon bread by virtue of
his word and decree, we may see it plainly, in that the poor man's child which
fares hardly, and ^is but meanly clothed, is as well legged and (...), and
likes as well, even as the child of the Prince: now the reason is, because God^
blessing is all in all upon the poor fare of the poor man's child, as well as
the Kings.

2 Again, seeing it is not so much bread, as Gods blessing upon bread, that
preserves man's life, it should teach us al sobriety in the use of Gods
creatures: for neither meat, nor drink, nor clothing, can do us good, unless
the Lord send out his word and decree, and give a blessing unto them, even to
every b^^ of bread we put into our mouths. Now if we abuse the good creatures
of God, in sur^etting and excess, how can we look that the Lord should bless
them unto us? nay we may rather fear he will curse them for our abuse and
intemperancie, so that they shall hurt, yea choke us rather then do us good.

3. We must learn from hence, to use the creatures of God with invocation upon
his name for a blessing upon them; for seeing it is not the substance of bread
that nourishes us, but the blessing of God upon the bread* who sees not, that
we ought before we use the creatures of God, to crave a blessing (...) God upon
them?

4. This should teach us to be content with our estate, to moderate our
affections, and to take heed we do not so eagerly desire and see^ for
abundance: for the blessing of God is riches enough, Pro. 10. 22.
and has not these cutting cares with it: and he which has but a mean
estate, may be as well blessed of God, as he that has the greatest abundance:
nay this immoderate seeking for abundance, it argues great distrust and
unbelief in the providence of God.

5. If man's life stands not in abundance, and our life is not preserved by
bread alone, though a man had all the bread in the world, unless God infuse a
blessing into it: this teaches us, that we may not be so much entangled with
the things of this life: we must not so eagerly seek after meat, drink,
clothing, lands, livings, gold, silver, etc. for in taking too much care for
these things, we see many men's hearts are so carried away, that no grace can take
place in them.

But you will say, Objection.
meat, drink, clothing, and such things, they be my living, I cannot live
without them. Answer.
I answer, that our lives do not stand in these things alone, but especially
in the blessing of God upon these means: without which, though we had all the
world at command, it could do us no good. Again, the Lord can not only
preserve our lives by bread, but even without all means, yea, if so it please
him against means. Now then seeing our lives stand not in these means, but
especially in the blessing of God upon them, we must first seek for the
blessing of God, without the which all these means shall become unprofitable
unto us and do us no good: and it is not wisdom, too greedily to seek for
the things of the world, seeing our life is not preserved by them alone. Man's
life stands not in abundance, says Christ, Luke 12.

6 Seeing man lives not by bread alone, that is, man's life is not maintained by
these outward means, but by Gods blessing upon them: this must teach us all to
be content with that estate the Lord sends us, though it be poor and mean:
and we must learn patience in extreme miseries and afflictions. And if the
Lord should deal^ with us as he did with his servant Job, eue^(...) all from
us, yet we must be content, and take heed that we do not suffer our selves to
be swallowed up of too much grief. For our life is not maintained by these
outward means of themselves, but by Gods blessing upon the^, which is all in
all: and when all means fail, the Lord can preserve our life even without
bread* and against means too, if he please* Indeed if a man wa^ted the outward
means and the inward means too, namely, Gods blessing, then he had some cause
to be grieved: but seeing the Lord can save our lives both without all outward
means, and against means: though we want bread, yet let us cast our selves
upon the Lord, and never distrust his mercy; but say with Job: Though the Lord
kill me, Job. 13. 15.
yet will I trust in him. And let us know, the Lord can increase the poor
woman's cruse of oil, 2. King. 4.
and make it last as well as the rich man's abundance,

7 This should teach us all to moderate our affectiones, and to carry an even
sail, so as neither in the estate of wealth and abundance, we be not puffed up
with pride: nor yet in poverty to be overwhelmed with sorrow. For though a man
have abundance, it follows not that he is therefore blessed; nor if he be
poor and want riches, that he is therefore cursed, and wants the blessing of
God: but in wealth and poverty, the blessing of God is all in all to make men
happy.

8 Lastly, this should teach every one of us to labor all our life long to
know the providence of God, and to depend upon it in all estates of life,
whatsoever the Lord shall send us: and when we can see this providence of God,
we must then hang upon it, as well in adversity as prosperity, in sickness and
health, in life and death. True it is, men can acknowledge Gods providence in
prosperity: but we must learn to see the providence of God as well in
adversity, and then to hang upon it with both the hands of faith, Pro. 16. 3.
so as we can roll our selves upon it, and can even wholly depend upon it, and
commit our selves and all our ways to the Lord. The children of Israel were
forty years learning this lesson: which shows it is an excellent point, and
not easily learned. And therefore seeing it is of so great use, and so
necessary, let us study to know the providence of God, and show the true use
of it in our lives and conuersations.

Then the devil took him into the holy city, etc.] Now follows the second
conflict betwixt the devil and Christ, in the 5. 6. 7. verses. Now though S.
Luke chap. 4. 9. places this temptation in the last place, yet does this
breed no great difference betwixt the Evangelists: for Luke in pe^ning of the
words and deeds of Christ, sets them down as the Spirit of God directed him,
not regarding precisely the time when they were done, but sometime setting that
first which was done last: but Matthew he sets the^ down in order as they were
performed by our Savior Christ.

Then the devil took him, etc.] In this second conflict, we are to consider
three points. First, the devils preparation to the combat, verse. 5. Secondly,
the temptation it self, verse. 6. Thirdly, the answer of Christ, verse. 7.

In the devils preparation: first, the time, then: secondly, the parts of his
preparation, which be two. First, he took Christ from the wilderness, and
carried him to the holy city. Secondly, he sets him there upon a pinnacle of
the temple.

First, in the circumstance of time, then: that

By this we may perceive the malice of the devil, Doctr.
who as soon as he has ended one temptation ceasseth not there, but presently
provides another. The devil never makes truce with man, but either he is
busy in tempting of us, or else he is devising and plotting new temptations;
for he is never idle.

Again, hence we learn, that when we have overcome in one temptation, we must
presently prepare our selves for another: we must not look to be at ease when
we have given the devil the foil: for he will set upon us afresh, and tempt
us again and again. Nay, our life is a continual warfare against sin and
Satan: and therefore we must ever be in a readiness to encounter with our enemy.

And if this lesson were well learned, and as well practiced, men would not be
so impatient in temptations when they befall the^: then temptations would be
far more easy to them, so as a man would willingly and chearefully endure
them, and undergo them though never so many.

The devil took him to the holy city: Here is the first part of the devils
preparation. Now by the holy city is meant Jerusalem, as Luke 4. 9. it is
plain.

But how did the devil carry our Savior Christ from the wilderness to
Jerusalem? How Christ was carried by Satan.
He might do this three ways: first, in vision: Secondly, by the ordinary
way: Thirdly, carry him in the air,

First, by vision, as it was usual in the time of the prophets. Ier. 13. 4.
So Jeremiah was carried in vision to the river Euphrates: but Christ could not
thus in vision be carried from the wilderness to Jerusalem; for then it should
have been no temptation unto him in vision only to cast* himself from the top
of the temple.

Secondly, our Savior Christ might be led

Thirdly, the Devil might convey and carry set him on a pinnacle of the
temple. Now it is as likely that he carried Christ from the wilderness thither,
as that the devil had power to place and set him on the top of the temple.

Now then if the devil had permission to transport the body of Christ from
the wilderness to Jerusalem: Doctr. 1.
this makes for that opinion which is common in the world, that the devil can
carry a man or woman from one country to another, if God give him leave: but
so as he cannot do it with such celeritie and expedition as men imagine. Some
foolishly think, he can carry one many hundred miles in an hour, which is a
thing impossible: for such a violent motion would stop a man's breath; as we see
if a man fall from the top of an high steeple, his wind is gone ere he come
half the way to the ground.

If he had power in the head, why not in the members? if he had power to annoy
Job, to kill his children and destroy the^, though they were no doubt the holy
servants of God, why may not the devil have power over our bodies, to carry a
man from one place to another? If the Devil could by Gods permissio^ torment
the body of one that was a daughter of faithful Abraham, Luke 13. 10.
and even 18. years afflict her, so as she was bruised and bowed together by
Satan; then no doubt he can do the less, to remove men's bodies from place to
place.

And this may serve to admonish those, Use.
who think their faith is so strong, that the devil cannot annoy the^ or any
way bewitch them. But if the devil have power by Gods permission to torment
the bodies of the faithful, yea to destroy the bodies of Jobs children, who no
doubt were the true servants of God, he may if God give him leave, bewitch the
godliest man that lives. For we know what the holy Ghost faith: that all
things fall out, Eccles. 9. 2.
and all things come alike to good and bad; and there is no difference in
outward things oftentimes between the children of God and the wicked.

To the holy citie] That is Jerusalem, Jerusalem city holy.
Luke 4. 9. Now this city was called holy for sundry causes. First, because
in Jerusalem was the temple of the Lord where were the sacrifices and other
ceremonies prescribe^ by God for his own worship. Secondly, i^ the temple they
had the law of God and the books of Moses and the Prophets read an^ expounded
unto them. Thirdly, because Jerusalem was a mother Church, from whenc^ religion
did flow and was dispersed into many places of the world. Now for these
considerations Jerusalem is called the holy city.

This church at Jerusalem though it hao many corruptions in it, Use 1.
yet our Savior Christ calls it holy: and it was a true Church of God. Then
hence I conclude, that the Church of God in England, though there be in it many
blemishes and corruptions, yet may it be, and in truth is the true Church of
God. For the Church of God in England is proprotionable to the Church at
Jerusalem for as they had Moses and the Prophets read and expounded, so have
we: nay, we have the Gospel now soundly preached* which they then had not in
so plain and plentiful manner as we have. They had the Sacraments of the old
Testament: so we have Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. Their Church was a
mother church to derive Religion to many other: and though our Church cannot be
called a Mother church, yet it may be truly called a nourcing Church to many
neighbor churches round about us.

As Christ and his Apostles did not therefore separate themselves, or refuse to
join

If any shall say, that the church of Rome is the true Church of God, as well
as the Church of Jerusalem, seeing the Romish church has as many privileges
as the Church at Jerusalem; I answer, By examining the particulars it will
appear to the contrary. Rome no true church.
As first, the Church of Rome braggeth, that she has her succession from the
Apostles: but I answer, succession from persons, without succession in the
Apostles doctrine, can be no true note of the Church. Secondly, the Church of
Rome has the sacrament of Baptism, yet that proves he^ not the true Church:
for in Samaria they had the Sacrament of circumcision, and so in other places,
and yet it cannot be proved that they were the true Churches of God. Besides, I
answer, the church of Rome has baptism no otherwise then a thief has a true
man's purse: now it cannot be said, that a thief is therefore a true man,
because he has a true man's purse. Lastly, though the Church of Rome have the
outward baptism, yet she in doctrine ouerturnes the inward baptism: namely,
the true imputed justification and inherent sanctification of Christ by the
spirit.

3 The Church of Rome holds the Apostles Creed, but it is only in word: for
the truth is, their God whom they worship is an Idol, and their Christ is a
false and counterfeit Christ, forged by their own brain, as may appear to
all that will search their doctrine.

4 She says, that they hold the word of God, and the writings of the Apostles:
but it will appear in their writings, that they hold it but in show, not in
truth: for in the maine grounds of religion they ouerturne the doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles. Again, they hold the Scriptures but as a lanthorn holds
the candle, not for it self, but for those that pass by: so the Church of
Rome have the word of God, not for themselves, but for the good of Gods
children, which ever lie hid in the midst of Popery.

5 She brags that she is the mother church of many Churches: I answer; we must
consider that city, as Rome is, and as Rome was: the old Rome which was in the
time of Paul, was the true Church of God; but as for that old Rome, it is dead
and buried, and this new Rome is that whore of Babylon, and no mother church,
but a cruel stepmother to Religion. By all this we may see, that the present
church of Rome, is no Church of God, but only in name and outward show.

And seeing that the Devil tempts our Savior Christ in the holy city, we
learn that there is no place so holy; but the Devil can broach his
temptations in it, as we may see Zach. 3. 1. 2. and therefore this condemns
that dotage and sorcery of the Church of Rome, who teach that their charmed
holy water, their coniured bread, and the sign of the cross, and such stuff
can drive away the Devil from their houses, and from their persons: and yet we
see here, that neither the holiness of Christ's person, nor yet of the place,
could hinder Satan, but he did tempt him

Again, we see it is to small purpose, to the end we may be freed from
temptations, to change the place, or to change the air; for what place is
there so holy, or so sound and wholesome, where Satan cannot and will not set
his temptation on foot and assault us? Indeed to remove the diseases of the
body, these may be of some force, to change the air, etc. but to cure the
conscience, and to help the diseases of the soul, this and such like can do
nothing at all.

And set him on a pinnacle of the temple.] Here is the second part of the
Devils preparat^on, who having carried Christ from the wilderness to Jerusalem,
now he places him upon a pinnacle of the temple, or a little wing of the
temple. Some think that it was a sharp broach gilded to some especial use:
but it is either the battlements which were made by Gods commandment, least
any should fall, because their houses had flat roofes, o^ else some corner of
the temple; howsoever, it was a dangerous place.

If thou be the son of God, cast thy self down, etc.] In this verse is set
down the second temptation, and in a syllogism it may be thus concluded* If
thou be the son of God, then cast thy self down: but thou say, and art
persuaded that thou art the son of God, therefore thou may cast thy self
down.

Here we must mark the scope of the Devil in this second temptation, which is
this, to tempt our savior Christ to presumption, to persuade him to presume of
Gods mercy, and to bring him to a vain confidence in his fathers protection,
without using lawful means.

And in this second temptation we may observe one especial thing, Doctr.
which the Devil aims at in his temptations, namely, to persuade him to a
vain presumption of Gods mercy. And surely we see the devil preuails much in
these days by this argument: for we see how some men cry, God is merciful,
God is merciful, and so presume and grow secure in sin, and take occasion of
Gods mercy to sooth themselves in their sins. Others, they say, I am either
elected or rejected, and if I be elected, I am sure I shall be saved howsoever I
live; if I be rejected I am sure I shall perish, though I live never so well:
and thus men live as they list. Others say, I know the Lord will provide for
me, and therefore refuse to live in any calling. And as for those which make
profession of the Gospel, the Devil he labors to persuade them, that it is
sufficient to profess religion, though they practice not the duties of
religion: as the five foolish virgins, who held out their blazing lamps, yet
wanted the vessel of oil to maintain their lamps.

This being so, Use.
it should admonish us al to take especial heed, that we be not over com^ of
Satan in this kind, seeing the Devil knows our nature, and sees that to
presume and think well of our selves, it is a thing very fitting and pleasing
our nature: whereas despair, it is a troublesome thing, and brings men often
to a greater sight of their misery: and the truth is, the Devil preuailes with
a thousand to one more by presumption then by despair: despair kills
thousands, security ten thousands.

And it is to be noted, that when the Devil had in the former temptation
labored to bring Christ to despair of his Fathers providence, now he labors
the clean contrary, to bring him to presume of Gods providence. And here we
may see the Devils exceeding cunning, that he fought to carry our Savior Christ
from one extreme to another. And thus does the Devil deal with all men, he
seeks to draw men either to presumption or else to despair, and labors to carry
them from one extreme to another, as from covetousness to prodigality, and so
of the rest. And therefore we must labor to avoid both the extremes, Use.
neither to presume too much, nor yet to be cast down by despair, but to
keep the golden mediocritie, even as Christ does in this place.

Cast thy self down.] He would have Christ not to show by his doctrine, but
to work a miracle, that he may know him to be the son of God. This shows the
nature of all wicked men; they care not for the doctrine of God, but they cry
out for miracles: as we may see in Herod, he desired to see our Savior Christ
work some miracle, but he contemned his word and doctrine. And the Jews who
persecuted Christ and his Gospel, yet when he was upon the cross, they would
have him work a miracle, to come down when he was nailed hand and foot. And
all wicked men are of the same nature, more to regard and desire a miracle,
then to hear the blessed doctrine of Jesus Christ.

Cast thy self downe] The Devil having proved before the faith of Christ to be
most constant, that he would not so much as doubt of his fathers providence in
his greatest need, now he takes occasion from the graces and gifts of Christ to
bring him to presume, and to have a vain confidence of his fathers protection.
And so will the Devil deal with all the members of Christ; if he cannot
prevail by our weaknesses to bring us to despair, then he will take occasion
by the graces and gifts he sees in us, to make us presume: as often he
preuailes by this means to make men swell and think highly of themselves for
some grace they have received, of learning, wit, eloquence, etc. to puff men
up with satanicall pride and ouerweening o^ themselves.

Then cast thy self down.] The Lord gave the Devil permission to place Christ
in a dangerous place: but yet the Devil could not go any further to hurt
Christ there; (...) cast him down he had no power, but persuades him to cast
himself down. Where we see, the Devils power is limited, his power is not so
great as his malice is to mankind; but the Lord does limit Satan's power, and in
all things has care of his own children, that Satan can do them no harm. For
the Devil, though he had set Christ upon the top of the temple, could not for
his life cast him down; where we may see, the Devil for all his malice can go
no further then God gives him leave. And this must comfort us: for as God the
Father limits Satan in respect of Christ our head, so does he in us his members.

Now follows the reason which the Devil uses, the better to persuade Christ
to yield unto his temptation: For it is written, he shall give his Angels
charge over thee. When as the Devil heard our Savior Christ allege
Scripture; he like an ape imitates Christ, and begins to allege Scripture
roundly as well as he. Doctr.
And therefore we must be wary how we entertain doctrines of heretics, and
false teachers, though they seem to prove them by the Scriptures: for the
Devil he has his scriptum est, it is written, as ready as may be. But we must
learn to prove the spirits, that is, the doctrines of men, whether they be of
God or not, 1. John 4. 1. lest the Devil and wicked men deceive us; for we see
here how the Devil can allege Scripture, and that fitly for his purpose. And
it is the subtle practice of the devil to allege Scripture, that so he may
persuade men to receive his damnable doctrines, and become heretics and
scismatickes. And to this end he does grossly abuse the Scriptures; yea when he
would persuade men to live in sin, he has his, Scriptum est, very ready, and
can tell them, At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin, he
shall have mercy: and truly by his abusing of Scripture he preuailes with many.

The words which the devil alleges are taken out of the fourscore and
eleventh Psalm, the eleventh verse: For he shall give his Angels charge over
thee, to keep thee in all thy ways, etc. Now the Devil in alleging and
propounding the words is very precise, and shows himself very careful in
repeating of the words: in so much as he will not leave out no not this
particle [For] which might well have been left out. Yet in the end he sticks
not to leave out a whole clause, which is the maine point and ground of Gods
promise: namely, this: to keep thee in all thy ways. Where we may see, how
the devil does most vil^ly abuse the Scriptures of God: and it is usual with
him in his allegations, to put in, or to put out something, or some way or
other to deprave them, or to corrupt the sense and meaning of the Scriptures,
to serve his own turn.

And as this is the devils manner in his alleging and dealing with the
Scriptures, so do the Papists as his scholars. For though in word they hold the
Scriptures, yet it is usual with them to put in, or leave out, or by some
means to corrupt and deprave the^ in the sense and meaning, as might be showed
by example.

Well, seeing the devil is so skillful in the Scriptures, and can allege them
so readily and so fitly for his purpose, and withal is so malicious to mince
them and deprave them, it should make all men to study the holy Scriptures,
that so we might be acquainted with them, and be able to disclose and to descry
Satan's fallations and subtilties: and we should wish with Moses, Nu^ 11. 29
that all the Lords people could prophecy. But especially the Ministers of the
word, they must labor to be thoroughly acquainted with the book of God, to
observe even the circumstances of the text, else the devil will cast a mist
before their eyes, and beguile them with his subtle fallations: and therefore
they must do as Ezechiel did, eat up the book of God.

And that we might not perceive Satan's subtilties and deceit, he labors to
keep men in ignorance of the word, and by all means to have the Scriptures
hid and dark: and if it were possible, to root out the schools of learning,
and that the Bible might be burned. And as he preuailes in Popery, to bring
men to this, that all religion, and the Scriptures might hang on men's devises
and man's learning, as they do in Popery ground all upon Lumbard the master of
the Sentences, and bar the common people from the Scriptures, locking them up
in an unknown tongue: so with Christians he takes the like course, for he
persuades them, that the Scriptures are hard to be understood, and very obscure
and troublesome, and therefore he draws men^ minds from the study of them, to
read the writings of men, because they seem to be more pleasant and
delectable; that so (...) being not acquainted with the text, might not descrie
his deceipts and subtilties.

Again, Doctr.
seeing the devil can allege the word of God and say, It is written, and that
he can bring in Scripture fit for his purpose; what a shame is it for
Christians, if they do not labor so to know the Scriptures of God, that they
may allege them as occasion shall serve: and that not as some do, to heap
place upon place without all reason, but to allege them fitly and to the
purpose?

Lastly, seeing this is a devilish and satanicall

He shall give his Angels charge over thee] The true sense of the place is
this, that the Lore had a special care of his people; and when he sent any
judgment upon the Israelites, he gave them this comfortable promise, that in
the midst of all their troubles he himself would protect them. And as this
promise was made to them, so it is general to the whole Church of God, and
belongs to us. For in all common judgments and calamities, the children of God
which walk in his ways, shall be sure to have protection and security: for
the Angels of God, by his appointment, do hold them up, as it were in their
hands. In which words there is a comparison taken from nurses, who having
children committed to their care, do hold them very charily and tenderly in
their hands, and dare not let them go out of their arms: even so the Angels of
God by his appointment* become even as nurses to his children in all their
lawful ways, Use 3. Psalm. 34. 7.
and do attend upon them, and are very careful to protect them from danger, so
long as they keep themselves within the compass of Gods word.

It is true indeed, that judgment begins at the house of God, and he often
afflicts his dearest children to try their faith and patience, yet is is most
certain, that in common calamities the children of God shall have protection
and security: yea the Angels of God (as it were nurses) shall hold them in their
hands, and defend them, so long as they keep themselves in the ways of God,
and within the compass of his will in his word* But if they leave the way of
Gods commandments, and wa^der in bypath, and go out of their lawful
callings, they have no assurance of Gods protection, neither have Gods Angels
any charge to watch over them,

Seeing then God has made so merciful a promise of protection, to all them
that walk in his ways, and within the compass of his commandments, it
should warn us all to beware how we go out of our ways and lawful callings,
but that we study the law of God, and as we look for his protection, to keep
within the compass of it.

Jesus said unto him, Verse 7.
It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.] In these words
is contained the answer of our Savior Christ, to the second temptation of the
Devil; wherein he does oppose Scripture against Scripture. But to expound that
place which the Devil alleged, and to show how vilely Satan abuses the word
of God, he alleges another place of Scripture, wherein our Savior Christ
answers the Devil, that it is true, God has made sundry promises in his word,
of protection to his people, but yet so, as if they refuse to walk in the
commandments of God, and to use such lawful means as he prescribes in his
word, he is not bound to perfome them, for they be made upon that condition,

Again it is written,] Seeing our Savior Christ does allege another place of
Scripture, to expound that the Devil brought against him, and to show how he
abused Scripture: hence we gather, that the holy Scriptures are of themselves
sufficient to interpret themselves, Doctr.
for so Christ alleges another text of scripture to expound that which Satan
alleges, and to confute his abusing of it. Nehe. 8. 8.
So we find that Ezra did expound the law of God, and gives the sense of it by
the scriptures, and so expounds the one by the other, Nehem. 8. 9. (Iunius.)
Now if the servants of God could do this in the old Testament, how much more
may we in the new, wherein many things are most plainly opened and expounded
by Christ and his Apostles?

But the Papists cannot by any means yield to this doctrine, for they hold,
that that which must interpret the scriptures, must have judicial power and
authority to judge of the sense of the scriptures; but they hold the
scriptures are but a dumb letter, and therefore are not able to judge of the
sense and meaning of the scriptures. Yet for all that* we see (by the example
of our savior Christ) that the scriptures are of sufficient power to give the
sense of the scriptures, to interpret themselves, and to show what is the true
sense of the scriptures, though they be dumb. And as we see, that a man may
as well show his mind to his friend by letters and writing, as by word of mouth:
even so the Lord God speaks now to his people by the scriptures, as well as he
did in old time by his own lively voice from heaven.

But if the Papists will yet deny the scriptures to have power to judge and
determine of the sense of the Scriptures; then would I know, who has this
power given unto him? They answer, the church must give judgment, and
determine of the sense of the scriptures: but that is false, for the Lord has
not given any such power to the Church, to determine of the sense of the
scriptures at her pleasure, but only he has given to the ministry of the
word, to open and expound the scriptures by the scriptures themselves. As a
Lawyer has not that power to judge of the law of his Prince, and to give what
sense he lists, but only to expound the law, and to give the sense of it by
the words of the law, and other circumstances concerning the same.

The Church of Rome say further; they (...) determine of the sense of the
scriptures, either by the rule of faith, or the consent of the fathers: or, if
they fail, then the Pope he is (...) determine of them, as one that cannot
err.

1 Concerning the rule of Faith (by which they understand unwritten traditions)
how can they be fit judges to determine of the sense of the scriptures, unless
we will gi^e more authority to unwritten verities then to the written word of
God? Nay only the scriptures must be the rule of faith, and only the
scriptures judge and determine of the sense of themselves.

2 Neither is the consent of Fathers a sufficient rule to give judgment, and
to determine of the sense of the scriptures: for we know that they being men,
and many of the^ (having not the knowledge of Hebrew and Greek, yea and most
of all in expounding the word) are subject to error, and sometimes do err. And
by the same reason the Pope is no meet man to be the judge of the scriptures,
and to determine what should be the sense of the^, seeing he is subject to
manifold errors, and many Popes have erred in the foundations of Religion.

Now follow the words of Christ's answer, taken out of Deuteronomy. 6. 16. Thou shall
not tempt the Lord thy God. First we must search what this word, to tempt,
signifies: secondly, the manner how God is said to be tempted: thirdly the cause
and root of this tempting of God.

First, What it i^ to tempt God.
To tempt God, is to prove or to make trial whether God be such a one as the
scriptures report him to be: namely, whether he be so just, so merciful, so
mighty as the word of God describes him to be. So the Propet David expounds
it, Psalm. 95. 9. Your fathers tempted me, and proved me in the desert. Where to
tempt, is to prove Gods justice and mercy, whether he were so just and
merciful as the word sets him out to be, and as he promised to be.

Secondly, for the manner, it is not simply to tempt and to make trial of God,
but to tempt God, is to make needless trial of Gods power etc. when we have
no cause to try the Lord: and so it is taken here in the words of Christ, Thou
shall not tempt, that is, thou shall not take needless and unnecessary
experience and trial of Gods power and goodness.

Thirdly, the cause which moves men to tempt God, is a distrustful and
unbelieving heart, eue^ want of faith. So the Israelites tempted God, Psalm. 78.
ver. 18. 22. They tempted God in their hearts, and required meat for their
lust. And the reason is, verse. 22. because they did not believe in God, and did
not trust in his help, because they did not rely upon his care and fatherly
providence: so that unbelief was the root of this their tempting of God.

So then to tempt God, is to make needless and unnecessary trial and
experience of his mercy, goodness, power and justice, proceeding from a
distrusting heart.

Now God may be tempted five manner of ways. How God is tempted.
First, when men will take upon them to appoint God the time when, the place
where, and the manner how God must help them, and accomplish his promise to
them. Thus the Israelites in the wilderness wanting water, Exodus 17. 7.
they say: Is the Lord amongst it us or no^ showing, that through the Lord had
promised he would be with them, yet unless he would at that time give them
water in their need, they would not give credit to his promise. Again, Psalm.
78. ^0 though the Lord had given them water, yet they say: Can he give bread
also, or prepare flesh for his people^ still showing, that unless the Lord
would at their pleasures, and now presently send them meat, they were ready
to distrust his providence.

And therefore it must admonish us, Vs^*
that we must not in our requests and petitions (as the Bethulianes did)
appoint God the time, Judith. 7. 30
place, or means how we would be helped in poverty, sickness, or other
ways; but continuing in prayer, wait upon the Lords leisure, and leave these
circumstances to his good will and pleasure.

Secondly, God is tempted, when men will not believe his word, but do demand
signs and wonders from heaven, as the Scribes and Pharisees did (Ioh. 2. 18.)
tempt our Savior Christ, not believing his doctrine, unless he would confirm
it by some miracle. And thus all they tempt God, who refuse to believe the
doctrine of God, because it is not confirmed unto them at their pleasure by
signs and wonders.

But some may say: Objection.
What, is it not lawful the^ to demand and require a sign at Gods hands?
Answer.
Yes we may sometimes: and so we read that Gedeon did require a sign of God
and sinned not: Iud. 6. 36. 37.
so did Hezechiah. 2. King. 20. 8.

In two cases men may ask a sign of the Lord. First, when the Lord gives a
man commandment to ask a sign, then we may ask it lawfully: and thus the
Lord bid^ Achaz to ask a sign, Isai. 7. 11. 12.
and he sinned in refusing to do it.

Secondly, a man may ask a sign of God, when it is necessary for the
confirmation of a man in some extraordinary calling: as we see in Gedeon being
extraordinarily appointed of God to be the Captain and deliverer of Gods
people; he being not fully persuaded of this his vocation, desired a sign of
God, not of infidelity, but the better to resolve himself of Gods calling him
to that business. And so it was in Hezechiah, to persuade himself of Gods
extraordinary deliverance from an extraordinary di^ease.

The third way whereby men tempt God* is when men live in sin continually
without repentance, and so will try Gods mercy: and thus the Israelites
tempted God, Number. 14. 18. And so all those which live in ^inne from day to day
without repentance, do indeed tempt God and abuse his patience, Mal. 3. 15.

And therefore seeing that this is even to tempt God, Use.
to live in sin without repentance, it must stir us up all to take heed how
we run on in sin: but that we do wi^^ speed repent and break off the
course of our sins: for so long as we live in sin without repentance, we
tempt God, and then we can promise no safety to our selves, neither look for
the protection of Gods Angels, but ly even naked to all Gods heavy judgments.

The fourth manner of tempting God, is Ast. 15. 10. the Jews are said to tempt
God, in that they urged the observation of the ceremonies of Moses.

And by this we may judge of the present estate of the Church of Rome, and of
their religion; which stands for the most part in vain and superstitious
ceremonies; and that which is worse, of Iudaisme and Gentilisme.

The last way how men tempt God, is, not to use the lawful and ordinary means
which God has appointed, either concerning men's souls, or concerning their
bodies: and this is here understood in this place, when Christ says: Thou
shall not tempt the Lord thy God. When we shall refuse such lawful and
ordinary means as the Lord has appointed, and use extraordinary; even as a
man having a ready way over a bridge, should leave that, and thrust himself
into the water, what were this but to tempt God? Or when a man has the
ordinary way to come down by the steps or stairs, and refusing that should
cast himself down from the top of a steeple? So those men who contemn the
word of God, and will not vouchsafe to hear, what do they else but even tempt
God; seeing they refuse the preaching of the word, which is the ordinary
means to save men's souls?

And thus Satan tempted our Savior Christ to tempt God. For having now set him
on the top of the temple, in a dangerous place, he persuades him to cast
himself down: and he adds, that he may be bold to do so, because God has
given his Angels charge to look unto him, that he take no harm. But our
Savior Christ answers him; That were to tempt God, seeing he had the lawful
and ordinary way to go down by the stairs, and therefore he had no reason to
cast himself down.

In a word, all those tempt God, which either refuse the ordinary means God
has appointed, or do wilfully cast themselves into danger, being not called
thereunto of God: as Peter having no calling of God, went and thrust himself
into Caiphas hall, to see what became of his master: and the three Worthies
which ventured through the host of the Philistims to fetch water at the well
of Bethell for David, whereas he might have had it without danger at home.

Here some may ask, What we are to judge of those which use to walk on ropes
on high places, and on the top of houses: whether do such men sin or not?
Ans. These men do so either with a calling or without a calling, Such as do it
by virtue of their lawful calling, as Mosons and such as build churches and
houses, and so by reason of their trades work on high places, cannot be said to
tempt God: nay rather so long as they walk faithfully in their lawful
callings, they may assure themselves of Gods blessing and his protection.

But as for those who to show their agilitie; and to make sport, walk on
ropes, or run upon the roof of houses, these men having no calling from God
so to do, they cannot look for Gods protection; nay, they in so doing tempt
God, casting themselves upon danger. And our Savior Christ might a thousand
times better have done this which Satan would have him here to do^ yet would he
not put himself into needless danger, lest he should tempt God; much less
ought any man else adventure to do it.

And in this, that our Savior Christ uses the ordinary way, even the
stairs, we may learn, that if any man look to have Gods protection and
blessing, he must also make sure to use the lawful and ordinary means
appointed of God, and keep himself within the compass of his calling: yea if
we desire to find comfort in any of Gods gracious promises, we must be wary to
keep our selves within the compass of his commandments: but if we leave
them, then we find no true comfort, neither have we any promise of protection
from God. But so long as we walk in obedience of Gods commandments, and
within the compass of our callings, we have this blessed promise from God,
that his Angels shall take the care of us, to guard and to defend us.

Again, Verse. 8.
the devil takes him into an exceeding high mountain.] In the seven verses
going before, we have heard of the two first temptations of our savior Christ;
now follows the third. In this third temptation we are to consider again
three especial points first, the preparation of the Devil, ver. 8. Secondly,
the temptation it self, ver. 9. Thirdly, Christ his answer, ver. 10.

And first of all seeing the Devil does thus arm himself, Doct.
and comes prepared three times, in three several temptations, it should teach
us all on our parts to prepare our selves continually, and to be ready to
resist his temptations.

In the Devils preparation note two parts: first, he takes him to an exceeding
high monntaine: secondly, he shows him all the kingdoms of the world, and the
glory of them.

But how could the Devil carry our Savior Christ to this high mountain?
Objection.
I answer, Answer.
he might do it two ways: first, by vision: secondly, by real transporting of
his body from Jerusalem to this mountain. Some think that this was only in
vision: but I rather think our Savior Christ was carried locally and really;
for our Savior Christ his temptations are not imaginary, but true and real
temptations; and the words import no less, but that he was really and locally
transported from the city to the mountain.

The reasons why the Devil carried our Savior Christ to the mountain, are
these: First, because the Devil in all things desire^ to imitate God, and to
become as it were Gods ape. Now we read, that the Lord carried Moses to the
mount Nebo, Deuteronomy. 34. 1.
to show him all the land of Canaan; so the Devil to imitate God, and by
imitating God, to match him, and so to disgrace the Lord, carries our Savior
Christ to the mountain, as it is likely, to imitate Gods dealing with Moses.

Secondly, the Devil carried our Savior Christ to this high mountain, as a
most fit and convenient place to broach this his third and last temptation now
in hand.

In that the Devil does carry our Savior Christ from Jerusalem to this hill
locally; hence we learn, that he may by Gods permission, have like power over
the dear children of God, not once, but twice, nay thrice, and oftentimes. We
see this true in our savior Christ the head: therefore if the Lord permit
Satan, and by his permission give the Devil liberty to transport our bodies
from place to place, we must not be discouraged. Seeing the same thing befell
the head, it may also befall his members, which we are.

he shows him all the kingdoms of the world, etc. Now concerning this, we may
not think the Devil could do this in deed and truth, to show Christ all the
several kingdoms of the world, as they be here placed upon earth, for that is
a thing impossible: for there is no hill so high, that a man might see them
all. Nay, if a man were as high as the Sun, and could see never so clearly,
yet he could but see the one half of the earth; and therefore we must know, he
showed them in a counterfeit vision.

Now these visions of the Devil, they be either of the outward senses, or else
of the understanding. Of the outward senses, as the delusions of the Devil,
making men think they see that they do not see indeed. So the Devil is said to
show Samuel to Saul in a vision in his proper habit: and this was indeed but a
cou^terfet Samuel, 1. Sam. 28.
not that true Samuel, who rested in the grave concerning his body, and
remained in heaven concerning his soul.

Secondly, there be false visions and deludings of the understanding; as the
Lord speaks, Zach. 13. 4.
that he will make the false prophets ashamed of their lying visions. And some
of these visions come unto men sleeping, called dreams. Deuteronomy. 13. 1. some come
waking, as to such as have their brain crased, they oftentimes have visions,
and think themselves to be Kings or Prophets, as John Baptist, etc. Now
concerning this vision of Christ offered by the Devil, he did it not only to
the mind of Christ, but also to his out ward eye, and visibly.

By this practice of the Devil we may behold his wonderful skill and power,
in that he can resemble to the outward senses in such a strange manner, even as
he lists, so great and wonderful matters. And the like is done by Magicians
and Coniurers, who by the help of the devil, can reveal and show things done
in a far country, or things that be lost, in a glass: or for things long
passed, can resemble them to outward sense in a glass, or in the air. So that
those are deceived who are of mind, that they cannot do this: for if the devil
could show Christ all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them in so
short a time, then much more can he show some one particular thing to the eye
and sense of man.

Now let us mark the devils drift in this temptation, and setting before
Christ's eyes this goodly and glorious sight: sure it was to this end, that the
devil might by this means more easily wind himself into the heart of Christ:
and therefore he sets this thing before his eyes, that Christ might be moved by
them, and take some delight in them, and delighting in them might desire them,
and so Satan might in the end overcome him and ensnare him.

And this has been the ancient practice of the devil, as Genes. 3. first, to
move Evah to cast her eye upon the apple, to mark the beauty of it, then to
like it, the^ to desire and lust after it, and so in the end to taste of it. And
thus he dealt with Christ: first, he shows this glorious sight, and the
beauty of all these things, that if he could, he might have moved him to
desire them, and so make his temptation take place.

Seeing this is Satan's ancient subtlety, Use.
it must warn us to take great heed of our outward senses, especially the two
senses of learning, namely, seeing and hearing. The eyes and the ^ares be the
two windows of the Soul: and if the devil can get in his head there, he will
easily wind in all his body, and poison our souls.

We had need therefore to counterguard our hearts, Prou. 4. 23.
to keep them with all diligence, even above al watch and ward, and evermore
to take heed who, and what enters into our eyes and ears, and to make sure w^
keep careful watch at those doors. We mu^^ pray with David: Psa. 119. 37.
O Lord set a Watch before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips: and with
holy Job, Job. 31. 1.
make a covenant with our eyes that they behold no vanity. This if we do,
death shall not enter in by these doors and windows, but we shall preserve
our souls in purity.

Now when the devil shows our Savior Christ this goodly show, let us mark
the manner: he shows Christ all the beauty, the glory and delight of them:
not the troubles, vexations, calamities and dangers of them. And thus will the
devil deal with us; if he would tempt any one to some sin, he never shows
but hides the misery and danger, the curses and calamities that will ensue
upon that sin: but he shows the profit, gain, pleasure, delight and
commodity that that sin will afford them: that by this meane^ he may bring
them to his bow, and move them headlong to rush into the commiting of sin.
Indeed when he has got his purpose, and prevailed thus far to bring a man
into sin, then he will lay it open in most ugly manner, and lay before a poor
sinner the horror and punishment due to his sin, that so he may make a poor
sinner break the neck of his soul in despair.

Further, mark how the cunning devil showed not these goodly and glorious
sights in the first or second temptation, but reserved them for the last, and
that in great subtlety. For the devil know very well, that if any would
peruaile, then surely the desire of honor, of preferment, of profit and
pleasure, would move the heart of Christ.

And in this subtlety he shows, that this is a most dangerous temptation
which comes from the right hand, that is, which proceeds from profit, pleasure,
preferment and honor. And by this temptation he prevailed more against David,
then he could when he was in great conflict, and persecuted by Saul.

So prosperity and ease in the Primitive Church in the days of Constantine,
did more prevail with Christians, then persecution and tribulation could do
for the space of three hundred years before. And those which could be moved by
no other means, yet the hope of honor, profit and pleasure has overcome and
prevailed with them. Thus ease slays the foolish: prosperity is as a
slipperie way: and few having rest are edified, and walk in the fear of the
Lord, and the comfort of the holy Ghost, Act. 9. 31.

Luke cap. 4. 5. he adds the circumstance of time, that the devil showed all
this to Christ in a point or moment of time, in so short a time as possibly
might be, with marvelous speed and celeritie. And this the devil did being
subtle, the more to inflame the heart of Christ to desire them: and therefore
he set his wares open, and as it were in a glimpse gave him the beholding of
the beauty of the^. So we see, if me^ see some st^a^g^ and beautiful thing,
and have but a blush or a little glimpse of it, they desire it with more
eagerness, and more greedily affect it. Eue^ so he would have dealt with our
Savior Christ, he would have affected his hea^ with this sudden and glorious
spectacle.

Now follows the temptation it self, in these words: And said unto him, All
these will I give thee, Ver. 9.
if thou will fall down and worship me.

In this temptation we must first mark the scope and drift of the devil
therein. In the first temptation he labored to tempt Christ to distrust and
unbelief: in the second, to puff him up with vain confidence and
presumption: now in this third, he tempted Christ to commit idolatry, even to
worship the Devil.

And truly this has ever been the practice of the Devil, to seek to
ouerturne religion and good conscience by these three things, honor, profit,
and pleasures. Among Protestants and Protestant Ministers he has prevailed
much by these means. When as for the Ministers of the word, many have in hope
of profit and preferment, forsaken true religion and clean abiured it, and
taught the clean contrary, even that which the papists hold and teach: so we
see that protestant Merchants for hope of gain, do carry over to the Church
of Rome all such merchandise of wax, etc. as the Papists use to maintain
their superstitions and Idolatry.

And among common Professors, many of them to save their lands, livings, and
places, have changed as religion has changed; now Papists, now Protestants,
like to Camelions into any color. Of this we had experience in Queen Mary's
days: few great men remained Protestants, but yeeded to the Idolatry of those
times.

This third temptation has two parts: first, a promise: secondly, a condition.
And here the Devil says not: I will procure thee these things at Gods hands;
but in his own^ name, I will give thee, all these, to make Chrit depend upon
him for them, to trust in him, and to deny his confidence in God, and to rely
upon the devil for an inheritance in this world.

In which vile practice of the devil, we may behold his shameless boldness,
who dares offer Christ the gift of all these, conditionally, if he would
worship him: whereas indeed they did all most properly belong to Jesus Christ
himself, and were his own; neither had Satan any title to them, but only by
usurpation.

And as the devil here with Christ, so he deals with most men of the world,
to tempt them to depend upon him for the wealth of the world, and to make the
Devil their God. For though me^ deny this in word, and say, All they have, God
has sent it, they thank God: yet their wicked practices show the contrary,
that they do indeed depend upon the devil for gain and profit: seeing most
men get their goods by false waight^ and measures, by deceit, fraud, cousinage,
by lying, swearing and forswearing. Now while they get that they have thus by
such vile and wicked means, it plainly shows that all they have, they have it
of the Devil, and depend upon him for wealth, and so make him their God,
though in word they deny it never so much.

Secondly, the Devil knew Christ was a King, and that his kingdom was not of
this world, but spiritual, exercised especially in men's consciences: now the
Devil he labors to tempt Christ to become an earthly King, which if it had
taken place in Christ, he knew then that he could not be that true Messiah, who
should reign spriritually in men's consciences.

And in like manner deals the Devil with the members of Christ: for the church
of God has a kingdom, and that is spiritual in the word of God. Now the
stewardship is the dispensation and ministry of the word preached, and against
this the Devil labors that it may become an earthly kingdom, not
spiritual but carnal, not in the power of the spirit, but in the carnal
wisdom of man's eloquence; and so by all means to ouerturne the true kingdom
of Christ.

Thirdly, we see here how the Devil makes very large and liberal promises,
though he meant to perform nothing, neither could he though he would.

This must teach us to study that we may be contrary to the Devil, and
therefore that we do warily consider what promises we make, whether the thing
we promise be lawful, and in our own power, and that we do it with sincere
hearts, void of deceit, and with purpose to be as good as our word: and when we
have promised, accordingly to perform our promise; Psalm. 15. 4.
for that is a mark of Gods children, Gal. 5. 25.
and a fruit of the spirit and true faith, in doing the duties of equity.

And in that the Devil showed all these unto Christ, even the several
kingdoms of the world, it is manifest he knew them all, and was well
acquainted, and had traveled through them, as he confesses, Ioh. 1. 7. And in
that he could show the chiefest glory and beauty of them in such a short time,
it is clear he was cunning in them, and the several estates and conditions of
them all.

And we see, that the Devil in propounding all these glorious kingdoms vn^^
Christ, he did tempt him to ambition, tha^ he would set his heart on them and
so desir^^ them. And herein note one of his most principal practices, which is
the ouerturning (...) kingdoms: for the Devil desires to do the greatest
harm and most mischief that he can. Now in the overthrow of a kingdom, many
go to wrack; and to effect this, he seeks continually to puff men up with
ambition, that they may desire and gape for preferment and honor. The Lord has
in mercy placed over us in this kingdom a gracious Prince and a Christian
Queen, and the Devil has long envied this our prosperity, and sought sundry
by-plots and manifold practices to overthrow our state, to cut off the head,
and to cast her crown into the dust. And to this purpose he has raised up
many wicked and rebellious subjects: but the Lord has in mercy brought all to
naught. And therefore the remembrance of this should move us all to
thankfulness, for this great mercy of God in defending both Prince and
people, and bringing to naught all such rebellious wretches, confounding those
ambitious heads, and all their vile and treacherous plots and devices: and we
must show this thankfulness in the duties of repentance and sincere obedience.

Secondly, this must teach us to pray unto God continually, for the
preservation of our Prince and kingdom, that he would evermore confound and
bring to naught all Satan's policies, and vile plots and practices of ambitious
heads. And it is our duty, in token of true joy and thankfulness, to do as the
people did in the days of Solomon, who shouted so loud, and cried out God save
king Solomon, 1. Kin 1. 4.
that the very earth rang again: eue^ so should all true Christians, to
express the joy of our hearts, pray day and night, God save Queen Elizabeth.

And herein is our comfort, that though the Devil with all his malice seeks
to destroy both Prince and people, and the whole kingdom, and has his wicked
instruments to effect the same: yet the Lord God has his Angels which take
care of his Church and people, and stand round about them, to defend them both
by sea and by land, that all the Devils in hell cannot hurt them: but the
Angels of God defend his children at home, and beat back all our enemies from
inuading of us.

All these will I give thee] These words are the very words of the Pope of
Rome, who as Satan's vicar, has indeed the two horns of the lamb, but he
speaks like the Dragon: he makes himself equal to God, he can (as he says)
send to heaven and to hell, set up and pull down Princes, he can do what he
list, he can open and shut at his pleasure, pardon sins, and I know not what:
which shows he speaks the Devils language, the language of Ashdod, not of
Canaan.

Luke. 4. 6. The Devil ads a reason further to persuade Christ: for he says,
All these kingdoms are mine, and I ca^ give them to whom I will.

Where first the Devil tells a loud lie, chalenging to himself the right of
all the kingdoms of the world: for it is the Lord his right alone, as we may
see Dan. 4. 2^. where the Lord speaks to that proud king N^buchadnezar by the
ministry of Daniel: I bear rule over the kingdoms, and I alone (says the
Lord God) can give them to whom I please. So then the Devil has no power to
give them, neither has any title to them, that he can bestow them at his
pleasure: no, that belongs to God alone: yet we see Satan will be an usurper at
large.

Secondly, mark the Devils arrogancy and shameless boasting, in that he
dares challenge all the kingdoms of the earth to himself, as though he were
sovereign Lord of them, to do with the^ at his pleasure. And let us all learn
by this shameless lying and notorious boasting of the devil, to take heed that
we be not like him in these sins, but study to be contrary to him: and
therefore we must desire and study to speak the truth at all times, and take
heed of boasting yea rather let us think as humbly and basely of our selves as
possibly we can, which is a good means to humble and cast down our proud
hearts: and let such know that are given to these sins, to lying and vain
boasting of this and that which they have not, it argues great pride, and
shows they be very like the Devil himself in this point.

If thou will fall down and worship me.] Here is the second part of the
temptation: namely, the condition, and the maine drift of the Devil in these
words, is to bring our Savior Christ to manifest Idolatry, even to worship
the Devil himself.

First, seeing the Devil durst be so bold to tempt our savior Christ to
Idolatry, and to worship himself; hence we see that the maine scope of the
Devil is especially to deface Religion, and the true service and worship of
God, and therefore he assaults the Church of God, and tempts men to bring them
to embrace heresies, schisms, idolatry, that he might destroy the church of
God: and thus he became a lying spirit in the mouth of four hundred false
prophets at one time. 1. King. 22.
And when Iehosuah the high Priest came into the Temple to perform the worship
of God, Zach. 3. 1.
he stood up to hinder him, when he was praying for the good of the Church. And
so does he in these days stand up and seek by all means to hinder Gods
Ministers in the building up of Gods Church. When Christ has sown good
wheat, Mat. 13.
the^ the Devil sows tares; and when Paul would have gone to preach the
Gospel to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians 2. 18
the Devil hindered him; and it is his special study to stop the ministry of
the Gospel: and therefore it is said that the Devil cast many of Gods
ministers into prison, Revel. 2. 10.

Reu. 16. 13. 14. there came 3 evil and unclean spirits out of the mouth of
the beast, which entered into Kings houses, to turn the^ from the entertaining
of the Gospel, because that Kings be either especial nurses to the Gospel,
or else if Satan can prevail with them, become greatest enemies to hinder the
course of the Gospel. Such frogs be these Seminary Priests, Monks, Friars,
and popish Jesuits, which lurk commonly in Kings courts, and in the places of
mighty men.

Then seeing the Devil is so painful to stop the course of the Gospel, to
ouerturne true religion and the service of God: it must stir up all the
Ministers of the word of God, to labor and take pains, that their diligence
in defending and upholding true religion, and building the church of God, may
counteruaile Satan's diligence in hindering of it.



Thirdly, if Satan durst set upon the Son of God, and tempt him to idolatry
and to worship the Devil, then much more will he be tempting us to the like
sin, and set upon sinful man to move him to worship him, and make him his
God.

But you will say, Objection.
there is none so mad to worship the devil, to make him our God: oh we defy
him.

True it is, Answer.
men say they defy the Devil, and spit at him, but alas if we consider their
dealings, we shall see the Devil sits in their hearts, and rules there as God.
Do but cast your eye upon the three maine Religions of the world, the religion
of the Turk, of the Jew, and of the Papist; and it will appear that most men
worship the Devil and make him their God: because the Turk he is ignorant of
the true God: the Jew worships God the Father, but not by Jesus Christ, whom
they deny: the Papist worships a false and counterfeit Christ forged by
themselves, and never read of in the word of God: for they make him a Savior in
part, and a Priest to be creator, or the maker of his Creator.

That it may appear, that these three sorts of people do not worship the true
God, but even the devil himself, let us mark these 2 principles. First, that
al doctrines set down and invented by man, concerning Gods service and
worship, being against the word of God, they be the doctrines of Devils: so
says Paul 1. Tim. 4. 1. 3. that there shall come false teachers, which shall
teach doctrines of Devils: and what are these? Verse. 3. he says: Such as
forbid to marry: and teach men that some meats be holy in themselves, and
some unholy and not lawful to be eaten. The second principle is this, all
worship of God devised by man, being against the word of God, is the doctrine
of Devils. So the Gentiles offering to Idols Paul says they offered to
Devils: ^ Cor 10. 22
yet none of them intended that, but rather by the idols offered to God. So
whatsoever worship shall be invented, being against the word of God, it is
indeed the worship of the Devil, not of God.

Now by these two principles it appears, that the worship of God performed by
the Turks, and by the Jews, it is no worship of God, but the worship of
Devils: seeing both of them worship the Father out of the Son. And the
worship of God in Popery, it is no better then the worship of the Devil,
seeing they worship God out of the true Christ, and have forged to themselves a
false counterfeit Christ. And if Paul might truly affirm of the Gentiles,
that they worshipped not the true God, but offered to devils: then mnch more
may it be avouched of that abominable sacrifice of the Mass, that it is indeed
the worship of the devil, seeing it is more vile idolatry then that of the
Gentiles.

Now it will be said: Objection.
Though the Devil prevail thus with them, yet he cannot prevail so with
Protestants, neither can they be said to worship the devil. Answer.
I answer: That in truth there be thousands of Protestants in the world who do
worship the Devil: for all those which do only in outward show profess true
religion, but in heart love the world, set their hearts upon pleasures,
profits and preferments, such professors do in truth make the devil their
God, and may be said to worship the Devil. For to whom soever they give their
hearts, to them they do give worship: but while they set their hearts on these
things, they do not love God neither do they believe in God, and rest upon him
as their God; and therefore they make the world their God, and so worship the
Devil.

Fourthly, by this practice of the devil, we see those men confuted, who
think that the devil cannot make a league with men, as with witches,
coniurers, etc. For we read and know such things have bin done, and here we
have a manifest proof of it: for the Devil offers a league to Christ: there
was nothing wanting but our Savior Christ his consent. And if sinful man had
been in Christ's stead, questionless there had been a league* and for so great
gain he would have the devil his service.

Then said Jesus unto him, Verse. 10.
Avoid Satan, etc.] Now follows the answer of our Savior Christ. And first
in Christ's answer mark, in propounding of it he uses first a speech of
indignation and of defiance to the Devil and his offer: Avoid Satan: as
though Christ should have said: I have heard thee blaspheme both me and my
Father, and have thus long suffered thee, but I will suffer thee no longer, get
thee hence Satan, I will not vouchsafe to answer to thy temptations any more.

Mark here in the answer of Christ, that he was content to endure the devils
temptations and reproaches, which concerned his own person: but when he is so
bold to blaspheme God his Father, he can endure him no longer. Now when he
makes challenge and claims title to all the kingdoms of the world, as though
he were Lord of them, and could bestow them at his pleasure, therein he
blasphemed God his Father.

Then this teaches us, Use.
that if we shall hear ungodly wretches blaspheme the name of God, we may not
endure it, but have indignation and great dislike of it. And if we hear
black-mouthed Rabshekahs blaspheme the holy name of God, by swearing, cursing,
banning, we must be touched with grief, to hear the glorious name of our God
dishonored, and if time and place require, manifest our dislike in open
reprehension of it. When Ahab and Iezabel being both wicked, heard that Naboth
had blasphemed God, they rent their clothes in token of sorrow. So when
Hezechiah heard the blasphemies of Rabshekah, 2. Kin. 19. 1*
he rent his cloths and was very much grieved for it. When David heard the
Gentiles say, Psalm. 42. 3.
where is now their God? this blasphemous speech did greatly affect him, so as
his very tears were his drink. And the bad speeches of the men of Sodom, did
much affect Lot, and vex his righteous soul, 2. Pet. 2. 8.

And as all men must be grieved to hear wicked men blaspheme the name of God,
so especially those that be governors of others, and by name, masters of
families: as David says Psalm. 101. he would not suffer a talebearer in his
house, much less a blasphemer. And the Magistrate is especially bound to look
to this, seeing it is the law of God* that the blasphemer should be stoned to
death: now this law is perpetual. And if a man for speaking a word of disgrace
against the person of the Prince wittingly and willingly, shall justly lose his
life: then he that is a blasphemer, and speaks to the disgrace of the eternal
God, is much more worthy to die a thousand deaths.

Deuteronomy. 13. And when Peter would have dissuaded Christ from going to Jerusalem,
Mat. 16. 23
he says: Get thee behind me Satan: though he was an excellent Apostle, yet in
this Christ accounts of him as of the very devil.

when his temptations be more mild, we may reply by the word of God, yet when
Satan shall be more violent in his assaults, we must imitate our Savior Christ,
and bid him avoid, and dispute no more with him. And whatsoever he shall bring
against us, when we are not able to answer him, yet let us hold the maine
conclusion in the word of God, not vouchsa^ing him an answer.

It is written] Seeing our Savior Christ now the third time answers the Devil
by the scriptures, saying, It is written: we learn that the written word
believed and understood, is the most sufficient weapon to confute and to
confound Satan and his vile temptations, else Christ would not now eue^ the
third time have made choice of this weapon: It is written again.

This confutes the Papists, who make two Scriptures, one unwritten and inward,
which is traditions, the consent of the fathers which have lived in all ages;
and the other written in the holy scriptures. Now they do make their unwritten
scriptures, as they call them, and the consent of fathers, to be of equal
authority with the written word of God, which our Savior Christ does show
here, to be the most powerful means to repel all Satan's temptations. And the
holy scriptures which they call a dead letter, and make as though it had no
power in it, eue^ this alone is the sword of the spirit to confound satan: and
therefore damnable is that their doctrine, which so abuses the holy
Scriptures, and sets up the erroneous tradition of sinful men. For if the
written word had been but a dead letter, our savior Christ would never have
made choice of it about all other weapons three several times to confute
Satan, every time answering, It is written.

It is written, we learn how to behave our selves when any shall seek to
turn us from true Religion, to embrace false Religion, though we cannot answer
their arguments, but they set such a color on them by their wit and eloquence,
and seem to dazzle our eyes that we can not see their deceits; yet we must
stick to the scriptures, and clea^^ fast to the text of the Bible: and if we
find but one sentence in all the Bible to persuade us of the truth of Religion,
we must hang upon it with both hands, and let not o^ hold go; nay it must be of
more force and credit with us, then a thousand arguments that tend to the
contrary.

Thou shall worship the Lord thy God only,] In these words is contained the
answer of our savior Christ to the third temptation of the Devil. The words
are taken out of Deuteronomy. 6* 13. where they are read thus, Thou shall fear the
Lord thy God, and serve him. Now there may seem to be some difference in the
words, as they be alleged by Christ: for in that place of Deuteronomy it is
said, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God: our savior Christ says, Thou shall
worship. Again, our savior Christ adds a word, which is not added by Moses
in that place, namely, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God only: this word
only is not in that text of Moses.

But if we understand two points concerning the alleging of scripture, there
will appear to be no difference; the first is this, that Christ and his
Apostles in their alleging of scripture, do not so much stick to the very
^illables, as aim at the sense of the scriptures which they allege. The
second thing is this, that our savior Christ in alleging scripture, seeks to
expound scripture, and to open it in alleging of it; and so doing, he may well
add a word, when as the word he adds makes much for the meaning of the text.

And thus Christ in this place changes the word, not mistaking of it, but
rather to expound Moses; for whereas Moses says, Thou shall fear the Lord, he
means that religious fear whereby we fear God, and worship him. Now our
savior Christ he says, Thou shall worship, showing Moses meant that fear
whereby we do with reverence and bowing of the body and adoring of God worship
him, moved thereunto by religious fear, either in praying for some mercy we
want, or giving thanks for some benefit received.

Again, Christ in alleging this text of Scripture, he adds a word, yet so,
as he does it without any fault: for though this word (alone) be not in Moses
his text expressly set down, yet it is included, and in sense it is understood:
for where he says in the thirteenth verse, Thou shall fear the Lord, and ads
no more; in the fourteenth verse he says, Thou shall not walk after any other
gods; so that a man may easily perceive he did in sense include it, though not
express it in words: and thus we see our savior Christ cleared.

In the text of scripture alleged by Christ, note two points: first, what this
worship and fear is: secondly, to whom worship is due.

First, worship taken generally, signifies the giving of honor and reverence
to another. Now this honor is either civil or divine. Civil honor is that
outward reverence we give to men, by ^rostrating of the body, or bowing of the
knee; and the end of this civil worship is, that thereby we might acknowledge
another to be our superior: and therefore it is given of subjects to Princes,
or of inferiors to those that by some means are their superiors. And thus
Jacob worshipped, that is, gave civil worship to Esau seven times, Genes. 33.
3. This reverence Abraham gave to the Hittites, Genesis 23. 7. and Lot to the
Angels bowed himself to the ground, Genesis 19. 1. where he gave them only
civil worship and honor. So then it is manifest by these examples, that we
may lawfully bow and bend the knee and kneel to Princes, to give the^ this
civil honor, thereby showing we do acknowledge them to be placed above us in
authority and dignity in the world by God.

The second kind of honor is divine or religious worship, when we give such
honor to another, that thereby we do ascribe divinity and divine power unto
it, acknowledging thereby that it is some divine thing above all creatures. And
this we do first, when we ascribe the godhead to it, and make it God: secondly,
when we ascribe Gods attributes to it, as omnipotency, providence, etc.
thirdly, when we acknowledge it to be the creator and maker of all things:
fourthly, when we acknowledge it to be the giver of those good things we enjoy,
and the defender of us from evil.

This divine worship is either inward in the heart, or outward in the body.
Inward divine worship is when a man gives his heart to any thing, by believing
in it, by loving of it, and rejoicing in it above all other creatures; and that
because it has in it the godhead, or divine nature, or is God, because it
has the attributes of God, because it is the Creator and defender of all
things, or else because it gives us all good things, and keeps us from all
evil.

The outward divine worship, is when a man any ways by prostrating himself
and bowing of his body, does it to manifest his faith, hope, love, confidence,
fear, or any gift in his heart, thereby confessing it is his Creator, defender
and preserver.

So then here is a manifest difference between outward civil worship, and
that divine worship which is outward: because by that civil worship we do only
acknowledge them to whom we do it, to be our superious: but by this outward
divine worship, we do acknowledge that to which we do this worship to be God,
Creator and defender of us and all other things.

Now in this place our savior Christ means not that civil worship, but he
understands outward divine worship.

There is another service mentioned, which is fear: when we give and perform
obedience to another, it is either a service absolute or in part: absolute,
when we obey the commandment of another simply without all exception: when we
obey another, not only outwardly in body, but inwardly in soul, will,
affections, and with the conscience: and this is proper to God alone, neither
may this absolute obedience be given to any creature, only God alone is to
have this absolute worship, so as we must obey him without all exceptions or
question, and that in body, soul, will, affections, and in the very conscience.

There is a second service, which is only in part, which we may give to men, as
to the Magistrate being in authority above us, under God; for God has given
them leave to make laws, and power to give commandments; and they must be
obeyed in civil things, yet with condition, In the Lord, so long as their
commandments stand and agree with Gods commandments. Again, they must be
obeyed only with our bodies: their laws cannot reach unto men's hearts and
consciences, to bind them. And of these two in this place, we are to understand
that obedience which is absolute, to obey the commandment of the Lord
absolutely and simply without condition or exception even in all things
whatsoever he commands us: following herein our father Abraham, who to
perform obedience to the Lord, forsook his native country, and was ready to
offer his son his only son, his beloved son, his son Izak the son of
the promise.

Now follows the person to whom this worship must be given. This divine
worship, whether outward or inward, is due to God alone, neither may it be
given to any other creature, though never so excellent. And this is taught us
plainly by Christ his answer, and it is agreeable to the first and second
commandments, where we are forbidden expressly to give this divine and
religious worship either to any creature, or to idols, but we must have and
acknowledge Jehovah to be our God alone. Revel. 19, 10. when John was about to
worship the Angel, and to give him some part of this divine worship, he
forbids him, and tells him that he is but his fellow servant, and charge John
to worship God alone.

So then by this which has been said, we see how fitly our Savior Christ
answered the devil, and alleged this place of Scripture to stop his mouth.
The devil had showed him all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them
all: and tells Christ, if so be he would but acknowledge him to be the giver of
them, he would bestow them all upon him. Now our Savior Christ answers, that
he may not give that honor to him, which belongs to God alone and to none
else.

First, Use.
we learn from this answer of Christ, that it is not lawful for us to give
this divine worship either inward or outward to any creature, though never so
excellent; neither to Angels, nor Saints: because it is peculiar and proper to
God alone. And therefore if any man shall prostrate his body before Saints to
pray unto the^, he makes them no less then Gods, in giving them that
privilege which is proper to God: namely, to search the heart, that they can
hear our prayers, that they be omnipotent, omni-present, that is, present in
all places at once, with all things: which can be affirmed of none but God
alone. And yet this is the common practice of the Papists, to yield this divine
worship to Saints, and dead men and women, and to adore and worship them.

But the Papists answer: They do not worship Saints with that worship which
belongs to God, neither do they worship the^ as Gods. Why, no more would the
Devil here have Christ so to do, neither durst he presume to tempt Christ to
worship him as God, but to acknowledge him to be the giver of all the kingdoms
of the earth. And the Devil requires no more but outward worship: and yet our
Savior Christ tells him, that this outward worship which he demanded, was
proper to God alone, and none may or ought to have it, save he alone. Now the
Papists do give that to Saints, which Christ denies to the Devil: for they
avouch, that Saints can deliver them from this disease and that disease. They
make them patrons not only of private men, but of whole kingdoms and
countries, as of Italy S. Martin, of Spain S, James, of England S. George.
etc. Now to give a kingdom (which Christ denied to Satan) is a less matter
then to be a patron of a kingdom: for one may give a kingdom, that cannot
defend a kingdom.

Nay in truth, whatsoever they say, they make the Saints gods: for they pray
unto them, they make them intercessors for them unto God, to procure them
favor in things concerning the life to come. They call the Virgin Mary the
Queen of heaven, they make Christ to be her underling and a punie: for they
pray her to command her son, and to cause him to hear their prayers, which
is to make her even above God himself. And therefore in truth they give more to
Saints, then the Devil required of Christ.

Again they answer: That which may be done to earthly Princes, Objection.
may much more be done to Saints in heaven. Now say they, we kneel and bow to
earthly Princes, and do reverence to the chair of Estate: why then may we not
to Saints? Answer.
But we answer them: It is true, we do kneel and bow unto earthly Princes, but
all this that we do, we do it not so much to their persons, as to that
authority God has laid upon them: and we do it only to show our subjection
unto the^* But to kneel to Saints is no token of civil honor, as this is
which we give to earthly Princes, but a part of divine honor. For by that,
they do acknowledge, that the Saints can hear their prayers, search the
hearts, that they be omnipotent, and present in every place, which honor is
due to God alone.

Yet though we may not thus adore Saints as the Papists do, What honor is due
to Saints.
we do acknowledge a certain honor due unto them: and this honor stands in
three things: First, by giving tha^ke^ to God for them, in that the Lord has
giu^ his Church in former times such worthy instruments. Secondly, by a
reverent estimation of them, in that we account of them as the friends of God.
Thirdly, by honoring them, though not with divine worship, yet by imitating
their virtues: and this is all that honor we owe unto the Saints departed.

Now if that the adoring of Saints be flat unlawful and forbidden, Use 1.
then it is not lawful to appoint and dedicate solemn days unto them, to
fast for them, to worship the^ to worship their relics: all these be
unlawful, and yet common among the Papists. Neither can the Church of Rome
justly accuse us of the like, though we have and retain the names of Saints
days in the church of England; because we dedicate those days not to the
worship of Saints as they do, but to the service and worship of God alone.

We must mark how our Savior Christ in alleging and expounding of Moses
ioynes worship and fear together: Use. 2.
to show, that none can truly worship God but they that do truly fear God.

Men commonly think they have done enough if they come to church on days
appointed, listen a while to the word, receive the Sacraments; they think this
is all the worship of God that he requires, though they want the fear of God
in their hearts: but alas all this is to no purpose, if men want the fear of
God, and practice injustice in their particular callings. Read the first of
Esa. verse. 14. The Lord hates all the service and worship which the Jews
offered him: not simply, because these things were unlawful in themselves,
Mich. 6. 6.
for the Lord had commanded them: but because they joined not not so much to
their persons, as to that authority God has laid upon them: and we do it
only to show our subjection unto the^. But to kneel to Saints is no token of
civil honor, as this is which we give to earthly Princes, but a part of
divine honor. For by that, they do acknowledge, that the Saints can hear
their prayers, search the hearts, that they be omnipotent, and present in every
place, which honor is due to God alone.

Yet though we may not thus adore Saints as the Papists do, What honor is due
to Saints.
we do acknowledge a certain honor due unto them: and this honor stands in
three things: First, by giving thanks to God for them, in that the Lord has
given his Church in former times such worthy instruments. Secondly, by a
reverent estimation of them, in that we account of them as the friends of God.
Thirdly, by honoring them, though not with divine worship, yet by imitating
their virtues: and this is all that honor we owe unto the Saints departed.

Now if that the adoring of Saints be flat unlawful and forbidden, Use 1.
then it is not lawful to appoint and dedicate solemn days unto them, to
fast for them, to worship the^ to worship their relics: all these be
unlawful, and yet common among the Papists. Neither can the Church of Rome
justly accuse us of the like, though we have and retain the names of Saints
days in the church of England; because we dedicate those days not to the
worship of Saints as they do, but to the service and worship of God alone.

We must mark how our Savior Christ in alleging and expounding of Moses
ioynes worship and fear together: Use. 2.
to show, that none can truly worship God but they that do truly fear God.

Men commonly think they have done enough if they come to church on days
appointed, listen a while to the word, receive the Sacraments; they think this
is all the worship of God that he requires, though they want the fear of God
in their hearts: but alas all this is to no purpose, if men want the fear of
God, and practice injustice in their particular callings. Read the first of
Esa. verse. 14. The Lord hates all the service and worship which the Jews
offered him: not simply, because these things were unlawful in themselves,
Mich. 6. 6.
for the Lord had commanded them: but because they joined not to the service
of God, the fear of God, but their hands were full of cruelty and injustice,
and they practiced no mercy to men: and whatsoever men profess in the worship
of God, and show not the fear of God, and conscience in their particular
callings and dealings with men, all is but hypocrisy.

Whereas we teach that a man may be certainly persuaded by faith of his
election and salvation: Use. 3.
the Papists say, we cannot prove it out of the word of God. Now what though we
cannot find this sentence in so many words: (I am elected) yet as our Savior
Christ by alleging Scripture gathered the sense of it: so may we without blame
gather that out of the word which is the same in sense, which we hold in this
point.

We see it is our duty not only to worship God with outward worship of the
body, Use. 4.
but with inward worship in the soul, mind, will, affections, and in the
conscience. Paul he preached the Gospel of God unto the the Corinthians, 2.
Cor. 10. 4. 5.
to bring their very thoughts into subjection: that is, so to order them, that
they might not think any thing but that which was holy and according to the
will of God.

Then the devil left him, Verse. 11.
etc.] In this verse is set down the third and last part of the conflicts of
Christ with the devil: namely, the issue and event of them, which is that
glorious victory and conquest which our Savior Jesus Christ got against the
devil. And this is the most principal part of all the rest. For what comfort
could we have had in Christ's temptations, in the preparation, in the conflicts
and several temptations, unless Christ had vanquished Satan, and got the
victory? Nay all the comfort of Gods children stands in this victory of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: because now Christ stood in our stead, and was
tempted for our sakes: so that he being our head, and getting victory over the
devil, the Church and every member of the Church in Jesus Christ, got victory
over Satan.

In the victory we are to observe two things: First, that the Devil departed
from him: Secondly, the Angels ministered unto him. Use. 1.
In this departing of the Devil from Christ, we may behold the unspeakable
goodness of God to his Church, for that which befell Christ, befalls the
Church of God. Now the Devil having tempted Christ in three several and sore
temptations, he encountered him in all three, and resisted the Devil in all his
temptations: and then the Devil leaves him, and goes his way. Wherein we see
the endless love of God, in that he puts an end to the afflictions of his
Church, though they be many and sore, yet they shall last but a time and have
an end. So the Lord speaks of Solomon: 2. Sam. 7. 14
If he sin I will chastise him with the rods of men and with the plagues of
the children of men: such as should not be too extreme, but that he should be
able to bear. So the Prophet Habacuck, he in the first chapter breaks out
into impatient speeches, for the afflictions of the Church: but chap. 2. verse.
3. the Lord bids him wait, and tells him, it shall be amended, and that he will
put an end to their miseries: the Lord has promised that he will not suffer
his children to be tempted above that they shall be able to bear, but shall
find a blessed issue of their temptations. The two Prophets which were slain
for doing their message, Reu. 11. ver. 11. 12.
and for the testimony of Jesus, lay unburied three days and an half: but
after the Lord puts into them the spirit of life again, and they revived, and
stood up before the Lord, and they that saw them shall be afraid, and see them
ascend up into heaven. So that we may see, the Lord in mercy puts an end to
all the afflictions of his children.

And this we may see by daily experience, some of Gods children are visited
with grievous and fearful temptations, some half a year, some a whole
year, some, two, three, four, ten years, yet at length the Lord gives them a
good issue, and puts an end to their misery; and in stead of horror of
conscience, sends them comfort; and in stead of grief, joy unspeakable. And
though the Lord should suffer them to be tempted all their life long til their
dying day, yet then the Lord would give them a blessed issue of all their
miseries, and fill their souls with exceeding comfort.

Here we see a notable difference between the first Adam and the second Adam.
Use. 2.
The first Adam was tempted, and yielded to Satan's temptations, and suffered
the Devil to enter into his heart: the second Adam Jesus Christ, he was
likewise tempted, yet he yielded not to the least assault of the Devil,
neither could he ever enter into his holy heart, but departs from him, and is
feign to leave him.

In this departure of the Devil from Christ, first, mark when he departed:
secondly, for how long he departed.

For the first, Then the Devil left him, that is, after the three temptations
were ended, and Christ had in great indignation bid him avoid Satan, for his
blasphemous speeches, then the Devil departed.

Here we see the best way to put the Devil to flight, Use. 1.
and to give him the repulse: namely, to resist him at the first, and give him
no ground. But as S. James says, Resist the devil, Iam. 5.
and he will fly from thee: when as we depend on Gods word, and the blessed
promises of the Gospel, praying for grace from God to resist satan; he shall
never prevail against us, but will depart. And therefore it is but
foolishness to think or imagine that he can be put to flight by music, merry
company, sports and pastimes, or such like vanities: but the only means to
cause him to depart, is the word and prayer, by them alone he is resisted.

driven away: nay we shall find it a hard matter, if not impossible, to put him
to flight in our old age. But as men in a dropsy, the more they drink, the
more they desire: so the more men yield to his temptations, the more violently
will he set upon them.

After that our savior Christ says unto him, Avoid Satan, presently he
departs, and is obedient to his commandment. What? was this any virtue in
the Devil to obey Christ's commandment? No surely, it was no virtue in the
Devil: for we are to understand, there be two kinds of obedience, one is
voluntary and cheerful, the other by constraint and forced. Voluntary
obedience is that, when any of the creatures of God do willingly through Gods
grace moving them, obey the commandment of God, as all the good Angels of
God, and Adam before his fall, and all the children of God that be effectually
called, justified, and sanctified, do willingly and with cheerfulness yield
obedience unto God in part. Besides this, there is a constrained obedience,
when one is urged and compelled whether he will or not to obey another; as one
that is a malefactor, being condemned to die, he is obedient and yields
himself to death, he submits him self, because he must neither will nor
choose. So the Devil here obeys the voice of Christ, and departs at his
commandment: but this obedience in him is no virtue, because he was compelled
to do it, and could do none otherwise.

And that which here befell the Devil, shall befall all wicked and impenitent
sinners if they will not now obey the commandment of Christ, to repent and
believe the Gospel, they shall one day in spite of their teeth be constrained,
will they nil they, to obey that commandment at the last day of judgment,
Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.
The consideration of this one point, should (...) all men now in the time of
grace, to yield hearty and willing obedience to the voice of Christ, in
repenting and turning to God, le^^ one day we be constrained to yield to our
eternal confusion.

Luke 4. 13. he says, When the devil (...) ended all the temptation, then he
departed. Where we may note, that before the Diuel^ left our Savior Christ,
he employed all (...) might, skill, subtlety and fraud in tempti^^ of Christ.
And from this malicious pract^^ of the devil, we may gather, that Christ was
tempted with no small and easy temptation, but that he was tempted in the
highest degree that could be: for the Devil made an end of his temptations
before he left him, and had his will in tempting of him, and therefore no
question, in these three maine temptations that we have spoken of, he tempted
him as much as he could, and showed his greatest extremity and fraud. And this
may appear, in that the Angels were feign to come and comfort our Savior
Christ: so that he was not tempted with some light and ordinary temptations,
but in most extreme manner, so as his heart within him was in perplexity,
anguish and grief, yet without all sin.

And this may minister comfort to the children of God; Use. 1.
if any man be tempted with some grievous temptation, in some wondrous and
fearful manner, that he is almost at the point of despair, yet let him stay
himself, and let him not think that therefore he is cast away: for here we
see, that Jesus Christ the Son of God was tempted in the highest degree that
might be, and therefore the dearest servants of God may be extremely tempted.

We must learn from hence to suspend our judgments: Use. 2.
and if we see any so fearfully tempted, and their temptations so extreme and
grievous, that they say of them selves that they be cast-awayes, or that while
they yet live they are already in hell; let us take heed we be not too rash in
condemning of them, neither let us speak or think of them as cast-awayes: for
our Savior Christ was tempted in the highest measure that could be, and why
the^ may not these kind of temptations befall the dearest children of God?
Therefore that which is written of Francis Spira, that he was a reprobate and a
castaway, was penned very inconsiderately, though he affirmed the same of
himself; for there did nothing befall him, which may not befall a child of God:
for we see that our Savior Christ himself was tempted in the greatest measure
that might be, and we have daily experience from time to time, that some of the
dear children of God have been in like sort assaulted to despair for a time,
to think themselves reprobates and cast-awayes, yet it has pleased the Lord
in time to restore them to the feeling of his love, and they have continued the
faithful servants of God till their dying day.

And as it is said, the devil departed as soon as he had ended all his
temptations: we may gather, that these three wherewith he assaulted our Savior
Christ, they be the most principal temptations of the Devil, and the very
ground of all other his temptations: and therefore it shall be good for us to
learn to know them, and the danger of them, that we may arm our selves by
the example of Christ against them especially.

The second circumstance to be marked in the Devils departure, is that which S.
Luke adds, though it be not expressed in Matthew, namely, that the Devil left
Christ but for a season: but we never read that the Devil did tempt our
Savior Christ after this, but once upon the cross: then indeed the Devil and
all his Angels set upon him, Coloss. 2. 15. I answer, the Devil tempts either
by himself, or else by wicked men. It is true indeed, we read not that the
Devil did ever tempt Christ after his departure from him, but once when he was
on the cross; but he set wicked men a work in persecuting of him continually.
So he tempted Euah but once by himself, but no doubt he tempted her after many
times by other means

Secondly, the devil tempts by his instruments, namely, by wicked and ungodly
me^: and thus he tempted Adam, not by himself, but by Euah: so he tempted Job,
not only by himself, in casting the house upon his children, but also by his
vile instruments the Sabeans and Caldeans, whom he set a work to rob and spoil
him, and after by his mistaking friends.

So though we read not that the Devil did tempt Christ all his life time
after this by himself, yet did he it by his instruments, as the Scribes and
Pharisees, the cruel Jews, yea by Herod, Pontius Pilate, Annas and Caiphas,
and the rest: he never ceased tempting of him after this; and these temptations
by his vile^ instruments were very great and grievous unto his sacred soul.

Seeing the devil took this course to tempt Christ, and then to depart for a
while, and after to return again: we may see what is the estate of Gods
Church in this world, namely, that the Church of God upon earth is in a
continual intercourse of afflictions: now afflicted; after, the Lord gives it
peace for a time: and then the Lord sends afflictions again: and as winter
follows summer, so does joy afflictions.

This being the estate of the church of God upon earth, a continual
intercourse of afflictions, we must then learn what is our own particular
estate while we live in the church, namely, a state that is in a continual
intercourse of troubles and afflictions. If we now enjoy peace and rest, we
must make account it cannot always endure, but there must come a change: and
therefore we must beware in time of peace to prepare our selves against the
time of affliction and of trial, and persuade our selves the Sun will not
always shine, but this state will change, and trial will come. It follows.

And behold the Angels came and ministered unto him.] Here is now the second
part of the victory: when as our Savior Christ had foiled the Devil, and put
him to flight, then the Angels come and minister unto him, to comfort him after
this tedious combat.

Behold] This word is a word of wonder, and it shows there is some matter of
moment that follows: and what is that? the wonder is, that that person whom
the devil despised, and would have trodden under his feet, even this person is
here attended upon by the good Angels of God, who are ready to offer him their
service, and come to comfort him.

In this ministry of these Angels consider, first the bond which caused them
to attend on Christ: secondly, the number, how many they were: thirdly, the
time when they came to him.

First the bond which makes these glorious Angels and heavenly spirits to
attend and wait upon our Savior Christ, is this, that the man Christ, not the
manhood of Christ, but Christ God and man, is Lord of all creatures, even of
the Angels in heaven. And the manhood of Christ, though it be not Lord of
Angels, yet it is far more excellent then any creature whatsoever, yea then
the blessed Angels.

And here we may behold the great goodness of God, who has exalted man's
nature which was most vile by reason of sin, to be far more excellent then
any Angel in heaven, as it is joined to the Godhead in the person of Christ.

So then the Angels minister to Christ not as simply man, but as God-man, or
God and man: and so they minister to all the true members of Christ Jesus,
which are truly coupled and united unto his mystical body. Christ is that
ladder of Jacob, whereby the Angels of God do ascend and descend, to do service
to all those which are truly joined unto Jesus Christ, Genesis 28.

This ought to make us all admire the endless and unspeakable goodness of God,
Use. 1.
who has not only given us to be Lords of heaven and earth by the means of
Christ, but even the glorious Angels, which are far above man in excellency,
to be our servants, to minister unto us, to comfort and defend us.

This should move us all to carry and behave our selves reverently and holily
in all our actions and speeches, Use 2.
seeing the glorious and blessed Angels of God do wait and attend upon us.
Truly this ought to make us have great regard that no unseemly speech or
action pass from us, seeing we be in the presence of these most excellent
creatures of God, the blessed and holy Angels, to behave our selves with
greater reverence then we would before an earthly Prince, and in the presence
of a mighty Monarch.

2 The number of them. Luke 22.
It is not said, there came one Angel, as in the garden: but, the Angels came
unto him: showing there were mo then one. And we find in the word, that our
Savior Christ had sometimes one, sometimes mo to attend upon him. And so the
wicked Angels come sometimes one alone as here in Christ's temptations:
sometimes many, as when Christ was on the cross, Colossians 2. 15. And so it
is likewise with the good Angels of God: sometimes they come one alone,
sometimes more together.

Mow if this be true, then that opinion fa^leth to the ground, which holds,
that every man has his two Angels: an evil Angel to tempt him, and his good
Angel to defend him. But if God so please, he has a legion of bad Angels to
torment the bad^ and ten thousands of good Angels to comfort the good.

[Then] when the devil had now ended all his temptations not in the time of
the temptations whi^^ Christ was tempted, but immediately after they were ended.

True it is, the good Angels of God be ^^waies ready to attend upon Christ and
to ob^^ his will; yet here it is said, they came not (...) our Savior till
after his temptations: (...) then when he had most need, they are (...) of God
to comfort him: and as it is like^ they took upon them some bodily sh^^ ^^the
time, as the devil did, that so they ^^ght the better do him service.

And here in the person of our Savior Christ we may observe the dealing of God
^ith his children, even as he dealt with Christ himself: namely, that the Lord
does sometime conceal his favor, and not show his accustomed mercy to his
children, (...) least the comfortable sense and feeling of (...) for a time, to
try his children. As here the Lord with held for a time the comfort of his
Angels from our Savior Christ, yet after in is greatest need sent them to
comfort him. ^o the Lord deals with his children, even (...) a nurse deals
with her child, sets it ^owne, and goes and hides her self for (...)
time, lets it sit still, so as the child ta^eth a knock; and it may be
hurts it self, so as it bleedeth again: now all this she does, not because
she loves not her child, (...) that when she takes up her child again into
her arms, it may love her better, and cling faster unto her. Even so dea^eth
the Lord with his children, he often withdraws the comfortable feeling of his
mercy, and does as it were hide himself for a time, that so we may the better
(...) what we are without his mercy, and make more account of it, when the
Lo^^ does give us the feeling of it again, and (...) we may love him ever
after more earne^^ and more constantly.

To conclude, most men will say, There (...) no need of this doctrine of
temptations: (...) they never felt any such matter, nor are (...) acquainted
with them: nay, they hope (the say) never to feel any such temptations: (...)
they thank God that they never knew (...) temptations meant. Indeed these po^^
souls may think themselves happy, (...) they be in a most pitiful case, and
a mise^^ble estate: for whosoever belongs to Ch^^^ he must be made in some
measure con^^^mable; and if they be the true member^ Christ, they must be made
suitable to the head, Iam. 1. 2.
in suffering temptations. Nay, it is (...) joy, and we have just cause of
reioyci^ when we be tempted: especially if we (...) able (by the power of
Christ) to resist (...) temptations, as he did. So says the (...) Ghost, Iam.
1. 2. My brethren (says (...) Apostle) account it exceeding joy, when ye (...)
into diverse temptations.

And those men which say, they never (...) tempted all their lives, alas they
have a (...) full judgment of God upon them, (...) ^^^dnesse of heart, which
makes them that (...) feel no temptations, though they be ^^yly tempted by the
Devil to a thousand (...) and impieties. As the Disciples of Christ (...)
though they saw the miracle of Christ, (...) saw that the bread was multiplied
in ^eir hands, yet understood it not, because (...) the hardness of their
hearts: so these blind ^^les, though Satan tempt them from day (...) day, yet
they be so blinded and their hearts (...) hardened, that they perceive no such
mat^^.

But if these men would learn once by the lord of God to see and feel their
misery, and so repent and be truly humbled for their (...), and become new
creatures, they would (...) be of another mind. And therefore let (...) such
men pray to God, that he of his mer^le give them the sight of their woeful
mise^le, that he would give them soft and tender ^earts to be humbled for their
sins, that so ^^ey may feel the want of grace; and they ^^il then confess
it is not an vnneedful thing ^^or them to know and undergo temptations, and
that unless they be tempted with Christ, they can have no true joy nor sound
comfort in Christ.

Master Perkins his Prayer before his Sermons.
OAlmightie Lord God, most merci^^ and loving Father in Jesus Christ, (...) are
here assembled before thy glorious Mijestie, to be partakers of thy heavenly
wor^ which of thine infinite goodness and mer^^ thou have ordained to be the
ordinary me^^ to work our salvation: we beseech the therefore most merciful
Father, to blesse^uery one of us in the hearing and the sp^^ king of thy holy
word. Good Lord op^^ our blind eyes, that we may be able to understand it: and
whereas our hearts are (...) of hardness, full of sin, full of manifo^^
rebellions: good Lord soften our hard ha^^ grant that thy holy word may be the
tw^ edged sword of the spirit to cut down sin^^ and corruption in us, and make
us new (...) tures in Jesus Christ. And whereas we (...) troubled with many
impediments in h^^ring of thy word, as wandering imagination in our hearts,
suggestions of Satan, and the dullness of our own flesh: good Lord remove
these impediments, and give us eue^^ ^ne grace to hear thy word in fear and
^^uerence, as in thy presence; and to receive the same not as from man, but as
from Jesus Christ: and when we have heard thy word, grant that it may be not
the savor of death to our deeper condemnation, but the savor of life to our
eternal comfort and salvation. For this cause write the same in every one of
our hearts, and tranforme us into the obedience of the same in our life and
conversation. And because Satan is a deadly enemy to the ministry of thy
word, good Lord confound Satan, dissolve in every one of us the cursed works
of the Devil, work thine own good works, show thy self more merciful in
blessing of thy word, then Satan is or can be malicious in hindering of the
same. Hear us, we beseech thee, in these requests, and grant these graces to
every one of us, not for our own merits (for unto us belongs nothing but
eternal shame and confusion for our sins) but for the merits of thy dear
son Jesus Christ, in whom thou art well pleased: to whom with thee and the
holy Ghost, be given of every one of us all praise, honor and glory, both now
and for evermore. Amen.

The voice of a person 1. Carnal, of Evil: I do it, and will do. Good: I do
it not, nor will do.
2. Regenerate, of Evil: I do it, but would not do it. Good: I do not that I
would.
3. Glorified of Evil: I do it not, neither (...) I do it. Good: I do it, and
will do it.



To the right Honorable and virtuous Ladies, the Countess of Cumberland, and
the Countess of Warwick, grace and peace.
RIght Honorable, in the former (...) is the combat of Christ: in this latter
is set down the combat of a Christian. He that fought with our head, will
fight with the members* and he that assaulted Christ, will assail all
Christians. But Christ did bear troubles, and was borne out of them: we must
have troubles, and shall be borne out of them. If our afflictions were plagues,
as to the Egyptians: curses, as to Cham: destruction, as to Sodom: desolation,
as to Israel: then had we cause to fly from them, as Moses did from that
miraculous serpent. But since they are but the trials of faith, corrections of
a father, visitations from the Bishop of our souls: since they are as
Phlebotomie to a Pleurisy, and a purgation to a Plethora, they are to be
endured with all patience. How Christ did endure them, you may read in that
Treatise: how a Christian must, you may see in this. The former Treatise I
presented to your honorable brother: this latter to you most honorable sisters.
I desired to annex this to the former discourse, because it is suitable to that
present argument: and I know not to whom I may better present it, then to you
who have experience of this Christian warfare. If it please you but to read
these holy meditations, and to entertain this poor mite into your rich
treasury by the reading I doubt not but you shall have much comfort; and by your
entertaining, the church shall have much good. Now that good God who has given
your mind to know him, give you also an heart to lo^ him: and as you are
Honorable in the eyes of this world, so he make you most honorable in the eyes
of his Majesty. And thus craving pardon, I commit you to the grace of that
God, who will honor them that love him, and comfort them that seek comfort
from him.

Your Honors in the Lord, Robert Hill.

A comfort for the feeble minded: wherein is set down that spiritual combat
which is betwixt a Christian and Satan.
Lidia. SIr, I heard you with much comfort, when you preached upon the
temptations of Christ. I pray you instruct me concerning the temptations of a
Christian, and give me leave to ask you certain questic^s.


Paul. Say on.


Lidia. What is it which we call Christi^^ warfare?


Paul. Christian warfare is concerning the right way of fighting in the
spiritual battle.


Lidia Which be the parts thereof?


Paul. The parts thereof, are the preparation to battle, and the combat it
self.


Lidia. How may I prepare my self unto it?


Paul. To the preparation, you must use the complete armor of God. Ephesians. 6. 13.
For this cause, take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
resist in the evil day: and having finished all things, stand fast.


Lidia. How many parts has this armor?


Paul. The parts thereof are especially six: 1. truth: 2. justice: 3.
Evangelical obedience: 4. faith: 5. the word of God: 6. continual and fervent
prayer with watching: as you may read, Ephesians. 6. 14. Stand fast therefore, your
loins girded about with verity, and having o^ the breast plate of
righteousness, 15. And your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace. 16. Above all, take the shield of Faith, wherewith ye may quench all the
fiery darts of the wicked. 17. And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword
of the spirit, which is the word of God. 18. And pray always with all manner of
prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watch thereunto with all perseverance
and supplication for all Saints. 1. Pet. 5. 8. Be sober, and watch: for your
adversary the devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may
devour.


Lidia. What then is the combat?


Paul. The combat is a mutual conflict of them that fight spiritually.


Lidia. Who are the warriors?


Paul. The warriors, are the tempter and the Christian soldier. Ephesians. 6. 12.
For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against
powers, and against the worldly governors, the princes of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickednesses, which are in high places.


Lidia. Whom call you the tempter?


Paul. The tempter, is the Prince or his helpers. The Prince is Satan and his
Angels, which are spiritual wickednesses in high things. His helpers are the
flesh and the world.


Lid. What is the conflict of these warriors?


Paul. The conflict of all these, is temptation, whereby a man is provoked to
commit such wickedness as is hurtful to the salvation of his soul. 1. Pet.
2. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims abstain from
fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul.


Lidia. What must I note in this Christian soldier?


Paul. In the soldier, two things are to be considered: his resisting, and his
fall.


Lidia. What is his resistance?


Paul. Resistance is an action, whereby the soldier does withstand temptation,
through grace working inwardly in him. 1. John 2. 14. I write unto you babes,
because ye have known the Father: I have written to you fathers, because ye
have known him that is from the beginning: I have written to you young men,
because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome
the wicked. 1. Pet. 5. 8. Ephesians. 6. 16. Psalm. 91. 13. Thou shall walk upon the
Lion and Asp, the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou tread under feet.


Lidia. How is this resistance confirmed?


Paul. To confirm this, these preservatives which follow are very necessary.

1. When you are tempted to sin, do not only abstain from it, but earnestly
love and follow after the contrary. John 8. 44.

2. Never yield or consent to Satan's words, whether he speak the truth, accuse
falsely, or flatter dissemblingly. John 8. 44. Ye are of your father the devil,
and the lusts of your father ye will do: he has bin a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him: when
he speaks a lie, then speaks he of his own; for he is a lier, and the
father thereof. Mark 1. 24. And cried with a loud voice, and said, What have I
to do with thee, Jesus the son of the most high God? And Jesus said, Hold thy
peace, and come out of him. Act. 16. 17. She followed Paul and us, and cried,
saying: These men are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us the
way of salvation, etc. August. sermon. 241.

3. One temptation is to be looked for after another, and then especially when
our enemy after he has set his snares, is at rest: for the devil never makes
an end of his malice, 1. Pet. 5. 8.


Lidia. I have heard how to resist: teach me (I pray you) what is his fall.


Paul. The fall is, whereby the soldier through infirmity faints, being
subdued by the power of the enemy. Gal. 6. 1. Brethren, if a man be fallen by
occasion into any fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such a one with the
spirit of meekness, considering thy self least thou also be tempted.


Lidia. If I fall, how may I rise?


Paul. To this appertains the spiritual remedy: now a remedy, is a thing
having aptness to restore him which is fallen to his former estate. Gal. 6. 1.

And here two things must always be thought on.

1. If there be a willing mind, every one is accepted for that grace which he
has, not for that which he has not. 2. Corint. 8. 12, For if there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to
that he has not.

2. In all these things, whosoever will lead a godly life in Christ, the power
of God is to be made perfect through their infirmity. 2. Cor. 12. 9. And he
said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my power is made perfect
through weakness: very gladly therefore will I rejoice rather in mine
infirmities, that the power of God may dwell in me. 10. Therefore I take
pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
anguish for Christ's sake, for when I am weak, then am I strong.


Lidia. But since Satan is mine adversary, instruct me how many his assaults
be.


Paul. Assaults are threefold.


Lidia. Which is the first?


Paul. The first is about the Christian man's effectual calling: and the
temptation is the enterprise of the Devil, to blindfold man's mind and to
harden his heart, lest the word of God should work in him to salvation. Mat. 1^
4. And as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and the fowls came and devoured
them up. 5. And some fell upon stony ground, where they had no^ much earth,
and anon they sprang up, because they had no depth of earth. 6. And when the
sun rose up, they were parched; and for lack of rooting withered away. 7. And
some fell among thorns, and the thorns sprung up and choked them. 19.
Whenever a man hears the word of the kingdom, and understands it not,
the evil one comes, and catches away that which was sown in his heart: and
this is he which has received the seed by the way side.


Lidia. How may I resist this assault?


Paul. A resistance in those that are called, is wrought by the spirit of God,
that causes men to lend their ears to hear, and does ingraffe the word in
their hearts, that the immortal seed of regeneration may spring in them. Psalm.
40. 6. Ioh. 6. 44. Act. 16. 14. Iam. 1. 21. Wherefore lay apart all
filthiness, and superfluity of maliciousnes, and receive with meeknes the
word that is graffed in you, which is able to save your souls. 1. Pet. 1. 22.
Seeing your souls are purified in obeying the truth through the spirit, to
love brotherly without faining, love one another with a pure heart fervently.
1. Ioh. 3. 9. Whosoever is borne of God sins not, for his seed remains in
him, neither ca^ he sin because he is borne of God. A resistance in those that
are to be called, is, when in a sincere heart they do join the word which they
have heard with faith. Luke 8. 15. But that which fell in good ground, are they
which with an honest and good heart hear the word and keep it, and bring
forth fruit with patience, Heb. 4. 2.


Lidia. What certain preservatives are to be noted in this resistance?


Paul. 1. Premeditation of the power and use of the word. Eccles. 4. 17. Take
heed to thy feet when thou entrest into the house of the Lord, and be more
near to hear then to give the sacrifice of fools, for they know not that
they do evil. Cha. 5. 1. Be not rash with thy mouth, n^ let thine heart be
hasty to utter a thing before God: for God is in the heaven, and thou art
(...) the earth, therefore let thy words be few.

2. Diligent attentio^ of the mind, Act. 16. 14.

3. An hungring desire of the heart. Ioh. 7. 37. Now in the last and great day
of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying: If any man thirst, let him come to
me and drink.

4. Integrity of life. Psalm. 26. 6.

5. The casting away of evil affections Iam. 1. 22. And be ye doers of the
word, and n^ hearers only, deceiving your own souls.

6. The inward consent and agreement of the heart with the word preached. Act.
2. 37.

7. An hiding of the word in the heart lest we should sin, Psalm. 119. 11. I
have hid thy word in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee.

8. A trembling at the presence of God in the assembly of the Church, Esa. 66.
2. For all these things has mine hand made, and all these things have been,
says the Lord, and to him will I look, even to him that is poor and of a
contrite spirit, and trembles at my words. Act. 10. 33. Then sent I for thee
immediately, and thou have well done to come; now therefore are we all here
present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God.


Lidia. The God of power preserve me from this assault by these preservatives:
but how may I fall in this temptation?


Paul. Your fall, is either by a coldness in receiving the word, and a neglect
thereof, or else by falling into errors.


Lidia What then must be my remedy?


Paul. The remedy for this, is subjection, which must be made to the judgment
and censure of the brethren and Ministers. Revel. 3. 15. I know thy works,
that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou werest cold or hot. Gal. 6.
2. 1. Tim. 1. 20. Of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered unto
Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme.


Lid. What is the second assault?


Paul. The second assault is concerning faith.


Lid. How may one be thus assaulted?


Paul. By an illusion, which the Devil casts into the hearts of godly ones:
as when he says: Thou art not of the number of the elect: thou art not
justified: thou have no faith: thou must certainly be condemned for thy
sins, as Mat. 4. 3. Then came to him the tempter, and said: If thou be the
Son of God, command that these stones be made bread. Now as he dealt with
Christ, so will he with Christians.


Lidia. What helps does the Devil abuse, for the strengthening of such
illusions as these?


Paul. 1. He abuses Adversity: as dangers, losses, persecutions, jealousy,
grievous offenses, etc. So in David, Psalm. 73. 12. Lo, these are the wicked,
yet prosper they always, and increase in riches. 13. Certainly, I have cleansed
mine heart in vain, and washed mine hands in innocence. In Job 13. 23. How
many art mine iniquities and sins? Show me my rebellion and my sin. 24.
Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and take me for thine enemy? 25. Will thou
break a leaf driven to and fro, and will thou pursue the dry stubble?

2 The remembrance of sins past. Job 13. 26. For thou writest bitter things
against me, and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth.

3 A feeling of death even already at hand.


Lidia. How may I withstand these?


Paul. By a true faith, applying Christ with all his merits particularly, after
this manner: I assuredly believe that I shall not be condemned, but that I am
elected and justified in Christ, and am out of all doubt that all my sins are
pardoned. Esa. 53. 11. He shall see the travel of his soul, and shall be
satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he
shall bear their iniquities. Romans 8. 38. For I am persuaded, that neither
death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come. 39. Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.


Lidia. Give me a preservative that I may resist.


Paul. Your best preservative is, in temptation, not to behold faith, but the
object of faith, which is Christ. So did Paul, Philip. 3. 12. Not as though I
had already attained unto it, either were already perfect: but I follow, that
I may comprehend that, for whose sak^ also I am comprehended of Christ Jesus.
13. One thing I do, I forget that which is behind, and endeavor my self to
that which is before. 14. And follow hard toward the mark, for the price of
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. So must all. Ioh. 3. 14. And as Moses
lift up the Serpent in the wilderness; so must the son of man be lift up,
that he that believes in him should not perish, but have life everlasting.


Lid. What is my falling in this assault?


Paul. Your falling is doubtfulnesse, and distrust of your election, and of
Gods mercy Psalm. 77. 6. I called to remembrance my so^^ in the night: I
com^^ned with mine own heart and my spirit searched diligently. 7. Will in Lord
absent himself for ever, and will he show no more favor? 8. Is his (...)
clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? So David of himself
says: Psalm. 22. 1. My God, my God; why have thou forsaken me, and art so
far from my health, and from the words of my roaring?


Lid. What is my remedy?


Paul The remedy is double:

First, the operation of the holy Spirit, stirring up faith and increasing the
same. Philip. 1. 6. I am persuaded of this same thing, that he that has
begun this good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus
Christ. Luke 17. 5. And the Apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith.

The second is, an holy meditation, which is manifold:

1 That it is the commandment of God, that we should believe in Christ. 1.
Ioh. 3. 23. This is then his commandment, that we believe in the name of his
Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave commandment.

2 That the Evangelical promises are indefinite, and do exclude no man,
unless peradventure any man do exclude himself, Esa. 55. 1. Ho, every one
that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and ye that have no silver, come, buy,
and eat: come, I say, buy wine and milk without silver and without money.
Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease
you. Ioh. 3. 15. That whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
eternal life. Also the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, do to
every one severally apply indefinite promises, and therefore are very
effectual to enforce particular assurance or plerophorie of forgiveness of
sins.

3 That doubtfulnesse and despair are most grievous sins.

4 That contrary to hope, men must under hope believe with Abraham. Romans 4.
18. Which Abraham above hope believed under hope, that he should be the father
of many nations: according to that which was spoken to him, So shall thy seed
be.

5 That the mercy of God, and the merit of Christ's obedience, being both God
and man, are infinite. Esa. 54. 10. For the mountains shall remove, and the
hills shall fall down: but my mercy shall not depart from thee, neither shall
my covenant of peace fall away, says the Lord, that has compassion on thee.
Psalm. 103. 11. For as high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is his
mercy toward them that fear him. 1. Ioh. 2. 1. My babes, these things write I
unto you, that ye sin not: and if any man sin, we have an advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the just. 2. And he is the reconciliation for our sins:
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. Psalm. 137.
7. Let Israel wait on the Lord: for the Lord is mercy, and with him is great
redemption.

6 That God measures the obedience due unto him, rather by the affection and
desire to obey, then by the act and performance of it. Romans 8. 5. For they that
are after the flesh, savor the things of the flesh, but they that are after
the spirit, the things of the spirit. 7. Because the wisdom of the flesh, is
enmity against God: for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed
can be. Romans 7. 20. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it,
but the sin that dwells in me. 21. I find then by the law, that when I
would do good, evil is present with me. 22. For I delight in the law of God,
concerning the inner man. Mal. 3. 17. I will spare them, as a man spares his
son, that reuerenceth him.

7 When one sin is forgiven, all the rest are remitted also: for remission
being given once, without any prescription of time, is given for ever. Romans 11.
29. For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Act. 10. 43. To
him also give all the Prophets witness, that through his name, all that
believe in him, shall receive remission of sins.

8 That grace and faith are not taken away by falls of infirmity, but thereby
are declared and made manifest. Romans 5. 20. Moreover, the law entered thereupon,
that the offense should abound: nevertheless, where sin abounded, there grace
abounded much more. 2. Cor. 12. 7. And lest I should be exalted out of measure,
etc. there was given unto me a prick in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to
buffet me. 8. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart
from me. 9. He said, My grace is sufficient for thee.

9 That all the works of God are by contrary means. 2. Cor. 12. 9. My power
is made perfect through weakness.


Lidia. By the blessing of God I will not forget to practice these sovereign
remedies if Satan at any time seek to take away my faith, and to cut off this
hand by which I must apply, or to blindfold this eye, by which I may behold
Christ sitting at Gods right hand, as Stephen did. Let me hear, I pray you,
the third assault, and what it concerns.


Paul. The third assault is concerning Sanctification.


Lid. What is this temptation?


Paul. The temptation is a provoking to sin, according as the disposition of
every man, and as occasion shall offer it self, 1. Chron. 21. 1. And Satan
stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel. Ioh. 13. 2. And
when supper was done, the devil had now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot,
Simons son, to betray him.


Lid. Let me not be ignorant of Satan's enterprises. How will he allure to sin?


Paul. In this temptation, the devil does wonderfully diminish and extenuate
those sins which men are about to commit, partly by obiecting closely the
mercy of God, and partly by covering or hiding the punishment which is due for
the sin. Besides, there are helps to further the devil in this his
temptation: as first, the flesh which lusts against the spirit, sometimes by
begetting evil motions and affections, and sometimes by ouerwhelming and
oppressing the good intents and motions, Gal. 5. 17. For the flesh lufteth
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary
one to another, so that ye cannot do the same things that ye would. 19.
Moreover, the works of the flesh are manifest: which are, adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, wantonness. 20. Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
debate, emulations, wrath, contentions, seditions, heresies. 21. Envy,
murders, drunkenness, gluttony, and such like, whereof I tell you before, as
I also have told you before, that they which do such things shall not inherit
the kingdom of God. Iam. 1. 14. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn
away by his own concupiscence, and is entised.

Secondly, the world, which brings men to disobedience, through pleasure,
profit, honor, and evil examples, Ephesians 2. 3. Among whom we also had our
conversation in time past, in the lusts of the flesh, in fulfilling the will
of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath, as
well as others. 1. John 2. 16. For all that is in the world, as the lusts of
the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the
father, but is of the world.


Lid. How may I resist this temptation?


Paul. Resistance, is made by the desire of the spirit, which works good
motions and affections in the faithful, and drives forth the evil. Gal. 5.
22. But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, 23. Meekness, temperancie: against such there
is no law. 24. For they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and the lusts thereof. 26. Let us not be desirous of vain glory,
provoking one another, envying one another.


Lid. Give me here some preseruariues, that I may resist.


Paul. The preservatives are these.

1 To account no sin light or small. Gal. 5. 9. Alitle leaven does leaven the
whole lump. Romans 6. 23. For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God
is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

2 To avoid all occasions of sin. To these rather agrees the Proverb used
of the Plague: long, tarde, cito: that is, aloof, slowly, quickly. 1.
Thessal. 5. 22. Abstain from all appearance of evil. Iud. v. 23. And other
save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, and hate even the garment
spotted by the flesh.

3 To accustom thy self to subdue the lesser sins, that at the last, thou
may also overcome the greater. Romans 13. 4.

4. To apply thy self to thy appointed calling, and always to be busily
occupied about something in the same.

5 To oppose the law, the judgments of God, the last judgment, the glorious
presence of God, and such like, against the rebellion and looseness of the
flesh. Pro. 28 14. Blessed is the man that fears always: but he that hardens
his heart, shall fall into evil. Genesis 39. 9. There is no man greater in this
house then I: neither has he kept any thing from me, but only thee, because
thou art his wife: how then can I do this great wickedness, and so sin
against God?


Lid. But alas, I see Satan foyles me in many sins: instruct me I pray you,
with some rules against them. Say I be angry unadvisedly, or desire to revenge
wrongs done unto me, how may I remedy this my sin?


Paul. Against unjust anger, or private desire of revenge. Here meditate, 1.
injuries; they happen unto us by the Lords appointment for our good. 2. Sam.
16. 10. 2. God of his great goodness forgiueth us far more sins, then it
is possible for us to forgive men. 3. It is the duty of Christian love, to
forgive others. 4. We must not desire to destroy them, whom Christ has
redeemed by his precious blood. 5. We our selves are in danger of the wrath of
God, if we suffer our wrath to burn against our brother. Forgive says he) and
it shall be forgiven. 6. We know not the circumstances of the facts, what the
mind was, and purpose of them against whom we swell.

Bridles or external remedies, are these: 1. in this we shall imitate the
clemency of the Lord, who for a very great season does often tolerate the
wicked. Learn of me, for I am humble and meek. 2. There must be a pausing and
time of delay, betwixt our anger and the execution of the same. Atheno^^rus
counseled Augustus that he being angry, should repeat all the letters of the
Alphabet, or A B C, before he against another did either speak or do any
thing. 3. To depart out of those places where those are, with whom we are
angry. 4. To avoid contention, both in word and deed. Do nothing through
contention.


Lidia. Say I sin by covetousness and ambition: what must I do?


P. Remedies against those bad desires of riches and honor, are: 1. God does
even in famine quicke^ and revive them which fear him. Psalm. 33. 18. 19. The
eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, to deliver their souls from death,
and to preserve them from famine. 2. Godliness is great gain, if the mind of
man can be therewith content. 1. Tim. 6. 6. 3. we do wait and look for the
resurrection of the body, and eternal life: therefore we should not take such
carking care for this present mortal life. 4. We are servants in our fathers
house, therefore look what is convenient for us, that will he lovingly bestow
upon us. 5. The palpable blindness of an ambitious mind, desires to be set
aloft, that he may have the greater downe-falle and he fears to be humbled,
lest he should not be exalted. 6. Adam when he would needs be checke-mate with
God, did bring both himself and his posterity headlong^^ destruction. 7. He
is a very ambitious rob God, which desires to take that comme^dation to
himself, which is appropriate only to the Lord.


Lidia. Admit Satan allures me to carnal uncleanness; how may I preserve my
self that I may with the wise virgins enter with the bridegroom?


Pa. Preservatives against the desires of the flesh: are, 1. He that will be
Christ's disciple, must every day take up his cross, Luke 9. 23. 2. They which
are according to the spirit, savor of such things as are according to the
spirit, Romans 8. 5. 3. We ought to behave (...) selves as citizens of the
kingdom of heaven, Philip. 3. 20. 4. We are the temple of God^ 1. Cor. 3. 6.
Our members, they are the members of Christ. 1. Cor. 6. 15. And we ha^^
dwelling within us the spirit of Christ^ which we should not grieve, Ephesians. 4. 30.


Lid. How may I fall in this temptations?


Paul. When you being prevented, fall (...) some offense: Gal. 6. 1.


Lidia. What does Satan when one is thus ^^llen?


Paul. Here Satan does wonderfully aggrauate the offense committed, and does
ac^use and terrify the offender with the judgments of God. Mat. 27. 3. Then
when Judas which betrayed him, saw that he was condem^^d, he repented himself,
and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief Priests and
Elders: 4. Saying, I have sinned, betraying the innocent blood: but they said,
What is that to us? see thou to it. 5. And when he had cast down the silver
pieces in the Temple, he departed, and went and hanged himself.


Lid. What remedy is there if that I fall?


Paul. The remedy is, a renewed repentance, the beginning whereof is sorrow,
in regard of God for the same sin; the fruits hereof are especially seven.
2. Cor. 7. 9. Now I rejoice not that you were sorry, but that ye sorrowed to
repentance: for ye sorrowed godly, so that in nothing ye were hurt by us. 10.
For godly sorrow causes repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of: but
worldly sorrow causes death. 11. For behold, this thing that ye have been
godly sorry, what great care has it wrought in you: yea, what clearing of
your selves: yea, what indignation: yea, what fear: yea, how great desire:
yea, wh^^ zeal: yea, what punishment: in all things (...) have showed your
selves, that ye are pure in this matter.


Lid. Repeat out of this place those seven fruits of repentance.


Paul. First, a desire of doing well.

Secondly, an Apology, that is, a confession of the sin before God, with a
requiring of pardon for the offense. Psalm. 32. 5. Then I acknowledged my sin
unto thee, neither hid I mine iniquity: for I thought, I will confess against
my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my
sin. 2. Sam. 12. 13. Then David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the
Lord: and Nathan said unto David, The Lord also ha^^ put away thy sin, thou
shall not die.

3 Indignation against a man's self, for his offense.

4 A fear, not so much for the punishment, as for offending the Lord. Psalm.
130. 3. If thou straightly markest iniquities, O Lord who shall stand?

5 A desire to be fully renewed, and to be delivered from sin.

6 A fervent zeal to love God, and to embrace and keep all his commandments.

7. Revenge, whereby the flesh may be ta^ed and subdued, lest at any time
afterward such offenses be committed.


Lidia. Blessed be God, that thus teaches ^e by you. Let me speak yet unto
you concerning calamities: I read in the Scriptures of the patient bearing of
the cross; what will it teach me?


Paul. The patient bearing of the cross, teaches how Christians should
undergo the burden.


Lidia. What (I pray you) is the cross?


Paul. The cross is a certain measure of afflictions, appointed by God to
every one of the faithful. Math. 6. 24. If any man will follow me, let him
forsake himself, take up his cross and follow me. Col. 1. 24. Now rejoice I
in my sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in
my flesh, for his bodies sake which is the Church.


Lidia. How must this cross be taken up?


Paul. We ought to take up this cross willingly, even with both hands, when it
shall please God to lay it upon us. And after we have taken it up, we must
bear it with patience and perseverance. Col. 1. 11. Strengthened with all
might through his glorious power, unto all patience and long suffering with
ioyfulnesse. Luke 21. 19. Possess your souls with patience.


Lidia. How may I preserve patience?


Paul. The preservatives of patience, are first strength by the holy Ghost.
Phil. 4. 13. I am able to do all things through the help of Christ, which
strengthens me. Phil. 1. 20. It is given to you for Christ, that not only ye
should believe in him, but also suffer for his sake. 2. An holy meditation
which is manifold.

1. That the afflictions of the faithful come not by chance, but by the
counsel and providence of God, which disposes all things in a most excellent
sort. Genesis 45. 4. 5. It was God that sent Joseph into Egypt. 2. Sam. 16. 10.
The Lord bids Shemei curse David. Psalm. 119. 71. It was good for me that I
was afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. Hence it is evident, that
afflictions to the godly are inevitable. Act. 14. 21. By many afflictions you
must enter into the kingdom of God. Mat. 7. 14. The gate is straight and the
way narrow that leads unto life, and few there be that find it. John 16 20.
In the world ye shall have troubles.

2 That albeit afflictions are grievous, yet are they good and profitable. For
they are helps, whereby men being humbled for their sins before God, obtain
peace and holiness of life. 2. Cor. 1. 9. We received sentence of death in our
selves, because we should not trust in our selves, but in God, which raises
the dead. Esa. 26. 16. Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they powered out
a prayer when thy chastening was upon them. Hos. 5. 15. I will go and return
to my place, till they acknowledge their fault and seek me: in their
affliction they will seek me diligently. Psalm. 78. 34. When he flue them they
sought him, and they returned, and they sought God early. Ierem. 31. 18. I have
heard Ephraim lamenting thus: Thou have corrected me, and I was chastised as an
untamed calfe: convert thou me, and I shall be converted. Heb. 12. 11. No
chastisement for the present see^eth joyous, but grievous: but afterward it
brings the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them which are thereby
exercised. Psa. 30. 5. Weeping may abide at evening, but joy comes in the
morning. John 15. 2. Every branch that bears fruit, he purges it, that it
may bring forth ^^re fruit. 1. pet. 1. 6. Wherein ye rejoice, though now for a
season (if need require) ye are in heaviness through many temptations. 2. Cor.
1. 4. The God of all comfort, which comfort us in all our tribulations, that
we may be able to comfort them which are in affliction, by the comfort
wherewith our selves are comforted of God. Romans 5. 3. We glory in afflictions,
knowing that affliction brings patience. Heb. 2. 10. He did consecrate the
Prince of their salvation through affliction. We permit Chirurgians that they
both bind us lying diseased in our beds, and sear us with hot irons, yea lanch
and search our members with rasors: and lastly, we send them away usually with
friendly and kind speeches, and often with a golden fee for their thus handling
us. Shall we the^ suffer so many things of a Chirurgian, to cure a bodily
disease, and will we not give God leave to cure by afflictions the most
festered diseases of our sick souls?


Lidia. What is to be gathered hence?


Paul. By this we may gather, that the afflictions of the godly, are signs of
their adoption. Heb. 12. 6. Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and he
scourges every son that he receives. 7. If ye endure chastisement, God
offers himself unto you as unto sonne^. And that they are to them, the Kings
high way to heaven. James 1. 12. Blessed (...) the man that endures
temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which
the Lord has promised to them that love (...) 2. Cor. 4. 17. For our light
affliction which i^ but for a moment, causes unto us a far more excellent
and an eternal weight of glory.

3 That God has promised favor, mitigation of punishment, his presence and
deliverance. Philip. 1. 29. 1. Cor. 10. 13. God is faithful, who will not
suffer you to be tempted above measure, but with temptation will give
deliverance. 2. Sam. 7. 14. Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in time of trouble, and
I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Psalm. 121. 4. He that keeps
Israel, will neither slumber nor sleep. Esa. 43. 2. When thou passest through
the waters, I will be with thee, and through the floods, that they do not
ouerwhelme thee: when thou walk through the very fire, thou shall not burn,
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee: 3. For I am the Lord thy God, the holy
one of Israel thy savior.

4 That in all troubles of the faithful, Christ is a companion. 1. Pet. 4. 13.
Rejoice that ye are partakers of the afflictions of Christ. 2 Cor. 4. 10. Every
where we bear about in our body the dying of Christ, that the life of Jesus
might also be made manifest in our bodies. Col. 1. 21.

5 That the Angels are ready to defend such as fear God. Psalm. 34. 8. 2.
Kings 6. 16. Fear not, there are more with us then against us.


Lidia. But of all calamities, the remembrance of death is fearful unto me:
give me (I pray you) some few preservatives against it.


Paul Against the fear of death, note these preservatives:

First, death it freeth the godly from the tyranny of Satan, sin, the world,
the flesh, and eternal damnation; yea from infinite both perils and losses,
and does place us both safe and happy under the shadow (as it were) of Christ's
wings.

Secondly, Christ by his death has sanctified unto us both death and the grave.

3 Christ is both in life and death, gain to the godly, Phil. 1. 12.

4 Those consolations which the spirit of Christ does suggest to the souls of
the faithful, do by many degrees surmount the dolors of death.

5 The desire of that most bright and glorious beholding of God, and the
presence of those Saints which are departed before us.

6 In stead of our bodies we shall be clothed with glory, 2. Cor. 5. 1.

7 The sting of death, namely sin, is then so taken away, as that that serpent
can no more hurt us. 1. Cor. 15. 55. O death, where i^ thy sting! O grave,
where is thy victory! Heb. 2. 15. That he might deliver all them, which for
fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage.

8 We should not so much think of our death, as to take an exact account of
our life. For that man cannot die ill, who has lived well: and he seldom
dies well, that has lived badly.

9 The Angels they stand at our elbowes, that so soon as a Saint departs,
they may with all speed immediately transport his soul into heaven.

Souls being once in heaven, remain ther^ till the last day of judgment,
where they partly magnify the name of God, and partly do wait and pray for
the consummation of the kingdom of glory, and full felicity in body and soul.
Reu. 5. 8. And when he had taken the book, the four beasts and the four and
twenty elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one harpes and golden
vials full of odours, which are the prayers of the Saints: 9. And they sang a
new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals
thereof, because thou wast killed, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood,
out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. Revel. 14. 2. I heard
the voice of harpers, harping with their harpes, 3. And they sung as it were a
new song before the throne: and they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long
Lord, holy and true? do not thou judge and avenge our blood on them that
dwell on the earth?


Lidia Yet for all this, Satan in the time of temptation, and at the hour of
death, will go about to persuade me that these things do not belong unto me:
what must I do then?


Paul. Descend into your own heart, see whether you have Gods spirit or no,
testifying unto you that you are Gods child: for as many as have the spirit of
God, they are the children of God.


Lidia. But how shall I know whether this testimony come from Gods spirit, or
from carnal presumption?


Paul. First, by a full persuasion which you shall have; for the holy Ghost
will not barely say it, but persuade you that you are Gods child, which the
flesh cannot do. Secondly, by the manner of persuasion; for the holy Ghost
draws not reasons from the works and worthiness of man, but from Gods favor
and love: and this kind of persuasion differs much from that which Satan
uses. Thirdly, by the effects of that testimony; for if the persuasion arise
from presumption, it is a dead persuasion: but contrariwise, it is most lively
and stirring, if it come from the holy Ghost: for such as are persuaded that
they are elected and adopted the children of God, they will love God, trust in
him, and call upon him with their whole heart.


Lidia. Alas, I find this testimony marvelous feeble in me: are there not
other means by which I may be comforted in this temptation of Satan, that I am
not Gods child?


Paul. Yes verily, if you feel not the flame of Gods spirit in you, then must
you judge of it by the heat: and if you find the effects of sanctification in
you, you are without doubt in the state of grace.


Lidia. Which (I pray you) be they?


Paul. Of all the effects of sanctification, you may judge of your adoption by
these that follow: First, if you feel your wants, and with grief bewail the
offense to God in every sin. 2. If you strive against the flesh, that is,
resist and hate the first motions thereof, and with grief, think them
burthenous and troublesome. Thirdly, if you desire earnestly and vehemently the
grace of God, and merit of Christ to obtain eternal life. 4. When you have
obtained it, to account it a most precious i^well, and all things to be as dung
in respect of it, Phil. 3. 9. 5. If you love a Minister of the Gospel, as he
is a Minister, and a Christian as he is a Christian; and if need require, can
be ready to give your life for them, 1. John 3. 16. 6. If you call earnestly
upon God, even with tears. 7. If you desire Christ's coming to judgment, that
an end might be made of these days of sin. 8. If you fly all occasions of
sin, and endeavor to come to newness of life. 9. And last of all, if you
persevere unto the last gasp in these things. For, as one says, he that will
serve God, must believe that which he cannot see, hope for that which is
deferred, love God when he shows himself an enemy; and thus remain to the
end.


Lidia. These indeed are sure effects of sanctification, but even these are
weak in me as the former.


Paul Are they so? Then know that God tameth you, yet so as you must not
therewith be dismayed: for it is certain, that if you have faith but as a
grain of mustard seed, and be as weak as a young infant, it is sufficient to
ingraft you into Christ: and therefore you must not doubt of your own
election, by reason of your weakness. A child holding a staff in his hand,
holds it as well as a man, though not with so much strength; and you laying
hold upon Christ by faith, though you do it never so weakly, it will suffice
for your salvation. Nay, if one have not yet felt these effects in his heart,
he must not conclude, he is a reprobate, but must rather use the word of God
and the Sacraments, that he may have inward sense of the power of Christ
drawing him unto him, and an assurance of his redemption by Christ's death and
passion.


Lidia. He that opened the heart of Lidia to hear Paul, open my heart to know
and do these things.


Paul. Amen.


Sundry necessary observations meet for a Christian, published long since by
some religious man.
I. THat you keep narrow watch over your heart, words and deeds continually.
Psalm. 93. 1. Mat. 24. 42. Luke 12. 36. 1. Cor. 10. 13. 15. 34. 16. 13. Col. 3.
17. II. That with all care the time be redeemed that has been idly, carelessly
and unprofitably spent. Ephesians. 5. 16. Col. 4. 5. III. That once in the day at
least, private prayer and meditation be made. Psalm. 119. 164. Dan. 6. 10. Luke
18. 1. Ephesians. 6. 18. Col. 4. 2. IV. That care be had to do and receive good in
company. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11. V. That your family be with all diligence and
regard instructed, watched over, and Christianly governed. Genesis 18. 19. Deuteronomy.
4. ^ and 5, 6, 7. Pro. 31. 27. Ephesians. 6. 4. VI. That no more care be spent in
matters of this world, then must needs. Mat. 6. 31. Col. 3. ^. 1. John. 2. 15.
VII. That you stir up your selves to liberality to Gods Saints. Gal. 6. 10.
Heb. 13. 16. VIII. That you prepare your selves to bear the cross, by what
means soever it shall please God to exercise you. Mat. 16. 24. Luke 9. 13. and
24. 27. IX. That you give not the least bridle to wandering thoughts. Job 31. 1.
Ephesians. 5. 3. X. That you bestow some time in mourning, not only for your own
sins, but for the time and age wherein you live. Ezech. 9. 4. Psalm. 119. 136.
XI. That you look daily for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, for your full
deliverance out of this world. Mat. 24. 44. XII. That you acquaint your self
with some godly person, with whom you may confer of your Christian estate,
and open your doubts to the quickening of Gods graces (...) you. James 5. 16.
XIII. That you observe the departure of men out of this life, their mortality,
the vanity and alteration of things below, the more to contemn the world, and
to continue your longing after the life to come. Esaias 57. 1. Phil. 3. 3. 1.
Pet. 1. 24. Reu. 22. 20. XIIII. That you meditate often upon your death and
going out of this life, how you must lie in the grave, go to dust, leave all
glory and wealth: and this will serve to beat down that pride of life which
naturally is in you. Eccles. 7. 4. and 12. 1. XV. That you read something
daily of the holy Scriptures, for the further increase of your knowledge. Math.
22. 29. John 5. 39. Act. 17. 11. XVI. That you make a covenant with the Lord to
strive against all sins, especially against the specialsins and corruptions
of your heart and life, wherein you have most dishonored God: and that you
carefully see that your ^ouenant be kept and continued. Neh. 9. 38. ^. Chron.
34. 31. XVII. That you mark how sin dies and is weakened in you, and that
you turn not to your old sins again. Matt. 18. 8. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. 2. Pet.
2. 22. XVIII. That you fall not from your first love, but continue still your
affection to the liking of Gods word, and to all the holy exercises of
religion, diligently hearing it, and faithfully practicing it: that you may
prepare your self before you come, and meditate of that you have heard, either
by your self or with other, and so mark your daily profiting in religion. Heb.
3. 12. and 12. 15. Reu. 2. 4. XIX. That you be often occupied in meditating
upon Gods benefits and works, and sound forth his praise for the same. XX.
That you exercise your faith, by taking delight in the great benefit of your
redemption by Christ, and the fruition of Gods presence in his glorious and
blessed kingdom. Psalm. 116. 12. 13. and 118. 15. Ephesians. 5. 20. XXI. Lastly, that
you make not these holy practices of repentance common for the time, nor use
them for fashion sake. Luke 8. 13.
In Adamo potuimus non mori, in Christo non possumus mori. FINIS.

