A GRAIN OF MVSTERD-SEEDE Or, THE LEAST MEAsure of grace that is or can be
effectual to Salvation.

Corrected and amended by W. Perkins.

Printed at London by John Legate, Printer to the University of Cambridge.
1611.

And are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard as the sign of the Crown by Simon
Waterson.

To the right honorable and virtuous Lady the Lady Margaret, Countess of
Cumberland, Grace and Peace.
RIght Honorable, the kingdom of heaven, of which the scripture speaks so
often, is properly a certain state or condition, whereby we stand in the favor
and love of God, in and by Christ. And this kingdom is compared to a Grain of
Musterd-seede, to teach us that a man is even at that instant already entered
into the kingdom of heaven, when the Lord that good husbandman has cast but
some little portion of faith or repentance into the ground of the heart; yea,
though it be but as one grain of musterd-seede. Of this little grain I have
penned this Treatise, in quantity answerable thereto: and I now present the
same to your Ladishippe, not to supply your want, (for I hope you are stored
with many grains of this kind) but to perform some duty on my part. Hoping
therefore that your Ladyship will read and accept the same, I take my leave,
commending you to the blessing and protection of the Almighty.

Your Honors to command, W. Perkins.

A GRAIN of Musterd-seede, Or, the least measure of grace, that is, or can be
effectual to Salvation.
IT is a very necessary point to be known, what is the least measure of grace
that can befall the true child of God, lesser then which, there is no grace
effectual to salvation. For first of all, the right understanding of this
point, is the very foundation of true comfort unto all troubled and touched
consciences. Secondly, it is a notable means to stir up thankfulness in
them that have any grace at all; when they shall in examination of then selves
consider, that they have received of God the least measure of grace, or more.
Thirdly, it will be an inducement, and a spur unto many careless and
unrepentant persons, to embrace the gospel, and to begin repentance for their
sins; when they shall perceive, and that by the word of God, that God accepts
the very seeds and rudiments of faith and repentance at the first, though they
be but in measure as a Grain of Musterd-seed. Now then for opening and
clearing of this point: I will set down five several conclusions, in such
order as one shall confirm and explane the other, and one depend upon the
other.

I. Conclusion.
A man that does but begin to be converted, is even at that instant, the very
child of God, though inwardly he be more carnal then spiritual.
The Exposition.
IN a man there must be considered three things, the substance of the body and
soul, whereof man is said to consist; the faculties placed in the soul and
exercised in the body, as understanding, will, affections: the integrity
tegritie and purity of the faculties, whereby they are comfortable to the will
of God and bear his Image. And since the fall of Adam, man is not deprived of
his substance or of the powers and faculties of his soul, but only of the
third, which is the purity, or integrity of nature. And therefore the
conversion of a sinner, whereof the conclusion speaks, is not the change of
the substance of man, or of the faculties of the soul: but a renewing and
restoring of that purity and holiness which was lost by man's fall, with the
abolishment of that natural corruption that is in all the powers of the soul.
This is the work of God, and of God alone, and that on this manner. First of
all, when it pleases God to work a change in any, he does it not first in one
part, then afterward in another, as he that repaires a decayed house by
peecemeale: but the work, both for the beginning, continuance, and
accomplishment, is in the whole man, and every part at once, specially in the
mind, conscience, will, and affections: as on the contrary, when Adam lost the
image of God, he lost it in every part. Secondly, the conversion of a sinner is
not wrought all at one instant, but in continuance of time: and that by
certain measures and degrees. And a man is then in the first degree of his
conversion when the holy Ghost by the means of the word, inspires him with
some spiritual motions, and begins to regenerate and renew the inward powers
of his soul. And he may in this case very fitly be compared to the night in
the first dawning of the day, in which though the darkness remain and be more
in quantity then the light, yet the sun has already cast some beams of light
into the air, whereupon we term it the breaking of the day. Now then, the
very point which I teach, is that a man at this instant, and in this very state
(God as yet having but laid certain beginnings of true conversion in his heart)
is the very child of God, and that not only in the eternal purpose of God (as
all the elect are) but indeed by actual adoption: and this is plain by a
manifest reason: There be four special works of grace in every child of God:
his union with Christ, his adoption, justification, and conversion: and these
four are wrought al at one instant, so as for order of time, neither goes
before nor after other: and yet in regard of order of nature, union with
Christ, Justification, and adoption, go before the inward conversion of a
sinner, it being the fruit and effect of all. Upon this it follows
necessarily, that a sinner in the very first act of his conversion, is
justified, adopted, and incorporated into the mystical body of Christ. In the
Parable of the prodigal son, the father with joy receives his wicked child;
but when? surely when he saw him coming a far off, and when as yet he had
made no confession or humiliation to his father, but only had conceived with
himself a purpose to return and to say, Father I have sinned against heaven
and against thee, etc. And Paul says of many of the Corinthians, that he could
not speak unto them as spiritual men, but as carnal, eue^ babes in Christ, 1.
Cor. 3. 1. When David reproved by Nathan did but begin to repent and to say, I
have sinned, presently Nathan the Prophet of the Lord said, The Lord has taken
away thy sin, Of this thing David seems to speak in the 32. Psalm. v. 5. I
said [that is, I purposed and thought with my selfe] I will confess against my
self mine unrighteousness, and thou forgauest mine iniquities. Upon these
words Augustine says, Mark, he does not confess, but promises to confess,
and God forgiueth him. Again, There be (says he) three syllables, peccaui, I
have sinned: and from these three syllables the flame of a sacrifice did ascend
into heaven before God. Chrysostom says, Say thou have sinned: and thou have
loosed thy sin. And Ambrose says: If he said, I will confess, and obtained
pardon before he confessed, how much more when he had confessed, saying, I know
mine iniquity, was his sin pardoned* Gregory on this Psalm. says, Mark how
speedily pardon comes, and how great is the commendation of Gods mercy, in
that pardon comes together with the desire of confession, and remission comes
to the heart, before confession break forth in speech.

II. Conclusion.
The first material beginnings of the conversion of a sinner, ar the smallest
measure ofrenewing grace, have the promises of this life, and the life to come.
The Exposition.
THe beginnings of conversion must be distinguished. Some are beginnings of
preparation, some beginnings of composition. Beginnings of preparation are such
as bring under, tame, and subdue the stubbernes of man's nature: without making
any change at all: of this sort are the accusations of the conscience by the
ministry of the law, fears and terrors arising thence, compunction of
heart, which is the apprehension of Gods anger against sin. Now these and
the like, I exclude in the conclusion; for though they go before to prepare a
sinner to his conversion following, yet are they no graces of God, but fruits
both of the law, being the ministry of death, as also of an accusing
conscience. Beginnings of composition I term all those inward motions and
inclinations of Gods spirit, that follow after the work of the law upon the
conscience, and rise upon the meditation of the Gospel, that promises
righteousness and life everlasting by Christ: out of which motions the
conversion of a sinner arises, and of which it consists: what these are, it
shall afterward appear. Again, grace must be distinguished: it is twofold;
restraining grace, or renewing grace. Restraining grace, I term certain
common gifts, of God, serving only to order and frame the outward conversation
of men to the Law of God, or serving to bereave men of excuse in the day of
judgment. By this kind of grace, heathen men have bin liberal, just, sober,
valiant, and merciful. By it men living in the Church of God, have been
enlightened, and having tasted of the good word of God, have rejoiced therein,
and for a time outwardly conformed themselves thereto. Renewing grace is not
common to al men, but proper to the elect, and it is a gift of Gods spirit,
whereby the corruption of a sinner is not only restrained, but also mortified,
and the decayed image of God restored in righteousness and true holiness. Now
then the conclusion must only be understood of the second, and not of the
first: for though a man have never so much of this restraining grace, yet
unless he have the spirit of Christ to create faith in the heart, and to
sanctify him, he is as far from salvation as another. Thus then the sense
and meaning of the conclusion is, that the very lest measure of saving grace,
and the very beginning or seeds of regeneration do declare, and after a sort
give title to men, of all the merciful promises of God, whether they concern
this life or the life to come: and are therefore approved of God, if they be
in truth; and accepted as greater measures of grace. That which our Savior
Christ says of the work of miracles, Math. 17. 20. If ye have faith as a
grain of Musterd-seede, ye shall say unto this mountain, remove hence to
yonder place, and it shall remove, must by the law of equal proportion be
applied to saving faith, repentance, the fear of God, and all other graces? if
they be truly wrought in the heart, though they be but as small as one little
grain of Musterd-seede, they shall be sufficiently effectual to bring forth
good works, for which they are ordained. The prophet Esaias 42. 3. says, that
Christ shall not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed, Let
the comparison be marked: fire in flax must be both little and weak in
quantity as a spark or twain, that cannot cause a flame, but only a smoke,
specially in a matter so easy to burn. Here the^ is signified, that the gifts
and graces of Gods spirit, that are both for measure and strength as a spark
or twain of fire, shall not be neglected, but rather accepted and cherished by
Christ. When our Savior Christ heard the young man make a confession of a
practice but of outward and civil righteousness, he looked upon him and loved
him: Mark. 10. 21. and when he heard the scribe to speak discreetely but one
good speech, that to love god with all the heart is above all sacrifices, he
said unto him. That he was not for from the kingdom of heaven. Therefore no
doubt, he will love with a more special love, and accept as the good subjects
of his kingdom, those that have received a further mercy of God, to be borne
a new of water and the spirit.

III. Conclusion.
A constant and earnest desire to be reconciled to God, to believe, and to
repent, if it be in a touched heart, is in acceptance with God, as
reconciliation, faith, repentance it self.
The Exposition.
Lust or desire is two fold, natural, and supernatural. Natural is that
whose beginnings and object is in nature, that is, which arises of the
natural will of man, and affects such things as are thought to be good
according to the light of nature. And this kind of desire has his degrees, yet
so as they are all limited within the compass of nature. Some desire riches,
honors, pleasures, some learning and knowledge, because it is the light and
perfection of the mind: some go further and seek after the virtues of
justice, tempera^ce, liberality, etc. and thus many heathen men have excelled.
Some again desire true happiness, as Balaam did, who wished to die the death
of the righteous: because it is the property of nature to seek the
preservation of it self But here nature stays it self: for where the mind
reueales not, the will affects not. Supernatural desires, are such as both for
their beginning and object, are above nature. For their beginning is from the
holy Ghost; and the object or matter about which they are co^uersant, are
things divine and spiritual which concern the kingdom of heaven: and of this
kind are the desires of which I speak in this place. Again, that we may not
be deceived in our desires, but may the better discern the^ from flittering
and fleeting motions, I add three restraints. First of all, the desire of
reconciliation, the desire to believe, or the desire to repent etc. must be
constant and have continuance, otherwise it may justly be suspected. Secondly,
it must be earnest and serious, though not always, yet at sometimes, that we
may be able to say, with David, My soul desires after thee, O Lord, as the
thirsty land. And, as the heart braieth after the rivers of water, so pants my
soul after thee O God, my soul thirsts for God, even the living God.
Thirdly, it must be in a touched heart; for when a man is touched in
conscience, the heart is cast down, and (as much as it can) it withdrawes it
self from God. For this cause, if then there be any spiritual motions whereby
the heart is lift up unto God they are without doubt from the spirit of God.
Thus then I avouch, that the desire of reconciliation with God in Christ, is
reconciliation it self: the desire to believe, is faith indeed: and the
desire to repent, repentance it self. But mark how. A desire to be
reconciled, is not reconciliation in nature, (for the desire is one thing, and
reconciliation is another) but in Gods acceptance: for if we being touched
thoroughly for our sins, do desire to have them pardoned, and to be at one with
god, God accepts us as reconciled. Again, desire to believe, it is not faith
in nature, but only in Gods acceptance, God accepting the will for the deed.
That this doctrine is the will and word of God, it appears by these reasons.
First of all, God has annexed a promise of blessedness, and of life
everlasting, to the desire of grace. Mat. 5. Blessed are they which hunger and
thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied Ioh. 7. 38. If any
man thirst, let him come to me and drink. Revel. 2. 1. I will give unto him
which is a thirst, of the well of the water of life freely. Now what is this to
thirst? properly it is, when we are in a drought or drines, and want drink to
refresh us, and desire it. And therefore by all resemblance, they are said to
thirst after righteousness, that want it, and would feign have it: And they
thirst after christ that feel themselves out of Christ, and desire, yea long
after the blood of Christ, that they might be refreshed with it in their
consciences. Here then we see, that the desire of mercy, in the want of mercy,
is the obtaining of mercy: and the desire to believe, in the want of faith, is
faith. Mark then: though as yet thou want firm and lively grace, yet art thou
not altogether void of grace, if thou can unfeignedly desire it, thy desire
is the seed, conception, or bud of that which thou want. Now is the
springtime of the ingrafted word or the immortal seed cast into the furrows
of thy heart: wait but a while, using the good means to this end appointed,
and thou shall see the leaves, blossoms, and fruit will shortly follow after.
Secondly, the desire of any good thing is accepted of God, as the lively
invocation of his holy name, Psalm. 10. God hears the desire of the poor.
Psalm. 145. He will fulfill the desire of him that fears him. When Moses said
nothing, but only desired in heart the help and protection of God at the red sea, the Lord said unto him, Why criest thou unto me? Exodus 14. 15. And
when we know not to pray as we ought, Paul says, that the spirit makes
request by the inward groans of the heart, Romans 8. 26. Hence I gather, that
when a man in his weakness prays with sighs and groans, for the gift of
lively faith, the want whereof he finds in himself, his very prayer on this
manner made, is as truly in acceptance with God, as a prayer made in lively
faith. And here it is further to be considered, that Paul calls these groans
unspeakable, and why? Of most interpreters they are thought to be unspeakable,
by reason of their greatness, and this I will not deny: it seems
nevertheless that they are so termed by reason of their weakness, for they
are commonly small, weak, and confused in the hearts of Gods children when
they are distressed: and the words following seem to import thus much: for
when it had been said that Gods spirit in us makes request with groans not to
be uttered: some man might happily reply and say, if we cannot discern and
utter these groans in our selves what are we the better? Paul adds therefore,
that although we know not, yet God a searcher of all things hidden in the
heart, knows the mind and meaning of the spirit. And thus the words yet
further afoard a comfortable instruction to the children of God, namely, that
being in distress, whether in life or death, if by grace we can but sigh or
sob unto God, though it be weak and feeble like the faint pulse in the time of
death; we, or the spirit of God in us, do indeed make request unto God that
shall be heard, yea, (as the words are) we do more then make request: and
though we do not always see what Gods spirit makes us to sigh after, yet god
does. To the testimony of Scripture, I add the testimonies of godly and
learned men, not to prove the doctrine in hand; but to show a consent, and to
prove thus much, that the thing which I avouch, is no private fantasy of any
man Easily (says Ambrose of God) is he reconciled, Lib. 7. in Luc. c. 66.
Si impense rogatur. on Psalm. 36.
if he be instantly entreated. Augustine says, Let thy desire be before him,
and thy father which sees in secret shall reward thee openly: for thy desire
is thy prayer, and if thy desire be continual, thy prayer is continual. He
adds further in the same place, that the desire is a continual voice, and the
cry of the heart, and the inward invocation of God, which may be made without
intermission, Again, To desire the help of grace is the beginning of grace.
Again, Exposit. Epist. John, tract. 4. cap. ^.
The whole life of a good Christian, is an holy will and desire. And that which
thou desire, thou see not: but by desiring, art (as it were) enlarged and
made capable, that when it shall come which thou shall see, thou may be
filled. Basil says, Hom. of humility.
Only thou must will, and God will come of his own accord. Sup. Cant. Ser. 84.
Bernard says, what, is not desire a voice? Yea a very strong voice. God
hears the desire of the poor: and a continual desire, though we speak
nothing, it is a voice continued. Tom. 4. page 124.
Luther says, Christ is then truly omnipotent, and then truly reigns in us,
when we are so weak that we can scarce give any groan. For Paul says, that
one such groan is a strong cry in the cares of God, filling both heaven and
earth. Ib. fol. 156
Again, Very few know, how weak and small faith and hope is, under the
cross, and in temptation. For it appears, then to be as smoking flax, which
a good blast of wind would praesently put out: but such as believe in these
combats, and terrors against hope, under hope, that is, opposing themselves
by faith in the promise of Christ, against the feeling of sin, and the wrath
of God, do find afterward that this little spark of faith (as it appears to
reason, which hardly perceives it) is peradventure as the whole element of
fire which fills all heaven and swalloweth up all terrors and sins. Lib.
fol. 300
Again, the more we find our unworthiness, and the less we find the
promises to belong unto us, the more must we desire them, being assured that
this desire does greatly please God, who desires and wills that his grace
should be earnestly desired. This does faith, which judges it a precious
thing, and therefore greatly hungreth and thirsts after it, and so obtaines
it. For God is delighted to fill the hungry with good things, and to send the
rich empty away. Resp. ad Acta Colloq. Monpel.
Theodore Beza says, If thou find not thine heart inwardly touched, pray that
it may be touched: for then must thou know that this desire is a pledge of the
fathers will to thee, Locor. com. par. 1.
Ke^nitius says: When I have a good desire, though it do scarcely show it
self in some little and slender sigh, I must be assured that the spirit of God
is present: and works his good work. Catechis.
Vrsinus says, Faith in the most holy men in this life is imperfect and weak.
Yet nevertheless, whosoever fecles in his heart an earnest desire, and a
striving against his natural doubtings, both can and must assure himself that
he is endued with true faith. Again, Wicked men do not desire the grace of
the holy spirit, whereby they may resist sin. And therefore they are justly
deprived of it: for he that earnestly desires the holy Ghost has it
already: because this desire of the spirit cannot be but from the spirit: as
it is said, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for
they shall be satisfied. Epistle to Careless.
Bradford says, Thy sins are undoubtedly pardoned, etc. for God has given
thee a penitent and believing heart: that is, an heart which desires to repent
and believe: for such an one is taken of him (he accepting the will for thee
deed) for a penitent and believing heart indeed. Book of the marks of Gods
children.
Taffine says, Our faith may be so small and weak as it does not yet bring
forth fruits, that may be lively felt of us, but if they which feel
themselves in such estate, desire to have these feelings [namely, of Gods
favor and loue] if they ask them at Gods hands by prayer: this desire and
prayer are testimonies that the spirit of God is in them, and that they have
faith already: for, is such a desire, a fruit of the flesh, or of the spirit?
it is of the holy spirit, who brings it forth only in such as he dwells in,
etc. Then these holy desires and prayers being the motions of the holy Ghost in
us, are testimonies of our faith, although they seem to us small and weak. As
the woman that feels the moving of a child in her body, though very weak,
assures her self that she has conceived, and that she goes with a live
child, so if we have these motions, these holy affections, and desires
beforementioned, let us not doubt but that we have the holy Ghost (who is the
author of them) dwelling in us, and consequently that we have also faith. Again
he says, 1. If thou have begun to hate and she sin, 2. If thou feel that
thou art displeased at thine infirmities, and corruptions: 3. If having
offended God thou feel a grief, and a sorrow for it: 4. If thou desire to
abstain: 5. If thou auoidest the occasion: 6. If thou trauailest to do thy
endeavor: 7. If thou praiest to God to give thee grace: all these holy
affections, proceeding from none other then from the spirit of God, ought to be
so many pledges, and testimonies that he is in thee. (n) Masterknockes says,
Albeit your pains sometimes be so horrible that you find no release nor
comfort, neither in spirit nor body, yet if they heart can only sob unto God,
despair not, you shall obtain your hearts desire. And destitute you are not
of faith: for at such a time as the flesh, natural reason, the law of God, the
present torment, the devil at one do cry, God is angry, and therefore there
is neither help nor remedy to be hoped for at his hands: at such time, Isay,
to sob unto God, is the demonstration of the secret seed of God, which is
hidden in Gods elect children: and that only sob is unto God a more acceptable
sacrifice, then without this cross, to give our bodies to be burnt even for
the truths sake. More testimonies might be alleged, but these shall suffice.

Against this point of dotrine it may be alleged, that if desire to believe
in our weakness be faith indeed; then some are justified and may be saved
wanting a lively apprehension and full persuasion of Gods mercy in Christ.
Ans. Justifying faith in regard of his nature is always one and the same, and
the essential property thereof, is, to apprehend Christ with his benefits,
and to assure the very conscience thereof. And therefore without some
apprehension and assurance, there can be no justification or Salvation in them
that for age are able to believe. Yet there be certain degrees and measures
of true faith. There is a strong faith, which causes a full apprehension and
persuasion of Gods mercy in Christ. This measure of faith the Lord vouchsafed
Abraham, David, Paul, the Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs of God. It were a
blessed thing if all believers might attain to this height of lively faith, to
say with Paul, I am persuaded, that neither life, nor death, nor any thing
else, shall be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ: but all
cannot; therefore there is another degree of faith lower then the former, and
yet true faith, called a little or weak faith, and it also has a power to
apprehend and apply the promise of salvation, but as yet by reason of weakness,
it is infolded (as it were) and wrapped up in the heart, as the leaf and
blossom in the bud. For such persons as have this weak faith, can say
indeed, that they believe their sins to be pardonable, and that seriously in
their hearts they desire to have them pardoned: but as yet they can not say,
that they are without all doubt pordoned. And yet the mercy of God is not
wanting unto them. For in that they do, and can desire, and endeavor to
apprehe^d, they do indeed apprehend; God accepting the desire to do the
thing, for the thing done, This which I say will the better appear, if the
grounds thereof be considered. Faith does not justify in respect of it self,
because it is an action or virtue: or because it is strong, lively, and
perfect: but in respect of the object thereof, namely Christ crucified, whom
faith apprehends as he is set forth unto us in the word and Sacraments. It is
Christ that is the author, and matter of our justice, and it is he that
applies the same unto us: as for faith in us, it is but an Instrument to
apprehend and receive that which Christ for his part offers and gives.
Therefore, if faith err not in his proper object, but follow the promise of
God, though it do but weakly apprehend, or at the least, cause a man only to
Endeavor and Desire to apprehend, it is true faith, and justifies. Though our
apprehension be necessary, yet our salvation stands rather in this, that God
apprehends us for his own, then that we apprehend him for ours. Phi. 3. v. 12.
And rather in this, that we are known of him, then that we know him. Gal. 4. 9.

Out of this conclusion springs an other not to be omitted, that God accepts
the endeavor of the whole man to obey, for perfect obedience it self.
THat is, if men endeavor to please God in all things, God will not judge
their doings by the rigor of his law: but will accept their little and weak
endeavor, to do that which they can do by his grace, as if they had perfectly
fulfilled the law. But here remember I put this caveat; that this indeeuour
must be in and by the whole man; the very mind, conscience, will, and
affections doing that which they can in their kinds: and thus the endeavor to
obey which is a fruit of the spirit, shall be distinguished from civil
righteousness, which may be in heathen men, and is only in the outward, and
not in the inward man. The truth of this conclusion appears by that which the
Prophet Malachi says, that God will spare the^ that fear him, as a father
spares his child: who accepts the thing done, as well done, if the child show
his good will to please his father, and to do what he can.

IV. Conclusion.
To see and feel in our selves the want of any grace pertaining to salvation,
and to be grieved therefore, is the grace it self.
The Exposition.
Understand this conclusion as the former, namely that grief of the heart for
the want of any grace necessary to salvation, is as much with god as the grace
it self. When being in distress, we cannot pray as we ought God accepts the
very groans, sobs, and sighs of the perplexed heart, as the prayer it self.
Romans 8. 26. When we are grieved, because we cannot be grieved for our sins,
it is a degree and measure of godly sorrow before God. Com. 4. l. 1. ad Simpli.
in fine.
Augustine says well: Sometimes our prayer is lukewarm, or rather cold and
almost no prayer: nay sometime it is altogether no prayer at all, and yet we
cannot with grief perceive this in our selves: for if we can but grieve
because we cannot pray, we now pray indeed. Hierom says, Lib. 1. contra.
Pelagianos.
Then we are just when we do acknowledge our selves to be sinners: Again,
this is the true wisdom of man, to know himself to be imperfect: And (that I
may so speak) the perfection of all just men in the flesh is imperfect:
Augustine again says That the virtue which is now in a just man is thus far
forth perfect, that unto the perfection thereof, there belongs a true
acknowledgement and an humble confession of the imperfection thereof. A broken
and contrite heart after an offense, is as much with God, as if there had bin
no offense at al. And therefore so soon as David after his grievous fall, in
heaviness of heart confessed his sin, saying in effect but thus much: I have
sinned, the Prophet in the name of the Lord pronounces the pardon of his sin
in heaven, and that presently.

V. Conclusion.
He that has begun to subject himself to Christ and his word, though as yet
he be ignorant in most points of religion, yet if he have a care to increase
in knowledge, and to practice that which he knows, he is accepted of God as a
true believer.
The Exposition.
Sundry persons by the Evangelists are said to believe, which had only seen
the miracles of Christ, and as yet had made no further proceedings, but to
acknowledge Christ to be the Messiah; and to submit themselves to him and his
doctrine, which afterward should be taught. On this manner the woman of Samaria
believed, and many of the Samaritans upon her report: and a certain ruler, by
reason of a miracle wrought upon his son, is said to believe, and all his
household. Ioh. 4. 42. 52. When our Savior Christ commended the faith of the
Apostles, terming it a rock, against which the gates of hell should not
prevail, it was not the plentiful knowledge of the doctrine of salvation: for
they were ignorant of many articles of faith, as namely of the death,
resurrection, ascension, and kingdom of Christ: but because they believed him
to be the son of God, and the savior of mankind, and they had withal
resolved themselves to cleave unto him, and the blessed doctrine of salvation
which he taught, though as yet they were ignorant in many points. The holy
Ghost commends the faith of Rahab when she received the spies. Now this her
faith was indeed but a seed and beginning of lively faith: for then she had
only heard of the miracles done in Egypt, and of the deliverance of the
Israelites, and was thereupon smitten with fear, and had conceived a
resolution with her self, to join her self to the Israelites, and to worship
the true God. Now these and the like, are termed believers, upon just cause:
for though they be ignorant as yet, yet their ignorance shall be no
continuing or lasting ignorance: and they have excellent seeds of grace,
namely a purpose of heart to cleave to Christ, and a care to profit in the
doctrine of salvation, whereof they have some little knowledge.

VI. Conclusion.
The foresaid beginnings of grace are counterfeit, unless they increase.
The Exposition.
THe wickedness of man's nature, and the depth of hypocrisy is such, that a
man may and can easily transform himself into the counterfeit and resemblance
of any grace of God. Therefore I put down in this last conclusion a certain
note, whereby the gifts of God may be discerned, namely, that they grow up and
increase as the grain of Musterd-seede to a great tree, and bear fruit
answerably. The grace in the heart is like the grain of Musterd-seede in two
things. First it is small to see to at the beginning: secondly, after it is
cast into the ground of the heart, it increases speedily, and spreads it
self. Therefore, if a man at the first have but some little feeling of his
wants, some weak and faint desire, some small obedience, he must not let this
spark of grace go out, but these motions of the spirit must be increased by
the use of the word, Sacraments, and prayer: and they must daily be stirred up
by meditating, endeavoring, striving, asking, seeking, knocking. The master
delivering his talents to his servants, says unto them: Occupy till I come,
and not hide in the earth, Matthew. 25. 26, Paul uses an excellent speech to
Timothy: I exhort thee to stir up the gift of God which is in thee, namely,
as fire is stirred up by often blowing, and putting to of wood. 2. Tim. 1. 6.
As for such motions of the heart that last for a week, or a month, and after
vanish away, they are not to be regarded: and the Lord by the Prophet Ose
complains of them, saying, O Ephraim, thy righteousness is like the morning
dew, chap. 6.

Therefore considering, grace unless it be confirmed and exercised, is indeed
no grace; I will here add certain rules of direction, that we may the more
easily put in practice the spiritual exercises of invocation, faith, and
repentance: and thereby also quicken and revive the seeds and beginnings of
grace.

1. In what place soever thou art, whether alone or abroad, by day or by night,
and whatsoever thou art doing, set thy self in the presence of God: let this
persuasion always take place in thy heart that thou are before the liui^g God:
and do thy endeavor, that this persuasion may smite thy heart with awe and
reverence, and make thee afraid to sin. This council the Lord gave Abraham.
Genesis 17. 1. Walk before me and be upright. This thing also was practiced by
Enoch, who for this cause is said to walk with God.

2. Esteem of every present day as of the day of thy death: and therefore live
as though thou were dying; and do those good duties every day, that thou
would do if thou were dying. This is Christian watchfulness; and remember
it.

3. Make catalogues and bills of thine own sins, specially of those sins
that have most dishonored God, and wounded thine own conscience: set them
before thee often, specially then, when thou have any particular occasion of
renewing thy repentance, that thy heart by this doleful sight may be further
humbled. This was David's practice when he considered his ways, and turned his
feet to Gods commandments, Psalm. 119. 57. And when he confessed the sins of
his youth. Psalm. 25, This was Jobs practice, when he said he was not able to
answer one of a thousand of his sins unto God. Job. 9. 1.

4. When thou first openest thine eyes in a morning, pray to God, and give him
thanks heartily: God then shall have his honor, and thy heart shall be the
better for it the whole day following. For we see in experience, that vessels
keep long the taste of that liquor wherewith they are first seasoned. And when
thou lie down, let that be the last also: for thou know not, whether
fallen a sleep, thou shall ever rise again alive. Good therefore it is, that
thou should give up thy self into the hands of God, whilst thou art waking.

5. Labor to see and feel thy spiritual poverty, that is, to see the want of
grace in thy self, specially those inward corruptions, of unbelief, pride,
self-love, etc. Labor to be displeased with thy self: and labor to feel,
that by reason of them, thou stand in need of every drop of the blood of
Christ to heal and cleanse thee from those wants: and let this practice take
such place with thee, that if thou be demanded, what in thine estimation is
the vilest of the creatures upon earth? thine heart and conscience may answer
with a loud voice, I, even I, by reason of mine own sins: and again, if
thou be demanded, what is the best thing in the world for thee? thy heart and
conscience may answer again with a strong and loud cry, One drop of the blood
of Christ to wash away my sins.

6. Show thy self to be a member of Christ, and a servant of God, not only in
the general calling of a Christian, but also in the particular calling in
which thou art placed. It is nothing for a magistrate to be a Christian man,
but he must also be a Christian magistrate: it is not enough for a master of a
family to be a Christian man, or a Christian in the Church, but the must also
be a Christian in the family and in the trade which he follows daily. Not
every one that is a common hearer of the word, and a frequenter of the Lords
table, is therefore a good Christian, unless his conversation in his private
house, and in his private affairs, and dealings be suitable: There, is a man to
be seen what he is.

7. Search the scriptures, to see what is sin, and what is not sin in every
action: this done, carry in thy heart a constant and resolute purpose, not to
sin in any thing: for faith and the purpose of sinning can never stand together.

8. Let thine endeavor be suitable to thy purpose: and therefore do nothing at
any time against thy conscience, ritely informed by the word: exercise thy
self to eschew every sin, and to obey God in every one of his commandments,
that pertain either to the general calling of a Christian, or thy particular
calling. Thus did good Josias, who turned unto God with all his heart,
according to all the law of Moses. 1. King. 25. 25. and thus did Zachary and
Elizabeth, that walked in all the commandments of God without reproof, Luke
1. 6.

9. If at any time against thy purpose and resolution, thou be overtaken with
any sin little or great, lie not in it, but speedily recover thy self by
repentance: humble thy self, confessing thine offense, and by prayer entreat
the Lord to pardon the same, and that earnestly, till such time as thou find
thy conscience truly pacified, and thy care to eschew the same sin increased.

10. Consider often of the right and proper end of thy life in this world,
which is not to seek profit, honor, pleasure, but that in serving of men, we
might serve God in our callings. God could, if it so pleased him, preserve man
without the ministry of man, but his pleasure is to fulfill his work and will
in the preservation of our bodies, and salvation of our souls, by the
imploiment of men in his service, every one according to his vocation. Neither
is there so much as a bond slave, but he must in and by his faithful service to
his master, serve the Lord. Men therefore do commonly profane their labors
and lives, by aiming at a wrong end, when all their care consists only in
getting sufficient maintenance for them and theirs, for the obtaining of
credit, riches, and carnal commodities. For thus men serve themselves, and not
God, or men: much less do they serve God in serving of men.

11. Give all diligence to make thy election sure, and to gather manifold
tokens thereof. For this cause observe the work of Gods providence, love, and
mercy, both in thee and upon thee, from time to time: for the serious
consideration of them, and the laying of them together when they are many and
several, minister much direction, assurance of Gods favor, and comfort. This
was the practice of David, 1. Sam. 17 14. Psalm. 23. all.

12. Think evermore thy present estate whatsoever it be, to be the best
estate for thee: because whatsoever befalls thee, though it be sickness, or any
other affliction, or death, befalls thee of the good providence of God. That
this may the better be done, labor to see and acknowledge a providence of
God, as well in poverty as in abundance, as well in disgrace as good report, as
well in sickness, as in health, as well in life as in death.

13. Pray continually, I mean not by solemn and set prayer, but by secret and
inward eiaculatio^s of the heart, that is, by a continual elevation of mind
unto Christ, sitting at the right hand of God the Father, and that either by
prayer or giving of thanks so often as any occaon shall be offered.

14. Think often of the worst and most grievous things that may befall thee,
either in this life or death for the name of Christ: make a reckoning of them,
and prepare thy self to bear them: that when they come, they may not seem
strange, but be borne the more easily.

15. Make conscience of idle, vain, dishonest and ungodly thoughts: for these
are the seeds and beginnings of actual sin in word and in deed. This want of
care in ordering and composing of our thoughts, is often punished with a
fearful temptation in the very thought, called of Divines, Tentatio
blasphemiarum, a tentation of blasphemies.

16. When any good motion or affection rises in the heart, suffer it not pass
away, but feed it by reading, meditating. praying.

17. Whatsoever good thing thou go about, whether it be in word or deed, do
it not in a conceit of thy self, or in the pride of thy heart, but in
humility, ascribing the power whereby thou do thy work, and the praise
thereof to God, otherwise thou shall find by experience, God will curse thy
best doings.

18. Despise not civil honesty: good conscience and good manners must go
together: therefore remember to make conscience of lying, and of customable
swearing in common talk: contend not either in deed or word with any man, be
courteous and gentle to all, good and badde: bear with men's wants and
frailties, as hastiness, frowardness, selfeliking, curiousness, etc. passing
by them as being not perceived: return not evil for evil, but rather good
for evil: use meat, drink, and apparel in that manner and measure, that
they may further godliness; and may be as it were signs in which thou may
express the hidden grace of thy heart: Strive not to go beyond any, unless
it be in good things: go before thine equals in giving of honor, rather then
in taking of it: make conscience of thy word, and let it be as a bond:
profess no more outwardly the^ thou have inwardly in heart: opresse or defraud
no man in bargaining: in all companies either do good, or take good.

19. Cleave not by inordinate affection to any creature, but above all things
quiet and rest thy mind in Christ, above all dignity and honor, above all
cunning and policy, above all glory and honor, above all health and beauty,
above all wealth and treasure, above all joy and delight, above al fame and
praise, above all mirth and consolation, that man's heart can feel or devise
beside Christ.

With these rules of practice, join rules of meditation; whereof I propound
six unto thee, as I find them set down by a learned Divine, called Victorius
Strigelius.

I.
We must not fall away from God for any creature.

II.
Infinite eternity is far to be preferred before the short race of this
mortal life.

III.
We must hold fast the promise of grace, though we loose all temporal
blessings and they also in death must needs be left.

IV.
Let the love of God in Christ, and the love of the Church for Christ, be
strong in thee, and prevail against all other affections.

V.
It is the principal art of a Christian, to believe things invisible, to hope
for things deferred, to love God when he shows him to be an enemy, and thus
to persevere unto the end.

VI.
It is a most effectual remedy for any grief, to quiet our selves in a
confidence of the presence and help of God: and to ask of him, and withal to
wait either for some easement or deliverance.

VII.
All the works of God are done in contrary means.

FINIS*

