OF THE CALling of the Ministry two Treatises, discribing The Duties and
Dignities of that Calling.

DELIVERED PVBlickly in the University of Cambridge, by Master Perkins.

Taken then from his mouth, and now dilligently perused and published, by a
Preacher of the word

With a preface prefixed touching the publishing of Master Perkins his works,
and a Catalogue of all such particulars thereof, as are to be expected.

1 Cor. 4.1. Let a man so think of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and
disposers of the secrets of God.

Imprinted at London by I. R. for Willliam Welby, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paules-Churchyard, at the sign of the Grayhound. 1605.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Edward Cook Knight, his Majesty's Attorney
General, and Sir Thomas Heskith Knight, Attorney of his Highness Court of
Wards and liueries, and one of his Majesty's Honorable Counsel in the North,
two of Gods principal Attorneyes in the Cause of true Religion. Grace and
peace from Jesus Christ.
RIght Worshipful, give me leave to put you both in one Epistle, who^ one
service, one place, one profession, one order, and one Religion have so nearly
combined: As you are Brethren many ways, and especially in the profession and
practice of one Religion: so vouchsafe to be joint Patrons of this little
afterbirth, this faetus posthumus, of that worthy man Ma. Perkins, now
deceased. I send you here one of the shortest, and one of the sweetest of his
Treatises: had it been as well brought forth by me, as it ws begot by him, it
had been a child not unworthy of so great a father: but seeing it is now as a
fatherles child, be you the Tutors to this Orphane, at whose hands Orphans and
Wards have ever been well used. The father whilst he lived was a shining light
in this our Church, and being dead, is a shining star in heaven, for he
turned many to righteousness, Dan. 12, 3.
and his doctrine will shine in Christian Churches whilst the sun shines
upon the earth. The subject of this Treatise is the Ministry, whereof are
laid down the duties and dignities. And well does he couple these two
together: for some can challenge the dignities of the Ministry, and cunningly
cast the duties from their shoulders: others perform the duties but are kept
from the dignities dulle belonging to that calling: but as he that will do
the duties, may justly challenge the dignities, so he that will expect the
dignities, must do the duties of a Minister: therefore in this building, these
two beams are in great wisdom well set together by this wise Master builder,
and so closely coupled, as the idle or ambitious man cannot look at the
dignities, but he must withal behold the duties, nor the painful and laborious
man see his duty, but withal shall see the dignity thereto belonging.

And surely (Right Worshipful) none might better have written of this subject
then he: for who may more worthily describe the dignities of the Ministry
then he, who neither by doctrine nor conversation, was ever the least disgrace
unto his Ministry? or who may better challenge the honor of his calling,
then he who was ever an honor to his calling; And who might better teach the
duties of the Ministry, then he who so discharged them, as Envy it self
cannot justly reprove, and the enemies themselves cannot but Answer to Perkins
his reformed Catholic, by B. a priest.
commend: and who may better teach them to others, then he that carefully
practiced the^ in his own person? And as none could be a fitter Author of this
discourse then he, so not many fitter Patrons then your selves: not many in
your profession better scholars, nor any that better love scholars then your
selves: and you are some of those few in this wicked age, who willingly yield
all dignities and due reverence to such Ministers as you see willingly to
discharge the duties of good Ministers. Well would it be with the Ministry of
England, (and the better with it, the better with England) if all as great as
you, were as great friends to it as you. And if the Papists except, and say
how can this be, for that you have been persecuters of their Priests, let me
answer once for you, who often answer for many distressed men: they
persecute you with slander, that say you persecuted the^, (but be content to
bear your part in popish slanders, with our Prince and state, our Counselors
and Clergy, our Parliaments and Laws, for none of these have escaped these
viperous tongues) for though you have executed the laws upon some of them in
your several places, yet not with sharpnes nor severity, but with merciful
justice, and that also not as they were Priests, but Plotters, Practisers,
subuerters, and seducers: and as they were Priests, you sought their
reformation, not their ruin. And if they, who can hardly discharge themselves
from being Priests of Baal, have had but justice, and that also tempered with
mercy, it shows how good regard you have, and how much you esteem all good
and faithful Ministers, which are Gods Interpreters. In a word, if all our
Ministers were such as this Treatise describes, or came but as near it as the
Author hereof did, and if all our great ones did use and esteem good Ministers
as you do, we should then soon pull the Ministry from under that foot of
contempt, with which this profane age does daily tread upon it. The Church of
Rome, who are far wiser in their kind then the children of light, have taken
other and strange courses to magnify the Clergy. They teach, that the state
Ecclesiastical, is so far more excellent then the Civil, as the sun is then
the moon, and that not in spiritual only, (for that we deny not) but in
temporal power, pomp, and estate: and that therefore the Chief of their
Clergy, is as far above the mightiest Emperor, as the sun is above the
moon; and as the moon borrows her light from the sun, so does the
Emperor his state and power from the Pope.

They teach, that the Clergy is a state so distinct, and so absolute of it
self, as it has not to do with the Civil state, yea they exempt their
Clergy, from being any way subject to the temporal Magistrate. And though
their crimes, be never so many or monstrous, yet the Prince, or civil
authority, has nothing to do to take notice thereof, much less to punnish
them: and hereupon great volumes are written, and many Acts and decrees are
made in their Cannon Law, De exemptione Clericorum. They extol their Clergy
above the Temporaltie, allowing the Priests both Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament, but leaving the Laity bread alone. They make them in their Mass
Mediators betwixt Christ and God the Father, and Creators of their Creator and
Redeemer, when and as often as themselves list. And finally, they send for the
most part, all their Clergy immediately to heaven without let, whereas all the
Temporalty (except Martyrs) must pass by Purgatory. Here are great buildings,
but on a sandy foundation, goodly Castles, but built in the air; if these
devises were of God, they would certainly stand, but their long tottring
threatens a sudden fall.

Contrariwise, our Church, or rather the corruption of our Church, by avoiding
this Scilla, have fallen into Charibdis, by avoiding one extremity, have fallen
into the other, by taking too much dignity and authority from our Ministry,
and by laying too much poverty, contempt, and baseness upon it. It were a work
worth the labor of the wisest heads, to put down the true mean betwixt both
extremes, and vvorth the labor of our Noble King, to take order that that
mean be kept, without rising to the right hand, or falling to the left. This
short Treatise may hap to give some light and directions therein, or at least
may encourage and stir up their hearts in whose hands it is to do it: Under
your worthy names would I have it see the world, not so much for that I am
bound to you both in many private and particular respects, (though that be
much) as for that I know you both to be of so right and reformed a judgment in
this case, as you would have none Ministers but of sufficient gifts, and
unblameable lives, nor those Ministers put to their pensions, or uncertain
salaries, but to have certain and sufficient maintenance proportionable to
their charge, and beseeming the honor of a christian Church: God continue you
still in that mind, and make many more of the same with you, so should we have
as flourishing a Church as any Christendom has seen. Go forward in that, and
other your religious resolutions, it is the true way to honor both here and
in a better world: stand firmly for the truth, and boldly against the popish
enemies thereof, as hitherto you have done: Religion had never more cause to
thank you, and all that do so then now it has, for her enemies were never so
insolent since they were our enemies: but if you and others hold on, as in
your several places you have well begun, and others take the like course, there
is hope their insolences will be easily (if timely) repressed, and
themselves nearest the fall, when they imagine they are in the full. The Lord
bless and assist you in your painful places, and make you on earth
Instruments of his glory, to the good of his Church, so shall you be vessels
of glory in the kingdom of Heaven: And thus commending this little treatise to
your reading, and my self to your favor, I take leave, and will ever rest

Your Worships in the Lord, W. Crashawe.

To the Christian Reader, and Especially to all such as have any Coppies of the
works of Master Perkins, or intend any of them to the Press.
FOrasmuch as there has been lately signification made, of diverse of Master
Perkins his works hereafter to be printed, in an Epistle to the Reader
praemised before the Treatise of callings, and that signification being but
general, might peradventure give occasion to some, to set out some particulars
(without the consent of Master Perkins his assigns) as imperfectly as are
these two books, entitled The Reformation of covetousness, and The practice
of faith, justly and truly (for ought that I see) censured in the aforesaid
Epistle: It is therefore now thought good, to mention the particular Treatises,
and works of his, which shall hereafter (if God will) be published, for the
benefit of Gods Church: I do therefore hereby make known to all, whom it any
way may concern, that there were found in the study of the deceased and are
in the hands of his Executors, or assigns, and preparing for the Press.

1 His Expositions on the Epistle ^^ the Galathians.

2 on the Epistle of Jude.

2 His Book of the Cases of Conscience.

3 His Treatises 1 of Wi^chcraft.

2 of Callings.

All these he had perused himself, and made them ready for the press,
according to which coppies by himself so corrected, some of them already are,
and the rest will be published in due time: And heereuppon we desire all men
who have coppies of these, or any of them, not to offer that wrong to that
worthy man of God, as to publish any of their own, seeing the coppies hereof
which are to be printed, are of his own correcting: but rather if they can
help to make any of them more perfect by their coppies, they may therein do a
good work to the benefit of many, and much comfort to themselves.

And further, I do hereby make known, that I have in my hands at this
present, of his works, taken from his mouth, with my own hand, hereafter (if
God will) to be published, with the allowance of our Church, and for the
benefit of his children, these particulars.

1 His Expositions or readings, on the 110 Psalm.

2 On the 32 Psalm.

3 On the 11 Chapter to the Hebrews.

4 on the 1, 2, and 3, Chapters of the Revelation.

5 on the 5, 6, and 7 Chapters of Saint Matthew.

2 His Confutation of Camsius his little Popish Catechism.

3 His Treatises 1 of Imaginations out of Genes. 8, 2.

2 of Temptations out of Matthew 4.

3 of Christian Equity out of Phillip, 4, 3.

4 of the Callings of the Ministry, out of 2 places of Scripture.

5 of Repentance out of Zephaniah 2, 1.

Besides many other particular Sermons, and short discourses made upon
several, and special occasions: of all which seem are already published by
others, and some by my self: and all the rest that remain, as they be the
Jewels of Gods Church, so do I willingly dedicate them to the public and
general good. Judging it were a foul sin in me, or any other, to
impropriate to our selves, or our own private use, the labors of This* or any
other learned man, which are in my opinion, parts of the Treasury of the
militant Church: And as it were wrong to the Church, if I should conceal them,
so doubtless were it to him and his children: if I should publish them for my
own alone, and not for their benefit. If I do, I think it may be justly
said unto me, or whosoever does so, Thy money perish with thee. And what
herein I have said for my self: I know I may boldly and safely say, for
those his Executors or assigns, which have or had in their hands, any of those
which were found in his study: In the publishing of all which, as we do intend
to deal truly with the Christian Reader, and not to commit any thing to the
press, which has not either been written or corrected, by the Author
himself, or faithfully penned according to the truest coppies taken from his
own mouth, and since by others of sufficiency and integrity, diligently
perused: so we purpose to refer them to the benefit of the Authors wife and
children, as much as may be, wishing that upon this caveat man would not be so
hasty (as some have been) to commend to the world, their imperfect notes,
upon a base desire of a little gain, both to hinder the common good of the
Church, and to defraude the said parties of their private benefit, to whom in
all equity and Conscience, it does principally appertain: And desiring all,
who have any perfect Coppies of such as are in my own hands, that they would
either help me with theirs, or rather take mine to help them. That by our
joint powers and our forces laid together: the walls of this worthy building,
may go up the fairer and the faster. And so I commend them all to Gods
blessing, who endeavor to commend themselves, and their labors to God and to
his Church.

Your brother in the Lord. W. C.

The duties and dignity of the Ministry.
Job. 33.23.24. If there be with him a Messenger: An Interpreter, one of a
thousand to declare unto man his righteousness:

Then will be have mercy on him, and will say, deliver him that he go not
down into the pit, for I have received a reconciliation.


IN this Chapter and the former, Eli^^ a holy, learned, and wise young man,
has conference with Job in matters of high and excellent Divinity: the
points of his conference are these: from the first verse of this chap, to the
7. verse, is a preface to his speech. From thence to the 13. he repeateth
certain propositions of Job* and reproves them: from thence to these words,
he instructs Job in certain points touching Gods dealing with sinners: and
those are two.

1 How God preserves a sinner from falling.

2 How God restores a sinner being fallen.

1 The means whereby God preserves a sinner, are set down to be two
principal.

1 By Admonitions in dreams and visions.

2 By scourges and chastisements, when the first will not prevail. And these
are laid down from the 13 verse unto these words.

2 Then follows the 2. point, namely the restoring of a sinner: when both the
means formerly spoken of have not prevailed with him, but that through his
corruption he is fallen: and concerning this point, he handles these
particulers.

1 The remedy and means of his restoring.

2 The effect that follows thereupon. ^ The remedy is laid down in these
words now red unto us, then follows the effect, which is, that when a sinner
is restored by repentance, then the graces of God are plentifully poured upon
him both for soul and body: from these words to he end of the chapter.

The intent then of this Scripture, is, that God uses means in his mercy to
preserve sinnres from falling into sin, but if they do, the^ he in much greater
mercy affoordeth them means and helps to rise again. And this is the soul
and substance of the words. Now, that means and remedy is the matter I
purpose to speak of, out of these words: The means then to restore a sinner
after a fall, is to raise him by repentance into a better estate then he was
in before, and that is inclusiuely, and by implication taught in this text: But
the instrument by who^ that great work is to be wrought, is here in plain
terms laid down to be a Minister of God, lawfully called and sent by God,
and appointed by his Church to that great duty. So that these words contain a
worthy description of a true Minister, and he is here described.

1 By his titles, which are two, An Angel. An Interpreter.


2 By his rarenes, One of a thousand.

3 By his office: which is, to declare unto man his righteousness.

4 By the blessing that God gives upon the labors of this true Minister: which
is, th^^ God will have mercy upon the sinner.

5 By his Commission and authority in the last words: God will say, Deliver
him that he go not down into the pit, for I have received a reconciliation.

Let us speak of them in order as they lie in the text, and first of his
titles.

1 The first title of a Minister of God is, he is called a Messenger, Title an
Angel.
or an Angel: and not here alone, but elsewhere in the scripture, Malachy 2,
7, He is the Messenger of the Lord of hosts. And in the Revelation, the
Ministers of the 7. Churches are called the Angels of those Churches. Revel. 2.
and 3. chapters.
So that it is apparent* a true Minister is an Angel of God in (...) place,
and in the other place, the Angel of the Church. He is an Angel or Messenger
sent from God to his Church. This consideration affords matter of much use. Use
1 for Ministers.


The most of us in this place This sermon was in the University church, to the
body of the University.
are either Prophets, or sons of the prophets. If thou ^e a prophet, thou
(...) Gods Angel. If a son of the (...) to be, then mark thy duty, Prophets
and Ministers are Angels in the very institution of their calling. Therefore
thou must preach Gods word as Gods word, and deliver it as thou receiuest it:
for Angels, Ambassadors, and Messengers, carry not their own message, but the
message of their Lords and Masters who sent the^, but Ministers carry the
message of the Lord of Hosts, therefore they are bound to deliver it as the
Lords, and not their own.

In the first Epistle of Peter, 4, 11, we are bid, If any man speak, let
him speak, not only the word of God, but as the word of God. Gods word must
be spoken, and as Gods word* then show thy faith fulness to the Lord, in
discharging thy hands sincerely of that message, which he has honored the^ to
carry. Gods word is pure, therefore purely to be thought upon, and to be
delivered. Then let all that are god^ Angels, and would be honored at his
Angels and Ambassadors, think it no less reason to do the duty of Gods
Angels, least as many men (...) a good tale in the ^^ling* so the^ take away
the power and majesty of Gods word, in the manner of delivering it. 2 Use for
ministers.
The second use concerns the ministers also: are they Gods Angels? therefore
they must preach Gods word in the evidence and demonstration of the spirit of
God: for he that is Gods Angel, the spirit of that God must speak in him:
Now to speak in the demonstration of Gods spirit, is to speak in such a
plains, and yet such a powerfulnes, as that the capacities of the simplest,
may perceive not man but God teaching them in that plainness, and the
consciences of the mightiest may feel not man but God, reprove the^ in that
powerfulness: That this is so, appears by Saint Paul. If a man prophecy
aright, 1 Cor. 14, 2^, 25.
(says the holy Ghost) the unlearned or unbelieving man ^om^ in, he thinks
his secret faults are disclosed and laid open, he thinks all men see his
nakedness, and do reprove him for it, he therefore falls down and says
surely God speaks in this man.

In which words, observe an admirable plainnes, and an admirable powerfulness:
(which a man would think could not so well stand together.) First plainness,
for whereas the unlearned man perceives his faults discovered, it follows
necessarily he must needs understand, and if an unlearned man understand it,
then consequently it must needs be plain: Secondly powerfulnes, in that his
conscience is so conu^nced, his secret falts so disclosed, and his very heart so
ripped up: that he says, certainly God speaks in this man. This is the evidence
and demonstration of Gods spirit: It is thought good commendation before the
world, when men say of a Preacher, surely this man has shown himself a
proper scholar, of good learning* great reading, strong memory, and good
delivery, and so it is and such commendation (if just) is not to be: contemned:
but that that co^mends a man to the Lord his God, and to his own conscience,
is when he preaches so plainly to the capacity, and so powerfully to the
conscience of a wicked man, as that he thinks doubtless God is within him.
Art thou therefore an Angel of God, then magnify the spirit of God, and not
thy self in thy preaching of his word. The next use is for the hearers, The
use for hearers.
and they are here taught, that if their Ministers be Angels sent them from
God, then are they to hear them, gladly, willingly, reverently, and
obediently: gladly and willingly, because they are Ambassad^rs, reverently and
obediently, because they are sent from the high God the King of Kings, and do
deliver his embassage. God says, the people must seek the law^ at his mo^th:
Malach, 2, 7.
and good reason, for if the law be the revealed will of God, and the Minister
the Angel of God, then where should they seek the will of God, but a^ the
mouth of his Angel? The reason therefore follows well in that place ^ they
should seek^ the law at his mouth, for he i^ the messenger of the Lord of
hosts and this ^^st all christians do, not only if their doctrine be pleasing
unto them, but though it cross their corruptions, and be quite contrary ^o
their dispositions, yea though it be never so unsavory and h^rde unto nature,
yet in as much (...) message from thy God and King, and ^he ^eather the Angel
or messenger of that God: therefore both he and it must be received with all
reverence, and with the very obedience of the heart and soul. And this is the
cause why a con^^nient reverence (...), honor is to be given of all good
christians, even to the persons of Gods Ministers: (especially when they adorn
their high calling with a holy life) even because they are Angels of God. Saint
Paul teaches, 1 Corinthians 11, 11.
that women ought to be modestly attired in the congregation because of the
Angels: it is not only, because the holy Angels are present* and always
beholders of our service of God, but even because the Ministers, which are
Angels and messengers sent from God, are there, delivering their message and
Embassage rece^^ed from God: And th^s we have the first title given to the
Minister he is an Angel* Secondly he is an (...), that is, one that (...) to
deliver (...) the reconciliation, 2 Title, an Interpreter.
made betwixt God and ma^^ I say not, the author of that reconciliation, for
that is the godhead^ (...) of the (...), for (...) second person, Christ jesus
(...) the (...) for that is the holy Ghost, nor (...) of it, for (...) the glad
^idings of the gospel: (...) I say he is the ^^^^^preter of it, that i^ first
one that (...) and explane the covenant of grace, and rightly lay down the
means how this reconciliation is wrought: Secondly, one that can rightly and
justly apply those means, for the working of it out. Thirdly, one that has
authority to publish and declare it when it is wrought: and by these three
actions he is Gods interpreter to the people: then he is also the peoples
interpreter to God, by being able to speak to God for them, to lay open their
wants and nakednesses, to confess their sins, to crave pardon and
forgiveness, to give thanks in their names for mercies recea^ed, and in a word
to offer up all their spiritual sacrifices unto God for them: and so every
true minister is a double interpreter, Gods to the people, and the peoples to
God: In which respects, he is properly called, Gods mouth to the people, by
preaching to them from God, and the peoples mouth to God, by praying for them
to God: and this title shows how great and glorious a calling this Ministry
is, if it be rightly conceived. Now then for the use of it.

Use, 1.
First, if every true Minister must be Gods Interpreter to the people, and the
peoples to God, then hence we learn that every one, who either is or intends
to be a minister, must have that tongue of the learned, whereof is spoken in
Esaias, Esaias, 50, 4.
where the Prophet says (first in the name of Christ, as hear the great
Prophet and teacher of his Church, and secondarily in the name of himself, and
all true Prophets while the world endures) The Lord God has given me a tongue
of the learned, that I should know to speak a word in season to him that is
weary: where note the weary soul, or troubled conscience, must have ^ word in
season spoken to him for his comfort, and that cannot be spoken without the
tongue of the learned, and lastly that tongue of the learned must be given of
God: Now to have this tongue of the learned, which Esaias speaks of* what is it
but to be this Interpreter, which the holy Ghost here says a minister must
be: But to be able to speak with this tongue is, first to be furnished with
(...) and learning. Secondly, with divine knowledge, as far as it may by
outward means be taught from man to man: but besides these, he that will
speak this tongue aright, must (...) inwardly learned, and taught by the
spirit of God: the two first he must learn from men, but the third from God, a
true Minister must be inwardly taught by the spiritual scholar, and the holy
Ghost: Saint John in Revelation must take the book, Revel. 10, 8.
that is the Scripture, and eat it, and when he has eaten it, then (says the
Angel) he must go preach to nations, tongues, people, and to Kings: which
was done not that Saint John had not eaten that book, in the coming down of
the holy Ghost, Acts. 2.
the very end of whose coming was to teach them spiritually: but that in him
Christ might teach his Church for ever, that no minister is fit to preach, to
nations and to Kings, until they ^a^e eaten the book of God: that is, till
after and besides all the learning that man can teach them, they be also ^^ught
by the spirit of God himself, and this teaching is it that makes a man a tr^^
interpreter, and without this he cannot be, for (...) can a man be Gods
interpreter to his people* unless he kn^we the mind of God himself, and how
can he know the mind of God, but by the teaching, of the spirit of God: 1 Corinthians.
Indeed we be man's interpreter by humane teaching, and may interpret the
Scriptures, truly and soundly, as a humane book or story for the increase of
knowledge, but the divine and spiritual Interpretation, which shall perce the
heart, and astonish the soul of man, must be taught by the inward teaching of
the holy Ghost.

Let no man think I here give the least allowance to Anabaptisticall fancies,
and revelations, which are nothing, but either dreams of their own, or
illusions of the devil, for they contemn both humane learning, and the study
of the scripture, and trust wholly to revelations of the spirit; but Gods Spirit
works not but upon the foundation of the word: only I teach this, that a
Minister must be a divine Interpreter, an Interpreter of Gods meaning. And
therefore he must not only read the book, but eat it, that is, not only have
the knowledge of divine things flowing in his brain, but engraven in his
heart, and printed in his soul by the spiritual finger of God: and therefore
for this end, after all his own study, meditation, conference, Comentaries,
and after all h^^mane helps, he must pray with David, Open thou mine eyes,
Psalm, 119, 18,
that I may see the wonders of thy law. The discerning of those wonders
requires a spiritual illumination, and the opening of them requires the tongue
of the learned. Therefore after all the study which flesh and blood, and
humane reason can yield, pray with the Prophet, Lord give me the tongue of
the learned, that I may be a right Interpreter of thy holy will. 2 Use.


Furthermore, inasmuch as Ministers are Interpreters, Esaias, 13.
they must labor for sanctity, and holiness of life. In Esaias, the King of
Assiria is said to be sanctified or set apart to destroy Gods enemies. If there
be a certain kind of sanctification necessary for the work of destruction,
then how much more is true sanctification necessary for this great and glorious
work of the edification of Gods Church? A Minister is to declare the
reconciliation betwixt God and man, and is he himself not reconciled? Dare he
present another man to Gods mercy for pardon, and never yet presented himself?
Can he commend the state of Grace to another, and never felt the sweetness
thereof in his own soul? Dare he come to preach sanctification with polluted
lyps, and out of an unsanctified heart? Moses might not stand upon the Mount in
Gods presence, til he had put off his shoes from of his feet. Exodus 3. and
dare any man presume to come into this most high and holy presence of the Lord,
until he have mortified his corruptions, and cast off the unruliness of his
affections?

In Exodus, Exodus, 19, 20, Leuit. 10, 3,
the priests are bid to sanctify the people, and in Leuiticus it is said,
that God will be sanctified in all that come near him, but who come so near
unto God as the Ministers do? so that it is apparent, Ministers do sanctify
the people, and in some construction, God himself: Now, shall they one way be
sanctifiers of the people, another way of God himself, and no way of
themselves? Surely if it be so, they are but lame Interpreters; And this is
the reason doubtless, why unsanctified Ministers, and such as are of a loose
conversation, bestow such fruitless labors in the Church: many want no
learning, no ability to interpret, and yet how few souls do they bring to
God? Some it may be are converted by their ministry, that God may show, the
efficacy is not in the person of man, but in the ordinance of God, but few
doubtless (for ought that we can see) do teach us, how God hates him which
will take in hand to reconcile others, himself being unreconciled to God.
Seeing then Ministers are Gods Interpreters to the people, to declare and
publish their reconciliation with God, and that they cannot be reconciled,
unless they be sanctified, and can so hardly be sanctified by the ministry
of an unsanctified man: let therefore all true ministers of God: first be Gods
Interpreters to their own consciences, and their own souls Interpreters to
God, then shall they know more perfectly how to discharge the office of true
Interpreters betwixt God and his people.

And thus we have the two titles of a true Minister.

Now it follows in the text.

One of a thousand. Here is the second part of this d^scription, which is by
the rarenes, or scarceness, of good Ministers: which is laid down in a very
strange phrase, namely, that a true Minister, one that is a right Angel, and a
true Interpreter, is no common or ordinary man, but thin sown, one of many,
nay one of a thousand. The meaning hereof is to be conceived either properly,
or figuratively: in the figurative sense, it is spoken in relation to Ministers
themselves: in the proper senee, it has a comparison with all men: the
figurative and hyperbolicall sense is, that of all the Ministers in the world,
not one of many is a right Angel, and a true Interpreter: the plain and proper
sense is, that amongst the men of this world, there is not one of a thousand
which proves a true Minister; For this point let us examine the truth of it,
the reasons of it, and the use of it.

The truth hereof is manifest, by the experience of all ages, 1 The truth
hereof.
wherein it is strange to observe, how few men of any sort, especially of the
better sort, after the calling of a Minister: and which is more strange, how
few of those that are Ministers in name and title, do deserve these
honorable names of an Angel, and an Interpreter, and the truth is too manifest
in common practice, to insist much upon it, rather therefore let us see the
reasons of it, 2 The reasons heerof.
and they be these principal: first, the contempt that lies on that calling,
it being always hated, by wicked and profane men, because it discouers their
filthynes, and vnmaskes their hypocrisy: Reason the contempt of it.
and their doctrine oftimes is a fretting corrasiue to their conscience, that
they cannot welter, and wallowe so quietly, and secretly in their sins, as
otherwise they would, therefore is it that they spurn both against the
calling, and the men, and watch them narrowly, and take hold of their least
infirmities, thereby to disgrace them: judging that to cast contempt on that
calling, is to remove shame from their own shameful courses: nor is it
possible but that they should thus hate this calling, inasmuch as they hate so
deadly both that law and Embassage which they bring, and that God whose
Embassaders they are. This hatred and disgrace in the wicked world, was that
that caused Jeremy to cry, Jeremy, 15, 10.
w^e is me, and made him in the seeming of his natural reason, curse the time
that ever he was a Prophet, for says he, I am a man of contention, every man
is at strife and enemity with me. 2 Reason the difficulty.
The next reason is the difficulty, of discharging the duties of his calling:
to stand in Gods presence, to enter into the holy of holiest, to go betwixt
God and his people, to be Gods mouth to the people, and the peoples to God: to
be the Interpreter, of the eternal law of the old testament, and the
everlasting Gospel of the new, to stand in the rome, and to bear the office
of Christ himself, to take the care and charge of souls, these considerations
are so many amazements to the consciences of such men, who do with reverence
approach, and not with rashness, rush unto his sacred seat: this made Saint
Paul cry out, 2 Corinthians. 2, 16.
who is sufficient for these things, and if Paul said who is? no marvel
though many a man say I am not sufficient, and do therefore draw their necks
from this yoke, and their hands from this plough, until God himself or his
Church do press them to it.

The last reason is, 3 Reason: want of maintenance.
more peculiar to this of the new testament, namely, want of maintenance and
preferment, for them that labor in this calling: men are flesh and blood, and
in that respect must be allured, and won to embrace this vocation, by some
arguments, which may persuade flesh and blood: the world has in all ages been
negligent herein, and therefore God in his law took such strick orders, for
the maintenance of the Leuits: Deuter, 10, 9, and 28, 2, Number, 18, 26.
but especially, now under the Gospel, this calling is unprovided for, when it
deserves best of all to be rewarded: certainly it were a worthy christian
policy, to propound good preferments to this calling, that thereby men of the
worthiest gifts might be won unto it, and the want hereof, is cause why so
many young men of special parts, and greatest hope, turn to other vocations,
and especially to the law, wherein at this day the greatest part of the finest
wits of our kingdom, are employed, and why? but because they have all the
means to rise, whereas the Ministry, for the most part yeildeth nothing, but
a plain way to beggary* this is a great blemish in our church, and surely I
wish the Papists, those children of this world, were not wiser in this kind,
(in this point) then the Church of God: the reformation hereof is a work
worth the labor of Prince and people, and special care is to be had in it,
else it will not be reformed, for doubtless had not God himself in the old
testament, taken such straight orders for the livings of the Leuits, they had
been put to no less extremities, then is the Ministry of this age. And this
reason added to the other, makes them perfect, and all put together make a
reason infallible: for who will undergo so vile contempt, and undertake so
great a charge, for no reward: and where there is so great contempt, so heavy a
burden, and so mean a reward, what marvel, if a good Minister be one of a
thousand.

Now let us make use of this doctrine: 3 The use of it.
the use is manifold, and yields instructions to many sorts of people: 1 To
Rulers.
first Rulers and Magistrates are here taught, if good Ministers be so scarce,
therefore to maintain and increase, and do all good they can to the schools
of the Prophets, to Universities, Colleges, and schools of good learning,
which are the Seminaries of the Ministry: herein the example of Samuel is
very worthy to be followed, in whose days the schools of the Prophets
flourished, 1 Samuel, 19, 20, 21.22, 23, 24.
and even Saul himself, though he did much hurt in Israel, yet when he came
to the schools of the Prophets, his hard heart relented, he could do them no
hurt, nay he p^t of (...) robes, and prophesied amongst them: So should all
Christians Princes and Magistrates, advance these schools, and see them both
well maintained, and well stored, the reason is evident and forcible. A good
Minister is one of a 1000: If therefore they would have the number increased,
maintain the Seminaries. And again, if Antichrist to uphold his kingdom, the
kingdom of satan be so careful herein, At Rome Re^mes Doway.
to erect Colleges, and indowe them with living, to be Seminaries for his
sinagogue, and use so great means to sow his rares in the hearts of young men,
that so they may sow them in the hearts of the people abroad: shall not
Christian Princes be as careful, or rather much more zealous, for the
increasing of the number of goldly Ministers? shall Baal have his 400 Prophets,
1 Kings, 18* 22.
and God have his Elias alone: great shame must it be to A^ab, or to any King,
whose Kingdom is in that estate.

The Jesuits diligence is such in teaching, and the readiness of some of their
nouices such in learning, (the devil himself doubtless, putting to his help
withal) that in three years (as some of them say of themselves) they proceed
in humane learning, and in the fourth, in divinity: which if it be so, then it
may be a good lesson, for these our schools of learning, and an inducement to
move all that have the government thereof, to labor to advance learning, by
all good means, and to give it more speedy passage: And it may shame some that
spend so many years in the University* and yet alas for all that prove not
one of a 1000. In these our schools are by Gods mercy, many young trees
planted by the river side, of this goodly orchard, which by good ordring and
dressing, may prove goodly trees in the temple of God, and strong pillars in
the Church, but they are like tender plants, and must be cherished. Princes and
great men, by allowing maintenance, and the governors by stablishing good
orders, and looking carefully to their execution, must see that these plants
have sufficient moisture, to grow speedily to perfect ripenes, and that then
they be transplanted in due time, into the Church and commonwealth: these be
the trees spoken of in Ezechiell, Ezechiell, 47, 1, etc.
which grow by the sides of that river, which flows out of the Sanctuary:
Waters out of the Sanctuary must norish them, and so they grow unto their
perfection: but take away these waters, take away the liberality of princes,
and good discipline from the Universities, and these trees must needs decay
and weather: which if they do, then the small number of good Ministers, will
be fewer and fewer, and of one of a 1000, there will not be one of 2000. 2
Use for Ministers.
In the next place, Ministers themselves are here taught: first if good
Ministers be so scarce, then let every man fear to make them fewer then they
be: every man therefore for himself, labor first for ability, then for
conscience to discharge his duty: namely to be an Angel, to deliver faithfully
Gods Embassage, and a true Interpreter betwixt God and his people* thus if thou
do, then howsoever the number of good Ministers is small, yet it shall be
nothing smaller for thee.

2 If they be so few, labor to increase them, for the more they are, the
less burden lies upon each particular man, therefore let every Minister by
his teaching, and by his conversation labor, so to honor his calling, that
he may thereby allure and draw others to a love and liking thereof.

3 Are good Ministers so thin sown, are there so few of them? then let all
good and godly Ministers give the right hand of fellowship one to another,
Galath. 2, 9.
and join together in love, and by that means arm themselves against the
scorn and contempt of the world: we see they that are of a kindred, or a
brotherhood, or any kind of society, the fewer they are, the more closely do
they combine, the more firmly do they hold together against all foreign
force: so ought Gods Ministers to do because their number is so small; if they
were many, less danger in their disunion, but seeing they are so few, the
more it concerns them to cut off contentions, and all occasions of debate,
and to join hand in hand against these common adversaries.

3 Use for students.
In the third place, young Students are here taught, seeing a true Minister is
but one of a thousand, that therefore they bend their studies, and their
thoughts to the Ministry, for they well know it is an old proverb, the best
things are hard to come by, and certainly there are so few good Ministers,
because the holy Ministry in it self is so high and excellent a calling: and
as it is a shame to the men that there are so few good Ministers, so it is a
commendation to the calling, whose honor and excellency is such, that as we
see here scarce one of a thousand attaines unto it, therefore men of the most
excellent gifts, are here invited to dedicate themselves unto the most
excellent vocation, yea* very reason it self would urge a man to be one of a
thousand.

2 And further, as they are to intend this calling as the most rare and
excellent, so this must teach them likewise, to hasten to furnish themselves
with all good helps and means, that they may become true Ministers, and able
Jnterpreters, and not too long to stick in those studies, which keep a man from
the practice of this high function: for it is not to live in the University, or
in the College, and to study, though a man never so fast devour up learning,
but to be a good Minister, is that that makes a man one of a thousand.

In the last place, Hearers are here taught their duty, first, 4 Use for
Hearers.
to respect with reverence the person, and to receive with reverence the
Message of every true Messenger, seeing it is so rare a thing to find a true
Minister, for as nothing is more vile or base then an evil and leude Minister,
(whom Christ compares to salt which has lost his savor, which is good for
nothing, Math, 5, 13,
but to be cast out, and trodden down of men:) so is there none worthy of more
love, and reverence the^ a holy Minister: for as Esaias says: their very feet
are beautiful which bring glad tidings* and we should kiss their feet which
bring news of peace: therefore all good Christians are to receive and use a
good Minister, as Saint Paul says the Galathians did him, Gala, 4, 16,
even as an Angel of God. Have thou then a godly Pastor, run to him for
conference, for comfort, for counsel, use his company, frequent his sermons,
account him worthy of double honor, think it no small or ordinary blessing,
for thou have one of a thousand, and bless GOD for bestowing his mercy to
thee, which he has denied to so many others: for some have no Minister: some
have a Minister, and yet alas he is not one of a thousand.

And further: all men that are Fathers, may here learn to consecrate their
children to God in the service of the Ministry, considering that it is so
rare and excellent a thing to be a good Minister: nay that man should think
himself happy, and honored of God, who may be father to such a son as
shall prove one of a thousand.

In a word to conclude this point, all men must here learn, 5 Use for all
men.
seeing good Ministers are so scarce, to pray the Lord of the harvest, to
thrust out more laborers into his harvest: and for those that are called
already, that God would make them faithful in that high function. And as
Elisha craves of Elias, 2, Reg, 2* 9,
that the good spirit may be doubled, and trebled upon them, that so the number
may be encresed. And thus we have the truth, the reason, and the use of this,
that a good Minister is one of a thousand.

It follows. To declare unto man his righteousness.

Here is the third part of the description of a Minister, that is, by his
office, 3 Part of the description by his office
to declare unto man his righteousness: that is, when a poor sinner, by his
sins (the foulenes whereof he sees, and the burden whereof he feels) is
brought down, as it were to the very gates of hell, when this sinner by the
preaching of the Law, is brought to a true sight of this misery: and again,
by preaching the gospel, is brought to lay hold on Jesus Christ, then it is the
proper office of a Minister to declare unto that man his righteousness. Namely,
that though in himself he be as ill, and as foul as sin can make him, and
as the law can discover him to be; yet in Christ he is righteous, and just, and
by Christ so justified, as he is no more a sinner in the presence and account
of God: this is the righteousness of a Christian man, this is the justification
of a sinner. And to declare this righteousness to him that repents and belieues,
is the proper duty of a true Minister.

In the Acts, Paul says of himself, that he witnessed to the Jews, Acts,
20, 21,
and to the Gentiles, the repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ. In which words is laid down the complete duty of a Minister
(as he is a public Angel or Interpreter,) first, to preach repentance, which
a man must perform to GOD, whom by his sins he has grievously offended;
secondly, to preach faith in Christ, and free forgiveness, and perfect salvation
through that faith in Christ, to all that shall truly believe in him. And after
both these, follows that which is here spoken of, which comprehends both
the former, namely, to declare unto man his righteousness. So that in these
words, are inclusiuely laid down, these points of a Ministers calling: first,
a true Minister may and must declare unto a sinful man where righteousness is
to be found, 1, John, 2.
namely, in Jesus Christ the righteous. Secondly, how that righteousness may be
obtained, namely, by doing two duties; first, by denying and disclayming his
own righteousness, and that is done by repentance; secondly, by clayming and
cleaning to Christ's righteousness, and that is done by faith. Thirdly, a true
Minister may and must declare this righteousness to him, that is, first publish
and proclaim it, that it is ready to be bestowed on every sinner, which will
thus apprehend it, and that it is able to justify and save him: secondly,
beside a bare publication of this justification, he must (as Paul did)
witness and testify it to the conscience of the sinner, that it is as
certainly true, as God is true. For as a witness in doubtful cases is called,
that by his testimony he may clear the truth, so when the consciences of
poor sinners are wavering and doubtful what to believe, when they doubt of
this righteousness, then is a true Minister as a faithful witness of God to
auerre and testify this truth, from his own conscience, knowledge and
feeling, of the infallible certainty of Gods promises, unto the doubtful and
distressed conscience of the sinner.

Thirdly, besides declaration and testification, he is to maintain this truth,
and this righteousness, (if the sinners conscience be yet not quiet) against
all gainsayers, against the power of darkness, and all the gates of hell: that
this is true and perfect righteousness to him that apprehends it, as before is
laid down: and this is so infallible to every soul that repents and
believes, that the Minister may assure it to the conscience of the sinner in
the word of truth, and in the name of God, and may call to witness all Gods
Saints, and all his holy Angels, and may pawn unto him his own soul upon it,
that it is most true, that this is true, perfect, and all-sufficient
righteousness.

Thus we see in some measure, what it is to declare unto a man his
righteousness. And this is the peculiar office of a Minister of God, and this is
the height and excellency of his office. In the want of godly Ministers, I
confess that godly Christian men may one help another in the performance of
these duties, and that with profit, but it is the proper function of a godly
Minister to do it, and the promise and blessing belongs properly to him: as
the consciences of all penitent sinners, will testify in this case: let David's
serve for many, who when he was cast down even to the mouth of hell, by that
fearful discovery, of his two hideous sins by Nathans preaching, and when
the faith of his soul, began to wrestle against hell, and strive against
despair, and to apprehend the mercy of God in Christ: then I say, could not
the testimony, of all the men in the world, have given him that joy, comfort
and assurance, that Nathan did, when he said in the word of a Prophet, and of
a true Minister, God has taken away thy sin, thou shall not die: what did
Nathan here, but declare unto man his righteousness: what did Nathan here, but
the duty of every true Minister?

If this be the office and duty of a Minister, 1 Use for Ministers.
and if such be the height and excellency of his office let us see then what
use we may make of it.

First, concerning the Ministry: First for the Popish Ministry.
It first discovers how nakedly, weakly, and insufficiently, the Popish
Church does declare unto man his righteousness, who will let a man seek it in
himself, where alas it is not: for Paul himself testifies, that his desire
is that he may be found out of himself, and in Christ, and yet certainly if
ever man had righteousness of his own, Phillip, 3, 8, 9.
worth trusting to, Paul had: this is the cause why so many of that religion,
find not that righteousness, which will pacify, and satisfy their
consciences, when they come to die: and why so many of them, when it coms to
the pinch, do then go out of themselves, and with us do seek for this
righteousness in Christ, where both assuredly, and sufficiently it is to be
found.

Then for our own Ministry, here they are taught: Secondly our own.
first the true manner of teaching, and declaring righteousness, namely this,
not to preach the law alone, or the Gospel alone, as some unadvisedly do (but
both without profit) but both the law and the Gospel: the law to breed
repentance, the Gospel to work faith, but in order: first the law to breed
repentance, and then the Gospel to work faith and forgiveness, but never
before.

Secondly, they are taught to be holy: to be sanctified and reconciled
themselves, for it is thy office to declare unto man his righteousness, and
not thy own to thy self: and how can thou be a true witness to testify
betwixt God, and the soul of a sinner, when thy own soul knows not, nor
feels the truth of it? certainly such men a^e but lame witnesses betwixt God,
and the sinners soul. David says to the sinner, I will instruct thee in the
way wherein thou shall go: Psalm. 32.
but he first of all in the same, sets down his own experience, in a large
story of his own repentance, and of Gods mercy on himself. And though God
sometime do satisfy, and save the poor distressed soul of a sinner, by the
testimony of such men, to teach us that the virtue is not in the men, but in
the truth of Gods covenant: yet alas how few are they, to teach us how
pleasing it is unto him, when a Minister is a declarer of that righteous to
others, which he first has himself, and is a witness of truth to others, which
he first knows in his own experience.

Thirdly, 3 Use to Ministers.
the consideration of this high excellency of their calling, must arm all
true Ministers against the scorn and contempt of the world, which by wicked
men is cast like dust and mire into the face of Ministers: let this suffice
them, they are the men that must declare unto man his righteousness, even he
that scorns and contemnes the ministry, he has no righteousness in him,
unless, it be by the means of a poor Minister: then do thou thy duty, and
he that mockes thee, has cause to honor thee: and let this encourage Students
to consecrate themselves to the Ministry, 2 Use for Students.
for what calling has so high an office, as this, to declare unto man his
righteousness? And assuredly how ever in this wicked world, thou art little
accounted of (for if it did not so, it were not wicked) yet thou art honored in
the hearts of all Gods children, and even in the consciences of some, whose
tongues do smite thee: and the souls of thousands, when they die shall bless
thee, who in their lives cared not for thee: and the devil himself does envy,
and the holy Angels themselves do wonder at the excellency of thy calling, in
that thou have power to declare unto man his righteousnesses.

3 Use for the hearers.
In the next place, hearers may here learn: first if their righteousness, be
thus to be declared as before, then if they will have it, they must seek it as
it may be found, namely both in the law, and in the Gospel, and not in the
Gospel alone: and first in the law, then in the Gospel, for he must never
look to taste* the sweetness of the Gospel, which has not first swallowed the
better pills of the law: if therefore thou would be declared righteous by
the Gospel, be content first to be pronounced miserable by the law: if thou
would be declared righteous in Christ, then be content first to be
pronounced sinful and unrighteous in thy self: Secondly, all men may here
learn, how they are to esteem of Gods Ministers, and what reverence and
obedience is due to their persons, and their doctrine: these are they which
must declare unto thee thy righteousness, if thou have any: Art thou beholden
to him, who when thou have lost a Jewel (which was all thy wealth) can tell
thee where it is, and help thee to it again* or to him, who when thy cause is
in trial at the bar, will plead it for thee? or to him, who when thy health
is lost, can tell thee how to get it again? then behold how thou art beholden
to a godly Minister, who when Adam had lost both himself and thee, that Jewel
of righteousness, which was and is the whole wealth of thy soul, can truly
tell thee where it is, and how it is to be had again: and who when the devil
haleth thee to the bar of gods justice, to receive trial for thy sins, can
draw thee there such a declaration, as the devil himself shall not be able
to answer? and who when thy soul is sick to death, and even to damnation,
can heal the deadly wounds thereof. A good Minister therefore is worthy (as
the Apostle says) of double honor, whose duty we see is to declare unto man
his righteousness. And to conclude this point also, the consideration of the
height of this office of a Minister, may encourage fathers to dedicate their
sons to this holy calling: 4 Use for fathers.
for the Physicians care for the body, or the Lawyers, for thy cause, are both
inferior duties, to this of the Minister. A good Lawyer may be one of te^^e, a
good Physician one of 20. a good man, one of 100. but a good Minister is one of
a 1000. A good Lawyer may declare the true state of thy cause, a good Physician
may declare the true state of thy body. No calling, no man can declare unto
thee thy righteousness, but a true Minister. And thus we see the office or
function of a Minister. Now follows the blessing.

Then will he have mercy upon him. The fourth general part of this
description, 4 Point, the blessing.
is the blessing which God gives to the labors and function of a true
Minister: then that is when a man by the preaching of the law, is brought to
true humiliation and repentance, and by the preaching of the Gospel, to true
faith in the Messiah, then will he (that is, God) have mercy on him (that is,
on the penitent and believing sinner.) Behold here the admirable simpathy, and
the cooperation of God, and the Ministers office. Man preaches, and God
blesses: Man works on the heart, and God gives grace: a Minister declares
unto man his righteousness, and God says so be it, he shall be righteous: a
Minister pronounces mercy to a penitent sinner, and forthwith God has mercy
on him. Here we see the great and glorious account which God makes, of the
word of his Ministers, by them truly taught and rightly applied, namely, that
he as it were tieth his blessing unto it, for ordinarily till a man know his
righteousness, by the means of an Interpreter, God has not mercy on him, but
as soon as he does know it, then as we see here God will have mercy on him,
and will say, deliver him etc. This is no small honor to Ministers, and to
their Ministry, that God himself gives a blessing unto it, and works when
they work, and as it were stays waiting, when they declare unto a man his
righteousness, and then has he mercy on him: so powerful and so effectual,
is the word spoken by a Minister of God. This is that which Christ avouches,
Math, 16, 16.
whatsoever you bind in earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever you
loose in earth, shall be loosed in h^auen. Will you know the meaning hereof?
read Saint John, whose sins soever you remit, John, 20, 23.
they are remitted, whose you retain they are retained: will they have the
meaning of both: read Esaias, Esaias, 44, 25, 26.
God destroys the tokens of Sou^^ sayers, and makes v^sards, and Astrologers
Fools, ^^^neth worldly wisemen backward, and makes their knowledge foolishnes:
but he confirms the word of his servants, and performs the counsel of his
Messengers. Thus God binds and loses with them, remitteth and retains
with them, by confirming their word, and performing their counsel for example.

A true Minister sees a sinner hardened in his sins, and still rebelling against
the will of God, he therefore declares unto him his unrighteousness, and his
sin, and denounces unto him, the miseries and curses of Gods justice, as due
unto him for the same, here he binds on earth, here he retains on earth, this
man's sins are likewise bound and retained in heaven. On the other side, he
sees a man peniten^, and believing, he pronounces forgiveness of sins, and
happiness unto him for the same, he loses him from the band of his sins, by
declaring unto him his righteousness, this man's sins are likewise loosed and
remitted in heaven, and God himself does pronounce him clear in heaven, when
the Minister does on earth. Thus God confirms the word of his servant, and
performs the counsel of his Messengers.

The use of this doctrine is first for Rulers, 1 Use Rulers*
and great men of this world, this may teach them to be nursing Fathers, and
nursing Mothers unto the Church, whose authority they see is so great over
them, as that their decree stands ratified in heaven: Therefore though their
place be great, and they be Gods upon earth, Psalm^
yet must they withal acknowledge, that in justifying a sinner, in
interpretation, in declaring unto man his righteousness; in binding and loosing,
their power also is immediate from God, and above theirs, and they themselves,
as they are men, must submit themselves to this powerful word of the
Ministers, to be taught by it, and to be reconciled by means of it, and highly
must they receive it, for though a man speak it, yet is it the word of God:
this is to lick the dust of Christ's feet, ^ay.
which the Porphet speaks of: not as the Pope would have it, to hold the
stirrup, and lead the horse, and hold the water to the Pope, to kiss his toes,
to hold their kingdoms of him, as tenants at will, or by courtesy, but
reverently to acknowledge the ordinance to be Gods, the function and duty to be
high and excellent, to acknowledge the power of their keys and censures (being
rightly applied) their promises and their threatenings to be as from God, and to
submit to them accordingly.

Secondly, Ministers themselves here must learn, Use for Ministers
when they take the word of reconciliation into their hands and mouths, to
call to mind whose it is, even the Lords, and that he works with them, and
has the greatest hand in the work, and that therefore they must use it in holy
manner, with much fear and reverence: It is not their own, they may not use it
as they list. And lastly, Hearers are here taught, first ^o see how mad such
men be which carelessly and fildome hear sermons, 3 Use for Hearers.
but upon any oc^asion fly to wisards and charmers, which are ^he devils
prophets: for see the difference of ^hese two, the wisard and charmer has
socie^ie with the devil, the Preacher with God, the ^harmer has his calling
from the devil, the Preacher his from God, the charmers charm (...) the
devils watchword, when he charmeth the devil does the fear* the Preachers
doctrine is Gods watchword, when he truly applies it, GOD himself ratifieth
and makes it good: wherefore let all men fear to have thus to do with the
devil, by seeking to his slaves, and let them draw near to God, by entering
into fellowship with his holy Prophets, and godly Ministers.

And further, if when they preach, and thou belieuest, then GOD has mercy on
thee, then learn what reverence they and their word is worthy of, which is
thus accompanied with Gods mercy and forgiveness: and then learn to hear the
Word with fear and trembling, for it is Gods word, and not theyrs: and when a
true Minister says unto thee, on a true ground, I denounce thee a sinful man,
and under the curse, or I declare thee to be righteous, and a child of grace,
it is all one, as though God from heaven had said so unto thee. If any man
ask; But is it not as good if anoth^^ man pronounce forgiveness unto me upon
my repentance? I answer, yes vndoub^edly if it be in extraordinary times or
places, wh^^ there are no Ministers: for otherwise, cer^ainly this blessing is
principally tied unto the Ministers calling; for it is not said of any private
men's calling any where in the Scripture* as it is here said of the Ministers.

If an Angel, an Interpreter come to a man and declare unto him his
righteousness, the^^ (mark the conexion) then will GOD ha^^ mercy on him, and
will say, Deliver him, etc. Whence comes this blessing? from this promise of
God. If then other callings will challenge ordinarily the same blessing, then
must they have the same promise. Besides, other Christians being private men,
though they be sanctified, and have a good measure of knowledge, yet have they
not the same spirit of discerning that godly Ministers have: nor can so fully
and truly judge, when a man has repented, when not; and therefore cannot so
truly pronounce the sentence of the Law or Gospel, nor have they ability
ordinarily by their good conference, and Christian counsel, to con^^rt a soul,
but to confirm one converted: but that power ordinarily belongs to the public
Ministry of the word, therefore it follows, that ordinarily they have not the
power to pronounce the sentence of binding or loosing upon any man: I confess,
in times or places, where no Minister can be had, God blesses the labors of
private men, that have knowledge, sometimes even for the converting of a man to
God, and for comforting him at the hour of death, and gives a virtue and power
to that sentence which they shall pronounce one upon another repentance: but as
this is extraordinary, and in the want of ordinary Ministers, so in that case a
private man of knowledge and godliness, is made a Minister for that time to
himself, or to another, even as a private man in cases of extreme danger,
when no magistrate is present, is made a magistrate himself to defend his own
life. So then as in want of a Magistrate, the sword of the magistracy is put
into the hand of a private man: so in the want of Ministers, the keys of the
Ministry are committed and put into the hands of private men, (as in days of
persecution) that then they may with comfort admonish and advise: and with
power pronounce mercy and forgiveness one unto another, upon their true
repentance. Yet always remember that in so doing, a private man is as a
Minister for that time, and in that case: but ordinarily, (and always in
settled Churches) this power pertains to the Ministry, and is theirs alone
by ordination; and to them belongs the promise and the blessing, that when
he has declared to a man his righteousness, then God will have mercy on
him. And thus we see also the blessing of God upon the function of the
Ministry, and conexed thereunto by the merciful dispensation of God. It
follows.

And will say, Deliver him that he go not down into the pit: for I have
rece^ued a reconciliation.

The fifth and last part of this description is, 5 Part the Commission.
the Commission and authority given unto him, which is so great, as never was
given to any creature, and is thus, when a Minister of GOD has declared unto
man his righteousness, has brought him to the state of grace, and God in his
favor has had mercy on him; then God says to the Minister, Deliver that
soul from hell, for I have pardoned him in Christ, I am reconciled to him.

In which words, authority is given to a Minister of God to redeem a man
penitent, from hell and damnation: not that he is the means of working out
this redemption, for that wholly and only is Christ himself; but he is Gods
instrument, and Christ's instrument, first, to apply those means unto him:
secondly, to pronounce his safety and deliverance when these means are used.
Here is the principal honor of all belonging to that calling: and it is the
greatest that ever was vouchsafed to any creature. Man (...) Angel: for it is
a plain Commission to go and deliver such a man from the power of hell, and
to redeem him into the state of Gods children, and to make him heir of
heaven: Angels never had this Commission* they are Messengers sent out for the
good of those whom Ministers have redeemed, Heb. 1. vlt.
and they have brought many comfortable messages unto them: but it was never
said to any Angel, Deliver that man that he go not down (...) the pit, as it
h^^r^ is said unto a Minister: nor any men but Ministers have this Co^mis^ion.
To some callings God says, work^ thou for man, build him houses, provide him
sustenance; to the Physician, heal that man, to the Lawyer, do that man
justice, to the soldier, fight for him, to the Magistrate, defend him, to the
King, govern him, and see that every one do his duty:^ to none but to the
Minister does he say, Deliver him that he go not down into the pit.

If this be so then for the use, first Ministers must learn here, Use 1 to
Ministers.
that if they will have the honor of Redeemers, then must they do the duty
of redeemers, they must pray earnestly for the people, for that is one means
whereby they redeem men. They must say with Samuel, God forbid that I should
cease to pray for you: 1 Samuel 12.
They must mourn for the impenitent, when they will not turn to God. So did
David his eyes gushed out with rivers of waters, Psalm, 119,
because men kept not Gods law. And Jeremy, who w^shed a fountain of water in
his eyes* that he might weep for the sins of the people* They must privately
confer, ^^site, admonish, and rebuke* and principally they must preach, and
that in such good manner, and in so diligent measure, as that they may redeem
and win souls, and the end that they must aim at, must be to win souls.
Some preach for fear of the law, to avoid censure or punishment, some for
fashion sake, that they may be like to others, some for ostentation sake, to
win credit and praise, some for ambition, to rise in the world: all these
forget their commission, which is, Deliver him from hell.

This should be the end of their preaching, to deliver a soul from hell, and
what should Commissioners do, but execu^e their Commission? High Com^issioners
are worthy to be low Commissioners, or rather* no Commissioners, if they will
not put it in execution. It is therefore lamentable to see, that some by not
prea^hing, some by vain preaching, show that they intend any thing, rather
then the winning of souls to God. Let then all good Ministers so preach, as
they may say with Esaias, Behold Lord here am I, and the children who^ thou have
given me. And that they may return their Commission thus: Whereas thou O Lord
gave me this people, and had me deliver them, that they go not down into
^ell, Lord I have done it, it is the thing my soul aimed at, with all my
desire and endeavor: and by thy mercy I have effected it accordingly.

And the rather must all Christian Ministers seriously intend the saving of
souls, inasmuch as Antichrist does so earnestly seek the destruction of
souls, by winning them to his synagouge. The Turk spares no labor, no cost,
to infect young children of Christians with his impure and blasphemous
superstition. The Pope and his vassals, (especially Jesuits) use al means,
devise many stratagems, spare no cost, nor labor, to seduce and inueagle young
men, and the best wits. Surely their care and policy herein is admirable, and
yet alas, when (like the Pharisees) they have compassed sea and land to make a
proselite, they make him like themselves, the child of hell. And they are so
far from having any Commission from God to do this, or any blessing
promised, as contrariwise GOD forbids them, and his curse lies upon them for
so doing.

Shall they be so diligent to destroy souls without a Commission, and incur
Gods curse for their labor, and shall not Christian Ministers, be much more
diligent to win and redeem souls, having so large a Commission for the
purpose, and so great a blessing promised thereunto?

In the next place, 2 Use for Hearers.
this doctrine has use to the hearers. First to let them see the excellency
of this calling, which has a Commission and power to redeem them from hell and
damnation, and what honor is due unto it, and to let the wicked man see (which
any way abuses either the persons or the function) how base and unthankful
men they are, to recompense evil for so great a good, and therefore no marvel
though evil do never depart from the houses and families of such men: and
further, to encourage all men to give themselves to God in this great calling,
for see here what they are, even the high Commissioners of God. We have in
our estate, a power delegated to certain men of worth, and it is called the
high Commission, because they have power to do great things, and that man
thinks himself happy, who can bring his son to this, to be thought fit to be
one of this Commission: but behold here a higher Commission, a Commission from
God, to redeem souls from the power of hell, and the devils claws, this is
indeed a high Commission, and so high as this, was never granted out of the
Court of heaven to any creature but to Ministers: they therefore are the High
Commissioners of the high God. Is it not then an honor and happiness unto thee
to bring thy son to this estate?

And lastly, this must teach all hearers, their duty to Gods word, namely, to
submit them selves unto it: for if the Minister have a Commission to redeem
thy soul, it must be by the word and holy discipline. Therefore thy duty is
to hear Gods word patiently, to submit thy self unto it, to be taught and
instructed, nay to be checked and rebuked, and to have thy sins discovered,
and thy corruptions ripped up. If thou would have thy cause succeed well, thy
Lawyer must discover the weaknesses of it, if thy body to be cured, thy
Physician must purge the corruption of it; So if thy soul be to be redeemed,
thy minister must see the weakness, and purge the corruptions of it, and though
his doctrine be harsh, and hard unto thy nature, and the discipline of the
Gospel seem rough unto thee yet must not thou rage and rebel against it, nor
hate, nor rail at his person, but submit thy self unto it, for it is the
message and Ministry of thy salvation: if otherwise, thou do indeed a
great wrong to the Minister, for thou frustratest his Commission, but alas, a
far greater to thy self, for thou frustratest thine own salvation.

FINIS.
THE SECOND Treatise of the duties and Dignities of the Ministry, by Master
Perkins.

To the right worshipful and Reverend Judges, Sir John Sauile Knight, one of
the Barons of his Majesty's Exchequer: and Sir Christopher Yeluerton Knight,
one of the Judges of his Majesty's Court of Kings bench, the late worthy Judges
of our Northeren Circuit. The spirit of wisdom, zeal and courage be
multiplied.
RIght worshipful, it is said in other Nations, and written in some of their
books, that there are three disgraces of the English Nation: The Ignorance, or
(that I may so call it) the Vnlearnednes of our Gentry and Nobility, the
Be^gery of our poor, and the Baseness of the body of our Ministry. The first
blot, our Nobility and Gentry have well wiped off, since the first days of
blessed Queen Elizabeth, partly by study at home, partly by travel abroad,
and I hope they will do it more and more: The second has been well l^ssened
by good laws of late, and wou^d be more, if the Execution were as good as our
laws be, and it were much honor to our Nation, and more to our Religion, if
it were quite taken away: for he that tells us there shall be poor ever with
us, Ma^h. 26, 11. Dent. 15.
says also, there shall not be a beggar amonst us; If there were no poor,
what should become of Charity: for it is charity to relieve poverty, not to
maintain beggary: Poverty may be a Cross, but it is no Curse: but beggary is
a fearful curse, threatened on the enemies of God: and David says not, Psalm.
109, 10 Psalm. 37, 25.
be never saw a righteous man's child poor, but that he never saw him beg
his bread. The daily cries in our streets, cry for yet further reformati^n
hereof, that the impotent poor may be sufficiently provided for, that he
need not, and the s^urdy beggar compelled to work, that he may not be
suffered to beg. Happy you, or whosoever can have a hand, in effecting this
blessed w^rke, we, who can do little else shall pray for it, and for them
that labor in it. But now f^r the third, I fear none but the very hand of
God, can wipe out that stain from our Church: The bas^nes of the general body
of our Ministry, whence is it, but either from the vnworthin^sse or poverty
thereof: and the unworthiness thereof, whence is it but from the poverty, and
base maintenance of our Ministry, which was once robbed by the Abbeys, and
after worse by some in our own State: and Popery that stands so much upon Non
dimittitur peccatum nisi restituator ablatum, yet for all that, would not
restore unto the Church her tenthes again. But as Popish Abbeys stole them, so
a popish state kept them, and to their shame some of th^se good Professors of
our Religion, have restored such as were in their bands, and there is hope that
all our Professors, (unless they care not to be accounted hipocrits) will make
some conscionable restitution. We do not crave that they would with Zacheus
restore ^oure^old (though it is apparent, Luke, 19, 8, etc.
that the Tenthes were got from us in old time, by most false and forged
Cauillations) we only crave our own, we would ask no more, nor willingly
take less: for our whole duty is still required, then why should not our
whole due be paid. And yet that the world may learn of us contentednes, as
well by our practice as our doctrine, we would for the present, take in good
part, and rest contented with a part of our own, and some competent portions
out of the Impropriations, (proportioned to the quantity ^f the charge
imposed, and the gifts and pains required) would for a time be a reasonable
satisfaction to our Ministry, until our state found it self, either better
enabled, or more straightly tied in Conscience to full restitution. But as I
said, this is a work of God himself, f^r if man could do it, so many
Parliaments would not have slipped it, but some of them would have ete^nized it
self, with this honorable name to all posterities. The Parliament that
restored Impropriations, but till that, or some other course (as good) be
taken, it is both unseasonable, and unreasonable to complain of the Ignorant,
or to c^aue a learned Ministry. For shall the Oxes mouth be mousled, 1 Corinthians. 9, 7, 9, 14.
which treads out the corn, or shall a man go to war at his own cost? and
has not God ordained (mark it is his Ordinance) that those who teach the
Gospel, shall live of the Gospel? But alas, how shall the Ministry of England
live of the Gospel, when my small experience can show, that in one Corner of
one County of this Kingdom, wherein there are some 150. parishes, The
East Riding of the County of York.
or parochial Chappells, almost a 100. of them, (if not a full 100) are
Impropriate, and amongst them I can show the most parishes have but 10. pound
or thereabouts, some 8. li. some 6, li. some 5, li. some 4, pound, some not 4,
pound yearly living for the Minister, and those impropriations worth some 300,
pound, many 200, pound, almost all 100, pound, per an: yea there is one worth
400, pound, per an: where there were but 8, pound left for the Minister, until
of late with much ado, 10, pound more was obtained for a preacher, and so
there is out of 400, pound, 8, pound shared for a Minister, and 10, pound
carved for a preacher, in that parish where there are 2000, Communicants. Of
all the rest, the Crown has some 100, pound rent, or not so much, and the
remainder of 280, pound (being a rich living, for a worthy learned Minister, a
competent living for 2, and more then some 7, painful and able Ministers
(...)) I know not what becomes of it, unless it go to the feeding of Kits
and Cormorants. Are not these goodly livings for learned men, and may not we
expect a learned Ministry, where there is such maintenance? and I heartily
wish that other countries, be not able to show the like Presidents* have the
rather made relation hereof, that our high Court of Parliament, may see how
great cause they have, to go forward with that motion already by them made,
for the establishing of a learned Ministry. But if they bring it not to
pass, what then remains, but to hope that the great God of heaven, will put
into the heart of the God on earth, our noble King (into whose hands he has put
the sword of sovereign authority) an irreuocable and irresistable, resolution
to execute his supreme power, for the reformation of this evil, which (as
Master Perkins says in this treatise) may well be called the Kings evil, for
it will hardly be healed, but by the will and powere of a king. In the mean
time, this Treatise of that worthy man, may be a motive to our zealouse
professors, who have any impropriations in their own hands, to excite and
provoke them to a conscionable restitution, in whole or in part, as their
estates may bear, or their conscience shall move them. For herein are laid
down and mixed together, both the duties to be done by faithful Ministers,
and the Dignities due unto them for their duties: and so seeing the dignities
of that calling to be most honorable, and the duties so chargeable, it cannot
but grieve their Christian hearts to see the maintenance so miserable.

This Treatise I first of all send to you, and under your names to the world,
and to you first, for as I am sure you loved the Author, and honored those
excellent gifts of God in him, so you cannot but accept this after birth of
his, (as a fatherless child for the fathers sake). And for my self, (to
conceal all personal and private respects) in the name of many thousands in
the Northeren Countries, I praise God for the good done in those parts, by your
painful courses, and religious care, not doubting, but if your selves, or the
like be employed there, to asist our Honorable and Religious Lord President,
that the multitude of Popish Priests there lurking, will be daily lessened,
the number of painful preachers augmented, Popery put d^wne, and the Gospel
maintained more and more. Which blessing God grant to that and all other
Countries of this Kingdom, for his mercies sake: and give unto you and all
others in your place, the spirit of courage and constancy, in these declining
days, that being faithful in your great charges, unto the end, you may
receive the Crown of life: for which he heartily prays, who will ever rest

Your Worships in the Lord, W. Crashawe.

A TREATISE OF the dignity and duty of the Ministry.
Esaias 6.5. Then I said, woe is me, I am undone, for I am a man of pollut^d lips
and dwell in the midst of a people of polluted lips: for my eyes have seen the
king and Lord of hosts.

6 Then flewe one of the Seraphins unto me, with an hot coal in his hand.

7 Which he took from the alter with the tongues: and touched my mouth and
said, Lo this has touched thy lips, and thy iniquity shall be taken away,
and thy sin shall be purged.

8 Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying whom shall I send, and who shall
go for v^^^hen said I, here am I, send me: and he said go.


IN the five former Chapters are contained such Sermons, as the Prophet had
made under Vzziah king of Judah: At this Chapter begin such as he preached in
the reign of Iotham, and so forward: But before he either preach or prophecy
of any thing, in King Iothams days, or his successors, the Lord in this
Chapter gives a new commission to the Prophet, and a new confirmation to this
calling: the old king in whose days Esayah was first called being now (...),
and an other succeeding him, God with the new king, renews the calling and
commission of the Prophet: wherein God does not give him another calling, for
one calling to the office of the ministry is sufficient: but he confirms the
calling formerly given, by repeating and ratifying it. And this God did to
Easy, not as he was an ordinary, but an extraordinary Prophet: for ordinary
Ministers need no renouation of their calling, nor any new signs of
confirmation, but extraordinary Prophets, who come in extraordinary manner, and
to do many extraordinary works, God in his wisdom will have their calling
confirmed, again, and again, and that by very extraordinary means. Out of
which practice of the Lord, we learn, how great cause we have to doubt those
men to be either fantastical or worse, who pretend extraordinary callings in
these days, and yet scarce can show us any good signs of an ordinary, much
less of an extraordinary motion: for if in those days, when such courses were
more common, God will have his extraordinary prophets caling to be renewed and
confirmed, again and again, then certainly in these days, we may justly
require, more and more, wonderful signs of an extraordinary calling before we
believe it: and if God himself was so careful to satisfy his Church in those
days of the vocatio^n of his Prophet, surely ye Church in these days has
much more cause to doubt in such cases, and to require many and extraordinary
signs, before it acknowledge any such extraordinary calling: These men therefore
offer much wrong to the church, and deserve both the censure thereof, and the
sword of the Magistrate, who dare so boldly offer and obtrude to the Church
their own fancies and dreams, as extraordinary motions of Gods spirit. This is
the occasion and coherence.

This Chapter has two parts, first, the means of his confirmation, from the
beginning to these words: secondly, the confirmation it self, from these words
to the end: the me^ne^ of his confirmation is a vision he saw from heaven, of
certain holy Angels appearing and speaking to him, in the first 4. verses. In
the confirmation, which follows in these words, are three points.

1 The effect of the vision, which it wrought in the Prophet, it caused him
fear, it astonished him, and cast him down: in the fifth verse.

2 His Consolation, and raising up again after his fear, in the 6. and 7.
verses.

3 The renewing of his Co^^ssion again, from thence to the end. The fear and
astonishment of the Prophet, is described,

1 By the signs, of which are two;

1 A note of exclamation, woe is me.

2 By a note of extreme deiection in himself, I am undone.

2 By the causes of it, which are also set down to be two:

1 He was a man polluted, and dwelt amongst people polluted.

2 He had seen the Lord, Then said I, woe is me, I am undone.

The first point in order is, the fear and ecstasy, into which the Lord d^oue
this holy Prophet, which the Lord did not in his anger, but in his love unto
him, not for a punishment of sin, but as an evidence of his further love: for
the intent and purpose of God, in striking this fear into him, was to make him
to be a true prophet, and a fit messenger for himself. It may seem a strange
course, which God takes to confirm and raise up his servant in zeal and
courage to strike him into an extreme fear, even to astonish and amaze him*
and yet we see it is the course which the Lord takes: out of which practice of
the Lord, we learn this doctrine: That al true Ministers, especially such a^
are deputed to the greatest works in his church, must ^e first of all stricken
into a great fear, (...) consideration of the greatness of their ^^nction, yea
into an amazeme^t and astonishment, in the admiration of Gods glory and
greatness, whose room they occupy, and whose message they bring, and the more
they are afraid and shrin^, so it be under the contemplation of Gods majesty,
and their own weakness, the more likelier it is that they are truly called of God,
and appointed for worthy purposes in his church: but he that steps to this
function without fear, he may thrust in himself, but its doubtful whether he
be called of God, as here ye Prophet was: Nor is it so here alone, but every
where, when God called any of his servants, to any great work, he first drove
them into these fears and amazements, as is evident Exodus 3.11. and. 4.10.13.
in Moses, in Jeremy. 1 6.7.
Jeremy, in Act. 9.6. etc.
S. Paul and others. The reason of this calling of the lord is plain: namely,
because man's nature is always ready to take enough and too much unto it self
God therefore in his wisdom puts a bridle unto the corrupt nature of man, and
astonisheth it, lest it presume too much and take too much upon it self: Again
a Minister is to preach unto the people fear and reverence of the Lord: bu^
how can he do so to others, when he hat^ not tied the Lord in his own
conscience, nor was ever cast down in admiration of Gods glory and Majesty:
And lastly, the Ministry is a high and excellent cal^ing (especially the office
of extraordinary Prophets in the old testament) and is therefore subject to
pride, and to be ^uft up with self^-conceits* and therefore ^eacheth the
Apostle to Timothy, that a Minister may not be a young scholar, 1. Tim. 3.6
least he (...) puffed up, and fall into the condemnation of ^he wicked: giving
us to understand, that it ^s the peculiar danger of the calling to have high
conceits of themselves, because of the height and dignity of their function.
Therefore to prevent this inconvenience, God in mercy appoints that all his
true Ministers, shall have some means (...) other, to be cast down even to
nothing in themselves, and shall be driven unto such fears and amazements, at
sight of their own weakness, as they shall ^hrowe down themselves at
Christ's ^eete, and denying themselves wholly, shall acknowledge that they are in
him whatsoever they are; and do rely, and trust only on his grace and help.

The use of this doctrine, as it is for all Ministers, so specially for us
which live in the University: we live as it were in a Seminary, and many of us
are hereafter by Gods grace to be framed to the Ministry, and some of us
already are. Now here we have many occasions to be puffed up in selfe-conceits:
we see our selves grow in time, in degrees, in learning, in honor, in name
and estimation: and to many of us God gives good portions of his gifts: what
are all these, but so many baits to allure us to pride, and vain opinions of
our own worths* but let us remember the end we aim at, is not humane, nor
carnal: our purpose is to save souls, 2. Cor. 11.4
Then the weapons of our war raust not be carnal, as pride, vainglory, and
self-conceit. If therefore we ever look to be made instruments o^ Gods glory
in saving of souls, then a^ the first set we not before our eyes the honor,
but the danger of our calling, and humble we our selves under the mighty hand
of our GOD, that he may exal^ us in his due time: and let us be content that
God give any occasion or means to pull us down, either by outward cross, or
inward temptation: and let us rejoice, when we are thereby so far cast down,
that we cry out in the astonishment of our spirits, as the Prophet here: Woe is
me. I am undone: but otherwise if we will needs follow the swinge of our
proud natures, and trust in our own ability, gifts, and learning, let us
know, we use carnal weapons in a spiritual warfare. And let us be assured
the Lord will work no great work in his Church by our Ministry: we may
raise our selves in worldly estimation, and work out our own purposes, but we
shall do little in the salvation of souls: for those men do pronounce the most
powerful blessings on other men's souls, and speak the best words of comfort
to other men's consciences, which they oftenest say unto themselves. Woe is me,
I am undone.

Furthermore, whereas the Prophet at this Vision and Revelation of Gods glory
unto him, cries out of himself, Woe is me, I am undone: being words of
extreme fear and astonishment, and of so low a deiection as is a degree
toward desperation (if it had gone forward): let us learn that the Prophet
held not in his judgment the doctrine of Intercession of Angels and Saints
for particular men, for if he had, he need not at the sight of Gods majesty,
forthwith to have cried out, Woe is me, I am undone, but he might have stayed
himself awhile in this cogitation, I will desire Moses, Samuel, or David, to
pray to this glorious God for me, or here are holy Angels of the Seraphins here
present, they see in what fearful case I am, I will pray to them to speak to
this glorious and mighty Lord for me, that I perish not in this fear: but he
instantly seeing the Lord appear in Majesty, and fearing his just wrath,
(being guilty of his own corruptions) without any hope or expectation, or as
he seems, without the lest cogitation of help or assistance from any
creature, he cries out, I am undone.

Lastly, whereas he exclaimeth, Woe is me, I am undone: being words of a soul
humbled and dejected, and hereby shows himself to be in that case, which a
poor sinner is, when the preaching of the law has humbled him, by showing him
his sins and his extreme danger by them. We may learn, that to be called
to the Ministry, is to be as it were converted and regenerate: and that when a
man is called thereunto, it is a work little less then that whereby God
calls a sinner from his sin, to the state of repentance: for as God first
casts down the sinner, before he give him grace, or any feeling of his love
in Christ: so here, he first abaseth and casts down the Prophet in the
sight of G^ds Majesty, and his own misery, before he honor him with a
Commission to preach peace unto his people. Which I note against those men,
which hold it so ordinary a matter to enter into the Ministry, as many do,
which take it upon them in wordly and politic purposes. And some of a better
rank, which think if a man have learning, degrees and age, he is sufficiently
qualified for that calling. But alas, this is not all; there is a greater work
to be wrought then so, he must be humbled and cast down, in sight of the
greatness of that calling, of the majesty of that God whose room he is to
execute, and of the unworthiness of himself to so great a work: he must be
resolved, that to call a man to the Ministry, is the greatest work that GOD
works in his Church, but the converting of a sinner, and calling him to the
state of grace: nay it is a work eue^ like unto it: for as a sinner in his
conversion, so he at his Vocation to that place, is often to cry out in the
amazement of his soul, Woe is me I am undone. As therefore they are foulie
deceived, which think any holiness or sanctification, can sufficiently
qualify a man without learning, so are they no less which think all outward
complements to be sufficient without this work, which here was wrought in the
holy Prophet. Thus we see the fear and astonishment of the Prophet. It
follows; For I am a man of polluted lips.

Now follow the causes of his fear, which are two. The first is, his own
pollution and sinfulness, and the sinfulness of his people: his own he
freely confesses in these words; I am a man of polluted lips: that is, I am
a miserable and sinful man, and therefore I fear and tremble to stand in Gods
presence: nay, I dare not look upon the Lord, for my sins. But it may be
demanded, how could the Prophet say thus truly, for he was a holy man, and
justified in Gods presence, by his true faith in the Messiah, and sanctified by
repentance: can a man justified and sanctified, say, he is a man polluted? I
answer, It is doubtless, he was so, he therefore complains here not of any
great and enormous sins, which he had committed to the public scandoll of
the Church, but first of the corruption of his nature; which in him as in all
me^ is a very sea of iniquity, and which always appears the more, the nearer a
man comes to God and therefore did now most apparently discover it self in the
Prophet, when he was in the presence of the Lord himself. Secondly, he
complains of some actual sins of his life, and it is more likely of some
sins of omission, then of Commission: for we find not that the Prophet was
ever touched with any great sin, and where we know it not, we are in charity
not to imagine it. So that it ts most probable, he complains of some smaller
faul^s, or negligences in his Ministry: as not preaching to the people at
some time when he ought, or not preaching so willingly, or cheerfully as he
should, or desire to lea^e preaching, because the people were stubborn and
disobedient, or some impacience in his Ministry, when the people were
reb^llious and resisted his doctrine, which passion might the rather vex him
(as we read it did Jeremy) the Jews were so stubborn and stifnecked a
people: or it may be some want of zeal or forwardnes, these, or some such were
the cause of his fear: And the conscience of ^^ese makes him here cry out that
he canno stand in the sight of God. Where we le^r^e, first, what a tender
conscience godly Ministers must have above all men: ^am^ly, that they must make
conscience, (...) of the great and gross sins only, but even of the lowest
and least sins: and he m^st endeavor in his calling, not only to be clear of
great crimes, but as far as may be, to be free from the least appearances of
evil, and from the least negligences in his place, for a small fault in other
men is great in them, and that which may be some ways pa^donable in other
men, is no way in them: they must therefore watch over themselves most
carefully, and take heed to all their ways: and for this end is it, that a
Minister in godly wisdom must often deprive himself even of many things
(which it may be, lawfully he might use) least his liberty be an occasion
of evil to others: and must abstain from the least sins, least even they be
blemishes to his calling, and burdens to his conscience. And hence is it, that
a Minister cannot be too careful in his calling, in his words, diet, company,
recreation, apparel, gestures, and in his whole carriage, because little sins
are so great in them. Especially Ministers here learn the Apostles Lesson, to
be instant in season and out of season: to preach and exhort, to comfort and
rebuke publicly and privately: to good, to bad: when it is well taken, when it
is ill taken, when they willingly receive it, and when they stubbornly resist
it, when they commend him and reward him, and when they rail at him, and
persecute him for it: thus must he be diligent in season and out of season, for
the least negligence in his duty, or omitting the least opportunity of doing
good, will when God visits his conscience, be a burden and vexation to him, as
it was here to the Prophet.

And furthermore, if these small sins thus afflicted the Prophet, then alas
what is to be thought of those Ministers, who make no conscience of foul and
scandalous sins? how shall Symonie, Incontinencie, Usury, inhospitality,
covetousness, Ignorance, Idleness, careless Nonresidencie, how shall these
(I say) and other like greiuous crimes oppress and burden the soul, when as
the smallest sins do so affright this holy man? Surely, when God shall
visit the^, their states will be most fearful, nor, shall any man's case be
so miserable, as an unconscionable Ministers: And though now such loose and
licentious Ministers seem to live in Iolitie, and without any fear, yet when
God shall appear unto their consciences, then will they cry out in fearful
anguish, Woe is me, I am undone. And again, if these small faults so
affrighted this holy Prophet, and burdened his conscience, then what pitiful
consciences have those Ministers, whose daily negligence, and unconscionable
carelessenesse in their places is such, as all men speak of, and yet they are
not touched: surely, these me^ are not of so tender consciences as the Prophet
was: and either the Prophet here was much more nice then needed, or* else these
men will prove to be in a miserable estate.

Lastly, let Ministers of care and conscience, be here comforted in the examble
of the Prophet: who is there, but may find imperfections and blemishes in
himself, which will often make him cry out; Woe is me: but let not that
discomfort the^, but rather rejoice, that they can see their own weakness, as
the Prophet did here: If they have cause to exclaim against themselves, they
are not alone, as was this, and all other holy Prophets case before them. In
having imperfectio^s in themselves, they are no more miserable then the Prophet
was: but let the^ labor to be as blessed in seeing and complaining of
themselves as he was: And let every Minister assure himself, that the more
he makes conscience, even of the least sins of all, the more he resembles
the ancient holy Prophets, and the more likely is he to work effectually in
his Ministry. For his duty is to work in his people a conscience, not of
great sins only, but even of all: but how can he do that to them, if he
have not first of all done it in himself? hence it is therefore, that godly
Ministers find fault with themselves, when other men cannot, and cry out
against themselves, for their pollution (with the Prophet here) when no other
man can accuse them of the least crime: nay, when others do magnify God for
his graces on them, and praise their gifts, and commend their good lives, even
then do they condemn themselves, and exclaim against their own corruptions:
and their own smallest negligences, or omissions, are great wounds to their
consciences: and their last sins, and their most pardonable infirmities, are
sore burdens unto them: for of all men in the world, a godly Minister is a
man of the most tender conscience.

Hitherto has the Prophet complai^ed generally of his pollution.

Particularly, he exclaimeth against the pollution of his ^ippes. But why will
some say, complains he of the pollution of his ^ippes, rather then of his
heart, or his hands, or any other part of him? were they not all polluted? yes,
all in some measure: and was not he grieved at them all? yes assuredly, we
must grant that also. But the reason is, he was a Prophet, his duty was to use
his tongue, the practice of his calling consisted in the use of his tongue: for
a Minister is an Interpeter, as he is called, Job. 33.23. that is, the peoples
to God by prayer, and Gods to the people by preaching: he is Gods mouth, and
the peoples mouth: so that the tongue of a Minister is that part of his body,
which is to be used as a principal instrument of Gods glory, and more to the
setttng forth of his honor then any other: Now every man is to be tried what
he is by his calling, rather then by any other accidental or collateral
courses: therefore the honor or dishonor of a Minister, is the use or the
abuse of his tongue: and his comfort or discomfort is the well using, or not
using of it. The Prophet therefore here affrighted at Gods presence, and
therefore retyring into himself, presently his conscience checkes him for his
most proper sins: namly, for some fault or negligence in his Ministry, (which
is the proper sin of that calling) and therefore is it that he exclaimeth
against the pollution of his lips: out of which practice of his we may
learn;

First, the vanity of the Papists, who magnify the merits of holy men's
works: for if this holy Prophet, a man truly justified, and extraordinarily
sanctified, yet durst not stand before God in this little appearance of his
glory, notwithstanding all his zeal, and courage, and conscience, and pains,
and sufferings in his function, but was cast down so far, from a conceit of
his own worth, that he cried out; Woe is me, I am undone. How then can we
who are no better, but rather worse then he, stand before GOD in the day of
Judgment, in the great appearing of his infinite justice and glory? Rather
doubtless, as here the smallest pollution of his lips, and negligence in his
calling, drove him out of all conceit of merit, when once he came into the
presence of GOD: so the due consideration of our so many and foul pollutions
above his, should beat down all proud conceits of our own goodness, when
we appear before GOD. It is therefore to be feared, that the Papists, who
thus magnify their own merits, do seldom or never enter into earnest
consideration of their own infirmities, and do seldom present themselves in
the presence of Gods Majesty. For if they did, then doubtless the least sight
of their least pollution, would make them far from ever thinking of their
own merits.

They also tell us, of works of superrerogation, but it seems here, this
holy Prophet had none of them. And they teach, a man may in this life perfectly
fulfill the Law, but who can do it, if not Ministers? And what Ministers, if
not extraordinary Prophets? And yet Isaiah (the first and chief of them)
exclaimeth here in pitiful manner against his pollutions: Doubtless, if the
Papists would cease flattering ^or^mselues, and not examine their consciences
by their own pleasing corruption, but present themselves in the face and
presence of Gods Majesty, they would be far from these conceits.

In the next place, whereas the Prophet complains of the pollution of his
lips: As of the peculiar sin of his place: Ministers are here taught, to
avoid that sin above all other; and to labor in that duty above any other:
for the doing of it, is his most comfort: the want of it is his most vexation:
his tongue is the Instrument given him to honor God, if he use it well, it
yeeldes him comfort, more then any other duties. But if he use not, or abuse
his tongue, the pollution of his lips will be the heauiest burden of all:
they therefore are greatly deceived, who think a Minister to discharge
sufficiently his duty, though he preach not, if he keep good Hospitality*
and make peace amongst his (...), and perform other works of charity and
good life: for if a Minister have not this virtue, he has none: If he preach
not; If he^ abuse his lips: or if he open them not, he has no conscience,
nor can have any comfort, for that is the principal duty of a Minister
(though all the other be required to make ^him complete): the want of them
may condemn him before men, but it is the pollution of his lips, which
presently checkes him before GOD, as we see here in this holy Prophet: The
Conclusion then is to every Minister, that if he had all the virtues and good
properties, that can commend a man in the world, yet if his lips be polluted,
either by not preaching, or by negligent, idle, or careless preaching, this
pollution will so stain his conscience, and so burden him in the presence of
God, that the time will come (notwithstanding all his other good qualities) he
will cry out in far more pitiful manner then here the Prophet does; Woe is
me, I am undone, because I am a man of polluted lips. It follows;

And I dwell in the midst of a people of polluted lips.

The Prophet not only complaine^ of his own pollution, but of his peoples
also, amongst whom he lived, and this he does for these causes: First, to teach
us, that it is the Ministers duty to confess, not only his own sins, but
the sins of his people, and to complain of them to God: for as he is the
peoples Interperter to God, he must not think it enough to put up their
petitions, to unfold their wants, and to crave relief for them at Gods hand,
but he must further take knowledge of the sins of his people, and make both
public and private confession of them to God: and the more particularly he
can do this, the better: and this he is to do, both for the peoples good, and
for his own also, because it cannot be but that the sins of his people, are
in some sort his: for this is the peculiar danger of the Magistrates and
Ministers calling, that generally the sins of their people are theirs: I
mean, that they are accessarie to the sins of their people, either by
provoking them by their evil (...), or by not reproving, or not hindering or
suffering, or winking, or covering and concealing, or not punishing them, or
not carefully enough using means to prevent them: by all which means and many
more, it comes to pass, that the peoples sins are the Ministers by
communication: so that as well for his own sake, as theirs, he is to confess
to God their sins, as well as his own.

Now if a Minister must confess his peoples sins, then it follows
consequently, that he must know them, and take notice of them, for else he
cannot confess them. And this is one cause why the holy Ghost commaundes a
Pastor to know his flock. Pro. 27.23
He must not only have a flock, and know which is his flock: or have a
general eye over it, but he must have a particular and distinct knowledge of
the state of it, and the more particular the better. And if the Minister ought
to know his peoples sins, then it follows, first that it is best for a
Minister to be present with his people, that so he may better know them and
their state: and certainly if it be a Ministers duty to confess to God the
pollutions of his people, then wilful and careless nonresidency and all
absence, without just and conscionable causes, must needs be a foul and
fearful sin. For how could Isayah have confessed he dwelt in the midst of a
people of polluted lips, but that he dwelt amongst them. Nay says the Prophet,
he dwelt in the midst among them, indeed well may he know and confess his
peoples pollutions, that dwelles in the midst amongst them.

Again, if the Minister be to confess his peoples sins, and therefore must
needs know them, then it follows also that they must discover and confess
them unto him, or else it is not possible he should perfectly know their
estate: the want of this is a great fault in our Churches, for howeuer we
condemn Auricular confession, as a very policy in the deuisers, and as a
rack to the consciences of poor Christians, yet we not only allow, but call
and cry for that confession, whereby a Christian voluntarily at all times may
resort to his Pastor, and open his estate, and disburden his conscience of such
sins, as disquiet him, and crave his godly assistance, and holy prayers:
great blessing and comfort does doubtless follow them that use this godly
practice, and the want of it, is cause that a Minister cannot discern the
state even of his own flock, nor can complain to God of their pollutions, and
confess their sins so particularly as would be good both for him and them.
Secondly, the Prophet couples together his own pollution, and the pollutions
of his people, as the adiuva^t, or helping cause and the effect: For the
pollution of a people, helps forward the pollution of a Minister, and the
worse people they are, the worse do they make him, though he be otherwise never
so good: For even the Prophet, though called of God himself, and justified and
sanctified, and a man of extraordinary grace, yet dwelling in the midst of a
people so stubborn and disobedient, as the Jews were, he was something
touched with their pollutions: Ministers (even the best) are men, and this
comes to pass by reason of the corruption of their nature, as they are men:
the nature of which corruption, is to apprehend any evil where ever it can be
found, and to partake with it: regeneration qualifieth and abates this
corruption, but takes it not away perfectly in this life: whereby it comes to
pass, that a Minister, living amongst evil people, cannot but be somewhat
stained with their pollutions, of what sort soever they be; insomuch as it is
often seen, that one known to be otherwise disposed of himself, is found to
be disposed to this or that evil, by living amongst a people so disposed. And
again, that a Minister in such a place, and amongst such people, free from
such and such sins, removed to another place, is there found more or less
tainted with them, because they abound amongst the people: and yet further,
that a Minister, known to be faithful, painful and zealous, and coming to a
disobedient, stubborn, froward, or profane and dissolute people, his faith is
weakened, his zeal and courage abated, Gods graces in him dulled, and much
decayed: godly Ministers do daily complain hereof, and experience every where
shows it too true.

Out of this, we may learn something both for our instruction, and for our
conversation.

For our instruction, it here appears how wicked and wretched the corruption
of our nature is, which cannot but receive some contagion from the pollution of
those with whom we live: for this is so, not only in them who carry a loose
hand over themselves, but even in such as look most narrowly unto their steps:
as we see here in this holy Prophet, who was a man of more then ordinary
sanctification: how little cause therefore has any man to extol nature? and
how much less cause the schoolmen and some other Papists, to give the least
commendation to our pure naturals: for if nature rectified by grace, be so
hardly kept within compass, alas how outrageous and perverse is it, when it
reigns without controlment?

And for our further instruction, here we may see of what a creeping and
incroaching nature sin is, which like a secret venom in the natural body,
so it in the pollitique body restes not in the place, or pa^tie poisoned, but
closely creepes and diffuseth it self into every part and member of the whole:
it creepes from man to man, yea from an evil man to a good, from the worst man
to the best: from profane men, to godly Ministers: and as from public persons
(as Magistrates and Ministers) it descends visibly, and the example of their
evil life is palpably scandalous: so from the people to the Magistrate or
Minister, it creeps closely, and ascends in more secret and insensible
manner, yet in the effect it is too sensible: for it is always seen, that they
are something touched with their peoples pollutions: sin is not only as a
poison spreading from the heart to all parts, from the Minister to the people:
but as a gangreue, if it begin in the foot, will without speedy prevention
spread privily to the heart: so sin shows it self, even from the people to
the Ministers: So great cause is there for all men to stop sin in the
beginning, to break it in the egg, to give water no passage, no not a little:
for let this gangreue begin at the feet, it will not rest till it be in the
heart.

For our confirmation we are here taught, first if a Minister, by reason of
the corruption of his own nature, and the creeping nature of sin, is in such
danger to be stained with the peoples pollutions, then let all Ministers
desire, and use all good means to dwell with a people as little polluted as
may be: otherwise let him assure himself to be polluted with them, which is
both a great discomfort to his own conscience (as here it was to the Prophet)
and disgrace to his profession: for if it be a duty of every good professor of
religion, to keep himself unspotted of the world, Iam. 1.17.
then how much more is it the ministers duty so to do, and how foul a stain
is it to the honor of his calling, to be polluted in the common pollutions of
his people?

It may be therefore good counsel to all godly Ministers in the placing and
disposing of themselves, not to enquire only how good a living such and such a
place is, how well seated, how healthful, and beneficial it will be, (which
are alas the common and almost the only questions now adays) but principally,
to regard what a people they be: and how affected, amongst whom they are to
live: if godly and well disposed, or at least tractable and gentle, and willing
to be taught, then less to regard other incommodities: but if wicked, and
profane, or (which is worse) stubborn, froward, and intractable, then less
to regard the greatest commodities: and certainly if this point be well
considered of, and how bitter it has been in the end to many who have not
regarded it, it will appear, that this is the best encourageme^t or
discouragement, the greatest commodity, or discommoditie, and the best reason,
either to win a man to a place, or to draw him from it, how good soever it
be otherwise: they that neglect this duty and are led (or misled rather)
with carnal and worldly respects, how just is it upon them when they are made
to cry in the sorrow of their soul, Woe is me, I dwell in the midst of a
people of polluted lips.

And here such Ministers as have poor livings, but good people, let them not
faint nor be discouraged, they have more cause to bless God, then to be
grieved, for doubtless they are far better then those who have great
livings, and an evil people.

But as for those to whom God has been so good, as to bestow upon them,
competent livings, and a willing and well disposed people, let them think
themselves double blessed of God, and treble bound to honor God, and to do
good in his Church: and if such men go not before their brethren in all
Ministerial care and duty, their fault is above all men's, and they make
themselves unworthy of so great mercies. Again, if that a polluted people,
pollutes their Minister, here is a good warning for all ministers to be wary
and choice of their company, with whom they will most privately converse: for,
as on the one side they may not retire themselves into solitariness, nor
sequester themselves from all society with their people, (which is rather a
Cimical and fantastical, then any way a religious practice: so of all men are
they to be most careful, that they do not loosely and lauishly bestow
themselves on al companies, as too many do in our Church, to the great scandell
thereof, who care not with whom they co^uerse, but all companies, all places,
all times, al sports and recreations, all meetings, all occasions, are one with
them: but alas what marvel, though such men keep not themselves unspotted of
the world, but prove too offensive to their calling: for seeing the best men
cannot live with the best people, but they shall receive some contagion from
them, how carefully ought ordinary Ministers to make difference of men and
meetings, times and places, and not diffusedly and carelessly to thrust
themselves into all: So doing shall they keep their calling from much reproach,
and preserve themselves from much pollution, which otherwise from their
polluted people, they shall be sure to receive.

And here people are to be admonished, not too sharply to censure their
Minister; though he be not so sociable with them all, as it may be many would
expect: for it co^cernes no man to be so wary of his company and his sports,
as it does the Ministe^: and if they would have comfort and honor by their
Minister, let them be ^areful into what recreations and company they draw or
desire him: for the more polluted the people are amongst whom he lives, the
more careful must he be to keep himself clear from their pollutions.

Lastly, here people are taught, not to be too sharp condemners of those
Ministers, whose conuersations are not so unblameable as were to be wished: for
if they live ill, generally the cause is, because they live amongst an ill
people.

Why then should they so much condemn them, for such faults* as wherein
themselves have made them faulty? I say not, but our Church, and state, and
Ministry, are to censure such men, (and it were good they did it more) but it
is against all reason the people should do so, whereas themselves are the cause
of it* For alas, if this holy Prophet was a man of polluted lips, because he^
dwelt with a people of polluted lips; what marvel then, though ordinary
Ministers be polluted with the common and universal pollutions of their
people: People therefore, are first of all to see that themselves be well
ordered and godly, and then justly may they complain, if the lives of their
Ministers be not agreeable* but otherwise, it is not possible without very
special grace of God, but that a minister shall be more or less touched with
those crimes which are the common faults of his people. And lamentable
experience daily lets us see, that where a people in a town is given to
drunkenness, there the Minister, is either so for company, or at least too
good a fellow: where a people are given to contention, there the Minister has
too many suites: where the people be popish, there the minister is too
superstitious: where the people be ignorant, there ye minister is no great
clark: where the people are given to any great sin, there the Minister
generally is not clear from the same pollution: and it is seen, that the best
Ministers and most careful of all, do complain bitterly of the pollutions of
their people: for that howsoever it may be they escape partaking with their
sins: yet they always find, at the least a dulling and decaying of Gods
graces in themselves, where the people are untoward and disobedient. If
therefore a Minister live with such a people, his case is pitiful and
dangerous, for he walks in ye midst of nets and snares, which are laid for
him on every side, and if he escape them (I mean, if he keep himself
unspotted, in the midst of a spotted and polluted people) his care and his
conscience is worthy both admiration and imitation, and himself is worthy
double honor, as being both a zealous minister and a holy man. But he whom God
has blessed with a good and tractable people, and well affected to the word,
and yet himself lives loosely and scandalously amongst them, a heavy burden
and a hard account, lies on that minister, and no rebuke is too rough, no
punishment too great, no censure too sharp for him. And if this holy Prophet,
fear so much the presence of God for his small pollutions, and yet lived
amongst so wicked and polluted a people, then what heaviness and horror, shall
be heaped on his soul, who cares not with how foul pollutions his life be
stained, and yet lives amongst a godly and well disposed people* And thus we
have the first cause of his fear, his own, and his peoples pollutions.

It follows.

And mine eyes has seen the King, and Lord of Hosts. THe second cause of the
Prophets fear and astonishment is, He saw the Lord, who then appeared in glory
unto him: not that he saw the substance of God (for that i^ invisible and
incomprehensible) b^t hi^ glory: Nor the fullness of (...) glory, for that
cannot be endured, but a glimse of it: nor that with the eyes of his body in
ordinary manner, but in a vision: wherein how far the eyes of his body were
used, neither the Prophet express^^, nor we can well conce^^e. The m^^ning
then is; ^n a vision he saw such glory and Maies^^^* as he know there was
an extraordinary presence of the Lord of hosts who is the King of glory, at
whose sight and thought of his presence, instantly his conscience i^ smitten
with fear, for his own infirmities, and the pollutions of his people.

Wherein let us first of all observe the connection and dependence of these two
causes, one upon another: for as they are both jointly the cause of his fear,
so one of the^ is in a sort the cause of another: he fears, because of his
own and his peoples sins, and because he saw the Lord: but why is he afraid
to see the Lord? the cause thereof is his own and their sins, without which
he would never have been afraid, but rather have glorified to see the Lord:
but his conscience checking him, for some defect of duty in his calling,
therefore he trembles at the least glimse of Gods glory. Here let us mark the
ground of his reason, which is this: That man that is in his sins, is not
able to stand in the presence of God: this is a general and certain truth,
and the reasons of it are; First, the contrariety betwixt God, and the nature
of sin, it being the only thing which offends him, and which prouokes his
wrath and just displeasure: therefore as a subject cannot but be much amazed,
if he hap to come into the kings presence, with any thing about him which the
king hates, or cannot abide to see: so a man cannot but be extreme astonished,
if he know himself to be in Gods presence with his sins, which Gods soul
hates.

Secondly, sin makes a man indebted to God: for as the Law tyeth him first to
obedience, so if he sin and fail in that, it binds him to punishment: and
the more a man sins, the deper is he in Gods debt. If then in this world, a
man willingly indures not the sight of him, in whose debt he is; what marvel,
though a poor sinner tremble at the presence of God, to whom he has forfaited
soul and all.

Thirdly, sin is that which provoke God to wrath: therefore a sinful man
fears the presence of God, as a traitor the face of the Prince or a
malefactor of the Judge. For these causes, a wicman endures not Gods presence.

Now Gods presence has diverse degrees. First, God is present to our
conscience, when we think of him. 2. He is present, when we name him, or hear
him named or mentioned by others, and these are the furthest of: Thirdly, God
is nearer unto us in the presence of his Ordinances, as his Word and
Sacraments, and public service in the Congregation: Fourthly, there is a most
apparent and sensible presence of God, which shall be at the last Judgment,
when all men shall stand before him in his immediate presence, to receive their
judgment. Now all these presences of God, are hateful to a wicked man: for
the first, a wicked man by his good will never thinks of God, and if sometime
a thought of God (like lighning) flasheth in his mind, presently he quenches
it, as being a most unwelcome and burdensome thought unto him: therefore says
David; The wicked is so proud, Psalm. 10.4.
he cares not for God: neither is God in all his thoughts: Nay, God himself
is so little thought on, by them, that they will willingly think of nothing,
that might bring GOD into their thoughts: as namely, Gods great works of his
wonderful Judgments: of whom the same Prophet says, in the same place; Psalm.
10.5
Thy Judgments are far above, out of his sight. As if he had said, he
labors to set them far from the eye of his mind, that he may never have
occasion to think of them, nor on God by them. That this is true for his
thoughts, I have endeavored thus to prove, by Gods own testimonies, because
thoughts cannot be discerned by man. But alas, for the second; that is, for his
words, that is too apparent in the sight of all men. For observe it, and you
shall never see a wicked man, by his good will have God in his mouth, (unless
it be to abuse his name, by swearing or blasphemy) nor willingly does he
hear any other man talk, or discourse largely of God, or of his greatness
and his Justice; but such talk is tedious and combersome unto him: and if he
cannot break it off with other discourse, then he sits as mute as a fish, and
inwardly either frets with anger, or is tormented with fear. All this is true
in Felix the Governor: who whilst Paul discoursed of righteousness, Acts.
24.26.
temperance, and Judgment to come: The Text says, in the mean time, he
trembled.

And for the third, we see daily wicked men, endure not Gods presence in the
Church: for nothing is more troublesome unto the^, then many Sermons, often
praying, and much receiving of the Sacrament: and therefore they never come to
the Church, nor receive ofter then the Law lays upon them: but further then
that, as the Psalmist says; Psalm. 14.4
they never call upon God. But as for the last, that they fear and abhor
above all, they wish in their heart it may never be. And therefore S. Paul
makes it a token of a true believer, and a holy man, 2. Tim. 4.8.
to love, and look for the appearing of Jesus Christ. Whereupon it follows,
that eue^ so it is a sign of a wicked man, to fear the last Judgment, and to
wish it might never be: And when it comes in deed, and they see they cannot
escape it, when then do they? Even cry to the mountains, Revel. 6.16
fall upon us: and to the hills, cover us, and hide us: from what? from the
presence of God: so fearful and so hateful is Gods presence to a sinful man.

Besides these, there is another way, whereby God shows his presence: and
that is, by extraordinary revelation of his glory immediately: which was usual
in the old Testament, as here to the Prophet, but now is not to be expected.
But how terrible that is to the sinful nature of man, appears in this place:
for if the Prophet a most holy man, whose conscience accused him, but of a few
and small sins, yet thus cries out, amazed and affrighted, at the revelation
of some part of Gods glory: alas, how would they be terrified with it, whose
consciences are burdened with great and grievous sins, and that without
repentance? Thus we see the ground of his reason, how true it is, that a man in
his sin, cannot cheerfully come, nor boldly stand in Gods presence. The use
of this Doctrine: First of all, let us see the monstrous presumption of such
ministers as dare venture rashly into the ministry, The first use for
Ministers*
to tread upon the holy ground of God, with vncle^ne f^ete; to handle the holy
things of God with unwashed hands: For what is it to enter into the Ministry,
but to enter into the chamber of presence of the great King? and should not a
man look about him, before he come there? Therefore if God rebuked Moses, for
stepping too hastily toward the Bus^e, where his presence is, Exodus 3.5
and said; Come not too near, for the place where thou stand i^ holy
ground: then how will God rebuke and check the consciences of such carnal
men, as carelessly and carnally rush into the Pulpit, and to Gods holy Table,
where God is present, in a far more excellent manner then he was in the
Bushe? And if they be so to be blamed, who enter into this calling without
fear and reverence, then how much more faulty are they, who being Ministers,
dare venture to preach, or minister the holy Sacraments, without holy and
private preparation, and sanctification of themselves: but rush upon them, as
upon common and profane actions? Whereas God is present there, in a most holy
and glorious manner: these men sure will say, the Prophet here was of too nice a
conscience: but fearfully and terribly shall God appear at last unto such
men, The 2. use.
as care not how they appear in his holy presence.

Secondly, this shows the reason of the practice of al Christian churches:
who use to sing before the Sermon and after: namely, not for Decorum only, and
to grace the action, but to sanctify and to humble our selves, because then
we come before Gods presence: they therefore do not think reverently enough of
God, and his presence, who do by their practice in any sort, The 3. use.
make way to the contrary.

Thirdly, we may here learn, the pitiful case of those ministers, who are so
presumptuous, as to exercise that holy function, and yet remain in their
sins without repentance: what do these men? they approach to the burning
Bush, with their shoes on their feet: that is, into Gods presence in their
sins: what shall come of it in the end? surely, that burning fire shall
consume the^? the least sins, and smallest negligences affrighted this holy
Prophet, when he should go into Gods presence: Psalm. 50.16.
But these men dare come into the Sanctuary of God; yea dare take Gods words
in their mouth's, and yet hate to be reformed, and do cast the glorious Word
of God behind their backs, which they preach to others with their mouths:
these men may wonder at this holy Prophets nicenes, or else all the world may
wonder at their profaneness. A little pollution of his lips, feared him to
come into Gods presence: but these dare do it, with eyes, ears, lips, feet,
hands, heart, and all polluted: their eyes polluted, with careless looking at
all vanities: their ears with hearing: and their lips with speaking, wanton
and wicked talk: their feet, with running into wicked company: their hands,
with practizing, and their hearts, with devising and consenting to all
wickedness.

This is the cause, why the labors of such men are almost unprofitable:
because they dare come into Gods presence in their sins. In many places of
our land, there is by Gods blessing much teaching, yet there is little
reformation, in the lives of the most: but contrariwise, some fall to Atheism:
some to Papisme: some into foul sins, not to be named amongst Christians.

Where is the cause? surely not in the Gospel: nor in our doctrine, nor in the
teaching of it; but one very principal cause is, many Ministers come into Gods
presence, unsanctified, and in their sins: not caring how loosely they live, in
the face of their people: and therefore God in justice, though he instanstly
smite not them, with visible vengeance for their presumption: yet he smites
the people, with spiritual blindness, that they regard not their Doctrine,
but look at their lives, and do rather follow the profaneness of the one,
then the holiness of the other. Ministers are such, in whom God will be
sanctified, therefore because they do not so, but dishonor him, by coming
into his presence in their sins: therefore he cannot abide them, nor give
any blessing to their labors.

All ministers therefore, as they would see any fruit of their Ministry, let
them first sanctify themselves, and cleanse their hearts by repentance, before
they persume, to stand up to rebuke sin in others: else let them not think,
that their golden words shall do so much good, as their leaden lives shall do
hurt: and they may hap to confirm men, that already are converted, but
hardly shall any such men, convert any souls from Popery or profaneness. And
it is a vain conceit for men to imagine, there is any force in eloquence, or
humane learning, to overthrow that sin in others, which rules and reigns in
themselves. Our Church, and all reformed churches, may make use of this
doctrine: for it is the glory of a Church to have their doctrine powerful, and
effectual for the winning of souls, therefore it concerns them, to take
order, as well that their ministers be godly men, as good Scholars, and their
lives inoffensiue, as well as their doctrine sound: or else they will find in
woeful experience, that they pull down as much with the one hand, as they
build up with the other.

But most nearly this doctrine touches ministers themselves: who must know,
their case is most fearful of all men's, if they come into Gods presence, in
their profaneness: for as no man is more honorable, then a learned and holy
Minister: so none more contemptible in this world, none more miserable for that
to come, then he that by his loose and lewd life, does scandalize his
doctrine: and let him assure himself, that for his presumption, in rushing
into Gods presence in his sins, he shall in this world, be cast out as
unsavory salt, and trodden down of men, Math 5.13.
with the foot of contempt: and in the world to come, he shall above all men
cry out, in most extreme torment of conscience; Woe is me, that my eyes must
see the King and Lord of hosts: and so because he would not in this world,
come into Gods presence in sanctification and holiness: he shall therefore in
fear and horror, be haled into the presence of Gods glory, at the last day:
there to receive the just sentence of their condemnation.

The fourth use for Ministers.
Lastly, all painful and godly Ministers may receive comfort, not to be
discouraged or driven from Gods presence, because of their corruptions or
infirmities, for we see it was the Prophets case: but let them still approach
in fear and reverence, and be so far from being driven from their duty,
because they being sinful men, dare not come into Gods presence without much
fear: as let them contrariwise be assured, that the more they tremble at Gods
presence here, the less shall they fear it at the last day: and when profane
and ungodly men, who in this world feared not to stand in Gods presence in
their horrible sins, shall cry to the Mountains, fall upon us, and hills
cover us, and hide us from the presence of God: then such Ministers as in this
world in fear and trembling, and always in repentance, did approach into Gods
presence: shall then look up, and lift up their heads, and shall say to the
holy Angels, and all the powers of heaven, help us, and hasten us to come into
the glorious presence of our God and Savior.

And thus we see the manifold use of this doctrine to our Church and Ministry.

Secondly, The second use against the Papists.
Inasmuch as here the Prophet in a conscience of his corruptions, fears and
cries out at the least apparition of Gods glory.

The vanity and false dealing of the Church of Rome, is here discovered, in
whose Lege^ds and stories of their Saints, nothing is more common then
apparitions from heaven, of Saints departed: of glorious Angels of the virgin
Mary, (and that so familiarly, as sometime she sang with ^he^ in their Cell,
kissed some of them, and let them suck her breasts). Nay, of God himself: and
especially of our Savior Christ Jesus: who they say, appeared (I know not how
often) to one man: namely, to Saint Francis: and appeared as he was crucified
with his wounds, and imprinting those wounds of his, in Francis his body,
which they say he bare all his life, and that they bled whenever he would
suffer them, which he always did on Good Friday, that he might be like to
Christ. This, and many more such, may you see in that fabulous and blasphemous
book, of the co^formities of Saint Francis.

But for the matter: are apparitions from heaven so ordinary in the popish
Church? how then came it to pass, that the greatest and holiest men in the
old Testament, were so amazed at the very apparition but of an Angel: as we
may see in the whole course of the Story? Some ran away, and hid
themselves: some covered their faces, some fell down flat on the ground: and
the Prophets ^ere cried out; Woe is me, I am undone: my eyes have seen the
King and Lord of Hosts. But in the Church of Rome, look the stories, that
Saint or Monk is no body that has not had some apparition: either of the
Virgin Mary, or some of the Apostles, or an Angel, or Christ Jesus appearing
and talking with them: and yet alas, Peter, James, and John, those 3. great
pillars, Gala. 2.9.
they were as good as beside themselves at the appearing of a little part of
the glory of Christ in his transfiguration. Mat. 17.6. and Luke. 9.33.


Either therefore must it follow that these men have no sin in them, which
dare and can behold Gods glory so easily, and so ordinarily, (which is
impossible): or rather which indeed is truth, it appears that these are but
deceitful fancies and forgeries of their own devise, to deceive the world,
and to magnify themselves before the eyes of the common people: for it is
first of all most false, that apparitions are so common as they make them, for
if they were, then are they more ordinary in the new Testament then in the old.
For whereas the scripture has one, their legions have 20. and whereas one,
namely Saint Paul, was once rapt into heaven, 2. Cor. 12
they have 20. that were rapt thither: And as that is false, so is it
impossible that any man clothed with flesh can endure an extraordinary
apparition of Gods glory, without extreme amazement, as is plain here in the
Prophet: who I hope was as holy a man as the holiest monk, that ever was. I
have noted this, that young Divines may be occasioned to look a little into
their fabulious legends, that so they may discover the false tricks, and
iuggling casts of that religion: which evil shifts it needed not, if it were of
God.

Thirdly, the people may here learn; First, 3 Use. to the people.
in that Gods presence is so glorious and fearful to man's nature, how
mercifully God has dealt with them, in teaching them not by himself, or by his
Angels from heaven, which they could never endure; but by men, who are like
themselves: and how vain and fond these men are, who would be taught from
heaven, and not by men, who are so full of wants. In the old Testament, when the
people received the law from Gods own mouth, it is said, they ran away and
cried out, why should we dye? if we hear the voice of God any more, Deuteronomy.
5.25 26.27.28
we shall dye: for what flesh ever hard the voice of the living God and
lived? therefore they said to Moses, Go thou near and hear, all that the Lord
shall say, and declare thou unto us, what God says to thee and we will hear
it, and do it. And then says the text, the Lord said, I heard the words of
this people, they have said well in all that they have spoken. And so, from
that day forward, God ordinarily taught his church by men like themselves; and
we see, that the beg^nning of it, was not in judgment, but in mercy unto the^.
It is is therefore the duty of all men, both to acknowledge this mercy of God,
in due thankfulness, and withal to remember, when they see infirmities in
Ministers, that they are but men, and that, if they had not the Ministry of
men, how hard it would go with them: considering, that the least measure of
Gods own presence, cannot be endured by any man.

2. Inasmuch as gods presence, is so glorious in it self, and fearful to our
nature, al men are taught to prepare themselves by holy prayer, 2. Use.
by humiliation, and confession of their sins and unworthiness, before they
come to Gods word or sacraments: for they come at that time into Gods presence:
they therefore are not to come in their security, nor in their ordinary sins
unrepented of, least God strike their consciences, with a sense of his
fearful displeasure: and make them cry out, upon far greater cause, then
here the Prophet did.

3. Use.
Thirdly and lastly, we learn here the different natures and properties of
sin and holiness: Sin, even the least sin, nay a very sinfulness of
nature makes a man afraid of Gods presence: That sin unrepented of does so,
appears in Adam, who as in his integrity, he spoke and conuersed even in a
familiar sort with God: so no sooner had he sinned* but he ran from God, and
hid himself: and that even the least sins not repented of, do so also,
appears in this Prophet, who being a holy man, yet his conscience being privy
to it self of some small omissions or negligences in his calling, he cries
out, he is undone because he sees the Lord of hosts. But contrariwise the
state of perfect holiness, and the want of all sin, makes a man bold in Gods
presence, and rather desirous then afraid to behold Gods glory, which shall be
most apparent at the last day: for when the wicked shall desire rather to be
covered with the hills, Reu^. 6.16
and ground to dust by the mountains, then to appear before the face of God:
Luke 21*28 ^ob 19 5 26.27.
then shall the Godly whose holiness shall then be perfect, look up and ^ift
up their heads, because their redemption is so nigh. And Job testifies of
himself, that he knows his redeemer lives, and that he shall stand before
him and look upon him with his eyes. Thus as guiltiness drives a man from
the Kings presence, but innocence makes him bold before him: So sinfulnes
makes a man avoid Gods presence, but holiness makes him draw near unto God,
and to rejoice in his presence.

Then for a conclusion of this point, let all men here learn the way to true
courage and boldness before God: namely to repent daily of their sins, and
labor to grow in true holiness: wealth nor wit, learning nor autho^itie can
do this for thee, but only a good conscience, which must be made good by grace
and by repentance: then shall thou rejoice in Gods presence in this world, and
delight to think of God, to speak of God, to pray unto him, to meet him in
his word and Sacraments, and at the last day, shall thou stand with confidence
before the throne of his glory.

Hithereto of the fear and astonishment of the Prophet, and of the causes
thereof. Now follows his consolation.

Then flewe one of the Seraphims etc.

In these two verses is laid down the second general point: namely, the
consolation of the Prophet: concerning which, there are two points in the text:
1. the ground and matter of his consolation, that is, the forgiveness of his
sins.

2 Diverse circumstances of that consolation.

1 The time. Then.

2 The minister by whom it was done: an Angel, one of the Seraphims.

3 The manner how he did it, speedily, He flewe.

4 The instrument or outward sign, a Coal from the alter.

5 The outward action or application of it; He touched his lips.

The matter of the consolation is last in order. Let us therefore first speak
of the Circumstances.

The first circumstance, 1 Circumstance, the time.
is the time when this Prophet was comforted and raised from his fear. Then
says the text: that is, after his fear and astonishment, but not before. Thus
dealt God always with all his Saints, he bestows no graces on them
pertaining to salvation, but after he has by some means or other brought them
to true humiliation in themselves, and to sorrow for their sins: Humiliation is
the preparatiue for grace: for when by sight and sense of their sins, and
their own misery by sin, he has even driven them quite out of themselves,
finding nothing in themselves, but cause of fear and astonishment, then powers
he the oil of grace, and of sweet comfort into their hearts, and refreshes
their weary souls with the deawe of his mercy: this point needs no further
proof, for look into the scriptures, and we shall find, God never called
any man to the state of grace, or to any notable work or function in his
church, but he first humbled them, and then brought them out of all conceit
with themselves, and then wrought in them, and by them, his wonderful works.

The use of this doctrine, is first of all to teach all men, Use 1.
to esteem aright of the afflictions that God lays upon them in this world:
commonly men take them impatie^tly, and our nature grudgeth hagainst them: but
let a Christian man consider with himself, how God has always dealt with his
children, and he has cause not to think so: for does God lay some great
affliction on thee? it may be he has some mighty work of his grace to work in
thee, or some great work of mercy to be wrought by thee in his Church, and
hereby prepares thee for the same. Say therefore with the holy Prophet; Psalm.
39.9.
I held my tongue ^ Lord, and spoke nothing, because it was thy doing: and
what God may intend in his so doing to thee, thou can not tell: 2 To men
distressed in conscience.
and therefore in silence and patience possess thy soul. Again, here is a
comfort to all such as are distressed in mind, in sense of their sins, and
sight of Gods wrath: their states is not miserable, much less desperate, for
they are in the high way to grace and favor. God justifies not, but him that
repents: God exalts not, but him that is humbled: God comfort not, but him that
is distressed: God has mercy on none, but such as both know and feel they
want it: and know also, that they know not where to have it, but at his
hands. Happy therefore is that soul, that feels the weight and burden of sin
for to him will Christ bring most ease and comfort. Gods Misnisters therefore
are hereby to comfort distressed consciences, to assure them, that if with this
Prophet they be so deeply touched with sight of their sins, and Gods justice,
as that they cry, Woe is me, I am undone. Then, even Then, are they most
capable of comfort, and best prepared to receive it, as here it fell out to the
holy Prophet. Thirdly, here is the way taught us how to attain to any
excellent graces of God, Use. 3.
either for our own salvation, or the good of the Church, namely to labor for
a sencible feeling of the want of them in our selves: for God uses to bestow
no gifts on any man, but such as do in humility and lowliness, confess to
God, and acknowledge in themselves, the want of them. So the blessed Virgin
sings, Luke. 1.53 2. ^sal. 107 ^.
God f^lleth the hungry with good things, but the rich he sendes empty away:
And so the psalmist, God satisfies the hungry soul, and fills the empty
soul with goodness. So then if thou be rich in thy conceits, God has not for
thee: but if thou be hungry, he i^ ready to fi^^ thee with good things: and
do thou acknowledge thy soul empty, then behold treasures of goodness* to
feed and fill thee: and art thou cast down with the Prophet, and is thy soul
empty of hope, and fraught with fear, then behold even then: God and his
Angels ready to raise thee up, and to fill thee with co^solatio^. T thus much
for the time of his consolation: the minister by whom was. One of the Seraphims.

The 2. circumstance of his consolation is the Minister by whom it was done: An
angel. One of the Seraphims: 2. Circumstance of the Minister.
that is, an Angel of that order so called: out of which we learn,

First, that there are diverse degrees and several orders of Angels, though we
know not the true distinction thereof: nor think it lawful to imagine them to
be 9. nor to set them down particularly, as the Church of Rome does, who make
many of their own devises, which they call traditions, of equal authority with
the scriptures. Secondly, that these holy Angels are the glorious guard of God,
and do continually stand about the throne of his glory, and attend his holy
will, both in heaven and in earth.

Thirdly, that they are also by the merciful appointment of God, Psalm. 34. Heb.
1.
the guard of Gods children, and ministering spirits sent out, as it were with a
commission, for the good of the elect. All these points because they are plain
in the scripture, and do less concern our general scope, which is concerning
the Ministry, I pass them over.

Fourthly, here it is apparent, that as the Angels are sent out for the help
and service of the elect: so specially of Gods ministers, as is plain in this
place, where the Prophet being afrighted, a holy Angel is ready to give him
comfort: and so over the whole course of the Prophets: and at this day, their
protection, and comfortable assistance, is no less present to the godly
Ministers of the new Testament, though not in such sencible signs, and such
visible manner, as in the old: for if they be ministering spirits, sent out
for the good of them which shall be saved, how much more for their good, which
shall both be saved themselves, and save others also.

A doctrine of great comfort, and much good use to all Ministers: who first of
all may here learn contentment in their calling: for howsoever no calling has
more crosses, so none again has more comforts: and howsoever none be more
disgraced by evil men, yet none is more honored by the holy Angels: and
howsoever in this world they above any calling, are servants to all me^, yet
none has the service and attendance of Angels so much as they: for though we
have them not to help us to do the outward actions of our ministry with us,
or for us, (as some Popish Doctors teach, that in their Mass, Amen is not said
to one collect, because the Angels say Amen to it) yet doubtless they are
present always, as at all holy exercises and lawful actions, so especially at
the public service of God, performed by the Ministers: and beside that, they
are witnesses thereto, and of the pains, and diligence, and faithfulness of a
good Minister, they also do Minister unto them oftentimes bodily strength, and
assistance, and many comforts: in their troublesome travels, which they know
not how by any natural manes they come unto them. And as this Doctrine does
thus yield them contentment against the contempt, so also courage against the
danger of this calling. For what though thou have mighty men of this world
against thee, when thou have angels for thee: and what though thou fightest
against principallities and powers, when thou have Cherubins, and Seraphims on
thy side? Godly Ministers have many enemies, but if by the eye of faith they
can see as well who are with them* as with the eye of reason who are against
them, they will confess with Elisha, there are more with us, then against us.
The stories of all ages do affirm, and the comfortable experience of these
days of ours does verify the truth hereof. Ministers that live in places very
profane, or very Popish, it is admirable to see how many dangers they have
escaped, and plottes they have avoided, which by their enemies, (or rather the
enemies of their Doctrine) have been laid for their lives: which their
deliverance, and many other comforts in their Ministries, whence are they but
from Gods protection, by the ministry of his Angels.

Before we leave this point, 2 Questio^^
two questions may be asked, not amiss briefly to be resolved.

First, if any ask, whence comes it that Angels perform more service to good
Ministers then to other men: I answer, the reason is partly from God, partly
from the Angels: first God has a principal care of them above other men,
because they work his work above all other callings: for their labors
immediately concern the good of men's souls: whereas others, do first concern
the body, and consequently the soul: therefore, Psalm 91.11.12.
whereas he has given his Angels charge over all his elect, to keep them in
all their good ways, they have a special charge doubtless over all godly and
faithful Ministers, whose ways are Gods in a special manner.

Again, Angels themselves as they willingly perform any service to the
Church, or to any part thereof, so most willingly of all are they employed for
the good of godly Ministers, and that for two causes.

First, because they are their fellow laborers, both for that ye Angels and
good Ministers are both called Gods ambassadors, 1 Cor. 4.2 Heb. 1.14 Mal. 2.7
Reave 2. and 3. ^hap.
and Gods own servants or officers, in a more peculiar manner then any other
calling: and for that their service is so like, that their names are common,
one to the other. Angels being called Ministers, and Ministers Angels, as
though they were almost all one.

Secondly, because the Ministers duty is, to convert and save souls, being a
work, which (next to the glorifying of God, and doing his will) the Angels do
take most delight in above any other: for if they be sent out for the good of
them which shall be saved, Heb. 1.14.
how much more willingly for their good, by whom they are saved, Luke. 15.10
which shall be saved? and if the Angels rejoice at the conversion of a sinner,
surely they much love him, and desire to do him good, by whom the sinner is
converted: and in these respects, that Angels and Ministers have the same
names: and are both employed in the same great work; namely, doing good to the
elect. Therefore is it, Revel. 19.10. and 22.9.
that the Angel calls himself S. John the Evangelists fellow in the
Revelation: If then they be fellows, even fellow-seruants, and
fellow-laborers, in a more special manner then any other, what marvel though the
Angels be most willingly employed, in doing any service of help or comfort to
godly Ministers.

In the second place, If any ask, 2. Question.
if it be so, then what duties are Ministers to perform to Angels, for this
their so careful service, and especial attendance upon them, above other men?

A Papist would answer; Minsters must therefore worship them, and keep their
fasting, and Holy Days, and say their service, and pray unto them, as to their
keepers and Mediators. But alas, cannot the Kings Messenger or Officer be
honored, unless he be set upon the Kings throne? will nothing serve him, but
the Crown and Scepter? so cannot Angels be honored, unless they be made
Gods, or Saviors, or Mediators? I answer therefore, we dare not go so far,
least we remember the servant so much, that we forget the Master: but rather
we answer thus: seeing Angels are thus serviceable to Gods Ministers, it
should first of all, teach all men to honor that Calling, with all due
reverence: For they cannot but please the angels, in honoring good Ministers,
whom they esteem their fellows.

Secondly, it should teach all ministers, not to content themselves with the
name and title, but to labor to be good and faithful. For so doing, they are
fellows to the Angels, and it is a disgrace to the Angels, when those that are
their fellows are unfaithful.

And it should further teach them, to adorn their Calling with a holy life,
for as sin is that, that grieves the angels, and drives them away, so it is
grace and holiness, which makes them delight in the fellowship of men.

And it may also encourage any man, to take pains in that holy Calling,
wherein he is sure to have Gods angels, in a special manner to attend him,
to assist him, to protect him, and to be a witness of his faithfulness: and
who would not work cheerfully in that labor, wherein he has the Angels to
be in a sort fellow-workers with him.

To do these three duties, is to honor good angels: and that Minister that
conscionably performs them, the angels will take themselves sufficiently
honored of that man.

And if beside this honor, we would rejoice Gods angels, and minister matter
of joy unto them, then in the fourth place, let all Ministers propounde to
themselves above all things, the conversion of souls, rather then their own
praise, or living, or pleasing of men, and so endeavor it both in teaching, and
all their other courses, that the angels may see it, and be witness of it: for
if they rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, (as Christ says they do) then
those men make them oftest rejoice, which do most seriously aim at the
conversion of sinners.

And thus we see, both the service of Angels to Gods Ministers, and the duties
they are to perform to them in that regard. The due consideration of this
point, may raise the world to a better conceit of this Calling, and persuade
fathers to dedicate their sons to it, and stir up young Students to
consecrate themselves thereto, and turn their studies to that end: for no man
in no calling has so special attendance, and assistance of Gods Angels, as
godly Ministers have: At least, if it work not this in the world, yet it may
yield comfort and contentment to all faith Ministers in their painful calling.

But let us see how the Angel performed his service to the Prophet: not
unwillingly, not lingeringly, but speedily: so says the Text.

He flewe.

Which is not so to be understood, 3. Circumstance.
as though the Angels had wings: for they have no corporal nor sensible
bodies, but spiritual and insensible substances, the actions whereof are
performed with such nimblenesse and agilitie, as cannot fall within the
compass of outward sense. But the Phrase is used for our capacities, to show
how readily and speedily the Angel went about to minister comfort to the
Prophet. For as nothing moves so quickly to our sense, as does the creature
that flies: and as we say, that man does fly about his business, which does
it quickly and diligently: so here the holy Ghost sets down the willingness
and quickness of the Angel, to comfort this holy Prophet, and to do the will
of God. Where we learn;

First, what excellent servants of God the holy Angels be, which so readily,
willingly, and speedily execute the will of their Lord. This must teach al Gods
servants to do the like, and to imitate them in this excellent obedience: And
the rather, because we pray daily to God. The fourh petition.
Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. In earth of us, as it is in
heaven of the holy angels: But they do it most cheerfully, and without all
lingering, therefore so ought we. Magistrates in their places, and Ministers in
theirs, and every man is his function, is to apply this to himself, and to be
stirred up thereby to a cheerfulness and quickness in their duties: for
therein they resemble the blessed angels, and then their deeds accord with
their prayer: but contrariwise, he that does his duty unwillingly, and
vnreadily, is like the Devil, which indeed does Gods will, and yet against his
will: and surely unto such obedience there belongs no reward. But as God
loves a cheerful giver, so doubtless loves he a cheerful worker. 2. Corinthians. 9.7.


Secondly, we see here how great love angels bear unto Gods children,
especially unto godly Ministers, how willingly they are employed to do them
good. Willingness and readiness to do good to any man, must needs come from
love: and yet alas all men, even the best, and all Ministers, even the best*
are creatures far inferior to the angels.

Here Magistrates and Ministers, must learn to be far from contempt of their
inferiors: and to do their duties of ruling and teaching carefully, though
the people be far their inferior^: it is the nature of love, to make any man
do service most willingly, to him that he loves, though he be far meaner
then himself.

If therefore Princes love their subjects, they will not spare any care, cost,
nor pains, nay they will rejoice to do them good, and they will labor to be
like the angels, who are as far greater then men, as they are then their
subjects.

And if Ministers love their people, they will forget their own dignity,
which often times they might stand upon, and will make themselves even servants
to all, that they may win some.

And seeing angles do fly so fast to give help and comfort to good Ministers:
1. Corinthians. 9.19.
this must teach them further.

First, every one to labor to be a good Minister, for then are they sure of
the love of angels, and then most willingly do the angels any service to them.
Again, let it teach them to fly as fast to the discharge of their duties to
Gods Church, as the angel^ fly to do them service, so shall Gods angels
think their diligence and careful service, well bestowed upon them.

Lastly, this diligence of the angels, and their willingness, proceeding from
love, must stir up al Christians, to perform all duties of godliness to
God, and of love unto his Church, with alacrity and cheerfulness. So do Gods
angels; we look to be like the angels in glory in the world to come: then be
like the angels in diligence, love and faithfulness in this world. The Wiseman
says, He that is slothful in his business is good for nothing: Pro. 22.29.
but the diligent man shall stand before the King. And surely, he that is
willing and diligent in the duties of Christianity, shall stand before the
King of kings in heaven. And let this suffice for the Angels service, and his
diligence in his service. Now let us see what instrument the Angel used.

A coal from the Altar. The fourth Circumstance of this consolation, 4.
Circumstance.
is the Instrument which it pleased God, the angel should use to minister
comfort to the Prophet, a strange instrument for so great a work: A coal of
fire. Here let humane reason hide it self, and wordly wisdom be confounded,
to see the wonderful works of the Lord: God could have healed the Prophets
infirmities, and given him comfort against his fear, and courage in his
calling, without means, but he will use means: And what? a weak means: nay, a
means that seems contrary: A coal of fire must touch his lips: that which
in all reason would have made him speak worse, by Gods appointment and the
power of his word, shall make him speak better. Out of which practice of God,
we learn many points:

First, see how God magnifieth means: he can work without them, and so he
did in the Creation, giving light to the world, Genesis 1. from 4. to 17.
diverse days before there was Sun: but since the order of nature was
established, he generally uses means, not only in his ordinary* but even
in his miraculous actions: and though he use not always the ordinary and
direct means: yet means he generally uses, though they seem contrary: as
here in this place, and the same will be found true in almost all the
miracles, both of the Old and New Testament.

This therefore commends unto all men, the use of such good means, as Gods
providence has ordained of any duties, or effecting of any thing, that does
belong unto us to do: and not to depend upon immediate helps from Heaven, as
many fond and fantastical men do, who are therefore oftentimes justly
forsaken of GOD, and left destitute of all help; and so exposed to shame and
reproach.

Secondly, see here the mighty power of Gods ordinance, how it appears in
weakness: such are all his great works. In the Creation, he brought light
out of darkness. In our Redemption, he brought us life out of death. In our
Conuersions, he works upon us by his Word, and by it he draws us to him,
which in all reason would drive us from him: and by it confounds the wisdom
of the world, which is stark foolishness to the wisdom of the Lord.

And so here, he cleanses the Prophet by a Coal of fire: which would rather
defile him, and seasoneth his mouth with it, which in reason should have burnd
him: so great, so admirable, and so powerful are the ordinances of GOD, though
they seem never so contrary, or so weak in themselves, or in their means.

Let this teach al men not to contemn the Sacraments, though the outward
Elements, Bread, Wine, and Water, be weak and common, and dead creatures in
themselves: nor the Ministry of the Word, though it be exercised by a weak
man, mortal and miserable as others are: for that God, which can season the
Prophets mouth, and cleanse his heart by a coal of fire, no marvel though he
work upon the consciences of men, by his word and Sacraments.

And again, when we see Grace and Holiness conveyed into men's hearts by the
Word and Sacraments: let us learn, not to ascribe it to the dignity, either
of the Minister, or the Elements, but to the supreme power of the mighty God,
who can purge the Prophet, by a coal from the Altar.

Neither is it altogether without Mystery, that God here sanctifies the
Prophet, by touching his lips with a fiery coal: for it signifies, that
the apt and sufficient teacher, must have a fiery tongue, and to that same
purpose, Acts 2.
tht holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles in fiery toungs, and it may be
that the one is a tipe of the other. Certain it is, that they both teach us
thus much, that all true and able Ministers, must pray and endeavor to have a
tongue full of power and force, even like fire, to eat up the sins and
corruptions of the world. For though it be a worthy gift of God to speak
mildly, and moderately, so that his speech shall fall like dew upon the
grass: yet it is the fiery tongue that beats down sin, and works sound
grace in the heart: It may be there are some, which need the fiery tongue.

This shows apparently that those Ministers never had their lips touched with
a coal from Gods altar: that is, their consciences never touched, nor their
souls seasoned with the sanctifying grace of Gods spirit, which sit still and
^ee great and grievous stains in a Church, and corruptions in a state, and can
be content never to reprove them, as though Ministers were perswaders only,
and not reprouers.

But when this comes to be wayed in the balance of a good conscience, it will
be found, that not the pleasing tongue, but the fiery tongue, is the
principal grace of a good Minister.

But to go further: whence came this Coal?

Taken from the Altar. This coal of fire was taken by the angel from the altar
of God, where was a fire which never went out, and this fire was that, that
came from heaven: sent down by God, at the dedication of the Temple by
Solomon. And this fire kindled by God never went out: for no man could kindle
the like, but all other was counted strange fire; As Nadab, and Abihu, tried in
woeful experience, when they would needs offer with it.

Now the Prophet must be cleansed with the fire which came from Hea^^n: Leuit.
10.1.2.
teaching us, that the Ministers must have his fiery tongue from the holy
Ghost. As the Apostles were said to be baptized with the holy Ghost and with
fire: Acts. 1.5. Math. 3.11.
A fiery tongue, is a special ornament of a Minister, but that fire must come
from heaven: that is, his zeal must be a godly and heavenly zeal; but he
that has a railing, lying, a slanderous, a malicious, or a contentious tongue,
he has a fiery tongue indeed. But this is kindled of the fire of hell, as
Saint James says: Iame^ 3.6
The unbridled tongue, is a world of wickedness, and defiles the whole body,
sets on fire the whole course of nature, and is set ^n fire in hell.

So then, a spiteful and malicious tongue we see, is a fiery tongue, but
that fire is taken from hell, and not from Gods altar.

And he that stands up to preach with this tongue, God will never suffer any
great work to be done by him in his Church, though his tongue be never so
fiery, and his speech never so powerful.

As therefore Ministers must abhor the flattering and pleasing tongue, and
must have a fiery tongue: so on the other side, this fire must be from Gods
altar: that is, the fire of their zeal must be builded by Gods spirit, and
not by the spirit of discord and dissension. Ambitious humors, turbulent and
proud humors, new opinions, private quarrels, all these, nor none of these,
are for the pulpit.

These may make a man fiery tongued, but this fire, was never taken from Gods
altar, as the Prophets was: this fiery tongue never came from heaven, as the
Apostles did. It follows.

And touched my lips. 5 Circumstance, the Application.
This fifth and last Circumstance, is the Application of the remedy. The coal
which is the medicine, is applied by this Angel to his lips, that is, to that
part which was polluted: and as he formerly complained of the pollution of his
lips, so the medicine is applied to his lips: Here the Angel, which in this
case is made Gods Minister, does teach all Gods Ministers, a great point of
wisdom, in heavenly Divinity, namely, to apply their Doctrine to their
audience, in such manner, as the circumstances of place, times, or persons do
require: some Ministers come to an ignorant and vnhumbled people, and teach
them the Gospel, which never knew the law: here the fiery coal is used, but
the lips are not touched: that is, good doctrine taught, but not well applied:
for that the law should first be laid to their consciences, others beat all
upon the law, when it may be their hearers are a people sufficiently cast
down, and have more need to be raised up with the sweet comforts of the
Gospel: others use to lay open the nakedness of the Court in the country, and
to reprove the faults of Princes and great magistrates before the common
people, who have more need of the Catechism: others bring the Catechism or
points of ordinary instruction into the Court, where ye duties of Kings and
counselors should be taught in all plainnes and sincerity: others bring their
new opinions or controuersall points unto popular audiences, which indeed are
fit for the schools: others busy themselves about ceremonies, when the
substance is in danger to be lost: All these have it may be, the Coal of fire,
but it is misapplyed, and not applied to the polluted lips. Let all ministers
therefore learn this point of wisdom of the Angel, to apply the medicines of
their doctrine to the times, persons, and places, which are infected, so shall
they be sure not to take pains in vain.

And thus much of the circumstances of his Consolation.

It follows in the text.

The ground of his consolation.
Lo thy iniquity shall be taken away, and thy sins shall be purged.

After the Circumstances, follows the ground and matter of his consolation,
and that is the forgiveness of his sins: where first let us mark how it and
the instrument are annexed together: Lo says the Angel, this Coal has
touched thy lips, and thy Iniquities shall be forgiven, and thy sins
purged: as though he had been cleansed by the Coal: where we may note, how
greatly God magnifieth the means which himself ordains, even true remission
and salvation to the right and holy using of them, though it come not from
them, but from his own mercy, and power of his ordinance. It is therefore no
marvel though God sanctifies the child by the Ministry of water in
Baptism, and feed our souls in the Lords Supper, by feeding our bodies with
bread and wine: and no marvel though the careless neglect of either of them,
be damnation to him that despises them: seeing they are Gods instruments,
ordained by him to convey his grace unto us: And yet for all this, we are to
know, that remission or salvation, is no more tied to the very elements, or
the actions, then here the Prophets forgiveness is to the Coal of fire.

But the maine point is, that for the Prophets consolation, the Angel tells
him his iniquities shall be taken away, and his sins purged, as thereby he
had said thy sins were the cause of thy fear, therefore that thy fear may be
taken away, thy sins shall be forgiven.

Where we learn, that as few comes by sin, so all true comfort comes from
the forgiveness of sins: this is that, that only pacifieth the conscience,
and satisfies the soul: when David had sinned against the Lord in his two
great sins, and thereby provoked Gods wrath against him, and wounded his own
conscience, if the Prophet had told him he had made him King of 10 kingdome^
more, 2. Sam. 11
he had not so rejoiced his heart, as when he told him, after his repentance,
thy sins are forgiven thee, thou shall not dye: So when this Prophet was
extremely affrighted at Gods presence, because of some sins and negligences
in his calling, it had been no comfort to his poor soul, to have been told,
thou shall have a more eloquent tongue, and a more powerful speech, thou shall
have better access to the Court and audience before the king: all these, and
all such like, would have been no better then gilded poison unto him, being
in this case: but the happy answer that refreshes his weary soul more then
all the world, was this, Lo thy iniquities are forgiven, and thy sins purged.

All faithful Ministers must here learn the true way of comforting troubled
and distressed consciences, namely, first to draw him unto a sight of some
particular sins, then to summon him into Gods presence, and there to arraigne
him for those sins, until the view of the foulness of his sins, and the
glory of Gods justice, have sufficiently humbled him, and then to labor to
persuade his conscience upon good grounds of the pardon of those sins by
Christ Jesus: this is the way that God used and devised, this is the sure way,
that cannot fail.

Some think that all trouble of mind is nothing but melancholy, and therefore
think nothing needs but Physic and outward comforts: but he that considers
in what case the Prophet here was, or David when he made the 6. the 32. or the
51. Psalms, Psalm. 6.3.6.7. Psalm. 32.3.4 Psalm. 51. the whole Psalm.
will be of another mind, and will find that nothing can properly trouble the
mind but sin: therefore as the wise Physician in his cure, first searches
out the cause, and then endeavor to to take it away: so the good Physician of
the soul, must first of all search into the cause of his sickness, that is
his sins, and must take them away: which if they do not, then al their labor
is lost: for all the company, music, recreation, wit, diet, nay all worldly
comforts and delights, if it were the advancement to a kingdom, cannot so much
comfort the distressed soul of a sinner, as this voice of a minister spoken
from God upon good grounds; Thy sins are forgiven thee. Now to lay down what
be those true and good grounds, whereupon a Minister may safely and
comfortably pronounce pardon of sins to a sinner, belongs properly to another
place.

In the next place; Let us here observe how the Lord before he renewed the
Prophets commission, or send him to preach to the people, first humbles him for
his sins, and then upon his repentance, gives him pardon: teaching us, that
no Minister is well qualified to the holy duties of the Ministry, unless he
have truly repented of his sins, and have obtained pardon and mercy in the
Messiah.

Ministers labor for qualifications, but the true Minister of God will labor
for this qualification above all other: for doubtless he shall pronounce most
powerfully the pardon of sins to others, to whose conscience God has
pronounced pardon of his own.

In the last place, let us observe how the preacher being to be comforted
before he go this new embassage, the Lord is so careful for him, that rather
then he be not comforted (if there be no man to do it), An Angel shall be sent
to be his comforter, and (if there be not another Prophet to do it) An Angel
shall pronounce unto him the pardon of his sins.

Let this be an encouragement for all Pastors and Ministers of Gods Church, to
labor painfully and faithfully in their places, for the goodness of the Lord
will never fail them, nor shall they want comfort, when ever they stand in
need thereof. Yea rather shall Angels from heaven be their helps and
comforters, then faithful Ministers shall be left destitute.

Hitherto of the second general points: namely, of the Prophets consolation.

3 General points, the renewing of his commission.
The third and last general point is, the renouation of the Prophets commission,
in the eight, and part of the ninth verses, and it contains 3. parts, 1. A
question or inquiry made by God. When shall I send, and who shall go for us?

2 The answer of the prophet: Here am I, send me.

3 The commission renewed unto him: The Lord said, Go and speak unto this
people.

1 Gods question.
The first part, is a question made by God, by way of proclamation, wherein he
inquireth who shall go preach unto this people.

Also, I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, whom shall I send, and who shall
go for us?

In which Proclamation, and inquiry of the Lord, we are not to imagine that
the Lord, was either unprovided of such as should execute his will, or knew
not who were able, or who were willing to go preach his wo^d: For as the
Apostle says, in the matter of Election* The Lord knows who are his: 2. Tim.
2.19.
so much more in particular vocations. The Lord knows who are his, and need
not to ask whom shall I send, or who shall go? But then it may be demanded,
why the Lord says so? I answer, not for his own sake, but for ours: whom
hereby he would instruct, in diverse points of holy doctrine.

First, hereby he would give us to understand, how hard a thing it is, to
find an able and godly Minister, for if there were not a great scarcity of
such men, the Lord needed not ask this question. But some will object against
this, that there are in many Christian Churches so many Ministers, as they
cannot all be maintained, but some go up and down, undisposed, and
unprovided for. I answer, this is too true in all ages: there were Wandering
Leuits in the Old Testament, which went up and down and offered their
service, and served for 10. shekels of silver, and a suit of apparel, and
meat and drink: Judges 19.18. and 17.8.6.
but this calamity was upon the Church of the Jews, never but then, when
there was no King in Israel, and every one did that which was good in his own
eyes. If therefore there be any in our Church, and in Christian Nations, which
go up and down, and offer their service at such rates, it is much more
miserable, Judge. 17.6.
seeing now there are kings in Israel: and therefore it is no reason that every
man rob the Church, as it shall please his covetous mind. But ceasing to
enquire whether thi^ be so or no: and if it be so, leaving the reformation
thereof to those Churches and States whom it may concern: I answer, for the
matter in hand, that this may be so, and yet the Lord may complain as here
he does. Whom shall I send? for the Lord means not such as bear the name of
Levites or Priests in the old, or of Ministers in the new: for there were
always more of them: who, some for preferment sake, some for their ease, and
some for a refuge how to live, are willing to enter that function, and
accordingly in that calling, seek not the Lord, but themselves, and their own
ends.

But here the Lord inquireth for such men, as first, purely do seek and
undertake that function, therein to honor God, and to gather his Church, and
then in all their labors and ministerial duties, truly and faithfully endeavor
to the same ends; Preaching Gods word, and as Gods word, diligently proving,
exhorting, and admonishing: and shining before their people in good works: for
such men, it is no marvel though the Lord light a Candle at Noone day, and
make open Proclamation to seek for them, Job. 33.23. 2. Corinthians. 2.16.
saying; Whom shall I send? for, such a man is as Job says, One of a thousand:
for ^ome want ability to discharge their duties, as S. Paul says; Who are
sufficient for those things? And some want willingness to undertake the
labor, as God here complains; Who shall go for us? Now to make use of this
doctrine to our Church.

It were to be wished, that in these days, and for our christian Churches, the
Lord had not as great cause to cry out in the want of able, faithful, and
godly Ministers, Whom shall I send, and who shall go for us? But alas, this
want is too apparent, and his blemish is too notorious, and it is a work
worthy the labor of kings and princes to reform it: and is a kings evil, nor
to be healed but by the power of a king, for as long as there are so few and
mean preferments for painful Ministers, there will never want abundance of
such Ministers as do want either conscience or ability to discharge their
duties.

In the mean time, till God put into the hearts of Parliaments, and Princes,
to look to this great and needful work; let us Ministers learn our duties:
and first, we who are in the Universities, are here admonished to look to our
selves. By Gods blessing we are many, and daily grow more and more: let us
therefore so furnish our selves* as that when God or his Church shall say, Who
shall go for us, and whom shall I send? then he may find many amongst us,
whom he may send to that great work of the Ministry: and let us fear to
be such, as that God may affirm of us, as in the days of Job, that he
cannot find one of a thousand.

Secondly, all Ministers learn here, not to content themselves with the name
and title of Ministers, but labor for the substantial ornaments thereof, nor
to be willing to take the honor and li^ings, and to refuse the burden and
(...) of the Ministry.

For else let them know, God has no need of them: for had the Lord pleased
or contented himself with such kind of men, as seek to be Ministers for
themselves, and not for his sake: or being Ministers, do feed themselves, and
not their flock: or preach themselves, and not Christ: then had he not needed
to have made this Proclamation, for all Ages have yielded store of such. But
contrariwise, he that is painful and faithful in this Function, let him
know, that God and his Church has need of him.

Lastly, here the Romish Clergy are justly to be taxed, whose number is
infinite: but it is lamentable to see how few among them be such as the Lord
here seeks for. Their Orders of Regulars are exceeding many, beside all their
Secular Priests, and it is almost incredible, how many thousands there be of
Dominicans or Franciscans, or in some one of their orders: and yet amongst the
many millions of their Monks, there is scarce to be found one of many, who
for his learning and other gifts, is fit to be sent to the work of God: nay,
their ignorance was palpable and rediculous to the world, until of late, being
by Luther, and others of our Church, made ashamed thereof, they have labored
(especially the Jesuits) to become learned. How foul a thing is it that
amongst so many, the Lord should have cause to complain; Whom shall we send?
The Jesuits indeed many of them are learned, but for other qualities, they are
fitter to be plotters, and practisers in State matters, Spies or
In^elligencers, reconcilers, seducers, and subuerters, then Ministers: and
fitter to be instruments of policy to evil kings, then Ministers of the
Gospel unto God. But take away them, and some few selected Monks (and those
but few out of many millions^ and then even for learning, also God may cry, and
call and proclaim in their Monasteries; Who^ shall I send? And if it be a shame
and misery? to a Church, to want such as God may send, or to have but a few,
then the Romish Church is shameless, which shames not to have so many, and yet
amongst them all, whom God may send, almost none.

In the next place. By this inquiry, and question made by God, Whom shall I
send, and who shall go for us? The Lord would teach us, that no man is to
undertake this function, unless God call and send him: therefore here are
condemned, the prophaine fancies of the Anabaptists, and all like them, who
think that any man upon a private motion, may step forth and undertake the
duties of a Prophet, to preach and expound, etc. Oh, but say they, these
motions are from Gods spirit: surely they can say little for themselves, who
cannot say so much: but that cannot serve their turn: for if we say
contrariwise nay, but they are from the devil, or at the least from your own
vanity and pride, how can they disprove it! Again, might not the Prophet have
alleged that with a better pretense and color then they? yet he stays till
God here call him: even so all good Ministers are to stay Gods calling.

If any ask, how he shall know when God calls him? I answer, God calls
ordinarily by his Church, her voice is his: therefore whenever the Church of
God, says unto thee, thou shall be sent, and thou shall go for us, even then
does the Lord call us out to this holy function.

Thirdly, let us observe how the Lord says: Who shall (I) send, and who shall go
for (us)? Some Interpreters gather out of this Chapter, an Argument for the
Trinity of persons; as namely, out of the third Verse, where the Angels sing*
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God, etc. But it is not sound enough to overthrow our
stubborn enemies the Jews, and therefore it seems those Divines are of a
sounder and wiser judgment: who seeing we have other places pregnant and
plain enough, therefore think it no good discreetio^ to urge this or any such
place which may probably admit another Interpretation, least that the Jews
finding the weakness of the argument, do judge all our proofs to be as weak,
and so take occasion to persist the rather in their blindness, by that which
we brought to have converted them. And as for that song of the Angels in the
third Verse, where they ascribe holiness to the Lord three times: that their
repetition signifies nothing else, but the continual joy and delight which
the holy Angels take in praising of God, who cannot satisfy themselves in
honoring his name: teaching us in their example, never to be weary of
praising God by prayers and holy hymns, and of ho^o^ring him in our lives and
callings.

But to prove out of the words; Holy, Holy, Holy, the three Persons in
Trinity, seems to be no fit nor sound collection. Rather in my opinion, we
may safely collect and conclude out of these words (I and us) that there are
more persons in the Trinity then one: for first, God the Father, or the whole
Deity says: Whom shall I send? and then changing the number, he says: Who
shall go for us? For howsoever God may employ in the word Us, that he that is
sent to preach, is sent as well for the good of the Church, as for his own
glory, yet can it not be denied, but that the plural number here, and
elsewhere, ascribed to the Deity, must needs argue a certain plurality of
persons in that Deity: as in Genesis it is written, that God said, Let us make
man: and here, Who shall go for us? Genesis 1.16*


Out of the evidence of which places, seeing the enemies of this doctrine must
needs grant a plurality, namely, that there are more then one: then we shall
sufficiently prove out of other places, and by other arguments, that there are
three.

In the last place, let us mark what God says: Whom shall I send, and who shall
go for us? God sends a minister to preach, and he goes for God. Then behold
here, what is the trade and profession of a minister, he is the servant of
God. So says God here, he goes for me: and so says the Apostle of himself
and al other good ministers, that they are Gods Labo^rers.

And in another place: The Angel of God appeared, 1. Corinthians. 3.9. Acts 27.23.
whose I am, and whom I serve? But if any man think that either God speaks
so favorably of them, or Saint Paul too partially of themselves, then let the
devil himself be judge in this case, who plainly and freely confesses
(though he did it not in love to the truth or them) These men are the servants
of the most high God, Acts 16.16.17.
which teach unto us the way of salvation. Let therefore either God be
believed, who is for them, or the devil who is against them. But what kind of
servants are they? what place or office have they* They are his Messengers or
Ambassadors, Job. 33.23.
this is their profession, and their place. Now then for the use hereof.

If they be Gods servants, then are they not their own Masters, they have a
Master, even God, whose they are, and for whom, and from whom they come: they
may not therefore please themselves, nor serve their own pleasures, nor seek
the satisfying of the their own carnal lusts, either in matter of pleasure,
credit, or profit: if they do then evil, he calls them to a heavy account,
whose servants they are.

Again, if they be Gods servants, then let them do their service to God, and
expect their reward from God: some Ministers will expect the reward, and honor
of Gods servants, but will do no service: that beseemes not servants: let such
men remember for whom they come, even from that God, who as he can give reward:
so he will expect service.

And as for such men as painfully do their service, but are not regarded nor
rewarded of me^ as they deserve, let the^ be content, and continue in their
faithfulness, for they are Gods Ambassadors: and we know Ambassadors may have
gifts given them, of those to whom they are sent: but they expect their
maintenance from the kings their own Masters: So the maintenance which the
world should give Ministers, is like gifts given to Ambassadors: if it come, it
is no more then they deserve. If it come not, yet will faithful Ministers do
their duty, and expect their payment from their king and Master God, whose
they are, and whom they serve.

Thirdly, if they be Gods Ambassadors, sent by him, and come from and for him,
then let all such as either condemn, or any way injury them, be assured, that
as God is mighty and powerful, so he will mightily revenge it.

There was never King so poor or weak, but thought himself strong enough to
(...) any wong offered to his Ambassor And shall God suffer so foul a
wickedness to lie unpunished? Nay, they and their posterities shall smart for
it; 1. King. 22.26.27, 28, 34, etc. 2. King. 9.33. etc. Acts 12.1.2. and 23.
let Ahab, and Iezabel, and Julian, say if it be not so: and all ages or
stories, ^hewe the contrary if they can, that ever any contemner and abuser of
godly Ministers, escaped the visible vengeance of Gods revenging hands on him
or his.

Fourthly, seeing they are Gods Messengers and servants, they must not be the
servants of men, to please, or flatter, or satisfy humors, this is not for
them that are Gods servants: they therefore that will be slaves to the
persons, and pleasures, and humors of men, they forget that they are Gods
servants, and came for him: yea, they must not endeavor the pleasing of
themselves, nor the bringing of their own purposes to pass, but in every
motions either made to the^ by others; or suggested from their own hearts,
they must forth with call to mind, Who sent me hither, and for whom am I come?
Even from and for God: therefore they are to yield to nothing, nor aim at any
thing but which may be both to the will, and for the glory of him that sent
them.

And if the great men of this world, do think it wrong that any man should
command their servant against their will, or expect any service from them
against their own honor: then let them think it reason that Gods Misters
should not be commanded any thing contrary to Gods will, or against his honor.

And lastly, if ministers be Gods servants, then let them regard their
Masters glory, and be ashamed to do any thing, either in their doctrine or
lives, which may dishonor him: that servant is unworthy of a good Master, who
seeks not his Masters credit in all his courses.

And again, if they be Gods Ambassadors, then must they not deliver their
own fancies, or inventions, but that message they received: And as they
received it, so must they better it. And if they do their duties faithfully,
this doctrine is comfortable to them, they take pains, with joy they have a
Master will reward them: they may speak freely, (so it be with discretion)
they have a Master will make it good: they may stand boldly in the face of
their enemies, they have a Master will defend them. And every faithful
Minister may say to himself, I will do my duty, and deliver my embassage. He
whom I serve, and whose I am: He who sent me, and for whom I come, will bear
me out. And thus much of the inquiry which God makes, and the manner of it.

Now let us see the answer which the Prophet makes, in these words. 2 The
Prophets answer.


Then I said, Here am I: send me.

The Prophet after he was comforted by God, and had his sins forgiven, then
answers; Here am I, send me. First mark here, what a great change is
wrought on the sudden: he who a little before, feared and shrunk at the least
appearance of Gods glory: Now stands forth boldly, as soon as he is called,
and answers; Here am I, send me: So great a matter is it for a minister to
have his sins forgiven, and to feel the favor of God to his soul and
conscience. Here therefore we have an answer^ to two great Questions, often
moved in the world.

First, many would have quietness of mind, and peace of conscience, and
cannot attain unto it; If they ask how they might, to them I answer; Here is
the way, seek it not in worldly wealth, carnal pleasures, nor humane
learning, in company nor recreations: but seek it in the favor of God, and
pardon of thy sins, and thou shall not miss of it. Thus shall thou have
comfort in thy own conscience, courage before men, and boldness toward God.

Secondly, many Students in Divinity, would gladly be Ministers, and do much
honor the Calling: but they find a fear and shrinking in themselves, and
thereby an unwillingness to venture upon it. If they ask, how they amend this:
I answer, (or rather the example of his Prophet answers for me); Let that
man set himself in Gods presence, enter into himself, search his conscience,
f^nde out his sins, confess and bewail them to God, crave pardon in
Christ's blood, and grace to leave them, and cease not till he hear the voice
of Gods spirit sounding in his conscience: Thy sins are forgiven thee.

Then when God shall ask whom shall send, thou will answer readily, and with
joy, Here am I, send me.

And again, many are driven from this calling, to behold the contempt and
reproach, and dangers which belong unto it. But let those men mark here the
phrase of this holy Prophet* when God asked, Whom shall I sen^e? He might have
answered: Lord, I would go, but such disgraces and discouragements do
accompany this Function, as I desire to be excused: but he casting aside all
such conceits, answers peremptorily, Here am I, send me. How came this to
pas^e, for certainly the Prophet was as sensible of these wrongs as any of us
all, for he was nobly borne and brought up, and was of the blood royal:
surely, because he saw he was in Gods favor, he had him and his Commission
on his side, and he held this for a sure ground: If God be on my side, who can
be against me?

Therefore doubtless, those men who are driven back by these discouragements,
were never settled in assurance that their sins were forgiven: nor satisfied
sufficiently, that God is on the side of all good Ministers, and that, that
calling as it has his authority from God, so likewise, allowance, blessing,
assistance, and defense of GOD above any other calling: for if they were, they
would scorn the storm, and contemn the contempt of the profane world, and
with much courage and comfort, set their hand to Gods Plough, and say with the
Prophet; Here I am, send me.

Secondly, let us observe, how the Prophet when God asks the question, sends
him not to others, nor commends others to that service, as is to be thought he
might have done many in the Churches of the Jews, but offers himself, Here
am I.

It controlles the carnal courses of many amongst us in the Universities, who
think it sufficient to live there, and send out other men, and give
testimonies and Letters of commendations to other men, but themselves stir
not: when question is made; Who shall go to such a place? or who shall be sent
to such a Parish? they say not, Here am I, but either it is too little a
living, or too great a charge, or ill seated, or some fault it has, that they
will not be sent to it: but will answer God and his Church, there is such a
man, and give him Letters of testimony, or commendation, and so all is well:
but for themselves, they live too sweet and easy lives, willingly to undertake
the attempt and burden of the Ministry. Let such men therefore learn, when
God and his Church give them a calling, to answer with the Prophet: Here am
I, send me.

And let all such as are Students of Divinity in the Universities, mark here
the Prophets answer, not I will be ready, but here I am; why takes he no
longer time? because he was now sufficiently qualified. Where let them learn,
not to linger and lie rioting too long in their spec^da^i^e courses: but when
they are competently furnished with learning, and other qualities befitting
that calling: let them show themselves willing and ready to yield their
service to the Church, when they shall be called. For as an Apple may as well
hang too long on the tree, as be pulled too soon, and both make it unfit for
use: so may men as well stay too long, as go out too soon: and both ways are
made unprofitable, or at least less profitable in the Church.

And to conclude this second point; It is not unworthy to be noted, that the
Prophet says not, Here I am: and I run on my own head, but, Send me.

He wills the Lord to send him: then where are they who dare brag of their
private motions, and will run when they are not sent?

The Prophet might have said; Oh, now I feel a motion from the Spirit,
therefore I will go and preach: but he stays till he be sent in express
terms: Let no man therefore presume to press into this function, till he be
fully resolved in his conscience, that God and his Church has said unto him,
Go.

And though a man be never so well qualified with all manner of sufficiency, yet
let him sit still and stay Gods leisure, and let him say, Here I am, send me:
and so rest contented until he be sent. If any man say it is unfit that a man
should say so of himself; I answer, let him not say so in words, but in
deeds: let him therefore make proof of himself, and give the Church trial of
his gifts. Upon which experience of his gifts, if he be found sufficient, that
practice of his is all one, and much more then if he had said, Here I am,
send me.

Thus we see the Prophet would not stir till he were sent, and therefore in
the next words, he is bid to Go.

And he said, Go and speak unto this people.

Here is the third and last promise, 3 The Commission received.
Namely, the essential words of his Commission. Wherein, (after God had sought
for one to go, and the Prophet had presented himself, and offered his
service) God both gives him leave to go, and further does furnish him with
authority, both to go and speak.

Wherein the principal point is, that the authority of the Prophets calling,
is derived from God him^e^fe, in plain and evident words; Go and speak: and
till then the Prophet went not. So in the New Testament, Matthew. 28.19. Acts
9.6. etc.
the Apostles went not into the world to preach, till they had their
Commission: Go and teach all Nations. And after them, Saint Paul preached not,
till it was said unto him, Arise, and go.

In all which is discovered and condemned the pride and presumption of those
who dare run on their own heads, and will not stay till the Lord say unto them:
Go, and speak. These men are bolder, then either the extraordinary Prophets
of the old Testament, or the Apostles, which are the extraordinary Ministers
of the New: who always had their warrant with the^ when they went. And if any
man ask why is it necessary they should have so; I answer, the reasons are
many.

First, all Prophets and Ministers, are Gods Deputies and Commissioners, it is
therefore reason that they have authority from their Lord and Master.

Secondly, their words nor deeds bear no credit, nor have any power in
them, unless they be spoken by virtue of a Commission* nor have their labors
any blessing: unless God give it.

Thirdly, these persons have no protection, nor safety, unless they be Gods
Ambassadors: and how are they so, unless they be called and sent by God, and
have authority given of God? For these causes, no man is to thrust himself
into the Ministry, without a calling from God, and therefore no marvel,
though those men who will be Chusers, and Callers of themselves, and run when
they are not sent, be in their persons, subject to all dangers: because they
are out of Gods protection, and their labors without profit because no
blessing, nor promise of God was given unto them: for GOD may justly say unto
them: Let him that sent you, protect your persons: let him that sent you,
bless your labors.

But it will then be demanded, how may I know if God bid me go: God speaks
not now from heaven as in old time, and as to this Prophet: I answer, It is
true, we are to look for no such visions, nor apparitions from heaven, for
ordinarily there are none such, and the Popish Church does but deceive
themselves, and cozen the world, who tell us of so many apparitions that happen
to their Monks and Friars: for now ordinarily, God speaks in another manner
to his Church: for in General duties God speaks to us out of his word and
holy Scriptures, and in p^rticular and personal duties, (where the word in
plain terms serves not) he speaks to a man by his own conscience, and by
the voice of his Church.

Out of this word, God shows thee the dignity and excellency of this
calling, 1. Corinthians. 4.1. Job. 33.23
to be a minister of the word: Namely, they are his Messengers and Ambassadors,
etc. that so he may win them to love and affect it. And again, Acts 16.17.
Pro. 29.18
the necessicitie of it, that it teaches the way to sa^uation, that without it
ordinarily Gods Chuch is not gathered, nor men's souls saved, that this may
stir thee up to undertake the burden: this is general. But now particularly
for thy self, would thou know whether GOD would have thee to go or no, then
thou must ask thy own conscience, and ask the Church, for if thou be
heartily willing, and be fully and worthily qualified, then God bids thee go.
Now thy conscience must judge of thy willingness, and the Church of thy
ability: and as thou may not trust other men, to judge of thy inclination or
affection, so thou may not trust thy own judgment, to judge of thy
worthiness or sufficiency. If therefore thy own conscience tell thee upon true
examination, that thou do not love and affect this calling above any other,
then God sends thee not: and if thou enter with such a testimony, not God* but
some wordly and sinister respect does send thee, and put thee forward: for
though thou do desire it, yet if the Church of God give not allowance of
sufficiency, God does not send thee: But if contrariwise, thy conscience do
truly testify unto thee, that thou desire to do service to God and his
Church, in this calling above any other: And if withal, upon signification
hereof to the Church, and upon trial made of thy gifts and sufffciency, the
Church (that is, maly learned, wise, and godly, and such as the Church has
publicly appointed for that purpose) do approve of that they desire, and of
thy sufficiency to do God service in his Ministry, and thereupon by a
public Calling, bid thee go, then assuredly God himself has bid thee go.
And it is as effectual a calling, as if thou heardst the voice of God from
heaven: for as in Repentance, If thy conscience tell thee thou have truly
repented, and if thou can make that known to the Church by so good evidence,
as thereupon a Minister of God pronounces the pardon of thy sins unto the^ If
thou restest herein, and know it to be as effectual, as if God from heaven
had told thee, thy sins are pardoned. So is it here, if thou have the
testimony, first of thy conscience, and then of the Church, thou art to rest
therein, as in the voice of God: And this is the calling that we are to look
for in these days.

By which doctrine, as those are justly condemned of foul presumption, who
dare run upon private motions, and carnal respects, and are justly left
without blessing or protection: so they on the other side, do offer great
wrong to God and to his Church, who when they cannot deny, but they affect the
Ministry above any calling, and have approbation of their gifts from the
good Church, yet will not believe the Testimony of the Church herein, but
their own private Judgments, which in this case is no way a competent Judge,
either for, or against. Let such men know, that they oppose themselves even
against God himself: it being certain, that where the inward calling of the
conscience, and the outward calling of the Church do concur, there God
himself calls and bids that man, Go, and speak.

Now then (to draw to an end) let us observe in the last place, with what
authority a Minister of God comes unto us, and executes his Function: even
with an immediate authority and Commission from God: whereby he is bid, Go,
and speak. If it be so, let it persuade the world, to fear to do any wrong,
either to that calling, as to those persons who come with so fair a commission
from God himself. But if it do not persuade the profane world, at least let
this be a comfort and encouragement to all true Ministers, for if God bid them
go he will go with them himself: If he send them, he will not forsake them,
but assist them, and bless them, and open their mouths, and enlarge their
hearts, and harden their foreheads, and give power unto their words to convert
his children, and to confound and astonish the hearts of his enemies. If he
send them, he will defend and protect them, so that one hair of their heads
shall not fall to the earth without his providence. If he send them, he will
provide for them, and sufficiently reward them: and will honor them in the
hearts of his own people, and magnify them in the faces of their enemies. And
lastly, if he send them, he will pay them their wage, even an eternal might of
comfort here, and of glory in heaven. And as they are here bid go, so once
they shall be bid Come: Math. 25.34. Math. 25.21.
and that not only with the general call of all the Elect. Come ye blessed of
my father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. But even with that particular
Call, with especial blessings to them that are faithful in this service: Come
thou good and faithful servant, enter into thy Masters joy.

Psalm 118 16. Blessed be he that comes in name of the Lord.

W. P.

Daniel 12.3. They that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the
stars for ever and ever.

W. C.

FINIS.

