A GODLY AND LEARNED EXPOSITION UPON THE WHOLE EPISTLE OF IVDE, CONTAINING
THREESCORE AND SIX SERMONS: PREACHED IN CAMBRIDGE BY THAT REVEREND AND
FAITHFVLL MAN OF GOD, Master WILLIAM PERKINS, AND NOW, AT THE REQVEST OF HIS
EXECVTORS, published by THOMAS TAILOR, Preacher of Gods Word. WHEREUNTO IS
PREFIXED A LARGE ANALYSIS, CONTAINING the sum and order of the whole book,
according to the Authors own method. TO WHICH ARE FVRTHER ADDED FOUR BRIEF
TABLES, to direct the Reader in the finding, of either; 1. Common places of
Religion. 2. More general doctrines. 3. Questions determined. 4. Places of
Scripture, either expounded, or cleared from corruption.


REVEL. 3.11. Behold, I come shortly: hold that which thou have, that no man
take away thy crown. LONDON, Printed by FELIX KYNGSTON for THOMAS MAN,
dwelling in Pater noster row, at the sign of the Talbot. 1606.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM LORD RVSSEL, BARON OF THORNEHAVGH: Grace and
all good blessings from God our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
RIght Honorable, as it cannot be but true, which Truth it self has uttered:
1. Sam. 2.30.
Him that honors me, I will honor; no more can it be but sure payment which
such a creditor has undertaken, and not by any surety, but by himself to be
performed. Bootlesly had the world been betrusted with such a charge; which by
suffering some to walk through dishonor, and by pouring out contempt upon
others, unwittingly suiteth the condition of the servants to the case of the
Son, who said: Ioh. 8.49.
I honor the Father, but ye dishonor me. Well then is it with us, that he
whose bare word is above all bonds, has said, I will honor: not those who by
treading down his honor, honor themselves, neither whom men honor, nor who
honor men; but those who honor him: by Mal. 1.6.
loving him as a Father, and ^eaing him as a Lord. Not that any man can enlarge
his honor; the Job. 11.7.
infinite perfection whereof is in it self incapable of any accession: nor that
any can of himself express this honor; seeing himself Philip. 2.13.
works ^^th such wills and deeds also, of his own good pleasure: neither
that if any ^ould, he might merit the return of honor; for all that Luke
17.10
were but his ^utie: nor that if any could and would, he should thereby profit
God, ^o whom Psalm. 16.^
man's goodness is not extended: nor lastly, if any could, and ^ould not; God
should thereby be disprofited; for Job. 35.6.7.
if one be wicked he ^^^teth not him: but because the Lord, who delights to
be the portion ^f Jacob, is pleased to accept the broken and homely service of
his chil^^en, as an high honor done unto himself; and themselves as honorers
^f him, and such as he (by crowning his own work in them) cannot ^ut honor.

But Ester 6.6.
what shall be done to the man whom this King will honor? Ans. If Baltazer
King of Babel were to promise his highest honors: Dan. 5.7.
if Ester 6.8.
Ha^an were to advise Ahashuerosh King of 27. Provinces, in the bestowing (...)
what honors himself could wish or hope: if Genesis 41.43.
Pharaoh should call ^gaine his Nobles to consultation, how to enlarge Joseph's
aduance^ents: no more could be either promised, expected or performed, than
^^at such a one should be arraied with royal attire, as cloth of purple,
(...) fine linen; with a golden chain about his neck, the Kings Ring (...)
his hand, his princely Diadem set upon his head, and withal by pro^^^mation
published the third man or Viceroy in the kingdom. Which (...)

infinite in recital: and partly for that these have most valiantly like
David's worthies broken thorough these Philistims forces, and brought unto us in
despite of them the pure water of the well of life; among whom this our Author
last named was not the least, nor of so small note through the Christian world,
that I can think by my pen to add any moment unto his: whose writings so
sauory and so innocent have sufficiently proclaimed his profound knowledge in
all learning, his prudent zeal, his mature judgment, with an admirable
dexterity and facility, yea I may say felicity, (for herein he reigned,
that I may use the phrase of the reverend Deane of his Majesty's Chapel,
properly applied unto him at his funerals, which with singular approbation he
performed) in the direct resolving the obscurest doubts of Divinity, and the
acute loosing and dissoluing the hardest knots of Papists, so briefly and yet
so perspicuously, as that his most polemicall writings, Reformed Catholic.
being first by himself in our vulgar tongue published, could scarce meet even
amongst our common people, with such an incapable reader (if any whit
catechized) into whom they might not convey some competent conceit and
understanding of the deepest and darkest differences between the Papists,
those patrons and defenders of darkness, and our selves. But besides these, such
a tongue of the learned had the Lord God given him, that he knew to minister,
and ministered according to knowledge a word in due time to him that was weary:
Isa. 50.4.
the which most weighty duty of the Ministry was so familiar unto him, that he
made it his holidayes exercise (as his recreation) to resolve cases of
conscience. In his ordinary Ministry how powerful was he? Which of his hearers
cannot confess that he spoke as one having authority? Add now unto these his
labors, an holy and harmless life: for why should I disioyne them, seeing
they were so happily combined in him? between which two (both of them
conspiring to the glory of God, and his cause) was such a sweet harmony and
concent, that in reading his writings any man might see the manner of his life,
and in seeing his life, he might also therein read his writings: for his life
spak^ what his pen writ, and his person was the president of his written
precepts. Bu^ when these unweariable labors had quickly worn out such a
candle, who so free^ly spent himself to give others light; such a life was not
shut up, but by a propor^tionall, even a religious and christian death: of the
which when God made (wit^ some others) my self a beholder, I could not but
conceive him a messenger on^ of a thousand, singled out by God to give
directions to others, both how to live and that well, as also in the right
manner of dying well, who himself wa^ so trained to a blessed death by a holy
life, whereby he became both in life an^ death a most happy and blessed man,
for whose written precepts concerning both the whole Church is bound to bless
God with us: but especially we his ordinar^ hearers in Cambridge, who besides
were also the beholders of both, cannot be (...) so much the more strengthened
and confirmed (our own heedlesse ingratitude (...) resisting or withstanding
us) by how much the eye is quicker then the ear, an^ the sight a more certain
sense then can be the hearing. But we will leave hi^ with God, and omit those
worthy works which himself whilst he lived (acco^^ding as the relaxation
both from the weekly labors of his calling, and the day^ weakness of his body
would permit) did publish, not only for the watering of the famous Seminary
where he lived, but even out of his abundance and full bucke^^ to the
refreshing of all the heritage of God, and come to our own purpose. It is
(...) now to be wished; but bewailed rather, that all his works were not
finished by hi^^selfe before his own course, seeing the orphane writings of
the learned publish^^ by others are commonly less polished: for sometimes the
Authors mind is not ^^^ken, and sometimes his matter is mistaken, otherwhiles
his form is inuert^^ and not seldom either his own elegances and proprieties
which are like goads we neglected, or something besides his own is injuriously
inserted: but yet the Lord having loosed him from his labors, the christian
care of his executors commends it self to the Church herein, that before it
should be deprived of any part of his pains so profitably employed, desirous
they are to communicate them, ^f not altogether in such exact manner as they
would, yet as perfectly as they can, contented rather to hazard the due regard
of the author himself, by committing unto his scholars hands the publishing
of his labors, then that the Church should want them by their holding and
hiding them with themselves. As for my self, my wish was to have been spared
in these pains, both because of my own weekly employments, and that in this
place wherein the business might have been committed to diverse others far
better furnished with gifts, and fitted with opportunity then my self: but
especially seeing how safe and wise a thing it is to sit silent where a man
need not speak, and that in these days wherein every man's (...) is in every
man's boat, and most men are become left handed in receiving things which are
reached unto them with the right; Judge. 20.16
too like the 700. left handed Beniamites, whose sole commendation seems to
stand in this, that they can throw stones and darts against others at a
haire-breadth and not fail: yet notwithstanding considering my calling
hereunto, as also being after a sort reared (...) by the Poets rule, (...).
Euripid.
not doubting but that the matter following is far better then silence, I was
contented at the instant entreaty of the Authors executors to ^ndertake the
publishing of this Epistle, which himself had in his heart (if God had given
him longer time) to have with his own hand set and sent out in it (...) native
beauty and perfection: wherein what my pains have been, they only (...) who
have fathered other men's posthumous writings. I have not trodden in their steps
who make the grounds of the authors serve their own discourses (for so should
I have made this exposition containing in it the sum of 66. Sermons, exceed
the measure even of a tedious Commentary) but in the Authors own, who was wont
to transcribe out of the notes of some of his hearers, the heads, and ^^rrow of
things more largely in public delivered, explaining the points which ^ere more
obscure, and with a second hand polishing and perfecting things so explained.
Yea herein imitating not only the Author of the Commentary, but (...) of the
text and Epistle, the Apostle Jude himself: who perceiving the men ^f his
days quickly waxing weary of hearing or reading Sermons or Epistles, if
^^tended to any length or prolixitie, condiscended so far to their infirmity
as (...) contract, and abridge much matter into a very short and summarie
Epistle. Upon the same consideration also have I studied brevity, so far as
in such mul^^plicitie of matter I might avoid obscurity: having herein
employed my best p^^^es, that it might appear that though I may have failed in
other complements, yet so far as my endeavor could erect me, not in
faithfulness to the Author either of the text or Commentary. The fitnes and
seasonablenes of this exposition may seem to plead for the more gracious
acceptance of it: which being ^^eathed out by the Apostolical spirit against
the heretics, and heresies which ^ere to infect, and infest the last ages of
the world, may by Gods blessing in the due (...) hereof, strengthen the people
of God in the land, in the discerning and (...) both the wicked seducers
themselves daily sent in amongst us: those Popish instruments (I mean) who
(like so many devils compassing the earth) (...) so diligent to compass sea
and land to make carnal Protestants Popish Prose^^^es, and so seuen-fold more
the children of the devil than they were before; as (...) their diabolical
doctrines which every where it meets withal. Let them out of their malice
(as that foul mouthed Franciscane Feuerdentius, Out of ^elsa^^us a ^unnagate
Friar.
who has not throughout his book passed many lines without some egregious lie
or other) apply the scope of the Epistle to black the doctrines and lives of
those most excellent instruments of God the restorers of true religion, Luther,
Calvin, Beza, etc. yet as a millstone rolled up a mountain, or as a ball tossed
against a brazen wall; so returns and recoyleth it upon themselves, as this
grave Divine has through this Exposition in particular divinely proved. Read
it (Christian Reader) with diligence, faithfully consider and remember what
thou read, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things, and build
thee up further upon thy most holy faith.

From my house in Cambridge, May 24. Anno 1606. Thine in the Lord Jesus, THO.
TAILOR.

A brief view of the whole Epistle, drawn according to the Authors own
method.
The Epistle contains three parts: 1. Salutation, wherein are considered the
Person saluting described by his Name: Jude. Office: a servant of Jesus Christ.
Alliance: brother of James.
Persons saluted, members of the militant Church, which are Called, Sanctified
of God the Father, Reserved to Jesus Christ.
Form of salutation, vz. a prayer for Blessings, Mercy. Peace, Love.
Increase of blessings: be multiplied.

2. Exhortation, wherein are considered the Motives exciting the Apostle, vz.
1. His Love. Beloved. 2. His Ready mind: Gave diligence, enlarged by three
arguments. 1. All diligence. 2. To write unto you (when he could not speak^.)
3. Of most weighty matters: Of the common salvation.
3. The present necessity: It was needful for me.
Matter. Propounded, vz. to maintain the faith: wherein are considered the 1.
Parties Maintaining: Saints. Oppugning: Seducers.
2. Means of maintenance, vz. By fight: the 1. Kind: Spiritual. 2. Weapons.
1. Doctrine. 2. Confession. 3. Example. 4. Prayer.


Confirmed by 1. The state of the Church in his time pestered with enemies,
described by their 1. Hypocrisy: Crept in. 2. State before God: Ordained of
old to this condemnation. 3. Religion: Ungodly men they are. 4. Doctrine:
which turn the grace of our God into vvantonnes. 5. Lives: and deny God the
only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
2. A prolepsis answered in a perfect form of syllogism, consisting of a 1.
Proposition, vz. Whosoever takes liberty to sin shall be destroyed: proved by
example of Men. Here consider the Persons destroyed: the people, vz.
Israelites. Time: after he (God) had delivered them out of Egypt. Cause: which
believed not.
Angels, here consider the 1. Persons sinning: the Angels. 2. Sin it self, and
in it the 1. Author set down Negatiuely: not God. Affirmatively: but
themselves* (...)
2. Parts Negative: which kept not their first (...). Affirmative: but left
their own habitation.
3. Measure of their fall: A total defection.
3. Punishment in two degrees. 1. Custody: Reserved in chains under darken.
2. Full punishment: unto the judgment of the (...)*

Cities with their 1. Names: Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about them. 2.
Sins 1. According to Nature 1. Committed fornication. 2. Followed strange flesh.
2. Against Nature 1. Committed fornication. 2. Followed strange flesh.

3. Punishment: wherein Use, set forth for example. Matter, suffered vengeance
of eternal fire.


2. Assumption, vz. But these seducers take liberty to sin: proved by
enumeration of their sins in their 1. Ground or fountain Dreamers. 2. Kind^.
1. Uncleanness: They defile the flesh. 2. Contempt of Magistracy. 1. Proved
from their Affection or judgment: They despise government. Speech or practice:
speak evil of them that are in authority.
2. Amplified three ways. 1. They blaspheme glories and dignities 2. By
comparison from the greater, thus: Michael durst not raile^ enlarged by the 1.
Persons contending 1. Michael (...) 2. (...).
2. Cause: about the body of Moses. 3. Speech of Michael: The Lord rebuke (...)
3. They speak evil of a thing they know not.

3. Intemperance in it, the Cause: natural knowledge. Work: corrupt
themselves as beasts without reason.
4. Cruelty against Gods people, comparatively called Cains way. 5.
Covetousness by similitude from Balaam with the Measure: they are powered out, or
cast away. Ground: Hope of reward, or wages.
6. Ambicious gainsaying of the truth, illustrated by Comparison: with that of
Core. The end of that: Perished in it as he did.
7. Riotousnes; proved by exampl^ and instance from Loue-feasts, in which. 1.
Sin: Fed themselves with neglect of the (...) (...)
2. Ground of it: without fear, vz. of God. 3. Fruit of it: makes them spots
in the^^ (...)
8. Unprofitableness in their places: Clouds without water. 9. Inconstancy:
Carried about with every vvinde, as light clouds. 10. Ba^renne^ in themselves,
illustrated by a comparison, and described by four degrees of naughtines, vz.
1. Corrupt trees, that is, without good fruit, 2. Altogether fruitless, that
is, without any fruit. 3 Hopeless of fruit: twice dead, that is,
certainly. 4. Hopeless of life it self: Plucked up by the (...).
11. Impatience: raging waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame. 12.
Unstableness in doctrine: vvandring stars. 13. Murmuring. 14. Complaining,
which proceeds from Coffeehouse with their outward present estate. The
frowardnes of their own disposition.
15. VValking after their own lusts. 16. Proud boasting. 17. Admiration of
men's persons. 18. Covetousness: for advantage.

3. Conclusion, inserted in verses 13.14.15. vz Therefore these seducers shall
be destroyed. This conclusion is Propounded verse. 13. For whom is reserved
black darkness. Confirmed verse. 14.15. and that by an ancient testimony, in it
consider the 1. Author. Enoch not the fourth, but the seventh from Adam Cains
son* of Seth. 2. Preface. He prophesied of such, saying. 3. The testimony it
self, wherein 1. The Lords coming to judgment. 2. His judgment being come,
which is General, to judge all (...) Special Persons all (...) Manner, (...)
convince.

3. Cause of this judgment 2. fold. Deeds described by Quality: (...) Manner
of (...) ungodly.
Words set out by 2. properties. Cruel. Vttred (...) him. i. (...)





3. An Apostolical testimony that such there should be in it. 1. A preface: But
ye beloved remember, etc. verse. 17. 2. The testimony it self, and in it are
two things. 1. The time when these wicked men shall abound: in the last times.
2. What manner of persons they shall be, described by two properties. 1.
Mockers. 2. Fleshly, walking after their own lusts.

3. The application of it to these persons, who are indeed 1. Mockers, common
to makers of Sects. 2. Fleshly, having not the spirit.

4. A direction in some means tending to this maintenance of faith in 5. rules
concerning 1. Faith, on which as upon a foundation they must build up
themselves, enforced by A motive: most holy faith. The means: praying in the
Holy Ghost.
2 Love of God, in which they must keep themselves. 3. Hope: looking for the
mercy of God, etc. and in it three things, the 1. Person on whom the Saints
must wait by hope, vz. our Lord Jesus Christ 2. Thing for which they must
wait, vz. Gods mercy in Christ. 3. End of their hope: Eternal life.
4. Christian meeknes in recovering weak offenders, in which consider the 1.
Way to begin this recovery: in putting difference. 2. Manner of performance:
Have compassion of some.
5. Christian severity in gaining of obstinate sinners: in it the 1. Rule it
self: Others save with fear. 2. Manner of it: Pulling them out of the fire.
3. Caveat for better observation of it: and hate even the garment which is
spotted by the flesh.




3. Epilogue or conclusion, consisting on a praising of God: wherein three
things. 1. Person praised: Christ Jesus. 2. Inducements moving to praise him,
drawn from 1. His power. Propounded here: To him which is able, etc. Amplified
by four effects. 1. Keeping the Saints that they fall not. 2. Presenting them
faultlesse, that is, justifying them. 3. Presenting them in the judgment day
before the presence of his glory. 4. Possessing them with joy everlasting.

2. His wisdom: To God only wise. 3. The work of our redemption: our Savior.
3. Form of praise, wherein four things. 1 What things are ascribed to God,
vz Glory, majesty, dominion, power. 2. That these belong to Christ only. 3.
The circumstance of time, now and for ever. 4. The affection of the heart ever
needful in the worship of God: in the word, Amen.




A GODLY AND LEARNED EXPOSITION UPON THE EPISTLE OF IVDE, EXPLAINED IN PVBLIKE
LECTVRES BY that reverend man of God, M. WILLIAM PERKINS, and now published for
the use of the Church of God.
Verse. 1. Jude (or Judas) a servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to
them which are called and sanctified of God the father, and reserved to Jesus
Christ.
THe general aim and scope of this Epistle, is partly to declare the duty of
all Christians, and partly to set out the corruptions of those, and these days
and times; in both which every one may receive edification, who are desirous
either to follow the former, or avoid the latter. In which general
consideration, we are to note three things concerning this Epistle, before we
come to show the parts of it in particular.

First the Authority, Secondly the Superscription, Thirdly the Argument or
substance of it.

First concerning the Authority, two questions are to be answered.

The first question, whether this Epistle be canonical scripture.

And secondly, how we may know the certeinty of it.

Concerning the former: Luther and others, who acknowledge it to be a
profitable w^iting, deny it to be Canonical scripture, and allege four
reasons.

Object. 1.
First they say, Jude calls himself a servant of Jesus Christ, and not an
Apostle, but all the new Testament was penned or approved by some Apostle.

^
This hinders not but that he was one of the Apostles, who also called
themselves servants of Jesus Christ, as Paul Romans 1.1. and Peter, 2. Pet. 1.1.
Secondly, by this reason the Epistles to the Philip. and Philemon, as also of
James, John etc. might be rejected.

Thirdly he calls himself as much as an Apostle.

Jude writes of such things as the Apostles themselves had formerly foretold,
Object. 2.
verse. 17. Therefore he was no Apostle.

Jude lived after the Apostles Paul and Peter, Answer.
who with John were the last of the Apostles, and living after their decease
(who were the principal) might very well put them in mind of those things they
had foretold.

In the ninth verse, Object. 3.
he brings in a profane Author, concerning the strife and disputation
between Michael the Archangell, and the devil, about Moses body, which cannot
be found in Canonical scripture; as also of Enoch the seventh from Adam, out
of profane writers.

By this reason, Answer.
neither should the Epistle of Titus be Scripture, seeing Paul makes mention
of the profane Poet Epimenides, Titus 1.12. nor the epistle to the Corinthes,
where is brought in the speech of Menander, 1. Cor. 15.33. nor the Acts of the
Apostles: where Aratus the Poet is cited. Acts 17.21.

This Epistle is taken out of Saint Peter from whom this Author has borrowed
both the matter and manner. Object. 4.
Therefore this Jude was no Apostle, but some scholar of theirs.

If this were sufficient to prove this Epistle not authentical, Answer.
then the whole books of Samuel, the Kings, and Chronicles should be cast out
of the Canon by the same reason: which take the matter from Civil Chronicles:
Now if it be lawful to take matter out of Civil Chronicles, why may not one
Scripture be taken out of another? we must therefore (notwithstanding these
weak allegations) esteem this Epistle to be the Canonical Scripture, and
the eternal word of God, as our Church, and the Church in all ages has
received it. And now in the second place see how we may come to be resolved
that it is so to be allowed: Quest. 2.
which we may in this resemblance. An Indenture between man and man is known
to be sufficient two ways. First by the matter and contents therein, which
plainly shows an act passed, and done: secondly, by adding and annexing
thereunto certain outward signs and testimonies, as the hands and seals of
the parties, the hands and names of the witnesses corroborating and
strengthening the same: the first is good in it self (though not so confirmed
to the parties) without the second: but the second is nothing without the
first: but if both th^se shall concur and be specified in the Indenture,
then it is absolutely authentical, both in it self, and unto the parties. If
this be applied to the scripture, it shall be apparent to be no less ratified
then such an Indenture. For first consider but the Contents and matter it
self of it, it will speak the certeinty and truth of it: read over the
Epistle, you shall find the whole matter agreed upon by the Prophets and
Apostles: and for the testimony, the Catholic and common consent of the
Church, or greatest part since the Apostles days, has set to her hand and
seal that it is the truth of God, no less assured then other books of the
Canon: which assent of the church, though it cannot make us, yet may move us
accordingly to entertayne it. Besides, if we consider the ends, as also the
effects of this scripture (which are the same with any part of the Canonical)
we cannot but confess that it is the holy and sacred truth of God, all of it
conspiring with all the other to the advancing of Gods glory, and furthering
of man's salvation. So much of the authority of this Epistle.

The second point is the Superscription, which is in these words: The
Catholic Epistle of Jude. This title seems to be prefixed rather by some
Scribe afterward, then by Jude himself: first because this title (
Catholic) was not heard of in the Church whilst the Apostles lived; so as it
is not so ancient as the Epistle.

Secondly the title seems to be unfit for this and other Epistles entitled
after the same manner, and may be well forborne; as the Epistles of Peter are
called Canonical, which are no more Canonical then others.

Thirdly, most of the Post-scripts are uncertain, if not false: as of that
after the second Epistle to Timothy: in which Timothy is called an elect
Bishop of Ephesus, and yet commanded to do the work of an Evangelist, 2.
Timoth. 4.5. which cannot stand together, to be the Bishop of one place, and
also universally to preach unto the whole world following the Apostles, as the
Evangelists duty was: and so of others. This title then was not added by the
Apostle, but by some Scribe that copied out the Epistle: it is not therefore
holy Scripture as the Epistle is.

The third point concerning the Epistle in general, is the argument: which
does exhort all Christians to constancy and perseverance in their profession
of the Gospel. Secondly, to beware and take heed of false teachers, and
deceivers which craftily creep in amongst them: And thirdly these deceivers
are lively set out in their colors; and with them their destruction.

Now concerning the Epistle it self, and the special parts of it.

Of it there be three parts: first a Salutation in the 1. and 2. verses:
Secondly an Exhortation, from the 3. verse, to the end of the 23. Thirdly, a
Conclusion, from that to the end of the Chapter. In the Salutation consider
three things.

First the person that wrote this Epistle: Jude.

Secondly, the persons to whom he wrote: to those which were called,
sanctified of God the father, and reserved to Jesus Christ.

Thirdly the Prayer, ordinary in Apostolical salutations: mercy unto you,
etc.

Concerning the first, namely the writer of this Epistle, observe three
things, first his name, Jude, secondly his office, a servant of Jesus Christ.
Thirdly his Alliance, and brotherhood, being of the kindred of Christ himself.

First of his name, Jude or Judas, which Judas the son of Alpheus, the
brother of James, and so near allied unto Christ; who was the writer of this
Epistle. The other was Judas Iscariot, or Judas the traitor the son of Simon
who could not write this Epistle because he died before Christ.

In this name consider two things. First the occasion of it, and secondly the
variety of his name. The occasion of this name is set down with the reason of
it in the 29. of Genesis 35. When Leah had borne three sons unto Jacob, she
conceived again and bare a fourth son, saying, Now I will praise the Lord,
therefore she called his name Judah, which signifies praise or confession: so
no doubt did Alpheus the father of this Jude at his birth give him such a name
as might move not only himself but his child after him to thankfulness and
confession of Gods goodness. So ought every father in imposing his childrens
names with Alpheus, and every mother with Leah make such choice of names as
themselves and their children may be put in mind, yea, and stirred up to good
duties, even so often as they shall hear or remember their own names. The
second point in this name is the variety of the names of Jude, he was called
Thaddeus, Mark. 3.18: and Lebbeus, Matthew. 10.3: all which signify the same
thin, gand all put in mind of the same duty. Here two Questions may be
asked. (...)* 1. (...).
First why was he called by so many names? Some think he had all these names
given him by the people and multitude, as signifying all one thing: others
(which is more probable) that he was thus called by the Apostles themselves
rather then by his own name, that the horrible fact of Judas in betraying his
Master should be utterly with his name forgotten.

(...). 2.
A second question is, whether may a man change his name, or no?

^
If the change thereof be no preiuidce to any man; much less hurtefull to the
Church or common-welth, nor offends the faithful, but wholly tends to the
glory of God, and good of men, it may be altered and changed: As Saul a great
persecutor, being called to be a publisher and Patron of the Gospel, changed
his name into Paul: as also Solomon was at the first called by his Mother
Iedidiah: Peter, at first called Simon Bariones, Christ afterward gave him a
new name, and he accepted it. Yet hence the too common practice of the world
cannot be warranted, who for fraud and deceit do alter their names: which
when it is not intended may warrantably be done: as in time of persecution in
the reign of King Edward the 6. Bucer changed his name, Beza writ two Homilies
concerning the sacrament under the title of Nathaniel Nesekins: and Caluins
Institutions printed under the name of Alcninus the Master of Charles the
Great, Anno 1534.
and both called himself, and suffered others to call him Aretius Felinus: so
did diverse other worthy men in those days seeking no other then the glory of
God, and good of the Church in their own saftie: and that the Papists not
knowing their names might read their writings without prejudice.

The second thing in the person writing, is his office: being called [ a
servant of Jesus Christ] which is not so generally to be understood as meant of
every professor of Christ and believer, who is a servant of the Lord Jesus: but
of a special service, namely of Apostleship, to which he was deputed.

Wherein consider two things. First, that he was called to be an Apostle and
servant of Christ to plant the Church of the Gentiles: Secondly, that he did
faithfully execute his function, and performed his service.

First he pleades his calling; for two causes: first in regard of others, and
secondly in respect of himself. First that his doctrine might with more
attention, and reverence be received of others, seeing he run not unsent but
was called, and that to an Apostleship; and therefore he spoke not of himself,
but wholly and immediately directed by God.

Secondly for the confirming and comforting of himself, that the Lord who had
called him would stand by him, both in protecting his person, and prospering
his work in his hand.

Use. Seeing the Apostle Jude before he writes lays down his calling; so
ought all Ministers to make their calling the foundation of all their
proceedings, containing themselves within the compass thereof, even as they
are to teach the same duty unto all sorts of men, that they tempt not the
Lord, by passing the bonds and limits of their calling.

Secondly, in that Jude, though he was of the same Tribe, yea of near alliance
unto Christ, yet he passes by all these respects which he might have stood
upon, and contenteth himself with the title of a [ servant of Christ:] We
learn to make more account, and esteem it a greater privilege to be a
servant of Jesus Christ, than to be of the kindred of Kings, and allied to
the greatest Monarchs of the world: Christ himself shows us what kindred
should take up our chief delight, when he turned himself from his Mother,
and Brethren, and beholding his hearers said, those were his mother, sisters
and brethren that hear the word of God, and keep it: this alliance in the
faith was nearer and dearer unto him then that in the flesh. If then thou
stand upon thy preferment, strive to be the servant of Christ, which is more
honorable then to be the son of a King, to be a follower of Chist, is more
then to go before the Rulers of the earth. But if thou ask how shall I come
to this preferment? Himself answers thee, thou must give up thy self to
hear his word and do it, that is, learn to know, and obey his will, this is
the maine duty of a servant, endeavor to please the Lord in keeping faith and
good conscience thou art in the way of preferment, and art admitted a servant
of Christ.

Thirdly: If we be admitted the servants and followers of Christ, we must
serve no other Master, but keep our selves from being entangled either with
the offenses, or affairs of the world, as to be vassals thereto: no man can
serve two, much less more Masters of such contrary commaundes. Let none
pretend to be the servant of Christ, who by loving pleasure more the^ God, or
seeking earth more then heaven, disgrace such a profession.

The third thing in the person writing, Brother of Iames] of which name there
were two, first, James the son of Zebedeus, whose death is mentioned in the 12.
of the Acts by Herod: the second was the son of Alpheus, here mentioned:

First, that he might distinguish himself from the other Judas the traitor.
Secondly, that he might win further credit and attention to his doctrine,
seeing he was no unknown person, but one that came of the worthiest stock
that was upon the face of the earth; and for this cause he mentions his
brother James, who was better known, as being the President of the Council at
Jerusalem and a choice pillar of the Church in his time, Act. 15.13: not to
credit himself, but this Scripture (which otherwise is in it self
sufficiently powerful) by the mention of him.

Now follows the second thing in the Salutation: that is, the person to whom
Jude wrote, in these words [ unto those who are called, and sanctified by God
the father, The Scrip^tures writ^ten proper^ly for the Church, that it might be
ga^hered and streng^thened thereby.
and preserved by Jesus Christ] it is, the militant Catholic Church, which is
lively described to be the number of believers dispersed thorough the face of
the whole world; who are effectually called, and sanctified and preserved unto
life everlasting: Out of which description note:

First, who and what they be that are members of this Church: namely no wicked
or profane persons, but only the elect, such as are chosen unto life
everlasting, who after receive their calling unto holiness, and therein are
assuredly preserved unto life* which privileges no wicked person, no
unrepentant sinner can be partaker of, but only the Church of the first borne,
as in Heb. the 12; whose names are written in the book of life, and who
receive daily spiritual increase: for howsoever in the Catholic Church there
be two sorts of men professing religion: the one, of them that do unfeignedly
believe, and are sanctified; the other, of them who make a show of faith, but
indeed believe not, but remain in their sins: of the former does the
Catholic Church consist, and not of the latter, who are no members s^t into
the head of this body, though they may seem so to be.

Secondly, this confuteth the Romish Church, who teach and hold that a
reprobate may be a member of this Church.

Thirdly, that none can be the head of this Church and Catholic congregation
but only Christ, for he only knows them, who and where they be thorough the
face of the whole earth: not the Pope or any other creature has any headship
over this company who are given and properly appertain unto the Son of God.

Fourthly, that this Catholic Church is invisible and cannot by the eye of
flesh be discerned; for what eye (except of faith) can see or discern the
depth of Gods election or whom he has effectually called? yea and who can
infalliblie determine of the things that are within a man? and therefore this
is a matter of faith, not of sense, an Article of our belief, not the object
of our sight, seeing faith is an evidence of things not seen: which again
overthrows that Romish doctrine, which teaches that the Catholic Church is
visible and apparent upon earth, and so destroy that Article of our faith.

Fifthly, that this Catholic Church being preserved by God the Father to life
everlasting, cannot utterly perish and be dissolved: all other congregations
and particular Churches being mixed, and the greatest part not predestinate may
fail, yet this cannot be overcome, Romans 11.7. this election of God shall
obtain, though the rest be hardened. The gates of hell shall not prevail
against the faith of the Church, because faithful and true is he that has
spoken, and who will preserve in this Church a succession of wholesome and sound
doctrine, and heaven and earth shall be sooner dissolved, than on jot of the
same shall fail and perish.

Object.
But though that fail not, the Church may fall from that, and so fail.

^
That particular Churches, and of them the most famous, have been ruined, yea
and fallen away, and so may do, is evident by the Churches of Ephesus,
Corinth, Galatia, etc. and no marvel, seeing these consisted ever of mixed
persons, but the Catholic Church consisting only of a number elected and
called, though it also (not being as yet without wrinkle) may err and fail in
some smaller points: yet being preserved by God to life, cannot possibly fail
in the maine and foundation.

This doctrine affords strong consolation to the elect of God, both in regard
of their frequent falls and infirmities, whereby they might fear to cast
themselves quite out of favor; as also in regard of the manifold assaults, and
bickerings, which in the world they do and shall endure, whereby they might
seem to the outward veiw to perish: yet the truth is, neither of both need so
dismay them, but that their faith and hope may still be revived and
strengthened, seeing they are preserved to salvation.

Sixthly, here are better notes of a true Church then the Papists Antiquity,
Succession, Multitude, etc. which can be no notes. Frst for Antiquity: in the
beginning was a true Church, but no Antiquity. Secondly, succession fails:
for what men soever are called and sanctified, are the Church: Thirdly,
multitude no note: for if there be a calling and sanctification of men, there
is a Church, be there many or few: The church (...) to persons or places, but
(...) Christ's (...).
But the true notes are the means of calling to the faith by the doctrine of
the Prophets and Apostles, and obedience thereunto, proceeding forward in
sanctification, even until death; without which notes none can truly say they
are of the Catholic Church* By which we may know the Church of England to be
the true visible Church of God, called and sanctified in the truth, Ioh. 8.31.

Now to proceed, we are in the next place to entreat of the order which God
observes in bringing men by degrees to life everlasting: And first of the
calling mentioned; which is a work of God, who of his mere favor and grace
calls vile and miserable men out of the world, and inuiteth them to life
everlasting: to understand which we must know that the calling of God is two
fold. The first is general, when God calls a whole Nation, kingdom, and
country, that is, when he offers them salvation in the means; as when he
sends his word amongst them, affordes them the Sacraments to seal the
Covenant, given leave to approach him in prayer, and all this in the Ministry
of men, that man might call man* yea when he vouchsafes private means far
inferior to the former, yet often serving for a general calling, a^ is the
reading of the Scriptures, yea of men's writings, and some time report^, as in
Rahab^ example, and the woman of Samaria; by these means the Lord generally
calls men, offering, but often not giving grace offered, in great judgment
turning away from a froward people.

If God offer, but give not grace, Object.
it is a deluding of men:

No, Answer.
for first a man was once able to receive it: secondly, hereby he makes them
without execuse whom he will destroy: thirdly, hereby he keeps the wicked in
outward order.

Use: Considering to be called of God is the first step to life everlasting,
and we in this Church of England are thus called, it remains that every man
should answer this calling.

How shall this be done? Question.


Frame thy heart to answer God, Answer.
as David did when God bad him seek his face: Thy face O Lord will I seek:
see also Mark 9.23.24. of the father of the possessed child, and Psalm. 40.6.7.
when David's ear was pierced, he answered: Lord I come: this ought to be the
Answer of our hearts to the Lords voice sounding in the Ministry.

The second calling is more special, when grace is not only offered, but given
also by God, thorough the effectual working of his spirit in our hearts: which
is the beginning of grace in us, he himself laying the first foundation of
it: by giving power to receive the word, to mingle it with faith, and bring
forth the fruits of new obedience; for the better conceiving of the nature of
it consider six points.

First the ground and foundation of it, namely Gods eternal free election of
us unto life everlasting, as 2. Tim. 1.9. when I say free, I exclude not only
whatsoever man can imagine within himself as vain in procuring such good unto
himself, as not of works, says Paul, least any should boast; but also placing
the ground of all our good out of our selves in the counsel of God, which the
Apostle calls his good purpose, Romans 8.28: yea to show the freenes of this
grace, it is thence denominated and called the election of grace.

Secondly the means of this calling, which in the Lords hands are diverse;
whereof some prepare to calling, othersome are instruments of it: as first the
reading of the Scriptures, serving to bege^ ^ general historical faith.
Secondly, afflictions in body, goods, name, friends or otherwise tending to
humble a man and prepare his heart as soft ground. Thirdly, the denouncing of
Gods judgments, and threats of the law which sends to hell, but gives no
grace: these are general preparatiues: others are instruments to effect inward
calling, as the preaching of the glad tidings of the Gospel, which is the most
principal and effectual means of this special and effectual vocation: and
to this Paul ascribes it, as 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. whereunto he called you by our
Gospel: that this is true, consider a two fold work of this Ministry, when
it is powerfully applied to the hearts of men. First it opens the very heart
of a man, and lays him out to the beholding of himself, showing him that by
his detestable sins he has made himself more ugly in Gods eyes than any Toade
can be in man's: whereby he is prepared not to lie asleep in this estate, but
unto the second work, which is to apprehend and apply the blood and merits of
Christ (exhibited in the Gospel) for the washing and bathing of his sinful
soul, that so he may be saved from wrath.

Thirdly, the persons that are called: those are mentioned, Romans 30. namely
those whom he had before predestinate, those he called: which seems to be
expounded in Acts 13.48. So many as were ordained to life everlasting believed,
that is, were called unto the faith: all therefore are not called.

It pleases some to teach another doctrine, namely that God for his part calls
all men effectually, and gives them a power to believe if they will; but the
difference, say they, is in the will of man; to prove which they bring this
comparison: The Sun shines on wax and clay equally, the wax is softened, but
the clay is hardened. But this is not true out of the Scriptures: for it is not
given to all to understand the mysteries of the kingdom, Matthew. 13.11. these
things are hid from most of the wise of the world, and reueiled unto babes,
Matthew. 11.25. Knowledge is given to some, not to others, and consequently
faith: for they which have not known cannot believe.

Fourthly, the time of this calling. The particular time of any man's calling is
not reueiled, but laid up in the secret counsel of God, in whose hands times
and seasons are: yet the extent of the time is large enough though stinted,
even the time of this life, some at the sixth hour, some at the ninth, and
others at the eleventh, etc. but not after, because that then all means of
calling men cease. Now because men know not the date of their days, it behoues
them out of hand to strive to enter, not to defer from day to day, alleging
that some are called at the twelfth hour, but accept of ye Lords call while it
is yet the acceptable time. If the Lord now say, Seek my face, let thy heart
answer as an echo which ^akes the word out of the mouth, thy face O Lord I
will seek, Psalm. 27.8. such a pleasant harmony God is delighted with. If he
say (as the Prophet speaks) Behold now my people, they are presently ready
to answer: Behold now our God; and the rather because the Lord will be free,
and not stinted by thee, that either he should call thee in thy crooked years,
or not at all: he will not be prescribed unto extraordinarily to call thee at
the twelfth hour, as he did the thief on the cross, when thou howlest upon
the bed of thy sorrow, and gaspest upon thy deathbed. Therefore while it is
called to day let us hear the voice, and harden our hearts no more.

Fifthly, wherein does this effectual calling stand?

Answ.
Both in the outward and inward calling, because the former is often in the
means given to Nations people, ^
men, at least to make them without all excuse: but the second being secret and
inward, whereby the Lord makes a man's heart inwardly answer the outward
calling, possesses him with a willing mind steadfastly to believe in the Lord
Jesus, and with an endeavor to please the Lord in all things: thus is the heart
pierced, Psalm. 40.6. the heart of stone changed into an heart of flesh, that is,
made tractable and pliable, Ezech. 11.19. and an heart which is a sacrifice
accepted of God; such an heart was Lydia^, Act. 16.15. when God had opened it,
it was heedfull and attentive to the words of Paul: this heart can relish the
sweet promises of the Gospel, and no other.

Sixthly, the excellency of this calling: which we shall perceive by these
considerations. First, in that it is a great work, as was the creation of man
at the first, Romans 4.18: so the Apostle makes it, 2. Cor. 4.6. he that at the
beginning called light out of darkness, the same has shined in our hearts, etc.
that as God calls the first time and dead creatures come forth to life: so with
no less powerful voice the Lord calls the second time the heart of man dead in
sin, and it is quickened with the life of God.

Secondly, this effectual calling goes beyond the work of our creation: for
here a man is taken out of the first Adam, and set into the second, and at the
same instant power is given to believe, being in time both together, though in
order faith is first, and then ingrafting, wherein is not only a bare
privation as in the creation when God called things that were not, as though
they were: but here is a plain resistance and rebellion, God calling not only
things that are not, but things that would not and refuse to be. Thus to raise
a man out of the blood of Christ, is more than to raise Eve out of Adams side*
to raise a dead soul from the death of sin far more glorious and
powerful, than to raise a dead body from bodily death; to raise a man to
supernatural life, far greater than to a natural only.

Thirdly, this calling ratifies all our covenants with God. Men in their
Baptism enter covenant with God, but often start from it, and will not stand
to it, so as the covenant is only made: but when as a man is effectually
called, the covenant is not only made but truly accomplished, and that on man's
part.

Use. Seeing we are called of God himself in the ministry of the word, (for
Paul calls it, Phil. 3.14. an high calling) we must labor to join the inward
calling with it which is higher than that, by having first a grief because we
cannot believe: secondly, a ready mind: thirdly, an endeavor to believe:
fourthly, a sorrow because we believe no more, and fail so much in the service
of God; which if we want we must labor for the^; and if we have them, be
thankful unto God for them.

2. Use. Learn the duty laid down by the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.1. that we should
walk worthy of our calling. To do which, first we must look that we frame
our lives holily, being holy in our whole conversation, as he that has called
us is holy. Secondly, there must be the same end of our lives which is of Gods
calling, that is, to bring us to heaven. The end of our being in the world is
to be called out of the world, and (as Abraham) to obey God, as looking for a
city in heaven not made with hands.

Now we proceed to the second step of life eternal, which is sanctification:
Sanctification follows effectual calling.
this name is taken from the Latins, and by it is understood Regeneration,
renouation, new creation, and to be sanctified is to be made holy and be borne
anew. That we the better know this grace consider sundry points.

First, what sanctification is: It is an inward change of a man justified,
whereby the image of God is restored in him. For the opening of which
description mark that first I call it a change of a man, to put a difference
between it and civil conversation, which is a gift of God likewise as this
is, but far different from it; because this only restrains the corruption
of the heart, whereas sanctification renews the heart: and thus the gifts of
God are of two sorts: first, restraining, which do keep in the wickedness of
the heart, such as are all civil virtues. Secondly, renewing or altering the
mind, which not only represseth but abolisheth corruption; of this kind is
sanctification.

Secondly, I call it an inward change, namely in the mind, will, affections,
as working upon the inward corruptions and lusts of the heart: to distinguish
it from outward sanctification which a wicked man may have, whereby he
reformeth his outward man and carriage by the ministry of the word, such are
they whom the Apostle speaks of, Heb. 10.27. which tread under their feet^ the
blood of Christ, whereby they were sanctified, namely externally: this is of
another kind working the inward change of the heart.

Thirdly, I add of a man justified: for two causes: first, to show that
justification and sanctification are two diverse gifts of God, and their
difference may appear in three things: first, in that justification is out of
a man; sanctification is within him. Secondly, justification absolues a sinner,
and makes him stand righteous at the bar of Gods judgment; sanctification
cannot do this. Thirdly, justification brings peace of conscience; so does not
sanctification, but follows that peace.

Thus the Apostle has them distinct, 1. Cor. 6.11. Ye are washed, ye are
justified and sanctified: as also 1. Cor. 1.30. Christ is made to us
righteousness and sanctification. Secondly, because justification goes with
sanctification, though justification be before in nature, yet they are wrought
at the same time. For when God accepts a man's person, then is he made just,
who is also sanctified. Fourthly, I say the image of God is hereby restored,
the which that we may know wherein it consists, consider the three-folde
estate of man; the first of innocence, the second after the fall, and the
third under Christ. First, in innocence man had three things: first, substance
of body and soul: secondly, the faculties of soul, as reason and
understanding: thirdly, the image of God standing in the conformity of the
whole man, to the will of God. Secondly, in the state after the fall man has
two of these: first, substance of body and soul: secondly, faculties as
before. But the third is wanting, standing in righteousness and holiness, and
in stead of it is found in every man original sin, which distempereth and
disordereth the whole man, his mind, will and affections, and carries him
against the will of God. In the third condition under Christ we have three
things: first, substance of body and soul: secondly, faculties of the
reasonable soul: thirdly, a new created holiness and righteousness, before
lost, but now restored by grace above nature; and this is a renewed conformity
to the will of God, and the image of God again restored.

Where note that sanctification is such a gift of God, as changes the man, not
the substance of the body, or the faculties of the soul, but the corruption,
Religion rectifieth affection^ but abolisheth th^^ not.
disorder and sinfulnes of man; it rectifieth, but abolisheth not affections:
if a man be of sad disposition, it neither increases nor takes away, but
moderates his sorrow, and keeps it in order: so if a man be of a merry
disposition, it depriues him not of his mirth, but corrects it, that it exceed
not: so in Choler and other complexions. Then those that fear to labor in
their sanctification, because then they must be solitary, sad, and cannot be
merry, and those that thus object against those who endeavor over their own
reformation, may see themselves deceived, seeing it only tempereth the
affections to such moderation as becomes holiness.

The second point is: Question
Whence have we our sanctification? whether from our parents, or from what
original?

No, it cannot flow from the parents, Answer.
no although they be holy; Who ca^ bring a clean thing out of filthine^ there
is n^ one.
Job. 1.13. the new birth is not of blood, nor the will of flesh, nor of man:
for parents must be considered two ways: first, as they are men, children of
Adam. Thus they bring their children, and convey no more to their children than
Adam did, which is nature, together with the corruption of it.

Holy parents have no sin, Object.
for it is mortified in them, therefore they cannot derive it to their children?

Notwithstanding their sanctification they convey the nature and sin of Adam:
which comes thus to pass. Answer.
God in the beginning gave this law, that whatsoever Adam received, he should
receive it for himself and his posterity; and whatsoever he lost, he should
lose from himself and all his posterity: by virtue of which law parents
sanctified bring forth children unsanctified, which may appear by this
comparison. Take wheat, make it as clean as you can, sow it, and it will come
up not as it was sown, but in stalk blade and ear, and it brings up as much
chafe as ever it did, though none were sown with it; what is the reason
hereof but only the order set in nature by God at the first? So parents, let
them be never so holy, by virtue of the former law bring forth unholy
children.

Secondly, parents must be considered as holy men, sons of the second Adam by
a second birth: and thus they produce not their children, nor derive their
holiness into them, although their holiness may be a means to bring them
within the Covenant.

Whence note that ye soul of the child is not derived from the soul of the
father, as the body is from his body, for then should they have the same
properties with the soul of the parents: so every regenerate man should derive
a regenerate soul unto the infant, which is false not only in many examples,
but in that original sin infecteth every infants soul, as well of the
believing as unbelieving parent.

But if sanctification be not from the parent, Question.
whence is it?

From Christ, who is made of God unto us sanctification, Answer.
1. Cor. 1.30. 1. Coloss. 22. In him are hid all the treasures of it, of whose
fulness we receive grace for grace, 1. Ioh. 16. wherein two further points are
to be known: first, what thing in Christ is the root of our sanctification:
namely Christ his holiness as he is man, even as Adams unrighteousness is the
root of our corruption.

Secondly, that seeing he is the root of our sanctification, it is necessary
there be a conjunction and union between him and us, before we can partake of
his holiness, and it is the bond of faith which knits us as members unto him the
head: in which regard the Apostle says, he is made of God our sanctification,
1. Cor. 1.30. that is, the root and author of it.

A third point is, the measure of our sanctification, which is but in part
given us in this life, the most regenerate man being partly flesh and partly
spirit, appearing in this comparison: Take a vessel full of water, let a
portion be taken out and an equal portion of hot water put in, it become^
lukewarm all of it, partly hot and partly cold: even so every man is a
vessel of water filled with corruption to the brim, if a part of his
corruption be taken away, and a proportional part of holiness put in stead of
it, the whole man becomes partly holy, partly unholy: of which we have an
example in Moses, Number. 20.8.9. who in smiting the rock so as the water gushed
out, bewrayed the mixture of faith with unbelief in the same action; he takes
the staff, therein he obeyed God; but he strikes the Rock twice, being
commanded only to speak to it, and therein he disobeyed, for which the Lord
was angry.

A fourth point is, touching the parts of sanctification, which may be divided
two ways: first it is divided into mortification and vivification.

Mortification is a part of sanctification, whereby the power, The first
division of sanctification.
tyranny and strength of original sin is weakened, and also by little and
little abolished, which be considered to be not in one part only, but
throughout; so as when one part of original sin decaieth, so does also the
rest, the ground of which is the virtue and efficacy of Christ's death: which
if any ask what it is, and what power it can have since it is ended: I
answer, it is that power of his Godhead whereby on the cross he sust^ined
his Manhood, and so made his death a satisfaction to the justice of God for
man's sin.

It will be further asked, Question.
how come we to be partakers of this virtue of Christ's death, and to feel the
power of it in our hearts?

So soon as any man by faith begins to be united unto Christ, Answer.
his death is applied unto him, so that by means of our conjunction with
Christ, we as truly partake of that power of his, as he himself was on the
cross sustained by it: then he feels sin wounded in him and dying daily, to
which he cannot live as before.

The second part of sanctification, is vivification, or quickening, and it is
when Christ dwells and reigns in our hearts by his spirit; so as we can say, we
henceforth live not, but Christ in us: the foundation of which is the virtue of
Christ's resurrection: which is nothing else but the power of his Godhead
raising his Manhood, and freeing him from the punishment and tyranny of our
sins: this power is conveyed from him unto all his members, who being
mystically conjoined with him, are thereby raised from the grave of their
sins.

The second division.
The second division is taken from the faculties of man: which are seven in
number: 1. The Mind: 2. Memory: 3. Conscience: 4. Will: 5. Affections: 6.
Appetite: 7. The life it self. In all which this grace of God must appear.

Mind.
1 The Mind is that part of man which frames the reason: this Paul calls
Ephesians. 4.5. the spirit of our mind, which must be renewed; the sanctification
of which is called, Reu. 3. the eye salve; it is a grace clearing the dark
mind and dim understanding: containing in it these three things. First,
saving knowledge, 1. Cor. 2.12. whereby we know the things given us of God.
Some will say, what be they? Ans. This knowledge may be referred to two heads.
The first is the knowledge of God. The second is the knowledge of our selves.
The former of these has two branches: first, that knowledge of the true God,
which is life everlasting, Ioh. 17.3. Secondly, to know the mercy of God in
Christ to my self in particular, Ephesians. 3.18. This is to know the height,
length, and depth of the love of God to me in special; as that God the Father
is my father; God the Son my Savior; God the holy Ghost my Sanctifier: this
is the saving knogledge of God.

The second head of this saving knowledge is to know a man's self, when he
sees the secret corruptions of his heart against the first and second Table, to
see and to feel this is a work of grace, and an argument of an heavenly
light enlightening the soul.

The second thing in the sanctification of the mind is (after the knowledge of
these) to approve the things of God: that is, to mind and meditate on things
spiritual, Romans 8.5. to savor the things of the spirit, namely things
pertaining to the kingdom of God. Contrary to the practice of them whose
glory is their shame, yea whose end is damnation, Phil. 3.19. who mind earthly
things.

The third thing is a settled purpose in the mind, not to offend God in any
thing, but to endeavor the doing of his will, and the pleasing of him in all
things* this is called the turning of the mind, and is the substance of true
repentance.

Memory.
2 The Memory: the sanctification of it, is an aptnes by grace to keep good
things, specially the doctrine of salvation, by which David was preserved from
sinning, Psalm. 119.11: and Mary pondred things concerning Christ, and laid them
up in her heart, Luke 2.15.

3 The sanctification of the Conscience is an aptnes to testify always truly
that a man's sins are pardoned, Conscie^^^
and that he preserves in his heart a care to please God, 2. Cor. 1.12. This
testimony was Paul's rejoicing: and Hezekias comfort on his deathbed was the
testimony of his conscience of his upright walking before God: yea this
conscience is apt also to check and curb us when we incline to evil: so
David says, Psalm. 16. his r^ines did correct him in the night season: and to
stir us up to good, as the voice behind us saying; Here is the way, walk in
it, Esaias 30.21.

4 The Will is sanctified when God gives grace truly to will good; Will.
as to believe, fear, obey God; when a man can say, that though he find not
to perform that which is good, yet to will good is present with him, Romans
7.18. This is much accepted of God: for where the mind and other faculties
fail in their duty, then comes this will and supplies their want; which being
willing to do much more then it can, the Lord of his mercy accepts it for the
deed it self.

5 For the Affections, some of them concern God, some our Neighbor, Affectio^^
and some our selves. Sanctified affections concerning God are first fe^re of
God, when a man stands in awe of Gods presence, and in regard of his
Commandments. Secondly, a contentment and quietness of mind in all conditions
of life, when a man at all times can submit his will unto the will of God, Job
1. The Lord has given and taken away, blessed be his name: and David, Psalm.
39.2. I held my tongue and said nothing, because thou Lord did it. Thirdly,
love to God in Christ, and to Christ in man, 2. Cor. 5.14. Romans 9.3. Fourthly,
an high estimation of Christ and his blood above all things in the world:
Philip. 3.8. I count all things d^ng for Christ.

Secondly, the affections toward our Neighbor is to love him, because he is
Gods child in my judgment, 1. Epist. Ioh. 3.14. and in Christ my brother.

Thirdly, concerning our selves, to have a base estimation of our selves in
regard of our known sins and corruptions: Paul cried out that he was the
head of all sinners: so the prodigal son; I am not worthy to call thee
father: David, Have mercy on me according to the multitude of thy mercy.

^
6 The sanctification of Appetite stands in the holy ordering of our desires in
meat, drink, apparel, riches, etc. and in the practice of three maine
virtues: first, Sobriety: secondly, Chastity: thirdly, Contentation: by which
the appetite must be governed.

^
7 Sanctification of life stands principally in three things: first, in an
endeavor to do the will of God, that herein we may testify our thankfulness.
Secondly, in testifying our love to God in man. Thirdly, in denial of our
selves: which is, first, when we hold God to be wiser than we a^^, that so we
should be both directed and disposed of by him. Secondly, when we account him
more careful for us, than we our selves can be, and so rest well satisfied
with what condition of life so ever he sets us in. Thus are we to practice this
grace through our whole conversation: for we may not measure it, nor judge of
it by one action good or bad; but look to the whole course of life, if that be
good, the heart is sanctified.



Use. Labor for the special grace of God. The means we are to use is laid
down in Romans 6.1. to the 14 verse, namely, to believe that we were crucified
with Christ, buried with him, yea and rose again with him; because he was upon
the cross, in the grave, as also in rising from thence in our stead and room,
sustaining our persons upon him: this is the foundation of our holiness. Some
will ask how this can be a ground of our holiness? I make it plain in this
comparison: As a Traitor arraigned, and hanged according to law, is then freed
from his fact, the Judge cease to punish him, and he cease to be a
Traitor, commits no more misdemeanour: so the sinner being arraigned at the
bar of Gods justice, and attainted of high treason, is according to Gods law
condemned and executed in Christ's condemnation and execution, is now as a dead
man unto sin, and cannot thencefoorth live thereunto any more.

Now follows the third degree of life eternal, in these words [ and reserved
to Jesus Christ.] The meaning of which words is plain in the 1. Epist. of
Peter, the 1.5: where he says, that the elect are kept by the power of God
unto salvation: in the adding of which words to the former, we are taught that
with the gifts of true faith, calling and sanctification, is joined unseparably
the grace of perseverance unto the end: of which truth we will consider four
maine grounds. 4. Grounds to prove the perseverance of the elect.


The first ground is, the election of God: that is, his decree whereby he
sets some apart to life. This decree is as unchangeable as God himself is;
and as election is unchangeable, so is the fruit of it in us, in respect of
the ground: and hence follows it that faith and sanctification are
unchangeable, Romans 8.3: the predestinate are glorified, Matthew. 24.24. the
exception shows it impossible the elect should be deceived.

The second ground is the promise of God in the Evangelical covenant, which is
largely propounded in Ierem. 32.40. where is promise made of two things: first,
the Lord promises that he will not turn from them to do them good, which is
a promise of eternal mercy, showing the pardon of sin, being once given, is
given for ever. Secondly, that he will put his fear into their hearts, there
is promised continuance of faith and sanctification, for they shall not depart
from it.

The third ground, is the office of Christ: in it consider first his
Priesthood, secondly his kingly office. First, he was a Priest, partly to offer
sacrifice* partly to make intercession for every believer: so he did for
Peter, Luke 22.32. that his faith might not fa^^^, and not only for him, but
as appears in that worthy prayer recommended in Ioh. 17. for all the
Disciples, and not for them only, but for all believers through their word.
The same request is in that Chapter repeated thrice. Secondly for his kingdom;
as he is the head of his Church, his office is 1. to keep all that are given
him unto life, Ioh. 10.28. I give unto them life: and none can pluck them out
of my hands. 2. To give spiritual life to his members, Romans 6.8.9. If Christ
the head died but once, and lives for ever, then all his members die but once
to sin, and after always live to righteousness: for this life admits of no
corruption neither in nor out of temptation.

The fourth ground is the quality of grace, as of faith, sanctification, etc.
whose nature is to endure to life everlasting: for he that once believes,
remains ever a believer, 1. Ioh. 3.9. He that is borne of God sins not,
because the seed^ remains in him. Now if that remain whereby he is borne of
God, himself must also still remain borne of God: upon which four grounds we
may persuade our selves of the gift of perseverance.

Object.
It is alleged, nothing is unchangeable but God, and therefore grace is
changeable.

Answer.
Every gift is changeable in it self, so man in himself considered may fall
away: but God has promised a second grace confirming the first, by virtue
whereof a man cannot fall away.

Object.
It will be further said, that the child of God when he falls into a grievous
sin, (as David did) is guilty of death, and therefore is not justified, and
consequently falls away.

Answer.
When David fell he was guilty of death but only in regard of that sin into
which he was now fallen, all his former sins being pardoned: yea that sin
also was pardoned (though not actually to him before his repentance) yet in
Gods counsel; so as that sin being on Gods part pardoned, he remains still
in the favor of God.

Object.
But in time of persecution many fall away.

Answer.
If any fall quite away they never had true faith: which stands in three things:
1. Knowledge: 2. Assent: 3. Apprehension of Christ. The two former they might
have, but the third was wanting unto them. Again, those that fall off in
persecution, if they have true faith they fall not wholly, because the seed of
God remains in them; nor finally, because in time they shall return unto the
Lord again.

Object.
But this doctrine leads men to security.

No, Answere^
it leads a man from security unto a new life and watchfulnes: seeing grace
is added unto grace to keep us in the state of grace.

Use. First, in yt the gift of perseverance is joined with true faith; I gather
that the doctrine of the Papists is not of God but a doctrine of devils, which
teaches that he which is chosen of God, who has true faith and is justified,
may in regard of his present right fall away: for how can that be if he that
be chosen be called, sanctified, and preserved unto life?

Secondly, it is false that a man truly justified may lose his grace, seeing
with justification is joined preservation: neither that which teaches, that a
true believer may fall wholly, though not finally, is true.

Thirdly, those also are deceived who think that man's salvation is pinned upon
his own sleeue, and hangs upon his own will; for God would have all saved,
Christ died for all, the holy Ghost gives grace to all: why then are some
saved, some not? It is (say they) from their own will, grace in some preuailes
against flesh, and they are saved; but flesh against grace in the other, who
therefore are damned: but this scripture shows that to be but a device of man,
seeing whosoever are once elected are called, sanctified and preserved to life;
and what malice is able to resist this will of God?

2. Use. Note here the unspeakable goodness of God in the work of
Regeneration; in that he not only gives a new life, but preserues it in us.
Adam once had this life of grace betrusted unto him and had it in keeping, but
he quickly lost it from himself and his posterity. Now God has restored this
life again to believers; but that they might be sure of it he will now keep
it for them himself.

And reserved unto Christ that is, to be presented and set before Christ, and
that partly in the day of death, partly in the day of judgment holy and
without blame, Ephesians. 5.27. Whence note: first, believers need not fear the
day of death or judgment; nay rather they may rejoice in it, as the day of
their redemption, yea and of triumph. What an honor was it for Pharaohs
daughter to be presented to Solomon, and Hester to become the spouse of
A^asuerus? much more glory is it for the faithful thus to stand before Christ
at that day.

Secondly, we must all our life long prepare and fit our selves to be
presented as pure spouses to our Bridegroom: both these duties are laid down
Revel. 19.7. Be glad and rejoice, for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and
his wife has made her self ready. This preparation stands in two things:
first, we must betroth our souls to Christ; this is done when God gives
Christ, and we receive him by faith, cleave unto him alone, depend on him as
the spouse upon whom her soul loves. Secondly, we must beautify our souls
having given them to Christ: this is done when the holy Ghost sanctifies the
same, and we daily labor in the renewing of our own hearts.

Thirdly, we must hence be stirred up to prayer for this gift of preservation
to life everlasting, and reservation to Christ, hungring for grace after grace,
to be strengthened in temptation, especially in this last and declining age,
wherein the Gospel takes little place in our hearts.

Verse. 2. Mercy unto you, and peace, and love be multiplied.] In these words
is laid down the third point in the salutation; namely, the prayer usually
observed in Apostolical salutations. In which first he prays for three
things; mercy, peace, and love. Secondly, that these may be multiplied; that
is, continued and increased in and upon them. First, of the multiplying of
mercy: The mercy of God toward the creature is taken in Scripture two ways;
generally, and specially: Gods general mercy is that, whereby he is inclined to
help the creature in misery, Luke 6.36. Gods special mercy (called riches
of mercy, whereby he will have mercy on whom he will, Romans 9 15.) is that, by
which is granted pardon of sin, and acceptance in Christ to life everlasting:
and for this he prays in this place. Now because this special mercy cannot
be multiplied in it self, being infinite in God, as himself is infinite,
therefore by mercy we must understand the fruits and effects thereof. And
for our better instruction herein, three things are to be considered.

(...) christ (...) in the (...) place, (...) be (...) for above all things in
the world.
First, that mercy is asked in the first place, before peace and love: teaching
us, that the mercy of God in Christ is to be sought for above al things in the
world. Psalm. 4.6. Many say, who will show us any good I but Lord lift th^^ up
the light of thy countenance upon us. Psalm. 119.77. Let thy tender mercy come
upon me, that I may live. This is the foundation of all blessing.

Secondly, note the persons for whom he thus prays. To you]: that is, as in
the first verse, to those who were called, sanctified, and reserved to Christ;
not for unbelievers, unrepentant, and Apostatates: whence we learn, first,
that a man justified, sanctified, and made heir of life, cannot merit any
thing at Gods hands: for merit and mercy cannot stand together, and he that
still stands in need of mercy can never merit; which doctrine must be
maintained against the Roman Church, which teaches, that a man may put his
trust in the merit of his works, so he do it soberly. Secondly, that men
effectually called and sanctified, because they still stand in need of mercy,
must be in their own eyes still vile and miserable. Abraham being to speak to
God, terms himself dust and ashes. Jacob acknowledged that he was less than
the least mercy. Job cries out that he was vile, and abhorres himself. After
these examples we must ever keep our hearts as empty vessels, ready to
receive more mercy.

Thirdly, note the measure of mercy asked; he prays for continuance and
increase of mercy to those who had already the riches of mercy. Whence we
learn, first, that all the good we have, or can do, is of mere mercy; not
only for the beginning and continuance, but also for the increase thereof: as
grace is no grace unless it be every way grace; so also of mercy. Which takes
away all conceit of merit, seeing mercy fills up all the room, and leaves
no place for merit. Secondly, that the Apostle here also confirms the former
grounds of our perseverance: for by this prayer, grace is to be added to the
former graces, yea multiplied: so the Lord deals, not giving over when he
has given one grace: for first, he gives his servant power to believe:
secondly, he gives an execution of this power. Neither there gives over, but by
a third grace gives continuance of that power: yea and adds a fourth, which is
an execution of that continuance. Thus he deals with all true believers, not
only in respect of faith, but of obedience also: Phil. 2.13. God works both
the will and the deed. Philip. 1.6. He that has begun this good work in you,
will perform i^ until the day of Christ. So as this may well be called a
multiplication of grace, seeing every believer has one grace more than Adam
had; he had power to obey; so the renewed have. Secondly, he had the act of
obedience; so they also have. Thirdly, he had power to persevere; which they
likewise have: but he had not the act of perseverance; which they having,
therein far excel him.

The second thing desired in the prayer is peace; namely the peace of God,
whereof he is the author; and it is the vniti^ and concord of man with God, and
with the creatures. Touching this peace, note three things; the foundation of
it, which is Christ the second Adam; even as the first Adam was the author of
discord and emnitie, Ephesians. 2.14. Secondly, the manifestation of it; this peace
is offered in the preaching of the Gospel, which therefore is called the glad
tidings of peace, Romans 10.15. and the Ministers of it, the Ambassadors of
peace, 2. Cor. 5.20. Thirdly, the kinds of this peace, it is twofold: first,
between person and persons: secondly, between person and things. The former
has six heads, I. Peace between man and God, the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, properly called reconciliation, whereby God in Christ is at one with
man, and man thorough Christ at one with God, of which when man is once
persuaded in his heart, then comes this peace, Romans 5.1. from which springs
another, namely tranquillity of mind, when the mind is quieted in all things
that befall, without grudging or impatience, and that because it is the
revealed will of God, Philip. 4.11. II. Peace with the good Angels, Ephesians.
1.10: for men being at peace with God, the Angels are become servants and
ministering Spirits unto them, Hebr. 1.14. III. Peace with a man's self,
consisting in two things: first, when the conscience sanctified cease to
accuse, and in assurance of Gods favor begins to take his part, to excuse,
and speak for him before God. Secondly, when the will, affections, and
inclinations submit themselves to the enlightened mind: of which if either be
wanting, man is at war with himself, and the peace of God rules not in his
heart, Coloss. 3.15. IV. Peace of true believers among themselves, who before
they believed were as Lions, and Cock^trise^, Esai. 11.6. but now in the
kingdom of Christ have put off that savage nature, and become peaceable; as
Act. 4.32. the number of believers were all of one heart. V. Peace of the
faithful with professed enemies; namely, when they endeavor to have peace with all men, Romans 12.17.18. not requiting evil with evil. VI. Concord of the
enemies themselves, with the true Church: for often the Lord restrains the
malice and rage of his enemies, and inclines them to peace. Thus Jacob and
Joseph's family were preserved in Egypt, and Daniel was brought in favor with
the chief Eunuch, Dan. 1.9.

The second branch of this peace, is when al things, and creatures conspire and
agree for the good of the godly. This is called good success; promised Psalm.
13. Whatsoever the righteous man does, it shall prosper.

Use. First, in that mercy is first asked and then peace, we are by the order
taught that peace and good success are grounded on mercy: so as men for the
most part take a preposterous course, who would have good success in health,
wealth, peace, honor, learning* etc. in that they seek it out of assurance of
mercy in the pardon of sin; whereas this ground must first be laid as the
foundation of al blessing and good success.

Secondly, we must endeavor that this peace grounded upon mercy may have place
in our hearts, that we may have boldness in regard of God, comfort in our
consciences, peace with our brethren, quietness and contentednes in all
conditions of life, etc. This peace shall preserve our hearts in all things,
Philip. 4* 7. This was David's security in the midst of his enemies, and
danger of death, he would now lie down in peace, because the Lord did sustain
him, Psalm. 4. verse. 8. This grace preserves the heart undaunted in many
afflictions, even as a soldier that takes the enemies Ensign, cares for no
blows or wounds so he may carry away the Ensign; so he that preserues the
peace of God in his heart, makes light of afflictions, seeing he holds that
which counteruaileth all of them.

The third grace desired in the prayer is love, which is a most excellent
virtue, preferred 1. Cor. 13.
before faith and hope, in some respects, and made 1. Tim. 1.5
the end of the Commandment. Love is diversely taken in the Scripture; sometime
it signifies the love of God to the creature; and sometime, the love of man to
God and man; and so it is taken in this place, being set after mercy and peace
as a fruit of them.

In the handling of this virtue consider three points in general, before we
come to the special parts of it: First, what this love is; The love of God and
man is a certain divine and spiritual motion in the heart, causing it to be
well pleased in the thing loved, and moving it to affect communion therewith:
in these two consists the nature of true love to God and man.

Secondly, Whence has love his beginning? A. Not from nature, for the (...).
8.7.
wisdom of the flesh is emnitie with God: yea there is in every man's nature a
disposition to hate God and man when occasion is offered; let the natural man
say never so often he loves God, herein he lies and deceives himself: for
urge him to frame and conform himself unto the word wherein he should
testify his love, here his wicked heart hating to be reformed, resists
plainly; saying, I will not have this man to rue over me, I desire none of his
ways. This love then comes from grace, 1. Ioh. 4.7. Love comes from God, 1.
Tim. 1.5. it has his beginning from a pure heart, true faith and good
conscience. Which must be maintained against the Papists, who say that nature
affoordeth the inclination, but grace the practice; whereas indeed grace gives
both.

Thirdly, consider the use of love; It is the instrument and companion of true
faith, which works by love, Galath. 5.6. The proper work of faith is to lay
hold on Christ, this faith as a hand can of it self do; but when it comes
to the practice of moral duties, it can no more work without the grace of
love, then a hand (which can lay hold alone and of it self receive and
retain) can cut any thing without an instrument. Whence it appears, that
faith in justification is alone, but in the life of man it works by love: and
whereas it has bin taught for many hundred years that love is the life of
faith* that is vn^rue, for it only testifies that faith has life. It is
alleged, that as the body without the spirit is dead, Iam. 2.26.
even so faith without works is dead: therefore works are the soul, and give
life to faith. But this consequence from this comparison is not good, because
the soul is not properly the soul of the body but of the man, and so it
proves not that love is the soul of faith. Again, the word Spirit there
betokens the breath, without which the body is dead, and thus is the
comparison to be returned; that as breath makes not a man living, but shows
him to be alive, so love makes not faith living, but testifies it so to be;
yea indeed is the fruit and effect of faith, as breath is of life.

More particularly this grace of love is twofold: first, that whereby man
loves God: secondly, that whereby man loves man. In the former note two
points: first, what it is; namely, a motion of the heart, whereby it is
affected to God, causing it to be well pleased in God, and his works for
himself; as also to seek fellowship with God so much as it can. Secondly,
note the measure of this love, which in Scripture is double: first, that which
the law requires, and that is the full measure of love, love in the highest
degree, when man loves God with all his soul, with all his strength, and all
the powers of the whole man, so as in man no love can be above it; unto this
all men are bound, yet no man since the fall can attain. Secondly, that which
the Gospel describes, standing in an unfeigned will, and true endeavor to love
God, with all the heart, all the strength, and all the powers; which is a
smaller measure than the former, yea and a qualification and moderation of it,
yet to none but those that are in Christ. Whereby we come to the right
understanding of diverse places of scripture; as 2. King. 23.25. of Josiah: 2.
Chron. 15.15. all Judah sought the Lord with their whole heart. These and such
other places must be understood as they are qualified by the Gospel, in that
they willed and endeavored by all good means to seek God; yea this text also
must be understood of this second measure, seeing the former being in the
highest degree, cannot be multiplied, no not if men were glorified.

The second kind of this love is that whereby man loves his neighbor: which
is a certain divine and spiritual motion, causing the heart (as the former)
both to be well pleased in man for God, (that is, because he is Gods image and
his own flesh) as also to power out it self and communicate goodness to his
neighbor, in wishing, speaking, and hoping the best of him. Wherein by the way
observe a plain difference between faith and love: faith is a hand, but to
pull Christ to our selves: love is a hand also, but opening it self and giving
forth unto others.

In this love of the neighbor consider Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self; for the rule (say they) must go before the thing ruled. But this is not
found, seeing worthy then have been commended in Scriptures for loving others
as well, yea and better than their own selves; so David loved Jonathan, 1.
Sam. 20.17. Christ loved his enemies better than himself; these began not with
themselves: yea indeed the right beginning of love is in God, and then as a man
is a more principal instrument of Gods glory, he must be for God preferred
in our love above our selves. Thus every man is bound to love and prefer the
life of his Prince above his own; see the perfect rule of direction herein,
Ioh. 13.34. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: that is, as we are
cheerful, and free to practice the duty of love to our selves, so must we do
it to others: for this precept aims at the manner, rather than the rule of
our love to man; for that is, as Christ has loved us. Thirdly, the kinds of
it: it is single, when men love others, but are not repaid with love again;
yea when a man loves his enemy, but is not loved again. The second is mutual
love, that is, when love is requited with love, called in Scripture brotherly
love; see Philip. 2.2. 1. Cor. 1.10* when men are of one judgment, like
minded, speak^ one thing; and one soul is as it were in many bodies.

The second point is the multiplication of love, which the Apostle prays for
upon good ground, because it joins man to God, and man to man, and so
becomes as it is called the bond of perfection, the bond of the Church,
Commonwealth, and of al societies. 1. Cor. 13. Love ed^fieth, that is, it
helps to build the kingdom of God, yea it constrains men to all good
duties in their particular callings. Qu. But how shall this love be multiplied?
Ans. By certain meditations, and practices. The meditations are many; first on
Gods commandment: Be servants one to another in love, Gal. 5.13. Secondly, of
Gods image, which al men should bear in love, 1. Ioh. 3.16. Thirdly, of the
fellowship of the faithful, having all one father, one brother, one salvation,
all linked by one spirit, Ephesians. 4.4. Fourthly, of the love of God, Ioh. 13.35.
which hereby we shall be assured of, 1. Ioh. 3.14. The practices also are
diverse: first, we must labor to be assured of Gods love to us, and increased
upon us, Ephesians. 5.2. Secondly, the law of nature must teach us to do as we
would be done unto. Thirdly, our care must be more to love, than be loved: for
to love is a virtue in our selves, to be loved i^ the virtue of another.
Fourthly, pray daily for multiplication of love toward God and man, yea
toward our enemies; seeing the more this is multiplied the happier is our
estate, yea and the condition of the Church upon earth.

Verse. 3. Beloved, when I gave (...) diligence to write unto you of the common
salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you that ye should earnestly
contend, for the faith which was once given unto the Saints.]

Here begins the second part of this Epistle, which is the Exhortation,
reaching to the end of the 23. verse. In this verse two things are contained.
First, the causes which moved the Apostle to write the Epistle. Secondly, the
matter of his exhortation. The causes of his writing are three. First his love,
noted in the word Beloved. Secondly, his ready and willing mind of himself,
noted in the word diligence, which signifies a careful endeavor and study to
do the Church good, and it is enlarged by three arguments: first, in that he
gave all diligence, and not some part only, to further the Church. Secondly,
when he could not speak to ye Catholic church, he gave diligence to write.
Thirdly, he writes not of small matters, but of things most weighty, such as
concern^ their salvation: against which seeing it might be objected, that he
was not able to write of such a weighty matter, he therefore calls it common
salvation to cut often that surmise, as also to show that it is common to
himself and the whole Church, of which therefore having a share therein he is
not ignorant.

The third cause in the word [ needfull]

Out of these three motives which caused the Apostle to write, observe; love
toward the Church to which he is called. Secondly, a ready mind to further
the salvation of their souls. Thirdly, the bond of his calling, stirring him
up to faithfulness and diligence. All these three concurred in Paul: first, his
love appeared, 2. Cor. 5.14. Secondly, his ready mind was not wanting,
Philip. 2.17. Thirdly, for his calling that urged him see 1. Cor. 9.16.

Note hence also, that whosoever David often to muse thereupon, Psalm. 119.97.
Secondly, a ready and diligent mind to receive and retain it: this was in
the Bereans, Act. 17.11. and in the Galathians, when they received Paul as an
Angel of God, Gal. 4.14. Thirdly, a consideration of the great necessity of
hearing and reading the word; Prou. 29.18. Where vision fails, people perish.

Watchmen, because they are to watch over their souls. Yea Saviors, Obadiah
21. to put them in mind, that they are to both means of saving men. They had
no^ need then be entangled with many charges, and other businesses.

common saluation] of which he has good experience; so every Minister must see
that he have experience in himself of that he teaches others; and have a
taste of that in his own heart which he would have others seasoned withal,
else his teaching shall be cold.

The second part of this verse is the exhortation: the whole matter and
substance may be reduced to three heads. First, that faith is a notable
treasure, which has many enemies. Secondly, that the Saints are the keepers of
it. Thirdly, that the office of every member of the Catholic Church is to hold
and maintain this treasure. For the first, that faith is a treasure, appears
2. Pet. 1.1. where it is called precious faith: 2. Cor. 4.7. a treasure in
earthly vessels; and by this, that a fight is here enjoined against the enemies
of it. For the clearing of which, consider two things: first, what it is.
Secondly, who be the enemies of it, against whom we must fight; and them we
shall jointly observe with the several grounds of faith. For the first, this
faith is nothing else but ye wholesome doctrine of the Gospel, called by Paul to
Titus 1.1. the truth according to godliness. So 1. Tim. 4.1: this faith, which
many shall deny, is opposed to the doctrine of Devils. Now for our more
orderly proceeding, we must consider that this doctrine of faith admits a
distinction, which Paul himself makes 1. Cor. 3.11.12. Some doctrines are of
the foundation, without which religion cannot stand, such as are set down
Hebr. 6.1. Others pertain to the foundation, but are not of it, as gold and
silver built upon the foundation. It shall not be amiss here to stand a while
to set down the wholesome doctrine of salvation which is fundamental, reduced
by the Apostle to two general heads, Faith and Love. 2. Tim. 1.13
The wholesome doctrine of faith, contains things needful to be believed. The
wholesome doctrine of love contains things necessarily to be practiced. And
both these are expressly set down in Scripture, as we shall s^ew in their
order.

Grounds of doctrine to be believed.
First, 1. Ground.
That all the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles (...) given by divine
inspiration: 2. Tim. 3.16. All Scripture is given by divine inspiration: that
is, all the doctrine both for matter, style, and words of Scripture is
delivered by the inspiration of the holy Ghost. Hence it follows that all
Scripture is authentical, as having the authority from God, yea and must be
believed as if God from heaven should speak; without disputation, or calling
any part of it into question. This ground must first be laid. If it be said,
Object.
the Scripture may be proved by reason, and by the general consent of the
Church. Answer.
Ans. That is untrue, for reason cannot settle the conscience to believe,
Object.
in any point. But scripture tells there is a God, which reason proves.
Answer.
Ans. Reason out of nature teaches there is a God, but by the word of God only
I do believe it: inducements to faith may be brought out of nature, but Gods
word only causes true belief. Secondly, for the authority of the Church; I
believe not because the Church says so, but because the Scripture says it;
and the Church I believe so far as she consents with the word and speaks
out of it.

The adversaries of this ground against whom we must fight.
First the Turks, and Turkish religion, who deny scripture to be given by
inspiration, and deny the books of the Prophets and Apostles, and in stead of
them stand to their Alcaran. Secondly the Jews, who refuse the books of the
new Testament. Thirdly the Atheist, who will believe nothing of all this.
Fourthly, Papists enemies to Hebrew and Greek.
the painted adversary the Papist, who undermines this ground; first, saying
that the Hebrew and Greek text is corrupted, so as we may not build upon it,
that thereby they might bring their Latin Bible into credit as most
authentical; and yet (that they might make the sentence of their Church the
rule of faith) the most learned of all that Church hold that the Latin Bible is
also corrupt; so indeed they covertly renounce all scripture that the sentence
of the Church may obtain the chief stroke. Secondly, in teaching that the
authority of the Church in regard of us, is above the Scriptures, because we
know not the sense thereof, but by the Church: Thus putting down the true and
principal ground of Scripture, that they might more easily set up their own
dotages.

2. Ground.
The second ground concerns the sufficiency of scripture, and is this: The
Scripture of the Prophets and Apostles is a perfect rule of faith and manners:
It is of all things to be believed or done to salvation. 2. Tim. 3.16. The
Scripture is profitable to teach, improve, correct, instruct in righteousness,
to make the man of God absolute, yea perfect in every good work. If it make
him perfect in all kind of teaching, it is also able much more to make every man
perfect to all the duties of his calling; Gal. 1.8. If an Angel should teach
otherwise, that is, diverse or besides, though not contrary to that which is
taught, he shall be accursed; many doctrines indeed of Arts and other things
are diverse and besides it; but the meaning is, that no doctrine of salvation
must be brought, no not besides it, therefore the books of the Prophets and
Apostles contain a perfect rule. Object.
Many things which cannot be found in scripture may be supplied by tradition?
Answer.
Ans. Traditions can never settle the conscience, for though diverse of them
are found in the writings of the fathers, yet they were subject to error, and
so might and did err in them.

Adversaries of this ground to be contended with.
First, all men by nature; Job. 22.14. Who say to the Almighty, Depart from
us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: yea our common Protestants*
who in judgment acknowledge this rule, yet in their life they leave it, and
take the leaden rule of natural reason; sense, sight, and feeling, and few
there be that live by faith.

Secondly, the Romish Church, for first, they make the written word a thing
ruled by setting up another Rule; saying, that there are two kinds of
Scripture: The first is inward, The myst^^rie of iniquity sup^ported by
mystical Scripture*
written in the heart of all Catholics, which is the universal consent of the
Church: The second is outward, written by the Prophets and Apostles, an inken
scripture (say they) and a dead letter without the former. Whereas the clean
contrary is true, the true rule being the scripture of the Prophets and
Apostles; and the other in the heart in this life, but an imperfect pattern
drawn according to the former. Secondly, they ouerturne the vnwritte^
tra^^tions; so making it but half a rule, and indeed as good no rule: but where
are these traditions? In the writings of Fathers they say: But how shall we
know them to be scripture? Because the Fathers say so: But how shall we know
they say true? Here must they fly to man, whereof yet no man can assure

^ Ground.
The third ground is: There is one true God. By one, I mean one in number, not
two: 1. Cor. 8.6. To us there is but one God, that is, to the Church, to us
that look to be saved: which is plain by this reason, for there can be but
one infinite, and if there were two or more Gods, there should be two or more
infinites, which is impossible.

Adversaries to this ground.
First, the common Protestant, who in judgment holds one God, yet in heart
and life he sets up two or more: some riches, some pleasure, some one sin
or other: for where a man's heart is, there is his God. Paul says, some make
their belly their God: and that the Devil is the God of the world.

Secondly, the maine Enemy is the Popish Church, Popery a ^onster (...) heads,
(...) many Gods.
which in word holds one God, but diverse ways set up diverse gods. As first
the Pope himself, who (by their reformed Canon law) is to judge all, and to be
judged of none. Who makes himself a forgiuer of sins and that properly:
yea, a maker of laws to bind conscience as well as Gods laws, which is
horrible blasphemy. Secondly, the Virgin Mary, whom they make a Goddess as
Christ a God: as Christ a King, so her a Queen; as he a Lord, so her a Lady:
yea they set Christ below her, whom they desire to command her son by the
right of a mother: yea and in some of their reformed Service books, they trust
in her for salvation.

Thirdly, the Saints whom they pray unto; wherein they attribute unto them the
knowledge of the secrets of men's hearts, and omnipresence, for they must also
be in all places; which are things proper unto God alone.

4. Ground.
The fourth ground is, that God is all sufficient in himself: Genesis 17.1. I am
all sufficient: that is, he has in himself all perfection: for first, he
takes being from none, but gives being to all. Secondly, for substance he is
a Spirit of perfect nature. Thirdly, every way infinite, in regard of time,
place, attributes. This may well be called a ground, for whosoever places any
want or imperfection in God, denies God, and makes him no God.

Adversaries hereof.
First, the common people, who conceive a God made all of mercy without his
justice.

Secondly the Papist, Papists rob God of his mercy and justice.
who robs God of his perfection two ways: first, they attribute an
imperfect justice unto him, namely, such a one as may be satisfied by man's
satisfaction. Secondly, an imperfect mercy, whereof our own merits must make a
supply: teaching that indeed Christ must make us just: but we must make our
selves more just and merit salvation.

The fifth ground is: 5. Ground.
There be three in heaven, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and th^se three
are one God, 1. Ioh. 5.7. How can it be that three are one God? Quest.
Ans. It is a mystery, Answer.
which the ancient Church answered thus: They be three in person and one in
substance; so we also say they be three in manner of subsisting, but one in
nature and Godhead: Three they be distinguished in person, the Father not being
the Son, nor the holy Ghost, and so in the other persons, 3. subsistences in
one nature. Ioh. 17.2. This is life everlasting, etc. This is a ground because
we must worship one God in three persons, neither can we aright think of God
out of the Trinity.

Adversaries of this ground.
First, Heretics innumerable whose memory is accursed; as Arians of former
and later times, denying the Godhead of Christ. Secondly, the Turk and Jew,
who hold an absolute God out of the persons. Thirdly, our common people, who
pray to such a God in their own names out of the Son and holy Ghost.
Fourthly, the Popish Church, Papists become An^itrinitaries
which denies by their doctrine the three persons: for he that denies the
Son, denies the Father and holy Ghost. 1. Ioh. 2.23. Now they deny the
Son both in his natures abolishing his Manhood in their doctrine of the
Sacrament, as also his offices of King, Priest and Prophet, for which we must
utterly separate from them.

6. Ground.
The sixth ground is: That nothing comes to pass without the special decree,
will and providence of God: Matthew. 10.23. A sparrow falls not to the ground
without his will. Object.
Ob. Sin is against Gods will, and therefore comes to pass without his
will. Answer.
Ans. That which is against the will of God is not without his will. Quest. How
can this be? Question.
Ans. No sin comes to pass but God decrees the permitting and being of
it: Answer.
now to permit sin and the being of it, is neither the causing of sin, nor
the doing of it, but the not hindering of it, to which he is not bound. This
ground being denied chance will be brought in, and God himself denied.

7. Ground.
The seventh ground is: That God has chosen some men before the world was, to
be partakers of the riches of his mercies, and passed by others because it was
his will, Roman. 9.18. He will have mercy on whom he will, Ephesians. 1.4. 1. Pet.
2.9. Some are a chosen generation, and therefore some are not chosen. Again,
whom he will he hardens: he hides the mysteries of the kingdom from some:
why? because his pleasure was such, Matthew. 11.25. And of this there is good
reason, for in nature the first cause orders the second causes, and not the
second the first. Now Gods will is cause of all causes; which therefore must
rule all as the supreme, and not be ruled by any other. That this is a ground
appears, 2. Tim. 2.19. The foundation of God remains sure, the Lord knows
who are his: and indeed none other can be the ground of grace and happiness
unto us, than the counsel of God in electing us, called therefore of the
Apostle a foundation.

Adversaries hereof.
First, our common people that thus abuse this doctrine: If I be chosen to
salvation I shall be saved, therefore I may live as I list. They might as well
reason thus: The term of my life is stinted, none can lengthen or shorten it,
I will therefore neither eat nor drink, nor use Physic, nor other means of
prolonging my days: which what were it else but to murder the body? So these
from the same ground become murderers of their souls; whereas men chosen to
the end, will prease after the means and conclude otherwise, and say, I will
use means that I may come to life. Secondly, others more learned are
adversaries to this ground, who teach that God for his part has chosen all men
to life; and for his part would have all saved, and that Christ for his part
has redeemed all, and the holy Ghost gives or offers grace to all. If we
ask, why then are not all saved? They answer, because God foresawe those who
would believe, whom he appointed to salvation: he foresaw also others who
would not believe, and adjudged them to damnation. But by this doctrine shall
Gods will hang on the will of man, and be ruled by it, seeing he would have
men saved, but man will not; and so this ground is in part rased.

The eighth ground is: 8. Ground*
That God made the heavens and the earth, and all things that have being in
them: Col. 1.16. By him were created all things which are in heaven and in
earth. This is a principle: for if creatures had no beginning, then are they
become Gods; which would overthrow the Godhead. But all things were not made
besides God. Object.
For the highest heaven the Throne of God is eternal as God himself is. Ans.
The Throne of God is a creature as well as the rest: Answer.
Heb. 11.10. He looked for a city having a foundation, whose builder and maker
is God. Object.
In the world are many evils which could not be from God, the foundation of all
goodness. Ans. Evil is of three sorts: first natural, Answer.
which comes by nature corrupted, as sickness, diseases, plagues, and death it
self. Secondly, material evils, as hurtful beasts, poisons in trees, plants,
beasts; these are created, and the very poison of them is a creature. Thirdly,
morali evils, which be tra^sgressions against the Moral law and Commandment
of God. Of the two former God is the author and cause: Esai. 45.7. I create
evil: that is, natural and material: but of the third, that is, moral evils
which be sin, God is no cause. Object.
Ob. But God is the cause of all things, and sin is some thing. Ans. Sin is
no creature, Answer^*
but the destruction of Gods image which is a creature, effected by the
creature: for though the creature cannot make a creature, yet it can destroy a
creature.

The adversary to this ground is the Atheist, who holds the creatures to
have been from everlasting, and so by denying one God, he makes many
thousands.

^ Ground.
The 9. ground is, that God made man according to his own image, Genesis 1.27. For
by creation man had three things: first, the substance of body and soul.
Secondly, in them the powers and faculties of mind, will, affections, etc.
Thirdly, an excellent conformity of all these to the will of God: This is the
image of God, called in the Scripture righteousness and holiness. This is a
ground: for the image of God is the substance and body of the law; he
therefore that denies this, denies the law, the fall from it, and restoring
unto it by Christ.

^^ Ground
The 10. ground is, that by Adam, sin and death entered into the world, and in
him all mere men sinned, Romans 5.12. To the conceauing of which we must know,
that the first sin of Adam was eating the forbidden fruit; the next was, the
putting out of Gods image, in stead of which corruption of heart took place so
far, as (the seed of all sin being within him) he was prone and ready to
every sin. Now Adam being a public person, and having received whatsoever
he had for himself and his posterity either to hold for, or lose from both;
hence is it that both those sins are become the two first sins in our
conception, he sinning we sinned, and with him have the seeds of all sin
within us by nature, no sin excepted, no not the sin against the holy
Ghost. Yea no otherwise is it with us than with a noble man practicing treason,
whose whole blood is thereby stained. Ob. But Christ came of Adam, therefore he
in Adam sinned. Ans. God made this law with Adam, that all who came of him by
ordinary generation should be guilty of his sin: but Christ was
extraordinarily conceived by the holy Ghost, and took of Mary Adams nature; but
not Adams sin. Again, Christ came of Adam, but from him as a beginning, and
not by him as by a father; whereas all other men are both from Adam and by him.
This is a maine ground of our religion, without which there could be no
redemption.

Adversaries hereof are:
First, our common people, who say they ever kept Gods law, and loved him with all their heart, and their neighbors as themselves, and think hence all is
well: but were it so as they dream, they had never fallen in Adam, and so
Adams sin had not gone over all men.

Secondly, the Popish Church: first, in teaching that the Virgin Mary (who came
of Adam by ordinary generation) was conceived without sin: Papists control
the Apostle where he says, that sin entered by one over all.
notwithstanding she was saved, not by her bearing of Christ in her womb, but
by believing on him with her heart. Secondly, in that they teach that men are
not wholly dead in sin, but in part, or half dead, yea that being a little
helped they can keep the law; as though by sin men had not been wholly
deprived of the glory of God.

The 11. ground is, 11. Ground
that the Law and Gospel are two parts of the word of God, and are diverse
kinds of doctrine. By the law I understand that part of Gods word which
promises life to the obeyer. By the Gospel that part which promises it to
the believer. These I say are diverse kinds of doctrine; to the clearing of
which consider first, their consent and agreement. Secondly, their dissent and
difference. First, the Law and Gospel consent: first in the Author; of both
which is God. Secondly, in their general matter, for both require justice and
righteousness to salvation. Thirdly, in their end, namely the glory of God.
Secondly, they dissent in six things: First, the Moral law is written in
nature by creation; yea and since the fall we have some remainder of it in us.
Romans 2.15. The Gentiles show the effect of the law written in their hearts: but
the Gospel is not in nature, but above the reach of nature created, much more
corrupted. The ground of the law is the image of God; but the ground of the
Gospel is Jesus Christ. Secondly, the Law will have us do something that we
may be saved by it, and that is to fulfill it. The Gospel requires no doing of
us, but only believing in Christ. Object.
Ob. But believing is a work to be done. Answer.
Ans. The Gospel requires it not as a work, but as it is an instrument and
the hand of the soul to lay hold upon Christ, Romans 4.5. and 3.21 and 10.5.
Hence is it that the Law requires righteousness inherent; but the Gospel,
imputed. Thirdly, the Law is propounded to the unrepentant sinner to bring him
to faith: but the Gospel to the believer to the begetting and increase of
faith. Fourthly, the Law shows sin, accuses and reuealeth justice without
mercy; but the Gospel covers sin, and is a qualification of the rigor of
the Law. The Law says, Cursed is every one etc. The Gospel qualifieth that
and says, Except he believe and repent, every man is accursed. Thus the Law
which only manifests justice is moderated by the Gospel, which mingleth
mercy and justice together: justice upon Christ, mercy unto us. Fifthly, the
law tells us what good works must be done; the Gospel, how they must be
done: the former declares the matter of our obedience, the latter directs us
in the manner of obeying: the former is pleased with nothing but the deed, the
latter signifies that God is pleased to accept the will and unfeigned endeavor
for the deed it self. Sixthly, the Law is no worker of grace and salvation, no
not instrumentally, for it is the ministry of death; the Gospel preached
works grace only, though the Law may be a hammer to break the heart and
prepare the way to faith and repentance.

Adversaries hereof are*
The Papists, who hold that they are one doctrine only, but herein differing,
that the Law is more dark, the Gospel more plain, the former more hard to
fulfill, the latter more easy; that is as the root of a tree, this as the
body and branches: by which premises they would conclude Christ to be no
Savior, but an instrument rather for us to save our selves by, he giving us
grace to keep the Law: for a sinner must needs be saved by works, if there
be no difference between the Law and the Gospel, and if the Law which
requires works were not moderated by the Gospel, which requires not works
but faith.

The 12. ground is, The word was made flesh, 12. Ground
Ioh. 1.14. This is a maine ground, as in 1. Ioh. 4.3. Every spirit that does
not confess that Christ is come in the flesh, that is, every doctrine in which
Christ is denied to be come in the flesh, is not of God but of Antichrist. Now
by [ word] I understand the eternal son of God, the second person in
Trinity, the very substantial word of the Father. It is added [ was made] not
as though the son of God was turned into flesh and ceased to be Gods son,
but as Heb. 2.16. in that he took not the seed of Angels, but of Abraham. The
meaning then is, that the Son of God (...)
abiding still the word took (that is) received into his person our nature;
Phil. 2.7. He took upon him the form of a servant. The word [ flesh]
signifies first man's nature which Christ took unto him, namely a true nature
of man, not fantastical or apparent only. Secondly, the whole nature of man
consisting of true and perfect soul and body, with all things that belong to
the entire nature of man; for if he had taken man's nature only in part, he had
redeemed it but in part. Thirdly, the properties of man in soul, mind, will,
affections, in body, breadth, length, circumscription, etc. Fourthly, the
infirmities and frailties of man's nature without sin; where must be noted, that
Christ took not all infirmities of man's nature, as sin and corruption, neither
every personal infirmity of every person, as blindness, Gowte, or this and
that particular disease. Here by the way it may be asked, whether Christ had
oblivion in his agony, as some have thought? To which may be answered: That
even when he uttered those words [ Father if it be thy will let this cup etc.]
it is not fit to attribute oblivion unto him, which properly is a forgetfulness
of those things which we are bound to remember, for thus we should draw sin
upon him: but rather to ascribe it to suspending of the memory: which is when
a man neither forgets nor remembers. For as in the will be three things, 1.
willing, 2. nilling, 3. suspending of the will, which is neither of the former;
so also is it in memory, which remembers, forgets, and suspendeth memory
for a time. Now the sum of the whole ground is; That the Son of God, the
second person and so abiding, took unto him the perfect nature of man, in all
things being like unto us, sin only excepted: for the further clearing of
which, consider these four conclusions: first, The Son of God made man is
not two persons distinct, but one alone. Quest. How can this be? Quest.
for as he is the Son of God he is a person; and as he is a man he is a
particular person, as every several man is, and therefore he is two persons.
Answer.
Ans. Every particular man is a person, because he subsisteth of himself; but
the manhood of Christ subsisteth not in it self, but in the second person
only, so that Christ God and man is but one person: for even as body and soul
make one man, so Godhead and Manhood make but one Christ. Secondly, this one
person consists of two distinct natures, the Godhead, and the Manhood
standing of body and soul. Thirdly, these two natures are united and joined
into one person, for the Godhead does take the Manhood and support it.
Fourthly, these two natures after conjunction remain distinct, the Godhead is
not the Manhood, neither on the contrary: but still distinguished, first in
regard of themselves. Secondly of their properties; for the properties of the
one are not the properties of the other. Thirdly of their actions; for the
actions of the Godhead are not communicated to the Manhood, neither is the
work of one nature the work of another.

Adversaries hereof are;
First, Heretics innumerable which are not known to all; but known enemies
are: first, Jews, who deny Christ to come in the flesh. Secondly, some Jewish
Arrians compounded heretics, who have withstood Christ's incarnation; some of
which have suffered amongst us. Thirdly, the Papists, the substance of whose
doctrine robs Christ of his humane nature, ^
though they confess him incarnate: for since his death (they teach) his body
is become invisible, and in innumerable places at once; so they abolish the
Manhood of Christ, and turn it into the Godhead, seeing it is become infinite
and uncircumcised. Ob. They allege, Object.
God can make it to be in many places at once. Answer.
Ans. We may not dispute what God can do, but what he will do; so far as he
has revealed. Secondly, it stands not with the power of God to do some
things, as those which employ contradictions to be true at the same time. Of
which nature this is to make a true body to be in many places at once* yea to
be in heaven, and also every where on earth. But his body is glorified, Object.
and therefore may be in many places at once. Answer.
Ans. The words [ this is my bodie] were spoken before his glorification.
Secondly, glorification takes away the corruption; but not the true properties
of his body, as length, breadth, thicknes, and circumscription. Ob. But things
joined together must be in the same place, Object.
and cannot be severed; and therefore his Manhood being joined to his Godhead,
must needs be every where. Ans. The antecedent is false: Answer.
for things joined together may be the one in one place, the other in another;
as the body of the Sun is joined with his beams and light, and yet the
body of the Sun is in heaven, but the beams and light in the earth also.

The 13. ground is, that Jesus is Christ. 13. Ground
1. Ioh* 2.22. Who is a lier but he that denies that Jesus is Christ, the same
is the Antichrist: From which place we may gather two things. First, That
Jesus is Christ. Secondly, That it is a ground susteyning our whole salvation.
For whosoever denies it is Antichrist; see 1. Cor. 3.10. The meaning of the
ground by Christ I understand the anointed Savior and Redeemer; who is a
King, Priest, and Prophet. First, as he is a king his power manifests it
self in three things; First, in saving and destroying not the body only as
other kings, but the soul also. Secondly, in pardoning sins or reteyning
them. Thirdly, in making laws to bind consciences. Secondly, his Priestly
office stands in two things: First, in a power to offer sacrifice
propitiatory for the sins of whole mankind. Secondly, in making intercession
to God for mankind: Thirdly, his Prophetical office consists in three
things: First, in revealing to man the will of his father. Secondly, in
enlightining of the mind to understand that will revealed. Thirdly, in framing
of the heart to perform obedience unto it, together with the settling of it in
the truth. Thus he is the Christ, that is the anointed of God.

But we must yet here go further and understand by Christ a perfect Christ, a
perfect Redeemer, without any partner, fellow, or deputy: for if he have a
partner, he is but half a redeemer, and if he have a fellow or deputy, how is
he omnipotent, or omnipresent? This is plain by testimony of Scripture; There
is none other name, Acts 4.12. therefore there is no fellow or partner. There
is one Mediator, that is but one, 1. Tim. 2.3. yea by himself he purged our
sins, (...).
Heb. 1.3. without fellow or deputy: whose Priesthood is such as cannot pass
from himself to another. Heb. 7.24. Object. But Ministers have power to remit
and retain sin, having the keys given them. Answ. The keys are not given
to Ministers to pardon men properly, but Ministerially to pronounce and declare
that God in heaven does pardon them. Ob. The Saints shall judge the world,
Object.
and therefore not Christ only. Answer.
Answ. They shall not judge by pronouncing a sovereign sentence of absolution
or condemnation, which is proper to Christ the Judge; but by assisting him (as
Justices upon the bench) both by witnessing and assenting unto that righteous
judgment. Object. Psalm. 45.7. He is anointed with oil of gladness above his
fellows: Object.
therefore he has fellows. Answer.
Answ. All that believe in Christ are the fellows of Christ: but in his
annoynting, that is in grace, though not in office. Object.
Object. But Ministers are Christ's deputies. Answer.
An. Ministers are properly no deputies, but instruments to declare the will of
God, Ministris vtitur Christus non Vicarijs. ^ucer de regno Christ. cap. 2.
and can go no further then to teach the ear: for it is Christ himself that
enlighteneth the mind. But it will be said that Kings are Christ's deputies on
earth. Answ. Object.
Answer.
They are his deputies as he is God equal to his father, not as he is
Mediator.

Adversaries of this maine ground are;
The Romish Church, who rob Christ of all these three offices. Papists wor^.
than the ^ouldie^s in pa^ting christ's garments.
For first, his kingly office they give part of it to the Pope, in making him
to remit sins properly; to make laws to bind conscience properly, as Gods
laws do, which is a power equal to Christ's, and so they make him check-mate
with Christ. Secondly, his Priestly office is given to the Mass Priest, who by
their doctrine has power to offer a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of
the quick and dead; ye^ every Papist has a piece of it, because every one of
them may satisfy the justice of God for hi^ sins by his own merit. And for
his intercession, the second work of his Priesthood, that is dealt among the
Saints (among whom the Virgin Mary has the greatest part) who are inuocated as
intercessors, not only by their prayers, but by their merits in heaven.
Thirdly, his Prophetical office is bestowed likewise upon every Pope, who is
without scripture to determine infallibly, by an inward assistance of the
Spirit locked up in his breast, of all matters concerning faith and manners,
which is the proper office of him who is the proper Doctor of his Church.
Therefore this Romish doctrine established by the Council of Trent, is an
heretical and Antichristian doctrine, making God an Idol God, which is
concluded out of the place alleged, thus: He that denies Jesus to be Christ,
is Antichrist. And again, He that has not the Son, has not the Father. The
(...) Church (...) Jesus (...) be Christ.
But the Romish Church deny Jesus to be Christ, and has not the Son,
because it ouerturneth his person and oppugneth all his offices: and therefore
neither have they the Father, but an Idol God, and so consequently their
doctrine is Antichristian and heretical. For which cause the reformed Churches
have justly separated from them, and ought ever, so long as they deny this
ground, so to do.

The 14. ground is: 14. Grou^^
He that believes in Christ shall not perish, but have life everlasting* Ioh.
3.16. God so loved the world, etc. For the better handling of it consider first
for the meaning, what this faith is. Secondly, that it is a maine ground of
true religion. Thirdly, the enemies of it. For the first: In this faith are two
things: first, knowledge. Secondly, application of the thing known. The
knowledge is, of Christ and his benefits; of which some measure must be had, or
else there can be no faith. Esaias 53.11. By his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many. Ioh. 17.3. This is life eternal, etc. And this stands
with reason, that the thing to be believed must first be known: for faith
without knowledge is fancy. The Roman Church has then erred, The cast^^ of
Romish faith hang^eth in the air without foundation.
which teach that there is a faith to salvation whereto knowledge is not
required, such a one as stands only in an assent to the faith of the Church.
The second thing in faith (which is the more principal) is an application of
things known: namely of Christ and his benefits unto our selves in particular.
And herein stands the very substance of true faith, which is not caused by
any natural affection of heart, or action of will, but by the supernatural
action of the mind enlightened by the spirit of God, resolving us that Christ
and his merits belong unto us in particular. That this true particular
application is required in true faith is proved by these reasons: First, that
which we lawfully ask by prayer we must believe by a special faith: but in
prayer we lawfully ask the pardon of our sins in particular, and life
everlasting by Christ; therefore we must believe the pardon of our sins and
life everlasting by Christ. The adversaries can deny nothing but the first
part of this reason, which is the very word of God it self. Mark. 11.24.
Whatsoever ye desire when you pray, believe ye shall have it, and it shall be
done unto you. Where in every petition of prayer our Savior requires two
things: first, a desire of things promised. Secondly, a particular faith of
things desired, standing in assurance that they shall be granted. Secondly,
whatsoever the holy Ghost does infallibly testify to us particularly, that
we must believe particularly: but the holy Ghost does particularly testify by
infallible testimony to every believers conscience, his own adoption and
pardon of sin, and acceptance to life everlasting; and therefore it must be
particularly believed. Object.
Here the Papist excepteth and says, that this testimony of the spirit of
God, is not certain but probable only, and a man may be deceived in it.
Answer.
But the Apostle Romans 8.16. answers this allegation: The spirit of God
testifies with our spirits that we are the children of God: and cleereth this
testimony of fearfulnes and weakness in the former words: where he says, it is
not the spirit of fear which we have received but such a spirit as makes us
cri^ Abba, (...)*
father, and with a strong voice: yea and for the further assuring us in this
testimony, it is called the 1* Cor. 1. (...)*
s^ale, and earnest penny of the spirit in our hearts, than which things what
are more sure and certain ratifications among men, whose testimony (though it
be but of two men, but much more of three) seal or earnest if it be sufficient
confirmation unto men, how much more sure is the testimony* seal, and
earnest, of the spirit of God unto us? Thirdly, that which God offers and
gives us particularly, we must particularly receive: but God offers and
gives us Christ and all his benefits particularly in the Word and Sacraments,
and therefore we must have particular faith to receive him. It will here be
said, Object.
we grant all this, we must receive Christ and his benefits in special; but we
do it by hope; as the Papists reach to hope well. Ans. It is a work of faith
alone: Answer.
Ioh. 1.12. As many as received him, etc. Who were they? The next words show,
even they that believed on his name. Again, in the Sacrament of the Supper,
Christ is offered as the bread and water of life to every one in particular:
and therefore every believer must have something in his soul proportional to
a hand and mouth, for the receiving and feeding upon him; which is nothing else
but faith specially applying Christ and his benefits: see Ioh. 6.35. Fourthly,
the example of believers in the Scriptures prove the same truth. Abraham
believed by a particular faith, which was imputed to him for righteousness, Romans
4.23. So also Paul, Galat. 2.20. I live by the faith of the Son of God, who
loved me, and has given himself for me. Now both these are patterns and
presidents for us to follow, that as they believed, and particularly applied
Christ to themselves, so must we: see Romans 4.14. 1. Timoth. 1.16. Now from
these two, namely knowledge and application, follows Confidence, whereby we
trust and rely our selves upon Christ and his merits thus known and applied
unto salvation; which because it inseparably follows faith, is often in the
Scripture put for faith it self: I distinguish it from faith, because it has
been said (though falsely) that it is a part of faith, which indeed is a fruit
and a follower of faith* and the Apostle Ephesians. 3.12. does manifestly
distinguish them; By whom we have boldness and entrance with confidence by faith
in him.

The second point in this ground is the weight of it. That it is a maine ground
of Religion, appears thus: If the inheritance of life (says Paul) be not by
faith, it is not s^re, Romans 4.15. For if we were entitled by works, the
promise should not be certain: he then that oppugneth this ground of
particular faith, overthrows the Gospel, as which cannot assure a man of
salvation. Secondly, in the Catechism of the Primitive church, faith in God is
made one ground, Heb. 6.1. Thirdly, this ground being the most maine promise of
the Gospel, whosoever overthrows it, he depriueth men of all comfort of
religion.

Adversaries.
The adversaries of this ground are, first the common people, who for the most
part profess that they are not certain of the pardon of their sins; they
hope well, because God is merciful; but to be certain they think it
impossible: as though there can be hope and confidence where is no assurance:
but special hope always presupposes special faith. Secondly the Papists,
for they condemn special faith for these reasons: First, where is no word,
there (say they) can be no particular faith; but there is no word that says,
Indeed no word (...) thou (...) Pope John the 2^ shall be ^aued.
thou Cornelius, Peter, John, etc. shall be saved. Ans. It is true indeed,
there is no particular faith where there is no particular word, or which is
proportional: but the Minister truly applying the general promise to this and
that particular man, it is as much as if a man's name were registered in the
scripture. Secondly, we have in substance a particular word, in that God who
has given the promise, has given also a commandment, to every believer to
apply the same unto himself. 1. Ioh. 2.23. This is his commandment, that we
believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ, which is equivalent to a
particular word. As a King gives a pardon to a thousand men, but names never
one of them: yet every of them truly applying the pardon, according to the
Kings intention have the benefit of it, as surely as if all their names had bin
set therein.

Object.
II. Object. Many that apply the general promise to themselves are deceived
and fail; yea every wicked man says he believes in the son of God, wherein
he is deceived.

Answer.
Ans. Many indeed fail in their special application, but it is only
unbelievers: but they must prove that none truly can apply the promise
specially, which all true believers do.

Object.
III. Object. They say: In regard of God we must believe, but in regard of our
selves we must doubt.

Ans. Yea in regard of our selves we must not only doubt but despair:
Answer.
yet believers being found not in themselves but in Christ, may prove
themselves whether they are in the faith or no, 2. Cor. 13.5. For whosoever
repents, knows that he does repent: We know we are of God, 1. Ioh. 5.19.
Object.
Ob. But all men in the world are full of doubting, and how can doubting stand
with certainty of salvation? Answer.
Ans. Consider faith first as it is in it self, so it is certain. Secondly,
as it is in us, and so it is mingled with much doubting, which is not of the
nature of faith, but contrary unto it; and yet these may and must stand
together in the believer, for doubtings may disturb, but not destroy true
faith: for the Lord (notwithstanding them) accepts our weak faith as perfect,
and our will to believe for belief it self, where he sees grief conceived
for doubtings, strife against them, and endeavor to have our faith increased.
Object.
Ob. But to believe pardon of our sins, is to enter into Gods counsel. Ans.
That is false, because pardon of our sins is reueiled. Answer
Object.
Ob. But your Church (say they) abhors revelation. Answ. Neither the
scripture nor our Church condemns Revelations contained in the scripture,
Answer*
but those that are without, beside, or against scripture: Ephesians. 1.7. The
spirit is called the spirit of Revelation: see also 1. Cor. 2.12. As for this
revelation of pardon of sin to the believer it is contained in the scripture,
and is no more a prying into Gods counsel, than it is for a Traitor to
believe that he is pardoned, when certain news of his pardon is brought unto
him from the King, of whom none can say he enters into the Kings counsel.
Hence we conclude, that seeing the doctrine of the Papists overthrow this maine
ground, we must take heed of joining our selves unto them.

The 15. ground is: That a sinner is justified by faith, 15. Grou^^*
without the works of the Law, Romans 3.28. Wherein consider first the meaning;
secondly the weight; thirdly the adversaries. For the meaning three things
must be known. First, what it is to be justified. Secondly, what it is to be
justified by faith. Thirdly, what works are to be excluded from
justification. Concerning the first. In justification there be three distinct
actions of God: first, the freeing of a sinner from his sins for the merits of
Christ: Act. 13.39. From all things from which they could not be justified by
the law of Moses, by him every one that believes is justified: that is,
acquitted from them. Paul opposes it thus to condemnation, Romans 8.33. which is
nothing else, but a binding of a man to just punishment. The second action is,
the reputing and the accepting of a sinner as just for the merit of Christ.
Esaias 5.23. Woe unto him that justifies a wicked man: that is, not to make but
accept him just; and in the Gospel, Wisdom is justified of her children,
that is, approved and acknowledged. The third is, the acceptance of a sinner
to life everlasting in Christ. For after that God has absolved a sinner, and
reputed him as just, there must follow this acceptance to life, which is
therefore called the justification of life, (...). 5.18.
with the reason rendered in the same place: for that like as Adams sin is
imputed unto all, by which death entered; so Christ's obedience imputed to
believers, brings life and justification. Out of which three actions we may
gather a true description of justification, to wit, It is an action of God the
Father, absoluing a sinner from all his sins, for the merit of Christ,
accounting him as just, and accepting him to life everlasting.

II. Point. What it is to be justified by faith. For the clear understanding of
this weighty point, we must answer 2. questions. First, what is the very thing
for which a sinner is justified? Ans. It is the obedience of Christ the
Redeemer and Mediator, passive and active: the former standing in suffering
the death of his body, and the pains of the second death in his soul; the
latter, in fulfilling the law. The truth of this answer appears thus: Since
our fall we owe to God a double debt: we break the law, and are bound to make
satisfaction. Secondly, being creatures we must fulfill the rigor of the law,
and perform what it requires: neither parcel of which debt, seeing we (being
bankcrupts) are able to pay, we fly to our suertie who must pay both for us:
the former he does by his death, being made a curse for us, and so redeemed us
from the curse, Galath. 3.13. the latter by perfect obedience unto the law,
that so in him we doing these things, might live in them. verse. 12. The second
question is: Seeing the obedience of Christ is the matter of our justification,
and is out of our selves; how comes it to be made ours? Ans. To make it
ours, first God must give it us: secondly we must receive it. First, God
gives it unto us, when he gives us Christ himself, for it is given with him,
and it is made ours when God in mercy esteems, judges, and accounts it to
be ours, for it is ours by imputation: which appears by these two reasons:
First, as Christ is made out sin, so are we made his righteousness, 2. Cor.
5.21: but he is made our sin by imputation, and therefore his justice being
inhere^t in him, is made ours by imputation. Secondly, as the first Adams
disobedience is made ours, so Christ's the second Adams obedience is ours, Romans
5.17.18. but that is ours by imputation, and therefore Christ's obedience also.
Secondly, to make this obedience ours, we must receive it, and that can be
only by faith, which is the hand of the soul receiving into it the things
that are given us of God: where note by the way, Note.
that a sinner is not justified by the dignity of his faith, but as it is an
instrument whereby Christ's obedience is applied unto the soul.

III. Point. What works are excluded from justification. Ans. The works of
Moral and Ceremonial law, works of nature and grace. That even works of
grace are excluded, appears by these reasons. First, a sinner must so be
justified, that all cause of boasting may be cut off, Romans 3.27. But if a man
were justified by works of grace, he might boast still, yea though he
acknowledge the works to be of God: see the Pharisees example, Luke 18.
Secondly, if a man were justified by the works of the law, then our
justification should stand by the law; but that it does not, Romans 4.14. for
then the promise were made void; yea the tenor of that whole Chapter
proves, that Abraham having store of good works, was yet justified by faith
without the works of the law; the which thing also that objection in chap. 6.1.
witnesses: What then, shall we continue in sin? drawn out of the five
former chapters thus: If a man may be justified by faith without works, we may
continue in sin; which objection were no objection if that had not been the
intent of the Apostle, to prove justification by faith only, without the
works of the law. Thirdly, Paul was not justified by any works: 1. Cor. 4.3.
I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified: where he notes two
things of himself: first, that he had a good conscience within him: secondly,
that he was not thereby justified; where he debarreth all works of grace.
Fourthly, we are saved by grace without works: these works excluded are
works of grace, for they are all such as God has prepared to walk in, Ephesians.
2.8. Fifthly, a man must first be justified before he can do a good work: and
therefore works follow justification, and cannot cause it. Yea and as all works
are excluded, so al virtues also (excepting faith) are here rejected. For as in
a man that stands to receive a gift, no part does any thing to receive it but
the hand, yet having received it, all other parts testify thankfulness, the
tongue, the feet, and all the body: even so we receive the matter of our
justification by faith alone, not by hope or love; but after the receiving of
Christ, these with the other graces work and show themselves.

The second point in this ground is the weight of it, appearing herein, that he
that overthrows it, ouerturneth the faith: Romans 4.14. If they of the law be
he^res of life, faith is made void, and the promise of none effect. And
Galath. 2.21. If we be justified by works, Christ died in vain.

Adversaries.
Adversaries hereof. First, the home-aduersarie is the common sort of ignorant
people and all natural men, who with the young man say, What shall I do to be
saved? They say they will be saved by faith in Christ, but when it comes to
the point, they will be doing somewhat, and stand much upon their good meaning
and righteous dealing. Secondly, the foreign enemy is the Popish doctrine and
Romish religion, which teaches that there be two iustifications. First, when a
man of an evil man is made a good man; this is by grace of the holy Ghost put
into the heart: the latter is whereby a man is made of good, better, which is
by good works. But what Church soever holds this, The Popish church fallen
from grace.
is fallen from grace. This is a peremptory sentence (will some say) and no
general Council has so determined. Ans. The more is the pity. But Gods word
has peremptorily determined it: Galat. 5.4. They are abolished from Christ and
fallen from grace, whosoever will be justified by the law, as the Roman Church
at this day. Object.
They say our doctrine maintains loosenes of life, by excluding all works
from justification. Answer.
Ans. Though we exclude the best works from justification, yet we debar them
not from Christian conversation, but therein require them as fruits of the
spirit plentifully. Object.
Ob. But it is absurd (say they) that one man may be justified by the
righteousness of another. Ans. Adams sin is made ours, Answer.
and they marvel not at it; what greater absurdity is it, that the second
Adams obedience, answering to the first Adams sin, should be ours in like
manner?

The 16. ground is this: 16. Grou^^*
Except a man be borne anew, of water and of the hol^e Ghost, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God, Ioh. 3.5. In which observe first the meaning,
secondly the weight, thirdly the adversaries. In the first consider two points:
first, what it is to be borne again: secondly, of what necessity it is. For
the former, we must know, that there must be in him that is borne again
three things: first, a real change from one estate to another. Secondly, there
must be a root from whence this change may arise. Thirdly, a new life. First,
the change is, when a man of a mere natural man is made a new man: not in
regard of his body or soul, or powers of them, all which a man retains the
same after his regeneration, but in regard of Gods image restored, and renewed
by Christ, Ephesians. 4.24. This is the restoring of that new quality of
righteousness and holiness lost in Adam, for so the Apostle describes this new
birth in the place alleged. This change is attributed to water and the holy
Ghost, wherein [by water] our Savior alludeth to some speeches of the old
Testament; as Ezech. 36.25. where the Prophet speaks of the clensing of the
Church, by pouring clean water upon it: that is, infusing new graces into the
heart, which take place of the old corruption. And by the holy Ghost, he
shows that this clensing of us is by the inward working of the holy Ghost.
Object. Object.
But it will be said, if a man be a new man, he must have a new soul.
Answer.
Ans. This new quality of righteousness and holiness is as it were a new soul,
for in a regenerate man, there is a body soul, and besides the spirit, which
is the grace of sanctification, opposed to flesh, and corruption of nature,
Romans 8.10. This is as it were the soul of a soul renewed.

Secondly, that a man may come to this estate, there must be some root and
beginning, whence this change may arise, and that is no other than Christ
crucified, the Redeemer and Mediator, of whose body believers are members, of
his flesh and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. for look as Eve was made of the side
of Adam, so is every believer of the blood of Christ; and as every man, so
far as he is a sinful man, springs from the first Adam, so does every man,
so far as he is renewed, spring from the second Adam Christ Jesus. Now that a
man may spring out of Christ, he must first (being taken out of the wild Olive
the old Adam, Rom, 6.5.) be set and ingrafted into the second Adam as a new
stock, and that by faith wrought in the heart by the spirit of God: by which
incision he receives from Christ two things: first, in regard of his soul,
holiness: secondly, in regard of body, incorruption, seeing that the whole man
is united unto Christ, and so both soul and body receive immortality and
glory.

Thirdly, in this new birth there must be a new life, by which if any live not,
he is not borne again: for the distinct knowledge of which life we must
distinguish of life: life is uncreated, and created: uncreated life is the life
of God, yea God himself; of which kind this is not. Created life, is either
natural, or spiritual: Natural, is that which we live by natural means, as
meat, drink, sleep, physic etc. of which kind this new life is not: but
this is that spiritual life, whereby a man in this life is ruled by the spirit
of God according to the word; and it stands in two things: First, when the
spirit dwells in the heart; Secondly, when the spirit rules the heart: or
more plainly, this life has two degrees: First, when a man begins to
savor, affect, and will spiritual things, loves them, and chiefly affects
them, Romans 8.5. when they have some savor and relish unto him. Secondly, when
a man in all estates lives by a justifying faith, and orders his life
thereby. The just man (says Abacuke) lives by faith, and this is, as it is
truly called, life eternal; the beginning and first degree of which every
believer has possession of, even in this life.

The second point in this ground is, the weight of it; for which observe the
necessity of the new birth, in the former words where it is said, that without
it a man shall never see the kingdom of God, much less enter into it. No man
is in Christ (and so consequently out of state of salvation) who is not a new
creature, 2. Cor. 5.17. No outward prerogative can bring a man in request with
God, unless he be a new creature, Gal. 6.15. It is a constant truth of
Christ, Ioh. 13.8. If I wash thee not, thou have no part in me.

The third point is: The Adversaries: Adversaries.
who are, first, every man by nature, the wisdom of whom herein is enmity
with God. For every one naturally is willing to yield unto God some external
service, and ceremonial worship; as in the Church to draw near to God with
their lips: but when they should come to their renewing, and the mortifying
of their lusts, O then they storm and swell, and cast off this yoke, because
they say it abridgeth them of their ease, liberty and pleasure, and they
cannot be their own men for it. Secondly, the Roman religion, which for many
hundred years has stood in ceremonial and bodily actions, rites, gestures,
apparel, and most of all in outward penance, borrowed partly of the Jews,
and partly of the Heathens: but all this doctrine of the new birth, Roman
religion leads not to the new birth, and therefore go not to heaven.
of mortifying hidden lusts, and denial of a man's self, is dead and buried
among them, little hereof is spoken or written in the great volumes of their
greatest Clerks. But ye doctrine which is from God is spiritual, as God
himself is, and most concerns the inner man. Secondly, they are great
adversaries hereof, in teaching that man (though captive to sin) has a power
in his nature, whereby, if the holy Ghost free him, he can of himself will and
do that which is good: which if it were so, then he is but in part new, and so
is no new man. Secondly, a regenerate man must be a new creature: now creation
is a framing of something out of nothing, not of something into something.
Thirdly, thus a man should be but half dead, and so could not be borne again,
but only strengthened, even as a man in a swoune, of whom we cannot say
properly he is revived, because he was not dead, but recovered.

17. Ground
The 17. ground is out of Galath. 5.1. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith
Christ has made you free. For the meaning of which we must know, that
Christian liberty which we are exhorted to maintain, stands in a double
freedom: First, from the Moral law: secondly, from the Ceremonial. From the
Moral law two ways: first, from the curse of the law, Romans 8.1. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ. Secondly, from the rigor of it, which
requires personal and perfect obedience: this rigor is moderated by Christ;
whence follows a freedom also from justification by works, Romans 5.1.
Galath. 5.4. The second freedom is, from the Ceremonial law, which having an
end put to it by Christ, binds no man: but our liberty is procured to us in
meats, drinks, and all things indifferent with good conscience, seeing to the
pure all things are pure, Tit. 1.25. Where we are commanded to stand fast, we
see the weight of it to be such, as it may not be departed from, nor forsaken,
for then we become debtors again to the whole law, and so are fallen from
Christ.

Adversaries.
Adversaries hereof, are first the Libertines; as the Family of love, who being
(as they say) deified, are so carried by the holy Ghost that they cannot
sin, no though they should commit fornication: but no man is freed from
obedience to the law by Christ, although he be from the curse and rigor of
it. Secondly, all that take liberty to sin, because they say, God in Christ
is merciful: but Christ freed from sin, not unto it. Thirdly, Popery makes
more sins than ever God made.
the Roman Church, holding that the Pope has power to make laws binding
conscience properly, prescribing such things to be done, the observing of which
is the worship of God, and meritorious; as on the Popish fasting days, yea and
Wednesdaies and Fridaies, not to eat flesh, even this law binds the
conscience of a Papist, and such abstinence (they say) is a work of merit, and
a worship of God. But it will be said, that Princes and Magistrates make such
laws, of meats, drinks, apparel, and must be obeyed. Ans. These laws bind
not conscience, Answer.
but the outward man. Secondly, they do not abrogate our liberty, but moderate
the over common use for the common good: but Popish doctrine accounts the
breach of any of these mortal sin. Object.
Ob. Yea, but they forbid flesh for temperance sake, because it stirs up
lust. Answ. But they forbid not the hotest wines, spices, Conserues, Answer.
and such meats and drinks, which more stir up lust than flesh: and
therefore this is but a shift.

The 18. ground is in Matthew. 18.18. 18. Groun^
Whatsoever the Church binds in earth, is bound in heaven; and whatsoever it
loses in earth, is loosed in heaven. In which ground observe first the
meaning, secondly the moment, thirdly the adversaries. First, to know the
meaning, two things are to be handled: first, what i^ this power of binding and
loosing, which the Church has. Secondly, what is the ratification and
efficacy of this power out of those words, is bound and loosed in heaven.
Concerning the former: This power of binding and loosing is that authority
given by God to his Church on earth, whereby it pardons or retains
unpardoned the sins of men: for men's sins are cords and bands which bind
them, Prou. 5.22. and chains of black darkness, wherein men are reserved unto
damnation, 2. Pet. 2.4. and hence fitly when men's sins are pardoned, are they
said to be loosed, and bound if they be not. This power is called Matthew. 16.
the power of the keys of the kingdom of heaven, for men's sins are as
locks, yea bars and bolts, shutting upon them the doors of heaven: and hence
also when the Church pardons sins, the doors of heaven are said to be
opened, and when it retains them, heaven is shut against the sinner. Indeed
pardon of sin is properly granted and given by God; but yet men are truly
said to pardon and retain sin, when ministerially they pronounce that God
pardons, or does not pardon. Object.
Ob. It will be said, that men upon earth know not whose sins God will pardon,
and whose he will not. Answer.
Ans. It is possible for man to know whose sins God will pardon, and whose he
will not; for God has generally made known that he will remit the sins of
all believers and repentant sinners, but will retain their sins, who go on
in the same. Now we may know particularly who these be that do repent and
believe; for the tree is known by the fruit, according unto which the Church
may pronounce a true sentence. Further, to know more distinctly what this power
is, the parts of it are to be considered, and they be two; for it stands
partly in the ministry of the word, and partly in the jurisdiction of the
Church upon earth. The ministry of the word is either public or private.
First, the public ministry of the word is called the preaching of it; in
which is this binding and loosing, opening and shutting, it being an ordinance
of God, in which Ministers are called of God to pronounce in the name of God
pardon of sin to the penitent, and condemnation to the obstinate: and here
must be noted, that this binding and loosing in the public Ministry is
general unto all, but with exception of faith and repentance. Object.
Ob. But seeing it is general it is of no great force. Answer.
Ans. It is: for every hearer must apply this general doctrine to his own
person, and say with the Virgin Mary, applying to her self the Angels speech:
Be it unto me according to thy word; this makes it forcible in the conscience.
Peter dealt with Simon Magus, Act. 8.21.22. Private comfort is, when upon true
repentance the Minister pronounces upon the believer pardon of sin without
condition. Thus dealt Nathan with David, 2. Sam* 12.22. David said, I have
sinned; Nathan hereupon tells him his sins are forgiven. Secondly,
concerning the Jurisdiction of the Church; It is a power given of God to the
Church, whereby it uses correction upon open sinners for their salvation, and
it stands in excommunication and absolution. Excommunication is a sentence
excluding open and obstinate sinners out of the kingdom of God, and
consequently from the society of the Church; for this follows the former, If
he will not hear the Church, let him be an heathen. Paul calls this sentence
a giving up of a man unto Satan. Ob. But no man can exclude another from the
kingdom of God. Ans. The Church excludes not properly, but by declaring that
God has excluded such. Ob. But the true child of God may be excommunicated,
Object.
and yet is not shut out of heaven. Answer.
Ans. In some sort and for a time he may be said to be shut out of heaven, but
conditionally and until repentance. The contrary hereof is public
absolution, when open sinners repenting, are by the Church openly declared to
be members of the kingdom of heaven, and so admitted and received again into
the Church. This power of the Church differs from the power of the Civil
Magistrate in four things. First, the power of the Church is ordered only by
the word; but Civil power by other civil laws also. Secondly, the former
corrects only by voice, in admonition, suspension, and excommunication; the
latter by real and bodily punishments. Thirdly, all spiritual correction, as
excommunication it self, stands at the repentance of a sinner, and
proceeds no further: but the punishments of Civil power stay not at
repentance, but proceed on even to the death of the malefactor
(notwithstanding his repentance) if he be a man of death. Fourthly, in the
Civil power be three degrees of proceeding: first, the knowledge of the
cause. Secondly, the giving of the sentence. Thirdly, the execution of the
punishment. In Ecclesiastical are the two former, but the last belongs to
God alone.

The second thing in the meaning is, to know what the ratification of this
power is: namely, to be bound and loosed in heaven; that is, when the Churches
judgment, following the judgment of God, does acquit, or condemn a sinner,
God in heaven has done it already and ratifieth it. For in absolution (as
also in the other) pardon of sin is first given in heaven: secondly, the
Church pronounces this according to Gods will: and thirdly, God ratifieth it
thereupon in heaven, and confirms it as sure as if on earth he had pronounced
the pardon.

The second point. The weight of this ground may appear, Mat. 16.18. where the
maine promise of the Gospel for the stablishment of the Church is contained:
Upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it: and the ground of our assurance thereof, is added verse.
19. I will give thee the keys of the kingdom. This makes the Church prevail
against the gates of hell, because it opens and sh^^teth heaven. Secondly,
hereby the word and Sacraments are preserved from pollution and profanation,
the souls of men pulled out of the snares of the Devil, and Gods kingdom set
open unto them: which being taken away, there will be no difference left
between the kingdom of God and the kingdom of the Devil. Which power of the
keys in opening and shutting heaven by the ministry of the word, seeing we
have established by the laws of the land, we have the state of a true Church,
and therefore no man can in good conscience separate from us as no Church and
people of God: indeed if it had not the power to open heaven unto men, it were
time to separate from it.

3. The Adversaries of this ground, are first the ignorant people, who popishly
think that this power is only given to Peter, whose office now is to open and
shut heaven. But this power was given to all the Apostles as well as Peter, and
in them to al Ministers, Churches and Congregations: yea, and it is not
exercised in heaven but in earth. Secondly, all Atheists and Epicures that
contemn and skorne the Word, Sacraments, and all holy things, yea even the
power of the Church it self. Thirdly, all Papists and the Romish religion; who
abolish all binding and loosing in the public Ministry, In stead of the two
keys, Popery has devised the picklock of Shrift.
and have brought al to a private shrift, and absolution, which in truth is
nothing else but a rack and a gibbet to the conscience: for first, men must
seek for it at the hands of the Priest: secondly, they must confess all their
sins to the Priest: thirdly, they must make satisfaction to the justice of
God, even such as the Priest shall enjoin them. But all this is directly
contrary to ye word: for first, Ministers must offer pardon of sin before it
be sought for. Secondly, in Christ pardon is offered freely, we need no
satisfaction of our own. Thirdly, they impose a heavier yoke, than ever Christ
or his Apostles did upon men, when they enjoin them to an enumeration of all
their sins, before they can be pardoned: the depth of which policy has been
sounded. Secondly, that Religion has turned this power Ecclesiastical to a
Civil power, whereby they take upon them to excommunicate Kings and Emperors,
not only out of the Church, That i^ n^^thing the Pope shall be unlike the
devil, he says with him, All these are mine, and I give them to whom I will.
(...) also out of their kingdoms and Empires, whom (they say) they may set up
and depose at their pleasure, as having power to wrest the Scepter out of the
hands of whatsoever Monarch shall not stoop under their Popes authority.
These be the maine enemies of this ground, against whom we must for ever
contend.

The 19. ground of faith is: There is, 19. Groun^
has been, and ever shall be a Church, one of which is no salvation. This is
an Article of our faith, and a maine ground of religion: for if there be not
ever a Church of God, Christ is sometime no Redeemer, no King, because there
should be no people redeemed, nor subjects to the rule of his word and spirit.
Of which consider two things: first, what this Church is: secondly, who be the
adversaries of this ground. For the first: The Church is a company of men,
chosen to salvation, called, united to Christ, and admitted into everlasting
fellowship with him. See Hebr. 12.23. and 1. Pet. 2.9. Compare these two
places, and this description will easily be gathered. The properties of this
Church are these six which follow. Six properties of the church
First, being the Spouse of Christ, she is one only indeed, although
distinguished in regard of time, as the Church of the old Testament and of the
new. Secondly of place, as of England, Scotland, etc. Thirdly of condition, as
the Militant and triumphant: all these make but one body of Christ. Secondly,
it is invisible, not to be seen but believed: for election, vocation,
redemption, can only be believed; yet some parts of it are visible, as in the
right use of the Word and Sacraments appears. Thirdly, to this assembly and
no other belong all the promises of this life, and the life to come, especially
forgiveness of sins and life everlasting. Fourthly, it consists only of
living members, quickened by the spirit of Christ, not of any hypocrites or
wicked persons. Fifthly, no member of it can be severed or cut off from Christ,
but abide in him and with him for ever. Sixthly, it is the ground and pillar of
truth; that is, the doctrine of true religion is always safely kept and
maintained in it. Object. The Churches in earth are true Churches, and yet in
these are many hypocrites and Apostata^s, who fall from their profession. And
therefore all are not living members. Answ. In visible Churches are two sorts
of men: lust men, and hypocrites; who although they be within the Church, yet
the Church is not so called of them, but in regard of them only who are truly
joined unto Christ, who are the better part, although not the greater: Even as
a heap of wheat and chafe together is called an heap of wheat, or a Corn
heap, of the better part.

Adversaries.
Adversaries hereof are Papists, who frame not the Church by these true
properties, but by other deceitful marks, as succession, (...) take (...)
marks (...)
multitude, antiquity, and consent: for when ye Church first began there could
be none of those, at least not the three former, and yet was there a true
Church. Secondly, all these agree to Heretics, as among the Jews what was
more challenged than these? and yet Christ says, they were blind leaders of
the blind. But the true mark is the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles
truly taught and believed. A note of Christ's sheep is the hearing of his voice,
Ioh. 10.27. And, Ye are in the Father and the Son, if ye abide in the word
which ye have heard from the beginning, 1. Ioh. 2.24. See Ephesians. 2.20.

^^. Ground
The 20. ground is: That there shall be a resurrection of the dead in the end of
the world. This was one of the six grounds of Catechism in the days of the
Apostles, Heb. 6.2. Hymeneus and Philetus destroyed the faith of certain, in
teaching that the Resurrection was past already.

Aduersa^^es.
Adversaries hereof, are the Family of love, who hold that there is no
Resurrection but only in this life.

21. Ground
The last ground of doctrine is: There shall be a general judgment of all
flesh. It is one of the grounds, Heb. 6.2. In which judgment every man's works
shall be tried, and every man accordingly shall receive sentence of life or
death eternal.

Adversaries.
The adversaries hereof, are first the Atheist, who denies God himself, and
consequently his judgment. Secondly the drowsy Protestants, who in judgment
deny not the last judgment, but yet plainly show in their lives that they are
not persuaded of it, for then would they make more conscience of sin, and of
pleasing God in all thi^^^. These are the maine grounds of belief, unto which
all other may be reduced. Now follow the grounds of obedience and practice.

The first ground of practice is, 1. Ground.
Luke 13.3. Except ye repent ye shall perish. In which two things are to be
observed. First the duty required, that is, Repentance, the necessity of
which appears, in that without it men perish. Secondly the adversaries.
Concerning repentance two things must be taught: first, what it is: secondly,
what is the use of it. For the first; Act. 26.20.
Repentance (as Paul describes it) is a conversion whereby a sinner turns
himself unto God, and brings forth fruits worthy amendment of life.
There be two kinds of conversion of a sinner: first, that whereby God turns
man. Secondly, that whereby a man being turned by God, turns himself by
grace: the former is not repentance properly, but the latter. Iere. 31.18.
Convert thou me, and I shall be converted. Surely after that I converted I
repented. Quest. In what part is this conversion made? Ans. It begins in the
mind, but it is of the whole man, the mind laying off all purpose of sinning,
the conscience calling back from sin, the will not seeking to fulfill the
lusts of it; but the whole man endeavoring to please God thorough his whole
conversation: further, repentance is attended with diverse fruits, worthy
newnes of life. These are the duties of the Moral law, performed in faith and
truth without hypocrisy: which because they proceed from the same beginning,
are approved of God as repentance is. The second point in this duty is, the
use of repentance, and that is not to be ^ cause of salvation, but only a way,
wherein men must walk to life everlasting. We are slandered by the Popish
church, while they exclaim that our doctrine requires nothing but faith to be
saved by, and so we become enemies to all good works. But this is not our
doctrine, for we hold the works of repentance to be the way of salvation.
Indeed when we speak of the instrument whereby we lay hold upon Christ, that we
say is faith only, not hope, love, or any works: but when we speak of a way
to life, then faith is not alone, but repentance is required, hope, the fear
of God, and e^^^y good work. So women are said to be saved thorough bearing of
children, 1. Tim. 2.15. namely, as a way wherein they practice their faith and
obedience. Thus Abraham's faith and works went together, Iam. 2.22.

Secondly: The Adversaries of this ground, are first professors of Religion,
who content themselves with a fained repentance: for most men being pricked and
stung with the sense of their sins, for a while will hold down their heads
like a bulrush, break off their company, come to Church, pray, hear the
word, and perform other duties: but when the remorse is once past, they
return to their former course of licentiousnes, and this is thought a
sufficient repentance; whereas it is but ceremonial, and a fig leaf whereby
men seek to cover themselves: for true repentance changes the mind, will,
affections, conscience, yea all the actions of life.

Secondly, the Romish Church, which for many hundred years has ouerturned
this doctrine: as first in general above these 500. years, penance and
public confession of persons excommunicated, has bin by them taken and deemed
to be repentance it self; any other has been scarce taught or known in these
parts of the world. Secondly, repentance is by them turned into a judicial
proceeding and sentence of the court, A pattern of Popish penitence.
wherein ye Minister must be judge, the sinner must come under confession; the
Minister must pass sentence, and the other must make satisfaction accordingly;
which is an high abuse of this doctrine. Thirdly, they hold the works of
Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction, to merit, yea and to confer pardon
of sin, and so abolish the merit and satisfaction of Christ. Secondly, the
world has bin by that Church deceived in diverse particulars concerning this
doctrine; as namely, first it has bin taught that repentance, for the
original of it, is partly from nature, partly from grace; partly from God,
partly from our selves: which is a false foundation, joining light with
darkness, it being wholly from grace. Secondly, remorse of conscience (which
the very devils may have) is made a part of repentance; Saul himself, nay
Judas wanted not this contrition, which is no grace, but a preparation unto it.
Thirdly, they make Auricular Confession, whereby every man is bound to confess
all and every one of his sins, with their circumstances in the Priests ear, so
necessarily unto repentance, as without which he cannot have pardon; which is
a very gibbet to the conscience. Fourthly, they turn their Canonical
satisfaction into satisfaction of Gods i^^stice for sin, wherein
blasphemously they overthrow the most perfect satisfaction of the Son of God.
We are therefore to praise God who has taken from our necks this yoke of the
Roman Church, which neither we not our fathers were able to bear.

The second ground of practice is concerning the exercise of repentance, 2.
Groun^
Luke 9.23. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross and follow me. In which ground we will consider three things: first
the meaning, secondly the moment, thirdly the adversaries against whom we must
contend. For the meaning; If any man will follow me* that is, will be my
Disciple, (for Disciples used to follow their Masters and teachers) he must
learn three duties: First, Le^ him deny himself: Secondly, take up his
cross: Thirdly, follow me: To the denial of our selves three things are
required: First, we must for the magnifying of the grace of God ab^se our
selves even to nothing. An example whereof we have in Paul, 1. Cor. 3.7. I I
have planted, Apollo has watered: but neither is he that planteth any thing,
neither he that watreth, but God that gives increase: If the planter be
nothing, much less the planted. We are not able as of our selves to think a
good thought. And again, All our sufficiency is of God. Secondly, we must
renounce our own reason and will, and bring them under subjection to the will
of God, we must not strive to have wills of our own, but let Christ's will be
sufficient for us, his wisdom must be our reason. Thirdly, we must esteem
all things as dung for Christ, and preserve within us a readiness to leave and
forsake friends, riches, honors, yea ou^ liberty and life it self (if need
be) for his sake and a good conscience.

The second duty is, To take up our cross daily: unto which two things are
required: first, every member of the Church must make reckoning of, and look
for daily crosses, private and particular in his calling and in his profession.
Secondly, when the cross comes it must be taken up cheerfully, and borne
with rejoicing: Matthew. 5.12. Rejoice and be glad, namely even when men revile
and persecute you: Romans 5.3. Justified persons are able to rejoice in
tribulations; according to the exhortation, Iam. 1.2. Count it a^ exceeding
joy. An example of the Saints, Hebr. 10.34. who suffered with joy the spoiling
of their goods.

The third duty of a Disciple is: after the two former to follow Christ. For
when Christ says, And follow me, it is as though he had said: I go before
bearing my cross, let my Disciples follow me step by step in bearing of this
cross. This contains in it the maine duties of Christian religion: to the
performing of which two things are to be done: first, we must bear the cross
in obedience, as Christ did, who most willingly abased himself to the death,
even the death of the cross, in obedience to his Fathers will. Qu. But wherein
stood this obedience of Christ? Ans. In the practice of three special virtues:
first, Meekenes, he opened not his mouth, he reviled not being reviled,
revenged not when he might. Secondly, Patience, he grudged not to suffer those
bitter torments for his very enemies. Thirdly, Love, he prayed for those that
pierced him, and shed his heart blood: in all which it is our part to imitate
him. Secondly, we must be conformable unto Christ being our head; which
conformity consists in crucifying our body of corruption, even as he was
crucified upon his cross. We must arm our selves with Peter's exhortation, 1.
Pet. 4.1. to suffer in the flesh, as Christ suffered in the flesh. Which
whosoever does, he cease from sin: he lives not henceforth after the lusts
of men, but after the will of God, verse. 2. The learning of this duty helps
forward our obedience under the cross, which many cannot attain unto (who in
the time of their peace are in some sort obedient) because they bear not about
in their bodies the dyings of Christ daily. 2. Cor. 4.

The second point. The moment and weight of this ground, appears Luke 9 24.
He that will save his life, shall lose it, that is, that will not take up his
cross to follow Christ, shall never be saved. Again, Baptism is a maine
ground, Heb. 6.1. namely, as it is joined with inward baptism, for else outward
baptism may be wanting, so it be without contempt; but both together are a
maine ground* especially in regard of that stipulation we make, and that
profession which we receive upon us thereby, of forsaking even our selves and
following of Christ, without which can be no salvation: which being the matter
and substance of this ground, shows evidently the importance of it.

The third point. Adversaries of this ground are, first among our selves, such
as are content to make Christ a Savior and Redeemer, but not a pattern and
example of imitation in his virtues: but Christ will not be made a packhorse
only to bear sins, seeing he has propounded himself a president to be
followed of those who look for salvation by his sufferings; they must first
be his Disciples, before he be their Redeemer. Secondly, Popish doctrine
suffers not a man to set one foot forward toward Christ, because it
resists denial of a man's self.
a more wicked enemy withstanding this doctrine is the Church of Rome. In
exalting nature, and extenuating the grace of God; as first, holding that all
sins deserve not not death, but may be done away with a little knocking on
the breast, or such light sorrow. Secondly, that by nature a man has free will
in his conversion, and being helped by the holy Ghost, can move himself unto
salvation. Thirdly, that after justification there is nothing in a man that God
can hate. Fourthly, that a man may merit life, and perform works of
satisfaction to God; which devilish doctrines what else do they but make the
heart swell with pride, so as it can never be brought to the denial of it
self.

The third ground is taken from the Moral law: 3. Ground.
Thou s^alt have no other God before my face. The scope and meaning of which
law is to direct us in choosing the true God only to be our God; which is
done, first, when we know and acknowledge him as he has revealed himself in
his word: secondly, when we give our hearts unto him, according to that
precept; My son give me thy heart. Now the heart is given to God when he is
loved and feared above all, when he is alone trusted in, relied on in danger,
when we ascribe all power unto him, believe in him, subject our selves unto him
in our very conscience; for whatsoever has these is become our God. Secondly,
that this is a ground cannot be doubted: for whosoever takes not the true God
for his God, is out of all way to salvation, seeing there is no covenant
between God and him, and being out of the covenant, can have no part not
inheritance in Gods kingdom.

Thirdly, Adversaries of this ground are, No (...) if that religion teach to
deny honor and allegiance due to our earthly Go^s.
first the Romish doctrine, which commits high treason against God, in
giving his honor to other things: as to Saints and dead men, whom they make
Gods, by teaching invocation to be due unto them, and so attributing an
infinite power, wisdom, or presence unto them, which are Gods proprieties.
Secondly, in teaching that men can merit, they make them Gods. For if Christ
himself had bin a mere man, he could not have merited. Thirdly, in ascribing
to dead creatures the virtue of the holy Ghost; as to water, the power of
sanctification, driving away devils, and washing a^ay sins. Fourthly, in
setting up the wooden Cross for a God, which must be worshipped with the same
worship and affection as God himself is. The Virgin Mary they make a Goddess,
and Queen of heaven, whom they pray to command her son. And lastly, the
Pope, to whom they give power to pardon sin properly, and to make laws to
bind conscience, as properly as Gods laws do.

The second adversary is the comm^^ Protestant, who carries an outward
profession of Christ, but in his heart sets up many Gods, as the belly,
wealth, pleasure, yea the Devil is the god of many men, as Phil. 3.19. 2. Cor.
4.4: others set all their hearts and study for the accomplishment of their
sins; now sin having the hold in their hearts, is become their God. Yea and
it is a common practice of many Protestants i^ their crosses to put off their
confidence in God, and betake themselves to cunning men and Southsayers; so
leaving the living God, and trust for their help in the devil himself.

4. Ground.
The fourth ground of practice concerns the worship of God: Exodus 20.5. Thou
shall not make to thy self any (...) image, etc. The first point. The meaning:
This Commandment has two parts: the former forbidding the making of Images:
the latter, the worshipping of them. The former in these words: Thou shall not
make unto thy self etc. In which is not simply forbidden the making of Images,
as if they be for political or historical use, ^ut the making of them in way
of religion or conscience, to put us in remembrance of God, or to worship God
in, by, or at the same. The latter in these words: Thou shall not bow down
etc. That is, thou shall not so much as bow down thy body before such an
Image made by others, neither to worship it, no^ the true God in it: which
exposition because it is oppugned by a great part of the world, I will prove
by some reasons: First, that which was the sin of the Israelites in making
Images, is here forbidden: but their common sin in the use of Images, was to
make them representations of the true God, and to worship the true God in them,
as appears Exodus 32.4.5. The Israelites having made a golden Calfe, said:
These be thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: that
is, this is a representatio^ of that God who brought thee out of Egypt: for
they should have been worse then mad men, if they had called that Calfe which
was but one day old, that God which brought them many days before out of
Egypt: besides that, Images true or false are usually called by the name of
Gods, as being so in the reputation of the worshippers. F^rther, Aaron said,
Verse. 5.
To morrow shall be the holy day of the Lord: signifying that the Calfe was
made to represent the true God, whom in the Calfe they were to worship. Again,
Judge. 17.3. Michae^ mother shows that her intent was to worship God in the
Image, when she says, that she had dedicated eleven hundred shekels of
silver to the Lord, to make a graven and molten Image; and having made the
Image, she says, Now will the Lord bless me: Verse. 13.
though his fact was gross Idolatry, yet he shows that he worshipped the
Lord in the Image, whose blessing he boasted of. Esai 40.18 To whom will y^^
^^ken God? whence it is plain, they made Images of the true God to worship him
in. Judge. 2.11. The Israelites were sore afflicted for serving Baal and (...),
that is, Idols fetched from the Heathen: but herein their intent was to worship
the true God in them, as appears Hose 2.16. Thou shall call me no more (...).
Yea the very Heathen themselves worshipped the true God in their Images, Romans
1.23. They turned the glory of the true God into the similitude of a
corruptible creature; much more then the Israelites who took their Idolatry
from them: and therefore in the second Commandment is forbidden the making of
Images of the true God, and not of false only, as the Papists would falsely
teach us. The second reason is in Deuteronomy. 4.15.16. where Moses making a
Commentary upon this co^man^ement, and forbidding to make any representation
of any figure, adds this reason: Ye saw no image in the day that the Lord
spoke out of Horeb: and therefore Moses understood the Commandment as we do,
namely not to make any Image of the true God. The third reason is in the words,
Thou shall not make the image of any thing that is in heaven above. etc. Seeing
then that God is in heaven above, as also the Saints and Angels, we must make
no Image to represent them: for even Images of the true God are Idols, hated of
God, and condemned in the Scriptures: so the golden Calfe is called an Idol,
Act. 7.41.

The second point is the weight of this ground standing herein, that whosoever
overthrows this ground, ouerturneth this religion. For first, whosoever
resembles God in any Image, and worshippeth him therein, he denies the true
God, Romans 1.25 The wisest of the Heathen worshipping God in their Images,
turned the truth of God into a lie: so whatsoever me^ may believe of
worshipping ye true God in an Image, the truth is, it will prove no better than
a lie unto them. ^ Cor. 10.^^
The Apostle affirms, that whatsoever the Gentiles sacrificed to Idols, they
sacrificed it unto Devils, and not unto God. Some may ask, how can this be,
seeing their intent was to sacrifice unto God? I answer, that by offering to
an Image, they denied God, and so not serving him, they became sacrificers to
the Devils: for whosoever conceiueth of God otherwise than he will be conceived
of, conceive an Idol, and not God; and he that will remember him in things
wherein he will not be remembered, forgets him, as the Israelites, Psalm.
106.21. Secondly, professed Idolatry makes a separation between God and his
people, as adultery does between man and wife. For as a wife that seeks to
strangers, denies her proper husband; so the Church, which is the spouse of
God, going a whoring after Images and strange Gods, denies God her husband,
and procures the Bill of divorce: see Hose 2. and Ierem. 3.8.

Thirdly, the adversaries of this ground are, the professed Papists: first, in
allowing making of Images for Religions sake; as the Image of Christ crucified,
If the Pope had been with Moses in the mount, he would have demurred upon the
admittance of the second commandment.
which they call the Crucifixe; and of Christ glorified, which they call Agnus
Dei: also Images of the Virgin Mary, and other Saints; yea cursing and
condemning all those that forbid the making of them, and so curse even the Lord
himself: yea and most blasphemouslie in former times they were wont to make
Images of the Trinity, picturing the Father like an old man, the Son like a
child, the holy Ghost like a Dove, and yet much more blasphemously than that,
otherwise: but they are now ashamed of such wicked pictures. Secondly, they
maintain, yea and command the worship of Christ in an Image, and condemn
them who deny the worshipping of Images, whether they be Images of God, or of
Saints, Angels, and dead men. Thirdly, they teach that a man is to worship the
Crucifixe religiously, yea with the same worship and devotion with which Christ
is worshipped, wherewith also they worship their breaden God.

In former times their consciences secretly checking them of their Idolatries,
caused them to leave out the whole second Commandment, and divide the last
into two, to fill up the number: but of later days, seeing they are
constrained to retain the Commandment, they have found out some shift, which
we will examine. First, they say, there is a difference be^weene an Idol and
an Image, as the one is a Greek word, Object. 1.
the other a Latin: the former is a representation of the true God, the latter
of false Gods. Ans. The difference is but in the word, for indeed they be both
one, Answer.
Acts 7.41. The Calfe was an Image and an Idol too. Object. 2.
Ob. They make difference also of worship, which they say is of two sorts: the
first is Latreia, (...).
this is a worship and reverence due to God only: the second is Dulia, and
this is a service due unto Saints, to ye Crucifixe, (...).
etc. Ans. But besides that ye Scripture make these both one, Answer.
they herein bewray their folly, in that if either be greater, it is Dulia,
which is a kind of service most submisse, and that properly which vassals were
wont to yield their Lords who had taken them in war, and yet this must be
given to Saints, and the wooden Cross, being the greatest subjection. Ob^ect.
3.
Ob. 3. But they intend to worship not the image of the Cross, Answer.
but Christ in it. Ans. No intention of man can institute a true worship of
God, without warrant from God himself, who never authorized men to worship him
in Images. Object. 4.
Ob. 4. Englishmen kneel down to the Chair of Estate, the King not being in
presence, and therefore we may much more to Saints and Angels. Answer.
Ans. First, this is a civil and politic worship, testifying the subjects
allegiance: but kneeling to Saints is religious. Secondly, the King appoints
his Chair of Estate to be a sign of his presence, and wills it; but no
Papist can prove that ever Christ appointed a Crucifixe to be a sign of his
presence: or that God wills their Images to be signs of his presence.
Thirdly, the Chair of Estate is a sign only in the Kings absence; for
himself being present, the civil worship is performed to himself: but Christ
is never absent from his Church, and yet in his presence they set up an Image
to remember him by. Thus that Church being an open Idolater must not be joined
with; for she is not joined to Christ any longer, but is a professed harlot;
neither i^ it so indifferent (as some think) to find salvation there as well
as by our Religion.

5. Ground.
The fifth ground is, Matthew. 4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve. That this is a chief ground needs no proof; and
therefore we will consider first the meaning, secondly the adversaries against
whom we must contend. To know the meaning, the words going before will afford
us some direction; wherein Satan having moved Christ to fall down and worship
him with bodily worship only, and requiring not the maine worship due to God,
but a little bowing of the body; betokening that he was the disposer of the
kingdoms of the world: this Christ denies him with this reason ratified by
Scripture, that it is a worship and service proper to God, and to be tendered
to him only. Secondly, the words themselves are to be weighed: By [ worship]
is properly signified bodily* (...)
worship in a bodily gesture: the meaning then is, thou shall with thy body
adore the Lord, for so it is suitable to Satan's demand. The word [ serue]
signifies all worship due to God both inward and outward. [ Only] This word
appertains to both the members, and so to the whole sentence; for else there
should be no direct denial of Satan's temptation, requiring only the former
and not the latter. But some will say, Object.
we may serve men lawfully, how then is service proper to God only? Answer.
There be two kinds of worship; religious, and civil. Religious, is an action
or actions of reverence and subjection, whereby a man does acknowledge the
Godhead it self, or the properties thereof, either in God himself truly, or in
the creature falsely. These properties of God are, first, to be an absolute
Lord. Secondly, to be Almighty. Thirdly, to be present in all places at all
times. Fourthly, to hear all men in all places at all times. Fifthly, to know
all things past, present, and to come, yea and the hearts of men. Sixthly, to be
giver of all good things, and the preuenter of all evil. Now, any action of
reverence in signification of any of these properties is a religious worship;
the very intent of the mind in religious worship being, to ascribe either
Godhead or divine properties to the thing worshipped. Civil or politic
worship is, when men perform actions of reverence and subjection to others, as
acknowledging them to be preferred above themselves in gifts or authority.
Thus bowing of the body is sometime religious, when it is done to God, in
acknowledging his properties; and sometime civil, performed to a man in respect
of his eminency in gifts or government. But these words of Christ are meant
only of the former, and not of the latter, which belongs unto man. This ground
thus truly conceived, affoordeth us these two maine points of Religion: first,
that God is to be worshipped with religious worship. Secondly, that all
religious worship is proper to God, and due to him alone. Now religious worship
is twofold: first, inward, standing in two things; faith and inward obedience.
Secondly, outward, when this inward worship is outwardly testified, consisting
of three principal parts: first, in preaching, hearing, and reading the word:
secondly, in receiving the two Sacraments: thirdly, in prayer and thanksgiving
public and private.

Aduersa^^^^ C^^holik^, (...) Catho^^^^ depra^^^ of Gods wor^^^^.
The Adversaries hereof are the Papists, who pretend the Catholic Religion, but
indeed overthrow it, in deprauing the outward worship of God, wherein the
inward is testified. The first part whereof standing in the preaching, hearing,
and reading of the word, they deprave: first, by mingling the pure word of God
with man's word and writings; and authorizing books Apocryphal as Canonical
Scripture. Secondly, by making unwritten Traditions Apostolical and
Ecclesiastical (as they say) of equal authority with the Scripture. Thirdly,
in that they teach in their Catechismes, that the worship of God does stand in
obeying the Commandments of the Church, as well as the Commandments of God
themselves, and are necessarily to be practiced unto salvation, and so they
worship God in vain, Mat. 15.9. Fourthly, in that they allow no Bible to be
^uthenticall, but only the Latin translation of Iere^ie, renouncing both the
Hebrew and Greek fountains: and ye^ learned Papists confess that their Latin
text i^ corrupted, and that therefore the true sense is to be fetched from the
Popes determination, and from Councels, and no other sense to be admitted.
Fifthly, in that they make Images Lay men's books and teachers; and debar the
people of the Scriptures publicly and privately in the vulgar tongue, and
suffer it only to be read by them and unto them in the Latin tongue unknown
unto them.

The second part of outward worship standing in administration of Sacraments,
they likewise corrupt and abolish: for howsoever Baptism is preserved for the
substance of it in the Romish Church, which (as a lantern carries the light)
it retains not for it own, but for the hidden Churches sake within it; yet
have they abolished the Lords Supper for the substance of it: first, of a
Sacrament they have made it^ real sacrifice. Secondly, they have turned the
Communion into a private Mass, where the Priest alone receives all, and the
people nothing* Thirdly, although in a Sacrament the^e must be a distinction
between the sign and the thing signified, yet they make none, but overthrow
all such signification of the signs by their transubstantiation. Fourthly,
they have turned the body of Christ into a breaden God, which they carry
about in boxes and worship; which is as vilde an idolatry as ever was among
the Heathen, not inferior to the worshipping of Cats and Bulls as gods among
the Egyptians. Fifthly, they have added to Christ's Institution five Sacraments,
viz. Penance, Confirmation, Orders, Matrimony, and annoynting. But indeed
Baptism is a Sacrament of Penance: the Lords Supper of Confirmation: and
further are they deceived in the other.

The third part of outward worship concerns Prayer and thanksgiving: this
they overthrow likewise: first, they mock God in praying in an unknown
tongue, not knowing what they ask, much less seriously addressing themselves
unto the duty; which even earthly Kings would disdain. Secondly, in prayer
must be brought sense of want and contrition of heart, this they cannot bring
who are taught that they merit by prayer. Thirdly, prayer must be made in
particular faith, but this they make presumption. Fourthly, they allow praying
to creatures, and the mediation of Saints, and so deny the very substance of
prayer, which is to make request to God only in the alone mediation of Christ.

The second maine poin^ of Religion out of this ground is this; That religious
worship is due to God alone* for we may not give appearance of religious
worship to creatures. Cornelius is reproved for giving to Peter excess even
of civil worship, Acts 10.25. for he knew Peter to be a man and not God; and
so seemed to mingle a kind of religious worship with civil. This is a maine
ground also, which whosoever denies he holds no^ the head Christ, Col.
2.18.19.

The Adversaries of this ground also are the professed Papists, Adversaries.
Popish prayers, fitter to be preferred to dead men than the living God.
who worship Saint^ and Angels, not only by kneeling before them, but praying
also unto them; which cannot be denied to be a religious worship, seeing it
attributes unto them to hear the prayers of all men (...) all times, in all
places, ye^ and to know the hearts of men upon earth. Secondly, they maintain
religious worship of Images, they go on pilgrimage unto them, offer Incense,
creep unto them, and kneel before them. Yea, they worship the Crucifixe with
the same worship whereby they would adore Christ, if he were living upon
earth, as also the relics of Saints. Out of all which we see what to think
of that Church which only has the name of a Church, she holds not the head
Christ, seeing for so many hundred years she has displaied her fornication,
in worshipping Saints, Angels, Images, and the Virgin Mary, so as her Bill of
diuorcement is justly given her, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. Revel. 13.8. from whom we must
separate, if we would not partake with her in her plagues.

6. Ground.
The sixth ground of practice is Esai. 8.13. Sanctify the Lord of hosts: which
words contain the substance of the third Commandment: in which consider first
the meaning, secondly the weight, thirdly the Adversaries. For the meaning: A
thing is said to be sanctified two ways; either when it is made holy; or when
it is acknowledged to be holy. Now this latter must be here understood, for
Gods name cannot be made holy, which is holiness it self, and the first
cause of all holiness; but it is sanctified of us when we acknowledge it
holy: and this our sanctification of God either respects God himself, or
the gifts of God. Our sanctification of God himself (the thing intended in
this ground) is done two ways: first, when in our mind we acknowledge and
praise him in his attributes, of wisdom, mercy, loving kindness, power,
providence, and such like. 1. Pet. 3.15. Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts;
that is, acknowledge him in his wisdom, power, and other his attributes: Look
as good subjects speaking of, and mentioning their Prince, will put off their
hats in reverent opinion of him; so we religiously should think and speak of
these. Job. 1.5.
Job fearing only and but suspecting, that his sons in their feastings had
dishonored this name of God, sanctified them. When Hez^k^^h heard ye
blasphemies of Rabshak^h against God, be humbled himself, rent his clothes and
put on sackcloath, 2. King. 19.1. Yea wicked Ahab having heard (though falsely)
that Nab^^^ had blasphemed God, he rent his clothes and proclaimed a fast:
which shows (whatsoever his fact was) the use and manner of holy men in his
time, when Gods name was dishonored and blasphemed. Secondly, we sanctify
God himself, when we with reverence acknowledge his titles, as God, Lord,
Iehoua, Father, Christ, Jesus, Holy Ghost; and not without religious and
obedient affection speaking or thinking of them. Our sanctification of Gods
gifts, which are many, as the Word preached, Prayer, Sacraments, Meat, Drink,
and all things serving for the good of body or soul, is not by giving or
adding any holiness unto them, which in themselves are all holy; but when we
acknowledge them holy, by preparing our selves to a holy use of them, and use
them accordingly with good conscience: for every creature of God has a double
use: first, a lawful use when God permits a general use of his creatures, thus
all may use meat, drink, apparel, etc. Secondly, a holy use, when a creature
in his lawful use is used in a holy manner, for this includes the former,
though that may be without this. For example, all the Jews kept the Passover
lawfully, but only those celebrated it holily, who prepared themselves
according to the commandment: which holy use is obtained by the word and
prayer, 1. Tim. 4. The word directs us to use these gifts of God in
obedience; and prayer obtains grace to use them according to the word unto
which holy use of Gods creatures we are to be moved by these reasons: first,
we must distinguish our selves from the brute beasts; the swine in the forest
^^teth up the maste, but looks not up to heaven, no not to the tree whence it
falls. Secondly, because we have lost our title to all the creatures in Adam,
which only is in this use restored. Thirdly, because they are the gifts of
God, we must thus acknowledge them to be his, and in him learn to use them.
Fourthly, that vice may avoid the common abuse of them, whereby he is
provoked to displeasure.

The second point is the weight of this ground: which may appear in the
con^^^rie; seeing the blasphemer does what he can to overthrow the Godhead it
self; Leuit. 24.14.16.
whence every such one is called by such a name as signifies a (...) of God,
or one that thrusts God thorough: and therefore the sanctification of God is
a ground of moment. Secondly, the first petition of the Lords Prayer is,
sanctified be thy name: wherein we are taught to prefer and pray for the
hallowing of Gods name before our own salvation. Thirdly, the scope of the
third Commandment is the same, which whosoever observes not, reuerseth both
the former. And lastly, the Lord is so jealous of his glory, that he will be
sanctified of all them that come near him, else he will sanctify himself in
their confusion, Leuit. 10.3.

Aduersa^^^^.
Thirdly: The Adversaries of this ground are, first, though (by Gods mercy) the
religion of the Church of England is no adversary unto it, yet the lives of the
most fight against it: for although when we mention earthly Princes we can use
all reverence, yet Gods name is most fearfully abused, and tossed in wicked
men's mouths by oaths and cursed speakings; besides that, many abuse the same
to Charms, and Spells in their sorceries, and men think all is well, because
herein they use good words: but the truth is, the better the words be, the
greater is the sin; yea it is noted to be a sign of a low and base spirit
not to swear and blaspheme upon any occasion: many soldiers think they
cannot be courageous enough, unless they pierce God and rent Christ by
detestable oaths, such as would cause wicked Ahab himself to rend his
clothes at the hearing.

Secondly, the great adversary is the Papist, and that diverse ways: first, in
that they teach that the very doing of some work is a sanctification of God;
as the outward work of Baptism, yea in it the very action of the Minister is
a worship of God, and does confer grace, ex opere operat^; this was their old
doctrine, which now they color with this addition: If the party be well and
rightly disposed: but besides the use, yea the lawful and common use, there is
by this ground required an holy use of any thing to make it acceptable to God,
or rightly profitable to the doer himself. Secondly, Popish hall^^ing of the
crea^^res, dishonors the Crea^^^^.
their hallowing of Water, Bells, Palms, Ashes, Spettle, is a mere mockery of
God, seeing they have neither word nor promise from God, that these creatures
should thus be hallowed to preserve from evil, body or soul. Thirdly, they
err in the foundation of religion diuer^ ways; every which such error is
blasphemy. Fourthly, that religion oppugneth the sanctification of Gods name
in the use of a lawful oath, teaching first that the Pope has power to
dispense with an oath. Secondly, that men may swear by the Mass, and so doing
make it a God. Thirdly, even the learned among them with one consent hold, that
a man may swear ambiguously, even when he knows the thing to be otherwise.

The seventh ground is, Galath. 5.14. 7. Ground.
The whole law is fulfilled in this one word, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self. The meaning is not that we should love our neighbor equally with
our selves, and with no less affection, or degree of love; but that with the
same cheerefulnes, willingness, and truth of heart that we perform duties of
love to our selves, ought we also to reach them out unto others. The weight of
this ground appears, in that not only Christ says, It is like the great
Commandment, but also in that it is the sum of the whole law: for the first
table must be practiced in the second, and the love of God testified in love to
men.

The Adversaries of this ground be the Popish Church, Adversaries. A fit
principle for that religion, which wholly seeks it self
who thus expound it* First love thy self, and then thy neighbor; making the
love of our selves the foundation of the love of others: but sometime we may
love our neighbor above our selves; as Jonathan loved David more than his own
soul, and Christ loved his enemies more than his own life. Secondly, it
teaches that a man must not love particularly his particular enemy, nor
salute him in particular, but generally, as if he salute a whole company
together, his enemy being there.

The eighth ground: Exodus 20.12. 8. Ground.
Honor thy father and thy mother, etc. In the words two things are to be
considered: first, an ordinance of God: secondly, the means to preserve it.
The ordinance is, that all men must not be equal in degree, but there must be
orders of men, of whom some are to be in higher degree, as superiors; some in
lower condition, as inferiors: the former are above others in regard of power
to command and to punish: the latter are in subjection under others, by whose
discretion and will they are to be governed. This ordinance is described, Romans
13.1. Let every soul be subject to the superior power: that is, be content to
be under others which are above him in power: so here, some must be as
fathers, and mothers, some must be subjected unto them. The means to preserve
this ordinance is, the yielding of honor unto whom it belongs, which
stands in three things: first, in reverence toward the persons of
superiors. Secondly, in obedience to their just commandments. Thirdly, in
thankefulnes for their pains in governing: thus is that golden sentence to be
expounded, Matthew. 22. Give unto C^sar the things that are Caesar's; that is,
give him reverence, obedience, thankfulness, according to that, Romans 13.7. Give
fear unto whom fear belongs, honor to whom honor, tribute to whom tribute.

The weight of this ground is plain, because without it can be no practice of
true religion: for first, by it stand the three things, the Family, the
Church, and Commonwealth; all which are maintained by government, and
subjection: wherefore the Lord set this Commandment the first of the second
Table, as whereupon he would found all humane societies. Secondly, gouernour^
in any of these societies, are the keepers of both Tables, without whose help
and authority Gods kingdom could have no abiding on the earth.

Adversaries.
Adversaries of this Commandment, are the Papists, who weaken the authority of
the Magistrate, Such is the carriage of the Romish Clergy, as they had need
keep^ the ^iu^ll Magistrate o^^ them, and be their own judges.
in exempting their Clergy from all Civil power of Magistracy in causes both
judicial (that is, matters controuersall) and criminal, that is, matters of
trespass, although the Apostle says, Let every soul be subject. Secondly,
that Church has set up a power to bring into order and subjection all the
Kings upon earth, namely the power of the Pope, who challenges to himself to
ouerrule, yea and to depose at his pleasure Kings and Queens, who in their
dominions are above al and only under God. Thirdly, that religion lesseneth the
power of parents: for in the Council of Trent they establish, first, Marriages,
and Contracts made by children without consent of parents. Secondly, Vows also
made by children under age and without consent of parents, are held lawful, and
not to be broken.

9. Ground.
The ninth ground is, Micha. 6.8. He has showed thee O man what is good, and
what the Lord requires of thee* surely to do justly, to love mercy, to humble
thy self, and to walk with thy God. The meaning. Three virtues are here
required: first, Just d^aling: secondly, Mercy: thirdly, Humility. Touching
the first, we are commanded to do^ justly: and this execution of justice
between man and man has five substantial parts: First, to give honor to whom
honor is due. Secondly, by thought word and deed to preserve the body and soul
of our neighbor, that is, his life spiritual and temporal. Thirdly, his
chastity, which is the honor of body and soul in single life and Matrimony.
Fourthly, his worldly estate. Fifthly, his good name. This is the scope of all
the Commandments of the second Table.

Now because the due execution of justice must be tempered with mercy,
therefore is mercy required of man in the second place, which is a readiness
to relieve the misery of the distressed. And thirdly, because justice and
mercy without godliness are but civil virtues, we are in the last place
commanded to walk in humility with our God, which contains the sum of
the first table, and stands in three things: first, we must acknowledge our
sins: secondly, entreat for pardon: thirdly, purpose not to offend God any
more, but endeavor to prevent sin to come.

Concerning y^ weight of this ground, it appears in Micha. 6.7. where the
Lord testifies himself to be more delighted with the practice of love and
mercy, than with oblations of thousands of Rams, and ten thousand rivers
of oil: and elsewhere, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. Yea Titus 2.12.
This is made the end of the appearing of the grace of God, that we should live
soberly in regard of our selves, justly in regard of others, and godly in
regard of God. These virtues are so respected of God, that they are said to go
immediately before his face, Psalm. 89.14. and so necessary among men, that
without them no society can be preserved.

The adversaries hereof are, first, Adversaries.
the lives of most men, who seek their own things, and not to maintain the
lives, goods, name, chastity of others: yea too many prefer their private
gain before the common good of men in Church and Commonwealth. Secondly, the
maine adversary is the Roman Religion, (...) rel^^^on an (...) to all (...).
which defends the greatest injustice that can be, by establishing a Monarchy
among themselves, not only controlling the sovereign authority of Princes in
their own kingdoms, but also exempting their subjects from their allegiance
at their pleasure. Of which usurped power deba^^e them once, and that
counterfeit Religion will fall with it, because it is only underpropped by it.
Secondly, that Religion overthrows justice in chastity: for first, it gives
power to the Pope to dispense with marriages within degrees of nature; it
licenseth the brother by that dispensation to marry his brothers wife, and so
is a patron of horrible incest. Secondly, it defends the toleration of
Stews. Thirdly, by solemn decree it forbids marriages to sundry orders of
men, which Paul calls a doctrine of devils, 1. Timoth. 4. Yea they bind
certain men and women from marriage, and yet call it a Sacrament. Fourthly, the
last Council of Trent affirms, that all marriages not solemnized by a
Mass Priest, and in the faith of the Romish Church, are of none effect.
Thirdly, that Religion teaches, that to steal a small thing, is a venial
sin; whereas the thought of stealing deserves the curse of the law.
Secondly, it defends begging, yea and places holiness in it; whereas the word
teaches that there should be no beggar in Israel. Fourthly, it teaches that a
sporting lie, or a beneficial lie are venial sins, flat against the ninth
Commandment. Lastly, against the tenth Commandment it teaches injustice,
namely, that hurtful motions intended against our neighbor (if there be no
consent of will) are no sin. Whence we may see what to think of that
Religion; yea Christ himself shows, Mat. 5.19. Whosoever breaks the least
of these Commandments, and teach men so to do, he is the least in the
kingdom of heaven, that is, he has no part therein. But the Roman Church
breaks them, yea and teaches men to do so, and therefore it is not of God,
and the peremptory teachers thereof have no part (without repentance) in the
kingdom of heaven.

10. Ground
The tenth ground is, 1. Cor. 7.20. Let every man abide in that calling in which
he was called. First the meaning. The scope of the words shows, that among
the Corinths some who were sla^es and servants, but converted to the faith
(their masters still remaining Infidels) thought that now they were free from
their Masters, and might relinquish their service, and hence took occasion to
live as they listed; against which conceit of licentiousness the Apostle Paul
opposes himself, and wishes that this be reformed, and that those who being
called to the faith under unbelievers, abide in that same calling wherein they
were called. In which verse two things are contained: First, that every man
that would live religiously must have a double calling: first, the general
calling of a Christian: secondly, some particular vocation and calling wherein
to converse. Secondly, that every man must abide in his particular calling:
which that a man may do, first he must be contented and well pleased with his
calling. Secondly, he must walk diligently in the duties thereof; for these
reasons: first, the commandment of God, Genes. 3.19. In the sweat of thy face
shall thou eat thy bread: which words though they be a threatening, yet they
include a commandment bounded with a promise of blessing, Psalm. 128.2. The
man that fears God shall eat the labors of his own hands, and blessed shall
he be: Exodus 20. Six days shall thou labor, enforced by Gods own example,
for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth. Quest. May we not use
recreation in the six days? Ans. Yea, so it be moderate, and help to make us
fitter for our callings; for labor it self being commanded, every thing also
which vpholdeth it, is commanded. Such commandments are usual in the New
Testament also: Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that stole steal no more, but rather let
him labor with his hands the thing that good is. So 2 Thessalonians. 3.12. men are
commanded to eat their own bread. Secondly, Examples in the Scripture: God
enjoined Adam in the state of innocence this double calling: first to serve
him: secondly to dress the garden. The second Adam Christ himself while he
led a private life till his baptism, which was the space of thirty years,
lived in his father Joseph's calling. The Angels themselves are ministering
spirits for the good of the godly, and ascend and descend upon the son of
man, and live not out of their calling. Thirdly, it is the ordinance of God
that men should be his instruments for the common good of the societies wherein
they live; even as every member in the body endeavors it self not only for
it own good, bu^ for the benefit of the whole. So should every member of the
body politic.

This ground is of great weight for the maintaining of the three maine
societies: for neither family, Church nor Commonwealth can stand without
distinction of particular callings and labor in the same; for which cause the
Apostle would not have him to eat, that will not labor, 2. These. 3.3.

Adversaries.
The adversaries hereof are, first, many amongst us, as those who spend their
lives in gaming, and they who spend their wealth in bezeling and drinking: and
they also who being strong to labor spend their time in begging: all which are
vile courses of life, and enemies to all good societies. Secondly, the Roman
religion: first, in maintaining a Monkish life, whereby a man cutteth himself
off from all society, and lives in prayer and fasting: but we are taught not
only to practice duties of the first table, but of the second also, and
without the special calling the general is nothing. Secondly, In maintaining
loosenes of life and idleness, for God having appointed 52. Sabbaths in the
year, wherein men are to lay aside their ordinary callings, and no more, they
have added (as may appear in their callender) fifty two more, which they call
holy days, and so spend more than a quarter of a year in rest and idleness,
whereby they become adversaries of this ground.

The eleventh ground is 1. Tim. 1.19. Keep faith and good conscience. 11.
Ground
The meaning: By faith we must understand the wholesome doctrine and religion
delivered in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles: further, this faith
must not go alone, but must have his companion, which is a good conscience;
the property of which is to excuse and justify a man in all callings before
God and man: and it is known by a twofold testimony: first of the life past:
secondly, of the life present and to come. The testimony of the life past is,
that a man has repented him of all his sins past, and is turned unto God.
The testimony of the life present and to come is, first, that a man has a
purpose never to offend God, but endeavors to please him in all things.
Secondly, that when he has slipped and sinned against Go^, it was not
wittingly and willingly, but of humane infirmity. Thirdly, that a man has his
general testimony which is required to a good conscience. Psalm. 119.6. I shall
not be confounded, when I have respect to all thy Commandments Iam. 2.5. He
that breaks one Commandment, i^ guilty of all: that is, he that wittingly
and willingly against the knowledge of his conscience break one of the
Commandments of God, will, if occasion be offered, willingly and of knowledge
break them all: so as a good conscience must testify on a man's side concerning
all sins and all obedience. Examples whereof we have in Hez^kiah, Esai. 38.3.
Remember Lord how I have walked before thee with a perfect heart. And in Paul,
1. Cor. 4.4. I know nothing by my self. The weight of the ground appears in
the words following, where the Apostle says, that while some put away good
conscience, they have made shipwreck concerning the faith: where he compares
our conscience to a ship, our religion and faith to our treasures laid in it.
Now as a hole in the ship loses the treasures by sinking the ship: so crack
the conscience, and the treasures of religion suffer shipwreck: whence it is
that Timothy is willed to keep the mystery of faith i^ pure conscience, 1.
Tim. 3.9.

The adversary of this ground is the Romish Religion, Adversaries.
who overthrows true testimony of conscience, which is ever joined with true
humiliation and repentance for sins past; in teaching, that many sins are
in themselves venial, or no sins, as those lusts against the last
Commandment, which killed Paul himself; and in extenuating man's corruption,
and extolling nature, whereby (they say) a man may work his salvation, being
helped by the holy ghost: whereas indeed no true peace of conscience is to be
found till nature be wholly debased, and grace take the whole place. Secondly,
they teach that a man cannot be certain of his salvation in this life, but
may conjecture and hope well; which is the very rack and torment of the
conscience. Thirdly, while they teach that a man must merit his salvation by
his works, they torture the conscience, and leave it destitute of this
testimony: for how can the conscience quiet it self, when it knows not how
many works will serve the turn, nor when it has sufficiently satisfied the
justice of God? and this is to be marked, that the chiefest of that religion,
whatsoever they hold in their life time; yet when they lie on their deathbed,
they fly from their own merits to the merit of Christ. And Sir Christopher
Bl^nt (...) exe^^^ion.
Notable is that speech of Stephen Gardener at his death to convince it, who
having been a great persecutor, and being much perplexed on his deathbed, by a
friend of his visiting him, was put in mind of that justification which is by
the mere mercy of God in Christ: to whom he answered; You may tell me, and
those who are in my case of this doctrine, but open not this gap to the people:
So as they are glad to entertain our doctrine for the true peace of their
conscience, which in their own doctrine they can never find.

Thus have we showed in part that faith is a most precious treasure, beset
with many enemies, against whom we must always contend, which we shall yet
more clearly see in beholding the use of this treasure, which is twofold:
first, to r^ueil^ from God unto man all things needful unto salvation
concerning doctrine or manners: wherein it excels all man^ learning: for
first, all the laws and learning of men reueile the Moral law only in part,
and mingle it with superstitions, and ceremonies: but they reveal no part of
the Gospel: only this doctrine of faith reuealeth in the full perfection both
the Law and Gospel. Secondly, the laws and learning of men know nothing (much
less reveal) of m^ns misery, neither the cause nor the remedy thereof; but
this doctrine of faith knows and reueileth both; namely, the first cause to
be the sin of our first parents, and the proper and perfect remedy to be
the death of Christ. Thirdly, men's laws and learning speak at large of
temporal happiness; but know nothing of eternal* but this doctrine not only
knows the true happiness of men, but teaches and describes the ready way
thereunto. The second use of this doctrine of faith is, that it is a most
perfect instrument of the holy Ghost for the working of all graces in the
hearts of men; I mean not the letters and syllables, but the doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles taught, and believed. Paul calls it the power of God to
salvation: and Christ himself says, that his word is spirit and life, that
is, the instrument of the Spirit, whereby life eternal is procured: for which
two notable uses it is a most precious treasure. Whence we learn, first, to be
swift to hear this doctrine taught in the public Ministry, as James
counsels, chap. 1.19. because in it God opens his treasure to dispense the
same unto us. Secondly, it being a precious treasure we must hide the same in
the coffers of our hearts: Psalm. 119.11. I have hid thy word in my heart. It
must be an ingrafted word in them, Iam. 1.21. And this duty we practice first,
when we have care to know it: secondly, to remember it: thirdly, when we set
the affections of our hearts upon it, as men do upon their treasures. Thirdly,
if it be the treasure of the Church, then it brings to the possessors of it,
wealth, honor, and pleasure, as other treasures do. For as the house of
Obed-edom was blessed for the Arc; so is that heart which holds true
wisdom within it: see Prou. 3.13.14. etc. We in this land have good
experience of this truth, who by Gods blessing have above forty years
enjoyed wealth, peace, honor, and above all, Gods protection: and whence have
these flowed but from the true faith and religion set down in the Prophets and
Apostles, maintained and defended amongst us? which if we would have continued,
we must also continue to hold and affect this truth as a treasure unto the end.

The second point or head of the Exhortation is; that the Saints are the
keepers of this treasure of faith, to whom it was (...) given. Whence we may
learn, first, The true treasure of the Church committed to the saints, is the
true doctrine of salvation, and not ^^lik^ or merits of dead men.
that it is an infallible note of the true Church of God, to keep, maintain,
and defend the wholesome doctrine of Religion, delivered by the Prophets and
Apostles. It was noted to be the chief prerogative of the Jews, that to them
the Oracles of God were committed, Roman. 3. Hence 1. Tim. 3.15. the Church is
called the ground and pillar of truth, because in her public Ministry she
maintains and preserves the same, Cant. 3.^. (...) Christ where she shall be
sure of him* and not mi^^e of finding him in her necessity: he makes answer,
she shall be sure of him in the Te^^s of shepherds. Whence may be truly
concluded, that neither are the assemblies of Turks nor Heretics the Churches
of God, because they fight against the truth; neither is the Church of Rome a
true Church of God, because the truth of doctrine is for substance reuersed
amongst them. As also we may be confirmed that our Churches are the true
Churches of Christ by this infallible note: A Register is known by his Records;
so our Church is known to be Gods Register, because it keeps faithfully the
records of the Prophets and Apostles. Secondly, that it stands us in hand to
whom this treasure is now committed, so faithfully to keep it, that it be not
taken from us, and given to others who will keep it better: which we shall do
by making this use of it, that we bring forth the fruits of it in amendment
of life, else our unthankfulness shall justly bereave us of it. Concerning that
circumstance in the text [ once giuen] and not often, it may b^are a double
sense: first, it was given (a^ we say) once for all, that is, perfectly,
sufficiently, as never after needing any alteration or addition. Whence we
note, first, that all revelations in matter of salvation and religion given
since, are frivolous and superstitious; for there is but one edition of true
faith, and no (...) edition of Revelation besides or without the word; such as
the Papists have devised, to confirm their Purgatory, prayer and alms for
the dead, Mass, etc. seeing all necessary doctrine to salvation was once
given perfectly. Secondly, that all Church traditions in matter of religion and
doctrine of salvation, are mere prophanations of true doctrine, and argue it
to be imperfect* as those of the Mass: of receiving the Communion in one
kind; of the Popes supremacy; of works of satisfaction, and many more.
Secondly, it may be thus understood, Once given to the Saints, that is, not in
writing, but in the hearts of the Saints, when they are truly enlightened; and
therefore if after enlightening it be quite lost, it is not given the second
time, and consequently cannot be recovered. Heb. 6.4. If a man who has bin
once enlightened and tasted of the good word of God, fall away, it is
impossible th^^ he should be renewed again by repentance. From which we must
learn, to beware of Apostasy, and falling from the faith, yea and of al steps
and degrees leading thereunto, as of declining from our grounds of religion:
for better (...) it been for us never to have known the way of truth, than
after the knowledge of it to forsake the holy Commandment, 2. Pet. 2.22.
Which is the more to be remembered, because religion has been more cherished
than now it is, and the declining from it a great deal less. If it be asked,
how may we prevent Apostasy? I answer, never call any ground into question.
Here Cyprians rule is to be learned, that divine matters admit no deliberation.

The third point of the Exhortation is; the office of the Church of God and
every member of it; and that is to maintain, yea to The word is not (...), but
(...) signifying, an instant contention.

The weapons of ou^ warfare are not carnal. ^. Cor. 10.^^


fight for the maintenance of this ^reasure; and this is not a bodily fight by
strength of arm or bow, but a spiritual fight by spiritual duties, which
every member of the Church must take up; and namely by four duties. First, by
doctrine; for every man in his place and calling must be a Prophet; as Joel
2.28. and must teach all under him: the father must teach the children, the
Master his servants* and thus keep out Satan and al Satani^^^ doctrines.
Secondly, by confession; every man being called must stand against the ga^es of
hell, by constant witnessing of the truth. ^. Pet. 3.15. Sanctify God in your
hearts, and be ready always to give an account of the (...) that is in you.
Thirdly, by example of a good life and unblameable, suitable to the doctrine.
Philip. 2.15. This makes men shine as lights in the world. Fourthly, by
prayer, that the Lord would send forth laborers into his harvest to withstand
al false doctrines and heresies, that so the faith and religion wherewith he
has honored us these many years, may be maintained unto us, and continued
unto ours for ever.

Verse. 4. For there are certain men crep^ in, which were of old before ordained
to this condemnation; ungodly men they are which turn the grace of our God
into (...); and deny God the only Lord and our Lord Jesus Christ.
HEre the Apostle proceeds to confirm his exhortation, by a reason drawn
from the state of the Church in his time, and it is thus briefly framed. There
be certain men which secretly seek to undermine and overthrow the faith,
therefore you ought the more earnestly to contend for it. And that these
adversaries lurking amongst them might the better be descried, he describes
them by five several adjuncts: first, by their hypocrisy, in creeping in.
Secondly, by their estate before God, they are of old ordained to this
condemnation. Thirdly, by their religion; ungodly men they are. Fourthly, by
their doctrine; they turn the grace of our God into wantonness. Fifthly, by
their lives; they deny the only Lord. For the first, There are certain men
crept in] That is, there be men who secretly have insinuated themselves into
your societies, professing themselves to be teachers of the true faith, but are
indeed the destroyers and disturbe^s of it. In which words two sins are la^d
to their charge: first, that they cunningly joined themselves unto the Church,
pretending themselves to be the servants of Christ and of the Church, and yet
were enemies to both. Here mark the subtlety of Satan, who causes profane
men to join themselves to the societies of the Saints, that by this means
mingling his instruments with the members of the Church, he may by degrees
corrupt the faith and overthrow the Church. The Parable, Matthew. 13. shows,
that wheresoever the good husbandman sows his good seed, this malicious man
scatters his tares. In Abraham's house shall be an Ismael; in Isaaks, an Esau;
in the Arc, a cursed Cham; in Christ's family a Judas. In the Primitive Church
the devil raised up of all sorts of Heretics great numbers. In our own
Church the Devil stirs up daily troops of Atheists and Papists, to the
corrupting and deprauing of true faith and Religion.

creep into it.

The second fault that is laid to their charge is, that they are intruders,
thrusting themselves into the office of teaching, not being called thereto, but
(...), Quasi aliud agendo ingressi.
creep into the calling. Whence we note, that it is most necessary that
those who are to teach publicly in the church should be first called
thereunto. Reasons. First, besides the avoiding of this sin of creeping into
the Church, it is the order that God has set in the same; that he that is to
teach should first be sent, Romans 10.14. And, No man takes this honor (that is
lawfully) to himself, except he be called as Aaron was. Secondly, the
Ministry is Gods, and not man's, because the Minister stands in Gods room,
and speaks in his name; which he can never do truly, unless God send him
and depute him in his stead. Thirdly, the Minister must maintain that which he
teaches; unto which he had need (as in all the parts of his calling) of Gods
special protection; for the which he must be always instant in prayer,
which he can never be assured of, if he be not persuaded of the truth of his
calling. Fourthly, the people cannot hear with comfort and profit, if they be
not persuaded that God has called the teacher to instruct them: Romans 10.14.
How can they hear etc. This truth extends it self also to all other offices
as well Civil as Ecclesiastical; all which are to be welded and executed by
men lawfully called unto the same. All entrance then into any office in Church
or Commonwealth by money, favor of men, or any unlawful means, is intrusion;
and such are not called of God, but are to be ranged among these seducers, who
creep into places, and come not in by Gods call or approbation.

The second adiunct whereby the seducers are described, is their estate before
God; being men of old (...).
ordained to this condemnation.] That is, they were before all times, locked,
enrolled, or billed unto condemnation, even as though their names had been set
down in a book. By condemnation is meant judgment, as the particle This does
plainly show: which makes this the plain meaning: They were of old ordained
to this judgment in this life, to try, to exercise and molest the Church of
God, and so consequently to procure unto themselves at length their own just
condemnation.

In which words we are taught: first, that God keeps his books of Registrie
and records, in which all things are set down, the persons, behauiours and
eternal estate of all men: which books are of three sorts: first, the book
of his Providence, containing all particulars of things past, present and to
come, in which the Lord saw the members of David when he was yet unformed,
Psalm. 139.16. In the same book, the number of the hairs of our heads, and the
falling of sparrowes to the ground, are recorded. The second book, is of the
last judgment; in which the persons and sins of all men al enrolled. Dan.
7*9.10. The thrones were set up, the ancient of days did sit: thousand
thousands ministered unto him, and ^enne thousand thousands stood before him:
the judgment was set, and the books opened. Reu. 20.12. I saw all great and
small stand before God; and the books were opened, and another book was
opened. The third is the book of life, in which are written the names of those
who are to be saved. Phil. 4.3. Paul says of Clement and other his fellow
laborers, that their names were written in the book of life. Now by these
books we may not grossly conceive material books, such as men note what they
would remember in: but the counsel, election, providence, pleasure, and
knowledge of God, wherein all these things are so certainly set down, as if
any man should write them in a book.

Out of which we note two things: first, that in regard of God there is no
chance, neither any event by it; in regard of men indeed who know not the
causes of things, many chances may be: but Gods providence, and chance are
contrary; he having all things written before him with their causes. Secondly,
that nothing comes to pass without the decree of God, no not the wicked
actions of men. Which God not only foreseeth, but decrees: for this Jude
insinuates, saying, they were ordained to this judgment; and even that which
is against the will of God, comes not to pass without his will, God willing
the being of that which he wills not to effect; and though he esteem not
evil to be good, yet he accounts it good that evil should be.

Further, where he says [ ordained of old to this condemnation] we learn,
that as God has before all worlds decreed the electing of some to salvation:
so he has decreed the refusal and rejecting of others to condemnation. 1.
Pet. 2.8. Predestination the^ is not only to be referred to the elect.
Many were disobedient* unto the which they were even ordained. 1 Thessalonians. 5.9.
God has not ordained you to wrath, but to obtain salvation through Christ:
showing that some are ordained to wrath, who are not to obtain salvation
through Christ. Romans 9.22. God is compared to a potter, framing vessels of
honor and dishonor, vessels of mercy, and vessels of wrath. In the same
place, I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau; that is, I have decreed so to do.
For the whole chapter speaks of Gods counsel and unchangeable decree. Object.
Ob. If this be so (will some say) then God deals iniustly, that absolutely
ordains some men to condemnation and perdition. Answer.
Ans. We must know, that we are creatures, and may not presume to prescribe a
law of justice to the Creator; whose will is justice it self (whatsoever we
may conceive) and makes the things willed good, because it is willed, and not
willed because it is good. Secondly, though God refuse and reject men, yet he
does it in most wise order and just proceeding, in these two degrees: first,
he vouchsafes to some men the riches of his grace tending to life
everlasting; which special abundant grace he denies to some other passing by
them, who being left of him unto themselves fall into sin. Secondly, Home ^on
damnatur propter decretum, sed propter peccatum.
for sin God decrees judgment and condemnation, so as he does not simply and
absolutely ordain his creature to hell, but in regard of sin: not that sin
is a cause of the decree moving him unto it, but that he decrees not
condemnation without respect of sin and relation unto it: which speech we
need not fear to speak, because the holy Ghost so speaks.

Use. First, if some men be passed by of God, we must humble our selves under
his mighty hand: and with fear and trembling work our salvation. Roman.
11.20. Some are cut off, thou stand by faith, be not high minded but fear.
Secondly, we may not be offended when we see the Gospel not received, yea
hated of men, and the professors of it persecuted: for many are of old ordained
to be underminers of the truth even to this condemnation, which by disobedience
they hasten upon themselves. If the Gospel be hid to any, it is to them that
perish. Thirdly, many Divines ouershoot themselves, that seek to obscure or
overthrow this doctrine of reprobation, teaching that God for his part electeth
all, and that man himself is the cause of reprobation; so as man is either the
savior or damner of himself, by receiving or refusing grace offered; whereas
the Scripture speaks otherwise: and here teaches us, that some men were
enrolled to certain judgment by God before all worlds. The darkning of this
doctrine breeds security of spirit, wherein grace is made so large, and
salvation so easy, that if men will they may be saved: whereas our doctrine
leads to the fear of God, and a care to walk as in his presence continually.

Lastly, in that it is added, they were preordained of old, note first the time
of the reiection of some men: namely, before all worlds. Secondly, the proper
cause of the decree of God, which must needs be in himself, because it was
before the creature was. Romans 9.11. Before they had done good or evil. That
is, before he considered of their good or evil in his decree, he decreed to
love the one, and hate the other. So Ephesians. 1.9. whom he chooses, he chooses
in himself. Not informing his judgment, nor framing his counsels as man does
from outward respects, he goes not out of himself for any motive to choose or
refuse, but as Matthew. 11.25. because his good pleasure was such. This confuteth
the Popish error, which affirms that God did decree according to his
foresight of faith or infidelity, the saving of some, and refusing of other:
but this cannot stand, seeing Gods decree is in order and time before the
creature; which being the latter, cannot be the cause of the former.

The third adiunct or property of these seducers is: their want of religion.
[Vngodly men they are] Ungodliness is a sin much spoken of, but not so well
known, and therefore it is requisite to show the nature of it, that we may
know who an ungodly man is; the rather because it is a grievous sin, much
greater than any of the seven deadly sins of the Papists, being the ground of
them all. Secondly, because it is rooted in the bottom of the heart, and
cannot be so easily discerned as others, though as dangerous as any. Thirdly,
because it is a sin more spiritual against the first Commandment of the
first table, directed against God himself, robbing him of his due honor. For
the clear knowledge of which, consider three maine parts or properties of
ungodliness: first, that it denies God the honor due unto him, and that
three ways: first, by ignorance it causes the ungodly man to rob him of his
honor, in that he acknowledges not the Godhead, but in his heart he inwardly
denies the providence, the presence, the justice, mercy, power, and the other
attributes of God. Psalm. 14.1. The thought of the heart of the fool, that is,
of every ungodly man, is, that there is no God: not that in conscience he is
not convinced of the contrary, but by reason of his wicked heart, upon
occasion offered he is willing to acknowledge none. Secondly, by not subiecting
the conscience and life to the written will and word of God, but rejecting and
renouncing subjection thereunto. Thus Job brings in the ungodly man, saying
to the Almighty, Depart from us, we will have none of thy ways: which is too
outrageous to ^ee the speech of the tongue, but of the heart casting off the
Lords yoke. To whom the King shall say: Those mine enemies that would not have
me to reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before me, Luke 19.27.
Thirdly, by not lifting up the heart by invocation of God for blessings
needful, and in thanksgiving for benefits received; the property of the
ungodly man is, that he calls not upon God, Psalm. 14.4. This point of
Atheism makes a man like a beast, which looks not up from whence his food
falls.

The second property of ungodliness is, to attribute and give this honor,
which it denies God, unto some thing else than God: as when the ungodly man
sets his love, joy, fear, or any other affection upon any thing besides
God. Thus the covetous man becomes an Idolater. And 2. Tim. 3. in the last
times men shall be lovers of pleasures more than of God.

The third property of it is, when it gives God his due honor, to deny him
the true manner; which causes the ungodly man to content himself with a form
and show of godliness, outwardly bearing himself as godly, but inwardly wants
the power of it; 2. Tim. 3.5.
the heart is not single, but full of fraud, of doubling and deceit before God,
who looks into it, and delights not with the approaching of the lips, when
the heart is removed. By which we see the practice of the ungodly man, sundry
ways robbing God of his due honor, which one sin entertained, breeds and
nourishes sins of all sorts: and so much we are given to understand in the
placing of it here, as the first sin of the seducers producing a great number
of sins more, noted in them through the Epistle; neither can any other be
looked for but that the life should be plentiful in all sins, where the
heart is possessed of this ungodliness. Romans 1.26. The Gentiles acknowledged not
God, and therefore he gave them up to vile affections, and this was the ground
of all those sins reckoned there, above twenty in number. Abraham thought not
amiss that he might easily be slain for Sarah his wife (whom therefore he
durst not confess) if the fear of God were not in Abimilech^ Court, Genes.
20. giving us to know, that where the fear of God is not in the heart, there
is no bones made of any sin in the life, no not of murder it self.

Use 1. We are hence taught to spy out in our selves this hidden and secret
sin, and heartily to bewail it above all other sins, as the mother sin
of the rest. But some may say: We are not tainted with this sin, we abhor
to be counted ungodly. Ans. It is too common a sin among all sorts: we have
indeed an outward form of godliness; we come to hear the word, to pray, to
receive the Sacraments, but the most want the power of it in their hearts: for
first, the laws bind our outward man to this outward form: but the hearts of
men remain secure, seldom thinking of their sin and damnable estate by it,
and seldom sorrowing for the same, and saying, What have we done? Secondly,
many have the form of godliness, whose hearts are filled with the cares of
this life, which choke up the power of godliness, and will not suffer it to
fea^e it self there, seeing the love of the world and the love of God cannot
stand together. Thirdly, many having this form cannot abide to subject their
hearts and lives unto the laws of God: yea they would exempt their speeches
and affections from such strictnes, and count it too much precisenes: these are
al fruits of the ungodly heart, of which the fewer we can see in our selves
the more they be, and the more to be bewailed.

2. Use. Further, hence we are to take out that lesson which the Apostle
teaches, 1. Tim. 4.7. To exercise our selves unto godliness: for if
ungodliness be such a mother sin, we must endeavor our selves to the
contrary. For which purpose, we must first prepare our selves thereunto (else
we shall fail in the whole exercise) by learning to acknowledge Gods
providence, presence, mercy and justice in every thing. Gal. 4.8. When the
Galathians know not God, they worshipped them which by nature were no gods: no
godliness can stand with the ignorance of God, neither can it be exercised in
particular actions, unless we behold him thus in the particulars. Secondly, to
this exercise of godliness we must first inwardly worship God in our spirits,
souls, hearts, and affections, not in lips only, speeches, and outward
actions: For the Ioh. 4.23.
right worshippers, worship him in spirit and truth: Paul Romans 1.9.
served God in his spirit. Qu. How shall a man do this? Ans. True inward
worship stands in two things: first in faith, secondly in the actions of
faith. Faith is that whereby a man generally believes the whole word of God,
containing the Law and the Gospel, to be the truth of God it self; and
particularly concerning himself three things: first, Gods mercy in the
forgiving of his own sins. Secondly, his presence in all his actions.
Thirdly, his providence over all events good or bad that befall him. The
actions of faith are two: first, subjection of the heart unto God, in three
respects: first, to Gods judgment, that seeing he passes sentence against
our sins, we also should call our selves to account for them, confess them,
condemn our selves for them, (...) must condemn (...) own ^^^es, least God
con^^^ne us (...).
and entreat for mercy. Secondly, to his word and laws of both Tables, by
hearty and conscionable obedience; willingly taking up his yoke, and suffering
our selves to be directed by all his laws. Thirdly, to the good pleasure of
God known by the event, whether sickness or health, want or abundance, in
departing from our own wills, and patiently yea thankfully submitting them unto
his blessed will. The second action of faith is, the elevation or lifting up of
the heart unto God incessantly, both in suing for his grace and aid in the
seasonable supply of our necessities: as also in blessing him for blessings
received. In these stand the practice of the true worship of God in the spirit,
which is true godliness: unto which we may be incited by these reasons:
first, because this godliness has the promise of this life and the life to
come, 1. Tim. 4. that is, the godly man has title to all blessings of all
kinds. Secondly, Godliness is great gain, 1. Timoth. 6. Every man affects
gain; but if any man would attain it, let him be godly. Men are often
crossed in the world, and things succeed not with them, they are not prospered
in their callings and duties of it, and seeing no reason of it, marvel why
they should not thrive as well as others: whereas indeed being ungodly men
they want that which should bring in their gain. Thirdly, le^ the
consideration of the last judgment joined with the dissolution of heaven and
earth move us hereunto? 2. Pet. 3.11. Seeing all these things shall be
dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to be in holy co^^^rsation and
godliness? As though h^ had said, seeing nothing else shall stand v^ in stead
but godliness, how are we to (...) our selves to the practice of it. Fourthly,
the appearing of grace teaches us to deny all ungodliness, and to live (...)
in this present world, Tit. 2.12. If this be the end of the Gospels appearing,
and we have been they to whom (...) has appeared with peace and prosperity
above forty years* how can we be but vnexcuseable and speechless before
God, if we remain untaught in this duty, but continue still in the ways of
ungodliness?

The fourth adiunct whereby the seducers are described, is their doctrine, in
these words; They turn the grace of God to wantonness. In which consider two
points: first, the sin or vice here condemned. Secondly, the du^ie or
contrary virtue commanded. Before we can know the former, we must search out
the meaning of the words. And first by [ grace] is meant the doctrine of the
Gospel, called in the former verse by the name of faith; so it is called, Titus
2.11. The grace of God has appeared, teaching us etc. because it teaches us
that remission of sins, and life everlasting, are obtained only by the mere
grace of God in Christ. By wantonnes] is properly understood that sin whereby
men addict themselves wholly to intemperance, incontinencie, and unlawful
pleasures; but here it must be taken generally for a licentious profane kind
of living and liberty of sinning. Turne] that is, they displace the grace of
God, applying it from a right to a wrong end, and that not only in practice of
life, but in propounding of doctrine tending thereunto. As though he had more
plainly said, that whereas the doctrine of grace in the Gospel, teaches men
free justification by faith in Christ without the works of the law, these men
pervert this gracious doctrine, and teach that therefore men may live as they
list, and so themselves do also: by which same sin such seducers are
elsewhere noted in the Scripture. Romans 3.8. Some gathered from Paul's doctrine
the same liberty, saying, Why do we not then evil that good ^ay come of it?
And 2. Pet. 2.19. some such are mentioned, who beguiled diverse with wantonness
through the lusts of the flesh, promising unto them liberty. Ecclesiastical
histories mention in any such who sprung up after the Apostles days* (...) the
Libertines, Simon Magus and his disciples, who ^^ught that men might lawfully
commit fornication. So also the disciples of ^a^ilides, Eu^omius: and the
^^osticks. Heretics who taught that men might live as they list, seeing ^ow
such liberty was procured them, being freed from being under the Law any
longer: which sin died not with those cursed heretics* but the Devil has
in these last days revived it, especially in four sorts of men: first, the
Libertines of this age, who hold with the former, that being under grace we
are free from the obedience of the Law. Secondly, the Anabaptists, who (upon
the consideration of abundant grace and peace in the new Testament, and of the
liberty obtained by Christ) teach, that Civil jurisdiction and Magistracy is
unlawful: as also to make war, and to take an oath before a Magistrate; which
sort of men are not so well known here as in other Churches, but are
dangerous enemies (wheresoever) both to the grace of God and good of man: for
where the Civil sword does cease, there can no society stand in safety.
Thirdly, another kind of Libertines are the Papists, and the Popish Church,
with the whole Roman Religion, themselves being open enemies unto the grace of
God, and their whole religion turning it into wantonness and liberty of
sinning, and that diverse ways. First, God having of his grace given unto the
Church a power of the keys to open and shut heaven, that religion has turned
it into an instrument: first, of profaneness, in setting up an new Priesthood
to absolve and lose men sins properly, in offering a sacrifice for the quick
and the dead, so abolishing the sacrifice of Christ. Secondly, of injustice:
for by it they depose Kings and Princes, they free subjects from their
allegiance, they stir them up and encourage them to conspiracies,
rebellions; and maintain in other states, factions, civil wars, and
seditions, and al by virtue of their power. Thirdly, of horrible covetousness:
for by it they sell pardons for thousands of years, the which sales have
brought to the Church of Rome the third part of the revenues of al Europe: The
Romish mart makes sale of all sorts of sins for ready money.
which one practice, if there were no more, proves plainly, that that Church
turns the grace of God to the liberty of sin.

Secondly, their whole Religion is a corrupted Religion, and makes the
receivers of it the children of Satan more than before: for first it makes men
hypocrites, requiring nothing but an external, bodily and ceremonial worship,
without any inward power of it* as in fasting, it requires only a show of it,
as to abstain from flesh and white meats, but they may use most delicate
fishes, the strongest wines, and sweetest spices: and in other parts of their
religion is no less hypocritical. Secondly, it makes men proud and arrogant,
teaching the freedom of will unto good, if the holy Ghost do but a little
help it; that a man can merit by his works; that he can satisfy Gods justice
by suffering for sin; yea that he can perform some works of supererrogation:
who can hold these points and be humble? Thirdly, it makes men secure,
teaching that they may have full pardon of all their sins by the power of their
keys for money; and that though they have no merits of their own, they may buy
the merits of other men; yea although in their death they fail of repentance,
yet for some money they may be eased in Purgatory. What shall any rich man now
care how he live or die, seeing all shall be well with him for a little money?
Fourthly, it makes men in their distress desperate, teaching that no man can
be assured of his salvation without some revelation. Fifthly, it reuiueth the
old sin of these seducers, teaching that diverse men and women may not marry,
that were adultery; and yet openly tolerating stues and uncleanness. Which what
is it else but to maintain wantonness? whereby the chief teachers of that
Church witness themselves the right successors; not of the Apostles (as they
pretend) but of these seducers and other wicked heretics old and new.

The fourth sort of Libertines are carnal and formal Protestants; who first
turn the counsel of Gods election into wantonness, by reasoning thus: If I be
elected to salvation, I shall be saved let me live as I will; or if not I
cannot be saved, do what I will or can; because Gods counsels are
unchangeable: and thus conclude to spend their days in all wantonness.
Secondly, they turn the mercy of God into wantonness, thus reasoning in their
hearts; Because God is merciful, therefore I will defer my repentance as
yet; for at what time soever a sinner repents, God will put away all his sins
out of his remembrance: what? young Saints, old Devils. Thus the timely
acceptance of Gods mercy offered, is become a reproach: besides many more, who,
because the Lord deferreth punishment, set their hearts to do evil. Thirdly,
others under pretense of brotherly love, mispend all that they have in
wantonness, riot, excess, company keeping, gaming, to the beggering of
themselves, and undoing of their own families, unto which they ought to show
their love in the first place. Fourthly, others under pretext that the Jewish
Sabbath is abrogated, and that Christ has brought such liberty as has
abolished distinctions of times, take liberty to keep no Sabbath at all:
whence many tradesmen will do what they list on this day, and dispatch those
businesses, which they can find no time for in the week days. Fifthly, some
because they would humble themselves, commit diverse sins and continue in
others; these say in themselves, Let us continue in sin that grace may
abound: all these sorts of men turn the grace of God into wantonness, and
practice the vice here condemned.

The 2. thing to be considered is, the contrary virtue; and y^ is to make a
godly and holy use of the grace of God, and to apply it to the right end for
which God vouchsafes it unto us, to wit, that we might be thankful unto him,
and testify the same in obedience to all his laws. Which appears, first, by
testimony of Scripture, Luke 1.74.75. We are delivered (...) of the hands of
our spiritual enemies, to serve him in holiness and righteousness. Romans
6.16. We are under grace, therefore let us give up the members of our bodies,
weapons of righteousness. Tit. 2.11. The grace of God has appeared, teaching
us to deny ungodliness. Secondly, the end of all Gods graces is, that we
should be furthered in holiness of life; we are elected that we might be
holy: the end of our calling is, that we may be Saints; Justification freeth
from punishment of sin; Sanctification from corruption and sin it self;
Faith purifieth the heart; Love contains us in obedience; he that has hope
purges himself: and so of all other graces. Christ has not merited the life
of glory for any who (...) lives (...) the life of grace.
Thirdly, Christ is a Mediator two ways: first by merit, to procure life and
work our salvation: secondly, by efficacy, that is, whereby his death is
powerful to cause us to die to sin, and his resurrection to raise us from
the grave of sin to a new life, and he is no Mediator by his merit to those
who are destitute of this efficacy.

Use. We have in this land been many years partakers of this grace of God, our
duty then is to make a holy use of it, and walk thankfully before God. Romans
12.1. I beseech you by the mercies of God (which he had in the former chapter
mentioned) that ye give up your selves a holy sacrifice to God: no more
forcible argument can be urged to stir up men to thankful obedience than
this, for if Gods mercy in Christ cannot move, what will? Let this then
persuade us likewise; If we believe God to be our Father, that is a great
grace. Let this grace move us to walk as children before him: let the grace of
our redemption move us to walk as redeemed ones, rescued out of such
captivity wherein we were inthralled to sin and Satan, seeing it were a
madness to return to such bondage again. If Christ be dead for us, let that
grace move us to die to sin; if he being risen again sit at Gods right
hand, that we might sit there with him, let that grace move us to walk as
those that are risen with him, and have our conversation in heaven, seeking
(even while we are below) the things that are above; and so of the rest.

Further, the Apostle to make those seducers more odious, says not simply
they turn the grace of God: but [ of our God] into wantonness, which notes the
indignity of their fact, in which consider three things: first, by what means
God becomes our God: and that is not by any merit of ours, but by means of the
gracious covenant propounded in the Gospel, promising pardon and remission of
sin in and by Christ. Iere. 31.31. This is called the new covenant which the
Lord contracteth with his people, where writing his law in their inward parts,
he becomes their God, and they his people. Secondly, what must we do to say
truly and in assurance that God is our God? Ans. We must for our parts make a
covenant with him, unto which is required a consent on either party: first, on
Gods part, that he will be our God; which we shall find, not in any revelation
besides the Scriptures; but generally in the word, and more specially in the
ministry of the Gospel and administration of the Sacraments, annexed as
seals unto the Covenant: in which God does as surely covenant with us, as if
he should from heaven speak unto us. Secondly, on our part is required
consent, of which there be two degrees: first, when we make an outward
profession of faith, hear the word, receive the Sacraments, Baptism and the
Lords Supper, which serve to distinguish us from Jews, Turks, etc. this is
somewhat, but not sufficient to make God our God, seeing it is common to the
very hypocrites themselves. Secondly, seeing he is not a Jew which is one
outwardly, but which is a Jew within, there is required in our consent a
further degree, which stands in an inward consent of the heart, whereby a man
takes God for his God; which is then begun when first a man acknowledges and
bewaileth his sins. Secondly, when he endeavors to be reconciled to God.
Thirdly, when he purposes never to sin again: when this covenant is thus
concluded by consent of both parties, a man may safely and truly say that God
is his God.

Now seeing we know these things, our duty is to labor to be settled and
assured in our conscience that God is our God: for first, in this assurance is
the foundation of all true comfort; all the promises of God are hereupon
grounded, and herein accomplished, that God is our God: see Isai. 41.10. Be not
afraid, I am thy God: yea Christ being upon the Cross, having the pangs of hell
upon him, herein stayed himself, My God, my God: so David, Psalm. 22.1. and
being ready to be stoned to death, comfort^d himself in the Lord his God, 1.
Sam. 30.6. And not only is it the foundation of all our comfort in this life,
but of our happiness after death it self, being the ground of those two maine
Articles of our faith, the resurrection of the body, and the immortality of
the soul: for by virtue of this Covenant alone shall we rise again after
death to life, glory, and immortality; as Christ himself disputing against
the Sadduces, from hence proves the resurrection, in that God is the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Secondly, it is the ground of al obedience; Psalm.
95.7. the Prophet exhorting men thereunto, uses this as a reason: For he is
the Lord our God, and we are the people of his hands: the preface of the
Moral law enforcing obedience lays the same ground; For I am the Lord thy
God which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: see also Psalm. 50.71. and
whosoever is truly persuaded that God is his God, cannot but obey him.

The fifth property of these seducers is, That they deny God the only Lord,
and our Lord Jesus Christ.] Thus are they described by their manners. The
Translators of this Epistle were (as it seems) of opinion, that these words
are properly spoken of God the Father, and of God the Son also: but by the
tenor of the words in the original, it seems that they are all to be
understood of Christ, and not of the Father; and are thus to be read: Which
deny that only Ruler who is God and our Lord Jesus Christ. Again, the tenor
of the words being borrowed from the Epistle of Peter, may thence be rightly
expounded: now Peter speaking of the same sin of these seducers, applies it
only to be a denial of Christ, 2. Pet. 2.1. They deny the Lord that bought
them. In the words then consider two things: first, the sin here condemned,
namely, to deny Jesus Christ. Secondly, a description of Christ. For the
first, To deny Jesus Christ is, to renounce and forsake Christ, and so much as
in a man lies to make his death void, and of none effect. Now because this
denial presupposes a redemption (as Peter mentions) they denying the Lord
that bought them; this question is to be cleared, how these men being
reprobates, can be said to be redeemed by Christ? Answ. We must not think
that they were in Gods decree ever redeemed, for then had they been saved: ( he
doing whatsoever he wills, Psalm. 115.3.) but it is to be meant in regard of
themselves and other men: for both in their own conceit and judgment they
were redeemed, as also in the judgment of others, who are to be led by the
rule of charity in passing their judgment upon men, and to account of them as
redeemed, leaving all secret judgments to God. Secondly, the description of
Christ, by three things: first, that he is a Ruler, yea an only ruler, a Lord
and ruler over all things in general, in heaven, earth, and hell: and more
specially a Lord over his elect only: and in that he is said to be an only
ruler, it must not be meant as excluding the Father and holy Ghost, but all
false gods, and false Christ's; as Ioh. 17.3. the Father is called the only
God: for all outward actions of the Trinity are common to all the persons.
Secondly, that he is God: which is a notable place against all Arrians to
prove the Godhead of Christ. Thirdly, he is said to be our Lord: Ours in two
respects especially: first, of the free donation of his Father, who gave to him
a people to be Lord and King over before all worlds. Secondly, in regard of his
work of redemption which he wrought for them, who were of the Father given
unto him.

Out of that which has bin here said, we may note these two points: first, how
these seducers deny Christ: namely, not openly and plainly, for then the
Church should have espied them; neither in word nor speech, for in word they
professed him: but in their deeds denied him, living after their own lusts,
and encouraging others in the same course, Titus 1.16. And this sin is
revived and renewed in this our age, wherein too many outwardly and in word
profess Christ, come to the Word and Sacraments; but covertly and in their
deeds deny him, whose lives are very full of epicurisme, and earthlines, and
mouths filled with blasphemies and reproaches against true obedience, which of
them is counted too much nicenes, and precisenes. These are the disciples of
the old Heretics, whom (without repentance) the like fearful judgments
awaite, which befell them. Secondly, we may observe in what regards they deny
Christ; namely, first in regard of his Godhead, by withstanding the means of
that power of Christ, whereby (having redeemed them) he would sanctify their
hearts to obedience. We easily acknowledge Christ a Ie^^^, but hardly a Lord.
The merit of his redemption is welcome to them, but they will none of the
efficacy of it, which sanctifies and renews the inner man, subdueth sin,
and quickneth the life of God in them. Secondly, in regard of his Lordship, by
denying him obedience, which as to a Lord is due unto him: A Redeemer they
would have him, but not a Lord; so every man would have portion in Christ's
redemption, but their lusts must be their Lords, and they servants to sin and
Satan: but these be those enemies that will not that he should reign over
them, (...). 19.27.
who shall be brought and slain before him. Our part then is (if ever we
would find comfort in Christ) to make him our Lord* his counsel is, that
those that are laden should come unto him for ease; Mat. 11.29.
but the next words are, take my yoke vp^^ thee; and if we would have him our
justification, let him become also our sanctification.

Verse. 5. I will therefore put you in remembrance, for as much as ye once know
this, how that the Lord after that he had delivered the people out of Egypt,
destroyed them afterward which believed not.]
THe Apostle having propounded his principal exhortation to contend and fight
for the faith, verse. 3. with the reason thereof, verse. 4. does here begin to
answer a secret objection which might be made against that reason, thus:
These seducers profess Christ, and look for salvation by him; what danger
then can redound if we should join our selves unto them? This objection is
answered from this fifth verse unto the twentieth; in all which verses he
disputes at large that there is great danger herein, seeing their end shall
be destruction: the sum of which disputation is contained in this reason: All
such persons as give themselves liberty to sin* shall be destroyed: But these
seducers give themselves liberty to sin; and therefore shall be destroyed.
The former part of which reason is contained in the 5.6.7. verses; and the
latter from the 8. unto the 20. The former proposition is not plainly set down
in so many words, but the proof of it only by an induction and enumeration of
examples of sinners, which have bin destroyed; and they be three in number:
first of the Israelites, in the 5. verse: secondly of the Angels, in the 6.
verse: thirdly, of Sodom and Gomorrha, in the 7. verse.

In this 5. verse are two things to be considered: first the preface, in these
words: I will therefore put you in remembrance, for as much as you once kn^w
this. Secondly, the first example whereby the point in hand is proved in the
words following. The preface serves to prevent an objection which might be
made by the Church reading these examples; that Jude teaches them nothing but
things which they knew well enough before: to which he answers, that his
intent is not to teach them any new thing, or any unknown thing, but to bring
known things to their remembrance* and in it three things are to be observed:
First, the Apostles practice: I will therefore put you in remembrance.] Where
note the office of all Pastors and Teachers, which is not only to teach things
unknown, but to repeat and to bring into remembrance things known before.
This was Peter's care, 2. Pet. 1.12. though they had knowledge to put them in
remembrance: and chap. 3.1. to stir up and war^e their pure minds; giving us
to understand, that knowledge in the mind lies as embers under ashes, and
needs daily stirring up. Which admonishes all hearers not to be offended if
they hear the same thing often, seeing it is the duty of Ministers to teach
the same thing often. Yea hearers which have understanding in the Scriptures,
must be content if they hear nothing but that which they have bin out of the
Scriptures acquainted with before, seeing the Apostle thinks it meet to teach
nothing else.

Secondly, in this preface observe the property of the Church, which is to
know the histories and examples of Scripture. Christ commanded his hearers to
search the Scriptures: the Apostle wishes that the Scriptures dwell
plentiously in m^n: which exhortations (no doubt) stirred them up to have the
scriptures familiar unto them, even as Timothy knew the Scriptures of a
child. The state of our times is far otherwise; for Ministers cannot say as
Jude speaks, for as much as you know these things, I will put you in
remembrance: but our people plead and profess ignorance, yea that the
knowledge of the scriptures belongs not unto them (they being not book
learned) but to scholars and Ministers that live by it. But we ought to
account it a property of every Saint of God, who is justified and sanctified,
to know the Scriptures, which only are able to make them wise unto salvation.

The third point in the preface is a second property of the Saints, namely
that they once know] that is, they know certainly, unchangeably, and once for
all, never to revoke or alter this knowledge: which first informs us what to
think and judge of those men, who because of diversity of opinions, will be
of no religion, nor believe any thing until it be determined by some general
Council; these want this property of the Saints, and are plain Atheists.
Secondly, it teaches us to hold our religion certainly, receiving it once for
all unchangeably. In humane things we may often without danger change our
minds and deliberate; but grounds of Religion must be out of al question, and
admit no deliberation.

Now follows the first example, whereby the first part of the former reason
is proved, and that is of the Israelites, who wittingly and willingly sinning
against God were destroyed, as appears Numb. 14. In which example consider
four things: first, who were destroyed, [ the people]. Secondly, the time when
[ after that he had delivered them out of Egypt]. Thirdly, for what cause, [
which believed not]. Fourthly, the manner of the speech. For the first, the
persons who were destroyed were the people; by which word is meant a special
people, a peculiar and chosen people, the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, a
people privileged above all people of the earth; to whom belonged the
covenant, sacrifices, worship, of whom Christ came according to the fles^,
Romans 3.2. and 9.4. notwithstanding all which prerogatives the Lord destroyed
them. If it had been a Heathen people against whom this destruction had
prevailed, it had been worthy observation, but much more when it is against
Gods own people.

Here then we learn, that no outward privilege can avail us; nor any o^^ward
means of salvation be effectual or fruitful to our good, out of their right
use in faith and repentance. Romans 2.25. Circumcision is nothing, He is a (...)
that is (...) within.
unless thou keep the law. Gal. 6. Neither Circumcision avails, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature. Judas had many great privileges, and yet
perished. This made Paul, though he had many privileges, to account them all
as dung, in regard of the knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3.8. We must not then
content our selves with the means of salvation in the Word and Sacraments, but
use them aright in faith and repentance; otherwise they (being out of their
holy use enjoyed) shall turn to our destruction and greater condemnation, as
they did to this people who (notwithstanding them) were destroyed.

The second thing in the example is, the time when the Israelites were
destroyed, that is, after their deliverance out of Egypt. God had diversely
testified his love to this people, having chosen them out of all the people of
the earth, he called himself their God, and he gave them many pledges of his
love, but especially in that their great deliverance out of the bondage of
Egypt by such an outstretched arm: yet for all this not long after they
sinning against him, he destroyed them. Whence learn, that after many great
blessings, men not walking worthy of them, Great vengeance follows the
^^^^ankful (...) of (...) bles^^ngs.
but provoking the Lord by their sins, comes a great vengeance. The whole
book of the Judges is a worthy proof of this truth, where we shall see the
people still forgetting their deliverance, and are forthwith left to Tyrants to
be afflicted for ten, twenty, forty years together. The same appears
in the Commonwealth of Israel under the Kings: In the days of Solomon the
state was most flourishing and glorious, enjoying a most happy peace: but
Solomon once forgetting the Lord and his Commandments, and falling to the
Idolatry of his outlandish wives, there followed most fearful accidents; as
the division and rent of the ten Tribes from Judah, a long dissension and hot
war between Reh^boam and Jeroboam, whose Idolatries brought much evil upon
their several lands, and at last utter desolation; the ten Tribes being
carried into Syria captives, and there ended their days, the other two Tribes
into Babylon, and there remained 70. years, which judgments ouertook them
about 400. years after. Jacob when he went over Jordan made a vow to the
Lord, that if God would bless him, and give him but food and raiment, he would
in way of thankfulness return to the Lord the tenth part of his goods, Genesis
28.22. God blesses him so far as he became a mighty man, having the
substance of a Prince; in this abundance he forgot his vow, or neglected it:
but what followed of it? was there not horrible confusion in his family? Dina^
was deflowred; Ruben ascended to his fathers bed, Hamor was slain, and the
Lord is glad to call to mind hi^ vow, Genesis 35.1.

Use. This doctrine concerns us nearly in this land, who by Gods mercy have
enjoyed many of his best blessings in this our long peace, having bin delivered
from the Egypt of Rome, and have (...) under the Lords protection all the day
long: Englands sin.
but as ou^ blessings have been and are many and great, so have been and are
our rebellions raging amongst us, especially that sin of falling from our
first love, so as l^sse love of God and religion is to be found amongst us
than heretofore; besides that our peace causes men to make their heaven here
upon earth, and to embrace and affect things below: these sins unrepented of,
will bring upon us days of affliction, we having no more privilege than this
people had, who after their deliverance were destroyed.

The third point in this destruction is the cause of it: namely, because they
believed not: here first observe what kind of unbelief this was. To the
answer of which, we must know, that first God had promised to Abraham, that
after 430. years he would give to his posterity the land of Canaan for their
inheritance: this promise they all knew well enough. Secondly, it was often
repeated, and renewed, and namely to Moses; unto whom the Lord promised that he
should be their guide, yea and that himself would pro^ect them in their
journey, and safely conduct them thither. Thirdly, God sealed this promise by
many and sundry signs and miracles, both in Egypt, at the red sea, and in the
wilderness: yet for all this they believed not, that God would accomplish
these promises unto them, to bring them to that good land: and further, seeing
the land of Canaan was a type of that heavenly Canaan, they believed not that
God would bring them to heaven, and give them inheritance in that eternal rest
by means of the Messiah. This unbelief then of the promises of God was the
cause of their destruction.

Secondly, why are they destroyed for unbelief, rather then for their
murmuring, fornication, and diverse other sins which we^ read of to have
been rise among them? Ans. Although they murmured, blasphemed, tempted God,
reviled their guides, (...) causa (...).
etc. yet this sin of unbelief was the foundation and ground of them all;
the which does the more displease God, in that it was the first sin that ever
was in the world, and the mother of all transgression. Secondly, this sin in
a more special manner dishonoreth God in making him a liar; and so touches
his honor more nearly.

Thirdly, what was this destruction? An. It was the destruction of their souls
and bodies, for their carcasses were left in the wilderness where they fell;
and their souls have their portion in the lake prepared for unbelievers,
Revel. 21. For the fur^her hatred of this sin, see 2. Kings 7.19. the Prince
who would not believe the word of the Lord was trodden to death: and Moses not
waiting, but failing in his faith, was barred the land of Canaan, and only saw
it a far off.

Use. Seeing destruction follows unbelief, we must labor to see our
vnbele^fe, and take out that exhortation, Heb. 3.12. Take heed least there be
in any of us an evil heart of unbelief, to depart away from the living God:
which place well considered, shows what are the degrees of falling away which
are studiously to be declined: as first, when a man is deceived by sin, and
gives himself liberty thereunto. Secondly, when the heart is hardened and
made an evil heart. Thirdly, when infideliti^ takes possession of the heart to
rule it, and cause it to call in question Gods promises, and providence.
Fourthly, then follows apostasy and departure from God: now we must beware
of the least and lowest of these degrees of this defection and departure from
God. Secondly, if they were destroyed for unbelief, we must on the contrary
exercise our faith daily, and inure it in the daily apprehension of Gods
providence, power, protection, justice, and mercy: and thus walking vndismaid,
we which have thu^ believed shall enter into the rest prepared for the people
of God, when as many shall not enter for vnbeleefes sake, Heb. 4.3. and 6. Even
as Caleb and Joshua only entered into that good land, because they believed that
God could and would bring his people thither. Thirdly, this must teach us
obedience* for upon this ground that they were destroyed for unbelief* David
infers this co^sequent* Psalm. 95. To day therefore if y^ hear his voice,
harden not your hearts: which Moses also makes the ground of his exhortation
to the people ^o fear the Lord, because (...) destroyed for vn^eleefe, Deuteronomy.
1.^^. etc. Fou^^hly, in that destruction of body and soul follows of
unbelief, let such persons as (when judgments are upon themselves, wives, or
children) run to Witches, and Wizards for ease, as though they were
bewitched, and make that the ground of their harms, be informed that their
own wretched hearts have bewitched them; The wretched hear^ of unbelievers is
the witch which afflicts th^^
which being full of unbelief, bring plagues of al kinds not only upon their
bodies* but their souls also. Art thou strangely diseased? the witch that has
brought it upon thee, is thy own wicked heart, which knows not to rely it
self on Gods promises and protection. Fifthly, were they destroyed because of
their unbelief? let not us judge of our sins by the crooked rule of our own
reason, but by the law of God: we can judge murder, theft, and adultery,
great sins; but we never epsy the mother sin of all, which is our
infidelity, the maine sin of the first Table, and the nurcerie of other
sins, we never bewail it, we account lightly of it, and therefore the Lord
takes the revenge of this sin into his own hands, and punishes it with
destruction both of soul and body; so odious it is in his eyes, and ought
therefore to be as heinous in ours also.

The fourth thing in the example is the manner of the speech, which at the
first seems to be general, as though all they had been destroyed which
believed not; whereas indeed it is special, for all that believed not were not
destroyed, seeing that all under twenty years were exempted and saved, Number.
14.29. who were reserved that God might still have his Church among the^, and
that there might be of them a people left to possess the good land, according
to the promise: where note that to be true which Habacu^ke ascribes to God,
that in his justice he remembr^th mercy; Habac. 3.2*
by which mercy the younger so^^ are here spared; which warranteth us to pray
in common judgments, that the Lord power not ou^ his whole wrath upon us;
neither in our temptations utterly forsake us, and give us over to Satan's
malice, seeing he has manifested such goodness toward his Church, that in
judgments he h^th remembered his m^rcie. But here it may be asked, (...) this
can stand with equity that even th^se men should be destroyed* for it seems
that they repented of this sin? Numb. 14.40. yea they confessed it and mourned
for it, and offered to pass into Canaan* yea and were very ready to hasten
into the land? Ans. They repented indeed, but fainedly, it was far from true
and sincere repentance and sorrow; for even in the very same place it appears
that they disobeyed God; for when he had passed sentence against their sin,
commanding that they should return into the wilderness of Arabia, verse. 25. and
there abide forty years and die there; they would not submit themselves to
that sentence, but in all haste they would go forward to Canaan, according to
the promise; although against a particular commandment: yea Moses himself
could not stay them: but that brought on their necks a more speedy
destruction, as appears in the end of the Chapter. Whence note the wicked
nature of the deceitful heart of man, which in distress when Gods hand is
stretched out against it, can feign a false repentance, and counterfeite
humiliation: which causes many a man in sickness to vow amendment of life, if
ever God raise him again; and yet as soon as the scourge is ouerpassed, he
forgets the hand of God, his own vows and promises, and falls back into
the same bad courses again: which consideration may move us to watch over our
hearts, and suspect them of this deceit, whereby they can frame and feign a
false repentance, when indeed there is nothing less then soundnes in it.

The fifth point in this judgment is the general use of it; namely, that we
should frame our selves to repentance for this particular sin of unbelief,
upon which we behold such a fearful destruction in Gods own people. To the
practice and performance of which we must do four things: first, laying aside
the common persuasion of the fulness of perfection of our faith, we must come to
the discerning of this sin in our selves, which is the first step to repent of
it, and the rather because it is our mother sin. Now because this sin is so
inward and secret, Unbelief (...) many particulars.
and so hardly to be discerned, for our help herein some directions may be
given for the especial of it in some signs and fruits thereof; which every
man shall find in himself less or more. For first, we believe not as we ought
the particular presence of God in all places and times toward us: for we are
ashamed to do and speak many things in the presence of men, which in the
presence of God (men not being by) we make no bones of, either to speak or
do; so as man's presence keeps us in some awe, which Gods presence cannot do.

Secondly, we believe not the particular providence of God, watching over us;
but either not regard it at all, or not as we ought; which appears by these
three things: first, if we have health, wealth, friends, favor and means, we
are well contented, we can think our selves very well, and can then rely our
selves on God: but if God take these away; oh th^n we are troubled, much
disquieted and discontented; the reason whereof is, because the heart is not
settled in the persuasion of Gods special providence: which if it have a pledge
of God, can trust him; otherwise not at all: but as the Usurer trusts not the
man, but his pawn; so men relying themselves on these pledges, trust neither
God himself, nor for himself. Secondly, in any distress let our friend
promise us help, we are well cheered; but let God in his word promise supply
of all good, and ease in our troubles, we reap little or no comfort from
thence; this is a manifest fruit of inbred unbelief. Thirdly, in sickness or
any judgment, any means is used for case and freedom; yea there is too
common running and riding to Witches, Charmers, Cunning men, and women; for men
wait not on God, nor expect the same hand in healing them which has smitten
them. He that believes makes not haste (says the Prophet) which if it be
true, then this hastines to be disburdened of the hand of God, is a token of
distrustfulnes of God, and want of faith. Nay, this practice argues not only
want of a true faith, but a presence of a false and Satanicall faith: for if
there be no faith in the Charm, it will not work.

Thirdly, we believe not the Lord to be the Lord of body and soul, as one
having sovereign Lordship and power, to save and destroy: for let any civil
man be pressed by temptation unto sin, he will be easily brought to make no
bones of very dangerous sins: what other is the reason hereof, but that he
esteems not the Lord to be his Lord? and accounts of his commandments but
as dreams, not serious or given in earnest? whereas if Gods Lordship were
rightly acknowledged, sin would not be so ripe and rife as it is.

Fourthly, we believe not the mercy of God in the pardon of our sin as we
ought: for howsoever in our peace we think our faith strong enough for any
encounter, yet let a temptation assail us, then we begin to doubt whether we
be the children of God or no, and are full of impatiencie. Example hereof we
have even in Job himself, who before his trial thought himself safe in his
nest; but when Gods hand was heavy upon him, then he brake forth in speeches
full of impatiencie; as that God was his enemy; and did write bitter things
against him: wherein he bewraied his want of faith, and his crooked and
cankered incredulity: and the same weakness may the dearest and strongest of
Gods children one time or other epsy in themselves.

Fifthly, we know not as we should the agony and passion of Christ; he
suffered the first death and the pains of the second death for our sins,
they were the spears that pierced his heart; but we carry up our heads, and
can take delight in them, as though there were no danger in them: whereas the
remembrance of them should make our hearts to bleed, and faith in the heart
should cause us die to sin, seeing those who are Christ's are crucified with
him: but because men will not depart from their sins which are not killed, but
live and are strong in them, and no man says what have I done? it is a plain
evidence that the life of faith is not to be found in the lives of most men.

Sixthly, we believe not that we did rise with Christ, and ascended with him
into heaven: because in this our long peace, our thoughts are set upon the
world, and we mind earthly things still; whereas if we were risen with Christ,
we would seek the things that be above, Coloss. 3.1.

Seventhly, we do not believe as we ought the last judgment: because we are
not smitten with fear and reverence in speaking and meditating of it. Paul
speaking of it, calls it, the terrors of the Lord, 2. Cor. 5.11. and this
made him so forward in all good duties; yea this same consideration of the last
judgment made him endeavor to keep a good conscience before God and all men:
but men make no conscience of their ways.

Eighthly, we believe not aright our own death and resurrection in the last
day: for men commonly defer their repentance and amendment of life, till the
last day of their days, and then they cry and call on the bed of their
sorrows; which argues a counterfeit faith: for if a man did believe his death,
it would drive him to the daily amendment of his life. By these notes we may
easily discern this secret sin of unbelief within our selves.

Secondly, when we have thus found out this sin we must bewail it, an^
mourn for our unbelief, as being the mother of all our sins, confess it
before God, and crave increase of faith, as the man in the Gospel, Lord I
believe, help my unbelief: and with the Disciples, Lord increase our faith.

Thirdly, we must set before our eyes and acquaint our selves with the promises
of the pardon of sin and life everlasting by Christ: as also all other
dependant promises, whereof some concern our prosperous success in our ways,
and Gods protection in our labors and callings: and others concern
afflictions, promising happy issue and deliverance therefrom, with strength in
temptation, to the which all promises may be referred: which we must always
have in our eye, that our faith may ground it self upon them.

Fourthly, we must truly rely and rest our selves in these promises, settle
and content our hearts in them: that look as the earth hangs without proppe
or pillar in the midst of the world, only by the word of God; so must our
hearts be stayed in the same word and promise of God: yea if we should see
nothing but destruction before our eyes, our faith must then be our
subsistence: and when our unbelief would vnloosen our hold, and make us give
back, let our faith in these promises make resistance: as David, Psalm. 42.5.
My soul why art thou so disquieted within me? trust still in God: especially
seeing we have promises which assure us in our troubles, either of their
mitigation or remouall: after all these follows the subjection of faith, when
the heart and life are conformed to the obedience of all the Commandments of
God. And thus we purging our hearts of unbelief, shall escape such fearful
judgments, as this first example has put us in mind of.

Verse. 6. The Angels also which kept not their first estate, but left their
own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto
the judgment of the great day.
THese words comprehend the second example, whereby the first part of the
former reason is confirmed: namely, that whosoever give themselves liberty to
sin, shall be destroyed; here proved by this example of the Angels
themselves. In which consider three points: first, the persons that sinned; The
Angels.] Secondly, the sin or fall of the Angels; which kept not their first
estate, but left their own habitation.] Thirdly, their punishment; he has
reserved in everlasting chains.] In the persons sinning we have sundry
considerations; as first, that it pleases the spirit of God to choose this
example of the Angels to prove his purpose, and that most fitly: because they
are the excellency of all creatures, for so the Scriptures every where speak
of them: as when the highest praise that belongs to inferior creatures is
attributed unto them in Scripture; the speech is drawn from the glory of
Angels. Genesis 3 3. Jacob commending the favorable countenance of Esa^, being
reconciled unto him, says he saw his face as the face of an Angel. So Manna
is called Angels food: Psalm. 78.^5.
that is, a most excellent food, that if those excellent creatures should
need food, they could wish no better. 1. Cor. 13.1. Though I should speak
with the tongue of men and Angels. Signifying that if Angels had tongues, they
must needs be most admirable, divine, and excellent. David speaking of the
glory that man once had, and in admiration of it, being not able to contain
himself, breaks out into a speech full of passion: Psalm. ^.5.
O Lord what is man that thou art so mindful of him I thou have made him
little inferior to the Angels. Showing that the chief glory of men in their
best estate is inferior to the excellent condition of Angels. Yea further, it
is a part of the glory of God to be attended of them, and a part of our glory
after the resurrection to be like them. Whence note the scope of the Apostle,
which is hence to teach us, that no glory, beauty, or excellency of the
creature can exempt it from the punishment of sin, when it falls thereinto:
nay, the more glorious the sinful creature is, the more grievous punishment
may it expect, if sin be found therein; as the Angels here: which may
instruct those who are in these schools of the Prophets, in which many men
excel in rare gifts, of whom in regard of their wisdom and knowledge may be
said, as the woman of Tekoah said of David, 2. Sam. 14.17. My Lord is as an
Angel of God to hear good and bad. And they are the Angels of the Lord of
hosts, Malac. 2.7. Yet for all this let them not be puffed up hereby, but
walk in fear and trembling, not emboldening themselves to sin: for be it
they were as the Angels in gifts; yet if they sin, they shall be as Angels in
punishment also.

Secondly, hence note that Angels are substances, though invisible, having
being, life, sense, and understanding, and are not only qualities; for pure
qualities neither can sin, nor be capable of punishment, as the Angels are here
said to be. Ob. It will be said, seeing they are capable of punishment, they
must be bodily substances. Ans. No: it is sufficient they be substances to be
capable of punishment, though spiritual; for the punishment of hell is
spiritual. Where we see the Sadduces and others even of our days are
deceived, who think Angels to be nothing but Motions, and melancholy passions:
and the Libertines also who think they are nothing but good and bad success.

Thirdly, (...) etc. Heb. 2.10.
the name Angel is not a name of nature, but of office: which signifies that
their office was to be the messengers of God, who were to stand round about him
as attendants, ready to be sent forth at his pleasure, for the execution of
his will, in all the parts of the world. In which function of theirs they are
propounded patterns to us, and examples for our imitation: who ought
accordingly to set our selves ever in the presence of God, as pressed, and ready
to perform his will: for so we pray daily, Let thy will be done in earth, as
it is in heaven; that is, Give us grace with cheerefulnes and readiness to
perform thy will here on earth, as the Angels in heaven do: for whosoever
would be like the Angels in heaven, must be herein like them first in earth.
Now in that this name is here given to the Devils and wicked spirits, it
shows two things: first, what their office was in the creation, unto which
they were fitted and deputed. Secondly, the justice of their punishment for the
neglect of the execution of the same.

Fourthly, observe the distinction of Angels; of which some kept their first
estate, others (of which he here speaks) left their first condition: some
stood, and some fell: the ground of which distinction Paul mentions 1. Tim.
5.21. I charge thee before God and his elect Angels. Some therefore are
elected, and (because election presupposes a refusal) others are rejected; no
other cause of this distinction is known to man, but the will of God, and his
good pleasure. Ob. If any man say, it was because God foresaw that some would
fall, and others would stand. I answer, that is no cause: for God did not
only foresee the fall of some, but decreed also before all worlds to confirm
some in their state, and to pass by others in his justice: so as the cause
shall ever rest in his good will, which willing the same makes it most just,
not giving us any leave otherwise to dispute of this doctrine, or curiously to
search out the secrets of it, but rather to stand in admiration, and say with
Paul: O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! Romans
11.33
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!

Now follows the second point, namely, the fall of the Angels: in which
observe three points: first, the cause: secondly, the parts: thirdly, the
measure of the fall. The cause of their fall in these words; which kept not
their first estate, but left their habitation; themselves were the cause of
their own fall; which is thus proved: Either God must be the cause of their
sin, or man, or themselves; but neither God nor man: and therefore themselves.
First, God cannot be the cause: for that were injustice to condemn them for
that which himself caused; how unrighteous were it, first to cause them to
fall, and then to punish them for falling? Object. But it will be said, that
God did foresee their fall, and might have prevented it, and so not hindering it
he seems to be a cause of it. Ans. Whosoever foreseeth an evil, and
hinders it not when he may, is accessarie unto it, so be he be bound to
hinder it: but God was not bound to hinder it, being a most absolute Lord, not
bound to any of his creatures further than he binds himself. Ob. But God did
not confirm them in that grace which he gave them; whereupon they fell:
whereas if he had confirmed them they had stood; whence carnal reason
concludes God to be the cause of the fall. Answ. God gave them grace in
creating them righteous, but confirmed them not therein; he gave them a power
to will to persevere, but gave them not the will not perseverance it self, and
yet he is not to be blamed, because he would not do it. Quest. Why would he
not? Ans. I answer with the Apostle, What art thou O man that disputest with
God? Romans 9.2^
Let us without further reasoning stay our selves in these two conclusions:
first, that God is an absolute Lord* neither bound to any action, neither to
give reason of any: secondly, that he does all to the glory of his name, in
the manifestation of his mercy and justice. Secondly, as God is no cause or
author of this fall of Angels, no more is man; for the Angels fell first, and
were the cause of man's fall, and therefore themselves were the proper cause of
their own fall. Qu. How can this be? Ans. The Angels had in themselves the
proper cause, and beginning of their own fall; and that was a free and flexible
will, whereby for the present they willed that which was good, and might will
to persevere in it: but that will being mutable, they might also will evil and
so fall from God, this being the same will that Adam had in the state of
innocence.

Object. Good trees cannot bring forth evil fruit: therefore the Angels
being good, could not sin of themselves. Answ. A good tree remaining good
brings forth good fruit; but being changeable may bring forth evil. So
much of the cause of the fall of Angels.

The second thing in their fall is the parts of it, which here are two: first,
They kept not their first beginning. Secondly, They left their own habitation.
First they fell from their first estate: which words are expounded Ioh. 8.44.
they stood not in the truth. By this truth is meant the image of God in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. and this image is truly called [
truth] because it never deceives men, as unrighteousness does; which makes a
glorious show of pleasure, or profit, but indeed it deceives men, who find
nothing less therein. Secondly, because herein is no hypocrisy, it makes no
show or appearance of other, than indeed it is, as the manner of falsehood is.
The sense then is, that the Angels voluntarily departed from their original
condition, and stood not in that image of God wherein they were created. The
second part of this one sin is, that they left their habitation; which a man
might esteem but a small matter, but yet the sin is not small: for God in
the beginning appointed most excellent places for his several creatures;
wherein they were to perform their service and homage unto God; as Heaven was
the proper place assigned to Angels: to man Paradise in his innocence; as
after his fall the families of the Patriarchs: before and in Christ's time the
Temple: since that time, the societies and congregations of the faithful are
these places appointed for man to set (...) the special praises of the Creator
in. Now the Angels leaving their place incurred two grievous sinne^: first,
they left the presence of God: secondly, their office and calling, in which
they ought for ever to have been employed in the glorifying of God. Ob. But do
not the Diuel^ keep in the air? Ans. Some of them do by Gods permission, but
not as in their proper place, or first habitation, for that was in the
comfortable presence of God in heaven. The third point in this sin is the
measure of it: They left: that is, wholly and to^ally [ their condition,] they
quite forsook God, his image, heaven it self, and that office which therein
they were assigned unto. Object. Here it may be objected: If the Angels in
their innocence and excellency f^ll wholly and utterly from God, much more
(...) sinful man, although believers, wholly fall from God, and utterly cut
themselves by (...) from Christ. Ans. But hereunto I answer, that there is not
the same reason of the grace of creation, as i^ of the grace of regeneration:
for that comes far short of this: by the former the creature has a power
either to stand or fall, to abide with God, or depart from him, and this power
is in it self: but by this latter grace of regeneration, such fear of God is
put into the hearts of the regenerate, that they shall not depart from God,
Iere. 32.40. and this power of not falling is in them indeed, but not from
themselves: neither is it strange that there should be such difference
between the state of nature and that which is above nature. Again, as the
grace of creation and regeneration is different; so there is a difference of
the will created, and regenerate. So called, not because the other is not also
created, but because this is in the subject by creation, as the other is not.
Created will has a freedom to will that which is good: so has the will
regenerate also. Secondly, created will has a power to will to persevere in
that which is good: so also has the will regenerate. The created will has not
the will it self, neither the act of perseverance; wherein it differs from
the will regenerate, which has both these. Here the Schoolmen deceived
themselves and others, in that they taught that in the conversion of a sinner
the will has a freedom to receive grace, or not to receive it; so placing it
in the will of man, and putting it in his own hand and power to believe, or not
believe. But the truth is, that in the first conversion of a sinner the will
rebelleth and (...): For none comes to the Son, unless the Father draw
him: it is not the will it self, but the conversion of it that frame^^ i^
(...) willingness, making it of unwilling* willing to ^^tertaine that which i^
truly good. I^ is untrue that the will of man is now as the will of Angels was
before their fall, having a power to fall* or not fall.

Use. First, in th^^ the Angels were condemned for forsaking their first
beginning, we must bewail this (...) sin in our selves, for we also had the
same first beginning with them: the same image of God (...) upon (...), which
we have willingly departed (...) that remains for us to do, which belongs
not (...) them* to vs^ all means to obtain ou^ first beginnings again, that
this image may be restored unto us, and renewed upon us; unto which three things
are required: first, that our spiritual understanding be cleared, and
enlightened: secondly, that a good heart and conscience be gotten and
preserved: thirdly, a subjection in our whole conversation unto all the laws
and commandments of God.

Secondly, though we have the same beginning by creation, which is lost by our
fall; yet we have another beginning, by a new birth and regeneration, which
they want; we have been borne, baptized, and brought up many years in the true
faith, and profession of Christ; now our duty is to be more wise than before,
to be wary lest we fall from this beginning, as we have done from the
former; but cleave to our faith, and stand to our vow made in our Baptism: for
otherwise our estate becomes as remediless as the condition of the Angels
themselves, who are shut up in the chains of condemnation for ever.

Thirdly, we see how far the Scriptures may be said to be sufficient to
clear all doubts and determine all controversies, We ought rather to be
serious in consideration of our own fall, than curious in theirs.
seeing here it only propounds a general sin of Angels, and names no
particular, as Peter also says, they sinned; and John, that they stood not in
the truth. Thus contenting it self with general terms, without
particularizing the proper sin deserving this judgment; and determines not
that great question controuerted among Divines, of whom some say it was a
(...) in thought: other^, that it was actual: others, that it was envy: some,
Pride, etc. which makes the Papists say, that the Scriptures are not
sufficient to determine all hard questions. But we must not imagine the
Scriptures to be such a judge (...) decideth all doubts, which the curiosity
of man's brain may cast within it self; whereof there are (...) among the
ancient Schoolmen, such as this i^ by scripture indeterminable: nay of purpose
the holy Ghost ^u^teth (...) all cause of such curiosity by silence in such
^nnecessarie matters, that (...) the rather (...) to ^^re ne^^ssarie^ yet is
the Scripture a judge sufficiently able to resol^e thy spiritual minded man in
any case concerning conscience^ or in any matter concerning salvation; all
which it is the sole and proper determiner of: now as for the particular sin of
Angels it is not necessary to salvation to know it; but seeing the Scripture
concealeth it, it is a safe and learned ignorance to be rested in, without
further desire to know that which the Lord has hid in secret with himself.

Fourthly, we are hence taught to seek to enter into our habitation and true
resting place, which is not the earthly Paradise, for that was our dwelling
place before the fall; but Heaven it self, which since the fall is assigned
and prepared to be a rest for the people of God: this was the city which
Abraham looked for, Heb. 11. so the Saints departed are said to be at home with
the Lord being in heaven. ^. Cor. 5.
Christ tells his Disciples he goes to prepare them these dwellings in
heaven, Ioh. 14. which elsewhere he calls everlasting habitations. Make you
friends of unrighteous ma^man, etc. Now for our better practice hereof, this
must be marked, that howsoever this our habitation be in heaven, The (...)
heaven (...) set open here upon earth.
yet the suburbs and the gate of it is here in earth; for all the assemblies
of the people of God are the (...) and gates of heaven it self, ye^ the ^ery
entry into it. Jacob when he saw the testimonies and tokens of Gods presence
and favor, built a^ Altar in the place for his worship, and called it B^thel,
and said it was the very gate of heaven, Genesis 28.17. and therefore we must
while we li^e here seek to enter, if we would be ad^i^ted within that glory
hereafter* Qu. But what (...) may we use to help us forward herein? Ans. These
five* First, we must always endeavor to be found ready to enter into that
heavenly habitation; for which purpose our hate^ must be at this our ho^e, y^^
our whole conversation must be in heaven, w^^lest our (...) are upon earth, our
walking must be in the path of life everlasting* ^^ll containing ourselves in
the ways of repentance, obedience, and daily mortification, whereby we deny
our selves, take up our cross and follow Christ. Secondly, (...) love (...)
assembly of Gods people, and ^oy^e our selves unto th^^ i^ the holy use of the
Word and sacraments, whereby we draw near unto heaven it self: yea and keep
at the gates of this City, and with David think it a special privilege to
be a doore-keeper in the house of God, Psalm. 84. Moses chose rather to suffer
with the people of God great affliction, than to enjoy the treasures and honors
of Pharaohs Court: yea even wicked Cain himself thought of this as the
greatest part of his punishment, and which he most complained of, that he was
cast out from the face of God, that is, out of Adams family, where Gods face
was to be seen in his worship. Thirdly, we must weine our affections from our
earthly inheritances, which are but Tents, that they may be fixed upon this
sure habitation in heaven; without the assurance of which, all earthly reuenews
and treasures can add but little comfort to the heart. Cain built a City, he
had besides great lands and fair possessions; but yet even then the holy Ghost
brands him with the name of a Vagabond; because he was cut off from Gods
people, and cared not to join himself unto them again by repentance.
Fourthly, we must every day address and prepare our selves to our death,
seeing our death is a means to bring us home to this habitation: every new day
must occasion us to renew this our preparation: and this will cause us neither
to fear our own, nor excessiuely to sorrow at the departure of our faithful
friends, seeing they have passed these first things, and are only gone before
to their longed-for habitation. Fifthly, if God call us hereunto, we must be
contented to leave and forsake goods, friends, native country, and all for
assurance of inheritance in this our country; and if we cannot find the
doors hereof in our own country, we must seek them elsewhere, where we may
enjoy them, making light reckoning of all things for this one thing of highest
account.

The last use of this doctrine is, to teach us from this sin of the Angels
our contrary duty; they by their office were to do homage unto God, and
perform all duty as children to their father; for so Job calls them the
sons of God; but this office they departed from* we now being by adoption the
sons and daughters of God, being called unto holiness, are to take heed of
this sin of forsaking our calling; yea on the contrary to walk worthy
thereof, as the sons of God, approouing our faithfulness unto him. And it
stands us in hand so to do, seeing the contrary has such just vengeance
attending upon it, as now in this example we are in the next place to behold.

The third point in this example is the punishment of the Angels, which has
two degrees: first, their custody, in these words: He has reserved them]
namely in durance. Secondly, their full punishment: unto the judgment of the
great day.] The former is set forth in two things: first, in that they are
reserved in chains. Secondly, under darkness. By these chains are signified
first that mighty power of God* which bridleth and restrains the might and
malice of the Devils themselves; as Reu. 20. the old Dragon was bound for a
thousand years: the power of God was the chain that curbed and ouermastred
him; and this is one part of his present punishment. Secondly, the chains
signify also that guiltines of the Angels, which by the tenor of Gods justice
binds them over to destruction: these bonds be upon the consciences of the
wicked Angels, they know they are adjudged to damnation for their sin; so a^
let them be where they will, in the earth or air, or wheresoever, these
chains of guilty consciences bind them over to judgment: where we are
taught two things, first, to beware of guilty and accusing consciences; for
these are Gods chains binding body and soul unto everlasting vengeance: and
therefore for time past, if thy conscience accuse thee, seek in due time to be
loosed and freed by Christ, that thou may be able to say with Paul; I know
nothing by my self: and for time to come beware of sin, even small sins as
well as great: for so many sins as thou committest, are so many chains
binding thee over to just damnation. Secondly, hence we also learn, Christ's
yoke is easy, and Gods service is perfect liberty.
that the service of God is a most happy and sweet liberty, any liberty
else is strait bondage: men think that to be tied to the daily service of God
is a yoke and bondage intolerable, and they must need^ have liberty to sin:
but they deceive themselves, for while they seek for liberty, by this means
they plunge themselves into captivity, and lay chains upon themselves, yea
bolts which hold them in eternal bondage. The liberty which is sweet unto
those who are freed by Christ is, that they can walk before God in the
compass of their callings, without those accusing consciences, which
continually vex and torment the wicked men and Angels themselves. Further,
these chains are called here eternal,] because the wicked Angels stand
guilty for ever without hope of recovery or redemption; seeing Christ took
not upon him the seed and nature of Angels to redeem them, but Abraham's
seed: where note Gods infinite mercy to mankind, who being fallen, have
found a mean of redemption published in the ministry of the word; whereby
Gods people (being bound before) are loosed from their chains; but the Angels,
those glorious creatures, being fallen, found no Savior, nor any means given
by God to loose them, for their chains are eternal: which infinite mercy
toward us, should stir up our dead hearts to thankfulness, and continual
praise of Gods free mercy, who has given us the blood of his Son to loose
these chains; when we as little deserved it, as the Angels unto whom such
favor was denied.

The second part of their custody is, that they are kept under darkness: which
darkness signifies the wrath and anger of God, and want of the blessed favor
which David prayed for: and calls it by the contrary name; the light of his
countenance, Psalm. 4. and as these Angels are said to be in darkness: so the
Saints are said to be in light, Col. 1.12. that is, in Gods favor. Ob. But
the wicked Angels are not wholly cast out of Gods favor, for they have faith,
and therefore some favor and grace of God. Ans. The Devils indeed believe,
but they have not their faith by the gift of illumination as men have, but it
rises of the remnant of natural light and understanding left in them since
their fall: whereby they can persuade themselves of the truth of the word of
God: so (...) their faith is not from any grace since their fall, neither
common, nor special. Besides, this reserved light lighteneth not nor eases,
but increases their torment.

Use. Seeing the misery of the Angels is, to be kept under darkness, which is
to be cast out of Gods favor; we learn to place all our happiness in the
fruition and enjoying of this favor of God, and instantly to pray that the
Lord would still lift up the light of his countenance upon us; in that our
whole felicity must be placed in the apprehension of Gods mercy, in the
pardon of sin, and life everlasting.

The second degree of their punishment is, that they are reserved unto the
judgment of the great day, wherein the fulness and extremity of their torment
is expressed; for by judgment is meant that fearful and final condemnation
and torment which they are adjudged unto, which abides them, and is reserved
for them. Where we see that howsoever the Devils are already entered into
diverse degrees of their punishment; yet their full punishment, and the full
wrath of God is not powered upon them till the last judgment; this themselves
know, as Matthew. 8. Art thou come to torment us before the time. That time is
called here the [ great day, The great works which sha^ be performed on the
great day.
] because the greatest works of God shall be accomplished in that day. For
first, an assembly of all men and Angels shall be made by the sound of a
Trumpet, who shall all be cited before Gods judgment seat, though they were
resolved into dust many thousand years before. Secondly, all the works and
intentions of men good or bad shall be in that day reueiled, Eccl. 12.14.
Thirdly, another great work is, the giving of a most upright sentence upon all
men of absolution unto the godly, and of condemnation upon the wicked Angels
and men. Fourthly, the reward shall be given to every man according to his
work: to the godly free reward of life and glory: to the wicked deserved
condemnation. Fifthly, then shall Christ God and man give up his kingdom unto
his Father, and shall cease to reign, not as God, for he shall be still
equal ^o his Father; but as Mediator; for an end shall be put to all
families, societies, Civil, and Ecclesiastical distinctions and governments,
so as in regard of ou^ward government and administration this his kingdom
shall cease.

Use. Let the remembrance of this great day strike us with fear and reverence
of it. Shall every work be brought unto judgment? Then let us fear God, and
keep his commandments; it is the use that Solomon makes, Eccles. 12. and
considering those terrors of the Lord, what manner of men ought we to be in
all holy conversation? says the Lord. Yea the Devils themselves believe and
tremble in remembrance of this terrible and great day: but how many Atheists be
there worse than the Devils themselves that make a mock of these great works,
Atheists (...) at (...) which (...) the (...) Devils (...).
not fearing nor acknowledging the Scriptures, Heaven, Hell, God, Devil, nor
this great judgment day? but experience shall teach such fools, who in the
mean time might learn so much of the Devil himself (but that God has given
them into his hand to be led by his will) to tremble at the remembrance of
this dreadful day; and let all that love the Lord shake off security, and
stand in awe, and fear with another fear: let their hearts be smitten with a
reverent fear, that this day overtake them not unawares.

Verse. 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about them, which, in
like manner as they did, committed, and followed strange flesh, are set forth
for an example, and suffer the vengeance of eternal fire.
IN this verse is laid down the third and last example, proouing the first
part of the former reason, and it is the first part of a similitude. The words
[ Even as] signifying that the holy Ghost here instituteth a comparison, the
former part or proposition whereof is in this verse, and the reddition or
second part in the two next following. In the example consider three things:
first, the people who were destroyed. Secondly, the sin for which they were
destroyed. Thirdly, the destruction or punishment it self. First, the people
destroyed were Sodom and Gomorrha, and the rest of the cities about them;
which cities are named, Deuteronomy. 29.23. Admah and Z^b^im: the reason of whose
destruction is noted by the Apostle; because they followed the sins of Sodom
and Gomorrha: They sinned in like manner; so as they being found in the same
sins, they were wrapped up in ye same judgments. Here first mark that the
holy Ghost mentions not the persons who were destroyed, but their Cities, to
signify an universal destruction, an utter ruin, and a total overthrow of
the^; the which heaping up of so many words, expressing the same thing, gives
us likewise to understand that place in 2. Pet. 2.6. he turned their cities
into ashes, condemned them, and overthrew them. Whence we may note that there
is a difference between the people of God, and those who will not be obedient
to his word, these meet with utter destruction. Gods people may be destroyed
indeed, but not utterly: for we must always believe the Catholic Church upon
earth. Elias in his time could not behold it; but yet there were 7000. reserved
from that general apostasy of those days. When the Lord visits his own
house in judgment, his manner is to leave some remnants whom he saves, lest
their destruction should be like this of Sodom and Gomorrha. So Isaiah
acknowledges: Isai. 1.9.
Except the Lord of hosts had reserved unto us even a small remnant, we had
been like to Sodom and the people of Gomorrha. Use. This may teach us true
humility in regard of our own deseruings, and true thankfulness in regard of
Gods gracious dealing with us: both of which must be often acknowleged of every
member of the Church, and every man must confess and say with the Church, Lam.
3. It is the Lords mercies that we are not utterly consumed. Secondly, in
these people observe the justice of God, and his severity in such an universal
destruction, sparing none, but destroying even the children with the parents,
who sinned not in following strange flesh as their fathers did, which makes
this a strange and unsearchable judgment: whence the Atheists condemn these
books of Moses (whence this judgment is fetched) as attributing to God
cruelty, and justifying in him injustice. But herein to clear the just
proceeding of the most righteous God, we are to know, first, that the child is
Gods creature, and the life of it is Gods (he being the Lord of life) so as
he may take it away when he pleases, having power to do with his own as he
will. Secondly, children are part^ of the parents, and therefore the Lord may
justly infold them in the punishment of their fathers sin, to manifest his
greater detestation of it. Thirdly, children are borne in original sin, and
therefore God may justly inroll them with their parents, not only in temporal
punishments, but in everlasting condemnation also.

Thirdly, in this people who are made examples, note that as wicked a people as
these have had mercy offered them. Isai. 1.10. The Prophet calls the Jews
Princes, the Princes of Sodom, and their people the people of Gomorrha, that
is; such Princes and people as matched Sodom and Gomorrha themselves in
wickedness; and yet he inuiteth them unto repent^nce, with proffer of mercy
and promise of pardon: yea though their sins were as red as scarlet, he would
then make them white as snow, verse. 18. Whence we may learn, that the mercy
of God every way matcheth his justice; in justice he overthrows Sodom and
Gomorrha, and in mercy saves those who were every whit as wicked as they, his
free grace brings those to heaven, who by their sin equalled themselves to
those whom his justice had detruded into hell. Yea it offers and gives
repentance to them which are holden in the snare of the devil, and ruled at
his will, 2. Tim. 2.25. Manasseh himself who broke off his covenant with God,
by making league with the Devil, found mercy with God upon his repentance. 2.
Chro. 33.
Use. Let not the greatness of our sins dismay us from seeking the Lord, thy
sins are not above the sins of Sodom and Gomorrha, for which mercy has
been obtained; use thou also means to turn unto God and there is mercy in
store: but see thou abuse not this mercy unto sin.

Fourthly, note that in the same time this people of Sodom and Gomorrha was
destroyed, Lot escaped, though he was in Sodom: for at the time of the
execution the Angel led him out from among them, and not before. Which
teaches, that although the Lord seem sometime to neglect his dear servants,
and leave them in tribulation: yet the instant time of their necessity shows
his gracious and seasonable regard and remembrance of them. The Israelites had
a promise, that after four hundred and thirty years they should be delivered
from their bondage in Egypt: which promise the Lord was not unmindful of,
neither for the substance nor circumstance of time; for in the very same night
that the time was expired, their deliverance was wrought according to the
promise. Our duty hence is to learn in the midst of our afflictions, with
quiet hearts to rest and rely our selves upon God, waiting his time wherein
he will come in mercy unto us.

Fifthly, note that with this people of Sodom and Gomorrha, the other Cities
Admah and Zeboim, because they followed their sins were likewise destroyed.
Follow not the multitude to evil: neither let a common error prejudice the
truth.
Where we learn to avoid the wicked manners and fashions of the world, not
imitating these lesser Cities, which imitated the greater in their wicked
manners; but on the contrary, follow the example of David, in shedding rivers
of tears when he beheld men not keeping the laws of God. We should not with
dry eyes behold men's impieties: ye^ for this end our hearts should be like
unto Lots; when we see the sins of our people break out as the sins of
Sodom and Gomorrha, our righteous hearts should be vexed within us in the daily
seeing and ^^aring of such uncleanness. So much of the people punished.

Now follows the second point in the example: namely, the sins for which
Sodom and Gomorrha were destroyed, in these words: They committed fornication,
and followed strange flesh. First, they committed fornication. Secondly, they
committed sins against nature it self, following strange flesh. To
understand the vileness of these sins consider two things: first, the cause
and occasion of them: and that was abundance of prosperity, and plentifulnes
of Gods blessings. For Sodom was as a Garden of God, enriched with variety of
profits and pleasures: this caused Lot to choose Sodom to dwell in. This ground
nourished four bitter roots, from which these sins of fornication and
following strange flesh did spring, reckoned, up by Ezechiel, chap. 16.49. The
sins of thy sister Sodom were first Pride, by reason of prosperity. Secondly,
fulness of bread: that is, they gave themselves to eating and drinking
excessiuely: for so says Luke 17.28. Thirdly, Idleness, which was the daughter
of their security. Fourthly, Unmercifulness, and contempt of the poor: and
these must needs nourish all sins of uncleanness: unto which add a fifth
sin, mentioned Genesis 19.9. and 14. that is, contempt of heavenly admonition
and instruction; for they scorned Lot while he warned them of their danger.

The second thing in their sin is the measure of it. They sinned in like
manner, etc. The original signifies and implies not only a bare committing
of sin, but a giving of themselves over to commit their filthy lusts, (...).
and that impudently and shamelesly: which the Prophet Esaias noted also chap.
3.9. They declare their sins at Sodom, they hide them not: showing that they
were past all shame in these most shameful sins. Yea they boasted and
gloried in them: both which may be gathered in Genesis 19.^. and 9.

Doctr. 1. By these sins we are taught to take a view of the sins of these
last times unto which that of Ezechiel unto Jerusalem may be properly applied:
Thou have justified thy Sisters (namely Samaria and Sodom) in all their
abominations. So these last times justify Sodom in her abominations, which I
prove thus: First* the Church of Rome is that Sodom wherein the two Prophets
were slain, Revel. 11.8. It is there so called because it matcheth Sodom in
her sins, in that it teaches the sins of Sodom, in making laws to inhibite
lawful marriage in sundry sorts of men* to tole^ate fornication, and such
filthiness; yea not only by the Scriptures, but, in many other sundry
ancient, and some of their own records, it is manifest that Rome is a Sodom.
Whence we see not only the duty of every Lot, and righteous person, namely
to hasten out of her, but also the end and destruction that abides her, to be
everlasting (...)* Secondly, again in these times i^ must be verified, and is
also, which was applied by Christ unto them of his age, Luke ^7.28. It is in
these latter times as it was in the days of Lot, men eat and drink, buy and
sell, marry, and give in marriage, and think of nothing; and (...) the
wonderful (...) of many (...) that many (...) in the midst of the Church
herein may match, if not exceed even Sodom and Gomorrha themselves. Thirdly*
whoso^uer (says Christ) shall not believe and obey the doctrine of the
Gospel, Mat. 10.15.
it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for
them. Which sentence might move most men to tremble, who whilst they take
themselves freed from Sodomes sins* fornication* and following strange flesh,
they nourish a sin within them, which makes them as far off their
salvation as Sodom it self is, and that is the not receiving of the Gospel as
they ought: most men content themselves to live ciuilly, and out of danger of
humane laws; but as for the doctrine of religion, and yet much more the power
and life of it, it lies horribly neglected. But Sodom it self shall be saved
before such men.

Doct. 2. In that fornication and following strange flesh are the sins of
Sodom; we are taught to avoid this sin of fornication and al sins of
uncleanness. For first, the heavy curse of God is passed not only against Sodom
and Gomorrha for th^se sins; but wh^^esoeuer they be found they be sins that
burn to destruction, Job. 3^.22. they set families on fire, and devour them
utterly, waste and consume them. Again, no fornicators, adulterers, wantons,
1. Cor. 6.9.
b^gga^ers, shall even be admitted into the kingdom of heaven: and in verse
13. the same Apostle propounds six reasons why we should fly fornication:
first, our bodies are the Lords, and must be serviceable unto him. Secondly,
we look they should be raised to glory in the last day, and therefore we
must in the mean time keep them honorable. Thirdly, they are the members of
Christ, we may not th^n make them the member^ of an (...). Fourthly, whereas
all other sins are without the body, this directly is against the body.
Fifthly, the body is the (...) of the holy Ghost, and th^se sins make it the
Devils (...) and (...). Sixthly, our bodies are bought with a price, and it is
sacrilege (...) glorify God in the body as well (...) soul, (...) both are
alike his. Now if any man (...) solicited by temptation unto (...), and would
know how (...) might ouermaster them, he must begin with his heart, and
obtain and retain within it the fear of God, which only is able to ouerrule
him. This grace alone preserved Joseph, being daily enticed by Po^iphars wife.
How should I do this wickedness and sin against God? Genesis 39.9.

The third point in this example is the punishment it self* in which three
things may be noted: first, the matter of it; they suffered the punishment of
eternal fire: by fire, we must not understand our fire, no^ such material and
bodily fire as ours is, but an eternal fire: that is, the endless and
comfortless apprehension of Gods wrath for sin eternally burning, that is,
always terribly tormenting the sinner, called fire, because as burning of fire
is the most horrible and sensible torment unto nature, so much more terrible is
this torment* which elsewhere is called by other names, as the worm that never
dies, etc. Where in the fearefulnes of the punishment mark the grieuousnes of
this sin: it were therefore to be wished that whoredom might be punished
with death. The thief does not more, if so much harm against families and
Commonwealths, as sinners of this kind and quality. The second thing is the
(...) of their punishment, (...) when they gave themselves wholly to
fornication, and were come to the height in their sins. Where note, that though
the Lord be slow to wrath, The Lord is slow to anger, but much (...) wrath.
yet he recompenseth that slownes with the heaviness of it when he comes;
seeing* he comes not till he must needs, and that is not till sin be at the
height and most of necessity be taken down: as appears in those four
hundred years allotted for the filling up of the Amorites sins. Genesis 15.16
Let us then beware of abusing Gods patience, by adding to our sins; for then
he is adding unto, and heaping his judgments, and we shall find that though
he come slowly, To avoid Gods stroke strike down thine own sins.
yet he will strike surely, if we give not (...) a stroke to our sins by
repentance, as in (...) his judgments may be preuerned. The third thing noted
here is the use of this punishment; namely, (...) they (...) an example to the
whole world. Which (...) that (...) so (...) all (...) of the son (...) for God
teaches not ^nely (...) by his word (...) of it, Gods judgments are his real
sermons.
but really also by his works in the execution of his judgments. Job says
that God speaks to men once or twice, therein teaching that corrections are
the speeches of God in men's (...) so as no person or people can go clear away
with that plea, that they wanted all means of instruction, seeing the whole
earth is filled with the judgments of God.

Verse. 8. Likewise notwithstanding these dreamers also defile the flesh, and
despise government, and speak evil of them that are in authority.
NOw the Apostle comes to the proof of the second part of the former reason:
namely, that these seducers are they which take liberty to (...): and
therefore they shall be destroyed. This is proved in this, and some verses
following, by a particular rehearsal of certain sins apparent in these men.

In this verse three things are offered to be considered of us: first, the
(...) down of two vices unto which these men were addicted: first, they (...)
flesh: secondly, they despise government. Secondly, the fountain of these and
other their sins in this word (...). Thirdly, the manner of their sins in
these two words; Likewise notwithstanding; namely in two things: first, as
Sodom and Gomorrha sinned, so ^^ned these likewise, no otherwise than they.
Secondly, they did not only sin as they of Sodom did* but notwithstanding
they knew what had befallen Sodom and Gomorrha, they not being afraid of these
judgments rush into these sins: and hereby they are convinced to be
dreamers, seeing they sleep securely in the midst of such judgments.

In handling the words we will first speak of the fountain, because it is
first in nature, and then secondly of their sins flowing from thence. The
origin^ll of these sins is that they are dreamers; (...).
which word leads us to a double cause of them: first, that they are
sleepers made (...) with sleep* and secondly, in this sleep of theirs they
are deluded with dreams* We are then to understand first what th^^ sleep is:
and in the next p^^ce, what be the dreame^ which in (...) sleep (...) them.
This sleep is not that natural sleep which oppresses the body; but a
spiritual sleep, like unto that in diverse things going over the soul,
binding up the faculties of the same, and bringing a heaviness or deadnes rather
into all the powers of man; so far forth as they ought to be moving in
spiritual actions and affairs. It causes the mind never to think seriously
of God or a man's own estate: the conscience never or seldom to accuse for
sin committed: the will never or seldom to will that which is truly good:
the affections never or seldom to be moved at Gods word or works. Thus it
goes over the whole soul, and casts it in a dead sleep, so as it is
altogether unfit to go about the actions of an heavenly life. Example hereof
we have in the old world, they eat and drank, etc. and knew nothing till the
flood came: they dreamed continually of many other things, but never of their
own destruction. Dives also was cast on such a sleep; he f^red deliciously
every day, he never thought of heaven, for he was never to come there; nor of
hell fire till he felt the flame. This spiritual sleep is three-fold^ first,
the natural sleep of heart by which every one is overtaken; so as by nature
no man can so much as move himself to the least good, till God awake him, and
say to him, Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead. Ephesians 5.14.
The second sleep is a slumber, and indeed the remainders of this natural
sleep in the children of God, being awakened out of their dead sleep; for
even they are overtaken often with a spiritual slumber, by reason of
remainders of sin in them. So the spouse acknowledges Cant. 5.2. I sleep, but
my heart waketh. The third sleep is the increase of that natural sleep and
deadnes of heart by the custom of sin, when as the heart is made past
feeling, and altogether senseless through continuance in sin, Ephesians. 4.19.
This last kind is that which is attributed here to these deceivers, for so the
word [ notwithstanding] imports: for although they knew the judgments of God
against sin, yet they are senseless and careless in the midst of them.

Now in the next place let us see what these dreams are here spoken of, and
they be nothing else, but wicked, carnal, and vain imaginations, arising
from an impure heart, and conceived in a corrupted mind, which in the end
deceive and delude men no otherwise than a dream, which while a man sleeps
seems to have some truth in it, but as soon as one awaketh it vanishes
away, and indeed has in it nothing less. An example whereof we have in the
rich man, Luke 12.19. who in his fulness and increase of riches dreamed of an
happiness and a continuance in it many years: when that night his soul was
taken away. The Angel of the Church of Laodices dreamed* that he was rich,
increased with wealth, and stood in need of nothing; whereas he knew not that
he was blind, poor, miserable, and naked, Reave. 3.17. So the Pharisee
dreamed that he was another manner of man than the poor sinful Publicane; but
it was but a mere dream, for the other departed away justified.

Doct. Hence we may note the cause why so few entertain the doctrine of the
Gospel, so few forsake their sins and turn unto God, and that is because
men are dreamers, being cast and lulled asleep in their sins, and therein
deluded with many false imaginations which draw them from God. As first,
Dreams of men waking.
some plead that they were never book learned, they could never write nor
read, therefore they must be excused in their ignorance, as not being bound to
know the word of God; they need not frequent so many sermons, or if they do,
they are not greatly to care to carry them away. Secondly, others dream that
because they have lived thus long, and yet had never any such cross, as they
see befall others, therefore they are most happy men, and God loves them; they
find the blessing of God upon them in every thing, and therefore they serve
God well enough, or so much as serves their turn. Thirdly, others have
learning and knowledge, and begin to dream that therefore they want nothing,
they bless themselves in their naked knowledge, and never have care in their
hearts to receive Christ. Fourthly, others are profane, and dream that the
Master will not come yet; God will not yet call them, they shall have time
enough to repent in; for they crave but one hour on their deathbeds, and that
shall they have; in the mean time they give themselves over to riot and
excess, never regarding though all the world cry shame upon them, until
their Master take them unawares. Lastly, it is a common dream amongst men that
the promise of life eternal is but a dream, Most men dream, that the doctrine
of the Gospel is but a dream.
and so many make but a dream of the whole word of God, and all religion: that
look as Sarah did not so much regard the promise as she ought to have done,
because she took it for a dream, and made a matter of laughter of it, Genesis
18.12. and as those who were reduced from ye captivity of Babylon, entertained
the promise of their return but as a dream, by their own confession, Psalm.
126. and Peter when he was delivered by the Angel out of prison, could not be
persuaded that it was so, but that he had seen a vision, or dreamed a dream,
Act. 12.9. Even so, men hold the doctrine of the Gospel but as a dream,
seeing they can hold it in opinion, but never endeavor to reform their lives
by it: but such dreams disappoint men commonly of salvation; which while men
bring to the hearing of the word, it is no marvel if we have such just cause
of complaint for want of profiting under it, as appears every where at this
day. The most powerful Ministry shall little prevail, so long as men come
with their hearts full fraught with their carnal imaginations, and with such
heaviness of spirit. Secondly* in that these dreams are made the causes of all
sins, we are taught to learn the lesson of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.14. Awake
thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead. And 1 Thessalonians. 5.6. Let us not
sleep as others do: which that we may do, consider first the reasons, and
means which may be effectual to awaken us: and secondly, the notes to know
when we are wakened. For the former, consider first the infinite justice and
wrath of God against the least sin, which made the Apostle say, Heb. 10.13
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of God. Secondly, the greatness
of our sins, and the number which is like the sand upon the sea shore.
Thirdly, ye uncertainty of the day and hour of our death, which as it leaves
us, so shall the last judgment find us. Fourthly, our vow in Baptism;
wherein we promise to forsake the Devil* and all our own lusts. Fifthly,
Christ's passion and his bloody sweat, not for his own, but our sins, which
made him cry: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Sixthly, that the
night is past, and it is n^w day, the sun is up, even the sun of
Righteousness is risen upon us; and therefore we are to be raised out of our
sleep, and walk as children of the light, Romans 13.12.13.

Secondly, if a man would know whether he begin to be awakened, let him observe
whether his heart have begun to move in spiritual actions or no. For that
body is wakened out of bodily sleep, which can move it self in bodily
actions. Quest. When does the heart begin thus to move it self, and how shall
I know it? Answ. When thou beginnest to turn thy eyes inwardly into thy self,
and can find, and epsy the privy corruptions which lurk within thee.
Secondly, when thou art inwardly and heartily displeased with thy self, and
grieved for thy sins. Thirdly, when thou can humbly and heartily sue to God
for pardon, and can hunger and thirst after Christ and his merits above all
earthly things. Fourthly, when thou beginnest to endeavor to do the will of
God, and please him in all things; then assure thy self thou art wakened out
of thy sleep of sin, and not before.

Thirdly, if dreaming be the fountain of all sin, we must learn the contrary
virtue, namely, that being once awakened, we strive to watch and be sober, 1 Thessalonians. 5.6. For the practice of which duty these rules are to be marked*
first, we must daily and diligently observe our selves, our hearts, and
sins; and seeing what sins we are most prone unto, there must we double
our care and watchfulnes: for otherwise where we are weakest Satan soonest
makes a breach, for there he makes his greatest assaults. Secondly, we must
daily look for an evil day, so as we forecast every day to endure the worst
that it can bring forth against us and our profession: out of which forecast
in vain shall any man purpose to keep faith and a good conscience. We may not
cry peace, peace; for then commonly sudden desolation comes upon us.
Thirdly, we must esteem of every day as our last day, that so we may be Lie
every day, that thou may (...) once ^ell on thy dying day.
(...) did, of which we have spoken in the seventh verse, and therefore pass
this sin over without further handling. Only let this one thing be here
remembered, that seeing it is a sin of Sodom to defile the body with the
sins of the seventh Commandment, our duty is to reserve within us that
special care whereby our bodies may be preserved in holiness and honor* 2 Thessalonians. 4.3.4. This is the will of God* The body must be given up as an holy
sacrifice to God, else it shall not be acceptable, Romans 12.1. Would thou
have thy body rise up unto glory and fellowship with God and Christ at the
last day? then let thy ^are be to lay it down in the grant in honor, by
preserving i^ a pure member of Christ: for without holiness, no man shall ever
see God, that is, have fellowship with him being a most holy and cha^^ spirit:
yea the contrary things ought not to be named in the Church of God, Ephesians. 5.5.

The second sin follows, in these words; (...) despise government, and
speak (...).] In which words (...) (...).
(...) refuse and put away, yea and so (...) as they can put down all
Lordship, government, civil power and dominion. Secondly, in their practice
(...). First, in their iudge^^^^ they put down government, by ^eaching (for
otherwise they could not) and maintaining that after men were converted to the
faith, being now become Christians and believers, they were no longer to be
under Magistracy or authority; but their necks were to be eased from that
yoke: and this error was dangerously sown by the malicious m^n in the
Primitive Church, and called some trouble and labor upon the Apostles
themselves in their (...); as appears 1. Cor. 7.11. where the Apostle
answers this case, which servants themselves were hold to call in question
being converted. Art thou called a servant* care not for it. So Titus 3.1. Put
them in remembrance that they be subject to principalities and powers. So as it
(...) a lesson not well learned in those first ages of the Gospel. This was
the judgment and opinion of the false Teachers, which even the word [ despise]
implies and presupposes. Now whereas some might say, that they must needs
(will they ^ill they) be under authority: for Rulers and Princes would and did
keep them under: The Apostle adds, [ and speak evil etc.] that is,
although they cannot shake off government so easily as they would, yet they can
easily manifest their malice against it, in reuiling them that are in
authority.

First then we are to speak of their doctrine, and then of their practice. In
the former consider three things: first, what is this rule or government which
they despise: secondly, upon what ground refuse they to be under authority:
thirdly, upon what ground does Jude condemn them for this refusal. First, to
know what this authority is, we must distinguish all government into divine
and humane: The Apostle Peter acknowledges this distinction, 1. Pet. 2.13,
Submit your selves to every humane ordinance. Divine government is the absolute
power of God, whereby he makes laws to bind the conscience, and that under
pain of life and death eternal. This is the power of all the Trinity; but
the administration of it is given to the Son. This power is not here meant;
for had they denied this, they could not have carried a face or show of
Christians. The other (which here is understood) is humane or civil rule and
dominion, whereby man is set over man: which may be thus described: Civil
government is a state of superiority, consisting in the power of commanding,
and in the power of the sword for the common good of mankind. That it is a
state of superiority, appears Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the
higher power. Further, I say it consists in a double power: first of
commanding* that is, of making edict^ and laws, of calling and conuenting.
Secondly of the Sword, and that in four things: first, in arresting: secondly,
imprisoning: thirdly, putting to death; fourthly, making war in way of
protection or otherwise. This second power, namely of the Sword, is added*
first, to put a difference between the authority of the Magistracy and
Ministry: which difference stands in three things: first, the Magistracy
has a power in it self, whereby the Civil Magistrate may command in his own
name. The authority of the Magistrate and Minister far different.
The Ministry has power only to pronounce what God commands, and that in
his name. Secondly, the authority of the Civil Magistrate is in himself; the
authority of the Minister not in himself but in Christ; so as the Civil
Magistrate may command obedience to himself, but the Minister commands it to
God. Thirdly, the Civil government has an absolute power to compel, and
enforce the outward man; but the Ministry has power only to counsel,
persuade, exhort. Secondly, this power of the Sword is added to distinguish it
from all private power, as in Schools, families, which have a power of
commanding, but not of the Sword. Lastly, I add for the common good of
mankind, Romans 13.4. The Magistrate is the minister of God, for thy wealth, that
is, procuring the welfare of soul and body: which stands in two things:
first, true Religion: secondly, civil justice; both which are by Magistracy
maintained. It may be here demanded* (...) Church appears, in that the (...)
preparation and performance of the same, 2. Chron. 35. and (...) here two
differences in this authority must be marked. First, that civil (...) does
not after the same (...) order causes ecclesiastical as (...) in civil causes
is ord^^th all, and (...) all likewise; but in ecclesiastical it has power to
order all, but not (...) execute them. The Magistrate indeed orders and
prescribes in all, but the Minister is ^e that executes in ecclesiastical
causes. Secondly* that civil authority has power over all the things of men,
but not over the things of (...)* as the Wo^d and Sacrament^, faith,
conscience, the graces of God in (...) Ci^ill power has no rule over these;
concerning which Christ comm^nded to give unto God the things of God and unto
Caesar Caesar's. Secondly, this authority extends it self to all persons as
well Ecclesiastical as Civil, but so, as it stretches only unto the (...)
man, to the body, life, (...)* and outward things, but not to the soul and
conscience, of which God is the only Lord and governor. (...) asked what are
the kinds of this power* I answer, it is of three sort^: first, in one person
man or woman, which is a Monarchy: secondly in more, when the government is in
a few states and (...)* thirdly, in the body of the people, which is a popular
government by one of these three is every Commonwealth governed. These are the
Gouernment^ despised by these seducers.

The second point follows, (...) upon what grounds they despised government?
Ans. Their grounds may be known by the Heretics of th^^ time the Anabaptists,
who are given up to the same (...); and they (...) be (...) to these four
heads: First, subjection (say they) came in with sin; and therefore Christ
having taken away sin, has taken away subjection also. The former part they
prove out of Genesis 1.26. Man in innocence was to rule over the fish of the
sea, the fowls of heaven, over the beasts, the earth, and all creeping things;
but not over man: but after the fall Eve is put under subjection to Adam,
Genes. 3. Ans. There be two kinds of subjection: the first Servile, the
second Civil. The former is the subjection of a slave or vassal, who is only
to seek the proper good of his Lord and Master. The latter whereby one man is
subject to another for the common good. The former came in by sin: the latter
was before sin in innocence. Eve was subject to Adam in innocence: thus the
Apostle reasons 1. Tim. 2.12. Let the woman be subject to the man: for she
was taken out of the man. Again, in innocence it was said, Increase and
multiply; and therefore in the light of nature is a plain distinction
between the father and son, and an inequality.

The first place is misalleaged Genes. ^.26. because it was spoken not of man
alone, but of all mankind, even women as well as men; who have also dominion
given over the unreasonable creatures. As for the second place, Genesis 3.15. He
shall rule, and thou shall be subject. It is not spoken because the ordinance
of God simply considered in it self was not before the fall: but because now
the subjection was joined with fear, grief, and sorrow, which it wanted in
innocence: for then it was a pleasure, and this makes subjection a curse in
some respect; but is not so (no not since the fall) in it self considered.

Secondly, they reason thus: Every believer is in the kingdom of heaven, even
in this life: Now in heaven there is no King but God; and therefore no believer
is to be subject to any but God and Christ. Ans. There be two kinds of
governments upon earth; one is spiritual and inward, this is the kingdom of
heaven and of Christ within man, standing in peace of conscience and joy in the
holy Ghost: in regard of which regiment of Christ, there is no distinction of
persons, no difference of bond or free, Master, servant, father, son; but all
are one in Christ. The other is a civil regiment, wherein orders and
distinctions of men must be maintained; as some must be Princes, some
subjects, some fathers, some children, some Masters, some servants. Whence it
is that every man susteines upon him two persons: and is to be considered first
as a believer, and as a member of the kingdom of Christ: thus is he equal to
any believer, and any believer equal to him. Secondly, as a member of the
Commonwealth wherein he lives; thus he is either a superior or inferior.
Their reason were somewhat, if every believer were only in the kingdom of
heaven: but every of them living here in earth is also a member of some
Commonwealth.

Thirdly, Object.
Civil government is full of cruelty, which having the power of the sword
destroys the bodies and souls of offenders, in not giving them time of
repentance: and therefore is intolerable among Christians. Answer.
Ans. Moses and the Levites by Gods commandment flew 3000. of the Israelites
for worshipping their golden Calfe, Exo. 32.2^
and never gave them space to repent. Secondly, the malefactor that is not
moved to repentance at the sentence of present death, there is little hope that
ever he would repent after if he had longer time. Thirdly, Gods wisdom and
commandment must take place of man's reason; he commands that the
Malefactor should die, Pereat vnus potius quam vnitas.
and thereby that the evil be taken away; better it is that one should be
destroyed than an unity; better that one be removed, than a multitude by the
contagion of his example infected.

Fourthly, Object.
they plead liberty by some places and testimonies of Scripture: Gal. 5.1.
Stand fast in the liberty wherein Christ has set you free. Answer.
Ans. The liberty which Christ has procured us is liberty of conscience,
freedom from the power of sin, Satan, death, hell, and condemnation; and
therefore spiritual: but not from temporal and civil subjection.

Ob. Romans 13.8. Object.
Owe nothing to any man but love: therefore not obedience. Answer.
Ans. There be two kinds of debt: first, a civil debt, occasioned by
contract and bargaining between man and man: the second is a debt to which we
are bound by Gods law and covenant; the place is meant of the former, so far as
it lies in our power: but we are bound still to obedience and subjection by
the latter.

Object.
Ob. Matthew. 17.26. The Kings sons are free from tribute; and therefore from
subjection. Answer.
Ans. Christ speaks that of himself, who by his birth was heir to the
Crown and kingdom of the Jews: and therefore by right was to pay none;
neither did but for avoiding of offense: what is this to free other men from
obedience to the Magistrate?

Object.
Object. 1. Cor. 7. Ye are bought with a price, Answer.
be ye not the servants of men. Ans. The meaning is, that servants should not
subject themselves to men as to absolute Lords; for we must do service one to
another for Gods sake; and not only for God but in God.

Object.
Ob. Believers are governed by the spirit of God, and so are able to govern
themselves every way, and need not any government of man. Answer.
Ans. One thing it is what we do, another what we ought to do: we ought
indeed so to live, as not to need governors, but we do not; yea and if
believers could, yet were the reason naught, for the Church contains as well
bad as good; hypocrites as well as sincere Christians; and therefore the best
Churches need Magistracy for the punishment of the evil doers, and the
praise of them that do well. Yea the Church lying open to the malice of Satan
and the wicked, stands ever in need of Magistracy to protect it by force
and war, or otherwise.

The third general point is; upon what ground does the Apostle here blame and
condemn these seducers for despising civil government? Ans. The ground is,
because it is a solemn ordinance of God; called therefore by Peter a creation
or creature, which binds every soul unto subjection to the higher power,
Romans 13.1. and that for conscience sake, which respects not so much the rule
it self as Gods commandment, subiecting not only civil but all
ecclesiastical persons thereunto. Christ himself taking upon him man's nature,
was subject unto authority, submitting himself unto Caiphas, and Pilate, yea
to apprehension, arraignment, condemnation, and execution, Matthew. 26. Paul
himself whose Apostolical authority and spiritual weapons, were able to
bring down every opposition: yet acknowledged that he must be judged by
Caesar, Act. 25.11.

Ob. Ierem. 1.10. Object.
I set thee over nations and kingdoms to plant and pluck up: the Prophets
therefore and their successors are not to be subject unto civil Magistracy.
Answer.
An. The Prophet is set over nations and kingdoms, not to govern by the civil
sword, but the sword of the Spirit in his mouth; and he is to plant and pluck
up kingdoms no otherwise, than by declaring that God would plant or pluck them
up.

Ob. Esaias 60.10. Object.
Kings shall come and serve the Church in the new Testament; and therefore the
Church is not to be subject unto Princes, but they unto it. Ans. In the Church
are two things: Answer.
first, the persons of men: secondly the things of God. Regni mundi and regni
Christi est m^tua subiectio. Bucer.
Now Kings are subject to the Church; but how? not to the persons of believers,
but to the things of God, namely the Word, Sacraments, faith, etc.

Object. Object.
Kings and Magistrates are as sheep; Ministers are Pastors and shepherds:
therefore they are under the Ministers, as the flocks under the shepherds.
Ans. In the Prophets, Pastors, Answer.
and Ministers, consider two things: first their persons: secondly, their
ministry. In regard of their persons all of them are subject to their own
Princes, and that for conscience sake: but in regard of their Ministry,
Princes and Magistrates are to be subject thereunto, as wherein the Word is
taught and Sacraments administered: even as a mean man being a Sergeant, may
arrest a Baron, Earl, or Duke, who may not resist him, because he comes
with the Princes authority, unto which he must yield himself, though not unto
the person of the Sergeant: so must Magistrates to the Ministers coming not in
their own, but in the name of God. For this also must be marked, that
Magistrates are not simply subjects to the Ministry, but so far as the word
is rightly taught, and Sacraments du^ie administered: for else they have power
either to reform, or depose such Ministers as shall fail in their
administration: for even in this regard themselves are shepherds. As Isai.
44.1. Cyrus is called a shepherd, though otherwise he be a sheep, so far as
he is truly taught and directed by the Minister. So much of the ground.

Use. By this doctrine we may discover the wickedness and horrible rebellion of
sundry persons in this age. First of the Bishop of Rome that most ancient
Rebel, The Pope the archrebell of the world.
who has for many hundred years taken upon him an usurped supremacy over all
civil government in the earth; which is the highest rebellion which ever the
world has heard of, seeing there is not a soul which must not be subject to
the higher power. Object.
Ob. Yea but that place is meant of those that are to be subject, but the Popes
themselves are exempted. Ans. But besides that the text commands every soul
to be subject, Answer.
it is made a note of Antichrist, to exalt himself above God, and all that is
called God; that is, all Magistrates.

Object.
Ob. But they allege the example of Vzziah the King, 2. Chron. 26.20. who
taking upon him presumptuously the office of the Priest, Azariah the Priest
resisted him, cast him out of the temple, and deposed him from his kingdom.
Ans. Azariah resisted the King not by force, Answer.
or violence, but by word only and admonition, whereby he caused him to
depart the Temple: neither did he depose him from his government; but being by
God stricken suddenly with a leprosy, he was by the law shut out from the
company and society of men, and so disabled to govern; although the right of
it still belonged unto him.

Object.
Ob. They allege likewise the example of Iehoiadah the high Priest, who deposed
Queen Athaliah from her kingdom, and set up young Ioash to be King, 2. Chron.
23. therefore the Pope has authority to depose Kings and Emperors. Answer.
Answ. Iehoiadah the high Priest was next to the King in blood, 2. Chro. 22.11.
and was one of the states of the land; who deposed her not alone, but by the
common consent of all the states and Peers of the land; as chap. 23.1.2. He
indeed is chiefly named, because he was the chief of them in blood; neither
did he set up Ioas, but helped to maintain his ^ight, which was usurped by
Attaliah: in a word, he protected the right heir, but could not himself, nor
did not dispose the kingdom unto him. And of this kind are all their
allegations: which yield no patronage at all to that usurped Papal authority,
but even the Pope himself ought to be subject to his Emperor, if he would
avoid his most just title of a most unjust usurper.

Use. 2. Hence also may be observed that the exemptio^ or immunitie of the
Clergy from the authority of the Civil Magistrate is wicked, and a kind of
rebellion: and this is the condition of the whole Roman Clergy. Object.
Ob. They plead that Kings and Princes of their bounty have granted these
privileges unto them. Answer.
Ans. The law of nature acknowledges a civil subjection: the law of God
straightly enioyneth it, and no law of any man may offer violence, or derogate
from either of these.

Thirdly, the Pope usurping a power to free subjects from their allegiance,
and their oath of obedience, has been for many hundred years a most wicked
instrument of rebellion, as the kingdoms of Europe have had too woeful
experience of. If here they say, the Pope may dispense with the laws of
kingdoms. I answer, were it so that he could dispense with humane laws of
Kings and Princes in their Countries and Provinces, (which is gross
usurpation) yet with what face dare he challenge to dispense with the laws of
God and nature?

Fourthly, we see hence what we are to esteem of the Roman Religion: namely,
as of a Religion to be abhorred, as are these seducers themselves, because it
is clean contrary to Christian Religion: which teaches to fear God and
honor the King: but the Roman Religion pretends to ^each men to fear God,
but puts down the honor of the King: Popish religion urges me^ to
forswear the honor of the king.
nay he that professes that Religion, must swear the flat contrary to the
Kings honor.

Fifthly, we are hence directed what to think of that oath of the supremacy
unto the Bishop of Rome, namely to be such a one as fights directly against
the law of God and nature; seeing it gives all ecclesiastical government unto
the Pope, which belongs properly to Kings and Princes in their several
dominions.

Sixthly, if every man must be subject to the power of the Magistrate for
conscience sake, then all wandering beggars and rogues, that pass from place to
place, being under no certain Magistracy or Ministry, nor joining themselves
to any set society in Church, or Commonwealth, are the plagues and banes of
both, and are to be taken as maine enemies of this ordinance of God: and
seeing a most excellent law is provided to restrain them, it is the part of
every good subject or Christian to set themselves for the executing,
strengthening and upholding of the same.

And speak evil of them which are in authority.] In these words the Apostle
shows how these false teachers pull down authority by their practice, as in
the former they did by their judgment: for when they cannot quite put down all
authority and Magistrates, they speak evil of them, and blaspheme those that
exercise the same: that is (as the word signifies) those that are in dignities
and glories: (...).
for that is his meaning, when he calls Princes by the name of Glories. Here
two things are to be considered: first their sin, [ speak euill*] secondly,
the amplification of their sin, partly in this verse, and partly in the next.
The sin is mentioned and condemned in Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not speak evil
of the Rulers of thy people. Eccles. 10. Curse not the King, no not in thy
heart, for the birds of the air shall bewray it. Which sin we should be so
far from, as that we should not receive any accusation against any Elder,
under two or three witnesses, 1. Timoth. 5 If we may not receive slanders
against Rulers, much less may we raise them.

Use. 1. See here as in a glass the common sin of these days, wherein the
common practice, yea and table talk of men is the censure of the doings of the
Magistrate, and the doctrine of the Minister. Paul when he called Ananias a
painted wall; Act. 13.5.
being reproved, answered, that he knew him not to be the high Priest, for
then he would not have reproched him: that is, he acknowledged him not, but
knew him rather to be an usurper, which made him use that boldness. Secondly, if
a man may not speak evil of a Ruler, then much less may any private man take
a sword in hand to take away the life of a Prince or Magistrate. David knew
that he was to succeed Saul in the kingdom, and that Saul sought his life
daily, and yet his heart smote him when finding Saul at advantage that he cut
off but the lap of his garment, whereas he might have as easily taken away his
life; the ground of his grief was, because he was the Lords anointed. 1.
Sam. 24.
Where take notice of the spirit that leads and rules those Romish vassals,
who are sent out into Christian lands with Commission to take away the lives of
the Lords anointed ones, Romish vassals authorized to take away the liue^ of
the Lords anointed ones, the lappes of whose garments they ought not to touch.
who will not stoop unto that Antichristian tyranny. Instruments of Satan they
are, inflamed by Diabolical fury; fighting for their Babylon with the weapon
of most monstrous and unnatural cruelty. Thirdly, we are on the contrary
taught hence to bless our Magistrates, especially the Lords anointed over us:
as also other inferior Magistrates; who although their persons may be mean,
yet are under the supreme, as he under God is a Steward and Deputy for our
wealth. The Apostle Paul wills that prayers be made for all men, but
especially for Kings and Princes; 1. Tim. 2.1.
and those that are under them in authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Jeremy wishes the people in
captivity to pray for Nebuchadnezzar an Heathen King, that under him they
might have peace. Hence is that good order commended unto us, whereby in our
public prayers we make solemn mention of our lawful Magistrates, testifying
both our desire of their good, and our thankfulness for their government.

Secondly, the amplification of their sin stands partly herein, that they
speak evil of Dignities, Glories, Majesty's, that is, of those whom God has
adorned with these: in detracting and detaining from them their due honor.

It may be here asked, why does the Holy Ghost call Magistrates by the names
of glory and dignity? Ans. For two causes: first, because the Lord has set
them in his own room and place, and accordingly honors them with titles
befitting the same. Psalm. 82.1. God stands in the assembly of Gods, that is,
of Magistrates; called Gods, not only because he has set the^ in his place;
but also because they have received a particular charge and commandment, and
therewith a power of executing his own judgments amongst men upon earth as his
deputies. 2. Chro. 19.6. They execute not the judgments of man, but of the
Lord. Secondly, these titles are given them, because the Lord does usually
furnish them with worthy and peculiar gifts (though not always of
sanctification) yet of regiment and government to be answerable to their
former designement, as of wisdom, courage, zeal, etc. 1. Sam. 10.9. when
Saul was made King, the Lord gave him such princely gifts, as it is said, God
gave him another heart, his heart was changed in regard of other gifts than
formerly he had: so when David was anointed King, and when Samuel had powered
the horn of oil upon his head, it is said, 1. Sam. 16.13. that the spirit of
the Lord came upon him, which furnished him with gifts and graces both of
regeneration and regiment also. In like manner the Lord took of the spirit of
Moses, and put it on the seventy Elders, Numb. 11.17. whereby they were
furnished with gifts of government, and enabled to bear rule* and judge justly
as Moses was: such titles therefore as these, are not ascribed unto them
without just cause. Yea, how can they be fitlier called than Glories? seeing
there is no greater glory in earth than to supply Gods room, and to be
enabled with gifts for the sufficient discharge of it.

Hence learn, that it is lawful for Princes to bear an outward pomp, in
diet, buildings, costly apparel, and troops of men, for they are dignities,
and their dignity being outward in regard of men, they may maintain it by
outward pomp, to procure more reverence and awe of men thereunto. So Agrippa
and Bernice came with great pomp and entered into the common hall: Act. 25.23.
which pomp is not there discommended, but rather approved, as by the
circumstances of the text appears.

Secondly, Magistrates ought especially to honor God, because he especially
honors them; this must they do by discountenancing and punishing vice, and
by setting up and maintaining true religion and virtue.

Thirdly, being in Gods place they are to execute justice, without corruption
or partiality, in the face and fear of God. 2. Chro. 9.7. Seeing the
judgment is the Lords, let the fear of God be upon you, take heed and do
it. Deuteronomy. 1.17. Ye shall have no respect of persons in judgment, but shall
hear the small as well as the great: ye shall not fear the face of man, for
the judgment is Gods: and herein stands a great part of their glory.

Fourthly, we are in all lawful things to yield free subjection and obedience
unto our Magistrates and governors, even as unto God himself, whose room
they are in; which duty the child owes also to his father, the servant to his
Master, because they also are set over them in Gods stead.

Fifthly, hence also is it lawful for us to give to Princes the titles of
Majesty and Grace, because it has pleased the holy Ghost to ascribe them unto
them, and by their titles to commend their persons and places unto us; yea and
to furnish them with such gifts of Magistracy, as that they become not only
naked titles, but just significations of the true honor which God has graced
them withal.

Verse. 9. Yet Michael the Archangell when he strove against the Devil, and
disputed about the body of Moses, durst not blame him with cursed speaking,
but said: The Lord rebuke thee.
IN this verse is laid down another reason, amplifying their sin of these
seducers, by a comparison from the greater to the less: and thus it stands:
Michael the Archangell durst not so much as rail on the Devil himself, much
less may these upon Magistrates who are Gods: and consequently their sin is
heinous, who dare open their mouths to revile Princes and Magistrates. Here
one question is moved, namely: whence the Apostle had this history of the
disputation between Michael and the Devil, concerning the body of Moses,
seeing it is not to be found in the Scriptures? I answer, the substance of it
is in the Scripture, although though not the circumstances. For in Deuteronomy. 34.6.
is said, that the Lord buried Moses, but no man knows of his sepulcher till
this day. There is the ground of the history: the other particular concerning
the contention of the Archangell and the Devil, wi^h this manner of rebuking,
is not found in the old Testament. Quest. Where then had he this? Ans. Either
from some book then extant among the Jews, which is not now to be found: or
else from some tradition which passed among the Jews from hand to hand, as
many things did: as that 2. Timot. 3.8. where the Apostle says, that Iannes
and Iambres withstood Moses; the history of which is not found in the old
Testament.

Hence the Papists conclude, that the word written is not sufficient and
perfect in and of it self, unless the unwritten word be added unto it, that
is, that word which is given by tradition, both which (say they) make a perfect
word, but neither is perfect or sufficient alone; grounding their opinion
hence, that Jude alleges an example out of a tradition which is not found in
Scripture. But that is an heretical doctrine and untrue, seeing the perfection
of a thing is not to be measured by every thing that is wanting unto it, but
by the perfect end of it: for perfection is taken from the end. Whence I reason
thus: If the written word be perfect and sufficient to the end to which it is
ordained, it is every way perfect. But it is perfect and sufficient to that
end: namely to the glory of God in working out perfectly the faith and
salvation of man: and is in nothing wanting for the atchieuing of this end, but
sufficiently teaches all things to be believed and done, and gives perfect
direction concerning faith and manners. Ioh. 20.31. These things are written
that they might believe, and believing might have life thorough his name. Romans
15.4. Whatsoever things are written, are written for our learning, that we
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope: and therefore
the word written is every way most sufficient and absolutely perfect, and need
no addition or tradition to help forward this end.

Ob. This place is a tradition and not written, and many other true traditions
were never written: besides that the Church may make traditions. Ans. We grant
many true traditions are not in Scripture, but such they are as a man may be
ignorant of, and not prejudice his salvation. Again, the Church has a power,
and has had privilege to make constitutions and laws, which were to be
known and received: but these are such as only concern the orderly government
of the Church, and are not necessary to salvation.

Ob. But some traditions are necessary to salvation, which are not contained
in the written word, and they allege two: first, in Romans 12.6. that Gods word
must be tried by the rule of faith, and so also by the same rule expounded.
This rule of faith is nothing else (by their exposition) but a general consent
in the hearts of all true Catholics; together with the Pope assenting with
them, which of necessity we must believe; and yet (say they) it is not in the
Scripture: and therefore some things must of necessity be believed which are
not in the Scripture. Ans. The rule of faith is not such a crooked rule as they
would thrust upon the world by their wicked exposition; but the right rule of
faith is the plain word of God, every way absolutely directing in all points
of faith and love, 2. Tim. ^.5. Paul wishes Timothy to keep the true pattern
of wholesome words in faith and love: which is nothing else but the testimony
of Scripture, in points of faith and love, comprised in the Decalogue and
Apostles Creed. The rule of faith therefore in expounding Scripture is
Scripture it self. The second thing necessary by their doctrine to be
believed, not contained in Scripture, is, that the Canonical Scripture is Gods
word: which truth is absolutely necessary to salvation to be believed, but
cannot otherwise be known or believed but only by the tradition of the
Church. Ans. As every other Art and Science has certain principles of truth
to prove all other precepts by: but themselves are to be proved by none* so
also has Divinity the chief of al other Sciences: of which kind this is one
principle; that Canonical Scripture is Gods word, which not granted, infers
a destruction of all other divine rules: this is a truth therefore confirmed,
not a thing testified from some other, but as a ground of it self. Secondly,
in divine matters says goes before knowledge, which in humane things is
clean contrary: for if a man would know whether fire be hot, let him put his
hand unto it, he shall have experience of it, and then he shall believe it: but
in divine things first a man gives credit, and yields consent to the word,
and then has experimental knowledge: for although faith has his knowledge,
Rom 4.18.
yet experimental knowledge follows faith. Abraham believed above hope, here
faith went before knowledge. Ioh. 7.27. If ye do the will of my Father, ye
shall know whether the doctrine be of God, nor no. Thus then we may conceive
it, the tenor of the word of God is this: Thus says the Lord. If the question
now be whether the Lord said thus or no: I answer, to believe the Church
herein before God is sacrilege: but herein we are first to yield assent unto
God, and then after this experimental knowledge will follow, that Canonical
Scripture is the word of God. Thirdly, we know that Scripture is Gods word, by
Scripture, and not by the Church: out of which being in humility taught and
acquainted with the excellent matter of it and manner of writing, the end the
glory of God, and our own salvation; we cannot but have sufficient
persuasion of the author of it, and that it can proceed from none other but
God himself. Thus notwithstanding the allegations of the adversaries, the
written word retains that perfection, which needs no tradition to
strengthen or further it in that end to which it is appointed. Now to the
reason it self, amplifying this sin in this verse which contains three
points to be considered. First, the person that durst not rail. Secondly, the
goodness of his cause, which was very just, and yet he durst not rail upon the
Devil himself. Thirdly, the manner of his speech: The Lord rebuke thee.

The person that durst not rail was Michael the Archangell, whom some affirm
to be Christ himself: others, that he is some chief, arch and principal
Angel; which opinion is more probable. For first, the Apostle speaks of him
as one in subjection, and standing in awe, not daring to break the law of God,
for he durst not revile the Devil. Secondly, in 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. The Lord
Christ shall come to judgment with the sound of a Trumpet, and the voice of an
Archangell; where is a plain distinction between Christ who should come in
the clouds, and the Archangell. Thirdly, Peter explaineth it, speaking the
same thing, and says: The Angels give not railing judgment against them, 2.
Pet. 2.11. It is more probable then that by Michael was meant a principal
Angel, rather than Christ.

Doctr. First, from the person we learn that there be distinctions and
degrees of Angels; there be Angels and an Archangell. Quest. Is there but one
Archangell? Ans. The Scripture speaking of Archangels, uses always the
singular number, never mentioning more than one: and where the Scripture
resolves not, we are not to determine: yet I condemn not those who have
probably held that there are more than one. Secondly, we have here an example
of Angelical meeknes and modesty, Tit. 3.1. Put them in remembrance that they
be subject to principality, and speak evil of no man* but show all meeknes
unto all (...)* the contrary practice of railing, slandering, and obtrecting
is a property of the Devil, whence he has his name, Reu. 12.10. the Accuser
of the brethren: and the Adversary. 2. Pet. 5 8. who is ever ready with one
accusation or other to stand up against every man: the malicious man, whose
malice caused him to stand up against Job, and falsely accuse him of hypocrisy
unto Gods own face. Let slanderers and backbiters of their brethren see hence
whom they imitate, and most lively resemble.

Secondly, consider the goodness of Michaels cause, which was this: It was the
will of God that Moses body should be buried in a secret place unknown to any
man, to prevent and avoid al occasion of superstition and Idolatry among the
Jews. The Devil on the contrary would discover it, that so the Israelites
might fall to Idolatry before it; herein the Archangell resisted him, and
strove with him for the performance of the will of God and the maintenance of
his true worship: and yet in this good cause Michael durst not revile the Devil
himself. In this cause consider two things. First, the fight and contention
between Michael and the Devil. Secondly, the cause and occasion of it about
Moses body. In the former we may observe that there is a sharp and serious
contention between good and bad Angels; In these conflicting days of ours not
men only but the Angels have their combat^.
in which the good Angels labor to defend all that are in Christ, against the
rage and fury of the Devil and his angels. As Psalm. 34.8. The Angels of the
Lord pitch their tents round about those that fear him. And on the contrary,
the Devil and wicked spirits cast about how to destroy the bodies and souls
of men. 1. Pet. 5. Our adversary the Devil goes about continually seeking
whom he can devour. This combat concerns and is conversant about either
first the persons, or secondly the societies of men. The fight about the
persons concerns either infants, or men of years. First, for infants the
Devil seeks how to spoil and destroy them (especially those of elect and
faithful parents) in regard of their weakness and tenderness both of mind and
body: but the Angels of the Lord have charge given the^ to defend them against
this malice of Satan. As Psalm. 91.12. They shall bear thee up in their arms,
that is, they shall be as nurces to bear them in their arms, preserving them
from danger. Mat. 18.10. Despise not one of these little ones: for their Angels
always behold the face of my father which is in heaven. Secondly, concerning
men of years, the devil and his angels strive to drive them out of their
ways and callings, and to lead them into crooked paths; as he would have had
Christ to have leapt from off the top of the pinnacle, although he had an
ordinary way to go down: and have made stones bread: but the good Angels on
the other side are given us to keep us in all our ways, Psalm. 91. and so under
the protection of the Almighty. The second strife, namely about societies,
concerns either first families, secondly Churches, or thirdly Common wealths;
all which the Devil strives to ouerturne: as the good Angels to preserve and
maintain them. First, the Devils endeavor is utterly to overthrow all
families, of Christian men especially: he robbed Job of all his substance, slew
his servants, and children: but the good Angels guard and defend them. Jacob
had the Angels of God defending him and his family from the fury of Esau,
Genesis 31.1. Psalm. 91.10. when the plague and pestilence prevails against the
ungodly, the good Angels keep it off from coming near the tabernacles of the
righteous. Secondly, in Churches and congregations, the wicked Angels strive to
corrupt the word, Sacraments, and all the Ministry; or to make it fruitless,
every way to their power hindering the good success thereof. The Devil
offers himself to be a lying spirit in the mouth of all Ahabs Prophets. 1.
King. 2^.
Zach. 3.1. He stands at Iehoshuah his right hand, to withstand him in his
office. He seweth tares in the field where the good seed of the word is sown,
Mat. 13. Hence are those false doctrines of forbidding meats, and marriages,
called the doctrine of devils, 1. Tim. 4.1. He hindered Paul once or twice from
his journey to the Thessal. to confirm them, 1 Thessalonians. 2.18. He raises
persecution against the Church: for he is said to cast some of the Church at
Smir^a into prison, Reu. 2.10. The good Angels on the contrary fight against
them, for the good of the Church, the furtherance of the Gospel, and
preservation of the true worship of God. The Law was given by their ministry,
Galat. 3. The tidings of salvation and the doctrine of the Gospel was first
preached by Angels, Luke 2.9. The Angel brought Philip to instruct the Eunuch,
Act. 8.26. as also to baptize him, verse. 38. delivered Peter out of prison,
Act. 12.11. Thirdly, the wicked Angels seek to supplant Commonwealths and
kingdoms. Satan moved David to number the people, by which sin he wasted
70000. of his people. The good Angels fight in their defense. The Angel told
Daniel that he fought against the Prince of the kingdom of Persia for the
Jews, Dan. 10.13. The Angel smote of Zenacheribs army in one night, an
hundred fourscore and five thousand, who were enemies to the Church, 2. King.
19. Ob. How can the Devil thus furiously fight against persons and societies,
seeing he was never seen, neither can this fight be perceived of us? Ans. As
he is a spirit, so his fight is spiritual, not easily discerned by the eye of
flesh: for we fight not against flesh and blood, Ephesians. 6.12.
but against principalities, and spiritual wickednesses. Again, he fights
not only in his own person, (...) by his instruments and accomplices, whom he
daily raises up against the persons of men, and all humane societies and this
fight we may in part perceive.

Use. First, note hence the dignity of every believer, who have the Angels,
yea and as here the Archangels, to put themselves in garrison for their
defense* for from Christ it is. Secondly, we are with all thankfulness to
acknowledge Gods providence and protection especially in this land* whose peace
and prosperity has bin so long established unto our persons and societies,
our families, Church and Commonwealth* whereas if Satan had might to his
malice, no^ one of these should stand a moment. Thirdly, in all dangers our
comfort must hence be raised, that though Satan's cruelty be never so great*
yet we have the guard and defense of the good Angels to keep us in all our
ways* and these are too many, and too strong for him, and all the power he
can raise against us. Thus was Elis^^^s servant comforted: There be more with
us than against us* the good Angels are more powerful for our good* than the
wicked are to harm and hurt us. Fourthly, ^^nce learn to make conscience of
every sin in thought, word, and deed: for admitting and commi^ing any sin,
we trecherously turn against those that fight for our defense, and do what we
can to grieve and drive them away from us, and so put our selves in the power
of Satan to be led at his pleasure into sin, as also into the dangers of it.

The second point in this cause of contention is, the occasion of it, namely*
it was about Moses his body. Michael would not suffer the Devil to reueile
where Moses body was laid, so to sow the seeds of Idolatry, whereby Gods
true worship might be ouerturned: for he cared not for the body of Moses, but
to bring in Idolatry by means of it. Hence note that the wicked Angels fight
not so much against the bodies of m^, as against their souls* nor contend so
much to overthrow them in their outward es^ate, or to deprive them of their
goods, (...), drink, etc. as in their inward, to ^^est from them their
spiritual things, namely Gods true worship and the things and means which
(...) to the maintaining and (...) We have to fight (...) in high places*
Ephesians. 6.^2. But (...) may as well (...) in spiritual things* for therein bend
they their principal forces. The (...) of the devil is to blind the minds
of Infidels, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should not shine
unto them. 2. Cor. 4.4. This same Serpent that be guiled Eve thorough his
subtlety* seeks how to corrupt men's minde^ from that simplicity which is in
Christ* 2. Cor. 11.3.

Use. First, we must keep that which is committed unto us. 1. Tim. 6.20. The
treasure which God has put into our hands is his true worship* sound doctrine,
right use of Sacraments: al which seeing Satan most desires to break off or
corrupt* we ought accordingly to strive* how we may preserve them to our
selves, and have them continued in their purity to our posterity. Secondly,
in that Satan seeks to deprive the soul of spiritual things, we must (...)
our graces, and become more vigilant in maintaining, and adding also unto our
knowledge, faith, love, hope, and other our graces; seeing Satan will si^t v^
to make us ^^chaffe, we must watch and pray that our faith fail not.

Thirdly, mark who is the author of Idolatry, namely the devil himself, and
of that especial part of it, The devil has prevailed with the Papists and
drawn them to that idolatry which he could not bring among the Jews.
which then he could not effect; but has now obtained in that Idolatrous
Church of Rome, namely, in worshipping of Images, stocks and stones, relikes of
Saints, and of the wooden Cross; yea arms, legs, hands, feet, and fingers
of Martyrs: whence is all this but from the devil himself, who for the same
purpose would have reueiled where Moses body was buried by God? Yea so far
have they gone on in this delusion, that they are become spectacles of folly
to the whole world: for if John Baptist had had so many heads as the Papists
brag of, he had been a monster of men: besides* though the Cross whereon Christ
was crucified was no greater than as ordinary man might bear; yet so many
several pieces thereof they pretend themselves to have in several places as
would load a ship. Ob. They say they had all those ^^likes by revelation
(...) Ans. These (...) are but (...) illusion^ to maintain Idolatry: besides
that (...) (the word being (...) perfect (...) in all matters to be believed
or done) unwritten revelations are no proofs of doctrine, but are lu^^ly to be
suspected.

The third thing in the verse is the manner of his speech, in which observe
three things: first, what speech the Archangell would not use: He would not
speak evil. Secondly, what speech he used; The Lord rebuke th^^* Thirdly, the
reason or cause of both; because he durst not speak evil.

First of this cause, as being first in nature, which is s^^d to be fear. Now
to know what kind of fear it was, consider that the (...) is a threefold
fear: first, from entire nature: secondly, from the corruption of nature:
thirdly, from grace. The first is a natural property, whereby the creature
seek^ to preserve it self, and to shun danger: which fear is not (...) in
it self; for it was in Christ when he said his soul was heavy even unto the
death: and, if (...) possible let this cup pass from me: but this is not here
meant. The second fear proceeding from corruption of nature in men and Angels,
is that servile fear when the creature fears nothing but due and deserved
punishment, the conscience being guilty unto it self and accusing for sin,
and the heart destitute of faith and love of God; which if it were present
would cast out this slavish fear; which is no other than the fear even of the
Devils themselves: who believe and tremble, Iam. 2.19. but neither was this the
fear of the Angel. The third fear is from grace, and it is a gift of the
spirit of God (who therefore is called the spirit of fear) working in men and
Angels a care to please, and a fear of displeasing God in all things: this is
the fear here meant which was in the Angel. In which consider three things
further: first, the beginning of it, which is faith even in the Angels
themselves; whereby they believe the power, justice, sovereignty, and Lordship
of God over them; and that they must be subject and obedient thereunto: but in
man it is a faith, apprehending the mercy and favor of God reconciled by
Christ: this fear in Angels and men therefore is the fruit of their faith.
Secon^^y, the property of (...) is to make the subject of it to fear the
offense of God (...) evil of the world, to (...) properly* (...) of all*
because by it God is displeased: and in the next (...) of judgment
consequently, but (...) the first place. Psalm. 119.12. (...) trembles for
fear of thee, and I (...) stand of thy judgments. This was the religious
fear of David* first, a fearing of Gods offense, and then a standing in awe of
his judgments: thirdly, the use of it: which is to make man and Angel make
conscience of sin. Exodus (...) the Midwiues spare the Hebrew (...)* it will not
suffer the Angel hereto revile the Devil. The fear of God (says Solomon)
causes to (...) every (...) way* yea it frames to obedience, Psalm. 19.9.
and i^ (...), because it keeps the heart from defiling it self. Our duty
hence is to pray that the Lord would put into our heart^ this religious fear,
which they contain us in awe of his Majesty, and so keep us from offenses,
wherein we may resemble this Angel: as also to be a welspring of life unto
us, Prou. 14.27
not only (...) escape the snares of death, but to quicken and provoke us in
the w^^es of life everlasting. Secondly, we must avoid the sin which the
Angel was (...) of, namely the boldness of sinning especially in these days
wherein then adventure and rush upon sin without fear or shame.

The second point herein is, what speech the Archangell would not use, that is,
cursed speaking, or railing judgment. Which to know what it is, observe the
differences of judgment; which is twofold, either public or private.
Public judgment i^ when a man is called by God to judge the creature; and
this is twofold: first of the Magistrate; secondly of the Minister. The
Magistrate is called by God to seek out the misdemeanors of men, and
according to the offense is to pronounce a righteous sentence, (...) to the
taking away (if the cause (...)) of the temporal life it self. The Minister
is also in the name of God to pronounce the curse of the law upon unrepentant
sinners; and the promise of the Gospel unto the penit^nt. Secondly, private
judgment is, when the creature passes judgment against ^^other, without
calling from God, but upon private grudge, anger, stomach, and revenge; this
is here called railing judgment; and it is practiced three ways: first, in
speaking falsehoods and untruths against others. Secondly, in speaking truths,
but with intent of slandering and detracting from the good name of others.
Thirdly, in misconstruing men's sayings and doings to the worst part, when they
may be taken in the better: this railing speech the Angel durst not use.

Hence we learn to make conscience of this sin of slandering, reproching,
and reuiling others, from which the Archangell abstained dealing even with the
Devil himself: but many of us who can utter the proverb, That it is a shame
to belie the Devil; are contented, yea and ready to belie, and detract from
the children of God our brethren by this railing judgment. Some will say, what
may we never use this kind of judgment? Ans. Never, no not against the Devil:
but if we would take up judgment against any creature, let it be against our
own selves for our sins; here we may pass sentence freely, and so escape
the judgment of God: as for others we are to judge by the judgment of love,
which hops, speaks, thinks, and suspecteth the best, and covers the
worst, even a multitude of sins.

The third point is the speech which the Archangell used in these words: The
Lord rebuke thee. Which words are a form of prayer, in which he commends and
remitteth revenge unto God, desiring that the Lord, to whom judgment
belongs, would restrain, correct and repay the Devil for his malice. Here
it may be asked: what shall we do when we are wronged? Ans. Learn of the
Angel not to requite and repay evil for evil, neither in action, speech, or
affection; but leave all revenge unto the Lord. Zachariah being stoned to death
unjustly, desired no revenge, 1. Chro. 24.22.
but said: The Lord see and require it. Christ himself being accused before
Pilate, answered nothing; and when he died he prayed for those who crucified
him, Matthew. 17. Again, when a man will needs revenge himself of a wrong done
against him, he takes upon him the person of the accuser, witness, Judge, and
executioner; which is against all justice and equity: besides that the Lord
challenges this as his own prerogative; Vengeance is mine, and I will repay.

Ob. But did not Elias pray for fire from heaven in way of revenge, whereby he
destroyed his enemies? Ans. He did: but by instinct from God, which is as much
as a commandment.

Ob. But Christ when he was smitten, said: If I have well said, why smitest
thou me. Ans. We must put a difference between lawful defense of our selves
in our good cause, and the offense of our adversaries. Far was Christ herein
from revenge, and so must we.

Ob. But this is hard and impossible unto flesh and blood. Ans. Yea but we
profess our selves to be children of our Father in heaven, and therefore we
are to have more than flesh and blood in us; even that grace of God which
carries believers further in Christ's school, than flesh and blood can lead
them. Use. Scholars and learned men that are to defend Gods cause and the
truth of religion, yea even against very heretics, must abstain from reuiling
speeches; if we be reviled by the pe^ of the adversary, we must commit the
injury to God. Secondly, people that go to law with others, for most part
herein offend, that they do it in way of revenge, and to wrecke their malice
upon their adversary; whereas the right use of sui^e in law is only to defend
a man's right, all revenge laid aside. Thirdly, hence men of valor are taught
not to take a challenge into the field, it is an honor not to accept of it,
seeing revenge is to be left unto God, let the wrong be never so great.
Fourthly, when men be at odds and difference, it is not lawful to chide,
braule, contend, cry, and lift up the voice in threatenings, seeing all these
are degrees and kinds of revenge, which we must leave unto God. Qu. What must
a man do that is to encounter with the Devil, either by temptation,
possession, or otherwise? Ans. He must follow the practice of the Archangel,
even fly to God by prayer, and entreat him to rebuke him. The like practice
must be taken up by those who are to deal with heretics, who seek the
overthrow of religion: The Lord must be entreated to restrain the malice of
the Devil, that he may not in himself or instruments prevail to corrupt or
repress; much less suppress or supplant the truth.

Verse. 10. But these speak evil of those things which they know not, and
whatsoever things they know naturally, as beasts which are without reason; in
those things they corrupt themselves.
IN the former part of this verse is laid down a third argument, which
amplifieth the sin of these deceivers; thus framed: For a man to give
sentence, and condemn that which he knows not, is a point of great
injustice and rashness: But these men condemning Magistracy, condemn a thing
they know not: and therefore are justly accused of rashness and injustice. The
like s^^ne of these seducers has been too usual in all ages. In the days of
the Apostles themselves, the Gentiles accounted the doctrine of the Gospel but
foolishnes: the Jews, an offense; and yet neither of them knew what it was.
The same rashness is at this day to be descried in the Church of Rome, who have
denounced the sentence of excommunication against our Churches, and condemn
the Protestants for heretics, when the most of them never knew our doctrine,
nor never heard what we could say for our selves; yea most injuriously they
mistake us in sundry maine points of doctrine; as when we teach that works
do not justify a man before God, they cry out and say we condemn all good
works. The same fault is exceeding rise amongst us in these days: for let a
man make conscience of his ways and endeavor to please God, he is presently
branded with names of reproach, by those whose tongues are nimble to speak
evil of things they never knew; who are to know that a man cannot be too
precise in keeping the commandments of God, and that themselves have made a
promise in Baptism to walk in no other ways, and ought to renew the same so
often as they come to the Lords table.

And whatsoever things they know naturally.] In the rest of this verse is set
down the third sin of these deceivers, which is the sin of intemperance,
standing in the immoderate use of meat and drink, apparel, etc. Touching
this sin two things are propounded: first, the proper cause of it, that is
natural knowledge, in these words: Whatsoever they know naturally.] Secondly,
the sin it self, or the property of it: In those things they corrupt
themselves. The cause is, because they are guided with a natural knowledge,
like the brute beasts which are without reason. There be three kinds of
knowledge incident unto the creature; first, natural knowledge, arising from
the instinct of nature common to man and beast, and consisting in the senses of
sight, taste, touching, etc. by the benefit whereof the beast it self can
discern what is food fit for it self, and what is not; what is profitable,
and what is hurtful and unprofitable for it: unto which is joined a natural
appetite, by the benefit of which the creature can choose or refuse his food and
meat in season. The second is reasonable knowledge proper to man, and is
nothing else, but the light of understanding, whereby he reaches far higher,
and discerns meat, drink, apparel, and rest, to be Gods good gifts, and
knows the civil use of them; with the which is joined election of will,
whereby he can choose or refuse the civil or uncivil, honest, or dishonest use
of them. This knowledge is in all men, for even the Gentiles themselves do by
nature the things contained in the law, Romans 2.14. that is, ciuilly and
outwardly: thus many of the Heathen have excelled in civil carriage, and
practice of justice, temperance, and other civil virtues. The third is
spiritual knowledge, not proceeding either from natural instinct, or reason
it self; but from the enlightening of the spirit of God: and it has sundry
fruits. First, it enableth men to know these things in their right causes, as
that these gifts of meats, drinks, and such like proceed from God, not as he
is the God of nature only; but as by grace in Christ he is our God, yea our
Father, and so they become pledges of his special mercy; seeing they are now
restored again to the believer, having been formerly lost in Adams fall.
Secondly, this knowledge causes men to know them in the due measure of their
goodness and excellency, rightly discerning them from spiritual blessings: so
as the heart shall not be set upon them in the first place, but upon the other
as of far higher esteem; yea they shall be counted as dung in regard of
these. Thirdly, it instructs men in the right use of them, namely when it
works this persuasion in their hearts, that til their persons please God they
can never use them well; and then only he is pleased in their use of these,
when as their persons first please him. Qu. What is the thing then condemned in
these seducers? Ans. The very sin condemned is, that in the use of the
creatures of God they are not guided by reasonable, much less this spiritual
knowledge; but only by nature, sense, and appetite, as the beast is, and no
otherwise, which is the cause of all intemperance.

Hence note the proper cause of the abuse of all Gods blessings unto
covetousness, pride, surfeiting, drunkenness, and other sins of that kind:
namely, because though men have by nature the use of reason; yet in the use of
these things they lay it aside, and follow their own sense and appetite: so
far are they from being guided by that higher knowledge which is wrought by
the spirit of God.

Secondly, from the reprehension we are taught to labor for spiritual
knowledge, whereby we may be led into the right use of these temporal things;
for then and not before shall we use them as pledges of Gods mercy in Christ
unto us (as the beasts cannot) and shall hardly be drawn to their abuse in
riot and intemperance, as these seducers were.

Thirdly, in that they are said to be guided only, as the beast which is
without reason, that is by nature, sense, and appetite: note the practice of
the Devil which is to keep men (if he can) in their natural knowledge, and
will not suffer them to attain to that which is spiritual: yea and which is
more, he corrupts also that natural knowledge which men have. A notable
experience hereof we have in the Church of Rome; which of a famous Church is
become heretical, and schismatic; the reason of it is, because the Devil
has turned all their religion and doctrine, into a natural doctrine and
religion: the maine points whereof are grounded upon natural reason, and the
learning and Philosophy of the Heathen and Gentiles. As justification by
works, merits, Purgatory, with the rest. Others not a few amongst our selves
also are deluded by this subtilty of Satan; who suffers many men to live
ciuilly and honestly among their neighbors, but will not brook that they rise
any higher: they must content themselves to live by natural knowledge: Hence
many men plead they know enough, namely to love God above all, and their
neighbor as themselves: and that God is merciful, etc. which is nothing but a
sleight of the Devil still to hold them in their natural knowledge, and so
within his own power.

The second point is the sin it self, and property of it: In those things
they corrupt themselves.] This sin of intemperance causes men in the abuse of
meat, drink, and apparel, to corrupt themselves: here then are two things to
be spoken of, wherein the whole nature of intemperancie is sufficiently
comprised. First of the abuse of the creatures: secondly of his corruption that
thus abuses them. Concerning the former; the abuse of the creatures is four
ways: first, in excess, when men use them beyond their calling, ability, or
that which nature requires; this makes the heart heavy: forbidden by Christ,
Luke 21.34. Secondly, in curiosity, when men are not content with ordinary
meat, drink, apparel; but devise new fashions of apparel, and new kinds of
ways of stirring up and whetting of appetite. Thirdly, in affection, when men
so addict themselves to meats and drinks, as they cannot be without them. The
Minister must not be one that loves to sit at the wine, nor given to wine. 1.
Tim. 3.3 1. Cor. 7.30
The affection is here condemned, when he cannot sit without the pot at his
elbow; for else it is indifferent, and for his health sake he may drink a
little wine. Paul wills that the joy in the creature be as no joy. Those
also are reproved that drink not for strength, Eccles. 10.17.
but for drink sake: for although they neither are drunk nor surfeit, yet this
very affection is a sin. Fourthly, in time, when these good creatures are
used unseasonably. Eccles. 10.16. We be to the land whose Princes rise early
to eat. A woe is also denounced against those, that rise early to drink wine,
Isai. 5.11. that is, out of season. The rich man for that he was clad in
purple, and fared deliciously every day, is branded with a note of
intemperance, in not observing this distinction of times. These be the ways
whereby the creatures are abused.

The second point is, how intemperate persons in these things corrupt
themselves: namely four ways: first, in regard of their bodies, upon which by
their sin of intemperance they call sundry sicknesses, diseases, yea and
hasten their death. Secondly, they deface Gods image, making themselves worse
than the beasts themselves. Thirdly, they destroy their souls; for no
drunkard, or riotous person shall inherit heaven, 1. Cor. 3. Fourthly, they
overthrow their families in wasting their substance, to the maintaining of
their intemperance, and so bring ruin to the places where they live.

Use. In these seducers we have a glass, wherein to behold the state of our
days and times; in which intemperance has taken place not only in profane
houses, but eue^ in religious places, and where reformation is professed. A
common practice it is to drink with glasses, without feet, which must never
rest; also by the bell, the die, the douzen, the yard, and other measures, and
then use Tobacco or other means to sharpen appetite still an horrible sin
exceeding this sin of these seducers themselves. Secondly, seeing intemperance
brings just corruption, and in the end destruction upon the offenders, we
must make conscience of sobriety and temperance: this is the end of Gods grace
which has appeared, to teach us to live soberly, Tit. 2.12. And whosoever
cannot obtain thus much of himself to deny the abuse of creatures, will never
attain to the denial of himself for Christ his sake, and is as yet a man of
no religion.

But for the defending of this murdering sin, some things are alleged.

No face is so (...) but shall (...) painter.
1. Ob. Genesis 43. vlt. Joseph and his brethren did eat and drink, and were
drunk together. Hagge 1.6. The people are threatened to drink, but not to
drunkenness: wherefore drunkenness is not unlawful; yea it is a curse to drink
and not to be drunk. Ans. These places may indeed be thus translated; but then
drunkenness is taken two ways: first, for excess in drinking: of which the
places alleged speak not. Secondly, for liberal or plentiful drinking, and
this may be done in a holy manner. So Joseph with his brethren eat and drank
liberally and plentifully; but not excessiuely: so the people were threatened in
Hagge to drink, but not to sa^ietie and plentifulnes.

2. Ob. Ioh. 2. It is said the guests had well drunk; yet Christ turned water
into wine still, and commanded the Ministers to draw forth. Ans. This only
shows what we may do, namely, use the creatures of God in plentiful and
liberal manner, upon such occasions as this; but justifies not intemperance,
or excess in the use of them.

3. Ob. It is an ancient rule, that in some old and lingering diseases it is
good to be drunk; therefore it is lawful upon some occasion to be drunk.
Ans. This cannot be done in good conscience, being an unlawful means to cure
any disease, though old and used.

4. Ob. But some say they can drink and never be drunk, they can bear more
away than two or three. Ans. W^e unto them that are strong to drink wine and
strong drink; Isai. 5.22.
there is a curse of God against them who use needless drinking, though they
never surfeit nor be drunk. Q^. For what ends may we use the creatures, and in
what manner? Ans. The lawful end of their use is twofold: first, for
necessity to preserve life and health: secondly, for our lawful and honest
delight. Psalm. 104.14. God gives bread to strengthen the heart, and oil also
to make his countenance glad. Christ suffered a woman to power a box of
precious ointment upon his head: himself was at a feast in Galeley and forbad
not the liberal use of wine. Secondly, for the manner and measure we must know
that one man cannot herein be a rule to another, one man's stomach and health
craves more, another less. But every man must observe this rule of sobriety:
that he have always an eye to spiritual exercises; as prayer, hearing of the
word, meditation, as also to the works and duties of his special calling; and
so much as fitteth a man unto these is his measure: and when a man by the
creatures makes himself heavy and unfit for these, he has exceeded his
measure.

Verse. 11. W^e unto them, for they have followed the way of Caine, and are cast
away by the deceit of Balams wages, and perish in the gainsaying of Core.
IN the former words of the verse, [ W^e unto them] is laid down the
conclusion of the principal argument of the Epistle, namely, that these
seducers shall be destroyed: having taken unto themselves liberty of sinning;
which he has already proved by a particular enumeration of the sins, unto
which they were addicted: and further amplifieth that second part of the
reason, by the reckoning up of diverse other sins, both in this verse, and in
the rest unto the twentieth. First of the conclusion; W^e unto them.] Here first
it may be demanded, why or how the Apostle dare pronounce such a peremptory
sentence against them, and that of everlasting condemnation; seeing the
Archangell durst not pass judgment, no not against the Devil himself? Ans.
There be two grounds of this practice: first, God gives to all Prophets,
Apostles and Ministers the power of the keys; whereby they retain and bind
up some men's sins to destruction, as also to remit and loose the sins of some
others: in both which they pronounce judgment generally. Secondly, God gave
yet a further power unto Prophets and Apostles (which is denied now to
ordinary Ministers) whereby revealing unto them his special judgments
against particular persons, he made them his instruments to pronounce these
his judgments against men, even in particular. Thus David, Psalm. 109. cursed
particular persons. Paul curses Alexander the Coppersmith, 2. Tim. 4. and Gal.
5.12. Would to God they were even cut off that trouble you: and by the same
spirit of revelation the Apostle discerned this woe most certainly to befall
these seducers. Use. Hence the Papists conclude, that Prophets, and Apostles,
and consequently the Popes, may make laws to bind the conscience, because they
have power over it; it being lawful for them to curse body and soul. Answ. A
creature may be cursed two ways: first, by imposing a curse and inflicting it
upon the body, soul, or conscience: this is the peculiar curse of God,
resting in his power alone, and is not committed to Prophets, Apostles, or
Ministers; for it argues such a power over the soul as may save or destroy
it. Secondly, by foretelling and pronouncing a curse to come, which God will
inflict; and this is that which belongs to Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers:
but this argues no power at al over the conscience. Secondly, some hence may
conceive that they have warrant to curse other creatures, man or beast, seeing
the Apostle uses it. Ans. This practice of the Apostle (having an
extraordinary spirit of revelation) is no rule for any man, no not for the
Minister ordinarily called. Our rule left us by Christ is to bless, and not
curse, Mat. 5.44. Romans 12.14. which must be understood of particular persons,
for otherwise the Minister has authority to accurse impenitent sinners in
general; but not this or that particular person; no not in Gods cause: for he
knows not what shall be the future estate of this or that man in particular:
much less may private men in private causes use cursings or imprecations
against others: which condemns their wicked practice, who in their anger and
impatience break out into cursing of their children, servants, friends, yea or
enemies; our contrary duty must be to bless, as we are called unto blessing.
Thirdly, Christian meeknes must be tempered with Christian zeal*
mark the Apostles disposition; they were themselves most meek in dealing with
men, who called others unto meeknes; their own patient minds were known unto
all men in all the matters of men: but when Gods glory was called into
question, and the salvation of men likely to be hindered, they lay aside their
meekenes, and put on severity, and roughnes, their zeal in Gods matters would
not admit such lenity and patience, as toward men in men's matters they were
willing to exercise. They had an Apostolical r^d, which in such cases they
used against offenders. Moses the meekest man upon the earth, when he saw the
Israelites worship the golden Calfe, was so incensed with wrath, that he brake
the Tables which were in his hands, and took his sword, and together with the
Levites slew three thousand of them the same day, Exodus 32.27. Christ himself
though he would not break a bruised reed; yet dealing with the Scribes and
Pharisees, who had corrupted the whole law, laded them with woes and curses,
Matthew. 23. Paul, who otherwise was all things to all men; yet when Gods glory
was impared by Elymas his withstanding of him, he struck him blind: and cursed
Alexander out of a rightly ordered and holy zeal: all which examples teach us
the like religious affection, that when Gods honor is in hazard, our zeal
should be inflamed; when man's salvation is likely to be hindered, our meeknes
must be for the time set aside, that the zeal of Gods house may even consume
us, Psalm. 69.9. as it did Christ himself when he saw his Fathers house
dishonored, and of a house of prayer made a den of thieves, unto whom we are
daily to be conformed.

They have followed the way of Caine.] In these words the Apostle returns to
the former part of the reason, whereby he has already by three forenamed
sins proved, that these seducers are they which take liberty to sin; and
unto them adds this fourth: That they have followed the way of Caine. In
which, first we will show the meaning of the words; and then observe the
doctrines. In the former consider two things: first, what is the way of Caine:
secondly, why they are said to walk in this way of Caine. The way of Caine is
that course of life which Caine took up to himself, in following the lusts of
his own heart against the will of God. It is described in Genesis 4. of which way
there be seven steps or degrees, but every one out of the right way. The first
step was his hypocrisy: he worshipped God by offering sacrifice as Abel did,
but his heart was not a believing heart as Abel^ was; his worship was outward
and ceremonious, but not in spirit and truth, for his heart was an evil heart
of unbelief. The second, his hatred of his own, only, and natural brother,
prosecuting him with wrath and indignation, testified by the casting down of
his countenance upon him: the reason of all which was, because his own works
were evil, and his brothers good, 1. Ioh. 3.12. so as (his brothers offering
being accepted, and his rejected) he feared that Abel might get the birthright,
and become the Priest, Prophet, and King in the family, and every way (as he
deserved) be preferred before him; for thus much is signified in these words,
Genes. 4.7. that if he did well, Abels affection should be subject unto him,
and he should hold his rule over him. The third, his murder, whereby he slew
his righteous brother. The fourth, his lying unto God, saying, he knew not
where his brother was, having slain him, and extenuating his sin, denied
himself to be his brothers keeper. The fifth, his desperation, after that God
had convicted him and pronounced sentence against him: for being cursed for his
sin, he cutteth himself off from the mercy of God, in saying: My punishment
is greater than I am able to bear. The sixth, his security and carelesnes,
he regards not his sin, nor the conscience of it, but busieth himself in
building a City, and calls it after the name of his child: that seeing his
name was not written in heaven, he might yet preserve his name and memory in
the earth. The seventh and last, which was the highest step of his way, was his
prophanenes; for from thencefoorth he cast off, and contemned all the care and
practice of Gods worship: which appears Genesis 4.26. Then men began to call
upon the name of the Lord. Which words have relation to the whole chapter
going before concerning Caine and his posterity, who had utterly rejected the
service of God, and betaken themselves to other affairs: Caine himself to his
building; Lamech to his lust, being the first founder of Polygamie; for he
took unto him two wives: Iabal to the framing and pitching of Tents: Iubal to
Music: Tubal Caine to other curious works. But when Enoch was borne, then men
began to affect better things, to call upon the name of the Lord; then the true
worship of God (formerly neglected) began to be restored. This is the path
wherein Caine walked.

The second point is, in what regard these seducers are said to follow Cain^
way, and that is in regard of all these seven sins: but especially in the
hatred and cruelty which he practiced against his brother: for as he was
bloodily, and maliciously minded toward his brother, though he gave him good
words, till he saw his time convenient to execute his conceived malice: so is
it with these seducers, they may seem for the season otherwise affected, yet
indeed they carry a hateful affection to the Church of God, and against those
also that endeavor in the building up of the same.

Doct. Hence first note that the way of Caine is the high and broad way of the
world. The Turks and Jews follow Caines footsteps in the profession and
practice of all prophanenes, in that they deny and despise the Messiah the
Son of God, yea and persecute with a deadly hatred all Christians, and are
never satisfied with the spilling of their blood. The way of Caine beaten in
Popery, as is seen in infinite causeless massacres and cruel ^urthers of
Protestants.
The way of the Papists also is the way of Caine, carrying within them the same
heart toward Protestants, which Caine did toward Abel; without any conviction
of them either of heresy, or of wickedness; and (no otherwise than Caine) they
now carry themselves quietly and silently till opportunity may serve them:
which if it were offered, we should feel and have fearful experience of the
fruits of a Cainish heart in them, as Abel did. Besides, the doctrine of the
Romish Church teaches the way of Caine, for it stands wholly in outward
Ceremonies, borrowed partly from the Jews, partly from the Heathen; yea it
traineth up men to be hypocrites, because it is only a dumb and dead show,
without any power or life of godliness. Again, it teaches desperation, in that
by it no man ought to be assured of his salvation (for that were presumption)
as also that a man must satisfy the justice of God for his sins, and can
never obtain pardon without confession of all his sins in the ear of the
Priest. And to come nearer home even among our selves, this way of Cain is not
unbeaten; our hypocrisy, lying, malice, but above all, our prophanenes will
convince us hereof. Do not men go backward in religion, as those that shake
off the ways of God? Is not the Gospel of far less reckoning among us,
than it has been heretofore? Is that wholesome doctrine not less respected
now, than it was twenty years ago? and much less therefore obeyed? which is
a manifest argument that Caines way is generally the beaten way of this age.

2. Doct. Secondly, we must be warned to turn out of the way of Caine, into
the ways of God. Qu. Which is the way of God that we may walk in it? Ans. It
is altogether contrary to the way of Caine: for first in Gods way is
sincerity. God is worshipped in the spirit, and not in hypocrisy. Secondly,
love of God and men, testified in word, and deed; opposed to Cains hatred.
Thirdly, in Gods way is faith, which rests upon Gods mercy and providence,
even against feeling, both in life and death; opposed to Caines desperation.
Fourthly, wisdom, whereby the heart is stirred up to seek Gods kingdom,
peace of conscience, inward joy, and in the second place for the things of this
life. Fifthly, in Gods way is faithfulness and constancy, men that begin in the
spirit end not in the flesh, but are faithful to the death: whereas the way of
Caine is to begin with sacrifice, but end in profanenes. This is the way of God
in which we must walk: using all good means whereby we may be both set and
contained therein; especially the word preached and the Sacraments; which
means the very Pharisie himself could acknowledge when he said to Christ,
Master thou teach the way of God truly. So the Prophet Esaias says: Ye shall
hear a voice behind you, saying, This is the way, walk in it: this voice is
nothing but the voice of the spirit in the ministry of the word.

3. Doct. Thirdly, note what these seducers are blamed for, namely for two
things: first, for making choice of Cains way: secondly, for walking and going
on forward in it; which is a property of the wicked. It is true that the
child of God by the frailty of the flesh may slip into Caines way, as David
did in slaying Vriah; but he does not stand, go on, and keep a course in
that way, as the wicked do, being branded to be such, as stand in the way of
sinners, Psalm. 1. We on the contrary must preserve a care to recover our
selves out of the way of Caine, if at any time we shall be misled into it: that
if we cannot keep from al sin, yet we may be kept from a course and trade in
sinning. Let this Christian care preserve our paths in the ways of God, and
return us unto the obedience of his will, when through many weaknesses and
slips we often are turned aside: and the rather because Caines and attends
Caines whole course; who was haunted with an evil and accusing conscience,
whose sin lay at the door as a wild beast ready to tear him, and pull out
the throat of his soul: besides that he was accursedly cast from the presence
and face of God; that howsoever he was a Prince and mighty amongst men, yet
he was a vagabond and runnagate on the face of the earth: which curses let them
not look to avoid whosoever will follow his way, no more than Caine himself
could.

And are cast away by the deceit of Balaams wages.] In these words is set
down the fifth sin of these seducers: the meaning of which is first to be
known. (...).
Cast away. The word signifies they are powered out, or powered away: which
form of speech is taken from water, the which distilleth not out of a vessel
drop by drop; but is powered out in abundance, till so all is quickly spent.
Whereby the Apostle would give us to understand, that in the affection of their
hearts they were violent, and even carried headlong to commit their
wickedness. By the deceit of Balaams wages: that is, they are thus forcibly
carried to do evil upon hope of wages; of which hope notwithstanding they are
disappointed and defeated as Balaam was. So as this fifth sin is covetousness,
propounded in a similitude or comparison, of which there are two branches:
first, as Balaam was carried headlong to curse the people of God in hope of
wages; so these wicked men upon hope of reward are set to falsify and corrupt
the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. Secondly, as Balaam was deceived and
frustrated of the reward hoped for, as Numb. 31.8. he lost his reward, yea and
after his life (for returning home he was slain by the Midianites) so shall
these lose their reward which they expect, for falsifying that doctrine which
they teach: And so much for the meaning. That which was the sin of these
seducers, is the sin of these times of ours, wherein that prophecy of Peter
is accomplished; 2. Pet. 2.3.
where is foretold that false teachers should come in the latter times, who
through covetousness, with fained words should make merchandise of men's souls.
Quest. But where shall we find these covetous teachers? Ans. They are too
easily found every where, but especially within the precincts of the church of
Rome. The Bishop of Rome and the guides of that Church are the Archseducers,
who through covetousness make merchandise of men's souls, teaching first that a
man must confess all his sins, or else he cannot be forgiven; and when he
has reckoned up all, he must satisfy for them in that manner as they will
prescribe: who commonly enjoin men to bestow so much land, or such a sum or
pension of money upon this or that Church, or Abbey, The crafty conueyances of
Popery detected.
that so they may buy out a pardon. By which wicked doctrine through
covetousness they have (by encroching upon Countries and kingdoms) enriched
themselves, and purchased, or rather craftily conveyed to themselves the
greatest part of the revenues of all Europe. Secondly, they through
covetousness maintain the distinction between mortal and venial sins;
between the fact and the punishment, and hold that the sin may be remitted,
but not the punishment: for which purpose the fire of hell is changed by them
into a milder fire of Purgatory, to be suffered after this life; of which the
Pope is Lord and King, indulgent to whom he please: especially to those that
can pay well for the merits of others, or masses of their own. This painted
fire has a long time kept the fire of the Popes kitchen so bright burning,
which if it should go out, his state were shaken. Thirdly, through covetousness
they forbid many degrees of men from marriage, which God forbids not, that
so they may the oftener dispense with those degrees which themselves have
forbidden: for the more dispensations, the more wealth have they coming in.
And thus is their whole religion contrived and plotted for gain, compacted of
falsehood and covetousness. So as Peter's prediction is most fully accomplished
in these Balaamites of Rome: but especially herein the Pope is become a second
Balaam, The Pope a second Balaam.
in that as Balaam cursed Gods people for gain; so to maintain his own pomp
and state, by his Bulls and thunderbolts has he assaied to curse even Kings and
Princes, and some whole kingdoms, yea all such as have shaken off his
intolerable Antichristian yoke. The same accusation may be lustly intended
against very many that profess godliness and true religion; for these be the
last days and perilous times, wherein men shall be lovers of themselves,
covetous, etc. 2. Tim. 3.2. Such as Jeremy complained of, Iere. 6.13. From the
least to the greatest every one is given to covetousness; from the Prophet unto
the Priest they deal all falsely. The vsuries, oppressions, injustice, the
common craft and customable deceit in all trades, cry out of this sin of
covetousness in all estates. But some will perhaps here say; Yea but you wrong
Christians to charge them thus deeply with Balaams sin, for they have better
things in them. Ans. But it is no injustice, for Balaam had some as good things
in him as many Christians: for when he was first solicited of Balaak to curse
the people of God, he would not till he asked leave of God; and when God had
denied him leave, he answered him that he would not go with him if he would
give him his house full of gold and silver. Further, he desired earnestly to
die the death of the righteous, and that his end might be like his. Judas also
had many good things in him, he left all to follow Christ; he became a preacher
of the truth, none of the Disciples could accuse him, or could epsy any thing
in him, and yet was carried away with covetousness: so let no man object the
good things in many Christians, which I grant they may have, and yet too
eagerly hunt after the world, yea and be powered out also after filthy lucre no
otherwise than Balaam was.

Now for the avoiding of this sin, let us observe three things, which the
Apostle admonishes in the words. First, in that he says they are powered out,
we are given to understand that the affection of covetousness is a most violent
headstrong affection, Covetousness a violent and ^ead^e sin.
carrying a man headlong to sin even against conscience, as it did Balaam:
and causing him to power out his heart unto wickedness. Achans covetousness could
not be curbed, no not by Gods special commandment, Josh. 7.
the wedge of gold and the Babylonish garment did so sway with him. Ahab was
sick of covetousness, no physic could recover him, but Naboths vineyard and
life. Judas for thirty pieces of silver was carried against al sense to the
betraying of his Master, and that after diverse admonitions. Ananias and Saphira
to save but a little money, make no bones of lying unto the holy Ghost. What is
the cause of all treacheries, and those most cruel murders, of fathers, of
mothers, of servants, and strangers, but the covetous heart set upon the
booty, saying to it self; by this fact, this house, that land, such a sum
of money shall be mine? which object in the eye puts out all the light of
religion, reason, and sometimes of nature it self. Thus the heart is easily
powered out unto evil, when as first it is possessed with covetousness, which
Paul calls the root of all evil.

Secondly, the Apostle would have us consider how hard a thing it is to be
recovered from this sin, seeing such a sinner is powered out and cast away by
the deceit of it: and indeed little hope is there of the repentance of a
covetous man, of whom Christ was bold to say, that as easy it is for a Camel
to go thorough the eye of a needle, as a rich man to enter into heaven: the
reason is, because his covetous cares choke and hinder the word from taking
place in his heart, and so he frustrateth all means of his salvation. Again,
he has renounced the true God, and set up another god in his heart. The Idols
in our Church are defaced and destroyed by the Magistrate; but the Devil
sets up Idols still in the hearts of men, which ought to be Gods temples,
even Riches the god of greedy men.

Thirdly, observe that in Gods just judgment the covetous man is disappointed
of his hope, his wages are the wages of deceitfulnes: for either he atchieueth
not, Gods justice against ma^s injustice.
or retains not the things expected, as in the former examples: of Achan, who
for the wedge lost his life with it; so neither Ahab himself, nor his
posterity ever enjoyed Naboths vineyard. Judas brought back the thirty
pieces of silver, and hanged himself. Ananias and Saphira desirous to keep a
part of their possession, lost with the possession both their lives: or else if
he retain the booty, and get and keep also wealth fraudulently gotten and
heaped up by oppression; yet having the thing, he has not the use of it; his
covetous heart keeps the key of it, and locketh it from his comfortable use:
yea, and be it that he have some use of it, yet his gain is small for which he
loses his soul: Thou fool this night shall they fetch away thy soul.

Use. We are all hence admonished, especially aged and rich persons, to beware
of this dangerous sin. It becomes Saints not to have covetousness once named
among them, Ephesians. 6. Our practice is to varnish it over with terms of
thriftines and good husbandry, and the worst it hears of us is scarce a small
dislike: so as when we speak of a wreched worldling, we say he is an honest
man, but somewhat hard or worldly: so as this sin is in no disgrace among the
most, as it deserves, being both so odious unto God, and hurtful unto the
sinner himself. But let us consider first that it easily draws a man unto
perdition, and enwrappeth him in the Devils snare. 1. Tim. 6.9. Those that will
be rich fall into many temptations and snares. Wheresoever it rules, that man
respects not commandment, reason, conscience, no nor common honesty it
self. Secondly, we profess our selves to be members of Christ, the sons and
daughters of God; now such a base sin beseems not such an high profession:
for a Noble man or a Prince apparent to spend and trifle away his time in
buying and selling pinnes and points were a madness; what a base folly were it
for us that hope to be heirs of the kingdom of glory to be still po^ing on
earth and earthly things? whose hearts and affections should be raised up
higher, and taken up with heavenly meditations, using weanedly this world as
though we used it not. Thirdly, Nature is contented with a little, and is
surfetted with abundance: and yet grace is pleased with less: and therefore if
we have food and raiment for us and ours, let us be there with contented, 1.
Tim. 6.8. Qu. But what shall we do then? do not all men thus, and may not we
seek wealth as others do? Ans. The rule of the word must be our direction
herein, and not the manner of the world: and that advises us to make God our
portion: which lesson God himself taught Abraham, Genesis 15.1. I am thy buckler,
and thy exceeding great reward. David had learned this lesson, Psalm. 16. The
Lord is my portion. This is done by setting our love, our joy, our principal
care, yea our hearts and affections upon the Lord, as men do upon their
treasures. By which means if riches increase, our hearts shall not be set upon
them, for they are not our portion; and if we be pinched and pressed with
adversity, want, or losses, yet shall we not be oppressed; for we want nothing
but that we may well be without, and have not as yet lost any part of our
portion.

Further, in the phrase which the Apostle uses; They are powered away,] note a
difference between the child of God, and a wicked man; when both of them are
found in the same sin, but the one powers out himself to wickedness, gives
himself leave to sin with full consent, without restraint, yea with greedines:
the other sins with consent, but not full consent; for being regenerate he
is not all flesh as the wicked man, but partly, flesh, partly spirit: and
therefore partly wills and consents to sin, partly nilleth and consents
not, he is not powered out without restraint, as the other is, but at length
recouereth himself by repentance, and obtains reconciliation with God.
Secondly, we must beware of pouring out our selves to wickedness, but rather
with Annah power out our souls before the Lord in humble confession of sin,
and petition for pardon, that so the Lord may power forth his mercy upon us,
and shed his love abroad in our hearts. Thirdly, we may not content our selves
with a few or some good things; for the heart may notwithstanding be powered
forth to sin, as Balaam and Judas; but seek carefully to have our hearts
truly seasoned with grace, with the love and fear of God, which for the
present will cause us to decline every evil way; yea to detest and hate every
sin, and for time to come with a resolute and constant purpose, and endeavor
never to offend God again: for otherwise a show of some good things may often
deceive and delude us, and we may perish for all them, as Balaam did. Lastly,
we are hence taught never to give reins to our affections and desires, but
curb, crucify and mortify them carefully: for if once they get head, and be
yielded unto, they will not easily be subdued, nor suffer a man quiet til he
have powered forth himself unto all wickedness, and so brought him into the high
way of perdition.

And are perished in the gainsaying of Core. In these words the Apostle lays
down the sixth sin of these seducers: to understand the meaning whereof,
consider two things: first the history it self: secondly, the application of
it. The history is recorded in Numb. 16. wherein Moses mentions three things
concerning Corah: first, the cause of his sin, which was ambition and pride;
for Core (being a Leuite) affected the Priesthood of Aaron: and Dathan and
Abiram (being heads of the tribe of Ruben) strove to take the government of the
people out of Moses his hand, who was appointed by God as King over the
Israelites, Deuteronomy. 33.5. Secondly, the sin it self, namely in this their
coffeehouse, they enterprised an insurrection against Moses and Aaron: they
stood up against them, contradicted and gainsaid them in their offices; and
charged them first that they usurped authority, and took too much upon them,
and lifted up themselves above the congregation without the Lord, verse. 3. and
therefore they would not obey Moses commandment, verse. 12. and secondly, that
Moses had dealt deceitfully with the people; and (only in policy to make
himself a King) had promised them a land flowing with milk and honey, whereas
they saw no such matter: nay rather he had brought them out of Egypt to
destroy them in the wilderness, ver. 13.14. Thirdly, their punishment for their
sin, which was an horrible destruction upon them, and their company, being all
of them partly swallowed up of the earth; partly devoured by fire from heaven,
verse 32.35.

Secondly, the history of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, is applied to these false
teachers by way of comparison, and they are compared in two things. First, as
Core and his company most ambitiously and proudly gainsaid Moses and Aaron; so
do these false teachers the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. Secondly,
as they were destroyed for their such resistance; even so shall these perish in
their gainsaying of the truth. Thus the meaning of the words is made plain.
This Epistle was written for a warning unto the last times, even unto us upon
whom the ends of the world are come: and therefore that which is affirmed of
these men, is verified in sundry sorts of men in this age. For example: first,
The Pope the forema^ of Cores company.
the Bishop of Rome is the next follower of Core: for look as Core gainsaid
Moses and Aaron, in regard of their lawful authority* so does the Pope
gainsay Christian Kings and Princes, in striving to take out of their hands all
their power and authority in causes Ecclesiastical within their own
dominions: nay herein he goes beyond Core, in that he usurps that power
over them which the Lord has put into their own hands, and so (being invested
in their own persons) most rightfully belongs unto themselves. Secondly, his
shauelings, and Mass Priests, not only gainsay and contradict Christ in his
doctrine; but also attempt to usurp his office in offering a real and proper
sacrifice of atonement for the sins of the quick and dead: yea, and
(wherein they strip Core) they take upon them to become mediators between
Christ and the Father, in praying the Father that he would accept the sacrifice
of his Son, as he did the sacrifice of Abel. Thirdly, of this sort are all
Traitors and Rebels, either Priests or Jesuits, or other traitorously minded
men at home or abroad, who (no otherwise than Core) gainsay the ordinance of
God, and stand out in denial or resistance of their lawful and natural
Prince, whom he same punishment shall assuredly find out, which consumed Corah
and his company in the end of their conspiracy. Fourthly, many amongst us who
profess the Gospel, yet walk in the gainsaying of Core, of who^ some will
openly say they (...) not what the Ministers speak; whatsoever it is they will
withstand it: yea many wretched creatures who come to the Lords Table, will not
stick to say, that they hope to see the day when they shall be hanged; which
argues them to be abetter^ in the wicked conspiracy of Gore. Lastly it were
to be wished that some of our students even of Divinity, had not a spice of
this sin of Core: for within this six or seven years, diverse have addicted
themselves to study Popish writers, and Monkish discourses, despising in the
mean time the writing^ of those famous instruments and clear lights, whom the
Lord raised up for the raising and restoring of true religion; such as Luther,
Calvin, Bucer, Be^a, Martyr, etc. which argues that their minds are alienated
from the sincerity of the truth; because the writings of these (the soundest
expositors of the Scriptures raised since the Apostles) are not sauourie unto
them; yea some can revile these worthy lights themselves, which is a spice of
Cor^ his sin.

2. Doctr. Secondly, hence we are taught to beware of ambition, and study to
be contented with that condition of life wherein God has placed us, not
seeking things beyond our estate. David would not meddle with things beyond his
reach, Psalm. 131.1. Paul had learned in every estate to be conted, Philip. 4.
to be abased as well as to be exalted. Our first parents in the ambitious
conceit of further highness, fell from a most happy condition, and brought
ruin upon themselves, and us their posterity. The virtue of contentation is
indeed necessary for all men, but especially let students seek it at the hands
of God; and the rather, because that within these few years diverse of them
(not possessing the benefit of this virtue) being frustrated here of their
expected preferments, which they thought were due to their gifts, have departed
away discontented, and have grown to resolution in heresy, Papistrie,
treason^, and most desperate attempts. Now that every man may learn to be
contented with his condition, be it better or worse, let him think well upon
these two considerations: first, that the present estate and condition of life,
wherein every man is set by God, is the best estate for him: health is best in
time of health, and sickness in time of sickness: riches when they are enjoyed,
poverty and want when the Lord changes his hand: life whilst he lives, yea
and death it self is the best when as that change befalls: and all this is
because the Lord so orders and disposes unto every man out of his wise
providence, which we for our parts must in all our thoughts be submitted unto.
Secondly, that in regard of our sins we are less than the least of Gods
mercies; unworthy to draw breath in the common air or to tread upon the
earth: and therefore (being so unworthy) if we have but small and few
blessings, we may well content our selves: for by our deserts we cannot
challenge so much as we have. Jacob herein stayed himself in his want that he
was unworthy of the least mercy of God: the basest calling is too good for
the best man, if he look at his desert. Ob. But every man is preferred before
me, and yet I deserve as well as they, or some of them. Ans. Herein content thy
self, God has called them to such condition; stay till he call thee: distract
not thy thoughts herewith, but rest in his revealed will.

3. Doct. Thirdly, it may seem strange that Core and his company should
gainsay Moses and Aaron, and their authority, especially beholding all the
miracles whereby their calling was confirmed, the one to be Prince, the other
the high Priest; and yet we see it to be so: for his affection had blinded his
conscience; Vnrectified affections ouercast rectified judgment and
understanding.
he knew very well that they were called by God: he saw their whole religious
course, the great miracles in their hands: but yet the disordred affections of
his heart were they which blinded the understanding of his mind. In like
manner, men may marvel that so many learned Papists, otherwise so wise and
prudent, should maintain so many gross errors, and heresies, and those
against the foundation of religion: but the case is with them as it was with
Core; for let them be never so learned, grave, and wise, yet their wicked
heart^ and ambitious affections ouercast their judgment and knowledge, and
ouercarrie them against conscience: yea and often reason it self they read
the Bible the word of truth, but see not the truth therein contained, because
the clowd of corrupt affections has ouerspread and darkened their
understandings. Whence we may learn, that if at any time we would with
fruit hear, read, study of learn the word of God, we must bring with us
not only quick understandings, sharp conceits, and firm memories, but honest
hearts, calm and tempered affections: without which it shall be with us as
wish the Jews, who saw indeed and yet perceived not.

Fourthly, here Magistrates and Ministers must learn, not to be discouraged if
they be gainsaid and contradicted by such as Core, Datha^, and Abiram, who were
great men in their Tribes; it was Moses and Aarons lot. Christ himself was a
rock of offense, and (...) stumbled at him; he was made a wonder of men, and
few of the great believed his doctrine: yea few there were that did not gainsay
it: it is not well with men when all men speak well of them; meek Moses shall
have his patience tried by very many such in the world.

The worst kind of coffeehouse is in things concerning man's salvation.
Fifthly, Students especially of Divinity, must take heed of this spirit of
contradiction and gainesaying, whereby no wholesome doctrine can easily please
them; which was Cores sin: and content themselves with that truth of
doctrine, and those sound grounds of Divinity, which are propounded in the
writings of those famous and excellent instruments aforenamed, who were the
restorers of pure religion; preferring them before all Popish writers and
corrupt postillers (in whom a man shall meet with nothing sooner than error
and unsoundness) and reading seriously their works and writings, as the
soundest and best grounds of Divinity, and expositions of the Scriptures,
which have been set out since the days of the Apostles.

Sixthly, let inferiors hence learn obedience, and silent subjection unto
superiors; the servant or subject must not be a gainsaier, nay not an answerer
again, Tit. 3. This cutteth off all disputation between the Master and
servant, father and child, prince and subject: for the very appearance of
Cores sin must be avoided.

Seventhly, Core gainsaieth both Moses and Aaron; the one in regard of his
Magistracy, the other of his Priesthood. Whosoever resists Moses despises
Aaron also.
These two sins go hand in hand: he that opposes himself to Moses,
despises Aaron also; he that honoreth not the King, fears not God; he that
cares not for the word, is not loyal to his Prince: a rebel to God, is a
rebel to his Prince. Seeing then loyalty toward God and the King are so
linkt together in themselves, let us not sunder them, but rather conioyne them
in our practice, as the Apostle has coupled them in one precept, commanding us
to fear God, and honor the King.

Eighthly, it may be here demanded, whether have we done well in gainsaying and
contradicting the Church of Rome, seeing our Church before the time of K. Henry
the 8. was a member of that Church? Ans. When two are at strife both are not be
blamed, but the party in whom the cause is convinced to be: we have indeed
departed from them; but the cause of our departure was not in us, but in
themselves: we have departed from them, as the Israelites by Gods commandment
from the Tents of Core^ they have first a long time gainsaid Christ, We have
departed from the Papists as the Israelites from the tents of Core by Gods
commandment. Numb. 16.22.
and therefore we have well done to gainsay them: we are not therefore the
schismatikes, neither blame worthy; but they in whom the cause of schism is:
no more than Moses was here to be blamed, the cause resting in Core.

Lastly, it will be asked, what did Moses all this while that he was gainsaid?
Ans. He fell on his face, and prayed unto the Lord. Wherein he became a fit
president for us in this land, who have been above forty years assaulted by
Popish Cores, enemies and rebels, without and within us: from whom we have bin
defended not so much by the sword, as by Gods protection, obtained by the
prayers of his servants: which teaches us for time to come to turn us to this
most ready course, of subduing al gainsaiers and enemies of our peace: for the
direct way to discover conspiracies, to subdue treasons, and rebels, and to
purchase tranquillity to a Church and land, is to commend the safety thereof
unto the Lords favorable protection, whose eyes are ever watchful over his
people. And thus much of Core his sin.

The last point is their punishment: in which it may be asked how they
perished? Ans. It is commonly thought that Core, Dathan and Abiram were
swallowed up of the earth: but I take it, that all the men of Core, al his
substance and his Tents; Dathan also and Abiram were swallowed up of the earth:
but that Core himself was burned with fire from heaven, with the 250* men that
offered incense, verse. 35. for in the history, Numb. 16.27.32. it is said that
Dathan and Abiram and the men of Core were swallowed up; but Core himself is
not mentioned: so Deuteronomy. 11.6. and Psalm. 106.17. In both which places Dathan and
Abiram are said to be swallowed up with their households; but in neither place
is Core mentioned. Secondly, Dathan and Abiram were in their Tents, and so were
the men of Core also, when the earth opened and swallowed them, verse. 17. But
Corah and the two hundred and fifty men were at the door of the Tabernacle
with their Censors, fire and incense, and were devoured with fire from heaven,
verse. 19. Ob. Number. 26.10. The earth opened her mouth and swallowed them (that
is, Dathan and Abiram) with Core. Ans. The learned expound that place not of
Cores person, but his substance and retinue.

Mark here the just judgment of God: Corah had abused himself (being a
Leuite) his office, and those sacrifices which he offered by fire; and the Lord
destroyed him by fire. The same was the dealing of God with Nadab and Abihu,
Note.
Leuit. 10.2. Look in what things men sin and dishonor God, by those for the
most part the Lord reuengeth himself upon them: so men glory in abusing the
creatures of God, as meats, wine, and strong drink, the Lord in the mean time
secretly turns the same to their own destruction; that those which are his
good gifts and ordained for the preservation of nature, being by^ men abused,
through Gods just judgment are turned to the choking and ouerturning of nature.

Secondly, hence learn the wise counsel of Solomon, Prou. 24.22. Feere God,
honor the King, and meddle not with the seditions; or with them that make
alterations. For although it be lawful for a subject (being called) to show
his mind, Private men may not attempt to control public co^stitutions.
what he thinks meet for the Church or Commonwealth; yet for a private man
to attempt upon his own head to alter any thing, standing by Gods and the
Princes law, is no better than sedition, and is a branch of Corah his sin.

Thirdly, although Corah, Dathan and Abiram are destroyed for this sin, yet
Cores children are not destroyed, but spared, Numb. 26.11. God in justice
remembering his mercy, his care for the Ministry was such as could not suffer
the Levites race to be rooted out, but preserved for the use of the
Tabernacle. Let Gods care teach us our duty in this behalf, namely to apply
our best endeavors for the maintaining and preserving the Schools of learning,
for the use and service of the Church. Commendable has been the care of many
Kings and Princes in this behalf, whom we should imitate in preserving these
seed-plots of the Ministry: for herein they imitate the great King even God
himself.

Verse. 12. These are spots in your feasts of love, when they feast with you,
without all fear feeding themselves.
IN these words the Apostle sets down the seventh sin of these seducers: to
know the meaning whereof the better, consider four things: first, what is
meant by feasts of love and charity. Ans. In the Primitive Church it was a
custom and manner to have a feast before the Lords Supper, made by the
Communicants; unto which some brought honey, some bread, some wine, some milk,
and every one according to their ability contributing something thereunto.
These were here meant and called Loue-feasts, because they were herein to
testify their mutual love among themselves; as also to the poor, who hereby
were relieved; and to the Ministry it self, which was by these feasts partly
sustained. Secondly, what is meant where these seducers are called spots in
these feasts, or rocks; for the word signifies either, and more properly the
latter; they are rocks, because as rocks are perceived a far off by the
seafaring men: even so the infection of these wicked men spreads it self very
far: and again, as rocks are dangerous and troublesome to them; so are
these as rocks and stumbling blocks to the weak, hindering them from the
profitable progress in godliness: they are also rightly called spots, because
as a spot defaceth the countenance; so their presence is an eye sore and a
disgrace unto these Loue-feasts. The third thing is the cause why they are thus
called: that is, because in these Loue-feasts they feed themselves: for laying
aside all care of the poor, and of the Ministry, for whose sake this
contribution was made, they pampered and fed themselves, riotously wasting the
goods of the Church. The fourth is the cause of this their riot [ without
feare] that is, because they have cast off the fear of God and man. In these
words therefore the Apostle charge these false teachers not only with
intemperance in general, but also with a special kind of riot in mispending
and wasting the contribution pertaining to the poores maintenance, and the
sustaining of the Ministry.

Use. That which is spoken of these me^, may be applied to these last times,
wherein diverse men riotously abuse the goods specially provided for the
maintenance of the Ministry and poor: as first the Romish Clergy, The
Romish Cler^ie has better faculty in feeding themselves than others
those Locusts that come forth of the mouth of the beast; idle bellies, and
slow backs, the most of which want learning, and are unable to teach the
people; yet feed themselves without fear, so as their eyes are swollen with
fatnes: wealth they want not, having craftily conveyed unto themselves the
third part of the revenues of Europe; but with it do nothing but pamper
themselves. Secondly, such Patrones are here included as feed themselves with
Church-liuings, appointed for ye relieuing of the poor, and maintenance of the
Ministry* in such sort as Gods people cannot be faithfully and sufficiently
taught: they can be content to depart from some ten pounds a year to some
unable man, so as they may of the rest feed themselves without fear, or else
(as some do) serve their lusts, in mispending the Churches revenues upon
Hawks, Hounds, and other improfitable ravenous creatures. Thirdly, such
Students whether Fellows or Scholars of or in Colleges as mispend their time
in idleness, gaming, or other improfitable exercises, come also within the
compass of the Apostles reprehension, as feeders of themselves with that
salarie or living which was given for the maintenance of the Ministry.

Here a question may be demanded; namely, whether those whom we call lay men,
having Church lands and livings impropriate unto them, may be said with these
seducers to feed themselves without fear; or whether can any man impropriate
any Church goods or livings, without sacrilege? Ans. The answer hereof is
twofold: first, though no good member of the Church can in good conscience
seek the harm and prejudice of the same; yet the plain truth is, that the
Church goods and lands may be sometimes upon some occasions alienated: the
ground of which answer is this rule; namely, that the governors of the Church
are to content themselves with things necessary. For when the people had
brought sufficient for the building of the tabernacle, Moses bids them bring
no more, Exodus 30.6.7.
seeing (says he) there is enough: so as when the Church has too much and
excess (as the Romish Church and these Churches of Europe gotten by Masses,
Purgatory, Dirge^, Sacrament of Penance, etc.) there may be admitted
alienation and impropriation of Church goods and l^nds; but so as two
conditions must be necessarily observed: first, there must be just cause: and
that which is so alienated must be employed to some good use in the Church or
Commonwealth; and this is four ways: first in case of present necessity; for
tenths have bin in some cases of necessity lawfully paid in way of tribute,
and otherwise neither Church nor Commonwealth could have been preserved.
Secondly, in way of exchange when the alienation of some lands shall be rather
more convenient both to the Church it self, and to whom such lands are
alienated. Thirdly, when as some great profit shall ensue unto the Church and
commonwealth: upon which ground King Henry the 8. of famous memory most
justly alienated most of ye Church lands called Abbey lands; that Monks,
Friars, Abbots, and such like idle Drones should never have more footing in
this our land* Fourthly, in way of reward: for Kings and Princes that are the
Patrons and protectors of the Church may alienate Church lands (where there are
excess) unto such as have bin faithful in the defense of Church or
Commonwealth* and that in way of requital and reward of their service. The
second condition is, that there must be reserved a sufficient relief for the
poor, and maintenance for an able Ministry. Some there are which teach
otherwise, and they reason thus: Tenths (say they) standing by Gods law are not
to be alienated: but the goods and lands of the Church stand chiefly in
tenths, and therefore admit no alienation. Ans. In England tenths stand not by
Gods laws, but by the positive laws of the land; so as if it please the King
he may appoint eights, or more or less as well as they: which if it were not
so, no Minister were to meddle with the tenths of his Parish: for by Gods law
tenths were brought to the storehouse of the overseers, and distributed by them
to the Levites, according as every man had need; but the Levites themselves
never meddled with the^. Again, if tenths stood now by the law of God, then the
poor should have every third year all the tenths of the earth: for so it was
among the Jews while they stood in force by Gods law. Secondly, they object
that in the Proverbs, chap. 20.25. It is a snare to devour tenths. Ans. The
place is to be understood of tenths the^ standing in force by Gods law, not of
ours which stand by man's. Thirdly, they allege that some decrees were made in
the Primitive Church, that the alienation of Church lands should become
sacrilege. Ans. But those decrees concerned private persons who might not, not
may not on their own heads impropriate the Church goods; as also they debarred
the taking away of necessaries from the Church, for then the Church was far
from that superfluity which sithence it has obtained: so that for a lay man
to hold lands impropriate, the former conditions observed, is no sacrilege.
Now if the question be concerning the impropriations of Colleges, whether they
lawfully hold them or no: then I answer secondly, that I take it, they hold
them by a more special right; for they being given at the first unto the
Church, they are not (being impropriate to Colleges) generally and wholly
alienated from the Church; but remain in this special use of the Church for
the maintaining of the Seminaries of it; without which the Church must needs
decay: and this seems a sufficient cause of reserving unto them this
maintenance, so as ca^e be had of the people and poor for their relief and
instruction. Secondly, whereas the Primitive church first feasted, and then
received the Lords Supper, we note first the lawfulnes of feasts, so as the
poor be regarded, superfluity and riot avoided, and the right end intended,
which is the praise and glory of God expressed in thankfulness for the
abundance of his good blessings. So after the sacrifices and offerings Aaron and
the Elders of Israel came to feast with Iethro before God, Exodus 18.12. So
Ezra. 8. Go your ways, eat the fa^ and drink the sweet, and send part to
them for whom none is prepared; for this is the day of the Lord. Secondly, the
Papists are deceived, who teach it necessary to come to the Sacrament of the
Supper fasting, for these feasted before it. Thirdly, in the Primitive Church,
and in the Apostles days, there was no private Mass in which one Priest
should eat up all alone; but there were feastings, which cannot be performed
by one man alone, but the whole congregation. Fourthly, hence we may note the
end of the Lords Supper to be the increase of our fellowship and communion with
Christian men, as well as our union with God* and that we are to come together
in love and Christian unity* for the testifying of which charitable affection,
the ancient believers in the Apostles days had these feasts of love before
they came to the Lords table.

Further, in that these seducers are called [ spots in these feasts] I note
first that open offenders should be hindered and repelled from the Sacraments,
being as spots in the face; which because they are blemishes, must be washed
away: so ought these by the censure of excommunication to be (until their
repentance) cut off from the face of the congregation. Secondly, that every one
that professes the faith is not a true member of the Catholic Church, as the
Papists erroneously hold; that let a man be what he will, if he profess the
faith, it is sufficient to make him a member of the Catholic Church. Whereas
open offenders are to be accounted as spots, which no man will say are true
parts of the body, but blemishes to be pared away, that their body may be
the more perfect and entire.

Feeding themselves without fear. Doctr.
] In feasting we are to preserve fear within our hearts, which is twofold:
first of God, secondly of man. The former is seen Exodus 18.12. The men of
Israel feasted before the Lord. Iobes fear was, lest his sons should cast
this fear of God out of their hearts in their feasting, and so offend God. The
latter is prescribed Prou. 23.1.^. When thou fittest to meat before a Ruler,
put the knife to thy throat, that is, bridle thine appetite; have respect not
to pass the limits of sobriety, tempetance, and moderation. And as we are to
eat and drink, so also to season all other our actions with the fear of God
and men: which one grace would cut off many graceless practices every where
reigning amongst men. But a special thing here aimed at, is, that we should
never come to eat the Lords Supper without fear and reverence: which because
the Corinths wanted, Paul complains that one came hungry, another drunk,
and so profaned that holy institution, 1. Cor. 11.21. Ob. But in that place it
seems Paul condemns these Loue-feasts, which Jude here dispraiseth not,
where he says, every man eats his supper before, verse. 21.22. Ans. These
Loue-feasts were indifferent, and might be used or not; Paul condemns the
great abuse of them in Corinth, because some were made by them drunk, and
unfit for the Lords Supper, and the rich deceived the poor: but Jude
commends them, because they were in other Churches rightly and religiously
used.

Clouds they are without water, carried about of winds.] These words contain
the eighth and ninth sins of these wicked men: which the better to know what
they are, let us a little consider the meaning of them. [ Clouds they are
without water,] I^ pleases the Spirit of God in many places of the old
Testament, to compare Prophets and Teachers unto clouds; and their doctrine
unto the dropping and distilling of the rain and sweet showers falling from
these clouds. ^zech. ^0.46.
So the Prophet Ezechiel is commanded to set his face toward the way of
Teman, and drop his word toward the South, and his prophecy toward the
forest. Deuteronomy. 32.2. My doctrine shall drop as the rain, and my speech shall
distill as the dew, as the shower upon the herbs, and as the great rain upon
the grass. Mich. 2.7. and 11. The word translated ^
prophecy, signifies properly to drop or distill: The reason of which
comparison is rendered Isai. 55.10.11. Because as the rain falls upon the
earth, and returns not in vain, but moistneth it, and makes it bring forth
and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to him that eats: so
the word in the mouth of the Ministers returns not void, but accomplisheth
the Lords will, and prospers in the thing whereto it is sent; in becoming
the savor of life to the salvation of some, and of death unto the death of
them that perish. The words then standing upon this similitude bear this
sense; Though the property and use of clouds is to carry water and rain for
the use of the earth, yet some clouds are without water: even so, though all
Teachers ought to be filled and fitted with store of wholesome doctrine, to
power it out for the use of the Church; yet these seducers are utterly
destitute thereof. And again, as those clouds without water are light, and
fitter for nothing than to be carried about with every wind: so these are
altogether variable and unconstant, carried about with every blast of strange
doctrine. The former of these similitudes condemns their sin of barrennes
and unfruitfulness: the latter their ninth sin of inconstancy and
variableness.

Concerning the former, seeing that the Apostle takes it for granted that the
clouds are naturally ordained, to contain water; it may be demanded how it
can be conceived that the clouds above being heavy with water should not fall
to the earth; seeing every heavy thing naturally descends and tends
downward? Ans. The clouds are heavy indeed; for even the winds themselves
(being by many degrees lighter than they) have their weight, Job. 28.25. No man
therefore by wit or reason can resolve this doubt, but only from the word of
God: which teaches that it is by virtue of Gods commandment given in the
creation, that the clouds fall not. Genesis 1.6. Let the firmament separate the
waters from the waters: by force of which commanding word, the water hangs in
the clouds, and the clouds in the air, and need no other supporters. Job
setting out the Majesty and greatness of God in his works, here begins; That
he hangs the earth upon nothing, he binds the waters in the clouds, and
the clowd is not broken under them. Philosophy is too defective to yield the
true reason of this great work of God, which commonly attributes too much to
nature, and too little to the God of nature; whose providence and power is
herein to be acknowledged, in that by his word he orders all his creatures,
unto which he speaks the word and they obey.

Secondly, hence we learn to conceive the right meaning of that place, Genesis
1.7. Let the firmament separate the waters that be beneath, from the waters
that be above. By the firmament is meant the air, or the distan^^ between the
earth and the starrie sky: by the waters under this firmament are meant the
seas and floods; and the waters above, are the watrie clouds, which are
divided by the firmament or air in which we breathe, called the firmament of
heaven: for it is the lowest of the three heavens, which the Scripture makes
mention of, ^eaching to the stars; the second being the sta^^ie heaven, the
third being the heaven of heavens, the seat of God, where he reuealeth his
glory to his Saints and Angels. Those then are deceived who out of this place
dream of a wat^ie heaven above the stars.

Now further in that these seducers are called Clouds without water, Ioh. 4*
^low^es w^^hout w^^er keep ^^ds (...) fruitless and barren.
because they are destitute of wholesome doctrine; we learn first that
Ministers ought to be such as are able to teach wholesome and sound doctrine,
1. Tim. 3.2. Malach. 2.7. The Priests lips should preserve knowledge: otherwise
they are as clouds without water, keeping the field of God barren and
fruitless: which ability supposes, yea and imposes the performance of
diligence herein; or else whether they have knowledge or not, they come under
the rank of them whom Esaias 56.10. calls dumb dogs; which cannot, or do not
bark. In former ages I grant indeed there were readers appointed in the
Church, who could not otherwise teach: but yet none were called for Teachers
into the Church, but such as had this ability of watring Gods church by
doctrine more or less, until heresy and schism came in. Secondly, Ministers
ought so to teach as they drop and instill the graces of faith, repentance, and
obedience into the hearts of the hearers: even as the clouds drop water upon
the dry earth which sinketh into the same. This was Paul's desire to see the
Romans, that he might bestow some spiritual grace upon them, Romans 1.11. This
is the right handling and dividing of the word, when men show not words but
power, 1. Cor 4.14. That Teacher shows learning that shows men Christ, and
can be a means to distill Gods graces into their souls: let this be the
scope of those who are set apart unto this holy Ministry; else shall they be
as unprofitable as clouds which contain no water in them at all. Thirdly, if
the Ministers must be as clouds having water in them; then must the people be
as dry ground, Men must be as dry ground, not in barrennes, but in regard of
their thirst after the drops of grace.
not in regard of barrennes, but of thirst and desire after these drops and
dewes of grace distilling from the Ministry. Psalm. 143.6. My soul desires
after thee, even as the thirsty land: unto which disposition we are to
preserve two things within us: first, look as in dry land parcht with the
heat of the Sun, there is a great want of moisture; so in our souls must
be retained a sense of the want of the graces of God, with an hearty sorrow
for our want. Our hearts must be persuaded that in us, and of our selves there
is no good thing, that God can take delight in: yea and the grief conceived
must not be small, but we must feel our selves even dried and parched with
the heat of his wrath due unto our sins, until these sweet waters flowing
from under the threshold of the Sanctuary have graciously refreshed us. Mary
says, that God fills the hungry with good things: Luke 1.13.
by the hungry are meant those who feel themselves void of grace, yea as it
were pined and starued for want of it. Christ tells the woman of Canaan that
he came to the lost sheep of the house of Israel: that is, Mat. 15.24.
he that knows himself not a wa^dring sheep, but quite lost, even in the
lions paw ready to be devoured: such does Christ take upon his neck, and like
a good shepherd bring back to his fold. For he was sent to preach the
acceptable year; not to the mighty and states of ^he world, but to prisoners
and captives, that is, such as could grieve and mourn for their captivity.
Secondly, as dry land parched with drought gapeth and opens it self wide,
as if it would swallow up the clouds for rain: so must our hearts preserve
within them an earnest appetite, and insatiable desire after Christ and his
merits, above all the things in the world: more hungring after him, than after
wealth, gold, silver, honors, health, or whatsoever is delightful and highest
prized among the sons of men. And this will follow of the former: for if we
be once at the point, that we are out of all conceit of our own goodness, we
will seek earnestly for it at the hands of him who is the fountain of al
goodness: if we feel our spiritual poverty once, we cannot but couetously
hunt after those true treasures which only enrich our souls to all eternity.
The woman of Samaria did but prattle with Christ til he had told her of her
sin, and of her husbands: and that he which was now her husband was none of
her^: then could she humble her self, and confess him to be a Prophet, and
quickly after came to acknowledge him the Messiah, and al her cauelling was
laid aside: so till we be humbled we do but cauel at the word, and receive it
not as dry land does the showers which fall; but let the heart once be
touched, it is turned presently vpside down, and we are become other manner of
men than before.

The ninth sin blamed in these seducers is, that they are inconstant and
unstable, carried like light clouds with the winds of strange doctrine: whence
Teachers must learn to hold constantly the doctrine of salvation, Titus 1.9.
holding fast the faithful word: people also must not revolt or depart from it,
nay not be unstable, or soon removed to another Gospel. Gal. 1.6.
Ephesians. 4.14. Be no more children wavering and carried above with every wind of
doctrine: but both Teachers and hearers must beware least we (being by Gods
blessing freed from the spiritual Egypt, where we were many hundred years
detained) now after forty years and more, Beware of looking behind thee
toward Sod^^, out of which thou art escaped.
look back again, and fall from that faith into which we have been baptized.

Corrupt trees and without fruit, twice dead and plucked up by the roots.] In
these words is the tenth sin of these seducers set down, and that is their
incurable hypocrisy; illustrated and amplified by a comparison or similitude,
from bad and barren trees: containing four steps or degrees of naughtines,
every one worse than other. The first step, they are corrupt trees; which must
be understood not in regard of their substance, but in regard of their corrupt
fruits: for the word translated (...).
corrupt, properly is applied to trees that bear no fruit, but in the fall of
the leaf, which with the leaves fall off, being neglected and wither away,
never coming to any good or gathering. The second degree, they are without
fruit: which words are a correction of the former; for they are not only
without good fruit, but utterly destitute of any fruit at all. Thirdly, they
are twice dead: that is, certainly dead, hopeless of any fruit. Fourthly,
they are plucked up by the roots, that is, utterly without hope, not of fruit,
but of life it self; they are past living, and much more past fruit. This
similitude then charge these seducers (to whom it is fitly applied) first,
that al their works are but hypocritical. Secondly, that they are utterly
destitute of all good works, which truly are good. Thirdly, that they have no
heavenly and spiritual life or sap in them. And fourthly, that they are out
of Christ, not rooted in him, but plucked up: and therefore they are most
hopeless of ever bearing fruit unto life* being proceeded so far in the
high way unto perdition. So much of the meaning.

Doct. In that these false teachers are justly condemned for this sin of
being corrupt trees without fruit: we on the contrary must strive to become
good trees of Gods delight; Isai. 5.7. Judah is the plant of my delight: trees
of righteousness; Isai. 60.21. The planting of the Lord, laden with the fruits
of righteousness: which that we may be, four things are required of us:
first, that we be well rooted: secondly, that we live in the root: thirdly,
that we bear fruit: fourthly, that we bear good fruit.

First we must be rooted. In this rooting two things are required: first, there
must be a root: this root is Christ, Ioh. 15.1. He is the vine, we the
branches. Romans 5.6. If we be planted into him, Col. 2.7. rooted in him. Here
we must consider Christ not as God alone, or man alone, or the Son of God
alone, but as God-man; as God made man; as an Immanuel, God with us, even our
Mediator and Redeemer. Thus he is our root, in whom are hid the treasures of
graces, Col. 2.3. and of whose fulness we all receive grace for grace, Ioh.
1.16. The second thing in this rooting is ingrafting: for trees of
righteousness grow not by nature. Psalm. 1. A good man is as a tree planted:
for by nature the best men are but wild olives, and must be transplanted from
the first Adam into the second. The author of this ingrafting is God himself,
who does it by two actions: first, he gives Christ truly and really in the
word and Sacraments, not out of the word, but in and by it. So 1. Cor. 3. Paul
planteth, Apollo waters; that is, God by their ministry ingrafted the
Corinthians into Christ. Secondly, when on his part he gives Christ, he
gives also a power to the believer to apprehend him, and receive him with his
merits unto salvation, and that by the only hand of faith. Ob. But this can be
no ingrafting, seeing Christ is in heaven, we are on earth. Ans. It is not
indeed a natural ingrafting, which cannot be but by the fit applying of two
bodies one to the other, but spiritual, yet as sure and as straight as that
is. We see in nature, the mind is present and joined with the thing it
thinks of, although it be distant many thousand miles: if this can be true
in nature, then much more in faith which is a work supernatural, and far
above the reach of nature. Again, a man has land given him in Spain, Turkey,
or America, many thousand miles off him, he was never at it, he never saw it,
and yet is truly the Lord of it, and may say of it, it is his own, by virtue
of the donation. Even so God in his word gives Christ and his merits to the
believer, who as he has received him by faith, so he retains him by grace:
by virtue of which donation, and acceptance, a man may as truly say, Christ is
his, as though he were now in heaven already with him; yea so firm and
certain is this ingrafting, that it once being made can never be dissolved,
but is everlasting: for the root living and abiding for ever, so also do the
branches, being set into the same, and that by the hand of the good husbandman
God himself. Ioh 15.1.


The second thing required in a tree of righteousness is life, which is not the
natural life of other plants, but spiritual and eternal; for eternal life
begins even in this life. Galath. 2.20. Now I live, yet not I now, but
Christ lives in me, and this life is by the faith in the Son of God, and then
wrought in us, when the same mind which was in Christ whilst he was upon
earth is also in us, Philip. 2.5. for he conueyeth his own disposition into
his members in part, who are daily made conformable unto him: of which
conformity the Apostle makes two parts, Romans 5.6. First, a conformity unto
him in his death; that look as he died for sin, so ought his members unto
sin: and as he by his death subdued sin, and obtained victory over it; so
ought they daily to be nibling in the abolishing, and mortifying of that sin
which presses them down, and hangs so fast upon them, until the day of
their full conquest and final deliverance. Secondly, a conformity unto him in
his Resurrection; that as he rose again from the grave, so should they from
the grave of their sins: and as he rose to live for ever, so ought they by
virtue of his resurrection to live to God in newnes of life, as those that
look to live forever with him. Thirdly, the tree of righteousness must bring
forth fruits, to testify the life of it, called Galath. 5.22. fruits of the
spirit, and there reckoned up; Love, peace, joy, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekenes, temperance. Phil. 1.11. Paul prays that the
Philippians might be filled with the fruits of righteousness, that is, the
duties of the Moral law contained in the first and second Table. Fourthly, a
tree of righteousness must bring forth good fruits, such as are pleasing unto
God. Quest. How shall a Christian bring forth good fruits? Ans. First, good
fruit must come from a good heart, an heart penitent, and truly turned to God.
Mat. 3. Bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life. 1. Timot. 1.5. Love
out of a pure heart. Secondly, it must be brought forth with intention, will,
purpose, and endeavor to obey God in his commandments, which the heart must
respect. Thirdly, the end of this fruit must be the glory of God, not seeking
our selves but Gods honor. In Leuit. 19.23. God requires that the trees
should be circumcised, which was thus performed: The three first years the
fruit was to be cast, or fall away; Trees of righteousness must circumcise
their hearts, seeing trees were to be circumcised by the law.
the fourth it was to be dedicated to the Lord, and the fifth year the
Israelites might eat of the fruit: even so we must first cast away in
respect of our selves our fruits, and dedicate them unto the Lord, so he shall
taste of them with delight, and not before. Fourthly, it must be brought
forth to the good of others; as trees bear fruits not for themselves, but
for men: so our fruits must be intended not so much for our private good, as
the common good of the Church and Commonwealth.

Doct. 2. Seeing the faithful are not such corrupt trees, but of Gods own
planting, they have here first a ground of comfort in the midst of sorrow,
sickness, yea and death it self; for being ingrafted into Christ, the whole man
is preserved safe and found in him: yea the dying body, nay the dead body,
and that which is rotting in the grave is planted into him, and is to live
again in him who always lives, and will raise it to life eternal at the
last day. Trees in winter are dead to man's sense; yet because the roots of
them live, and have in them sap and moisture, in the spring they shall bud,
blossom, and bear fruit again: even so the rotten body at the time of
refreshing shall revive again and become a glorious plant, putting off
mortality and corruption, no more to be subjected thereunto again, than the
root into which they are set; who has for his members chased them away.
Secondly, seeing we must be planted, and cannot attain this growth by nature:
we must detest, and abhor our selves in dust and ashes, renounce, and bewail
our natural condition, and be at no rest till we feel our selves set into
Christ, by living the life of the Son of God: For know we not that Christ
lives in us, except we be reprobates? Thirdly, our Church has herein
resembled Judah; having been for many years a plant of Gods delight, who has
hedged and fenced it by his favorable protection: but many, yea the most
branches are barren, bearing no fruit; others bear less fruit than they
have done, being withered and fallen back: what will be (think we) the end
hereof? Surely the axe being already laid to the root of the tree, shall cut
down whatsoever branches bear not forth good fruit, and they shall be cast
into the fire. It stands us then in hand to become more fruitful before we
be cut down. Fourthly, hence let every man learn subjection unto God in all
his crosses and afflictions; we are trees or branches at least, of the Vine,
the Father is the husbandman, and look a^ the husbandman loppeth, cutteth
(...) pruneth, yea and almost cutteth down his trees to make them more
fruitful? so deals the Lord with his children, who therein are to rest well
contented; for he chasteneth them for their good; that although no chastisement
seems joyous for the present, yet it brings afterward the pleasant fruit
of righteousness to those that are exercised thereby.

Twice dead and plucked up.] Some hence gather this, that we are once dead in
Adam by original sin; and secondly after regeneration or ingrafting into
Christ by some grievous sin wounding the conscience to death: and hence
conclude that a man regenerate may die again, and fall from grace: urging for
their purpose that in Romans 11.20. Through unbelief they were broken off, and
thou stand by faith; be not high minded but fear. But this cannot be so
understood: for by twice dead, is meant dead certainly; or dead twice, once in
Adam by original sin, and the second time dead by their own actual sin.
As for that place in Romans 11. I answer, there are two kinds of planting:
first outward: secondly inward. The outward is when God gives the word unto a
people with other his ordinances, and they publicly profess it. The inward is
when God gives true faith, whereby men are set into Christ. Now the Jews whom
the Apostle speaks of, were implanted by the former only, and therefore
might be broken off: the other is everlasting. 1. Ioh. 2.19. They went out from
us, but were not of us: for if they had been of us, they should have continued
with us. Further, where it is said, Plucked up:] hence is gathered by some that
they were once in the root, and therefore a man rooted and set in Christ may
perish finally. Ans. But we must know that this phrase in the Scripture
signifies a manifestation of the things to be done, rather than the doing of
them; they are therefore said to be plucked up, whom God manifests never to
have been rooted: as also men are said to be blotted out of the book of life;
not that they were ever written therein, but in that God manifests and makes
known to men that they were never written in it.

Verse. 13. They are raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame: they
are wandering stars, for whom is reserved the black darkness for ever.
THe Apostle in this verse proceeds on in the further discovery of these
wicked men by sundry other sins; set down after the same manner as the former
by way of similitude and comparison. And first he compares them to the raging
waves of the sea; and secondly to wandering stars. And in the end of the
verse: For whom etc. the conclusion is again repeated, of which we have spoken
in the 11. verse. The former comparison has three expositions: for some will
have their gross hypocrisy hereby signified; and then the comparison stands
us: Look as the waves of the sea rage and swell, rising up toward the
heavens, as though they would swallow and ouerflow the earth, which they seem
to threate^; but drawing to the shore, they are broken to a little foame: so
these seducers make a great show of godliness, and piety, as though they
only would go to heaven; yet is the matter nothing so, all is but froth,
seeing they want the power and practice of religion, and godliness in the
midst of such pretenses. Secondly, others hereby express their
unprofitableness and deceitfulnes in their doctrine, thus: As the waves of the
sea rise very huge and high, especially being stirred by the winds, and yet
their effect is nothing but a little foame and mire, which they cast up: so
these lewd men being puffed up in themselves, promise great matters to their
followers: as much liberty, many blessings and great good things; and yet the
effect of all their shows is but to make men much more the servants of sin
than before. And thus Peter speaks of them: 2. Pet. 2.18.
In speaking swelling words of vanity they beguile with wantonness, through the
lusts of the flesh, them which were clean escaped from them. This was truly
spoken of them, and may as truly be applied unto diverse of our times: as first
the Libertines and Familists, fondly assuring their disciples that they shall
be illuminate and deified, such great matters they promise: whereas they make
them the children of the devil seven fold more than they were before.
Secondly, Romish sea casts out nothing but fo^m^ and mire.
the Romish Clergy have been as large in their promises unto their hearers:
teaching them that they shall be able to satisfy the justice of God for their
sins, yea and merit life everlasting, and that many of them can perform
works of supererrogation, which the law of God binds them not unto: but what
is this but to foame out dirt and mire, and to teach men that for a little money
they may break al Gods Commandments? The third exposition is this: As the Sea
stirred by the winds and weather rages, and from the foundation casts up
nothing but froth: so these men stirred and moved by the hand of God
correcting them, amend not, nor profit thereby: but rather under the same,
discover the wickedness and unbelief of their hearts: which is the most
agreeable and fittest exposition; explained in Isai. 57.20. The wicked are like
the raging sea that cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. From this
sense consider these two things: first, a work of God: secondly, a practice of
man. First the will, work, and appointment of God is, that men shall be
troubled, stirred, moved, and set out of quiet, and have within them such
disquietnes, as if the raging waves of the sea were within their souls. The
minds of men both godly and wicked, their wills and affections are often so
distempered, as is the sea when it is troubled with boisterous winds and
tempests. Iere. 49.23. The Lord shall trouble Damascus, so she shall become as
a fearful sea that cannot rest. Josh. 7. Joshua said to Achan; Thou have
troubled Israel, and the Lord shall trouble thee. Job says, The Almighty
troubled him, chap. 23.16. Yea Christ himself, although he was without sin,
had his soul troubled in his agony, in which his mind, will and affections
were disturbed: and this trouble God brings on men diverse ways; sometimes by
those of a man's own house, as Jacobs sons troubled him, Genes. 34. Sometimes
they of his company, as Achan, Josh. 7. Sometimes by the Lords withdrawing of
himself, Psalm. 30.7. Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled. Sometimes
a man's own heart and conscience will rage against him, as Baltazar seeing the
hand writing upon the wall, was troubled, and there was no life in him, Dan. 5.
What then will some say, is there no difference between the godly and the
wicked herein? Ans. Yes: for every little cross unto the wicked is a tempest
breaking the rocks: which makes them to storm and rage, and send forth
foame and mire: but the crosses of the godly are as calm winds, a little
shaking them indeed, and for a little time: but are blown over when they have
a little exercised their faith and graces, so as they are bettered, yea and
furthered by them. 1. King. 19. Elias standing on Mount Horeb, there passed by
him a mighty tempest which rent the rocks; and then an Earthquake, then fire:
but God was not in any of these: afterward there came a still and soft voice,
and God was in the voice. Afflictions are like that tempest, earthquake and
fire, namely to the wicked, against whom the Lord comes to shake and consume
them: but to the godly are as a still voice to teach and instruct them: under
which they quietly content themselves, because God is in that still voice,
namely, by his grace and presence supporting and sustaining them even in the
midst of their troubles.

Secondly, the practice of a wicked man is, when he is troubled and stirred by
God to foame out his own shame; even as the sea his froth. Experience
teaches, that if a wicked man have any wrong or disgrace offered him,
presently he discovers the corruption of his heart, and breaks out into
railing, cursing, reuiling, and all manner of revenge: so if Gods hand be upon
him by sickness, or upon his family, he cannot cover his want of love of God,
he cannot hide the infidelity of his heart: for he betakes himself the next
way to the Sorcerer, As Adam fled from God upon his sin: so many a one flies
to the devil upon the punishment of it.
Figure-caster, or the next Wizard, so flies from God as fast as his feet
will carry him: and every way the same violent affections bewray themselves,
which these seducers are charged withal.

Use. Seeing this is the property of a wicked man being troubled, to foame out
his own shame, let the child of God in his trouble quiet himself, restrain
and bridle his corruptions; yea let him show forth his faith, obedience,
meeknes and subjection unto God; let him repair unto God by prayer: as
Iehosaphat being in a great straight on every side turned his eyes unto the
Lord, 2. Chro. 20.12.
saying: I know not what to do, but our eye^ are toward thee. And David (...)
from Absalom his son reviled him not, nor ^tormed against him, but turned to
the Lord, saying* If I please thee not, Lord here am I, do with me (...) at
thou please.

The second comparison follows in these words: They are wandering s^ars. By
which words we may not understand the Planets in the heavens: neither the
fixed stars which keep a direct and constant course: but such as we call
shooting, falling, or gliding stars; which have some light, but it is soon
obscured. The sin then is, that which was before mentioned, namely their
false and instable doctrine, which can never direct men to heaven, no more than
these shooting stars can direct either sailers by sea, or travelers by land.
Hence learn two things: first, that all true Teachers must be stars.
Secondly, they must be fixed and not wandering stars: first they must be
starre^. Ob. This cannot be, seeing they have no light of their own. Ans.
Christ is the light which inlighteneth every man that comes into the world;
called therefore the Sun of righteousness, and the day star, from whom all
Ministers receive their light. Again, they may be fit instruments to carry
light unto others (which is their office) although they have none of their own,
save that only which is conveyed from Christ unto them: as a Lantern has no
light in it self but what men put into it.

Doct. First, all true Teachers must first have the Sun of righteousness to
shine in their own hearts, before they can enlighten others with his light:
for as Paul was himself comforted that he might be able to comfort others, 2. Corinthians. 1. so no man can teach others, till himself first be taught.
Secondly, Ministers as stars must shine to men's hearts, and not only sound
to the ears.
if they be stars they must shine to somewhat, and that is, to the hearts of
men: so as the principal care of Ministers ought to be herein placed, that
they may enlighten the minds, consciences, wills, and affections of men, so
becoming the means of the rising of the Sun of righteousness in men's hearts,
not that they may fill the care with words, but the heart with light, comfort,
and refreshing. This was the scope of Paul's preaching, 2. Cor. 4.2. in the
declaration of the truth to approve himself to every man's conscience in the
sight of God: so as if his Gospel were yet hid, it was not his fault; but of
those men whose eyes the God of the world had blinded, that the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ should not shine unto their hearts.

Use. This teaches that all men by nature are the children of darkness,
without the knowledge of God; as unto who^ God has appointed Teachers to be as
shining stars to enlighte^ them. We need not to go far to prove this truth,
for even our own country witnesses that in the days of former Princes, our
forefathers wanting this light and these stars, sowed and reaped their fields,
brought home their corn, baked their bread: which served them partly for
food, and partly to make a breaden god of; a more palpable darkness than that
of Egypt which might have been felt. Secondly, seeing that darkness is chased
away, and we have the light, and many bright stars to direct us, take the
exhortation Ephesians. 5.8. Ye are now light, walk as children of light, namely by
accepting, entertaining and embracing of the light. That we may do this,
first we must know the light, and behold it with the love and affection of our
hearts unto it; that as when the Sun shines, every man opens his doors
and windows to receive the comfort of it: so we should open the doors of our
hearts to entertain, Open the door of thy heart, that the Sun of
righteousness may shine into the house of thy soul
and retain the light of Christ, to have them filled therewith: for then Gods
favorable countenance is shining upon us. Secondly, having the light, we must
do the works of the light, that is of obedience: when the Sun is up and
shines every man walks in his calling, and whilst our Sun of grace is
over our heads, we are to walk as becomes the calling of Christianity, to
make conscience of all sin; a shame is it at noon day to stumble and fall,
and rush into a pit: so now is it for Christian men in such a sun shine of
the Gospel, to betake them to every work of darkness, and be betaken with
every snare of sin, as though they had no light to direct them, but were left
in darkness.

Secondly, true Teachers must not only be stars, but fixed stars, that is,
constant and stable in the doctrine which they teach, and deliver out of the
Prophets, and Apostles: for if the stars and Sea marks should change their
places, and remove to and fro, the poor passengers that look for constant
direction from them, are likely to be carried and cast upon quick sands and
rocks, and so be overthrown and drowned: in like manner if Teachers be
variable, and changelings in their doctrines, the souls of their hearers (not
knowing where to have sure direction) are as likely to suffer shipwreck and
sink into the pit of hell.

Use. People ought to have their hearts stablished, and settled upon the
doctrine of religion taught, and proved unto them out of the word; by the
direction whereof they are to be passed unto the haven of happiness. If this
be learned of the body of this land, our peace and prosperity shall be
stable, within our walls and palaces: ye^ Gods protection shall be a wall of
fire round about us. So much of that verse.

Verse. 14. And Enoch also the seventh from Adam prophesied of such, saying:
Behold the Lord comes with thousands of his Saints.
THe Apostle having in the latter part of the former verse repeated the
conclusion of the reason, which is, that these seducers shall be destroyed,
(the blacknes of darkness being reserved for them) he confirms that
conclusion by a worthy testimony of Enoch; who prophesied that the Lord would
give judgment against all ungodly men: and therefore these ungodly men verse.
4. must needs be destroyed. In this testimony consider two things: first the
preface before it: secondly, the testimony it self. In the preface he names
the author; who was Enoch: and commends him in that he was the seventh from
Adam. Here two questions are to be answered: first, whence had Jude this
history, seeing it is no where recorded in the Scriptures? and how knew he it
to be Enochs? I answer two ways: first, he either had it and learned it to
be his by some tradition which went from hand to hand: (or else written by
some Jew) or secondly, he learned it out of some book which went under Enochs
name: then extant in the days of the Apostles, though now lost: it is certain
that one of these ways he had it.

Hence the Papists gather that the Jews had unwritten traditions, and
consequently all their traditions are to be observed. Ans. We deny not all
unwritten traditions, of which some are true and profitable: but we renounce
and deny all those traditions which are made articles of faith, and rules of
Gods worship, necessary to salvation, (for all such doctrines are written in
the books of the Prophets and Apostles, which contain perfect direction and
rules concerning faith and manners) of which kind the Roman Church holds
their traditions to be: this is of another kind, it being no article of faith,
nor necessary to salvation to know whether Enoch writ this prophecy or no.
Again, from the second answer, others who are no Papists, conclude, that some
books of Canonical Scripture are perished and lost. But this is untrue; for
then first the fidelity of the Church, which is the keeper of these Oracles,
should be called in question: and secondly, in the books Canonical extant,
not one sentence, or tittle, no not the sense of any sentence is lost: how then
should whole books come to be lost?

It is alleged that the books of Solomon are most of them lost. Answ. The
books of Solomon which were lost, were books of humanity and Philosophy:
for he writ of all beasts, birds, trees, even from the Cedar in Libanus to the
hyssop upon the wall: the books of humane truth might fail, but no part of
Canonical Scripture.

Ob. Mention is made in the Scripture of the books of the Chronicles of the
Jews or Kings of Judah; but these are perished. Ans. They were politic
histories, as are the Chronicles of England, or other Countries.

Ob. The books of Nathan, Gad, Idd^, Shemaiah, and other Prophets are
perished. Ans. All these (as is though by the learned) are contained in the
books of the Kings, Chronicles, and Samuel.

Ob. This book of Enoch is lost. Ans. First, it is doubted whether it was a
book or no, or went by a tradition. Secondly, if it was a book, it was no
part of Scripture: for Moses was the first penman of Scripture, who lived long
after Enoch.

The second question: why does the Apostle make choice of this testimony of
Enoch, rather than some other Prophet? Answ. Himself gives two reasons.
First, He was not the fourth from Adam Ca^^ son, Genesis 4.17. but the seventh of
the posterity of Seth: Genesis 7.18.
he was the seventh from Adam: it is therefore an ancient testimony, to be
received and reverenced for the antiquity: but withal it shows what is true
antiquity; namely* when a doctrine of religion can be proved from some
Prophet or Apostle: (for this testimony was a prophecy) and therefore that
antiquity which the Church of Rome challenges to her religion and doctrine is
but counterfeit; because they are not able to justify the maine points
thereof from any Prophet or Apostle: yea in these wherein they dissent from us
they cannot bring their proof and descent from within the first hundred years
after Christ. It is then a vain plea and false pretense of them to boast of
the antiquity of their religion. The second reason is in the word prophesied:
for Enoch spoke not this of his own head or motion, but from God; for no
creature, Angel, or man, can foretell things to come; it being a prerogative
properly belonging unto God. Ob. Yes, but the learned Physician can truly
foretell the death of the patient to come. Ans. He does not properly herein
foretell a thing to come: for the death of the party is present in the signs
and causes of it. Ob. But the Devil could foretell Saul's death, 1. Sam. 28.19.
To morrow shall thou be with me and thy sons. Ans. The Devil could not
properly foretell it, but might see it in the causes and signs. Again, he
might speak so to Saul; because God had made him an instrument for the
execution of that judgment and destruction: so as God only properly
foretells that which is simply to come, and no man or Angel.

The second point is the testimony it self. Behold the Lord comes etc.] In
which observe three points: first, the coming of the Lord: secondly, the
judgment of the Lord: thirdly, the cause of it in the 15. verse: To give
judgment against al men, etc. First of the party coming: Behold the Lord
comes.] Where the Apostle speaks in the time present, which is put for the
time to come: which form of speech shows the certainty of Christ's coming
to judgment; who shall as certainly come, as if he were now already coming.
Concerning which certainty, it may be demanded first, whence comes this
coming of Christ to be so certain? Ans. From the unchangeable will of God,
which has certainly decreed the same. Act. 17.31.
For he has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness. And thus are all other the articles of our faith most certain,
in that they are grounded on the unchangeable will and word of God.

Secondly, how or from whence may we know this will of God to be so certain?
Ans. From the manner of propounding the doctrine of it; wherein the evidence of
the spirit plainly appears, saying peremptorily; the Lord comes: evidently
expressing the certainty as if it were now present. And the same may be spoken
of the whole scripture, which in it self is most sure and certain, because it
is the most unchangeable will of God: but how do we know it so to be will some
say? I answer, by the evidence of the spirit, the authority, purity,
majesty, effect, and ends of the doctrine: it need not seek evidence
elsewhere than from it self, not from man or the Church it self. The Romish
Church confesses it is of it self, and in it self sufficiently certain, but
not to me or thee, except the Church say so: but this is a false position. The
Scripture is certain both in it self and unto us, and we know it so to be
though never a man would acknowledge it: the heart seasoned with grace will
make the mouth confess it.

Secondly, the Apostle speaking in this form, he comes, for he will come:
we learn to set before our eyes the coming of the Lord Jesus to judgment,
and to make account of every present day as the day of his coming: the
Scriptures every where commend watchfulnes unto us, which is to do nothing else
but to make reckoning continually of this day. But some will say, we cannot
make account daily of it, for we see it comes not: neither may we enquire
into the time of it. Answ. Although we cannot exactly make account of that
day of general judgment, yet may we well reckon upon the day of our
particular judgment, and the day of our own death, that so we may be fitted
thereto: For as this shall leave us, so that shall find us. A necessary
doctrine and duty to be enforced in these drowsy days, wherein every man
almost puts off the evil day, and makes league and covenants with death
and hell: the young man presumes of length of days: the old man dreameth he
may live one year longer: both of them defer hereupon their repentance, in
that they both are of one mind, namely, that their Master will yet defer his
coming. Thirdly, we must not only carry within us a conceit and opinion of
this day; but also must be inwardly affected with it, that we may walk in awe
and reverence before God in regard of it. 2. Cor. 5.11. Knowing therefore the
terrors of the Lord, we persuade men etc.

Now in the latter part of this verse, the attendants of the Lord in his
coming are mentioned in these words: With thousands of his Saints: which must
be understood not only of Angels, but men also, 1 Thessalonians. 3.13* at the coming
of the Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints. Qu. How can this be, and how
shall the Saints come with him? Ans. All men shall rise with their own bodies,
good and bad, at the sound of the Trumpet: then shall the Saints be taken up
into the clouds to meet Christ, and shall be made a part of his attendance:
but the wicked shall stand upon the earth, wishing the mountains and hills to
fall upon them, and hide them from the presence of the Judge. Which affoordeth
a most special comfort unto all them who know themselves to be the members of
Christ, they shall not need to be dismayed at that day, nor fear the face of
the wicked, seeing they shall be received in the clouds, into fellowship with
Christ before the judgment begin: which manner of proceeding the Apostle
having described, concludes with the same: 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.17.
Wherefore comfort your selves one another with these words, verse. 18. Here
also may be noted the power, majesty, and omnipotency of Christ in his
second coming, although his first coming was base and in the form of a
servant; now he shall come with many millions of Angels and Saints; whom all
creatures cannot resist: let no wicked man think then either to absent
himself, or escape his fearful wrath: the only way to avoid it is in thy
life time to meet him by repentance.

Verse. 15. To give judgment against all men, and to rebuke all the ungodly
among them, of all their wicked deeds, which they have ungodly committed:
and of all their cruel speakings, which wicked sinners have spoken against
him.
THe second point in the testimony, is the judgment of the Lord, which
together with the cause is in this verse described. Concerning the judgment
we must know, that it is either general or special: both of them here
mentioned: the former in these words: To give judgment against all men; the
latter in these words following: And to rebuke all the ungodly among them.]. In
the general judgment it may be asked how Christ can be said to give
judgment against all men; seeing the Saints shall come with him, and he will
pass no sentence against them? Ans. The meaning is, he will give judgment
upon all men: for the godly shall receive and hear a sentence, but of
absolution: and amongst all men he will rebuke the ungodly: all persons shall
come unto judgment without exception, of what age, sex, or state soever they
be. This universal judgment teaches us, first, to redress before this day
come whatsoever within us would when it comes confound us, for every man must
appear in his own person: no Procter shall be allowed to speak or solicit
for any man; the secrets of all hearts must be disclosed, and every man shall
receive accordingly to that he has done. It stands men therefore in hand to
reform things amiss before hand, for they shall appear nakedly even as they
are. We must be condemned by our selves, or by the Lord.
Quest. How shall this be done? Ans. 1. Cor. 11.21. Judge thy self before
hand, and thou shall not be judged of the Lord; arraigne, examine, cast and
condemn thy self, sue for pardon as for life and death, and thou shall escape
that fearful judgment: For he that confesses his sins and forsakes
them, shall find mercy, Prou. 28.13. Thus do and mercy belongs unto thee.
Upon the same ground Paul raises the same duty, admonishing all men every
where to repent, because he has appointed a day in which he will judge the
world in righteousness, Act. 17.30.31. Secondly, seeing there is a day of
universal judgment, seek in the mean time to stop the mouth of thy
conscience, that it may then stand with thee to excuse and acquit thee, and
never dare to offend again and wound it, for it is a deputy Judge under God;
which if it condemn thee, much more shall God the great Judge, being greater
than thy conscience. Thirdly, hence in all actions our care should be to
approve our hearts unto God, especially in hearing and speaking the word,
prayer, use of the Sacraments, yea and all our endeavors should be to please
and obey him; who one day will give an upright sentence upon them all. Thus the
consideration of the judgment to come, made the Apostle Paul endeavor to
approve all the actions of his life unto God, 2. Cor. 5.11. So Peter 2. Epist.
3.11 seeing all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of men ought we to
be in holy conversation and godliness, looking for the hasting unto the coming
of the day of the Lord?

The special judgment is laid down in the next words, and they contain two
things: first, the persons who shall be judged; All the ungodly among them.
Secondly, the manner of their judgment in the word rebuke or convince. The
persons are set out by their property of ungodliness, which is a sin
directly against God: and the ungodly man is he who denies God the honor due
unto him: of whom (that we might the better know him) the Scripture has given
five notes or properties: as first, that he knows not, or acknowledges not
the true God aright according to his word. Psalm. 10.4. All their thoughts be
that there is no God, that is, they acknowledge him not, in his presence,
providence, justice, or mercy. Secondly, he subiecteth not his body, soul,
and conscience to the laws of God in all things: but takes liberty to live as
he list. Job. 21.14. They say to the Almighty, Depart from us, we will none
of thy ways. Psalm. 50.16. They hate to be reformed. Thirdly, in heart and
life he depends not himself upon the will, power, providence, and good
pleasure of God; but on something out of God in himself, or some other
creature; Abac. 2.4. whereas the just man lives by faith, the wicked man
exalts himself, and is puffed up as bearing himself upon something besides
the Creator. Fourthly, he worshippeth not from his heart the true God, he
lifts not up his soul in prayer, or thanksgiving: but as a beast receives
blessings contenting himself within himself, never looking higher to the hand
reaching them out unto him. Job. 21.15. Who is the Almighty that we should
serve him, and what profit is it to call upon him? Psalm. 14. He never calls
upon God. Fifthly, he hates the Church and people of God, and when occasion
shall serve he will testify it by persecuting the same. For he that loves not
God, loves not his adherents. Psa. 44.5. They smite down thy people O Lord,
and trouble thine heritage. These be the notes of them against whom sentence
shall pass when they shall be judged: from whence two duties are to be
learned. First, to deny all ungodliness, and to put far from us all the
properties thereof. Secondly, to exercise our selves unto godliness and all the
duties thereof: as first to learn to know God aright, both in his own
attributes, and also in his affection to us ward, never quieting our selves
till we know him to be our Father, our Redeemer, our Sanctifier: and this
knowledge of him is life eternal. Secondly, to subject our selves, our lives,
wills, affections, speeches, and actions, to all his laws: for to shake off the
yoke of obedience to any part of his word is rebellion. Thirdly, to go out of
our selves, as being nothing in our selves; and in our hearts depend upon the
will and good pleasure of God, living by faith, making him our rock, our
tower, our fortress, and strong defense in all estates, yea in life and in
death our advantage. Fourthly, to worship him not only outwardly (as hypocrites
may do) but to serve him in our spirits, giving him our whole hearts. Fifthly,
to love all men, but especially Gods Saints, and the householde of faith;
affecting the particular congregations; and chiefly delighting in the Saints
upon earth that excel in virtue. Thus walking with God, as Enoch did, we shall
escape this most woeful sentence which shall be pronounced against the ungodly
ones of the earth.

The second thing in this special judgment is the manner of it in the word
rebuke.] God rebukes two ways: first in mercy, when as in justice he
reme^breth mercy, Hab. 3. Secondly in justice, yea in anger and wrath: Psalm.
6.1. O Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath: and this latter is here meant. So as
thus much is here signified, that the Lord will power out his fury, and his
wrathful indignation upon all the ungodly of the earth. This wrathful rebuke
has two parts: first, the conuicting of the ungodly in their own consciences,
of all their wicked thoughts, words and works; and this the word also
signifies, Reu. 20. The books shall be opened, and all men's sins shall be
laid open: that is, they shall be so discovered, as they (being convinced)
shall not be able to deny them. Secondly, the punishment that shall follow
that conviction. So David prays, Psa. 6. Neither chastise me in thy heavy
displeasure.

Doct. Hence we learn that al things are fully and perfectly known unto God;
and all things are open before him: Heb. 4.13. yea they are naked, and as it
were vnquartered before his eyes: for the Apostle alludeth to the cutting up of
a beast, or the anatomizing of the creature, wherein men are curious to find
out every little vein, or muskle, though they lie never so close: even so the
Lord shall find out every transgression, although never so secretly conceived
and concealed, and that in such sort as he shall convince the ungodly man,
whose mouth shall be shut so soon as ever his book is open: which should
teach us, first, in matter of religion to avoid all dissembling and
hypocrisy. Be as thou seem, or seem as thou art.
Be that in deed what thou seem to be: for though thou may delude men,
thou can not deceive the Almighty, but he shall convince thee. Secondly,
let thy dealing before men be plain, simple, without fraud, couin or deceit;
for though thou may gloss with men, who cannot convince thee, yet the
righteous Lord shall rebuke thee for want of righteousness in thy dealings.
Thirdly, humble thy self before God always for all thy known sins; yea and
for thy unknown sins also: for though they be unknown to thy self, yet
they are known unto him, who will one day convince thee of them all, except
thou prevent him by thy repentance.

The third thing propounded in the testimony, is the cause of the judgment,
in these words: Of all their wicked deeds which they have ungodly committed,
and of all their cruel speakings, which wicked sinners have spoken against
him.] The cause is twofold, the deeds and words of men: the deeds are
distributed, first, by the property of them, being works of ungodliness.
Secondly, by the manner of performing them, they are ungodly committed. By
ungodly works are meant all sins against any part of the law of God, whether
in the first or second Table: for every sin (though it be directly against
man) has in it a defect, and ^. withdrawing of some duty due to God.
Secondly, for the manner, these works being ungodly and failing against the
law, are done after an ungodly manner: and that work is done ungodly which
proceeds from an unrepentant heart, and a mind addicted and devoted to
ungodliness, which is known and discerned to be such a one by three notes:
first, because it purposes to commit sin before hand. Secondly, Notes of an
ungodly and unrepentant heart.
in the committing of sin it is delighted and takes pleasure in it. Thirdly,
after sin it walks in the same course, yea runs on in the same ways
without remorse or repentance: and this clause seems to be added to put a
difference between the godly and wicked, who both of them may commit ungodliness
and be found in ungodly actions; but not both committing them in an ungodly
manner: for the child of God before he sin he purposes it not, yea he has
a purpose not to sin; so as he may say it is not only besid^, but against his
purpose. Secondly, in his sin he has a resisting, and strife against it, and
is not wholly swallowed up in the pleasure of it. Thirdly, he lies not in it,
but renews and recouereth himself again by faith and repentance: so as
though he do wickedness, yet he does it not wickedly, but weakly, being
overcome and foiled by corruption. And hence is it that this wicked work being
found in the hands of Gods children, though it deserve death: yet through grace
it shall be no cause of his condemnation.

Doct. The principal cause of condemnation is not this or that sin, but the
lying and trading therein, which argues an ungodly heart: to commit ungodliness
indeed, makes men subject to condemnation; but to commit it ungodly, this
brings swift judgment. Secondly, The godly commit ungodliness, but not
ungodly as the wicked.
a wicked man sins not of infirmity, for he commits ungodliness in an
ungodly manner, and tradeth in wickedness, wickedly: the sins of infirmity
befall not the graceless sinner, but the regenerate only, in whom frailty
fails grace for a time: the drunkard may excuse himself and say his sin is
his infirmity; yet is it not, but a wickedness, wickedly committed: so of the
covetous person and other sinners. Thirdly, mark Gods great mercy with much
thankfulness: in that the regenerate doing wicked actions as well as the wicked,
are not condemned for them as the wicked are: For there is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1.

The second cause of the judgment is the speeches of the wicked, set out by
two properties: first, they are cruel: secondly, they are uttered against God.
An example of such speech we have in Lamech, Genes. 4. Whosoever kills Caine
shall be revenged seven fold: but whosoever offends me, I will revenge my
self seventy times seven fold; a cruel and bloody speech vanting it self
even against God himself.

Use. First, hence it follows that wicked words and works are causes of lust
condemnation. Ob. Then good words and works are causes of salvation. Ans. The
reason is not good: for wicked men's sins be perfectly wicked, but the actions
of the regenerate are not perfectly good. Secondly, we are hence to bewail the
ungodly words and works that have passed us, which bind us over to
condemnation, and above all things in the world to sue to God by prayer for
pardon: yea to give our selves no rest, till we have within us the witness of
Gods spirit, witnessing to our spirits that we are graciously accepted, and
that our ungodly works are removed out of his sight. Thirdly, we are to mark
those persons whose lives and mouths abound with ungodliness, and communicate
not with such; but mourn for them as Lot did, whose righteous soul was vexed,
not only in seeing the wicked works, but also in hearing the filthy speeches
of the unclean Sodomites. Psalm. 42.3.
My tears (says David) have bin my meat day and night, while they daily say
unto me, where is thy God? Fourthly, our duty is to avoid every wicked way
and word, and endeavor to have our speech seasoned with salt, and ministering
grace to the hearers. Fifthly, consider hence what we in this land may justly
be afraid of, seeing ungodliness so exceedingly abounds, godliness decreaseth:
the godly are taken away, the wicked reproach those that are left even for
religions sake, and for such religious practices as stand both by Gods law, and
the laws of the land, by such speeches as these: Thou art one that runs to
sermons; do thou learn this and that there? thou art full of the holy
Ghost, the Devil is within thee. And such like most wretched and ungodly
speeches, justly deserving fearful judgments: The wickedness of inhabitants
ouerturne whole kingdoms, Prou. 28.2. It behoues us then to betake our selves
to speedy repentance; lest speedy vengeance overtake us unawares.

Verse. 16. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts,
whose mouths speak proud things; having men's persons in admiration, because
of advantage.
IN this verse the Apostle returns again to his former purpose, and still
continues the rehearsal of the sins and vices of these false teachers,
against whom he writes; and against whom he has already alleged twelve
several sins; and in this verse adds six more, of which some
notwithstanding have been touched in the sins formerly condemned. Herein we
will first show the nature of the vices themselves, and secondly lay down the
contrary duties so far as they shall concern us.

These are murmurers,] By murmuring we are to understand a certain fruit of
impatience, whereby men show themselves displeased with the work of Gods
providence, especially when his hand is upon them, and they are under the
cross. Example whereof we have in the Israelites, who when Moses had brought
them out of Egypt, they murmured and repined that they were fed with Manna
only, and wanted their fleshpots which they had in Egypt: see Deuteronomy. 1.26.27.
where this sin is called rebellion against God; and therefore is no small
sin. For the avoiding and preventing of which sin, we must learn two
duties: first, in silence and subjection to calm and quiet our hearts in the
reueiled will of God upon us, though therein our own wills be crossed. Psalm.
4.4. Examine your selves, and be still. Psalm. 37.7. Be silent unto God, and
wait on the Lord. Which is al one as if he had plainly said: Let Gods will be
your will also. Isai. 30.15. In quietness and confidence shall be your strength.
Herein our strength must be exercised, not in resisting, but enduring the hand
of God. Secondly, we must show our selves truly thankful to God in all things
befalling us: yea, even in evil things, which otherwise may be occasions of
murmuring. Job. 1. The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, blessed be his
name. Ob. But this may seem harsh and contrary to reason to bless God for
crosses. Ans. Not a whit, if we conceive that according to our deserts, he
might plunge us into the pit of hell: and therefore if he mitigate of that
justice, and remember his mercy more easily correcting us, herein all the
praise of mercy is due unto him.

Complainers] So called for two causes: first, because they are discontented
with their present outward estate wherein God has placed them; the portion that
God has allotted the^ likes them not; they are displeased that they are not
as others be, and that they have not as others have. Secondly, because upon the
frowardnes of their disposition they are easily displeased, and hard to please
again, soon incensed, and not so soon satisfied; and thereupon are commonly
complaining of the hard measure they seem to receive at men's hands. But
especially they are so called in respect of the former reason. This is not the
sin of that age only, neither only of those persons, but is even a common
sin of our times, and that of the richer sort: for these are the poorest
amongst men, ever whining, and complaining that their state is not so good as
others, nor as they would have it: and although they know (as we say) no end of
their wealth, yet know they no end of their wishings and desires. We on the
contrary are hence to learn, first, to think well and speak well of that
estate in which God in his providence has settled us, be it better or worse.
Phil. 4.11. In what estate soever, I have learned therewith to be contented.
Heb. 13.5. Be content with that you have. First, carry not covetous, aspiring,
and malicious minds and affections: but if thou must needs be desiring,
satisfy thy self with Jacobs desire: Only the Lord be with me, and if he
give me food and raiment in this my journey, it is sufficient. Secondly, our
hearts must be set to obey God even in poverty and affliction, Gods will must
be obeyed, in being both done and suffered of (...).
and bear adversity with an equal and moderate mind, our obedience must not
only be active in doing; but passive also in suffering his will. Phil. 4.12. I
can want and abound, I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.
Hebr. 10.34. The faithful could with joy suffer the spoiling of their goods.
Thirdly, we must endeavor to show all meekenes to all men upon all occasions,
putting off all morositie, waiwardnes and difficulty to be satisfied and
appeased. Christ's voice was not life up in the streets; he endured all wrongs,
forgave all injuries; and all the members of his body put off likewise their
wooluish dispositions: they cease to be Tigers, Lions, Cockatrises: and become
Kids, Isai. 11.16.
Lambs, little children, easy to be handled, hardly offended, and quickly
pleased: which disposition we must put upon us.

The third sin; [ walking after their own lusts] is fitly expounded in
Eccles. 11.9. where the young man is ironically willed to walk in the ways of
his own heart, and in the sight of his own eyes, etc. even so these men live
in their sins, according to the leading and lusting of their own corrupted
hearts: which sin is before in the fourth verse touched; and somewhat also is
further to be spoken of it in the rest of the Epistle. Our contrary duty is
twofold: first, if at any time by frailty we fall into any sin, never to go
on in the same, but break it off, and return unto God: for to walk after his
own hearts lusts, is a note of a wicked person and an enemy of God. Psalm.
68.21. Surely God will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairie pa^^ of him
that walks on in sin. Secondly, we are to frame our lives clean against
the lusts and inclinations of our own hearts; waging battle continually
against them, ever crossing and thwarting them: Romans 13.14. Take no thought to
fulfill the lusts of the flesh. Galath. 3. They that are Christ's have crucified
the flesh, with the lusts thereof: for whosoever believes truly the pardon of
his sins by Christ's death, cannot but mortify the lusts of his wicked heart;
besides that the whole course of Christianity is nothing else but a continual
conversion and turning unto God.

The fourth sin. Whose mouths speak proud or swelling things.] That is, they
boast themselves of knowledge, holiness, and things not to be found in the^. The
same with the Devils sin, Luke 4. All this will I give thee, for they are
mine, and I give them to whom I will: wherein he shows himself the father of
lying and boasting. It is noted also to be the property of Antichrist, as to
whom was given a mouth which spoke great things and blasphemies, Reu. 13.5.
which was meant of the Emperor indeed, but so as the second beast, which is
that Antichrist, should do all things which the first beast could do before
him, ver. 12. It is also the noted vice of all heretics and seducers, 2. Cor.
10.12. to exalt and praise themselves. The contrary duties are, first, In
common speech neither to praise, nor dispraise our selves, for vanity lurketh
in both: besides that, modesty will not suffer the former; and the latter is
to occasion others to praise us, which is but vanity. Secondly, when in speech
we compare our selves with others our equals, we must ever think and speak
better of them than our selves. Phil. 2.3. Let every man esteem other better
than himself. Paul comparing himself with the Apostles, said he was the least
of them all; because he had been a persecutor, 1. Cor. 15.9. Thirdly, if any
speak of his own wants, when just occasion is offered, he must speak even
the most against himself. As Paul, that he was the head and chief of all
sinners. Fourthly, if a man upon just occasion be moved to commend himself,
first he must do it in all humility and modesty: so Paul speaks of himself
in another person: 1. Cor. 12.1. I knew a man in Christ which was taken up into
Paradise, etc. And in nothing was I inferior unto the very chief Apostles,
though I be nothing, verse. 11.

The fifth sin. Having men's persons in admiration,] The word person in
scripture signifies the face, and outward appearance of a man, and consequently
the things belonging unto the person, as riches, honors, dignities, for the
which these false teachers have men in admiration. Qu. Is it not lawful to
admire a Prince, or other Potentates at all? Ans. Yes: but when men admire them
only for their person, riches, honors, nobility, without respect of the fear
of God, or true virtue, this is unlawful, and the sin of these men: wherein
is also included the contempt of the religious poor, yea and also of the rich
themselves, if they truly fear God. Iam. 2.1. My brethren, have not the faith
of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons: teaching us that it will not
stand with true Religion, nor with the faith of Christ to honor men only
because they are rich or noble.

First, note here that no man carries so base a mind, and such slavish
affections, as the proud ambitious person; he magnifieth the great man, and is
seruilly addicted unto him even for outward respects, not esteeming him for
that which is indeed worthy to be respected. Secondly, the condition of great
men (for the most part) is miserable, A great misery of great men to be most
admired, but least admonished.
who have many to admire them, but few to amonish them: rich men are admired
for wisdom, whereas the same men, if they were poor, would carry away no
praise thereof. Ahab had four hundred false prophets who thus admired his
person, but only one Micha who faithfully admonished him. Thirdly, our duty
is to honor them that fear God, rich or poor, high or low: it being a note
of a child of God to contemn a vile person that is a wretched sinner, Psalm.
15.4.
but to honor them that fear the Lord, be they never so base: and yet the
honorable much more, if they be found in the ways of religion.

The sixth sin. Because of advantage.] That is, for profits sake: where their
covetousness, which before was touched, is here again taxed: the effect of
which affection is to blind the mind that it cannot judge aright of persons or
things: it makes a man account an enemy of God rightly honorable, and to
deem the things below of highest regard. Let us weed out of our hearts this
bitter root of covetousness, which otherwise will so blind us, as we cannot
truly discern the people and things of God, but take Egyptians for Israelites,
and accept of the red pottage in stead of the blessing.

Verse. 17. But, ye beloved, remember the words which were spoken before of the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ.
IN these words the Apostle goes about to answer an objection that might be
made by the Church after this manner: We cannot be resolved that these men
against whom ye write, are so ungodly as you would make them: The answer
whereto is framed in the 17.18. and 19. verses. The effect of which is, that in
the last times there shall be mockers, and these be no other than the men of
whom he writes: and lest they should yet doubt of the truth of that he spoke,
he brings in the testimony of the Apostles in the confirmation of the same:
so as his doctrine was no other than that which was before by them delivered.
Where three things are to be considered: first, a preface to the testimony,
verse. 17. Secondly, the testimony it self, verse. 18. Thirdly, the amplifying
of it, verse. 19.

For the Preface. But, ye beloved, remember etc.] First, the Apostle Jude
sets out his own duty and practice, in that whatsoever he speaks it
proceeds of love: and he is not carried away in speaking or writing with
sinister affections; and therefore he calls them Beloved. This ought to be ye
practice of al Teachers, who out of their inward love to Gods people committed
unto them, are to utter whatsoever they teach: yea and no man in any other
calling may lay aside this affection in the discharge of the duties thereof,
seeing it is the end of all the Commandments.

In the second word remember] is laid down the duty of the Church and
faithful people of God, which is to remember the words spoken by the Apostles
of the Lord Jesus Christ. Which we also in this age are to be exhorted unto
for very weighty reasons: first, it is a notable remedy against al sin, and
especially the forenamed sins: Psalm. 116.11. In my haste I said all men are
liars; that is, when I remembered not the word of God; but forgot my own duty,
and was carried away with the stream of my own affections against faith, then
I failed and was foiled. Psalm. 119. I have hid thy testimonies in my heart,
that I should not offend against thee. Secondly, this remembrance is a notable
remedy against heresies, and schisms, and all false doctrines, and is of much
use in these our days, wherein we are in danger to be seduced, partly by
Atheists, partly by Papists, and partly by carnal Gospellers; against all whom
we had need to be well fenced, and armed by the reading, knowing, believing,
and remembering the words of the Prophets and Apostles, which only are as
David's sling to overthrow the great Goliahs. Thirdly, it is an excellent means
to settle the conscience in the truth by persuading the same: and the rather to
be enforced, because many allege that there are so many Religions and
opinions, that they will be of none, for they know not which to betake
themselves unto. But if these were diligent in the words of the Prophets and
Apostles in reading, searching and sifting out the truth in humility, they
should find wherein to settle themselves.

Secondly, by this second word all Teachers are to take notice of their duty,
which is to whet the word of the Apostles upon the hearts, minds, and memories
of their hearers, so as they may learn and remember them: and the rather
because in former ages religion was destroyed, and superstition prevailed,
because that men laid away the Scriptures out of their hands, and betook
themselves to the exposition of other men's writings; and to gloss upon the
sayings of their ancestors: whereby they brought a black darkness over these
parts of the world. The Prophets and Apostles give another direction. Malachy
the last of the Prophets refers unto Moses and the former Prophets; and Jude
the last of the Apostles unto the former Apostles, showing what ought to be
the scope of all Teachers that would follow their steps.

Thirdly, hence all Students of Divinity are taught what they must most
remember, namely the words and writings of the Apostles: for these are the key
of the old Testament and of the whole Scripture; which duty if it were well
observed, Popery, superstition and Atheism could not so far prevail, but
fall down to the ground, as Dagon before the Arc.

Thirdly, he names the authors of the testimony, who were the Apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ, implying their authority; and taking it for granted, that
whatsoever they spoke or writ must be received as an infallible truth, and may
not be contradicted. Now the better to know both what the Apostles were, and
what this authority is, consider three points: first, their calling, and the
greatness thereof; They were called by Christ's own mouth, Ioh. 20.21. As the
Father sent me, so I send you: by which comparison he designeth them to a
particular and weighty calling, standing in these points: first, as Christ was
immediately called by the Father, so were the Apostles immediately called by
himself. Secondly, as Christ was sent from the Father to preach to the whole
world, being the great Prophet and Doctor of his Church; so Christ sends them
into the whole world, for the whole world was their charge. Thirdly, as Christ
was sent to reueile his Fathers will, which before was hid to the greatest part
of the world; so they were sent by Christ to reueile the Fathers will, partly
in making things more fully known, which were before but darkly shadowed: and
partly in foretelling things to come, they all being Evangelical Prophets. In
these three stands that comparison: in regard of which manner of the^^
sending they are above even the Angel^ themselves, nay the Angels were as it
were but their scholars. Ephesians. 3.10. Now unto principalities and powers in
heavenly places is made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God, that
is, by the ministry of the Apostles, the mysteries of God concerning man's
redemption, have bin reueiled to the Angels themselves.

Secondly, consider their Authority, which was most authentical, seeing that
neither in teaching or writing they could err, being specially privileged
therefrom: Matthew. 10.19. It shall be given you in that hour what ye shall say.
The peculiar promise of direction belonging to the Apostles is recorded in Ioh.
16.13. The spirit of truth shall lead you into all truth; in which regard they
were bold to join themselves with the holy Ghost. Act. 15.28.
It seems good to the holy Ghost and us, namely in ordering the Church
affairs: yet here that distinction which is falsely applied to the Pope, is
true in the Apostles, by reason of this assistance; that as they were private
men, and in other causes they might, and did err, but not as Apostles in
performing their office Apostolical.

Thirdly, their work or office, they were Master builders of the Church of the
new Testament: yea founders thereof, both by teaching doctrines, and informing
the manners of men: far passing all Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, or
ordinary Ministers since their days. 1. Cor. 3.10. As a skillful Master
builder* I have laid the foundation, and another builds thereon. For the
furthering of which great work in their hands, they had given them first a
power to work miracles for the confirming of their doctrine. Secondly, of
giving the holy Ghost by imposition of hands. Thirdly, an Apostolical rod to
strike, and correct obstinate offenders; by the which Peter smote Ananias and
Saphira with present death: and Paul Elymas with blindness.

Use. Mark that now the Pope claiming authority Apostolical from Peter: it
is but a false challenge; for that authoriti^ ceased with that office, and
seru^ only to lay the foundations of the Church withal, being both
extraordinary as (...) calling was: and personal, ceasing with the persons of
the Apostles. So as if the Pope succeeded Peter in any thing, The Pop^
succeeds Peter only in denial of Christ.
it is in the denying of Christ: it cannot be in founding the Church, which was
done to his hand so many hundred years before him*

Verse. 18. How that they told you that there should be mockers in the last
time, which should walk after their own ungodly lusts.
THis verse contains the testimony it self, the preface of which was laid
down in the former: wherein two things are to be noted: first, the time when
wicked men shall abound in the Church: in the last time.] Secondly, what manner
of persons they are; namely, described by two properties: first, they are
mockers: secondly, fleshly.

For the time: It is called the last time: which is the time from the Ascension
of Christ unto the end of the world. It may be asked, how could this be called
the last time, seeing it is sixteen hundred years ago? Ans. It is so called
for two causes: first, because it goes next before the end of the world, and
shall be closed up of the last day: 1. Corin. 10.11. To admonish us upon whom
the ends of the world are come. Secondly, in regard of former times, according
to the several ages of it, in which God altered the condition of his Church,
and renewed his covenant from time to time unto the same: as first plighting it
with Adam, and afterward renewing it to Noah: thirdly to Abraham often
repeating it: fourthly to David: fifthly, at the return out of the Babylonish
captivity: sixthly, at the coming of Christ. But now Christ being come, and
that fulness of time wherein the former prophecies are fulfilled and
accomplished, the shadows and ceremonies are abolished, and the new covenant of
grace established; there remains no renewing thereof, neither any other
alteration of it: but as Christ has already appeared in his humility by his
first coming; so nothing is to be expected now but his second coming in
glory: and this is the proper and principal cause why this is called the last
time.

Secondly, concerning the persons of the ungodly me^ they are described, first
to be mockers. These are described by Peter, 2. Epist. 3.3. In the last times
shall come mockers, which will walk after their lusts, and say, Where is the
promise of his coming: that is, those that shall scorn all religion, and make
a mock of God, godliness, and godly men: than which there is not a greater
height of wickedness: of whom Solomon speaks as being so far gone, that they
are past all admonition, Pro. 9.8.
and therefore would not have them admonished: and David makes this the
highest degree of a wicked man's proceeding in his sin, to sit him down in
the chair of scarners, Psalm. 1.

Use. This part of the testimony is most truly verified in our age. Popish
doctrine a mockery of Christian religion.
First in the Romish Church whose religion sets up a plain^ mockery of God,
and of Christ, of Scripture and of true religion. First, for Christ they make
but a mock of him: the true Christ is a King, and so they say, but the Pope
must control him, both in making laws of his own to bind the conscience,
as also in adding and detracting from Christ laws what he will: the true
Christ is a Savior; but they make every man a savior of himself, by meriting
salvation: for they teach that Christ merited, that we might merit our own
salvation: yea the true Christ is a Mediator, but yet Saints must be
intercessors: and his Mother, whom they entitle the Queen of Heaven, must
command her son by the right of a Mother, to hear their prayers, and
forgive their sins; what is this but to make his Mother Mediator in his
stead? Secondly, as for the Scriptures, they renounce the original Bible, and
the Greek and Hebrew text as corrupt, and will admit of none as authentical,
but the Latin translation: yea and of that allow no sense, but that which the
Pope authoriseth, and sets down: what is this else but to make a mockery
of the Scriptures? no Bible, no sense will serve, nor must stand, but the
Popish sense, which is indeed to reduce all scripture to the Popes will and
determination.

Secondly, if we come home to our selves, we shall find this scripture
verified among the swarms of Atheists, which make but a scorn of the word and
Religion: tell any man almost of his duty, he will be ready to say; How know
you these to be Moses writings? and these to be the Apostles writings which
go under their names, and may not falsehood be written as well as truth?
These are most profane and blasphemous scorners: but such as were prophesied
of before by the Apostles themselves.

Again, amongst those that profess religion are many scorners; that let a man
make but a show of goodness, and begin to make conscience of his ways, if he
will not blaspheme and swear as he was wo^^: if he will not drink with the
drunkard: if he refuse such company as he conuersed with before, or will not
do as others do, he is presently condemned for a precise fool, or with such
reproachful terms; how then is not this prediction of the Apostle
accomplished, when even the performing of moral duties, yea and such as stand
by the laws of God and the land is scoffed at, as a blemish? When scorners are
so rife, and bold even in the face of the Church? when where God has his
little flock, the devil has a large kingdom? let us not be offended too
much, when we hear and see these scorners* but then acknowledge the
accomplishment of this prophecy, and contrarily love and reverence the word of
God as a most precious treasure.

The second sin whereby these ungodly men are described, is, that they walk
after the lusts of their own hearts, wherein two things are included: first,
that these ungodly men shall have their hearts filled with ungodly lusts.
Secondly* that they shall walk after these lusts. Concerning the former sundry
things are to be known: First, what this lust or concupiscence is. Ans. In the
Scripture it is of two sorts, either original, or actual: or it may be
considered two ways: first, as it is the fountain or offspring of all other
sins; or secondly, as it is a fruit of the corruption of our hearts. The
former is an impotencie of the heart, whereby it is inordinatelie disposed to
the desire of this or that evil: of which James speaks, chap. 2.14. Every
man when he is tempted, is drawn away by his own concupiscence: hence is the
whole corruption of the heart, or original sin called lust, because it
principally shows it self in these lusts. The latter is actual lust, that
is, every inordinate and evil motion of the inner man against the law of God,
which proceeds as a branch or fruit from the fromer root. Romans 6.12. Let
not sin reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should obey it in the lusts of
it: where, by lusts, are meant the flames and motions of lusts springing from
the former fountain. This lust I call first an inordinate motion, to
distinguish it first from a holy lusting in the regenerate. David lusted after
and desired the commandments of God, Psalm. 119.127.
yea above gold and silver; and there is a lust of the spirit against the
flesh, Gal. 5.17.
as well as of the flesh against the spirit. Secondly, from a natural lusting,
which is an appetite after meat, drink, etc. which in it self is no sin.
Lazarus desired without sin the crummes under Dives his table. These lusts
then are not to be condemned, but only lusts inordinate. Secondly, I say every
evil motion; because lust in the Scripture comprehends all thoughts and
motions against Gods law, so is the Commandment to be understood: Thou shall
not lust, Ephesians. 2.3. Among whom also we had our conversation in times past in
the lusts of the flesh, in fulfilling the will of the flesh, and of the mind.
Where the Apostle inlargeth it unto all motions, inclinations, passions, and
perturbations of the heart, mind, will or affections: so far as they are not
directed by the law of God. This text must be understood of actual lust: of
which there be two degrees: for sometime it is sudden, and sometimes
voluntary: the former is the first motion of the mind conceived, but without
consent. The latter is the motion conceived, but with consent, purpose and
deliberation; which may be made plain in this similitude. The eye is sometimes
cast upon an object on a sudden, without any purpose or intention of the mind:
but sometimes purposely and steadily upon the same: and as in the twinkling of
the eye it is often shut without thought or purpose: but sometimes again of
purpose and deliberation to prevent some hurt: so is it in the mind; the heart
is a furnace of lust, the flames whereof arise sometimes upon the sudden, and
sometimes upon leisure and deliberation; both these degrees must here be
understood. Concerning which lusts there be three things further here to be
considered: First, the quality and nature of these lusts; in that they are
said to be ungodly lusts; such as their root is, such are these branches: and
therefore are in their nature properly sins, yea principal and master sins,
yea and sinning sins, causing men to go on in sin. Qu. If they be sins,
what Commandment of the ten condemns them? Ans. Sudden lust before consent
of will is condemned in the tenth: but voluntary with consent is condemned in
all the nine former. If this distinction be not held, we cannot make ten
Commandments. For in all the Commandments lust is forbidden; necessary then
it is that lust should be thus distinguished, and also referred, as we have
said. Quest. Some may ask: In what Commandment is original sin condemned?
Ans. Some say it is forbidden in the whole law, which is not untrue; but yet it
seems to be directly condemned in the first and last Commandments: for these
two concern properly the heart of man: the first respecting the heart directly
so far as it concerns God: the last so far as it concerns man, whether
himself, or others.

Use. This teaches us to detest the Popish error, which teaches us that
inordinate lusts be no sins, if consent of will be not added: but that is
false: for if they be conceived in the mind, they are the sins of the
mind, condemned in the tenth commandment. Ob. But they say, there can be no
sin properly produced without consent of will. Ans. In civil matters the
reason is good, that none can be accessarie unto sin, unless consent of will
be added: but in divine matters and in the Court of Conscience it is far
otherwise.

Secondly, in the lusts note the property of them, in these words: Which walk
after; their property is to reign in men, and to cause men to give attendance
upon them: yea and to walk after them. Where they are not resisted and
repressed, they make that man a vassal and slave unto them. Romans 6. Let not
sin reign in your mortal body, to obey the lusts of it. Where the Apostle
insinuates so much that they force and compel men to the obedience of the^:
the whole order and course of which regiment is lively described, Iam. 1.14.15.
by five degrees: first, lust tempts, and that two ways: first, by
withdrawing the heart from God: secondly, by intising, and intangling the mind
with some delight of sin. Secondly, lust conceiueth, when it causes the will
to consent, and resolve upon the wickedness thought upon. Thirdly, it brings
forth when it forces a man to put in execution the things consented unto and
resolved upon. Fourthly, it perfecteth the birth of sin, urging a man to add
sin unto sin, until he come to a custom, which is a ripenes and
perfection in sinning. Fifthly, it brings forth death, that is, everlasting
vengeance and destruction: in all which he alludeth unto the beginnings,
proceedings and end of a man; who after he is past his full strength, decaieth
again and dies: by these degrees the lusts of the heart rise unto this reign
and regiment in the heart of every wicked and natural man, where grace
overcomes not nature.

Thirdly, observe the number of these lusts. After ungodly lusts.] Where he
speaks in the plural number as of many: for original concupiscence is the
seed of all sin in every man: and look how many sins there be in the
world, so many lusts are there in the hearts of men: so as seeing there is no
number of the evils in the world, even so are the lusts of the heart
innumerable. Therefore truly may we conclude, that ungodly men have their
hearts filled with ungodly lusts.

The second point in the words is, that these ungodly men shall walk after
their lusts; which is then done, when men first suffer their hearts to be
withdrawn from God by evil lusts and motions: secondly, give assent
thereunto: thirdly, practice them: fourthly, keep a course and trade in
sinning, which is the perfection of it. Thus a man denies the true God, and
excludes him out of his heart, and sets up the devil, yea his own lusts
for his God, unto which he becomes a slave; so as this is no small sin.

Doct. Hence note a difference between the regenerate and the reprobate: for
if the child of God be enticed and drawn away from God, he grieueth for it,
and gives not ready consent unto the temptation. Secondly, if through
frailty he be ouercarried to give consent, yet it is not full consent; but he
does it against his will and purpose, for his purpose is not to sin. Thirdly,
if he put lusts in execution, he lies not in them, he will not walk after
them; but recouereth himself, because he is incorporated into Christ: he has
the root of grace, which shall not utterly die in him, the seed abides in
him, which at last shall sproute up to repentance and amendment of life: and
hereby may a man know whether he be the child of God or no.

Use. First, whereas all men good and bad have innumerable lusts in them, we
are to take notice of the vileness and uncleanness of our nature, which is common
to the good and bad, between whom there is no difference but by grace: our
endeavor must be to see more and more these lusts stirring and moving
themselves against God and man. Secondly, to mourn and bewail them. Thirdly,
to pray that God would bury them all in the death and grave of his Son, that
they stand not up in judgment against us; being every of them sufficient to
procure our eternal destruction.

Secondly, we must not suffer sin to reign in us, Sin will dwell in us
while we dwell in the flesh, but it may not reign as a commander in us.
for this is the part of an ungodly person: true it is that lusts will be in
the heart whilst a man is in the flesh: but they must be resisted, that they
may not reign and rule the heart. Quest. How shall we keep under the lusts of
the heart from reigning over us? Ans. Seeing sin reigns in the mind by
evil thoughts, our thoughts on the contrary must be framed according to the
word, and ordered by the counsel thereof: according to the Apostles advice,
Phil. 4.8. If any thing be honest, virtuous, of good report, we must think of
these things. Coloss. 3.16. Let the word of God dwell plentiously in you.
Again, lust reigns in the memory, by remembering vanities, wrongs, and wicked
speeches and actions: we must therefore remember our sins, the number and
greatness of them, the curse of the law against them, the day of our own death,
and the general judgment; the remembrance of which shall be able to keep
out, or at least to keep under these ungodly lusts. Further, seeing it
reigns in the affections of pride, revenge, hatred, etc. we must learn the
exhortation, Phil. 2.5. Let the same mind be in you that was in Jesus Christ:
that look as Christ was most mild, meek, humble, patient, full of love
toward God and man, so ought our unruly affections to be conformed unto his.
And lastly, seeing it reigns in the body by idleness, ease, sleep in
excess, which make the body an instrument of sin, we must always
diligently inure our selves to the duties of our callings; using fasting,
watching, and prayer: by which means well observed, the lusts in the heart may
still trouble and molest us; but they shall not rule and reign over us.

Use. 3. If it be the property of a wicked man to follow after ungodly lusts,
we ought to purge our selves from all the lusts of the flesh and spirit, 2.
Cor. 7.1. lest these defile our bodies and souls in the powers and parts of
them: to do which the better, Matthew. 5.8.
remember that blessed are the pure in heart: secondly, to inure our selves
unto the fear of God, seeing the fear of God is clean, Psalm. 19. that is, it
cleanses the heart, and breaks the neck of all noisome lusts.

Verse. 19. These are makers of sects, fleshly, not having the spirit.
THis verse contains the application of the former testimony unto the
particular persons whom it concerns: setting down who they be that are
scorners and followers of their lusts: namely, scorners are they that make
sects, separating themselves from the people of God: and followers of their
lusts be those who are fleshly, and without the spirit: which words being
applied to these seducers, fasten two sins more upon them. The first whereof
is, that they are makers of sects. The second, that they have not the spirit.
For the former, the word signifies a singling and separating of themselves
from the Church and people of God, and consequently the making of sects to
themselves: neither may this seem strange that there should be such persons
that make such separation; seeing it is the nature of every sinner to fly from
the presence of God, as Adam did: and Peter when he had seen a part of the
glory of Christ, bad him depart from him for he was a sinner. The prodigal
son must have his portion apart, and will not be persuaded to live with his
father; and every ungodly man withdraws himself unto perdition, Heb. 10.38.

Doct. First, it is a great sin for a man to separate himself from the
assemblies of Gods people: because first it is a flying from God and his
presence, whose face every one is commanded to seek; seeing he presents
himself in the Word and Sacraments, and wheresoever two or three are assembled
in his name, etc. Secondly, it is a contempt of Gods ordinance, which whosoever
despises, despises God himself. Thirdly, out of the Catholic Church is no
salvation: the saying is true, Whosoever will not have the Church for his
Mother, shall not have God for his Father. Fourthly, the congregations of Gods
people on earth are the suburbs and gates of the kingdom of heaven; whosoever
therefore shuts the gates of this kingdom of grace against himself here,
shall never enter into the gates of the kingdom of glory hereafter.

Use. Our duty hence is to join our selves to the assemblies of the
faithful, not forsaking the fellowship that we have among our selves, Heb.
10.25. but keeping the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3.
being like minded one toward another, Romans 15.5. speaking one thing as those
that are knit together in one mind and one judgment, 1. Cor. 1.10. And if we
would separate our selves, then let us depart from the Atheists and Papists in
their corrupt doctrines and wicked conversation. Secondly, such are justly
reprehended who seldom come to hear the word, receive the Sacraments, and to
call upon God in the congregation: for so much as they can they cut themselves
from the kingdom of God, in rejecting the means of their salvation. Ob. They
allege for themselves that if they should come, they should hear but a weak
man like themselves speak unto them; and if Christ himself or some Angel
should preach unto them, they would hear willingly. Ans. Lay aside all
disputing, and yield unto the wisdom of God, whose ordinance it is that men
should be taught by men, and not otherwise. Ob. They say further that they have
the Bible, and the sermons of the Prophets and Apostles at home, and none can
make better sermons than they: and again, that they can get knowledge enough
to salvation by themselves: and some say they have knowledge sufficient and
need no more. Ans. First, Gods ordinance must be acknowledged, and reverenced
in the public Ministry, and in the midst of the assemblies: and private
duties must give place to public. Secondly, the word is not only to be known
but affected: now although knowledge may be gained privately; yet the
affections must be wrought and moved in the public Ministry. Thirdly,
those that know the most, know but in part; and the Ministry is instituted,
not only to initiate and begin men, but to confirm them in grace, and lead
them to perfection: for which end the Lord has given Pastors and Doctors of
the Church to teach men, until they come unto a ripe age in Christ, which is
not till death.

Now for the further clearing of this point, two questions are to be resolved.
1. Quest. Seeing it is a sin for a man to sever himself from the Church of
God; where and what Church is that to which a man may for ever join himself
with a good conscience? Ans. That people which hear, believe, and obey the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, are the true people and Church of God,
unto which a man may safely join himself. Diverse notes there be, but the
infallible notes of the true Church are, knowledge, faith, and obedience unto
that doctrine; these were the notes of the Primitive Church next after Christ:
Act. 2.42. First, they continued in the Apostles doctrine. Secondly, in
fellowship, wherein the duties of love are comprehended. Thirdly, in breaking
of bread, that is, the administration of Sacraments; for the celebration of the
Supper is put for both. Fourthly, in prayer, that is, invocation of God with
thanksgiving. In that Commission of the Apostles given for the gathering
together of the Church of God, Mat. 28.19.
they are enjoined first to teach all Nations: that is, to make them Disciples,
namely by the doctrine Prophetical and Apostolical. Secondly, to baptize
them, that is, to bring and admit them into the house of God. Thirdly, to teach
them to perform all things which they were commanded. In which Commission two
of these notes are expressed. Ephesians. 2.19. The Church is founded upon the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. Ioh. 8.31. If ye abide in my word, ye
are truly my Disciples. Ioh. 10.27. My sheep hear my voice and follow me.
Psalm. 147.19. He shows his laws to Jacob, and his statutes to Israel, he
deals not so with every nation. Hence we note, that we may not join our
selves with the Jews or Turks, who renounce the words of the Prophets and
Apostles: neither yet with the Papists; for though in word and speech they
hold this word, yet in deed and in the sense they corrupt it, even in the
foundation.

The second question. But what if there be errors in the Church, or things
amiss; may we not then separate our selves? Ans. Things that may be amiss in
the Church must be distinguished: for some faults concern the matter of
religion: some the manner: the former respects doctrine principally: the
latter the manners of men. First, for things amiss in the manners of men we
may not separate; but with Lot have our righteous hearts vexed, and grieved
with the wicked conversation of those among whom we live. The Scribes and
Pharisees sitting in Moses chair, teaching Moses his doctrine must be heard,
howsoever the corruptions of their manners be such as they may not be
imitated, Matthew. 23.1. Yet here observe further, Whom we may not separate from
in public assemblies, we need not privately converse with.
that although we may not separate our selves from such corrupt persons in the
public assemblies, yet in private conversation we may abstain from them. 1.
Cor. 5.11. If any that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an
idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one eat^
not: that is, eat not privately. Secondly, if the Church err in matter of
religion, then must we consider whether the error be in a more weighty and
substantial point, or in matter of less importance. If it be in smaller
points (the foundation being kept) we may not separate our selves. 1. Cor.
3.15. If any man's work burn, he shall lose, but himself shall be safe, yet
as if it were by fire. Now if the error of the Church be in substance of
doctrine, or in the foundation, then we must consider whether it err of humane
frailty, or of obstinacy: if of frailty we may not separate. The Church of
Galatia was through frailty quickly turned to another Gospel, and erred in
the foundation, holding justification by works: yet Paul writes unto it as
unto a Church of God. So likewise the Church of Corinth erred grievously, and
overthrew the Article of the Resurrection: and yet Paul behaved himself
accordingly unto it. But if the Church err in the substance of religion
obstinately, then with good conscience separation may be made. 1. Tim. 4.5. If
any man teach otherwise, and consent not to the wholesome doctrine, from such
separate thy self. An example hereof we have in Act. 19.9. when Paul had
preached in the Synagogue of the Jews, and could not prevail with them, but
they began to blaspheme and speak evil of the ways of God, then he withdrew
himself and separated from them. 1. Chro. 11.14.16. when Jeroboam had set up
the two Calves to be worshipped, many of the best disposed Jews departed from
him and came to Rehoboam, and joined themselves with Judah and Jerusalem in the
true worship of the God of their Fathers. Whence we see that no man may with
good conscience separate himself from the Church of England; seeing it
teaches, believes, and obeys the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles.

Further, consider the manner of the separation of these wicked men: there be
three sorts of separation: First, by apostasy, when a man falls wholly from
his religion, from the Church, and from common grace. Heb. 6.4. It is
impossible that they which were once enlightened, if they fall away, etc.
Secondly, by heresy, when men err in the substance of doctrine and religion,
and that of obstinacy. Thirdly, by Schism; and that is when men hold the same
faith and foundation, and yet disagree and separate in regard of order and
ceremony. These seducers separated themselves by heresies: their heresies were
these: first, that men being in Christ might live as they list, and so they
were Libertines. Secondly, that among the people of God there ought to be no
civil Magistracy, and so they became also Anabaptists. Here observe that even
in the Apostles time and days were many heretics; among whom was Hymeneus and
Philetus, 2. Tim. 2.17. and many wolves entered even in their days which spared
not the flock. Which may serve to stablish our minds against the Papists, who
object that our religion is the foundation of al heresies: as at the rising of
which many heresies were revived: in so much as they call all our religion
heresy, and the professors of it heretics: by which reason they might as
strongly prove, that the doctrine of the Apostles themselves was heresy, and
that the Primitive Church in the Apostles time was heretical and no Church:
for in the first hundred years after Christ the Church swarmed with heresies,
sown by Satan's instruments, to the choking of that holy doctrine which was
sown by the Apostles and their successors in the field of the Church: nay
rather we conclude our religion to be Apostolical, because the same heresies
which arose up in the Apostles times against their doctrine, now revived again
upon the reviving of our religion.

The second sin of these seducers in this verse is, that they are fleshly, or
natural men. For so it is explained in the last words [ not having the spirit]
wherein consider two things: first, who is a natural man: secondly, that it is
a sin to be a natural man, for it is noted as a maine sin in these
seducers. Touching the former, a natural man is he who living a natural life
is endued with a reasonable soul, and is governed by nature, reason, and sense
only; without grace or the spirit of God: which may appear first by the word
natural; which signifies such a man, as in whom the best thing is nature, and
in whom there is nothing more excellent than his reasonable soul, though
corrupted. Secondly, by the exposition, or rather opposition in the words:
wherein it is opposed unto the spirit, who is wanting unto such a one to lead
him in the way of a heavenly life. Further, that yet we may know this matter
the better, there be three things to be found in a natural man: 1. He has a
body and soul united together in one person. 2. In his soul he has
excellent powers and faculties, as will, understanding, affections. 3. He has
all the ornaments of man, yet so as without grace: such as are, strength of
body and mind, memory, knowledge of Arts and Sciences, civil policy and
virtues, as Justice, Prudence, Temperance, discretion to discern what is meet
to be done, what not: these are ornaments incident to corrupt nature, serving
not to abolish, but to restrain and bridle corruption, and contain men in
order, for the preservation of humane society. Now he that has these three
and nothing else, is but a mere natural man.

The second point is: that it is a sin to be a natural man. Here it may be
asked, how it comes to pass that a natural man, because he is a natural
man offends God? Ans. There be two things in every natural man to be
distinguished: first, there is nature: secondly, the corruption of nature: the
former is from God: the latter from man's fall: which two may be indeed
distinguished, but cannot now be separated: the one is not the other; but the
one is not without the other; this corruption is that sin which presses us
down, and hangs so fast on, Heb. 12.1. which has corrupted the whole man, so
as the whole frame of man, that is, his whole disposition and inclination is
corrupted and evil from his youth, Genes. 8.21. his wisdom is enmity to
God, that is, even the best thing that is, or can be in the flesh, is hateful
to God, Romans 8.5. himself is dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1. having
no more ability to move to any thing truly good, than has a dead man to
bestirre himself in and about the actions of life.

For the cleerer beholding of this corruption of man's nature, mark that there
be two degrees of it: the former whereof is a want of that goodness and
righteousness which at first was, and now ought to be found in our nature. The
latter is a pronenesse and disposition unto all evil, which carries the heart
on every occasion thereunto: this corruption must be conceived as an ocean
sea, sending out into every channel and vein of the soul, and whole man,
streams and floods of wickedness: for look into the principal powers of the
soul, ye shall need to go no further for the finding of this truth. For
first, in the mind is such an impotencie, as whereby it is unable to think or
approve of any thing that is truly good 2. Corin. 3.5. We are not sufficient
of our selves to think of any good, but all our sufficiency is of God. 1.
Cor. 2.15. The natural man perceives not the things of God; which is most
manifest thus: first, he knows not God himself aright; for although he may
know God as an infinite and eternal being, or in some other attribute, yet he
cannot know him as a father to himself. Secondly, he knows not, neither
conceiueth the corruption of his own nature, nor his sins original and
actual in the stain and danger of them. Thirdly, he conceiueth not of the
remedy of sin, the death of Christ: but accounts it foolishnes that life
should be brought out of death. Secondly, as his mind is blind, so a natural
man's will is rebellious, and is not subject unto the will of God, neither
indeed can be. Ioh. 6.44. No man can come to Christ, unless the Father draw
him: insinuating our withdrawing of our selves, and resistance of his call,
until he turn us and make our wills, of unwilling, willing wills to will that
which is truly good: whence the Apostle says, that to will, namely that which
is truly good, is not of our selves, it is the gift of God. Now hence we may
resolve that question: why it is a sin to be a natural man? not because a
man has nature in him: but because his whole nature is tainted with original
sin.

Ob. The natural man may plead that he cannot help it; he was borne
sinful: why then should he be blamed? Ans. Romans 5.12. In Adam we all sinned;
for when he eat the forbidden fruit, we even eat it in him, and are no less
blameworthie than he was. Ob. But it will be said; it is no reason that we
should be said to sin in him, seeing then we were not? Ans. Adam was a public
person representing all mankind, and every particular person desce^ding from
him; and therefore what he did, all and every man did in him: Even as a
Burgess in the Parliament giving his voice and assent, all the country or
shire is said to give their voices, though they be absent, and not present
otherwise than in his person. God then giving a prohibition unto Adam, he gave
it unto all us in him; and threatening him he threatened us and all mankind:
this only is the difference that he being the root or flock, and we the
branches arising from him, he sinned actually, and we by relation and
imputation. If then the natural man still plead he was no cause but was
borne so, the answer is clear, The natural man procured that so he should be
borne in Adam, and is therefore excuselesse.
that himself is a cause, although not in himself, yet in Adam before he was
borne he procured that he should be borne a natural man.

Secondly, it may be pleaded again: If I be a natural man, I am Gods creature
as I am; why then should I be blamed? Ans. The former distinction between
nature and corruption of nature must be here retained: for by the former the
natural man is Gods creature, and not in respect of the corruption of nature:
for this he created not, as the other, but suffered it to pass by generation
from man to man, for the execution of the punishment of the first sin.

Quest. Why did not God stay this corruption in Adams person? Ans. God could
have done it; why he did it not, the reason is neither known, nor to be
enquired; a secret it is, but yet a just judgment of God silently to be with
reverence rested in, and not with curiosity to be searched out.

Use. First, some may hence gather, if a man be justly blamed for being only a
natural man, and not having the spirit of God; then every one has power to
receive the spirit of God? Ans. This is no good reason, but is all one, as if
because a bankrout is blamed for not discharging his debts to his creditors;
another man should conclude that surely he is therefore able to pay them. But
these wicked men were blamed here, first* because they professed Christ, but
yet had not his spirit: secondly, because that in Adam they were the causes
that they were borne without the spirit of God, and so made themselves unfit to
receive him.

Secondly, if natural men be justly condemned, much more those that are worse
than they, as Atheists, profane persons, those which contemn the assemblies,
and neglect the means of their salvation, and yet look for salvation as well
as others. The Gentiles who were without the law, do the things of the law by
nature, Romans 2.24. and yet many that profess the name of Christ, and live
under the Gospel, go not so far as those natural men in doing the things
of the law: so as even those Heathens and natural men shall rise up in
judgment, and condemn many a professor of Christ; of whom even many come
short of the Devil himself, who believes and trembles; and yet not a few
professors neither know what the Devil believes; neither through h^rdnes of
heart can tremble at the judgments of God as he can do.

Thirdly, those come far short that think themselves in state good enough,
because they live ciuilly and deal justly and neighbourly, as they say: for
the natural man can do this, and yet shall be condemned: no plea shall stand
at the great day of the Lord, but that which assures of the pardon of sin
sealed up with the blood of Christ. Let a man's outward and civil righteousness
be never so great, yea if it could be equal to the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, which for outward appearance was without all exception; yet if
he bring not a righteousness exceeding that, he can never be saved.

Fourthly, in that the natural man is blamed for being a natural man, this
overthrows all merits of congruitie, which the Papists boast of; because a
man's person not being accepted before God, all his works are sins: the work
never pleases God till the worker first please him.

Fifthly, every professor of Christ must strip the natural man, and become a
spiritual person, that is, such as the spirit of God dwells in: for first,
as the Father works our salvation, by giving Christ and his merits; so must
the holy Ghost by applying the same unto us, else can we look for no
salvation. Secondly, as the soul gives life to the body, which else were
dead; so the spirit of God is the soul of our souls, and quickneth them with
new life being dead in sin. Thirdly, we can never know that we are in
Christ, or belong unto him, but by the presence of the spirit in our hearts: 1.
Ioh. 3.24. Hereby we know that he abides in us, even by the spirit that he
has given us.

Quest. But how shall a man know whether he has the spirit or no? Ans. Let
him examine himself, first, whether he inwardly love and fear God in his word
of promise and threatening: secondly, whether he subject his heart and life unto
him: thirdly, whether his heart be continually lift up in invocation and
thanksgiving. All these are the works of the spirit of God: and they which
(...) of the spirit thus savor and ^ffect the things of the spirit, Romans 8.
Quest. But I fear I have not the spirit, how shall I obtain it? Ans. By using
the means of reading the Word, meditation, and prayer especially. Luke 11.13.
Your heavenly father gives the holy Ghost to th^^ that desire him. Psalm.
143.5.6. I meditate in all thy works; and stretch forth my hands unto thee.

Verse. 20. But ye beloved, edify your selves in your most holy faith: praying
in the holy Ghost.
IN this verse unto the end of the 23. are set down some means whereby all
believers may be fitted to the maintenance of the faith and true religion, unto
the which the Apostle has in the former part of the Epistle persuaded. These
means are contained in five rules here prescribed: first, concerning Faith:
secondly, Love: thirdly, Hope: fourthly, Meekenes: fifthly, Christian
severity: the first of which is contained in this twentieth verse, which is,
that they should build themselves upon their faith; which is not barely
propounded but enforced and urged: first, by a motive in this word, most holy
faith:] secondly, by the means of it, which is prayer; praying in the holy
Ghost.] In the rule note two things: first, that faith is a foundation:
secondly, that the duty of believers is to build up themselves upon this
foundation. Concerning the former: first is may be demanded what is here meant
by faith? Ans. Here by faith is not so much meant the gift of faith, as the
matter of it, namely the doctrine of faith and religion comprised in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles; in which sense it is said, that the
Ephesians were built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, that is,
upon their doctrine, Ephesians. 2. The same was the rock confessed by Peter, upon
which Christ promised to build his Church; and yet in the second place we must
not exclude the gift it self: for although the doctrine be a foundation in it
self, yet it is not so to us, unless we believe it, and apply it to our
selves by this gift. If any man ask what doctrine is this? I answer, the sum
of it may be reduced to three heads: the first whereof concerns man's misery
by his sin, original and actual: as also the dangerous fruits thereof. The
second, the redemption of man from this misery, and his freedom by Christ.
The third, the thankefulnes which man owes for this deliverance, and ought to
testify and express in newnes of life.

Hence learn first what is the infallible mark of the true Church, whereby it
may be discerned from the false and Apostaticall Church, and that is the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles; for this being the very foundation of
the Church, where it is, there the Church must needs be: and this note of it
self is sufficient to point out the true Church wheresoever. Secondly, seeing
faith is the foundation of the Church, and not the Church the foundation of
faith, beware hence of a damnable doctrine of the Popish Church, which teaches
that there can be no certainty of the points of religion, no nor of the
Scriptures themselves, but only by the judgment of the present Church of
Rome, and that Church must give what sense soever she pleases to the
Scriptures, else has it none: wherein they play the part of preposterous
builders, Papists foolish builders, laying the foundation on the top of the
house.
laying the foundation in the top of the building. Thirdly, it may be demanded
how any doctrine becomes a foundation unto the salvation of men? Answ.
Properly to speak, God and Christ is our foundation and rock, Psalm. 18.1. but
because God reueileth himself and the means of our salvation in the word, it
becomes hence a foundation: as also secondly, because Christ, who is the
proper foundation, is the sum of the doctrine therein contained.

Use. First, let no creature draw us from Christ, for then we are drawn from
our foundation. Secondly, the affections of our heart toward Christ must
exceed all affections of any thing besides: our love, fear, hope, confidence
and trust, must settle themselves upon him as upon a foundation.

The second thing in this first rule is the duty of every believer, which is
to build himself upon his faith; which that a man may do six things are
required: first, he must have in his heart a deep sense and feeling of his
misery in such sort, as not finding in himself whereon to be founded, he may
feel himself to be founded upon God and Christ: even as in laying strong and
sure foundations, men dig deep; and if they find sure ground proceed on in
their purpose: So this wise builder lays his foundation on a rock, Luke
6.48. Secondly, he must have knowledge of this doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles; for unless it be known it can be no foundation. Thirdly, a holy
memory to lay up the word of God in their heart as in a storehouse: for he
that remembers not the doctrine of salvation, can never build upon it.
Fourthly, faith, whereby not only we believe the truth of it, but apply it
unto our selves; this knitteth us unto the foundation, without which the word
shall be no more profitable unto us than the Jews, who mingled it not with
faith, Heb. 4.2. for this only applies it unto our hearts, Iam. 1.21. Fifthly,
the doctrine believed and applied must take a deep rooting in the heart, it
must descend into the affections, and there be embraced until it has wrought
out an experience of the sweet comfort of it. Sixthly, there must be an
unfeigned obedience unto the whole word of God: Not every one that says, Lord,
Lord: but he that does the will of my Father, Matthew. 7.21. This man builds
wisely upon the rock. Quest. But what is that which must be done of us? Ans.
Whatsoever is to be done of us may be reduced to three heads: first, faith,
whereby the believer truly rests himself upon God; cleaves unto Christ for
the pardon of sin, and renounceth all other means in heaven and earth.
Secondly, repentance, whereby he truly turns from all sin unto God.
Thirdly, new obedience, whereby he endeavors to obey God in all his
Commandments.

Use. First, here is reproved the carnal Protestant, who holds his religion
but for form and fashion, or for fear of laws, he is altogether without
foundation, and in a pitiful condition: seeing when the great day of the Lord
shall approach, whosoever shall want Christ, their foundation shall fall before
him. Secondly, we must never suffer our selves to be drawn from our faith and
religion; nor lose our hold of the doctrine of godliness, though we should
suffer loss of lands, livings, liberties, yea or life it self: if this be
once wrested from us, we are fillen (...) the foundation, and have lost (...)
hold of happiness and life i^ self. Thirdly, we may not take any ^est till we
be builded upon this foundation, it being the foundation and groundwork of
all our safety and security: for Christian men are as houses built upon the
sea shore, who must look for the wa^^s and billows of afflictions, one in the
neck of another: even as one surge in the sea ouertaketh another; how should
they hold out when this rain falls, these floods come, these winds blow and
beat upon their house, unless they be founded upon this rock? how else
should not their fall be great? but this sure foundation establishes the heart
against all calamities of this present life, yea in the hour of death also,
which otherwise is the downfall to hell, yea and in the day of judgment the
sentence shall pass on their sides, who are laid on this foundation: they
shall be found worthy to stand before the Lamb, when the devil and his
angels, with all sinners and sin it self shall be cast into the bottomless
lake. Now as every particular Christian man is to be a practiser of this duty
in his own person, so also may it be fitly applied to the state of the whole
land, which by Gods blessing has had for many years this foundation laid
within it: through the which it has been able to withstand, yea and subdue
many rebellions, treasons, forces, and powers, intended against it; and besides
has had security and safety, under Gods protection, with much peace and
prosperity. Would we now know the way to have this peace and security
continued to us and ours? the way is to continue and abide upon this
foundation, not looking back to Popery or superstition; but taking out the
wholesome counsel of good King Iehoshaphat: 2. Chro. 20.20.
Put your trust in the Lord and ye shall be assured; believe his Prophets, and
ye shall prosper.

In this duty of believers mark further, first how the Apostle ascribes
power to the believer to build himself: for although by nature men want this
power (for the natural man cannot of himself so much as think one good
thought) yet the regenerate whom the Lord by his spirit has moved, have a
power given them to move themselves, and build themselves, that which was
before to nature impossible, is made possible by grace.

Secondly, note further the force of the word, (...).
build up which requires not only a building, but a going on, and increasing
in building: as if he had said, Build up your selves more and more. A duty
which nearly concerns men in these days, wherein men decline to Atheism,
and Popery, (which also is but a painted Atheism) when men can content
themselves to go back, and fall from their former love, and are afraid to be
found either hot or cold. This disease of our days has this Apostle forwarned
us of in this Epistle, being one of the last farewels of the Apostles to the
Church. Let us then take notice of our declinings, and do our first works, and
go on forward to perfection, building up our selves daily, lest it come to
pass that the Lord come against us, spue us out of his mouth, remove our
Candlestick with his other blessings, and leave us unto our too late and
untimely repentance.

The motive whereby this rule is enforced upon the church, is drawn from a
property of faith, which is that it is most holy. Wherein (to understand it)
we will show first what holiness is properly: secondly, that faith is most holy.
For the former, in this holiness there be two things: first, a freedom from
all fault and blame: secondly, an excellency or perfection consisting of many
divine virtues. Holiness thus understood is twofold: uncreated, or created.
Uncreated is the holiness of God, which is nothing else but the perfection of
his properties and attributes: this holiness is incomprehensible, and infinite,
yea the fountain of all other holiness. Created holiness is a certain gift of
God, which by some proportion resembles this uncreated holiness of God; the
subject whereof are Angels, man, and Gods ordinances, especially the written
word: so as this holiness of faith is this derived holiness, and not the former.

Secondly, how is the doctrine of religion most holy? Ans. First, in it self,
being without all fault and error, and having sundry excellencies, being full
of divine wisdom and truth, and the only instrument whereby Gods infinite
wisdom and goodness is made known unto us. Secondly, in regard of the effect
and operation, which is to make the creature, but especially man holy: Ioh.
17.17. Sanctify them in thy truth, thy word is truth. It sanctifies men
instrumentally, in that it makes them resemble God in many graces: by this
David became wiser than his Teachers, Psalm. 129. and so resembled God in
wisdom, Iam. 3.17. This wisdom which is from above (of which the word is
the instrument) is pure, peaceable, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and
good fruits, without judging, and without hypocrisy. Thus we see how it
makes men resemble God in all these, yea and in all other virtues. Thirdly, it
is most holy, because it sanctifies all inferior creatures to the use of man,
so as he may use them with good conscience: 1. Tim. 4.4. Every creature of God
is good, sanctified by the word and prayer. Where (by the way) may be noted the
superstition of the Romish Church, which halloweth Bread, Salt, Water, Palms,
etc. for the curing of diseases, casting out of devils, and working wonders:
which practice of theirs is nothing but the defiling and profaning of the
creatures, by superstitious prayer seeming to hallow them, Papists account the
word superfluous in sanctifying the creatures.
yet without any word or warrant, either of promise or commandment: which is
the principal instrument of sanctifying the creatures unto their lawful ends
and uses.

Hence learn first, that the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles is from
God; because it is full of wisdom, without any folly, full of truth, void
of all falsehood; as also most holy both in it self, and in operation and
effect, and in the author, as proceeding from him who is the fountain of all
holiness: it is not of men, neither needs the evidence of men; by this
property only (if it had no more) it carries with it, and contains within
it sufficient evidence against the gates of hell, that it is from God, and holy
as himself is. Secondly, the word being most holy, it must dwell in our hearts
plentifully, and our care must be that it may be written in the tables thereof,
that it may be an ingrafted word, bearing rule over our wills and affections,
yea over our whole lives: for where it rules it sanctifies the whole man.
Thirdly, the doctrine of true faith sanctifies us; but as it is received,
believed, and applied by faith and no otherwise, when it takes place in us
then it sanctifies us: it is not the rehearsing of the articles of it, nor the
knowledge of it, nor carrying about with us the words of it that can work
grace, but the hiding of it and mingling it with faith in the heart: from which
we gather that it is a foul error of the Papists, to teach that the Sacraments
confer grace, by the work wrought, and that as the pen writes by the hand
of the writer, and that of it self, the hand moving it; so the Sacraments of
themselves sanctify, being administered by the Minister: but this is erroneous,
for the Word and the Sacraments are both of one nature, the Sacraments being
none other but the word made visible: but the word read or uttered sanctifies
not by the work done, but by being believed and applied by faith: therefore no
more do the Sacraments by being administered, but by apprehending Christ in
them: grace must be conferred by the spirit of grace, and not by the virtue of
any action in the Sacraments.

The last point in this first rule, is the means whereby believers are to
build up themselves in their most holy faith, and that is prayer [ praying in
the holy Ghost.] Wherein every member of the Church is put in mind of a
principal duty, namely, that whenever we fear, or foresee a falling, and
defection from the faith, by reason either of weakness within, or persecution
without, the^ time it is to repair unto God by the prayer of faith, craving at
his hands strength, and power not only to be preserved from revolt, but also
to be confirmed in the faith and doctrine wherein we stand. The Apostle having
exhorted the Ephesians to stand fast and be strong in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.10.
and having prescribed some means tending to that purpose; in the 18. verse
he concludes the principal of the rest to be prayer; praying always with
all prayer and supplication in the spirit: and that it is so, appears by two
reasons: first, by prayer faith is exercised, yea and increased, according to
the increase whereof, the other graces of zeal, hope, patience, and constancy
are likewise confirmed and animated. Secondly, faithful prayer has a
faithful promise made unto it, Ask^ and ye shall have, seek and ye shall
find, knock and it shall be opened unto you: these promises we must lay ^old
upon and apply unto our selves, for the stirring up of continual prayer, and
strengthening of grace, especially in time of temptation, and in sense of
frailty, and then God will be good in hearing and helping, as his promise is.

Now in this means observe the manner of making prayer in these words, In the
holy Ghost, which are added for four causes: first, to give us to understand
that although a man be regenerate, yet he cannot pray as he ought, unless he
be still moved, helped, and stirred by the holy Ghost. God gives sundry
graces in the conversion of a sinner: first, a preventing grace, which yet is
not at all effectual, unless it be seconded and helped with a supply of a
second grace: for that is true even of the regenerate, without me ye can do
nothing, Ioh. 15. God gives first the will, and then the deed, Phil. 2.13.
yea and the continuance of the doing of that which is truly good: He that has
begun the good work, will perform or finish it, chap. 1.6. Here let grace be
every way grace, lest it be no grace at all; let God who is all in all have all
the glory of all; as for the doctrine of man's merit and humane satisfaction,
which robs God, to enrich man, it here falls to the ground. The second is,
because prayer is a singular and especial work of the holy Ghost in us; who
stirs up in us these groans and sighs which we cannot express, Romans 8. and
makes us cry Abba Father, Zach. 12.10. this spirit of grace and compassion is
promised to be powered out upon the house of David and inhabitants of
Jerusalem: and from hence a man may examine and find whether he be the child
of God or no; for if he have the spirit of God he is his, and if he have these
holy motions and desires to pray, and can send out these cries unto God
unfeignedly, he has the presence of the Spirit; and he that has not this
spirit in these blessed fruits of it, is none of his. Thirdly, these words are
added, to teach us that when we pray, we must do it our hearts; for where
the spirit of God dwells, thence must prayer proceed, but his abode is in the
heart, and therefore prayer (that God many acknowledge it to proceed from the
spirit) must be hearty: and so of all other spiritual duties: Colloss. 3.
singing with grace in your hearts: Romans 1. whom I serve in my spirit: where the
Apostle expresses a reason why prayer should proceed from the heart, because
prayer is of the same nature with faith and the spiritual worship of God, yea
indeed is a part of it answerable unto God himself who is a spirit; but all
these are seated in the heart, and spirit, and consequently prayer it self
ought so to be: neither is it the outward action or words which is simply the
worship of God, but so far as they consent and proceed from the heart. Which
teaches us that whatsoever religious duty we are to turn our selves unto,
we are first of all therein to approve ou^ hearts unto God. Fourthly, that
there may be a distinction made between the true believer and the hypocrite
and carnal man. The hypocrite he prays outwardly for form and fashion; the
natural man in affliction prays of compulsion, as a man that is racked and
tormented, without any love of God at all; both of them without any inward
sense, or rectified disposition of the heart: but the believer he prays in
the heart and in faith, the spirit of God disposing his heart aright unto
prayer.

Quest. How does the holy Ghost direct the heart? Answ. By five ways or
means: first, by illumination, whereby he reueileth God to man, as also his
own estate; both of them in part. Secondly, by conversion, whereby he turns
the heart unto God once made known. Thirdly, by direction, whereby he
directs the heart to deal as with God himself, taking it from outward
means. Fourthly, by fervent and constant desire^ for things spiritual or
temporal. Fifthly, by faith, whereby we can rest on God for the accomplishment
of the things we have heartily desired.

Quest. Whether may we not pray to the holy Ghost, seeing here it is said,
praying in or by the holy Ghost? Ans. We may not only pray in or by him, but
unto him: for although we have no particular example hereof in the Scripture,
yet we have sufficient warrant: for the three persons being undivided in
nature, must be also undivided in worship, and one being worshipped, all must
be worshipped. Secondly, we are baptized into the name of the holy Ghost, as
well as of the Father and Son, and therefore he is to be prayed unto, even as
they are. Ob. But we are not commanded to pray any where by the Father or
Son, as here by the holy Ghost, which argues that the holy Ghost is not
the author of our prayers, as they are. Answ. The Apostle here would have us
observe an order in the working of the Trinity, for all the three persons are
authors of our prayers; the Father and Son make us to pray, but by the holy
Ghost; the holy Ghost makes us pray, but more immediately, for he is the
immediate author of our prayers: which teaches that when we pray, it is not of
our selves, but from the spirit which stirs and sends up heavenly requests
for us: herein then we must renounce our selves, magnify the grace of God
within us, and show our selves thankful by entertaining carefully such holy
motions of this most holy Spirit of God.

Verse. 21. And keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of
our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.
THese word^ contain the second rule of the Apostle tending to the
preservation of faith, and true religion concerning love, and it is indeed of
special use, and direction for the framing of our lives: Christ calls the
love of God and men the sum of the whole law: Paul calls it the end of the
Commandments. This caused Paul to keep faith and good conscience: 2. Cor.
5.14. The love of Christ constrains us. Now for the better informing of our
understandings, and our furtherance in observing this rule, five things are to
be considered: first, what is meant by the love of God? Ans. We are to
understand by the love of God a divine virtue in the hearts of the believers,
whereby they love God and Christ, properly and simply for himself, rest in
him, and cleave unto him as the most absolute good: for by Gods love in this
place is not meant that love whereby God loves man, but whereby man loves God.
Quest. Why does the Apostle here omit the love of man? Ans. Because the love of
man to man is included and to be understood in the other as a fruit
necessarily flowing from it: for first, when a man loves his neighbor, herein
after a sort he loves God: for then is God loved not only when our affection
of love is directed unto himself, but also when his ordinances, his creatures,
image, and other things partaining unto him are loved. Secondly, the Apostle
Paul calls the love of the neighbor the fulfilling of the law; Gal. 5.14.
which cannot be unless we include also therein the love of God, or rather it
within Gods love, and join them both together. Now if the love of man be the
fulfilling of the law, how much more is the love of God, which by the same
reason must include the other? Thirdly, it is a true rule in Divinity, that
the first Commandment must be included and practiced in all the nine
following, as being the foundation of them all. Now the maine duty of the
first Commandment is the love of God, which must go with the practice of all
the other, The love of God grows not naturally in our own grounds.
so as all the duties of the other Commandments are included in ye same.

The second point is, whether this love of God be in man by nature, or given
by grace? Ans. It is not from nature, but a gift of grace following faith and
justification. Ioh. 14.14. If ye love me, ye will keep my commandments;
both which proceed from one beginning: as no man then can by nature keep the
Commandments, so no man can by nature love God aright. Romans 8.5. The wisdom
of the flesh (that is man's best things, his best thoughts and affections) is
enmity to God, therefore can there be no true love of God in nature. 1. Tim.
1.5. The end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience and faith unfeigned. Again, we must first believe that we are
loved of God, before we can love him. 1. Epist. Ioh. 4. We love him, because
he loved us first. It will be objected here, Luke 7.47. Many sins are
forgiven her, for she loved much: where it seems that love is the cause of
forgiveness of sins. Ans. I answer, this word (for) does not signify here a
cause, but a reason drawn from the sign, as it is also elsewhere used; this
then is the sense, many sins are forgiven her, and hereby ye shall know it,
because or in that she loved much.

Note hence first that doctrine of the Church of Rome to be false, whereby
they teach that before justification there must be a disposition and aptitude
in a man thereunto, standing in a fear of hell, love of God, etc. for by this
doctrine ye love of God in man should go before justification, which is a fruit
and follower thereof. Secondly, that is as false, that love is the soul and
life of faith, for though in time they be both together, yet in the order of
nature love follows after faith, and therefore cannot be the form and soul
thereof. Thirdly, it has bin the opinion of some, that faith apprehends
Christ by love, and not by it self; but this is also erroneous: for love in
order follows apprehen^^on of Christ, and therefore Christ is not apprehended
by love. First we believe, and being knit unto Christ by faith, then our hearts
are knit unto God by love.

The third point is, what is the measure of love whereby we must love God and
man. Ans. According to the two distinct parts of the word of God, are
prescribed two distinct measures of love. The measure of the law is to love God
without measure, for it requires that we love God with all the powers of our
bodies and souls, and with all the strength of all these powers, Luke 10.27.
This measure is not now in our power to perform, no not although we be borne
anew: for being still flesh in part, some of the powers of our strength are
withdrawn from the love of God. The Gospel is a qualification of the law, and
moderateth the rigor thereof; it freeth a man not from loving God, but
exacteth not this love in the highest measure and degree, but accepts such a
measure as stands in 3. things: first, in beginning truly to love God:
secondly, in the daily increase in this love: thirdly, in being constant in the
same unto the end: this measure the Lord accepts for perfect love, in those
that be in Christ, in whom the imperfection is covered. Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord
thy God will circumcise thine heart, that thou may love the Lord thy God,
with all thine heart, and all thy soul, that is as if the Lord had said, I
will ingraft the true love of my self in your hearts which you shall increase
in, and constantly proceed in the same, and then I will account and accept of
it* for the full measure of love that my law requires* which distinction is
the rather to be considered, Papists are none of them that can confess that
they are ^^profitable ^hen they have ^o^e all they can.
because the Papists teach* that the love which the Lord requires of
Christians, is the same for substance and measure which the law prescribes:
and for the perfection of our love, they say a man may do more than the law
binds him unto; as if he gave all his goods to the poor, it is more than
ever God in his law has commanded: and if we love God above all creatures
(which they say a man may do though imperfectly) it is the love which the law
prescribes. But all this is most false, and so the Apostle Galath. 3.10.
concludes it, as many ^s are under the works of the law are accursed. If all
men be condemned by the law* then is no man able to perform the love and
duties which it requires: but he takes the former for granted, for else his
argument could not hold; and therefore that none can perform the love which
the law enioyneth is true. Secondly, the common opinion of men is, that they
ever loved God with all their heart, and it i^ pity he should live that does
not so: but it is a m^^re delusion* for if it were so, what needed any
qualification or moderation of the law by the Gospel?

The fourth point is, wherein stands the love of God? Ans. 1. Epist. Ioh.
5.3. This is the love of God, that ye keep his Commandments. Ioh. 14.13. He
that keeps my Commandments is he that loves me: the reason whereof is this,
he that loves God, loves his word, and he that loves his word will bewray his
love in yielding answerable obedience thereunto; and in one word this keeping
of the Commandments stands in these three things: first, in faith, for it
must be the work of a true believer: secondly, in conversion unto God:
thirdly, in new obedience: which shows many a man how miserably he has been
heretofore deluded by Satan* for every m^n professes and pretends the
keeping of the Commandments, and yet the most are so far from doing them
that they know them not neither care to know them.

The fifth point is, how a man should preserve in him the love of God and of
m^n? Ans. First, the means whereby man may preserve himself in the love of
God is twofold: first, every one must labor daily to have his heart settled in
the sense of Gods love toward himself: for the more he shall feel Gods love
confirmed unto him, the more shall his love be inflamed and increased toward
God again; even as the more we feel the heat of the Sun, the warmer we
are. Secondly, we must keep a daily observation of Gods blessings spiritual
and temporal, which is a special means not only to confirm and augment our
love, but preserve it constant to the end. Psalm. 18.1. I will love thee
dearly, O Lord. Why what made David thus resolve himself? the reason is
rendered in the next words; The Lord is my rock, my fortress, my strength,
and he that delivers me. Secondly, men must use the means whereby they may
preserve their love to men; and these are of two sorts, for some stand in
meditation, others in practice. The meditations are four. The first is the
consideration of the spiritual and near conjunction of all those that are
true believers, of which number we profess our selves all to be, who have all
one Father, God: one Mother, the heavenly Jerusalem the Catholic Church; all
begotten of the immortal seed, the word of God* all live by one faith in
Christ, and all are heirs of eternal life and glory. This was Paul's motive
persuading him hereto: Ephesians. 4.3.4. There is one Lord, one faith, one
baptism, one God and Father of all: see Phil. 2.1.2. The second meditation is,
that the duties of love which man shows to man, especially the faithful, God
accepts as done to himself* so says the Wiseman: He that gives to the
poor, l^ndeth unto the Lord. And Matthew. 25. When I was hungry, ye fed me,
etc. namely in my members upon earth. The third meditation is the consideration
of that curse, which is due to them that neglect duties of love to man when
occasion is offered: Matthew. 25. Depart ye cursed, I was hungry, ye fed me not:
to avoid this curse, we must embrace the Apostles counsel, to walk in love.
The fourth is, to consider that the love of man to man is a grace of God, which
leads a man by the hand to the first degree of happiness: 1. Ioh. 4.16. He
that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him; that is, he has
entered the first degree of happiness, for he has fellowship with God: and
verse 12. If we love one another, Gods love is perfect in us. Now as nature it
self can tell us a happiness is to be sought for; so let this grace lead us to
the degrees and beginnings of it.

The second sort of means stand in practice; and the rules of practice be six.
The first is the practice of the law of nature, being the sum of the Law and
the Prophets, by Christ's own testimony: Whatsoever ye would that men should
do unto you, do you the same unto them. The meaning of which golden rule is
this: Look what we would have other men to think, speak, and do to us, that
must we think, speak, and do unto them, and no worse: and on the contrary,
consider what we would not that men should think, speak, or do unto us, that
we must abstain to speak, or think, or do unto them. The practice whereof
would cut off many wrongs, contentions, frauds, and injuries both in word and
deed.

The second rule of practice is in Gal. 5 13. Do service one to another by
love: that is, let every man in his place and calling become servant to
another, and so preserve love by the duties of love. The reason hereof is,
because God (although he might if he had pleased preserved man without man)
would have man preserved by man, and that every man should be his instrument
for every man's good in regard both of body and soul. For which end he has
furnished men with several arts, sciences, trades, and callings, that one man
might stand in need of the help of another. Secondly, we are placed in the
world that here we might serve God indeed, not in speculation only, God will
be served of us in our serving of man.
but also in our whole practice in our standings and callings, he will be
served of us in our serving of man, for these two must go together, and as it
were hand in hand, the service of God and the service of man. Whosoever
therefore employ their callings principally for the purchasing of their
profits, pleasures, honors, and not for the good of men, they abuse their
callings, profane their lives, and mistake the proper end of them, as though
they were borne only to live unto themselves and serve themselves, and neither
God nor man besides: from which too common a practice has that devilish
speech sprung, and by Satan put into the mouths of many men: Every man for
himself, and God for us all. A speech well beseeming those who are at open
enmity with the duties of true love.

The third rule is in Phil. 4.5. Let your moderate mind be known unto all
men. Wherein is commended that meeknes of mind, whereby we can with
moderation and equity bear with men for the preservation of love: see Phil.
2.3. This moderation stands in four actions: first, in bearing with defects
and infirmities of nature, as hastines, frowardnes, desire of praise, slownes,
and such weaknesses, it is the part and property of an equal mind, not to
be severe, or hasty against these, but rather to pass by them, as Solomon
says: It is the glory of a man to pass by an infirmity. Secondly, in
covering many, yea a multitude of sins: yea and if a man be called to reveal
and discover them by way of testimony, it causes a man not to aggrauate the
crime, but equally to speak even as the thing i^. Thirdly, in construing men's
meanings, words, and actions (if it be possible) in the better part, even so
far as the word of God gives us liberty: for it is a fruit of malice to
misconster men, to make an offense where it is not given, or not to be taken,
and that i^ so long as the wickedness is not apparent. Fourthly, in restoring
him that is fallen into a fault, by the spirit of meeknes, courtesy, and
humanity: even as a Surgeon deals with a broken arm or leg, not with
roughnes, or anger, but with mildnes, yea and pity toward the offender, so
setting him as it were in joint again.

The fourth rule is in Romans 12.10. Be affectioned one toward another with
brotherly love. How may that be done? Answ. In the next words, in giving
honor go one before another, not in taking honor as our nature is; but in
preferring others before our selves: and here we must not conceive of this
honor as a mere ceremony, standing in some outward gesture; but it is a
reverent opinion conceived inwardly in the heart, whereby every man thinks
better of another than of himself, and accordingly yields him more honor. But
some will say here, this is hard to do, to esteem of every man better than
our selves, and how may we attain unto it? Ans. Whosoever judges this so hard
a lesson, let him enter into the serious examination of his own heart, without
partiality, let him look narrowly into himself, and he shall epsy such a
body of sin for measure and manner, as he cannot find in any man besides;
so as in the true sense of his estate he can never abase any man so far as he
can himself, whereby he shall come to judge every man worthy to be preferred
and honored before himself.

The fifth rule is in Ephesians. 4.26. Let not the Sun set upon your wrath. A
very necessary rule; for seeing we be but men, we cannot be without many
sinful motions, and especially of revenge upon occasion: but here we are
counseled forthwith to stay and repress them* yea and to break them utterly
off: that although anger, wrath, and reuengefull thoughts will arise up in our
hearts, yet we must extinguish them, and not suffer them to continue with us,
no not for the space of a day. The same Christ himself has taught, Mar.
11.25. When ye stand to pray, forgive, if ye have any thing against any man. So
often then as we are to pray (which is at the least daily) so often are we to
forgive injuries offered to us, for we pray to be forgiven as our selves do
forgive others: men content themselves to carry their wrath a whole year
together, and if they forgive once a year at Easter, or at the receiving of
the Sacrament once a quarter, it is as much (they think) as they need to do:
but they forget that the Sun must not go down upon their wrath.

The sixth rule, Romans 15.2. Let every man please his neighbor. Some will say,
how can this be, for some will never be pleased, if we condescend not to their
corrupt and wicked desires? Ans. The next words expound the Apostles meaning;
for good: What is that? Ans. For his edification: Please men in God, and for
good.
so as the general commandment admits this limitation; that men must be
pleased, but only so far as it tends to Gods glory, their own good and
edification. So Romans 12.18. Have peace with all men; but yet with a double
limitation: first, if it be possible: secondly, if it be in you; or so much as
lies in you, we must not carry cross and thwart minds, as being enemies
unto peace, but apply our selves to the preservation of it in our selves and
others: thus shall we testify our selves to be admitted into Gods kingdom,
wherein the lion and lamb play together, and the young child with the
Cockatrice, Isai. 11. Whereby thus much is signified, that men once converted
shall be so changed and altered, that if they were never so fierce and cruel
against the Church, and one against another before, yet now they shall be framed
to a peaceable and meek disposition toward all men.

Now to persuade us to the practice of these rules: consider first that these
are the last times, wherein most men are lovers of themselves, 2. Tim. 2.3.
and lovers of men for their own advantage, even so far as by them they may
attain and retain their wealth, pleasures, and pomp; but few are they that
love men for God, or his graces in them: now seeing the times more call for
these duties, let us be the more careful in them. Secondly, love amongst men
is the bond of societies; for what else linketh man to man but love? which
therefore the Apostle calls the bond of perfection, and truly, for it makes
men speak and think one thing, and perfecteth their society. Seeing then
Christian societies are Gods ordinances and preserved by love, we are to
labor the more in the preservation of it. Thirdly, the office and action of
love is most excellent, for the manifold gifts and graces which God bestows
on men for the use of the Church and Commonwealth, are all hereby made
profitable thereunto, all ordered hereunto aright, and all hereby applied to
their right ends and uses: the gifts of knowledge, tongues, arts, wisdom and
such like, without love they puff up, but it is love that edifieth, 1. Cor.
13. and which causes man to apply and use these gifts to the good of man.

The third rule for the maintenance of faith concerns Hope, in the next
word^, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.]
Wherein is contained a description of hope, which is this: Hope is a gift of
God, whereby we wait for the mercy of Jesus Christ to eternal life. For the
better conceiving of which grace, consider in the words three things: first,
the person on whom we are to wait by hope, namely our Lord Jesus Christ,
together with the properties of this waiting, which are four: first, it must
be certain without doubting: for the Apostle ascribes a full persuasion and
assurance unto our hope, as well as unto our faith, Heb. 6.11 neither does hope
make a man ashamed by disappointing him of the thing hoped for, Romans 5.5.
Secondly, it must be against hope, that is, against all humane hope, reason,
sense, and whatsoever may be grounded upon these. Thus Abraham believed against
hope, Romans 4.18. Thirdly, it must be a patient waiting on Christ: Romans 8.15. If
we hope for that we see not, we do with patience abide for it: for otherwise
the thing hoped for deferred, makes our waiting painful and tedious.
Fourthly, it must be grounded upon the word and promises of life. Psalm. 130.5.
My soul has waited, and I have trusted in his word: Heb. 6.18. the ground and
anchor of our hope is made not only the promise, but the oath of God who
cannot lie, although he should not swear, that we might h^ld fast the hope
that is set before us.

The second point is, the thing for which we must wait, which is not for gold,
silver, honors, pleasures, but only for the mercy of God in Christ unto life
eternal: by which we must not understand the beginnings of mercy, for these
we already here enjoy, and having the present hold thereof, need not hope for
the same, but for the full measure, and accomplishment of Gods mercies
hereafter to be enjoyed. The like manner of speech has Paul, Romans 8.20. We
wait for our adoption and redemption, not that we are not already adopted
and redeemed; but that it is not as yet fully finished and accomplished in us,
as hereafter it shall be.

The third point is, the fruit and profit of this waiting; and that is life
eternal, and therefore is added, unto life eternal, giving us to understand,
that our waiting shall bring us unto, and set us in the possession of this
life. So as the description stands in setting down two effects of hope,
described first, that it causes to wait on Christ for mercy: secondly, that
it does not fail nor make a man ashamed, for he waits unto eternal life,
and in this expectation is put in possession of the same. From the former
effect we learn first to put a difference between hope and confidence: first,
by hope we wait on Christ, but by confidence we rest upon him, and quiet our
hearts in him. Secondly, hope is of things to come, and confidence of things
present, at least made present by faith. Matthew. 9.2. Have confidence, and thy
sins are forgiven thee. Whence we may discern an error in Popish religion.
They teach with us that a man is to have confidence in Christ, but they include
it under hope, and will not permit that it should be referred to faith,
because then they should be drawn to grant a special faith. But that is
erroneous, seeing confidence is not of things to come as hope is, but of things
present: and therefore although confidence goes with hope, yet it is no branch
of it, but proceeds from faith. Secondly, seeing this waiting is a certain
expectation of Christ, hence I gather that there is a special faith; for if
there be a special hope, there must needs be a special faith to ground this
special hope upon: for we can never certainly wait for that, whereof we are
uncertain whether it belong unto us or no: he that has received the earnest,
may certainly wait for the whole sum; but it is faith which receives the
earnest of the spirit, from whence our hope is raised. Heb. 11.1. Now faith is
the ground of things hoped for: for which cause it is that hope also has his
full assurance ascribed unto it as well as faith. And hence we may further
take knowledge of another of their errors, whereas they teach that hope indeed
is joined with a certainty, but they distinguish of certainty, which is (they
say) either of the will or understanding: hope they grant has the certainty
of will, but not of judgment and understanding: but this is false, seeing the
Apostle Heb. 12. commands to rejoice in hope; which no man can do, unless
the judgment be certain and settled; he that is not certain of mercy, can
never hope certainly for mercy. Thirdly, we learn hence to wait by our hope
in Christ for life everlasting even to the death, that must be the white which
must ever be in our eye, at which we must continually direct our aim. We have
many examples of holy men who have gone before us in this duty: Jacob when he
was making his will, inserteth and as it were interlaceth this speech: O Lord,
I have waited for thy salvation, Genesis 49.18. Moses had his eye ever upon the
recompense of reward, Heb. 11.26. Job would trust in the Lord, yea although he
should kill him, Job. 13.15. David was much and often in this expectation of
the Lords mercy, Psalm. 40.1. In waiting I have waited on the Lord, that is, I
have instantly waited: and mine eyes have failed me, whilst I have waited for
my God, Psalm. 63.3. and Psalm. 16.9. My flesh shall rest in hope: his hope was
that his flesh should rise again unto life everlasting. Object. But how ca^ we
nourish this hope (will some man say) seeing we are so tossed and perplexed
with so many miseries and grieuances in this life? Ans. Paul meets with this
objection, Romans 1.3. We rejoice in tribulation. Qu. How can we do so? Ans.
When we subject our selves unto God in afflictions, he sheddeth abroad his
love in our hearts, and this breeds patience, which brings forth
experience, and experience hope, which makes not ashamed; being the helmet of
salvation, and our anchor which staieth our ship in the troublesome sea of this
life. Fourthly, if we must by our hope wait on Christ; then in all our
requests and petitions unto God we must abide the Lords leisure, not limiting
him, or prescribing the time unto him of hearing; for herein our hope must
exercise it self.

Further, from the object of this waiting, which is the mercy of God, we may
learn diverse points: first, that there is no such merit of work as the
Papists dream of, We must wait for mercy, and not for justice, as the
Papists teach by their doctrine of merits.
for then might we wait for justice, and of due lay claim to life eternal.
But here we have another lesson read us, namely that the Saints of God
justified, sanctified, and so continuing, (for to such Jude wrote, as verse 1.)
must wait for the mercy of God unto life eternal. Yea let a man keep all
Gods Commandments he shall merit nothing, he does but his duty. In the
second Commandment the Lord says he shows mercy on thousands: but who are
they? even to them that love me and keep my Commandments. If Adam had stood
in innocence, he could not have merited any better estate than he was in; how
much less can we since the fall? nay Christ as he was man alone, could not
merit, nor did not, but in regard of the personal union. But the Papist will
here say, that life eternal is promised upon condition, and if we can keep
the Commandments we may merit. I answer, if we keep the condition of our
selves we may merit indeed; but this is impossible, for even our keeping of
the condition were of mercy; and mercy and merit will never meet and stand
together. Secondly, if we wait for mercy in Christ, then must we altogether
despair in regard of our selves of ever attaining life everlasting, for hope
sends a man out of himself, and causes him wholly to rely himself upon
Christ. Thirdly, if we must wait for the accomplishment of mercy, which
tends to life everlasting, then much more must we in our dangers or troubles
wait for Gods mercy in our deliverance. If we must wait for the greater,
we may for the less. Hab. 2.3. At last the vision shall speak, and not lie;
though it tarry, wait. And Isai. 28.16. He that believes makes not haste.
This meets with man's corruption, Wicked me^ in present troubles must have
present help, though from Satan himself.
who in present trouble will have present help, or else he will fetch it from
hell it self, from Satan and Sorcerers: but such never learned to wait on
Gods mercy for salvation; for then could they wait his leisure in lesser
matters for health and ease, and with more comfort make far less haste.

Secondly, from the second effect or fruit of hope, namely, that it deceives
not nor disappointeth him that hops; note first a difference between humane
or carnal, and religious or Christian hope. The former often deceives men, at
least when death comes all such hopes perish: but the second never deceives
a man in time of need, no not in death it self. Secondly, hence a man may and
must believe his own perseverance in grace: for where this hope is, such a man
cannot fall wholly from Christ, for then his hope should disappoint him:
neither from his own salvation, because this hope lays hold on the mercy of
God unto eternal life, and herein can never frustrate his expectation, or make
him ashamed. Thirdly, if our hope bring us to the fulness of happiness, and to
the accomplishment of mercy hereafter, then it brings us to the beginnings
of this happiness even in this life; for the beginning of life eternal is in
this life, and stands in the conversion of sinners unto God, and in
amendment of life: and whosoever has true hope, he is thereby stirred up
unto daily repentance and reformation of life: 1. Ioh. 3.3. He that has this
hope, purges himself, even as he is pure. Now there is none of us but we say
we hope for life eternal, and look to be saved by the mercy of God in
Christ: it stands us the^ in hand to try the truth of this hope within our
selves, and manifest the truth of it unto others, and both these by this note,
namely that we find it to purge our hearts and lives, and that it conform us
unto Christ: for if we hope to be like him after this life, we must labor to
resemble him even in this life, by being in some measure pure, holy, innocent,
meek, loving, etc. even as he was: for otherwise if our lives be not in some
reformation of our selves, and conformity to our head suitable to the
profession of our hope, it is but pretense of hope, and will make men in the
end ashamed.

Verse. 22.23. And have compassion of some, in putting difference; and others
save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, and hate even that garment which
is spotted by the flesh.
THese words contain the two last rules tending to the preservation of the
faith, both of them teaching how we may and are to recover, and restore those
who are fallen or declining from faith or good conscience. For the better
understanding whereof, consider in the words two things: first, the way to
begin this recovery, which is in the end of verse. 22. By putting difference.
Secondly, the manner how they are to be recovered; expressed in both the rules:
the former concerns Christian meeknes: Have compassion on some,] the latter
concerns Christian severity; and other save with fear.] Concerning the
former: the way of this recovery is to put a difference] that is, All errors
are not of the same size.
by Christian wisdom to distinguish between offenders. For our direction
wherein, we must know that men err and offend two ways: first, in opinion
and judgment: secondly, in practice and life. Again, those that err in
opinion are also diversely to be distinguished, according to the diversity of
their errors: for some err in the foundation of religion, and matters of
greatest importance, as the Papists at this day when they teach invocation of
Saints, justification by works, Popish doctrine departs from the foundation.
a real sacrifice for the quick and dead in the Supper, with other false
doctrines racing the foundation: others may hold the foundation, but err in
smaller points of lesser importance. As for example, the Anabaptists holding
that war is not to be made, nor oaths to be taken, err grossly: but yet
herein (though in other points they do) they race not the foundation. These
ought wisely to be distinguished, for he that erres in the foundation,
ouerturneth his faith and religion: but he that holds the foundation, and
erreth in smaller points, does not. 1. Cor. 3.12. If any man build on the
foundation hay or stubble, (...) work shall burn, but himself may be safe.
One thing it is to beat down a wall, to pull down a window, yea some one
side of a house; and another to pluck up the foundation, for this destroieth
al. Which difference if it had been made and minded, many which have separated
themselves from the Church of England had still remained members of it.
Secondly, of those that err in opinion, some err of ignorance and blind
zeal, seeing no other truth than that they hold; as the Jews did, Romans 10.2.
who had the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge: others err of
malice, who know they are deceived, and yet persist obstinately in their error
and false opinion, lest they should lose their credit, as Heretics. Now
between these also a difference is to be put: Tit. 3.10. An heretic after
once or twice admonition reject; for such a one is condemned of his own self.
But if the error be of ignorance, Paul speaks; If any be otherwise minded,
the Lord will reueile it, Phil. 3.15. But here we must always remember, that
seeing we can hardly discern the ground of men's errors whether they proceed
of ignorance or malice, we are ever to condemn their error, but have respect
to their persons, and not pass sentence rashly against them. For the error of
the vbiquitie of Christ's body has been held and maintained b^ many both godly
and learned Protestants; their error we are always able to condemn, but we
may not condemn their persons, no not although they have defended it of
malice, or out of the pride of their hearts, seeing the Lord might give them
repentance before or at their death. Thirdly, again those that do err of
ignorance must be distinguished: for some of them are misled of simple
ignorance, as those who have no means, or very small means to come to
knowledge: others err of affected ignorance, which is when men are willingly
ignorant, having means of knowledge, but refuse the same. The ignorance of
this land more fearful than it was forty years ago.
As above forty years ago the people of this land erred of simple
ignorance, because they had not the means (which yet did not excuse the^) but
now their ignorance is wilful, and affected, neglecting at least, if not
fearfully despising so great salvation: and therefore as the sin of the land is
greater, so the more fearful is the judgment like to be, if it be not
seasonably prevented by repentance. Fourthly, there is also wise difference to
be put between the author of sects and heresies, and those who are by them
seduced. The Sect-masters and leaders are to be used with more severity, and
sin more grievously: Romans 16.17. Observe them which cause divisions among you:
as in a wisely ordered Commonwealth, the heads of conspiracies and authors of
treasons are most aimed at.

Secondly, errors in practice or action is any actual sin, or offense in
word or deed; and men that offend in these are not all to be ranged in one
rank, but to be distinguished. For of these, first some sin of ignorance, not
knowing what they do; as Paul persecuted the Church of God ignorantly, and
through a blind zeal. Now ignorance is twofold: first, general ignorance,
when the thing is utterly unknown: secondly special, when the equity of a
particular fact or some special action is unknown; as oppression and usury
in general are known to be evil; but many particular actions under this
kind are unknown to many so to be: and sometime these two ignorances are
joined both together, according unto which we may put difference between the
faults and offenses of men. Secondly, some sin of infirmity, who know what
they do, but yet are ouercarried by sudden and violent passions of anger,
fear, sorrow, or such like unto evil. Thus Peter denied his Master upon
sudden fear of danger. Thirdly, some sin of malice, being carried unto evil
by the malice of their own will, not of ignorance, or passion as the former, of
this the Apostle s^^^keth, Heb. 10.26. If we sin willingly, ^^ter we have
received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for
sins. Now of this malice of the will there be two degrees: first particular,
when a man wittingly and willingly sins against some particular
Commandment; as Acts 7.51. The Jews were stiffenecked and always resisted
the holy Ghost: that is, the ministry of the Prophets in some things, not in
all. Secondly, general malice, when a man is carried wittingly and willingly
to oppugn all the law of God, yea Christ himself, true religion, and
salvation by Christ, and so reuerseth all the Commandments. This is the sin
against the holy Ghost, and of this degree the Apostle says, there re^^ineth
no more sacrifice for sin: this being an universal and general apostasy.
Now offenders according to these differences must be distinguished.

Further, of those that actually offend, some sin secretly, when it is known
but to some one only; and privately, when it is known but to some few, and
the scandal is the smaller. Some sin publicly, when the sin is notorious
and the offense given great. If the offense b^ secret, the Apostle rules the
case, saying; that love covers a multitude of such sins. For the second, if
the offense be private, then must thou admonish the party between thee and
him: if he hear thee, thou have saved and won him: if not, but he persist
in offending, tell the Church. But he that offends publicly, must be
publicly reproved, that others may fear, 1. Tim. 5.20. By these differences
observed, a notable way is made for the recovery of those that are sliding or
fallen from the faith, in matter either of doctrine, or practice.

Hence we learn first, that it is our duty to observe one another in our
speeches and actions; or else we can never put any difference in them, the end
of which observing must be (not as the manner of many is to imitate others in
their evils, or traduce or floute men) but that of the Apostle, Heb. 10.24. Let
us consider one another, to provoke unto love and good works. Secondly, for
the making of this difference between offenders, we ought to have in us a
christian wisdom, whereby we may discern aright of persons and things, and
not to judge of al alike. Our head Christ was a notable president unto us
herein: for though many professed him, and believed in him, yet would he not
commit himself unto them, because he knew what was in man, Ioh. 2.24. Love
indeed must hope all things, Christian love must go hand in hand with
Christian wisdom.
believe all things, suffer all things, 1. Cor. 8.7. but yet this Christian
love must be ordered by Christian wisdom.

The second point concerns the manner of restoring offenders, standing in two
rules: first of compassion: secondly of severity. In the former consider two
things: first, on whom compassion is to be showed: the Apostle says, on some,
that is, on those that err of ignorance, or infirmity: on those also who are
carried away with ye violence of some sudden passion, if they repent, yea or
give any hope of amendment: all such must be restored with the spirit of
meeknes, Galath. 6.1. Secondly, the manner of showing the compassion, which is
not by winking at, or soothing men in their sins, but by admonitions and
exhortations seasoned with compassion: Matthew. 18.15. If thy brother trespass
against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him: if he hear
thee not, take yet with thee one or two. This is the means first to convince
the offenders, and then to bring them to repentance with all mercy and
meeknes, and confirm them therein. Thus God himself dealt with Adam, first
convinced him, and then in much mercy made that gracious promise, that the
seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents head. Thus Christ looked on
Peter, and mercifully restored him. Thus Paul restored the Galathians, being
fallen from the faith by merciful admonitions.

Ob. But if we admonish men before witness, according to the rule of Christ, we
may draw our selves into danger, for they may take such admonitions for
slanders, and use them as witness^^ thereof against us.

Ans. If therefore the fault be secret, we must only admonish our brother
alone; and if that will not serve to reclaim him, leave him to God to turn
him: and if it be private, that is, known to some few, it is Christian wisdom
to admonish him before some two of those that can testify of this sin, that
so the party admonished may be convinced, and the admonisher cleared from all
show and appearance of slander.

Use. 1. By this rule is condemned the rigor and austeritie of many in too
severe censuring offenders and offenses. This was a fault and blemish in the
ancient Church; which sometime for no faults would enjoin penance, as if a man
had married the second time: yea for small and light offenses were wont to
enjoin a penance of two, five, yea and sometimes of ten years. This is the
sin also of those that are departed from our Church, condemning us (for some
wants) utterly as no Church nor people of God, refusing to hear the word of
God, to pray, and to join in other religious duties with us. It is also the
sin of many of the Lutherans, who because we dissent from them in some
opinions, condemn us and our Churches to hell; and speak and write that we
are limbs of the devil. Which were too great severity, if we held not the
truth against them, in the things wherein we differ. Use. 2. We ought on the
contrary to put on the bowels of compassion toward offenders, if there be
any hope of amendment; following herein the footsteps of Christ himself, who
was very tender over Jerusalem, so as he wept over it. Moses when the
Israelites had sinned in making their golden Calfe, he mourned for them, fasted
forty days and forty nights for them, and would not depart from God till
he was entreated of him in their behalf. Men cannot but be compassionate
toward sick, and dangerously diseased, or wounded bodies; but a rare thing it
is to be so tender over the sick souls of our brethren. But blessed is he
that judges wisely of the poor, whether afflicted in body or mind.

The second rule of restoring offenders, concerns Christian severity: and it
is the last of the five, laid down in the verse 23. In it the Apostle lays
down three things: first the rule it self, to save with fear. Secondly, the
reason of the rule, or manner of it; pulling them out of the fire. Thirdly, a
caveat for the better observing it: And hate even the garment spotted by the
flesh. In the rule it self consider two things: first, who are to be saved by
fear? ^eare must force who^ love cannot allure.
namely those who otherwise are incurable, which is manifest in the opposition
of these words with the former, some are to be cured with mercy and
compassion, as those which sin of ignorance and infirmity: but those who are
hardly curable must be terrified, affrighted, and so saved by terror and fear.
Secondly, what this fear is? namely, not a bodily fear, as neither the means
causing it are: but a spiritual fear, and that of everlasting destruction.
The means of fear are either civil or spiritual. The former is the power
and authority of the Magistrate, who carries not the sword in vain against
offenders; but that those that do evil might fear, Romans 13.4. but neither is
this fear nor the means of it meant. The second means are spiritual,
directly respecting the soul, not the body, and they be reduced to three
kinds or heads: first, admonition, with denunciation of Gods judgments
against the party not repenting. Secondly, suspension, whereby offenders are
debarred from the Lords Table. Thirdly, excommunication, whereby men are
delivered up to Satan, and cast out of the society of Gods people. Of these
three this last is here most properly meant. Ob. But some will say,
Excommunication is of no force, it is lightly regarded, and therefore can be
no great means of fear to offenders. Ans. This censure used according to the
word of God, cannot but be full of horror, and terror, and the most forcible
(as the last) means of this fear. Matthew. 18.17. If he hear not the Church,
let him be to thee as an heathen. What will move a man if this will not, that
the whole Church should account of him as a Pagan or Heathen? The incestuous
person, 1. Corinthians. 5.5. thus censured, is given up to Satan, and delivered
into the devils power: then which what can be more fearful? Both these
places the enemies of this, censure, seek to elude, that they might make it
less forcible: for that in Matthew. 18. they interpret of seeking civil
remedy, against civil harm or wrong, as though the sense were thus: If thy
brother injury thee, admonish him first privately; and if he refuse to hear
thee, bring him before the Magistrate, thou may go to law with him, and use
him as an heathen man, in calling him before the heathen Magistrate. But this
exposition cannot stand; for to show that it is no direction of the manner to
revenge civil wrongs, but appertains unto the conscience, it is added in the
very next words, verse 18. Whatsoever they bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven: and whatsoever they loose in earth, shall be loosed in heaven. For the
other place 1. Corin. 5. they expound it of an extraordinary punishment, which
might be executed in those days by Satan upon the bodies of such offenders:
Deliver him to Satan: that is, say they, that he may torment his body. But
this cannot be a bare bodily punishment, but an excluding of the sinner from
the Communion and fellowship of the Church, and must be done in the face of the
Church, by the consent of the whole Church, which appear to be so verse. 2.
and 4. Again, if it had been meant of some such extraordinary punishment,
Paul by his Apostolical Rod could have done that alone, and needed not have
troubled the whole Church with it.

The second point is the reason of this rule, taken from the danger of the
delay of it: Pulling them out of the fire. They are in peril of present
danger, they must therefore presently be saved: even as things that are in
the fire must be presently pulled out violently, or else they are presently
consumed: so must these offenders be presently preserved and pulled out of the
fire of hell. Out of these two former points we learn diverse instructions.

First, that their censure of excommunication is an ordinance of God, and no
invention of man: for even in this verse we may observe, first, that obstinate
offenders are to be saved by terrible means, some must be saved by fear.
Secondly, violent and sudden means must be used, they must be as it were
snatched out of the fire. Thirdly, they must be separated from in regard of
society, in the next words: all which three things cannot agree to any thing
but only to excommunication.

Secondly, note the end of excommunication, The censure of excommunication not
to be inflicted but in most desperate cases.
which is to pluck men out of the fire of hell with violence; and therefore
this desperate remedy is only to be used in desperate cases, when there is no
other way to save the soul, and not for trifles. The Surgeon cutteth not off
arms and legs, until the life be disparaged; neither the Physician
prescribes rank poison, but in most desperate diseases. Again, if this be
the end of it, then it respects the spiritual estate of men, and not the
temporal; the soul properly, and not the body. Wickedly then does the Pope
(for the upholding of his estate) excommunicate Kings and Princes, to depose
them from their Crowns, and deprive them of their scepters, and by it free
their subjects from their allegiance: this is no end of this censure warranted
in the word. And thirdly, if there be such a necessary end and use of it, it
were to be wished that in this end it were more used against open and
notorious sinner^; whom the word cannot prevail with to their salvation:
seeing many go on every where obstinately in their sins without amendment,
to the great scandal of others.

Thirdly, hence we learn that many be so wedded and addicted to their wicked
ways, that although they be in the mouth of hell, yet they fear nothing;
neither God nor Devil: nor care neither for heaven nor hell; else what need
were there of such a censure as this is? Ahab was so addicted to Naboths
vineyard that he was sick for it: besides, he sold himself to work
wickedness. Manasses sold himself to Satan, nothing could return him but
setters and captivity. Fruitful of such has been, and is our barren age.

Fourthly, when gentle means will not serve to reclaim men, it is the will of
God that terrible means should be used, if by any means they may be pulled
out of the fire: and thus the Lord used to deal with his own people of the
Jews, proceeding with them according to that order in Romans 2.4. first by
patience by long suffering calling them to repentance: but when they hardened
their hearts against these means, then he hoorded and treasured up wrath for
them against the day of wrath. The same has been his dealing with us in this
land; for these forty years and more he has hedged us in with peace and
prosperity, together with the liberties of his glorious Gospel, still
expecting our further fruitfulnes, answerable to such means: but we become
still more barren, and less fruitful; he has often taken in hand his
pruning knife, and lopped us by famine, pestilence, and other his judgments,
and yet behold we abound with bitter fruits of blasphemies, injustice,
prophanenes, contempt of the Gospel, which was more embraced and esteemed of
twenty years ago, than now it is in these days, which make no end of
declining: that surely we cannot now but expect that the Lord should open upon
us the treasures of his wrath, and his storehouses of judgments, unless we
use means to prevent them, and that in due time. Some will ask, what be
they? Ans. Remember two rules, first the counsel of Amos, chap. 4.12. Prepare
to meet thy God O Israel. Means in this land are prepared to meet our
Enemies, and it is well done: Against the Iris^ Rebels.
but we must first prepare to meet our God by unfeigned repentance, and
forsaking of sin: for that is it which makes the breaches of our land, and
strengthens our enemies against us. Secondly, the practice of Iehosaphat, 2.
Chro. 20.12. We kn^w not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee O Lord.
Depend upon him alone, and nothing besides him; make him thy hiding place in
life and death, shroud thy self under the wing^ of his protection, and thou
shall be safe under his feathers.

Now follows the third point in this last rule, that is, the caveat tending
to the observing of it, in these words: And hate even the garment spotted with
the flesh: that is, keep no company, have no fellowship or society with
them: which precept is propounded in a dark comparison or similitude, taken
from the ceremonial pollutions of the law: that look as men were th^n made
unclean* not only by conuersing with persons legally unclean; but also by
touching (though it was vnware^) their houses, vessels, and garments, as
appears Leu. 15.4. and Numb. 9. and therefore did not only avoid such
persons, but hated even their garments: so must we under grace deal^ with
obstinate offenders, avoid their persons, sins, yea and societies, as
occasions thereof. First then in the former part of the comparison two
questions may be demanded. The former is this:

Why should any man's flesh be unclean, or his garments spotted, and so
detestable and to be hated, seeing they are the good creatures of God? Answ.
There be three kinds of uncleanness: 1. Natural, 2. Moral, 3. Ceremonial.
Natural uncleanness is, whereby the creature becomes by his corrupted nature
unclean for man's use, I say by corrupted nature, because this uncleanness
cannot rise from created nature, but from man's sin and Gods curse; as the
Serpents are now to man's use unclean, that is, noisome, and full of hur^ and
poison. Moral is, when any creature is used against Gods law and commandment,
separating i^ from the use of man: as to marry within any of the degrees
prohibited, Leu. 19. comes within this uncleanness. Thus a man borne of
unclean seed is unclean, Job 14. Ceremonial is, when the creature being
clean it in own nature, yet in some other respects by virtue of Gods
prohibitio^, becomes unclean. Thus were certain beasts, and fowls, and
dead bodies unclean, not in their nature, but in some respects, which
especially were three: first, in regard of touching: secondly, of tasting:
thirdly, of sacrificing; in which respects they might not be used. Now the
creature might be hated, not in regard of it self, or as i^ i^ the good
creature of God: but as far as this ceremonial uncleanness was fa^^^ed unto
it, it being prohibited in this or other respects by God.

2. Quest. But why should any m^n hate the flesh, or garments of another,
seeing this ceremonial vncleanne^ was no sin* yea to bury the dead corpse
was a duty to be performed necessarily: and so necessary was it to touch
them* and for garments they were natural, and no more sin to touch them than
to eat or drink? Ans. Although legal defilement was not always a sin, yet
i^ was always an evil, and prefigured the defilement of men by original
sin: and besides, upon Gods prohibition was to be hated. Secondly, although
the defilement it self was no sin; yet he that wittingly without cause did
touch or meddle wi^^ the thing defiled, did sin, because God commanded the
contrary.

Secondly, out of the second part of the similitude, in that we are to (...)
the company of obstinate offenders, it may be demanded whether we may keep
any company, or have any fellowship with an obstinate sinner? Ans. The
familiar company with such is forbidden, but all company is not absolutely
forbidden: for in two cases it is lawful to accompany with such a one, first,
to do him good with conference, instruction, (...) admonition; an heretic
must be once or twice admonished, and if he be not then reclaimed he must be
avoided, Titus 3.10. Secondly, when a man is bound to such a one by the bond of
civil society: as for example, if a man ^^re by the Church excommunicated,
yet a wife must perform the duty of a wife; the child of a child; the
servant of a servant: for th^se divine ordinances abolish not, but establish
civil societies. Then I say familiar company must be denied to such
obstinate sinner^, but not all company; as when by the same we can either
reclaim them, or else to perform some civil duty toward them.

Use. First we see here what was the end of ceremonial uncleanness* and that
was ^o represent that spiritual uncleanness in the whole man, Ceremonial
uncleanness figured with spiritual filthiness.
by original and actual sin in thought, word, and deed* Z^ch. 13.1. In
that day shall ^h^re be a fountain^ opened to the horse of David, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness: whereby is signified
such an uncleanness, whereby not only our selves are defiled wholly, but
whatsoever we touch and meddle withal, which is infected by reason of that
dwelling sin in us, even as it was which in the law was ^ouched by a polluted
and unclean person. This consideration should ca^se us to look into the
filthiness of our hearts; which if we could, or did see, as it is both in it
self, and in the vile (...) which without intermissio^ it sends out, it
would make us humble our selves, and never be at rest until this fountain of
the blood of Christ were set open unto us, and we even plunged into it, and so
cleansed from this uncleanness; whereof the uncleanness of the flesh was but a
figure and ^^adow. 2. Use. We learn how to understand the Commandments of the
Moral law, namely not only according to the letter, and bare words in which
they are propounded, which mention the maine sins only against God and man;
but by a Synecdo^he in the mentioned sins, all of that kind, as all
occasions, also motives, and inducements thereunto, as here the Apostle wishes
the Saints to hate the flesh, yea the garments spotted; so we are to hate the
sin itself, yea and all the kinds, and all the occasions of the same. 3.
Use. Hence we have a direct way wherein all believers are to walk: first, we
must hate the company and society of manifest and obstinate sinners, who will
not be reclaimed. Secondly, all their sins, not communicating with any man
in his sin, we must have no fellowship (as with the workers so) wi^h the
unfruitful works of darkness. Thirdly, all occasions and inducements unto
these sins. Fourthly, all apparances of wickedness, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. that is,
which men in common judgment account evil; and all this must, proceed from a
good ground, even from a good heart ha^ing sin perfectly, that is all sin, as
David Psalm. 139. I hate them with a perfect h^^r^d: and not as some who can
hate some sin, but cleave to some other; as many can hate pride, but love
covetousness, or some other darling sin: but we must attain to the hatred of
all, before we can come to the practice of this precept* besides that all
sins are hateful even in themselves. A needful duty to be heedfully
regarded in these days, wherein are so few hate^s of the flesh, and so many
haters of those that hate it: so many that are so far from hating the
appearances of evil, that many sins themselves are swallowed up and made no
bones of; horrible blasphemies must now credit men's speeches: the breach and
violating of the Sabbath in iourneying is (...) good a service of God (...)
horseback (...) need be, or as he requires (...) r^^^inge, also fightings,
and such work^ of the flesh, are notes of valor and spirit: and so in other.
Thus men who profess religion in word, deny it in deed; seeing true religion
stands not only in the hatred of the sins themselves, but even of all
occasions and apparances of them: because God has commanded them to be hated.
4. Use. As ye Jews (being not to come near the houses nor touch the unclean)
if they did touch any such thing they were unclean and polluted: and for that
cause must wash their bodies and change their garments, yea if they did but
suspect that they had defiled themselves, they were presently to be purified:
so we being defiled with any known sins, or suspecting any unknown; our
next course must be to the blood of Christ the Lauer of the Church, suing unto
God by prayer that our sins may be therewith washed away: we must put off our
garments, that is, the old man with his lusts, and put on the wedding garment,
that is, Christ Jesus with his righteousness, daily proceeding in the duties of
sanctification; for he that has washed himself, had need still have his feet
washed, that is, daily renew his repentance, and bring daily fruits worthy
amendment of life.

Verse. 24. Now unto him that is able to keep you that you fall not, and to
present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory ^ith joy. 25. That is
to God (...) wise, our Savior, be glory, and Majesty, and dominion, and
power, both now and for ever. Amen.
IN these words are contained the third part of the Epistle, namely the
conclusion of it, and it is nothing else but a lawding and praising of God:
wherein three things are to be noted* first the person praised, which is
Christ the second person in the Trinity, the Son of the eternal Father*
this appears by two reasons in the words: first, because he is here described
to be a Judge that does present all men before himself, which is proper to the
Son of God. Secondly, because he is called our Savior, which is the title of
Christ, according to the name Jesus* And yet here must be noted that in this
praising of the Son, the Father and the holy Ghost are not excluded: for as
the nature of the three persons is all one, so is their worship all one also.
The second point be the reasons or inducements moving us to praise Christ,
which be three. The first drawn from his power: To him which is able etc. The
second from his wisdom: To God only wise. The third from the work of our
redemption and salvation: Our Savior. The third point is the praise it self,
in these words: Be glory, and majesty, and dominion, and power, both now and
for ever, Amen. Of these points in order. And first of the person to whom this
praise is given.

First, note how the Apostle concludes his epistle with the praise of Christ
as the Judge, as also the Savior of mankind; in whose example we are taught
with willing minds to spend our days in the honor of Christ: for that which
the Saints do in heaven, that must we do while we live upon earth; for so we
pray in the Lords Prayer: but they in heaven continually do cast down their
Crowns at the feet of the Lamb, Reu. 5.11. as worthy to receive all honor*
and glory, and praise, and power; we must therefore be ready unto this
duty. Again, he has subjected himself to exceeding dishonor and abasement,
yea to the death, and that of the cross: and all that we might first honor
him, and then be honored by him: how therefore ought we in way of thankfulness
for the great work of our redemption, glorify him, and advance his honor?
But in stead hereof many even of those that profess Christ dishonor him,
using him as a packhorse to lay upon him all their sins, and so lade him with
their sins past, and crucify him again with daily new sins, and yet they
look he should be their Savior to bring them to honor and immortal glory.

The inducements follow. The first of which is taken from the power of Christ,
unto him who i^ able etc. That we may know the force of this reason, we will
first consider what this power of Christ is. The power of Christ is either
absolute or actual.
The power of Christ is twofold: first, absolute: secondly, actual. By
absolute I understand that power of his, whereby he is able to do even that
which he will never do; of which John Baptist speaks: God is able even of
stones to raise up seed to Abraham. By this power God could have made many
thousand worlds, whereas he made but one; and by the same Christ could have
commanded a legion of Angels to have delivered him from the hands of the Jews,
but would not. This absolute power goes beyond his actual power or will, yet
is not greater than his will: for as what God does, that he wills: so what
he can do, he can also will: but this power is not here meant. The second,
namely the actual power of Christ, is, whereby he does and effects
whatsoever he wills, and it is of two sorts: first, his general power which
tends on his providence, whereby he orders all things both in heaven and
earth: Psalm. 115.3. Our God is in heaven, and does whatsoever he will.
Secondly, a more special power which accompanies his grace, and always goes
with it: of which Paul speaks Ephesians. 1.19. That we may know what is the
exceeding greatness of his power toward us that believe, according to the
working of his mighty power. Of this power* working life and grace to them
which believe, Iud^ here speaks. Concerning which observe three conclusions.

First, that this power is given to Christ in time, Matthew. 28. All power is
given me in heaven and in earth. Acts 2.36. He is of God made Lord and Christ,
importing that this power is given him to be a Lord. Indeed the Son of God as
God, is of equal power with the Father, and that from all eternity: in which
regard no power can be given him: but if we respect his office of mediation, to
the performance of which he must lay aside his power, and become as a servant
subiecting himself to the death; thus this power may be said to be given him
again, namely when by his rising from the dead and ascending into heaven, he
was mightily declared to be the Son of God: so that in Psalm. 2. Thou art my
son, this day have I begotten thee, is in Acts 13. applied to the
resurrection of Christ: as if he had said, This day have I made manifest by
thy powerful resurrection that thou art my son, and that I have begotten
thee before all world^.

The second conclusion is, that this power is manifested in Christ the head
especially: namely, when it caused him so victoriously to overcome death in
suffering it; to rise from the grave, ascend to heaven, and sit at the right
hand of God his Father. Paul prays that the Ephesians might know the greatness
of this power, which raised Christ from the dead, and set him at Gods right
hand in heavenly places, Ephesians. 1.20.

The third conclusion: That this power conueyeth it self from Christ the head
to all his members, Ephesians. 3.20. To him that is able to do abundantly above
all that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us. Coloss.
1.29. I also labor and strive according to his working, which works in me
mightily. Now being conveyed unto the members of Christ, it is not idle in
them, or unprofitable, but works proportionably in them al, as it did in
Christ himself: for as it caused Christ to die for our sins, so it makes us
die to our own sins: as this power made him to live again to his Father, so
it makes us his members to live unto God; that as he by virtue hereof rose
again, so it causes us to rise to a new life in this life, and to our
eternal life in the life to come.

Further, this power is commended here by four effects: first, it is able to
keep them that they fall not, namely into manifest sins joined with
obstinacy: for of such sins and sinners he had spoken in the former words;
and cannot be meant of every kind of fall, seeing the children of God fall
daily, but of such as David prayed against, Psalm. 19. last. Keep thy servant
from presumptuous sins, let them not reign over me. The second effect is, to
present you faultlesse, that is, first to justify believers: secondly, to
sanctify them here in part while they live, and in death to finish and perfect
that inchoate sanctification. The third effect, in the day of judgment to
present them before the presence of his glory. The fourth effect, with joy,
that is, to possess them with joy everlasting.

Use. 1. In that Christ is able to keep them that believe, we may note that
this his power does order the wills of believers both in and after their
conversion. In their conversion it frames and turns their wills. Ioh. 6. No
man comes to the Son, except the Father draw him, that is, except he
incline, and turn man's will unto his own, and make it of an unwilling will a
willing will. Again, after conversion it is not an idle power in them: 1. Ioh.
3.9. He that is borne of God sins not, that is, addicteth not himself, nor
sets himself to the practice of sin; and the reason is given, because the
seed^ of God remains in him, which is all one with this power, which is able,
and accordingly keeps him. Whereby that Popish error is detected, namely that
in the conversion of a sinner it is in man's power and will, either to receive
or resist the grace of God: and that man's will can either apply it self to
grace offered if it will, or else refuse it: Gods power shall not order man's
will, if the disordered doctrine of Popery may obtain.
but if this were true, the power of God should not order man's will, but man's
will should order Gods grace, yea and overcome this omnipotent power of God.
Again, this overthrows the distinction of grace into sufficient and
effectual: for sufficient grace is effectual, seeing that this power of
Christ waits upon it to make it effectual.

Secondly, hence we see that this power of Christ in his members, is a
continued power, never wholly interrupted, for it keeps them in this life that
they fall not into presumptuous sins. Secondly, it justifies them and
sanctifies them imperfectly in life, and perfectly in death. Thirdly, after
death it presents them unto their glory. Fourthly, after the last judgment,
it possesses them with unspeakable joy. Thus the righteous man by virtue of
this power, becomes like a tree whose leaf never fails nor fades, Psalm.
1.3. And hence is it that hope is said to be a sure anchor, Hebr. 6. verse. 19.
for this property has it, not from it self (as also love and faith in
themselves are changeable, and nothing indeed is in it self unchangeable but
God) but the power of Christ is it that makes it an anchor sure and steadfast.
By which consideration, those two uncomfortable errors are confuted: first,
that the child of God being regenerate may fall maliciously, and even wholly
away. Secondly, that he may fall finally: seeing God puts his hand under,
and this power of Christ is able to keep them that they fall not (though
fearfully they may) yet neither wholly nor finally.

Thirdly, we must labor to have experience of this power of Christ in our
selves, working in our heart^ the death of our sins, and quickening them again
unto the life of grace and of God: for this power of Christ consists not in
any fancy, but in ^n effectual feeling in the heart of every true believer.
Paul prayed that the Ephesians might feel in themselves this proportional
power to Christ his power in his death and resurrection, Ephesians. 1.19. himself
counted all things ^^ng in comparison of the knowledge of this power* Phil.
3.^0. and that he might have experience hereof, he will rejoice in his own
weakness, ^. Cor. 12.9. And what will this power be profitable unto us (be it
never so powerful in it self) unless we find our selves thus strengthened
in grace and godliness by it?

Fourthly, we may not content our selves with a form and show of godliness,
but stri^^ to attain the power of it* or else let us never profess Christ,
and please our selves only in such a profession: for whosoever is truly
Christ's, in him this power works mightily in subduing (...), in striving
against temptations, in stirring up zeal of Gods glory, and in a word in
making men fruitful and abundant in all well doing^ yea it can no more hide it
self where it is, than can the Sun at noone day, but it will cause men to
shine as lights in the midst of a froward generation: which (...) and
effects, if a man cannot find in himself, let him suspect himself that he is
not as yet knit unto Christ, for then he would be by virtue of this power in
some proportion conformable unto him.

Fifthly, the doctrine ministers a stay and prop to our faith and hope, seeing
that Christ ^^th such a working power as this is, whereby he is able to make
good, and accomplish whatsoever he has promised concerning our salua^ion^
thus he stre^gthened his Disciples, Ioh. 17. But be of good comfort, I have
(...) the world: and thus Abraham believed above hope, because he kn^w that God
was able to perform what he had promised, Rom* 4 21. teaching all the sonne^
of ^a^thfull Abraham vp^^ what prop they are to (...), and stay up themselves
(...) the promises are delaied. Here the Papist ^eacheth that in regard of God
indeed and his promise, we may believe our own salvation; but in respect of
our selves, and in regard of our own indisposition we must still doubt, and it
is presumption (says he) to believe it. Answ. But this is false, for we must
not doubt in regard of our own indisposition* but must certainly by faith lay
hold on our own salvation, seeing that Christ by his power corrects, yea and
abolisheth in his members this indisposition, fitting them (notwithstanding it)
and keeping them unto life eternal.

Sixthly and lastly, we must strive to become like unto Christ, seeing ye same
power that was in him is conveyed and derived from him into every one of his
members, that as he lived in obedience unto his Father, both doing and
suffering whatsoever his Father enjoined and willed; even so ought we: look
what was his disposition and conversation whilst he conuersed here upon
earth, so ought we to be disposed and converse, resembling him in meekenes,
humility, patience, love toward our Father, and brethren, yea and toward our
enemies: and as he was minded, the same mind ought also to be in us, Phil.
2.6. So much for the first reason moving us to the praise of Christ, drawn
from his power.

The second motive is in the verse 25. To God only wise* drawn from his
wisdom; wherein three things are to be observed: first, that Christ is God:
secondly, that he is wise: thirdly, that he is only wise. For the first, this
is a notable testimony and to be observed against the Arrians and Atheists,
to confirm the Divinity of Christ, who like dogs most blasphemously with
black mouths bark against their Creator, affirming him to be one of the
great seducers of the world: against whom (that we may be the better armed) I
will first propound one or two evident reasons, and then answer their
allegations. The first argument: Consider that whosoever have taken upon
themselves to be called Gods, the just judgment and vengeance of God has
befallen them, and they have been destroyed by the hand of God. Adam and Eve
because they would have been but like God, or as Gods, were grievously punished
in themselves and all their posterity. Herod because he was contented that
the people should call him God, the hand of God was instantly upon him, and the
Angel of God smot him, and he was eaten up of lice. But Christ professed
himself to be God, yea and disputed Ioh. 7. against the Pharisees that he was
the Son of God, and yet no harm befell him: nay he proved manifestly by his
doctrine, and miracles, by his death and glorious resurrection, that he spoke
true when he said he was God and the Son of God.

The second reason: Christ wrought miracles, which could not be done either by
natural or Satanicall power* as to raise the dead, to make them which were
borne blind to see; and these by a divine and omnipotent power, and not as an
instrument but as an author of them; and therefore he was true God* Now, if they
allege here, that we have no proof hereof, but out of the new Testament,
which they reject as they do the other Scriptures. I answer, that many of the
same things in effect are extant also even in Heathen writers themselves. Ob.
But they allege against the Divinity of Christ, that Christ is inferior unto
God: Ioh. 14.18. The Father is greater than I: 1. Cor. 11.3. God is the head of
Christ, as the man is the woman's head: and chap. 15.28. The Son shall be
subject unto him that subdued all things under him. But as none is above God,
so God is inferior to none, and therefore Christ is not God. Ans. The two
former places must be understood of Christ as he is man and Mediator: which
hinders not but that as he is God he is equal to the Father. The third place
in 1. Cor. 15.28. must be thus understood: that the Son is made eternally
subject unto the Father, not as he is God, but in regard of his humanity.
Secondly, of his mystical body, that is, the Church: so as this subjection
and inferioritie of Christ, is nothing else but a manifestation of the
difference of Christ as he is Man and as he is God, and of the inferioritie of
his Manhood to the Godhead: which shall be especially reuelled at the day of
judgment. The second objection: Acts the 20.35. It is a more blessed thing to
give, than to receive: but Christ receives wisdom, life, yea and his
substance from his Father, and so the Father is more blessed than he? Ans. That
place speaks of such a receiving, as presupposes want, which is more
miserable than to be able to give, which argues plenty and abundance: but
Christ receives not thus his substance, wisdom, and life, for he never
wanted them: when he received them he had them; and having them he received
them, and both had and received them before all worlds, and so that allegation
is to no purpose. The third objection: Christ is a Mediator and prays unto
God, and so he is not God, for nothing prays to it self. Answ. Christ is
directly a Mediator to the Father the first person in Trinity: now because
the person^ have all one nature and will, therefore he is also Mediator even
to himself as the second person, as also to the holy Ghost. Let us be still
armed against these wicked ^ellbounds, and detest their Satanicall delusions
and such damnable doctrine^, derogatorie to the honor of the Son of God.

The second point in this second reason is, that Christ is wise. This wisdom
of Christ is a property common to him with the Father and holy Ghost, whereby
he perfectly knows all things as they are. Concerning which, remember these
eight things ^ first, that this wisdom of Christ is of it self, and has the
beginning from it self, and not from any other: for though he receives it
from the Father, yet it is all one with the Fathers, and therefore it is not
begotten nor proceeds from any, but is the fountains of all wisdom in the
creatures, me^ or Angels. Secondly, we by our wisdom conceive things by forms
and app^rances presented to our minds; but Christ he knows all things by the
things themselves, and not by any representations thereof* he needs no help
from the thing it self to conceive of it as we do. Thirdly, we know and
conceive of things by sense and discourse, but Christ does this by one simple
act of ^nderstanding. Fourthly, this wisdom of God is all one with God
himself, for his wisdom is his substance. In men and Angels it is not so,
but a quality distinct from their substances. Fifthly, this wisdom is
infinite, for hereby God knows both himself and all other things past,
present, or to come; things good and bad; things that are; and things which are
not; yea the very motions and thoughts of the heart. Sixthly, this is always a
certain and infallible knowledge; never coniecturall as ours is. Seventhly, it
is most perfect, both because it does not only know some things, but there is
nothing which it knows not, as also because nothing can be added unto it, nor
detracted from it: in all which it differs from ours. Eighthly, it is a
distinct wisdom, seeing God knows not in gross and confusedly all things;
but distinguishes every particular thing and action, even as they are; he
knows every hair of our heads and the places thereof, every lighting of a
sparrow upon the ground. The consideration of which points shows the
admirable greatness of this wisdom of Christ.

The third point is, that he is only wise.] Where is not excluded the wisdom
of the Father and holy Ghost, but all the wisdom of al creatures, as Ioh. 17.
This is life eternal to know thee the only God; where the Son and holy Ghost
may not be excluded. Ob. But some will say, the creatures have wisdom, and
so the Son is not only wise. Ans. The wisdom of the creatures is but a
created wisdom: God is only wise by a wisdom uncreated, theirs is but an
image and shadow of this. Yea compared thereunto it is no wisdom at al, so as
still God may be said to be only wise.

Use. 1. Seeing Christ is affirmed to be God, note that his death although it
was but momentarie and short in time, yet it was of endless merit. Quest. But
how can this be that a short death of so few hours should counteruaile the
eternal torment due to sin? Ans. The person that died being God, the
dignity of the person counteruaileth the eternity of the punishment: so as
the Son of God suffering, although it was not for half a day, it was as much
as if all men had died for ever; so infinite and endless it was (though not in
time) yet in merit and efficacy. 2. Use. Seeing Christ has such an absolute
wisdom distinctly knowing all things, we are taught to fear and tremble
before him, doing all things as in his presence; he beholds us with all our
actions, there is not a word in our tongue but he knows it wholly, yea he
understands our thoughts, and that a far off. See Psalm. 139.2.3. 3. Use.
Such as are in distress, resting themselves upon Gods mercy in Christ, may
herein stay and uphold themselves with this comfort, that Christ is God and
able to relieve them, yea he is the only wise God, and therefore he knows
all their miseries distinctly, he knows how far forth it is good for them
to suffer, how to turn their suffering to the best unto them, as also the best
and fittest time when to deliver them seasonably out of their trouble: and
therefore patiently commit thy self into his hand, and reli^ thy self upon
him as on a merciful redeemer. 4. Use. If Christ be only wise, Our wisdom
must be fetched from Christ who is only wise.
then we must take counsel of him, and learn wisdom of him: Learn of me.
If it be asked, how shall we learn of him seeing he is in heaven? I answer,
he has left his word with us in the Scriptures, there we may learn his
wisdom, there we may have his directions. If it be asked, what is the sum
of that counsel there contained? I answer, it stands in the hearing and
doing of his Commandments, to which three things are required: first, to
believe on him, and depend upon him alone for salvation. Secondly, to turn
unfeignedly withal our hearts unto him. Thirdly, to obey him in our lives and
conuersations. This is the right wisdom: for the teaching of which, Wisdom
her self utters her voice, and calls to the children of men, Proverbs 8.
verse. 4.

The third reason is taken from the work of our redemption, in the words Our
Savior.] The which reason that we may rightly understand, four points are to
be propounded. First, what kind of Savior Christ is? Ans. He must be
conceived, first a perfect Savior, saving perfectly all that are saved. Heb.
7.25. He is able to save perfectly all that come unto him; yea he perfectly
saves by himself (and not by any other creature) whosoever attain to
salvation, for this also is required unto his perfection: Romans 3.25. Whom God
has set out to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood. Hebr. 1.3. By
himself he has purged our sins. Where note an error in the Church of Rome*
which teaches that Christ did by his death merit, that we might by our own
works merit salvation: but this is false, Christ saves not man by man, or by
any creature but by himself, yea he should not so be a Savior, but an
instrument, by whom we must save our selves. Secondly, hence we learn to
acknowledge him an alone Savior, Popish doctrine admits not that Christ
should be a Savior, but an instrument whereby we must save our selves.
without any fellow, partner or deputy: Acts 2. There is no other name under
heaven given to save us, but the name of Christ; and if he have any partner,
he is but half a Savior. Hence we see that the Roman Religion, although in
word it honor Christ, yet in deed it denies him, in joining to Christ's
all-sufficient satisfaction, others satisfactions: and so likewise they join
to his sacrifice upon the Cross, their sacrifices in their Mass; to his
meritorious intercession, the intercession of the Virgin Mary and other Saints,
and that not by way of request, but of the merit of their intercession. Thus
they set up many Saviors in stead of this our perfect and alone Savior.

The second point is, from what danger does he save us? Ans. Salvation ever
implies perdition, so salvation by Christ implies endless destruction, which
is the thing from which he does save us. In which endless perdition note first
the foundation of it, that is our sins; noted in the exposition of his name,
Mat. 1. He shall save his people from their sins. Secondly, the degrees,
which are three: first, in this life a subjection to all kinds of miseries
inward and outward; in soul, body, goods, name, in our selves and others.
Secondly, in the end of this life, death, being in it self a curse, and an
entrance into hell. Thirdly, after the first, the second death, which is
everlasting destruction in hell fire for ever. Now Christ is a Savior to save
and free us both from this foundation, our sins themselves; as also from the
degrees, from the bondage to Satan by sin: secondly, from the first death so
far forth as it is a curse: thirdly, from the second death and everlasting
destruction.

The third point is: How does Christ save men? Ans. According to that order
which God has set down in the covenant, not of works but of grace: wherein
God promises to give Christ with all his merits and graces to every believer.
Now according to the tenor of this covenant, first Christ with his merits is
given unto the believer, he again is given unto Christ: by virtue of which
donation a man may say Christ is mine, his benefits are mine also, as truly and
as surely as my land is my own. Hereupon to make this mutual donation
effectual, follows a second thing, which is the union of us with him by the
bond of the spirit, and this is a mystical but a true union, whereby he that
is given unto Christ is made one with him. After this comes a third thing,
which is a communication of Christ himself and all his benefits unto
believers. This is done two ways: first, by way of imputation, which is an
accounting and accepting of his obedience and sufferings as ours, for the
discharge of our sins, and acquiting us from them. Secondly, by a kind of
propagation, whereby grace is derived from his grace, and infused into those
that are set into him: For as many candles receive light from one great Torch
or light, and as many streams flow from one fountain or head spring, and as
from one root proceed many branches; even so al his members drink of his
fountains, are enriched by his treasures of wisdom and knowledge: yea indeed
and live by no other life, than that which by his spirit he inspireth into the
faces of their souls: and hereby he shows himself to be a root, even that
root of Iesse and that second Adam conueying unto all his branches
righteousness and life, as the first Adam (being a root also) derived
corruption from himself to al his posterity springing and arising from him; so
is that place 1. Cor. 1.30. to be understood, He is made of God to us wisdom,
righteousness* sanctification and redemption; because he is the root and
fountain of all these graces unto us, of whose fulness we receive them.

The fourth point is: Of whom is Christ a Savior? Answ. Our Savior,] that is,
a Savior of the Catholic Church: Ephesians. 5.23. The Savior of his body: that
is, his Church. More plainly, the persons that are to be saved by him, are such
as truly believe in him, and testify their faith by their conversion unto God,
and forsaking their sins. For the evidence whereof consider two things:

First, that it is most necessary, that the person that is to be saved should
be thus qualified, if he be of years (for with infants it is otherwise) for
ma^ke the order prescribed to be observed in the Word and Sacraments, in which
God requires in the first place repentance and faith, and then afterward
makes promise of salvation by Christ, Luke 24.47. Repentance for sin must go
before remission of sin.
That repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name.
Repentance for sin must go before remission of sin: Acts 2.38. Repent and
be baptized, there is the first: for remission of sins, there is the second.
This is the rather to be observed, because many go preposterously to work,
beginning there where God ends: comforting themselves in their Savior, and
in the promises of life by his means, but let go faith and repentance, at
least defer them. This is the cause of much wickedness, and a false comfort,
not fetched from that order which is appointed by God.

Secondly, those who bring the beginnings of faith and repentance (if so be the
beginning be true) constant and still increasing, True grace though never so
weak i^ ^ccepted.
to these Christ becomes a Savior: Matthew. 9. Christ came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance: that is, those who acknowledge themselves
to be sinners, confessing and forsaking their sins, and not such as presume
of their own righteousness: Matthew. 25. I am sent to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel: even those who in their own judgment are lost, who are in
the mouth of the lion, and in all man's judgment lost. Isai. 45.1. The well of
water of life is promised to all those that thirst: that is, such as want water
and long after the welsprings of it, and wish after nothing so much: Isai.
42.3. A bruised reed he will not break, the smoking flax he will not quench;
even small beginnings of grace be they never so weak nor feeble, so they be
true, he despises not. Thus are the persons to be qualified unto whom Christ
will become a Savior. Now because all men are not thus disposed, it follows
that redemption, and the work of salvation is not universal.

Use. First, the multitude of our people are justly blamed as enemies of
Christ: for if they be asked how they look to be saved; they answer, by their
good serving of God, and their just and honest dealing among men. Now this
their serving of God is but to repeat over the Ten Commandments, the Creed,
and the Lords Prayer: and their good dealing is but to deceive no man, or not
to offer them open injury, and here they stay themselves; not all this while
ever looking after Christ, as men not standing in need of him, or of his
righteousness, but set up themselves for their own Saviors, and know not any
other way to life then their own which carries them from Christ. Secondly,
we are taught to conceive of Christ as of our Savior; which we shall do if
we be touched with the sense of our sin, and danger by it, and with the
need we have of his most precious blood, which will cause us to prise it
above the most precious things, which the world can contain. When our hearts
are thus affected, then we conceive of him as we ought. Thirdly, we must
carry our selves as persons saved already by Christ; for he is a Savior unto
us even in this life, and our salvation is begun and is in part here. This we
do when we join with the profession of faith a true conversion unto God.
Reasons hereof: First, because regeneration although it be no cause, yet it is
a part of our salvation: for by it a man is freed from the corruption of his
sin in part, which whosoever looks for remission of sins must atteine
unto. Secondly, whomsoever Christ saves from hell, he first saves them from
their sins: he redeemeth men not only from deserved condemnation, but also
their vain conversation. If the^ thou would know whether Christ has saved
thee from hell or no; look into thy self, and try whether his death has
wrought the death of sin in thee or no: He that is not by Christ's death
turned from sin, is not by it saved from hell.
for if thou art not turned from sin, thou art not saved from hell. Thirdly, to
whomsoever Christ is a Savior by merit, to him he is a Savior by efficacy
also, for he is a Savior both these ways: by the former he procures pardon
of sin; by the latter he turns the heart of the sinner from sin unto God:
this if it be wanting, there can be no true assurance of the other. Lastly,
the salvation of a sinner stands not in the fruition of riches, honors,
wealth, or deliverance from the miseries of this life, but properly in
righteousness, and life eternal, the recompense of the same; which fruit
whosoever would reap, he must sow the seeds thereof in righteousness, and
cease from henceforth to be the servant of sin.

The third general point in this conclusion is, the praise of Christ it self
in the last verse: Be glory, and Majesty, and dominion, and power, both now
and for ever, Amen. Which words co^taine the form of the praise of God and
Christ; where four things are to be considered: first, what be the things
that are here ascribed to Christ? and they be four: first, Glory: by which
we are to understand an infinite and incomprehensible excellency, whereby
Christ excels all things that ever were, are, or ever shall be. Now as there
be in God two things distinct: first, essence, which is the Godhead it self
simply considered. Secondly, person, as Father, Son, holy Ghost: so
accordingly the glory of God is twofold: first, the glory of essence:
secondly, the glory of person. The glory of essence is the Godhead it self,
or God himself, who is glory it self, or the excellency of the divine
attributes is the glory of God: Romans 1.19. That which may be known of God is
his wisdom, glory, power, justice, and mercy. And verse. 23. They turned the
glory of the incorruptible God etc. Whatsoever therefore that may be known of
God is a part of his glory: Exodus 33.19. Moses desires the Lord that he
would let him see his glory; the Lord answered him, Thou can not see my face
and live. Where to see the face of God and his glory is all one, and so of all
divine attributes.

The glory of the persons is distinct from the other, as the persons
themselves are by their personal proprieties, as the Fathers glory is to
beget the Son, the Sons glory is to be begotten of the Father, the holy
Ghosts is to proceed from them both. Thus Heb. 1.3. Christ is called the
brightness of the glory, and the engraven form of his Fathers person. Ioh.
1.14. We saw the glory thereof as the glory of the only begotten Son of
the Father. Both these are here to be understood; both which are
incomprehensible, and therefore our care must be to walk by faith, whereby we
may attain unto it, rather than more curiously to seek to comprehend the
knowledge of it.

The second thing attributed to Christ is Majesty. Whereby we are to
understand that highness and greatness of God and Christ, whereby he is in
himself, in his works, and every way wonderful, Luke 9.43. When Christ had
wrought a famous miracle of casting out a Devil, it is said they were all
amazed at the mighty power of God.

The third thing is dominion; which word properly signifies power and
authority, and by consequent dominion, as the second word translated power
signifies properly dominion: but it comes all to one. By dominion is meant
an absolute power and sovereignty in governing and commanding all creatures.

The fourth thing is power; which signifies that absolute might of God,
whereby he does whatsoever he will. Here by the way we must observe that of
these four, Glory is the chiefest, the other three are but as parts of his
glory, and are added to make a description of his glory. For the glory of
God is herein manifest in that he is full of Majesty, dominion, and power.

The second thing to be observed is, that these four are given to Christ
alone; for the word only must be referred to the whole sentence, the Father and
holy Ghost not being excluded thereby, but all false and Idol Gods.

The third thing is the time of praise: Now and for ever: for there is no time
wherein it is not to be expressed.

The fourth thing is the Affection, which is ever to be used in the praising of
Christ in the word Amen, that is, verily, or so be it: signifying that the
affection of the heart must ever be joined with this religious action of the
praise of God.

Use. First, we learn hence, that we are bound to give praise and glory to
God and Christ: Psalm. 65.1. O God praise waits for thee in Sion, it is one of
his rights, properly due unto him. 1. Cor. 5. Whether we eat or drink, or
whatsoever we do, it must all be done to his glory. Secondly, look what is
Gods principal end in all his actions, that ought to be ours in our actions.
But his principal end of all his actions is his own glory^ Prou. 16.4. The
Lord made all things for himself* that is, for his glories sake; which end we
also must aim at in all our actions. Thirdly, the end of al Gods blessings is
to move us to set out the virtues of God, 1. Pet. 2.9. which is then done of
us, when with our mouth we confess, and in our lives we express his mercy,
wisdom, power, and such other his properties. Fourthly, that we may not
think that this is an arbitrarie duty left to our own liberty, or put in
our own power whether we will perform it or not* we must know that it
sits near, or ought to sit near us, and is a case of necessity to
prefer the glory of God before our lives, yea before the salvation of our
souls. In the Lords Prayer we are taught first to pray for the glory of God
simply without any respect to ourselves, and afterward come to the petitions
concerning our selves and others. Ob. But here it will be said, God is the
fulness and perfection of all glory, how can we then add any glory unto him?
Ans. The glory of God is taken two ways: first, for that infinite glory which
is in himself, or rather which is himself, to the perfection of which nothing
can be added, neither can any thing be detracted from it to make it less
perfect. Secondly, for that glory of his which is in, and from us, the which
is nothing else but the acknowledging, confessing and praising of this his
glory, in which sense we may be said to give him glory, or not to give it.
Ob. But it may be alleged that God being the perfection of glory in himself,
he needs not glory or praise from us; and therefore the duty is not so
absolute necessary. Ans. Our praise of God is not needful in regard of God:
Psalm. 16.2. O Lord my goodness extends not unto thee, but it is needful in
regard of our selves being creatures, and in this respect bound to honor and
glorify our Creator. Secondly, because (although it is not his happiness) yet
it is our chief good and happiness to praise him. Thus are we to take knowledge
of our maine duty, and on the contrary of our maine sin who herein have so
often failed, dishonouring the Lord by our wicked thoughts, speeches and
actions, and that continually, and so have robbed him of his glory, for whose
glory alone we were created.

2. Use. In this form of praise observe the foundation of all divine and
religious worship, all which may be referred unto four heads: first,
adoration, the ground whereof is Gods Majesty and glory; for it follows
well if God be full of Majesty and glory, then we must adore him, we must
submit our selves before him, we must subject our consciences to his laws,
we must believe all his promises, and tremble at al his threatenings. Secondly,
faith: The ground of which is Gods dominion and power; for if he be the
sovereign Lord of life and death, if he have such absolute power to save and
destroy, then must we place all our faith in him for our salvation. Thirdly,
prayer: and fourthly thanksgiving, both which has their grounds and foundation
in his power, dominion, and glory; so in the Lords Prayer after the petitions,
is added as the ground of prayer the reason of all the requests, for thine is
kingdom, power and glory.

3. Use. Hence we must learn to adore and reverence the judgments and works
of God, howsoever they seem unto us, and may be harsh in our shallow reason;
for he is glory it self, Majesty it self, power it self, and he works
that for his own glory which we cannot comprehend. If God therefore love
Jacob, and hate Esau, for nothing seen in themselves, but because he will so
do, which might seem to the eye of flesh a thing unjust and partial, let us
stop our mouths at this most righteous judgment of God; for he is all power
and dominion, having sovereignty and absolute Lordship over al his creatures,
to make some vessels of honor, and some of dishonor; some of mercy, and some
of wrath, all men being as the clay in the hand of the Potter: and therefore
the Apostle Romans 9. so soon as he had propounded this famous and memorial
example, to shut the mouths of men, which otherwise would have been opened
against this just and incomprehensible proceeding of God, he brought them
presently to the consideration of the power and sovereignty of God, verse.
17.19. We our selves think it no injustice to kill the creatures, because God
has given us a Lordship and dominion over them; and shall we deny it to be
just in God to destroy likewise his creature, over which he has infinitely
more sovereignty than man has over them?

4. Use. We are to be afraid to sin against God; we must resign our will
unto his whatsoever it is, and simply subject our selves unto the obedience of
the same, fearing in the least thing to offend him; and all this because of his
Majesty, power, and dominion over us; for this is the living holy and
acceptable sacrifice which he requires of us, Romans 1.12. even our reasonable
serving of him.

Further, whereas all these are to be given to God alone, note first, that the
wicked Astrologer with his Art is here condemned, seeing all glory is
properly belonging unto God: but the Astrologer arrogateth to himself that
part of Gods glory which consists in the foreknowledge of things to come, in
that by erecting of a figure and the aspect of the stars, he takes upon him
to foretell things merely casual and contingent, as of life and death, woe, or
wealth, peace or war; wherein he enters upon Gods possessions. Isai. 41.23.
Besides that the stars neither by creation, nor by any ordinance of God, can
be any means to foretell things to come. Secondly, detestible is the Romish
doctrine, which gives the glory and power of God to Saints, as of hearing the
prayers of all men in all places, and knowing the hearts. Secondly, it gives
to the Pope power to make laws and to bind the conscience. Thirdly, it
ascribes to the Pope and hi^ Shauelings power to forgive sins properly; all
which be incommunicable properties of the Godhead.

Now for the time for ever.] Learn that it is the duty of every child of God
to dedicate himself unto the praise of God, and that continually, Psalm.
119.117. For this shall be the eternal c^^ling and condition of those who
shall possess the kingdom of glory, and (...) must be begun even in this
life.

Lastly, from the affection in the word Amen.] Note that whatsoever we are to
perform in the service of God, (...) must be not of fashion; but with the
earnest affection of our hearts* Psalm 103.1. My soul praise the Lord, and
all that is within me praise his holy name. It is said of Josias that he
turned to God with all his soul, and all his heart, according to all the law
of Moses; so we in like manner in our conversion to God, in our prayers,
praise^, or whatsoever holy worship and service we tender unto him, must beware
lest in drawing near him with our lips, we withd^^w our hearts from him:
which we shall the better perform, if we carry in mind his own commandment,
My son give me thy heart.

FINIS. Laus Christo nesci^ finis.
THE PVBLISHERS POSTSCRIPT.
MAny excellent points might I, as gemmes and pearls in this Comme^tarie,
commend unto thy consideration (Christian Reader:) but that one shall suffice
to give notice of, and direct thee unto, as worthiest of my penning and thy
perusing; which, as it is most joined with the scope of this whole Epistle; so
most seasonably is it fitted to our present condition, and most diligently
trauased by this our Author, namely, that The seducers of the last age,
especially here aimed at by the spirit of God; de^iers of the maine grounds of
Religion in doctrine, and practice, are the Papists and the present Romish
Church. The necessary consequent whereof is directly proved, namely, That we
may never join with them in their religion: but for ever contend against them
for the faith once given to the Saints: Verse. 3.
which we can never do if we avoid not their doctrines, as the rocks on
which we shall necessarily suffer shipwreck, or death it self, unto which
they cannot but carry the professors. The antecedent or former part seems
(by the way) to be a direct and natural answer unto a Popish pamphlet,
already by three learned men sufficiently confuted; wherein H.T. by twelve
triuiall articles (in comparison) goes about the bush to prove, that
Protestants have neither faith nor piety, religion nor good life. To whom our
Author in the exposition of the third verse reioyndeth, and (doubling the
number of those articles with advantage) in the same order proves the Romish
faith to be adversary in six and twenty several, solid and maine grounds
unto Christian faith and practice. I will no longer stand on this part than I
have showed who these Papists be, meant by the Author from whom we must
depart; and that for this end, that the sequel of our separation from them may
be acknowledged most just and necessary. By such a Papist we understand not
every one who in some things may be Popishly affected, for true faith may
stand with some errors, and the end of that faith be the salvation of men's
souls: so be the party aberring be framed to these two rules: First, he must
of necessity h^ld the foundation, namely, that in Jesus Christ alone, and in
no other name, either Angel or man, himself or others, salvation is to be
sought for. If a man upon this foundation build some wood, nay, stubble, 1.
Cor. 3.
or chafe, though these shall be burned, yet himself shall be saved,
notwithstanding as it were through fire. Secondly, those errors must not be
joined with either a willing, (...) wilful ignorance, for such errors are
desperate and bring swift damnation. 2. Pet. 2.1.
And thus where God reueiles no more but naked Christ, and where there is a
subjection of the heart to the word, causing it to depend on the Ministry for
further and more full instruction, the acknowledgement of every divine truth is
not of such absolute necessity to salvation, but that true faith may stand
with some (even Popish) errors. The Ruler is said to believe (and that was by a
justifying faith) when as yet he was only overcome by the Majesty of Christ;
Ioh. 4.53.
appearing in the miracle of raising his son, to assent unto and acknowledge
ye maine truth that Christ was the Messiah: but so, as himself and his
household depended on his mouth for further instruction, and became his
disciples. Yea even the Disciples themselves were long after their calling and
conversion very ignorant in no small points of Christianity. Philip, of the
first person in Trinity: Lord show us the Father. Ioh. 14.^.
Others of them conceived of Christ as a worldly King: whence two of them
desire to sit the one at his right hand, Matthew. 20.
and the other at his left, when he came to his kingdom. Others of them (even
after his resurrection) harping on the same string, and hearkening after
temporalities expect it. Luke 24.21. Act. 1.6.
Others ask him when he would restore it to Israel. Peter himself held not as
he ought the doctrine of the passion, Mat. 16.22.
seeing he dissuaded Christ from it. Wherein marvelous ignorance descrieth it
self in them being true believers: but so much the more tolerable, in that
first Christ reueiled no more unto them, either not opening the things, or
their understandings to apprehend them, till afterward that he sent the
spirit of truth. And secondly this ignorance (the mother of their errors) was
accompanied with a desire of knowledge: for they were ever questioning with
him, desiring him to open unto them his parables, and resolve their doubts,
instantly listening unto the gracious words of his mouth, and in a word were
blessed even in hungring and thirsting after righteousness. The persons then
here aimed at are absolute and perfect Papists, Note well. Perk. Probl. page 1.
operum vlt. edit. p. 367. and page 741.
against whom alone this grave Author deals in all such places of this or
other his Works, where in he may seem severe against them: as himself here
and there thorough his writings has described them, to be such as acknowledge
the Pope their head: hold and maintain the doctrines and devices of the
Council of Trent, and therein are become ouerturners and rasers of the
foundation of Christian religion; members of Babylon, Idolaters, not only
outwardly toward Saints and Images: but inwardly sacrificing to their own
nets; Perk. operum p. 431. col. 2.
these zealous Papists, especially the Teachers among them, are the deceivers
so lively described throughout the Epistle.

The second point is our consequent duty, standing in our standing out with
these adversaries of Gods grace and Gospel: never offering to communicate with
them in their cup of fornications; nor once bethink us of leaguing such
abhorring natures as are light and darkness: and truth (which is of an unstained
nature) with most foul and deformed falsehood. For we cannot drink of the cup
of the Lord and of Devils. 1. Cor. 10.21.
Which point let me with good leave a little further declare: not that I love
to kindle or keep in any coals of contention, (the Lord put far from me
such unpleasant thoughts) but calmely to show the oversight of diverse
mediators, attempting to reconcile ours with the present religion of the
Romish Synagogue: esteeming it to be too much peremptorines so far as we
do to depart from them: yea censuring it, either as wilfulnes on the one hand,
o^ scrupulositie on the other, to be so opposite unto them as we are: reputing
it a matter of no difficulty to frame both sides to a mean, either side (as
they say) yielding a little: nay it is buzzed out, into the ears, by the
tongues of common men, that there is no such discrepance and difference
between us in matters of moment as is made; but that the substance of both our
Religions is not far from the same: so as many are in a mammering whether way
may be better: whereunto (after the Hebrew (...), (...): Cicero.
imitated also by the Greeks and Latins, that I may begin with the last for the
helping of memory) first we may bewail, in beholding into what a
deliberation; Cyprian.
but even call the very maine grounds thereof into question: whereas if it be
in a motion to Idolatry, they ought instantly to say with Sidrach; Dan. 3.
We are not careful what to answer in this matter. But this judgment of God
is just upon them, that whereas they never received the truth in love of it,
they should lose of their ground, and be left unto further delusion. Good
cause have we all to lament the remembrance of our ruin, through this
Satanical stratagem: If the woman will needs be so unwise as (not needing) to
enter parley with Satan, whom she ought to have resisted: and that in matter of
such moment, as wherein Gods truth, his glory, and her own glorious estate
must be questionable: most justly must she be left of God, snared by Satan,
foiled through her own folly, thrown from her estate, (though of innoce^cie)
and dispossessed (not alone we all know) even of Paradise it self. Besides,
how far shor^ come these men in ^^ale to the truth, not only of our
adversaries the Papists themselves, among whom no doubts (...) questions in
their grou^^^ and (...) tolerable* but even of the law who will admit of no
dispute against his Religion* yea of the barbarous Turk himself, who
inflicteth death on whomsoever they conuin^e to have called a word of their
Alca^on into question*

See Perkins practice of a reformed Catholic, operu^ p. 743
that they might see, that he that sees not such a Papist as i^ mentioned to
profess a false Christ, and a false faith, sees in Religion sc^rse any thing
at all: neither doubt I live (to whom malice, (...) igno^^nt superstition
shuts not their eyes) to show plainl^^ in few words, that whatsoever in
words they confess with us, yet in doctrine and deed they altogether reuerse
it and dissent from us, in cases wherein we may never consent unto the^. And
first, seems it a small matter of difference, that in general they charge
our whole doctrine of novelty, whence ordinarily they term the Teachers
thereof Non^^^rs* and in special, first, that our doctrine of justification by
faith alone (for this strikes at the head, and vnbowelleth all their shifting
devices) is but a new device of ours? as appears in their Champians
challenge. Campian.
But confounded herein was he, his cause and abetters* our learned men at the
conference with him in the Tower not only mightily by the Scriptures
conuincing; but out of Greek and Latin Fathers also, who lived above a
thousand years ago, See the first and fourth days conference extant.
oppressing him with those very formal words, that faith only justifies; so
driving him to ridiculous shift^, and newly coined distinctio^s (so near the
Min^ was he) before unheard of: even as in this controversy being much
straightened, they were forced to cast about for that as false as new distinction
of justification into the first and second, never heard of for ye space of a
thousand and five hundred ye^res after Christ.

2. Let (...) ad^oyne hereunto the challenge of our England^ Jewel, B. Jewel
against Harding.
who vndertoo^* and performed the proof, that in seven and twenty points
(none of them (...)) the Papists are different, not ^nely from ours, but from
the doctrine of the Primitive Church* and that neue^ (...) of th^se their new
devices (...) once heard of (...) received i^ (...) Church of God for the space
of six hundred years after Christ. If then they chall^nge our doctri^^ of
Noueltie^ and (...) proved (they not improouing) that (...) of no ancient* and
not near Apostolical authoritical hope this cannot seem a circumstance^
between (...)* for there can be but one truth, and that is most mole^^.
Antiquissimum verissim^^, ^^hilterinq^^ quod posterius.


3. Again, can it seem so small ^ moa^e in the eye of any man of sight, that
the sacrilegious Synod of (...) teaches, (cursing the contrary minded) that
on their Romish Altars, sacrifices propitiatory are d^^ly properly and truly
offered for the sins of the quick and dead^ seeing that this doctrine utterly
derogateth from, yea and abrogateth that most perfect and only (...) for all
offered, Heb. 9.25.26.
whereby their sins are ^^p^ated that shall see the Lord in the holy of
holies.

4. Further, let any indifferent and single eye behold, and consider whether
those be but trifling differences which our reverend Reignolds has worthily
disputed, De eccles. Romans Idol^latria.
both against Bellarmine in his books entitled, The Idolatry of the Roman
Church: as also against Heart, both in the two principal questions concerning
Peter's and the Popes supremacy: (by which their doctrine they would make Kings
and Princes but vassals and ^eodataries unto the Pope; Council. Trident sess. 14
cap. 7. Bellarm. de pontis. Romans lib. 5. cap. 8. Stapleton says that the Popes
supremacy must be held in pain of damnation. See 5. and 6. conclusions.
to whom they ascribe absolute power to excomm^^icate Kings; to discharge their
subjects from their obedience, and allegiance; to dispense with their oaths of
loyalty, and faithful subjection; and dispose of their Crowns at his
pleasure: which no good subject (much less Christian) can say is a triuiall
point, or a little to be yielded unto) as also in those six conclusions
annexed, wherein he has substantially and learnedly determined, that the
says professed by the present Church of Rome is not the Catholic faith. That
their Church is so far from being the Catholic Church, that it is no sound
member of the Catholic Church, and consequently that the reformed Churches of
Great Britain, France, Germany, etc. have lawfully: that is, by warrant of
Gods word severed themselves therefrom.

5. Neither may we yield that to be a circumstantiall question discussed
between our learned Whi^taker and Stapleton concerning the Authority of the
holy Scriptures, which they so far debase and subordinate to their Church:
seeing through that great book of his (never like to be answered by them) he
gravely proves that the foundation of Papisticall faith is laid upon man, 1.
Book, 2. chapt. page 51.
and not upon God; and so it is an humane faith, and not divine; unto which
their whole service is suitable, according to Durandus his description in his
Rationale. And lastly, none but inconsiderate men would auerre either that the
most learned Protestants of Europe have spent their strength, and beaten their
brains only for the beating of the ^yre in matters immateriall: or that those
who have a^ yet vncontroleably published, that the Popish Teachers have
reuersed the whole Decalogue, with the most of the Articles of the Creed, and
Petitions of the Lords Prayer, have differed and squared in points not
essential: or that so many zealous Martyrs, many of them of very profound
knowledge should give their lives, and most innocent blood, for matters of
shadow (as is pretended) rather than of substance: for thus to impeach the
labors of the former, or stain the sufferings of the latter, would scarce
beseem any but either a Papist, or some special favorite of theirs.

Thirdly, to such as are of mind that Non omnis concordia bona; est daemonu^
legio concors, nec non latronu^ conspiratio. Muscul. in Matthew. 8.2.
well knowing how sweet is the name, and yet more pleasant is peace it self;
so would I choose an honorable war, before a dishonorable peace; a free and
just dissension, before a base and slavish agreement, such as theirs would be:
For Nahash the Ammonite will make no concord with Iab^sh Gilead, unless every
m^n suffer his right eye to be pulled (...), that so he may bring some sha^^
upon Israel. And first it seems to me a matter b^rder to be b^^ught about,
than Love of my shallow (...) can expect ever to see effected* both in regard
of our selves, as also of them* for if the truth be with us (as we are bound
to confess, both in respect of i^ self, and the Articles of religion set out
Anno 1562. and in Parliament approved Eliz. 13. c. 12
law whereby it is established) Ier. 2.19. and 6. c. 16.
th^n our turnings back^ must not reprove us; but having found the old way, we
are to walk in it, (without turning aside) that we may in it find rest for
our souls. The Lords counsel to his Prophet must be our direction in this
case: Son of man, go (...) th^n to them, but let them come to thee* for to
lose our hold of the truth, much less to le^se any part of it, ^s in exchange
with falsehood, were not only a wrongful betraying of it self, but a wilful
wronging of our selves and posterities; whom Gods blessings for the present
has made able to ^old it entire, not only without danger, but with
encouragement, power, and protection. But more hopeless or impossible rather
in respect of them shall out meeting in the midway seem to be, to whomsoever
with judgment shall perpend these four subsequent considerations.

First, that their faith being not Sadeel refut. assert. Pos^a^. c. 9.
Apostolical, their Religion a His Majesty's late Proclamation and speech at
the Parliament.
false Religion, their Church a D. (...) on Jude: by 25. notes. Perk. in Matthew.
4. verse. 5. and operu^ p. 741
false Church, and their worship a false worship: it will prove not a matter
of repairing (as requiring less cost and labor) but of founding their faith,
before they can be raised unto us: which how hard it is for them to be
brought unto, who are so settled in their lees and dregs for so many hundred
years, they cannot be ignorant, who know how difficult it is for a Bl^^kem^^re
to ch^^ge his skin, or a Leopard his spots: for so hard is it for those who are
accustomed to evil, to be drawn to good.

Secondly, that so long as the Pope holds his headship over the Church, with
that erroneous position, that he cannot err; (which he is likely to lay down
with his Crown and Crosier, (for sooner to part with them were a foul error)
if by much sweat some indifferent parley were compassed (himself still
remaining both party and judge, as he was in the Council of Trent)
improbable, yea impossible it were that any conclusions could on their part be
passed, Noli quaestu^sum vlcus tangere Erasm.
(if on any at all propounded) which any way might be derogatorie to his
usurped power and pre^ended supremacy.

Thirdly, their cautelous circumspection, lest by any means the knowledge of
our doctrine might perhaps be scattered among them, argues an utter
auersation in them for ever acknowledging it, which appears in sundry their
practices: 1. In that they bind the consciences of all Catholics, to a
perpetual separation from all our Ecclesiastical assemblies in religious
public duties; which is the ground of all Recusancie: to which purpose they
teach it to be a sin to hear our sermons, for that were a Bristol.
participation with blasphemies: and for prayer with us so strait laced are
they, as they may not say Amen in public or private, (suppose at their tables)
if any Protestant be present. 2. In that they censure most severely al their
subjects that travel or traffike into Protestant countries, blasting them with
excommunication. 3. In that they have erected in their Cities an Inquisition to
examine upon oath any forreiner or stranger, whereby they ransake not only all
his carriages, but even his conscience also, lest he should bring any opinion
within him; or instrument without him* that stands not with their minds and
liking: wherein not only some little escape, but even suspicion it self
proves often capital. 4. In their warines, lest any of our books, especially
of our translations of the Bible should be had, or read among them: whence it
is that no books, which pass not the Inquisition, may be sold in Italy: to
which purpose also studiously they teach it to be a sin against the first
Commandment to read any of their prohibited books, of which they have a
large Index very common, and consequently being such a mortal sin, it must
necessarily be confessed at time of shrift: yea as men every way foreseeing
what way our doctrines might be induced among them, to shut up surely every
crany and entrance, they scarsely suffer to see, or be seen in the light
their own greatest Writers, such as Bellarmine, Gr^gory de Valencia, etc. that
our positions, allegations, and answers (though answered by themselves) in
those books may not be made known; lest perhaps it should befall others of them
as it did Pighius, who reading over Caluins Institutions, with purpose of
refuting it, was (ere he was aware) won to the defense of the doctrine of
justification by free imputation according to the Apostle. So as Spain makes
not a more diligent annual search that the Jews among them have no arms in
their houses, than both Spain and Italy vigilantly secure themselves in this
behalf: and no marvel if our books be so avoided, seeing that they inhibite
men from reading the Scriptures themselves, lest they should become heretics:
condemning it, and Fox, Acts and Monuments.
bringing men in danger of their lives for reading them, as for an heretical
practice. In a word, at this day such a night do these Owls delight to live
in, that among themselves even their Regulars (much less their Laics) may not
without license from the Pope, or their Prelates, read the Bible, no not in
the Catholic translation.

Fourthly, consider their irreconciliable hatred against ours, far above all
other (although most heretical and damnable) religions; for why else can they
content themselves with so studious prevention of the Protestants profession
only; whereas both Jews and Grecians even in Rome it self the Popes Sea, are
suffered with their Ceremonies, Synagogues, Services, yea and Circumcision it
self administered to the dead as well as to the living? which lowdly
proclaims, that far they are from judging, and deeming so indifferently of
our differences, as some among our selves seem to do: and that they would
sooner be wone to the Jews or Turks in profession then the Protestants: which
Renaldus.
one of them says is in nothing better then that of the Alcaron; and in many
things far worse and more detestable. And good reason (me thinks) they have of
suffering among them the forenamed Sects and Heretics, as from whom together
with the heathen, the whole body of Popery is peecemeale patched together, and
yet the name of a Protestant be as much detested of them, as the Jewish names
were of the heathen Kings. For which cause Daniel and his fellows must have
all their names changed before they may be brought into the presence of
Nebuchadnezzar, whence their ordinary practice proceeds, that in their
writings, their bitterness and disdain suffer them not to name, but in most
reproachful terms, the first reformers and restorers of our Religion:
calling them usually, Caluinists, Puritans, Innouators, and Heretics; neither
does this inbredde malice of Papists against our Religion stay it self here,
but has broken out into most barbarous butcheries, and most cruel
bloodsheddings, which yet they could never account sufficiently savage: not of
their own subjects only, and within their own Territories: but within other
dominions: not of private only, but of public persons: not of meaner, but of
most noble, yea Royal descent: and not of persons only, but of Cities, States,
Kingdoms, and Countries. But where should I begin, or if I should, where
should I make an end of insta^cing their most matchless, and endless tyranny?
(ever a note of false Religion, and inseparable to the Romish) whose cursed
rage (like that of Symeon and Leui) Genesis 34.39. and 47.7. even fierce and
cruel, causing them to stincke among the inhabitants of the earth, has made
the streets of infinite Cities (which either their force, or fraud and false
arts could cast open) to run with the blood of Protestants, as did once
Jerusalem with the blood of the Saints which Manasseh shed like water. What
shall I need to speak of that notorious bloody inquisition in Spain and
Italy the chief seats of it? what of the many miserable massacres, Canniball
like conspiracies, and tragical murders in France and the low Countries? In
our own country, who but strangers at home are ignorant what fierceness,
fears, and fires, were raised to consume the innocent bodies of the Saints
living and dead: Furor etiam post ^atae.
in such sort as every corner of the Land seemed as hot as Nebuchadnezzars
furnace, even seven times hotter then it used to be: wherein were to be cast
whosoever would not fall down, and worship the Image which the Romish
Nebuchadnezzar had erected? Neither yet were those fires thought furious enough
for such; as might have appeared, if the Lord had not taken the rod out of
those wicked hands in that season when he did: and since that time; Stories
device of an iron cage against Protestants turned unto an bu^dle and halter
against himself.
what a number of devilish plots and conspiracies were attempted against the
noble person of her late Majesty of blessed memory, by Ard^n, Someruile,
Babington, P^rry, Lopez, Squire, and others? and those stratagems not performed
by persons exorbitant, but with the priuitie of the Pope, and Principals of
their religion, backing the same not only with their According to his Majesty's
most wise observation, his last speech at Parliament.
doctrine, to which it is most suitable (as appears by sundry their seditious
positions; lately collected by Mr. Morton) but with pardons, promises, paies to
particular Parry Lopez. Bull^ P^ Qui^^a.
persons: and co^mandeme^ts generally to all subjects whosoever, as appears
by the Popes Bull against her late Majesty: Volumu^ and iub^mus vt aduersus
Elizabetham etc. subditi arma capessant. And yet (as though all were well) they
can cover all the ill hearing of such traitorous practices, under the name of
Catholic pretenses: for the furthering of which intentions, what may not, and
must not be attempted? Now to these purposes maintain they innumerable
Catholic intelligencers and instruments (I mean their Priests and Jesuits)
sent out by them, not only as eyes to search out the secrets of states and
countries, and watch their best advantages: but as hands (full of blood) to
execute whatsoever mischief upon any of the Lords anointed ones, not only
opposing themselves to the Papal power; but which is more, if they be but
suspected not so firm to the Pope as they wish; or (which is most of all to
be marked) though they be their own dead sure; yet if they show not
themselves as ready to execute the Popes bloody designs, as he to command:
which was the case of the late King of France, slain treacherously for no
other cause by a Iacobin. What argument then can be brought to persuade us of
their ever according with us in whole or part in our Religion? of which they
deem no other, then as of a peccant humor necessarily to be purged out every
few years, either by murder, if it prevail in the head: or by massacre, if
in the body of any country; and rather then it should not, they will not
stick with Blas^^s at the commandment of their great Gracch^^ to set on fire
or to blow up even the Capitol it self: Cicero.
although nature and Gentilisme condemn such graceless deuotednes. The late
most diabolical and furious attempt against his Majesty and the whole state
that ever was invented; (the like whereof both in the contriuing and whole
carriage could never be showed, no I think if there were Annals and Chronicles
kept in hell it self) cries out against them long ere this time in all the
corners of Christendom. God Almighty still deliver his Highness and Royal race
from them: and by his Majesty's means, us and our Land from them. For how much
better had it bin, that his Majesty had been moved to have banished these
vipers out of his Realms, then those who profess the same Lord Jesus,
Picturer in (...).
and labor (though with acknowledgement of too much weakness and wants,) to be
found faithful before the Lord and their Sovereign? But not to depart from
our purpose: These be the ways wherein the Popish Baalamits would mee^e us,
and with us; if the Lord should not meet with the^, coming against them in
every corner. While then they walk in these ways of Caine, Iud. 11.
what booteth it us to speak of a peace with them? for while we speak of
peace, Psalm. 130.7.
they are bent to war.

But be it some peaceable consent and agreement were on their part promised;
yet that one consideration of the treachery in their compactes, would keep
any judicious man from settling his conceit, and affection upon any ingenious
conclusions with them: which treachery is not only practiced by the persons of
faithless Papists: but is prescribed as a maine precept of that most infidel
doctrine of theirs; nay which even infidels themselves would blush at in this
behalf: for does not their doctrine make it lawful for them to use any
Aequiuocatio^s, o^ reseruatio^s (as they term them) with their adversaries,
almost upon any advantage? yea and that (lest they should not come to the
height of impiety) in giving answer not only on their words, but upon oath
before the lawful Magistrate, though not their lives but their least liberties
only be touched? Which doctrine till it be reuersed, how dare we take their
words or any assumpsit from them in any thing werein we would not be
ouer-reached? But suppose again such peaceable conclusions were not promised
only, but purchased: what yet were we better the^ before? what bills, or bonds
would or could they lay in sure enough for our security, so long as their
doctrine stands in force published in word and writing, Tollet. Instruct.
Sacerd.
that fides haereticis non est seruanda, and that Leagues with them are more
honorable in breaking then in making? how long can we conceive, would the
continuance of our peace last longer, then by it they could with advantage
undermine us?

But because I must shut up many matters in few words, let us see the prejudice
which would ensue upon such pretended mediation, Note, I speak not against the
league of concord. Isay. 1.6.
in matter of Religion: and first seeing they are a seed of the wicked, corrupt
children, having forsaken the Lord, in whom from the sole of the foot, to the
crown of the head, there is nothing but wounds, and swellings and sores full
of corruption: and seeing themselves are become open Idolaters, their Cities
cages of Idolatry, their services all Idolatrous, having thus forsaken the
covenant of their youth; seeing filthiness appears on their skirts; and
finally seeing by seeking their justification by the works of the law, they
are abolished from Christ, and fallen from grace: (the which particulars have
been clearly proved by many our unanswered, and unanswerable books) to
communicate with them by accepting; yea not absteining from the least
appearance of any of these evils; were no other but to expose and lay our
selves open, and naked to all manner of danger, of infectio^ of our souls,
defection from our God, and in the end of destruction both of body and soul.
It was a dangerous disease which Israel brought out of Egypt, Elephas, or
Elephan^iosis, the Leprosit.
having through their long continuance there, by reason of those marshes, and
the River Nilus, (to which Lucretius in a distich appropriateth this disease)
contracted the same upon them: for the proving, Leuit. 13.
and purging whereof, the Lord instituted so many ceremonies and separations:
but far more fearful was that inward leprosy, even that abominable
Idolatry which they brought forth with them, and which cost them so dear both
in the wilderness and in the land of Canaan: yea so habitual and inbred was the
infection, that although the Lord used most wise preuentions every way: yet
presently upon their delivery out of the sea, will it burst forth, and become
in the end their utter overthrow. Exodus 32.
It cannot be but the strangers which come with Israel out of Egypt, being
accustomed to the Egyptian fashion and diet, will still be harping on their
cucumbers, leekes, onyons, and garlic: and draw the Israelites to the same
lustings, though with the loathing of Manna it self; but such an exceeding
plague shall proceed from the Lord, that in perpetual memory thereof, the
place shall be called the graves of lusting: Kibroth hataauah.
and if the daughters of Moab may have free access to Israel in Sitti^^,
Israel will easily be joined to Baal Peor, Number. 25.9 co^ferd with 1. Cor. 10.^
till the wrath of the Lord be kindled, and there fall in one day, three and
twenty thousand. The certain peril and inevitable danger whereof, the Lord
well perceiving, did not only charge his people to have nothing to do at all
with the Heathen, lest by any means they should be snared: but also that they
should be so opposite unto them, that they should in all appearances and
circumstances (and yet none will say the Lord herein was too severe and
strait) be unlike unto them both in Religious and Civil exercises: for if
they look toward the East in their Temples in the honor of the Sun, his
people shall in his Sanctuary and Temple contrarily look to the West: and in
the West shall the Sanctum Sanctorum be set. If they offer sacrifices unto
Oxen, Sheep, Doves, Goats etc. as unto Gods: the Lord in detestation hereof,
will have his people to consume and burn these creatures before him in
sacrifice: and hence was it, Genesis 46.34 and 43.32.
that every shepherd was an abomination to the Egyptians: with whom they
might not eat and converse, because they did kill, eat, and sacrifice those
beasts, whom the other worshipped as Gods. If they use to eat almost none but
Swines flesh, and yet neither that, before they have sacrificed of the kind to
the Moon or Bacchus: the Lord especially prohibiteth this meat of all other
to his people, they shall not meddle with it, it shall be abhominatio^ unto
them. If their Priests, make their Romish Balami^s make their pates bald, and
shave their beards.
pates balde, shave the lock^ of their beards, and make cuttings in their
flesh, Leu. ^1.5.
as Baals Priests did; the Priests of the Sons of Aaron may not do so. If
they make glorious Altars, and plant Groves about them; the Israelites may not
do so, (especially in the Wilderness) but either Altars of earth, Exodus 20.
which presently upon the remouall might be demolished and cast down, left
the remainds should be abused to superstition: or if of stones, they must be
rough and rude, vnhewen, and unpolished, lest any beauty of them should
solicit their preservation: as for groves see Deuteronomy. 16.21. If they shall in
way of superstition, Romanists reserve of the bread in the Mass, and Relics
of men superstitiouslie. Exodus 1^.10 Deuteronomy. 34.6
or worship, reserve any portion of their sacrifices: the Lord rather then he
will have any portion of the Paschall Lamb preserved till the morrow, will
have it burnt with fire: neither shall Moses body be known where it is
buried, lest they should make an Idol of it. Nay which is more, and as worthy
the noting, we may observe how the Lord even in civil things draggeth his
people from their society and fellowship: for first Israel is charged, that
they should go no more back to Egypt that way; so as the danger was (if any)
by their neighbors, whose countries were adjacent unto them: the which the
Lord uses all means to prevent: both in that he wills his people to nourish
a perpetual emnity with the Moabite, and Ammonite, Deuteronomy. ^3.6.
the peace and prosperity of who^ they may never seek all their days: as also
to debar them from pressing into his people, Verse. 3.
he charge that neither of them ever enter into the congregation of the Lord,
to the tenth generation: intending hereby that they should not rise to
preferment, authority, or Magistracy among them. And as for the other
strangers, though Israel seemed in private respects to be, if not somewhat
obliged and indebted to diverse of them, yet as it were bound to peace, and to
hold their hands from open hostility; Verse. 7.
yet might they not be admitted into the congregation of God, unto the third
generation. Besides this, foreseeing that the next and most direct way, whereby
the heathen might league and linck in themselves with his people, might be by
marriages and co^tracts: the Lord is very studious that all such means be cut
off; and therefore would have the distinctions of Tribes observed; with strait
prohibition, that no Jew (except the Leuite) should marry out of his own
Tribe, much less without his own people: whereof although I acknowledge other
more main causes (as the distinction of the Tribe of the M^ssiah from the rest;
the clear acknowledgement of his race; the execution of the Lords whole
regiment Ecclesiastical and Civil in that policy, fitted according to that
distinction to their several offices, Coniugia extera Deus and re^pub. causa,
and conscientia vetuit. Jun. in Deuteronomy. 21. Exo. 34.16. Exo. 21.4.
and possessions) yet I think this is one included reason not to be neglected,
especially seeing they had strait charge against it. Again, in case a servant
Jew would marry a stranger into his Masters house, he was not at his departure
to carry his wife and children, for they were to be his Masters: but if he
would abide still with her, he was then shamefully to come before the
Magistrate, and for ever renounce his liberty, until the Iubily released him:
by which strait laws the Lord would restrain even slaves and servants (who
for the most part are neglected) from matching themselves with strangers. Such
another law to this purpose is recorded, Deuteronomy. 21.10. that if an Israelite in
war, should see a bewtifull woman taken captive, whom he did affect for his
wife, it was ordered by God, that first all means should be used for the
alienating of his affection, as that he must have her home a month before,
and not marry upon any sudden motion. Secondly she must shave her head to
make her as ill favored in his eyes as might be. Thirdly she must nourish her
nails, to make her yet more sordid. Fourthly she must put off the garment
wherein she was taken, and put on base, and neglected garments fit for a pensive
captive. Fifthly she must bewail her father and mother a whole month, to
show how hardly, and sorrowfully she was brought from her fathers house, into
the power of strangers: and then if by all these means the man could not be
drawn from her love, it was permitted to him to marry her for his wife: which
law lets us see how hardly the Lord endures, and is drawn to admit the
least liberty in this behalf. How many civil things might I instance in,
wherein the Lord straitened his people, that they might be utterly unlike the
Gentiles in habit, manner of living, behavior, and other like circumstances,
otherwise in themselves very indifferent? which I had here inserted, but that
I must consider that I write an addition, not a book; an admonition, and not
an exposition: and if yet these ordinances of God himself, seem in some men's
opinions too strait, and not to be imitated of us in regard of the Papists,
toward whom we are not to be so severe, as so far to sever our selves; that
is but the seeking of a knot in a rush, and to be acute in distinguishing,
where God has not distinguished; and in effect to affirm, either that the
Idolatry of the Romish Church is not so vile and gross, as is that of other
Idolaters: or else (seeing our people converse with them more then any
Idolaters) that to communicate with their Idolatry, is nothing so dangerous
now, as it was for Gods people, to participate with the Idolatry of the heathen
against Gods express Commandment. But if with any such the testimony of man,
be greater then the testimony of God (as it is commonly with the Popish minded,
who fly from the Scriptures unto men, because their doctrine is from below)
let them look unto those most ancient Councels, which were the purer, for
six hundred years after Christ; and they shall find that the Church would
have her children diametrally opposed even on lawful things, to the Jews, and
heathen of whom they were in danger to be corrupted. Those were more famous, of
Nice, An. Dom. 315.
which decreed that the feast of Easter should not be kept of Christians, at
that time, and in that manner that the Jews did: that in nothing they might
agree with them. That also of Brac^a An. Dom. ^10. T^m. 2. Can. 73.
decreed, that Christians should not deck their howses with bay-leaues and
green boughs, (than which what can be more indifferent?) neither rest the
same day from their callings wherein they did: nor keep the first day of every
month as they did. It would be too tedious, and argue forgetfulness of my
self, and no remembrance of my reader to recite the testimonies of other
Councels, Fathers, and our own principal Writers in this behalf: which
otherwise easily had I bin carried unto by the tenacity and stiffenes of many
in this argument. But to end: as our Savior wished his hearers: Beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees; so let every man beware of the leaven of the Papists:
for what is Popish doctrine else, but a Pharisaicall leaven, always to be
purged out of Churches, and states; as the Jews upon some occasions were to
purge al leaven out of their howses. Let no man say it is but a little, and
such a difference which may be tolerated: for even the Pharisees doctrine was
much of it more true, the^ this Pharisaicall doctrine of theirs; yet was their
leaven hid in it, (as in this) the nature whereof is (though it be but little)
yet to sour the whole lump. In a word, as Caleb and Joshua said of Canaan,
Number. 14.8.
the land is a very good land; If the Lord love us, he will bring us unto it:
even so, if the Lord love us, he will expel these Giants from us, and give us
security in our own land from the Anakims: or if not, if any of these
strangers abide with us, our faithful prayer and hope is, that (as Solomon
numb^^ing all the strangers in the land, 2. Chron. 2.17.
set them to work in his Temple, even a hundred three and fifty thousand and
six hundred: so our wise and peaceable Solomon and Sovereign will continue to
set even thousands of these to worship with us in the Temple: yea and in this
one circumstance pass Salomons wisdom, Verse. 18.
in not choosing overseers of themselves, to cause them to worship. The Lord
Jesus strengthen his Highness heart, unto this and many mo honorable works, and
make us happy in his long and prosperous Reign, to his renown and glory in
this life, and fruition of the blessed Crown of righteousness at the peaceable
end of his through comfortable days. Amen.

FINIS.
COMMON PLACES OF CHRISTIan Religion more largely handled in this Commentary.
1 Actual sins. page 121. 2 Angels, their nature and fall, page page 63. The
combat between good and bad Angels. page 84.
3 Apostles and Apostleship. page 119. 4 Books of God. page 48. 5 Callings.
page 43. 6 Catholic Church. page 32. 7 Charity. page 135. 8 Christ a Savior.
page 151. 9 Christ's coming to judgment. page 112. 10 Christian liberty. page
30. 11 Church, properties and marks of it. page 32. 12 Church Censures, and
excommunicacation. page 143. 13 Commandment first. page 35. second. page 36.
third etc. page 39.
14 Cross to be taken up. page 34. 15 Divinity of Christ. page 149. 16 Fear
of God. page 85. 17 Hope. page 138. 18 Images. page 36. 19 Intemperance. page
89. 20 Judgment day. page 68. 21 Justification by faith only. page 26. 22
Keys of the Church. page 31. 23 Knowledge in the creatures natural reasonable
spiritual.
page 88. 24 Love of God toward man, and contra. page 15. 25 Magistracy. page
76. 26 Mercy of God. page 13. 27 Natural corruption. page 127. 28 Peace with
God Man the creatures.
page 14. 29 Perseverance. page 11. 30 Regeneration. page 28. 31 Repentance.
page 33. 32 Resurrection. page ibid. 33 Reprobation. page 48. 34 Salvation by
Christ alone how to whom
page 151. 35 Sanctification. page 7. 36 Table second. page 41. 37 Ungodliness.
page 49. 38 Vocation. page 5. 39 Wisdom of Christ. page 150. 40 Worship of
God. page 38.
DOCTRINES MORE CHOICE and general collected and urged in this Exposition.
1 TO be a servant of Jesus Christ, is more honor then to be allied to
Princes. page 3. 2 Faith is a most excellent treasure. page 17. 3 The Saints
are the keepers of this treasure, and must fight for it. page 45. 4 It is a
subtlety of Satan to thrust the profane and wicked into the societies of the
Saints. page 47. 5 Public teachers in the Church must of necessity be called:
and why. page ibid. 6 Gods grace may not be turned into Wantonness. page 51.
7 No outward privileges are profitable (...) of their right use in faith and
repentance. page 56. 8 Great judgments are at the beeles of great mercies if
abused. page 57. 9 Distractio^ follows unbelief, which is therefore to be
vnma^ked and avoided. page 57. 10 Gods service is the only liberty, and
freedom in sin is to be chained in bondage. page 67. 11 The mercy of God
every way matcheth his justice. page 70. 12 To take a view of the sins of the
last times is necessary for every Christian. page 71. 13 Our bodies are the
Lords, and therefore must be given up to his service, and preserved in holiness.
page 75. 14 Sleep in sin and spiritual dreams the cause why so few
embrace the^ Gospel. page 73. 15 A Christians duty is to watch and be sober.
page 74. 16 Not to speak evil of, but bless Magistrates. page 80. 17
Scripture is known to be Scripture, by Scripture. page 83. 18 The Devil the
author of Idolatry. page 8^. 19 Not to requi^e evil for evil, a Christian
precept, and an angelical practice. page 87. 20 Christian meeknes must be
tempered with Christian zeal. page 89. 21 Caines way may not be beaten by
Christians. page 90. 22 Covetousness in all, but teachers especially, to be
avoided, and why. page 96. 23 Contentation a special virtue, and how atteined.
page 98. and 117. 24 In feasting Gods fear must be preserved in the heart.
page 102. 25 All Ministers must be able to teach sound doctrine. page 104. 26
Hearers ought to be as parcht land to to receive it. page ibid. 27 Christians
being trees of righteousness, must be 1. well rooted: 2. live: 3. bear fruit: 4.
bear good fruit, in Christ the stock. page 106. 28 Wicked men are inwarly as
unquiet as the raging sea. page 108. 29 Ministers ( as startes) must receive
their light from Christ, the son of righteousness. page 109. 30 All secrets of
heart and life naked before God. page 114. 31 The duty of the Church to
remember the words of the Prophets and Apostles, and why. page 119. 32 To mock
and scorn godliness a maine sin of the last age. page 121. 33 It is the
property of the ungodly to follow and walk after their own ungodly lusts.
page 122. 34 It is a great sin to sep^rate from the assemblies of Gods
people. page 124. 35 To be a natural man, a fearful sin, and who he is.
page 126. 36 Every one ought to build up himself upon his most holy faith.
page 129. 37 The doctrine of faith, a most holy doctrine. page 131. 38 Every
man is to preserve love toward man, and the means. page 135. 39 The duty of
every believer is to restore and recover offenders, and the means. page 141.
40 All glory, dominion, majesty, and power is to be ascribed to God and
Christ of all his creatures in all things for ever, Amen. page 154.
QVESTIONS DETERMINED AND the most of them disputed in this Commentary.
1 WHether this Epistle be Canonical Scripture? page 1. 2 Whether a man may
change his name? page 3. 3 Whether sanctification be from the Parents? page 8.
4 Whether saving grace may be lost? page 11. 5 Whether the Scripture be to
believed for it self? page 17. 6 Whether it be sufficient of it self? page
18. 7 Whether God created all things? page 20. 8 Wherein the Law and Gospel
consent and dissent? page 21. 9 Whether Christ's body can be present in many
places at once? page 23. 10 Whether Christ as redeemer has any partner, fellow
or deputy? page 24. 11 Whether the child of God may be assured of his
salvation? page 26. 12 Whether Images be to be worshipped? page 37. 13
Whether God decreed before all worlds to reprobate some men? page 48. 14 How
can God punish children with their parents, who sin not as they? page 69. 15
Whether Magistracy be lawful? and hereunto add, 1. Wherein does the
authority of Magistrate, Minister. differ. page 76 2. How far does civil
government extend? page ibid.
16 Whether the Pope be the archrebell of the world? page 79. 17 Whether
traditions besides the Word are needful? page 82. Or of necessity to be
believed? page 111.
18 Whether a man may not revenge in his own cause? page 87. 19 Whether
drunkenness may be approved? page 90. 20 Whether the Apostle might curse the
false teachers? page 91. 21 Whether Cora^ was swallowed up of the earth or
burned? page 99. 22 Whether Church lands, and livings may be impropriated
without sacrilege? page 101. 23 Whence had Jude the history of Enoch the 7.
from Adam? page 110. 24 Why made be choice of that, before any other history
in the Canon? page 111. 25 How could the Apostles days be called the last
time? page 120. 26 Which Church is that, to which a man may safely join
himself? page 125. 27 Whether separation may be made, if errors be found in
the Church? page ibid. 28 Why it is a sin to be a natural man? page 127. 29 Why
prayer must be made in the holy Ghost? page 132. 30 Whether we may pray to
the holy Ghost? page 133. 31 Whether the love of God be in man by nature? page
134. 32 Why are we not commanded to keep our selves in the love of man,
as well as of God? page 133. 33 How should a man preserve himself (...) the
love of God and man? page 135. 34 How we may recover offenders. page 140. 35
Whether by the delivery of a sinner to Satan, be meant the censure of
excommunication? page 143. 36 How can men's flesh or garments be unclean, and
hated, seeing they be the good creatures of God? page 145. 37 Whether and how
far we may keep company with an obstinate offender? page ibid. 38 Whether
Christ be God? against the Arrians. page 149. 39 How Christ can be said to
be only wise, seeing other creatures are wise also? page 151. 40 How can we
give any glory to God, seeing he can receive no more then he has? page 155.
PLACES OF SCRIPTVRE EXPLANED AT large in this Commentary.
Cap. Verse. Page Genesis 17 1 19 Exodus 20 4 35 5 36 12 41 Esaias. 8 13 40 Micha. 6 8
41 Matthew. 4 10 38 10 23 20 18 18 30 Luc. 9 23 34 13 3 33 Ioh. 1 14 22 3 5 28 16
24 Romans 3 28 26 1. Cor. 7 20 43 8 6 19 Gal. 5 1 30 14 41 1. Tim. 1 19 44 4 7 50
2. Tim. 3 16 17 1. Ioh. 2 22 23 5 7 19

OTHER PLACES MORE BRIEFLY EITHER EXPLAned or cleared from cavil and
corruption.
Cap. Verse. Page Genes. 1 7 104 26 77 27 21 3 15 77 43 34 88 Number. 16 27 99 32
26 10 100 1. Sam. 28 19 111 2. King 23 25 15 2. Chro. 15 15 15 23 11 79 29 20
79 Psalm. 106 17 99 Esaias. 60 10 78 Ier. 1 10 78 Hagg. 1 6 90 Matthew. 17 26 78 18
17 142 Ioh. 2 8 90 14 28 150 Act. 20 35 ibid Romans 13 1 76 8 76 1. Cor. 5 5 143
7 23 78 11 3 150 15 28 ibid. 2. Tim. 1 5 82 Titus 2 11 51 and 53 James 2 26 14
2. Pet. 2 19 51

Christian Reader, s^^ing my self could not attend the Pr^ss^ (...) ^oules thou
maies meet withal; but seeing they are (the most of them) literal, such as
(...) the most ocul^^^ and diligent Pr^^ter; and none of them such (so far as
I find) as much change of trouble the sense, I reserve the correction of them
to thine own humanity.

ERRATA.
For Nesikius and Aleminus, read Neskius and (...) and page 8* for (...) 13.
read Ioh. 1.^3. and page 165. margent, for (...).


