E'PIEI'KEIA OR, A TREATISE OF Christian Equity and moderation.

Delivered publicly in Lectures by M. W. Perkins, and now published by the
consent of his Assigns in Cambridge by a Preacher of the word.

Ephesians. 4. 31. Forgive one another, as God for Christ's sake does forgive you.

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1604.

And are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Crown by Simon
(...)

To the right Honorable the L. Sheffeild, Lord Lieuetenant, and L. President.
Sir Tho. Heskith, S. John Benet Knights. Charles Hales, R. William, Cutbert
Pepper, John Fern, Esquires, and the rest of his Majesty's Hon. Council,
established in the North parts, and under his Highness the highest Patrons of
Equity: Grace and peace from Jesus Christ.
RIght Honorable and W. how famous in all writers the year Eighty eight, and
how fatal it was made by all the old and later Coniecturers, is not unknown to
any of you: but how the issue answered the expectation, I see not, save only in
that notable overthrow of the enemies of god, the Papists: whereupon our
reverend Fulk. in pr^^ in T^st. Rhe^^
countreyman, and Christ's Champion for England, said very well: Octogesimus
octavus, mirabilis annus Clade Papistarum, faustus vbique pijs.

But if ever year deserve to be famous in English Chronicles, it is this
year, I cannot tell whether I should say 1602, or 1603: wherein, whether Gods
anger was more, in taking from us such a Queen (as for ought I read) the
world never had: or his mercy, in giving us such a King, as England never had,
I leave it to better heads to be determined. How is the name of our God to be
magnified, by whose mercy so great a loss is made no loss, but a gain unto
us? for who sees not, that all her Princely virtues, do not only live in him,
but are also in him (being a man) more perfect and accomplished. She is dead,
but her Heroical zeal and love to Religion is alive; she bequeathed it with
her kingdom to his Highness, who doubtless will make both her Religion, and
her Kingdom, to flourish as much more, as a man does excel a woman. And who
knows not, that the enemies of our Religion, and our peace, (notwithstanding
all their politik dissembled brags to the contrary) do find his Majesty so
little for their purpose, that now they would sing a thousand Masses to have
her alive again, against whom they thundered out Pius Grego^^ Sixtus ^
so many Curses and Excommunications, and after whose blood they so thirsted
whilst she lived: what straights are they driven into? who would wish her
alive again, at whose hands (though a woman) they never gained, nor got one
inch of ground in 44 years; Paulus ^ius 4. Pius 5. Gregor Sixtus 5 Vrbanu^
Gregor. Innocen Clement
though nine or ten Popes, and 10000 of their slaves, wrastled with her all the
while, with all the power, and policy, craft, and treachery, which the Devil
could lend them. Nay, her end was as glorious as her beginning, and her last
Proclamation against them, was more to their shame, and less to their comfort,
then ever any, in her life before: and so far was she, from allowing them a
Toleration, of their intolerable religion, in her old, and therefore weakest
age, as that it never entered into her royal heart: nor ever thought she it
worthy to be made a question, whether it should be or no. No, she halted not
betwixt two religions: but to her Baal was Belial: 1. King. 18*
and therefore she banished him; and God was the Lord, and therefore she served
him. She was resolved that Dagon must down, 1. Sam. 5. 2*
if God's Ark stand; or else if Dagon stand, the Arc must away. For both
together cannot stand upright. She held that as, when the enemies themselves
brought the Arc into Dagons temple, Dagon fell down: so if the Israelites
should have admitted Dagon into Gods temple, that the Lord himself would have
removed his Arc from them. Blessed was she in her life, and twice blessed in
her end: she lost not her first love, (...) 4, 19.
and her works were more at the last, then at the first: and blessed are we
that enjoyed her so long: and more blessed, who under her enjoyed such 44
years, as all the books in the world cannot show under a woman: but most
blessed of all, in that after such a David, God has sent us such a Solomon,
after such a woman, such a man, after such a Queen, such a King, (...)
who will make an end of many a Ioab, and many a Shimei, which she could not
so well do, and finish that Temple which she so well began: (...)
and who (I doubt not to affirm it) do the Devil, and the crafty Papist,
all they can, is the chief Champion of Christ Jesus upon the face of the earth.

And how happy a year shall this be, if the losses which learning has
sustained be as well recompensed. Iunius of Leiden, Tossaine of Heilderberg,
Perkins of Cambridge, have this year bin taken from us, besides many other, of
inferior note: happy should those three famous Universities be, if the like
were seated in their rooms. Let us leave the first, to the lower, the second
to the higher Germany, to praise them, to lament them, and to make supply for
them. It is the third who especially concerns us: what loss the Church of
God, and in the Church, England: and in the Church of England, the Ministry:
and in the Ministry, the Universities: and in the Universities, the younger
students have sustained by the untimely death of that Reverend man, I think is
not unknown to any of you. For how should he be unknown to any (of any note)
in England; whose name and estimation is such in other nations, as that at one
Nund ver. 603.
Mart we find, that in one half year, two of Catho reforma de mort de vita.
Prophet
his books were translated into Latin, and four were were printed beyond the
seas. The best recompense of this loss, is the fruit of his labors, which he
has left behind him, whereof some were written by himself, and others taken
by other men from his mouth: all which, at least so many of them as may be
perfected, there is hope we shall intime enjoy. Had not Johan. Budaeus, Calr.
in.
and Carolus Ionvillaus done so to Calvin: Vitus Theodorus, Ioh. Frederus, and
Iustus Jonas done so to Luther, many worthy (...)
works of those two great instruments of God had utterly perished: and had not
some done so to this worthy man, no doubt many sweet blasts of that silver
trumpet of God, had vanished away. For my part, though time be precious unto me
otherways, yet think I that time well spent, which I may bestow in preparing
to the Press, any thing of his. This discourse of Equity now made ready, as
a child borne after his fathers death, I present to your Honorable view and
patronage. If any ask why I dare tender so small a gift, to so great
personages, my only answer is, I make the Judges of Equity, the Patrons of
Equity. God grant you a long and Honorable state, under our worthy Solomon.
Amen. From my study, Sept. 10. 1603.

Your Honors, and Worships in the Lord: W. Crashawe.

To the Christian Reader whosoever.
I Do here present unto thee, (Christian brother) a small discourse of Equity,
delivered by that faithful labourer in the harvest of God, Mr. William
Perkins, in a few Lectures. The discourse is little, and brief, but the matter
is pithie, and the use profitable. Equity and Christian moderation whether
public or private, is the true badge of Christianity. Without public
Equity, what is the court of Justice, but turned into the seat of Iniquity?
and without private Equity, what is man's life, humane society, neighborhood,
nay friendship, nay kindred, nay marriage it self, but even a potion of poison
in a golden cup? Art thou therefore a Magistrate? here is taught thee, how to
discharge thy place, in the execution of the laws, as shall neither be
unbeseeming the lenity of a Christian, nor the severity of a Magistrate. Art
thou a private man? here is taught thee how to carry thy self, in all
dealing and bargaining with another: how to demean thy self toward thy
wife, thy servant, thy child, thy friend, thy neighbor, in such manner, as if
thou had all the comforts and contentments of this earth, yet the practice
hereof, shall make them all ten times more comfortable: and the want hereof,
shall turn all their sweetness into gall and wormwood. When therefore thou
read this little book, and withal, (laying it to thy life) do find the
truth of it in thy course and conversation, then acknowledge the spirit of God
in this holy man, (who now sleeps in peace) praise God for him, be wail his
loss, and help me and others with thy holy prayers, that we may still go
forward in this good work, of publishing these his godly labors: and in
delivering out to the church of God these Jewels: which the Lord from his
mouth, gave us to keep, not for our own, but for the common good.

Thy brother in Christ Jesus, W. C.

Philip. 4. 5. Let your moderation of mind be known to all men: the Lord is at
hand.
THe Apostle in this chapter, gives sundry exhortations, to many Christian
duties. In the first verse, to perseverance in faith and true religion. In the
2. and 3. to mutual concord. In the 4. to a spiritual joy in the Lord.

In this 5. verse, he exhorts to the virtue of Equity, or moderation of
mind. Our English translations commonly read it thus. Let your patient mind
be known to all men. which though it be truly and well said, yet the words
translated have a larger and fuller signification. Therefore according to the
nature and force of the words, I rather choose to read it thus: Let your
equity or moderation of mind be known etc.

The words contain 2. parts.

1. An exhortation, Let your equity be known to all men. 2. An excellent
reason to enforce it: the Lord is at hand.

The drift and scope of the exhortation is, to persuade the Phillippians, and
in them the whole Church, to the practice of Equity.

Now this Equity, whereunto the holy Apostle so earnestly exhorts, is, a
worthy christian virtue, so excellent, as the careful practice thereof, is the
marrow and strength of a common weal, and where it is, there cannot but be
peace, and contentment in all estates: and so necessary: as without the
practice of it, no house, family, society, city, common-welth, kingdom, or
Church can stand or continue. Indeed a kingdom may be established by force and
arms, by violence and cruelty: but it cannot stand or continue, without this
equity, and christian moderation betwixt man and man. Nay civil society, and
common dealing betwixt man and man cannot continue, unless one man yield to an
other. In a word, there can be no peace in families, no sound nor lasting love,
betwixt man and wife, nor any comfortable quietness, where one does not yield to
the other, and one bear with an other in many things. And if it be so in
marriage, which is the nearest conjunction, and the most excellent and perfect
society, which is in this world: then is it much more true, in all other
societies of men, that there can be no peace, no christian neighborhood, no
true friendship, unless one bear with another, and one toward another do carry
himself, in an even and moderate course.

Seeing therefore this is so necessary and excellent a virtue, I have purposed
to speak of it at large. Let us then examine these two points 1. the nature of
it, 2. the kinds of it.

For the first; Christian Equity, is a rare and excellent virtue, whereby men
use a true mean, and an equal moderation, in all their affairs and dealings
with men, for the maintaining of justice and preservation of peace. This I take
to be the true description of the general nature of this virtue: and herein,
First, I say it is a virtue, which is conversant about practicing of a
moderation, in all our courses and dealings with men. For we men can use no
mean nor moderation with God, but if we do evil, it is all to much, and if we
do good, it is all to little: Again, equity and moderation, is to be
performed of God toward men, and not of men toward God. For if men deal
not equally toward God, the fault is theirs and not his, God is not worse for
it; but if God dealt not moderately with men: the world would not last one
hour, And lastly. where there are no faults, there is no forgiveness: where no
infirmities, there needs no moderation: but in God there is no want, no
error, no imperfection: but his love, his mercy, and his works of love and
mercy toward mankind, and to his Church especially, are most perfect,
therefore there needs no moderation, nor forbearance toward God, but
toward men, who being flesh and blood, and full of infirmitis, (from which
regeneration it self does not fully free us) do therefore stand in need of this
virtue, to be practiced amongst them: else their society and fellowship cannot
endure. And further, all men in this case are alike, and therefore one has good
cause, to bear with another. The Prince is flesh and blood as well as his
subjects: the husband is flesh and blood, as well as the wife is; the Pastor is
a man as his people and hearers are. Hence it follows, that therefore one is
subject to infirmities, as well as an other: and therefore I conclude, that in
all our courses and dealings of man with man in this word, there must be
practiced a christian moderation.

Secondly, I say in the description, that the end of this virtue, is to
maintain Justice, and to preserve peace; which two are the very sinews and
strength, of a Christian kingdom; for where we do not to other men, as we
would others should do to us: there is no justice. And where we will not pass
by small faults, and forbear infirmities, there can be no peace: such is the
excellency of this virtue, as it serves to maintain two other such great and
principal virtues, as are even the heart, and the brain of the commonwealth,
namely: Justice and Peace.

But for the more exact, and particular knowledge of the nature of this
necessary virtue: let us descend to the particular branches, and kinds of it.

Christian Equity therefore, is either public or private.

Public equity is that, which is practiced in public metings and
assemblies of men, as in Courts of justice, Assizes, Sessions, Counsels,
Parliments, and such like.

The matter, where about this public equity is conversant: is the right and
convenient, and the moderate and discrete execution of the laws of men.

Laws of men, made by lawful authority, according to Gods law, and for the
common good are, and are to be esteemed, bones and sinews to hold to gether,
proppes and pillars, to uphold the commonwealth, and all societies. God
therefore has given to Kings, and to their lawful deputies: power and
authority, not only to command and execute his own laws, commanded in his
word: but also to ordain and enact, other good and profitable laws of their
own, for the more particular government of their people, and to be helps for
the better executing of the laws of God. And also to annexe a punishment and
penalty, to the said laws: which penalty is to be according to the quality
of the fault, greater or less: in so much that they may in many cases, (if the
common good so require) inflict even death it self. And further God has given
these gods upon earth, a power as to make these laws, and annexe these
punishments: so also upon men's defaults and breaches, has he given them
authority to execute the law so made, and to inflict upon the offender, the
punishment annexed.

Now because this point is of great moment, in a common wealth: and the true
knowledge and due practice thereof, is the glory and beauty of a kingdom:
therefore for the better direction herein, both of prince and people,
magistrate and people governed: let us enter further into the consideration
thereof.

In the laws of commonwealths, two things are to be considered, the sight
whereof will give great light, to know more perfectly, what this public
equity is.

These are 1. the extremity of the law. 2. the mittigation of the law.

Both these, are put into the hand of the Magistrate by God himself, to be
ordered according to his discretion, and as the circumstance requires; and of
them in order. The extremity of the law, is, when any law of man, is urged and
executed straightly and precisely, according to the literal sense, and strict
form of the words, and the exactest meaning, that can be made out of the
words, without any manner of relaxation, at that time, when there is good and
convenient cause of mittigation, in regard of the person offending.

This point cannot well be expressed in sewer words.

The principal and most material clause in this description of extremity, is
in those words. At that time, when there is just cause of mittigation, in
regard of the person offending. For if there be no good cause of mittigation:
then it is not called, extremity: but justice of the law: but when there is
good cause, why in a Christian consideration of some circumstances, this
justice should be mittigated, and yet is not, but contrariwise is extremely
urged, and pressed to the furthest: then it is extremity. Now this extremity
of the law, is in this case so far from justice, as indeed it is flat
injustice. And herein is the proverb true. Summum Ius summa iniuria; that is,
the extremity of the law, is extreme injury. And of this does the holy ghost
mean, Eccles. 7. 8. be not over just, that is, press not justice to far,
nor urge it to extremely in all cases, least sometimes you make the name of
justice, a cover for cruelty.

Now besides this, there is a second thing in the hand of the Magistrate,
namely the moderation, relaxation, or mitigation of this extremity: and that
is, when the proper form of the words, and the strictest meaning of the law
is not urged, and the punishment prescribed in the law, is moderated, or
lessened, or deferred, or (it may be) remitted, upon good and sufficient
reason; and in such cases, as whereof the law speaks not directly, nor the
lawmakers did purposely aim at. The ground of this mittigation is, because no
law makers being men, can foresee, or set down, all cases that may fall out.
Therefore when the case alters, then must the discretion of the lawemaker
show it self, and do that, which the law cannot do.

This mitigation is in the hand of the Magistrate, as well as the extremity:
nay it is a part of his duty as well as the former: and he offends as well,
that neglects to mitigate the extremity, when just occasion is: as he that
neglects to execute the extremity, when there is need. As therefore, he is no
way fit to be a Judge, who has no knowledge, or care to execute the law: so
he is but half a Judge, who can do nothing but urge the law, and the plain
words of the law, and is not able also, to mittigate the rigor of of the
law, when need so requires. Therefore every Magistrate, is to practice this
with the other, and not to separate those things which God has joined.

But now least this moderation, and mittigation of man's laws, (which is the
practice of public equity) should turn to the maintenance of malefactors,
the abolishing of laws, the despising or weakening of authority, (which in
these days little needs) we must therefore now remember this caution. That
there must be no mittigation, but honest, profitable, and convenient. If any
man ask, when is it so? I answer in three cases.

First, when the mittigation stands with the law of nature.

Secondly, when it agrees with the moral law, or any part of the written
word.

Thirdly, when an inferior law is ouer-ruled or countermanded by a higher law.

In these three cases, the moderation of men's laws and the mittigation of the
punishment due, by the extremity of these laws, is honest and good, and may
and ought to be practiced.

But if it be contrary, and not warranted by some of these: then that
mittigation is flatt injustice, and a manifest wrong unto the law.

That the difference of these two, the extremity and mittigation, may better
be discerned, let us consider it in some examples.

It is the law of England, and many other countries, that the theife shall die.

Now though the word of God, has not the same punishment in plain terms:
yet is the law good and warrantable, as shall appear in the sequel, and I
think is doubted of by none.

The drift of this law is, to repress that common and general sin of the
every, a prevailing sin, as any other, and so far prevailing; as the
rigor of good laws is necessarily required, for the repressing of it: so that
this law was made, for the cutting off of such rotten members, as do but
corrupt others, and of whose amendment there is no hope.

Now, suppose a young boy pinched with hunger, cold, and poverty, steals
meat, apparel, and other things for releife, being pressed to it by want,
and not having knowledge, or grace to use better means: to put this person to
death, for this fact, is the extremity of the law, in respect of the
circumstances of the person, who did it, being a child: and of the end, for
which he did it, to releive his wants.

Now the moderation in this case is, when upon these considerations, that
first, he is not an old, nor a practiced theife: but young and corrigible; one
that being reformed, may live long, and prove a good member in the common
wealth: and secondly, that his theft was not heinous, but the things he stole
were of small value: and thirdly, that he did it not upon a malicious, cruel,
and injurious intent, but to releive his hunger and want. The equity or
moderation, I say in this case, is not to inflict death, (for that were
extremity) but to determine a punishment, less then death: yet such a one, as
shall be sufficient, to reform the party from his sin, to punish the fault,
to terrify others, and to satisfy the law.

Thus in this example, it apeares manifestly what this moderation is, and what
is extremity, which is contrary to it: and the same might we see in many more.

Now having thus considered these two together, here upon we may see what this
public equity is, namely nothing else, but a moderation and mittigation of
the extremity of a law, upon honest and convenient reasons, and in such cases,
as were not directly intended in the law. The observation and due practice of
this equity, is the glory, credit and honor of all public assemblies, as
assizes, sessions and all courts of justice, and without the observation of
this when need is, all that they do is flat injustice in that case. For they
lame and maime the law, they fulfill but the one part of the law: for in
every law there are these two things; the extremity in plain terms, and
the mittigation implied: and these two together make the law perfect: and the
glory of the law, stands as well in practicing of mittigation, as in the
execution of extremity, nay sometime it stands in the mittigation, and not in
the extremity, insomuch as the moderation is then the equity of the law, and
the extremity is more injustice. And as this is the glory of the law, so is
it the glory of Judges and Magistrates, thus to execute the laws, and to
temper them with such discretion, as neither too much mittigation, do abolish
the law, nor too much extremity leave no place for mittigation. Therefore (to
make an end of this point) two sorts of men are here reproueable. First such
men, as by a certain foolish kind of pity, are so carried away, that would
have nothing but mercy, mercy, and would have all punnishments, forfaitures,
penalties, either quite taken away, and remitted, or at least lessoned, and
moderated, they would also have the extremity of the law executed on no man.
This is the high way to abolish laws, and consequently to pull down
authority, and so in the end to open a door to all confusion, disorder, and to
all licentiousnes of life. But I need not to say much herein, for there are but
few that offend in this kind, man's nature being generally inclined, rather to
cruelty then to mercy: This fault proceeds either from a weakness of wit,
and an effeminatenes of mind; and then a man is unfit to be a Judge; or else
from vain glory, and a base and affected popularitie, and such a man is
unworthy to be a Judge.

But in the second place, this doctrine and the very scope of this text,
condemns another sort of men, which are more combersome; that is to say, such
men as have nothing in their mouths, but the law, the law: and Justice,
Justice: in the mean time forgetting, that Justice always shakes hands with
her sister mercy, and that all laws allow a mittigation. The causes of this
evil are two.

1. The general corruption of man's nature, which is always ready, to deal
too hardly with other men: as also too mildely with themselves, and partially
in their own causes.

2. And secondly, for the most part, such men do gain more by law, then by
equity, more by extremity, then by mittigation: as the soldier lives better
by war, then by peace; and as the flesh-flie, feeds on the wound, that
cannot feed on the sound flesh: so these men gain by law, that which they can
never get by equity: for equity and moderation breed unity, and if all men
were at unity, what should become of them? but extremity breeds variance: for
(in reason) one extremity draws on an other, and so in men's variances they
are set on work: and the more the better for them. These men therefore, stick
so precisely on their points, and on the very tricks and trifles of the law, as
(so the law be kept, and that in the very extremity of it,) they care not,
though equity were trodden under foot: and that law may reign upon the earth,
and they by it: they care not, though mercy take her to her wings, and fly to
heaven. These men (for all their goodly shows) are the decayers of our estate,
and enemies to all good government. For though they have nothing in their
mouths, but Justice, Justice, and have banished mercy, yet let them know,
that Justice will not stay where mereie is not. They are sisters, and go
always hand in hand: they are the two pillars, that uphold the throne of the
Prince: as you cannot hold mercy, where Justice is banished, so cannot you
keep Justice where mercy is exiled: and as mercy without Justice, is foolish
pity, so Justice without mercy, is cruelty. So that as these men have
banished mercy, so within a short time, they will send Justice after her, and
cruelty and oppression will come in their rooms, which are the very overthrow
of all estates.

These men, when they are made practisers of the law, Judges, or Magistrates,
are to learn this lesson, which the holy Ghost here teaches, Let you Equity
be known to all men: and let all Magistrates think it their honor, to be
counted merciful Judges: let them rejoice, as well to show mercy when there
is cause, as to execute extremity when there is desert: and let them labor
for that Christian wisdom and discretion, whereby they may be able to discern,
when mercy and mitigation should take place, and when extremity should be
executed. If inferior Judges or Magistrates be negligent herein, then must we
have recourse to the Prince, the highest Judge on earth, and under God the
first fountain of Justice and mercy: whose care must be, that as Justice and
mercy (not one of them, but both together) do uphold his throne, and fasten
the Crown upon his head: so he likewise see them both maintained, and take
order, that in the execution of his own laws, there be always a room as
well for mercy and mitigation, as for Justice and extremity. This must he
do, because his laws cannot be as Gods laws are. Gods laws are perfect, and
absolute, and of such an universal righteousness, as that at all times, and in
all places, they are of equal strength, and of the same equity in all cases:
and therefore are to be executed without dispensation, relaxation, or any
mitigation, which cannot be offered unto the^, but with injury and violation.
But men's laws, coming from their own wits, are imperfect, and so in all
cases, they do not hold the same equity, and therefore must needs be
executed with a discreet and wise moderation. This moderation is public
equity, and this public Equity, is the scope of this text, and the due
practice of it in the execution of man's laws, is the glory of all Christian
Commonwealths.

Hitherto of the first and principal branch of Public Equity.

To proceed further. As this public Equity principally stands, in the
moderation of the laws of men; so it descends more specially eue^ to all the
public actions of a man's life: so that by the rule and direction of this
Equity, thus described, men may know how to guide themselves, in suing bonds,
and taking forfeitures: and how men may with good conscience, carry themselves
in suretyships, in taking of fines, in letting of leases, and in all manner of
mutual bargains, betwixt man and man. By virtue of this, a man may see how to
frame all these and such like actions, in such sort, as himself shall reap
credit, and gain enough, and his neighbor help and succor by him.

For in forfeitures of bonds, forfeitures of lands, or leases, in suretyships,
in rents, in fines, and all other dealings of men together, there are these two
things.

First, the extremity, that is, that which the law will affoard a man in that
case: and there is secondly, the moderation of the extremity, upon good and
convenient reasons: let us consider of them in some few examples.

A man is bound to another, in an hundredth pound, to pay fifty at a day. The
same man, not by negligence, but by some necessity, breaks his day, and
afterward brings the principal debt. Now to take the forfeiture, is in this
case, extremity: though the law does yield it. And if a man stand upon this
extremity, he deals not honestly and equally, but hardly and extremely with
his neighbor: and the law cannot free him in this case, from manifest
Injustice.

What is then the moderation in this case? Even this, to take thine own and
remitte the forfeiture: the reason is, because the cause and ground of
appointing a forfaiture, was not for advantage, but only for the better
security of the principal: which seeing thou have, thou have that which the
law did inte^d thee.

Again, his breach was not wilful, or with purpose to hurt thee, but against
his will. If therefore thou be directly damnified by his missing thy day,
(without all aequiuocation) then take thy reasonable damages, out of his
forfeiture, if not, then remitte the whole forfeiture; and this moderation is
public equity. And without this, there can be no buying nor selling,
borrowing nor lending, betwixt man and man. See another example. One takes a
lease of thee, for years, to pay thee such a rent; and for not payment of that
rent, his lease to be void. The poor man misseth his rent day, now what says
the law? his lease is forfeited, but to take this advantage, is the extremity
of the law: the moderation is, to remit the same forfeiture, in part, or in
whole, as thou shall see reason in equity and conscience: This moderation is
in this ease, Public equity, and without this, there can be no letting of
lands, betwixt man and man.

So for fines and rents, the law says, Thou may make the most of thine
own, if thou stretch this law as far as the very words will bear, then
may thou make such fines and rents, as may grind the faces of the poor, so
as no man shall live under thee: but thus to do is Extremity, and beyond the
purpose of the law.

The moderation in this case is, not to take all thou may get, but so to fine
and rent thy lands, as he that takes them, may live of the^: The reason of this
Mittigation is, because envy and hatred, may often make many men offer more
for a farm, then it is worth, to cross and hurt their neighbor, or to get
all into their own hand. Here therefore, though the law does yield thee all
that, which a man does willingly offer, yet must thine own conscience be a
law unto thee, to make thee a moderator of that extremity.

Let these three examples serve for many. Now in these and all other public
dealings betwixt men in the world; a man observes Public equity, when he
deals not with his neighbor, according to that extremity, which the strickt
words of the law will bear: but according to that Moderation, which good
conscience requires: and which the law it self in some cases does admit. By
the knowledge of these two, a man that has any conscience, may see how to
carry himself, in all these civil affairs, in an even, upright, and equal
course, and warrantable not only by the law of the land, but even by the law
and word of God.

And I make this distinction of the law of the land, and the word of God,
because we are to know this for a rule: That every extremity, which a law in
the strictest acception does affoard, is not warrantable to be urged by the
word of God: and yet notwithstanding it is good, convenient, and requisite,
that the extremity be warranted by the law, because in some cases, it must
needs be executed. The laws of men, may ordain and appoint extremities: but
the law of God must tell us, when to urge them, and when to moderate them: So
then, when a man takes the extremity, he does that, that is always
warrantable by the law: but in some cases, is not warrantable by Gods word,
which commands a Mittigation, when there is good reason for it. But he that
takes the extremity, when there is no just cause of mitigating it, and again
does mittigate it, when there is cause, his course is not only warrantable by
the laws of men, but even by the laws of God also. For it is the duty of
every Christian man, to remember in all his bargains and dealings, that his
manner of dealing, must not only be warranted by the laws of the land, but
even by Gods word also: and this is to be known and taken for a general rule
in all this treatise. And he that will duly consider the true difference of
extremity and moderation, as they are here described, may see how to carry
himself in all his dealings, so as they may be warrantable: both by our own
laws, and by the word of God.

To return then to the matter, and to end this point of public equity: If
any man shall object, that this moderation is a wrong to the law: I answer, it
is not: for it is neither against the law, nor altogether besides the law,
but only beside the stricttest meaning of the law. Nay it is included in the
law, as well as the extremity is, though not in the same manner: for the
extremity is warranted by the law, mitigation is but tolerated: the law
allows extremity, but it only admits a mitigation. So then, both
extremity and mitigation, are within the law, but it is in the hand
principally of the Magistrate, and in some cases, of other men also, to
discern the several circumstances, when the one is to be executed, and when
the other: for sometime one is the justice of the law, and sometime the other:
and according as these two are justly and wisely executed or neglected, so is
the justice of the law executed or neglected.

The want of this equity in men's public actions, is the cause of much
cruelty, oppression, and inequality in dealings betwixt man and man: because
extremity is for the most part only regarded, and mitigation is banished out
of all bargains. And it is impossible, to keep good conscience in forfeitures
of bonds, and in forfeiture of lands, suretiships, fines, rents, and such kind
of actions, unless there be due regard had to the practice of this public
equity. Men therefore, must consider that they are Christians, and live in a
Christian commonwealth: And they must not stand only upon the law, and the
advantage that the law gives. As they are men, they have a law of the
country, which may allow extremity: but as they are Christians, they live
under a law of God, the eternal law, which must judge them at the last day:
the righteous law, which no creature shall ever be able to blame of injustice,
or of extremity: and men must know, that God himself commands this equity of
one man to another.

But if men, for the fear of God, will not deal equally and moderately, with
them that are in their power: but stand strictly upon forfeitures and other
extremities: then must the godly Magistrate exercise his power, and by the
force of his authority, cause them to mitigate their extremity, and to put in
practice that equity which becomes Christians. And let every Judge and
Magistrate know, that by the law of the everlasting God, he not only may,
but is bound thus to do to them, who will not do it of themselves. It may be
therefore good counsel to all men, rather to practice this Christian equity
of themselves, the^ to be compelled to it by authority: for every virtue and
good work, the more free and voluntary it is, the more acceptable is it to
God, and more commendable before men: and let all men remember, that whereas
the strict words of men's laws, seem to give them leave to urge the
extremity, yet cannot that excuse them, nor free them from the danger of Gods
law, which commands them to practice Christian equity and moderation.

Now before we make an end of this Public Equity, one point is necessary to
be handled in few words. Some may object, If moderation be intended, and
included in our law, as well as Extremity, why then is extremity only
mentioned in the law, and not this mitigation, which they so much do urge unto
us? The answer is ready. The law expresses and urges the extremity, to fray
men thereby, from coming within the danger of the extremity; and concealeth
the mitigation, least it should be an encouragement to offend: yet intending it
as well as the extremity, and leaving it in the hand of the Magistrate, to put
in practice, when just occasion is offered, as well as the extremity. Herein
appears the great wisdom of the lawmakers, our ancient forefathers, who
well and wisely foresaw, that though mitigation be as necessary as extremity,
and oftentimes more: yet because of the ill consciences of the most men, and
the readiness of all men to offend, thought it fitter to express the extremity
in plain terms; thereby to keep ill men within the compass of obedience,
and closely to leave the mitigation to the discretion of the Magistrate. So
then our lawegiuers concealed the mitigation, and expressed it not in their
laws, in good policy, and to good purpose. If we therefore do only take the
extremity, we take only one part of their intent, and show our selves unwise,
and shallow witted, who cannot see the wisdom, which they closely concealed,
in wise and Christian policy.

He is not worthy the name of a lawyer, at least of a Christian lawyer, much
less worthy the place and seat of a Judge, who knows not this. For if the
law contained not both these, it were unrighteous, and so no law. For
mitigation is for the good man, and extremity for the evil, the careless,
and unconscionable man: if there were no extremity, how could the evil man be
kept within compass? and how should the poor honest man live, if there were
no mitigation? So then, it is warrantable by the word of God, and good
conscience, that extremity should be in force, and should stand by law, but so
as it always admit of mitigation, when need is.

Let therefore our conclusion be, to exhort every man, into whose hands is put
the execution of laws, to show himself as wise, in executing them, as were
our forefathers in the making of them: that is, as well to regard the
Mitigation which is concealed, as the Extremity which is expressed: so shall
the lawmakers wise intent be performed, public equity preserved, and much
Injustice and hard dealing prevented.

Now in regard of this, that has been delivered touching public Equity,
lawyers must not think, that I have gone beyond the compass of my calling,
and encroched upon their liberties. For they are to know, that the laws of men,
are policy, but Equity is Christianity. Now Christianity was, before there
were any laws of men: and therefore they must be ordered according to the rules
of Christianity. Again, Divines must take lawyers advise, concerning
Extremity, and the letter of the law: good reason then that lawyers take the
Divines advise, touching Equity which is the intent of the law. Moreover,
their law is but the minister of equity; but our law the word of God is the
fountain of Equity: therefore the principal rules of Equity, must they
fetch from our law: considering that law without equity, is plain tyranny.
Lastly, in the first Christian Commonwealth that ever was, namely, the Jews,
the Divines, that is, the Priests of those days, were the only lawyers: for
their positive laws were the Judicial laws, given by God himself, whose
interpreters were the Priests and Levites. If therefore, once the Divines had
so much to do with positive laws, it may not now be thought amiss, if they
give advice out of the word of God, touching the equal execution of the laws
of men.

And so much touching the doctrine of public Equity, grounded upon the word
of God.

Now follows the second kind of Equity, called private; namely that, which
is to be exercised betwixt man and man, in their private actions.

But ere we go further, some may demand the difference betwixt public and
private actions. Private actions of men are such, as are practiced amongst men,
without any help of the law: as contrariwise, Public actions are such, as
cannot be performed but by the help of the law, and the hand of the
Magistrate. Whereupon it follows, that public actions may be betwixt private
men, and private actions betwixt public persons: there is a publiknes and a
priuatenes (as I may term it) both of men and actions. A man is private,
until he be exalted unto some authority, in Church or Commonwealth: then he
is a public person. An action is private, as long as it is begun and handled
betwixt two men, and needs not the public voice, nor censure of the law to
determine it, and then it is public. For example: a Magistrate may have
dealing with an other man, or two Magistrates together. If they determine it
together betwixt themselves, it is a private action, because they do it, not
as they are Magistrates, but as they are men: and so there is a private action
betwixt public persons. So a private man no Magistrate, may have a trespass,
a debt, a forfeiture, or any other action or demand against another man:
wherein (because he cannot come to a reasonable and equal end, by private
means) he craves the help of the law, and the voice of the Magistrate: and so
here is a public actio^ betwixt private men. Now this virtue of Equity
respects not the publiknes or priuatenes of the persons, but of the actions:
therefore as that is Public Equity, which is exercised in the determining of
public actions, which come to the judgment of the law: so that is Private
Equity, which is practiced in the managing of Private Actions, which are begun
and concluded privately betwixt man and man, and never come to public hearing,
nor trial of the law.

Now let us come to search more nearly into the nature of this virtue. Private
Equity is a moderate, even, and equal carriage of a man's self, in all his
private words and deeds, toward all other men, and all their words and
deeds. First, I say, it is [ a moderate carriage] of a man's self, that is,
betwixt both extremes, neither bearing all things, nor revenging every thing.
Secondly, I say toward all other men: wherein I comprehend all men, and all
sorts of men: husbands, wives: Magistrates, subjects: teachers, hearers:
masters, servants: Parents, children: men, women, neighbors in towns, fellows
in societies, in service, in labor. In a word, none are excepted, who any way
do live or converse together, but of them all it is true, that if there be not
a moderation, and a forbearance one of another, there can be no peace amongst
them, but their lives shall be all (as it were) a hell upon the earth.

Seeing therefore, the necessity and excellency of this virtue is such, that
the due practice of it is the ornament of families, and societies, and the
comfort of a man's life in this world; let us enter into more particular
consideration thereof. Private Equity has four degrees, or principal duties.

First, to bear with natural infirmities.

Secondly, to interpret doubtful things in the better part.

Thirdly, to depart from our own right sometimes.

Fourthly, to forgive private and personal wrongs.

Of all these briefly, and in order.

The first duty of private Equity, is to bear with the defects and
infirmities of men's natures, with whom we live, as long as they break not out
into any great inconvenience, or enormitie. These infirmities are manifold: as
for example: frowardnes or morositie of nature; bastines; slownes of conceit;
dulnes of wit; suspitiousnes; desire of praise, and such like. These and many
other natural infirmities, must a Christian man bear and tolerate patiently,
in those with whom he conuerseth, as with his wife, his child, his servant,
his friend, his neighbor, etc. And so long must he bear with them, as they
are kept within a mean, and break not out into extremity. Of these the holy
Ghost speaks, Prou. 19. 31. It is the glory of a man to pass by an
infirmity: that is, if he sees in his brother weaknesses of nature, which
do not arise from settled malice, or cankred corruption, it is a man's glory
and praise, always so far to moderate himself, as not to see them, nor to
take notice of them, at least not to be moved, nor disquieted at them: and
oftentimes, so little to regard them, as though they were not done. To this end
says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 13. Love suffers all things, that is, all things
that may be borne with good conscience, and are done by them whom we love. Now
any thing may be borne with good conscience, which is either so private, or so
small, that the wrong is only ours, and no dishonor thereby ensues to Gods
glory, nor ill example to the Church: all such things love suffers. And
indeed it is the property of true love, to pass by many wants: and the more
that a Christian is rooted in true love, the more infirmities will he pass by,
in them whom he loves: he sets no limits to himself, how many or how long
to bear, but even all that are infirmities of nature: many hard words, many
angry fits, many needles surmises, many unkindness, will he put up, and (as
it were) not see them, whose heart is possessed with true love, wisdom, and
the scare of God: and thus must every one do that will practice Christian
Equity. For this is a man's glory, and commendation. Let us lay this doctrine
nearer to our consciences, by considering the nature of this virtue in some few
examples.

A man has a wife, or a woman a husband, in whom there is the fear of God,
and honest and faithful love, but he or she is subject to anger or to
hastines, or to an austeritie in their behauiours, or it may be it is not in
their natures, to practice those outward compleme^ts of kindness, which others
can do with great facility. These and such like, are but weaknesses of
nature, in them that fear God: therefore must love cover them and bear them,
and oftentimes not take notice of them; and the rather, because he or she that
has not such, has either the like or greater weaknesses, all which if one
forbear not in another, it is not possible to live in peace and comfort. But
if this part of Equity were practiced, it is scarce credible, how much it
would augment the happiness, and add to the comfort of them, that are married.

Again, a man has a servant careful and willing enough to obey and please
his master, also trusty and faithful: but he is slow in his business, and does
not dispatch things appointed him, to the mind of his master, not so speedily,
not so readily, nor with that facility, as his master requires. What is to to
be done in this case? to see it, and always to check him for it, and to gall
and gird him with it, and ever to be casting it in his teeth, and threatening
him for it, is the extremity which here the Apostle condemns. The Equity
then in this case to be performed, is, in consideration that it is not a fault
of malice, but of nature, not of idleness, nor carelessness, but of a natural
weakness, the Master must gently tell him of it, and privately and seldom:
and advise him, what are the best helps for nature in this case. And though he
see not that speedy amendment, which he desires, yet is he to bear with him,
as long as he is trusty, diligent, dutiful, and willing, and for those so
many good properties, he must bear with his wants, and not be too sharp,
either in reproouing, or in correcting him for them.

In the the third place: A man has occasion, to confer often with another man,
by reason that they are neighbors, or special friends, or of the same
calling, and course of life: but one of them is hasty, and soon angry, and
it may be in his talk, either for the matter or the manner of it, he cannot
but show his anger. Extremity in this case is, for a man to deal roughly
with him, to contradict and cross him, to deny what he says, to stand stiffly
to our our own opinion, and to be angry again with him.

But on the other side, Christian Equity teaches a man not to see it, nor
take notice of it, nor to be angry again, nor to check him for it; but to
put it off by gentle words, soft demaundes, and other talk: and to yield to
him, as far as a man may do, in good conscience, without betraying of the
truth. And by the way, in conference hold it always for a rule of Christian
wisdom, and private Equity, never to stick stiffely to any opinion, unless
it be in a plain truth, and of great moment. Now thus doing to our brother,
and sparing his weakness, and continuing on our speech, as though we saw not
that he was angry: hereby the conference holds on, and love is continued as
before. But if contrariwise, we take the advantage of his infirmity, and
display it, and rub him for it, if we be as short as he, and stand stiffely
upon points, then the conference is broken off without edification, and
heart-burning rises betwixt them, in stead of true love. Thus we see in these
examples, how in a Christian moderation, we are to bear, and to forbear the
natural weaknesses of our brethren, if we purpose to live in any comfort with
them in this world.

Yet this forbearance must be with two conditions. First, that these wants be
wants of nature, not of malice, nor of old, rooted, settled, and cankred
corruption. Secondly, if they whom we forbear, contain themselves within
convenient bonds, and do not exceed, nor break out into any outrage, or
extremity: for then they are not to be forborne, but to be told, and
reproved for them, and a man's duty is not to wink at them, but to take
notice of them, and to show open dislike of them. But in as much as these are
wants of nature, as it is infirmity in the one to show them, so it is the
glory and praise of the other, to pardon them: yea it is a token of wisdom,
and good government, and a sign that a man is a lover of peace, and
consequently of religion, and of God himself, to pass by them. The practice
of this duty, maintains peace in kingdoms, countries, states, cities,
colleges, families, and all societies of men. Thus much for the first duty.

The second duty of private equity is, to constru and interpret men's sayings
that are doubtful, in the better part, if possibly it may be: this is to be
understood of all men, though they be our enemies and this must a man do, if he
will live in peace in this world.

Our nature is given to take men at the worst, to deprave men's deeds and words,
and to pervert them to the worst sense, that may be: and this is commonly the
cause of debate and dissension in the world.

But the duty of Christian Equity is contrary hereunto; namely, to think the
best they can of all men, to construe all doubtful actions in the better part,
and to make the best sense of all doubtful speeches, if we have any probable
reason to induce us to it. The Apostle makes this the property of love. 1.
Cor. 13. Love thinks not evil, that is, not only then, when there is manifest
and good cause to think well, but when it is doubtful, if it may by any means
have a good meaning, if by any means, it may be well thought of, love will make
a man think well of it: and the more specially a man loves another, the more
equally, indifferently, and Christianly, will he interpret all his sayings and
doings. The want of this duty, and the practice of the contrary, is the cause
of more troubles, tumults, garboiles, fallings out, and heartburnings, in
kingdoms, countries, societies, and families, betwixt man and man, then any
one thing in the world besides. Dealing thus with the words of Christ cost him
his life: for when Christ said, Destroy this temple and I will build it in
three days, they interpreted it of the temple of Jerusalem, when as he meant
of the temple of his body. And the wrong and sinister interpretation of David's
embassage, by his neighbor king Hanu^, was the cause of that great war betwixt
two mighty kingdoms, the Israelites, and the Amonites, which cost so many
thousands their lives. For when David sent Ambassadors to comfort him after
his fathers death, he and his wicked counselors interpreted it, that he sent
spies, and intelligencers, to find out the weakness of the land. It cannot be
spoken, what broiles, hurliburlies and confusions in kingdoms, what
contentions in eommon-wealthes, what factions and divisions in colleges and
societies; what disquietnesse in families, what unkindness and falling out
amongst old friends, and what separation even amongst them that should be
nearest, are daily in the world, by reason of this sinister interpretation, of
men's words and deeds. We therefore that do profess our selves the children of
peace, must learn to make conscience of this, the due practice whereof, is the
conservation of peace.

And further in this duty, one thing more is to be remembered, namely, that we
must not give too sharp a censure, even of the open and manifest evil
sayings, or doings of our brother: we must not judge them to be done carelessly,
when it may be they are done ignorantly: nor deliberately, when it may be they
are done rashly: nor presumptuously, when it may be they are done upon
infirmity: nor to be done upon hatred or malice to us, when it may be they are
done for an other cause: nor may we judge an evil thing, to be done for want
of conscience, when it may be, it is done for want of heedfulnesse: but always
we must remember, to make the best we can, even of another man's infirmities.
And as, if our brother do well, we are to acknowledge it, and commend him for
it: So if he do amiss, we must not make it worse then it is.

But the world is far too blame herein: for they can extol their own
well-doing, and twenty ways excuse their evil doing: but as for other men,
they can debase their well doing, and advance their evil doing; nay it is a
common thing, to make a badde man worse then he is, and to speak of an evil
action, and of men's faults worse then they are; yea to speak worse, even of
ill men then they deserve. But it is flat Injustice, not only to speak evil
of that that is good, but even to make an evil thing worse then it is. Many
cases there are, wherein a man is bound, to make the best he can, of a bad
action: but to make it worse then it is, there is no case, wherein a man may
do it, without plain injury to his brother. If any man reply, and say, I am
not to spare my self, nor excuse my own faults, but to judge as hardly of my
own sayings and doings, as they deserve, why then should I not also do so to
another? The answer is ready. Because a man knows not another man, so well
as himself. Words and deeds are known to other men, but a man's heart is
known to himself alone: therefore for thy own sayings and doings, thou art
also able to judge of thine own heart, and of thy purpose and intent in so
speaking and doing: but of another man, thou can say he spoke or did thus or
thus: but his heart, his purpose, and intent in so doing, thou can not judge:
and therefore thou may not judge so sharply of another man's sayings and
doings, as of thine own. To make an end of this point: in the performance of
this duty, two cautions must be remembered: first, that we speak not of
continued courses, in doing or speaking evil, but of particular speeches and
actions: for not an action or a speech, but the course of life shows what a
man is: one evil speech or action may be excused, but a continued course in
doing or speaking evil, may be by no means colored or excused. Secondly, we
speak not of manifest and public enormities, as of treasons against the
Prince or state: for therein it may be dangerous to the Prince, and hurtful to
the state, to have any thing colored, concealed, or excused. In such cases, we
must set aside our duty to our brother, and remember our duty to the head and
whole body: and better it is, that one member be cut off, then that the whole
body perish: but we speak of private evil words or deeds, the evil and hurt
whereof redoundeth to private men. And in them we speak not of manifest,
gross, and palpable crimes, wherein not only the action is plainly evil, but
the intent also: for to excuse or conceal, or to extenuate such, is to make
our selves accessarie to the evil of them. But we speak of doubtful words or
deeds, wherein either the action it self, or at the least, the intent of it,
may receive a likely excuse, and a probable interpretation of good.

And unto these two cautions, add thus much further, that the practice of this
duty, for the most part cease, when the Minister is to work upon the
conscience of an impenitent or a presumptuous sinner: for then he is not to
moderate or mitigate, to color or excuse, to lessen or extenuate his sins,
but to speak of sin as it deserves, and to lay out his sins in their own
colors, that so he may humble him, and cast him down.

But out of these three cases, this duty lies upon all men, at all times to
interpret every thing in the better part. So then the conclusion of this second
duty is this: Actions apparently good, are to be commended, doubtful are to
be construed in the best sense, apparently evil are to be made no worse then
they are, but rather to be excused, and let a man always rather speak too
well, then too evil of another man, and rather speak better, then worse then
be deserves and rather judge too mildly and mercifully then too sharply: for
if a man be deceived either way, that is the safer way wherein to be
deceived: Thus to do, is to perform that Christian equity which is here
commanded, and to maintain peace which is the comfort of a Christian life. And
thus much of the 2. duty.

The third duty and degree of Private Equity is, In sundry cases to depart
from a man's own right: that is to yield oftentimes in such things, wherein by
law he might stand; and oftentimes to forgo such things, which by law he
might require. Without this Equity, Justice and peace cannot stand. Christ our
savior, gave a notable example hereof in paying toll: Math. 17. 27. Christ
needed not to have done it, nor could any law have compelled him to it, yet
because he would not trouble the public peace, nor give them occasion of
contention, he yields from his right and paies them toll: al Christian men must
learn by his example, not to stand always upon their right, if they will
continue peace in the Church of God. It is not sufficient in Christianity, nay
it is a very wicked speech, which we often hear men speak. It is my right and
therefore I will not loose it: so might Christ have said, and if you look the
place, you shall find, that he first of all argues the case, and concludes
that he is free, and not bound to pay, and yet says Christ, rather then I
will offend them, or give them cause to thinck worse of me, or my doctrine I
will pay it. Even so must a Christan man, in many cases go from his right, and
that for the maintenance of public peace in the common wealth, and of private
peace one man with another.

For the maintenance of public peace, thus must men do in Public Conferences,
as in Parlaments and Counsels, and such like general assemblies* wherein the
several opinions of men are to be delivered, and thus must men do in bonds,
forfeitures, borrowing, lending, loosing, finding, buying, selling, in leases,
fines, rents, and all manner of bargains.

And for the maintenance of private peace, men must in their most private
actions, one yield to another in such things, wherein they might stand, and
oftentimes be contented to loose that, that is their own; and in conferences
must a man oftentimes, suffer himself to be crossed and ouerthwarted in that,
of which he is most certain, and to grant that to be, which is not, and that
not to be which he knows to be, if the matter be of small moment, and concern
not religion nor the state: many such things must a Christian man put up daily,
at the hands of his brother, for the maintenance of peace and love amongst
them. This is a doctrine little known, and less regarded in the world* for
its a general opinion that a man may take his own, and may lawfully stand
upon his own right, (which if it be meant generally in all cases, is most
false) nay this is a common speech of all men, I demand but my right, and I
will not loose my right, and this is thought a reasonable speech, and he is
esteemed a good man, who takes no more then his right: for oftentimes men stand
so strictly upon their right, that they go further then their right reaches.
But this is a very carnal practice, and controlled by the Scripture, and by
the example of Christ, as we heard before. But if any man object, that the
example of Christ is not to bind us, because he is the Mediator, and
therefore was to perform extraordinary obedience? I then answer, that not
only Christ, but other holy men, have practiced this duty, for he pays toll
not only for himself, but for Peter also. And there is a notable example of
this duty in Abraham, who when his brother Lot and his sheapheards could not
agree, was content to depart from his right: for whereas he being the elder,
might have chosen first, he notwithstanding, stands not upon that, but bids his
brother Lot choose whether he will, and he will take what he leaves. A most
equal, Christian, brotherly part of that holy Abraham, whose faith is so much
commended in the Scriptures. If we therefore will be called the children of
Abraham, then must we be followers of him in his works, and namely in this, we
must oftentimes depart from our own right.

In the practice of this duty, one caution only must be remembered, namely,
that we must distinguish of another right and our own. In thy own right thou
may yield, but when thou art to deal for another man, thou must not yield
too much, nor be too lavish of another man's right: but this caution holds
especially, when the cause is not ours, but Gods, or his churches, for when it
is such a truth, which directly concerns the honor of God, or the good of
his Church, the^ must a man take heed he yield not, without warrant from Gods
word. For as it is equity, often to yeilde thy right, so to yeilde in Gods
causes, is to betray the truth. If therefore thou may not give another man's
right from him, without his consent, much less may thou without warrant
from God, yield any thing at all of his right from him. This duty therefore is
to be performed in actions that concern our selves, and wherein the loss is
not Gods, or his churches, but our own. But it is lamentable to see many men,
how lavish they are in giving from God, and care not how much they loose of
his glory: but stand most strictly upon their own points, and will not yield
one inch, nor loose one foot of their own right. And from hence come so many
suites in law, and other brabling contentions in the world, all which, or many
of them, might be stayed, if men had but conscience to practice this Christian
Equity, to yield one to another, in matters of their own, and of small
moment: and it is certain, that if men in the world were not persuaded, some
by religion and conscience, some by natural reason, and policy, to practice
this duty, it were not possible for the society of men long to continue upon
the earth. So much for the third degree.

The fourth and last degree of Private Equity, is to forbear and to forgive
wrongs and injuries done unto us in word or deed. The scripture is plain for
this, and so is natural reason, which teaches, that every one that bears the
name of a man, should forgive another, because he being a man, may deserve and
stand in need of the same himself, and therefore is to do as he would be
done unto: But especially a Christian man, who looks for forgiveness at Gods
hand, for his own sins, must needs forgive his brother. So that to a
Christian man, there is a double bond or reason, to tie him to this duty. One
is, as he is a man, therefore must he forgive him that offends him, that so
another man may also forgive him, when he offends. For there is none, but
being a man, and living amongst men, he must needs offend. Another more
forcible reason is, as he is Christian, therefore must he forgive, because
else, how can he in reason demand or pray for forgiveness at Gods hand for
many thousand offenses of his own, and those exceeding great, when another man
cannot obtain forgiveness at his hands, for a few small offenses. This duty
is of greater necessity then all the former: for upon the practice of this,
depends the preservation of peace: but where this is not practiced, there is no
religion, no conscience, nor salvation: for where there is no forgiving of
another man, that man is not forgiven at Gods hands. And he whose sins are
not in Christ forgiven, and taken away, that man is in the state of damnation,
and till he be forgiven, he can never be saved: but he can never be forgiven,
till he forgive his brother: and so it is plain, that even salvation it self,
in some sort, depends upon the practice of this duty, yet not as a cause, but
as a sign, or an effect of salvation. For this is not true, that every one who
forgiues is forgiven of God, but this is true, that whosoever is forgiven of
God, will forgive his brother. So then, neither in reason, nor in religion, can
a man look for forgiveness himself, unless he make conscience to forgive
another. Yea God has made every man a Judge in this case, to condemn
himself, if he do it not, when he prays every day, that God would forgive
him even so, as he does forgive others.

Yet in this duty of forgiving outward injuries, two cautions are to be
remembered ^. That there is a time, when a man is not to forbear and suffer,
but may stand upon his guard, and defend himself from the injury: and that
is, when his life is endangered, as when a man is assaulted by a theife, or by
his deadly enemy, who seeks his life, and can have no help, he is in that
case to help himself, when he must either kill or be killed, then reason and
religion biddes him defend himself: and being in that case, that a man cannot
have the Magistrates help, that bears the sword for his defense, Gods puts
for that time the sword, into a man's own hand, and makes him a Magistrate for
that time, and occasion. For in cases of such extremity, god allows every man
to be a Magistrate, not only to defend himself, but even to kill his enemy,
if it be impossible, any way else to save his own life: and this defense of a
man's self, hinders not the duty of forgiving, for so far must a man
forbear and forgive, that he be sure to defend his own life.

In the second place, though a man forgive the Injury and wrong done unto him,
yet may he safely in some cases, go to law for recompense of that wrong. It
is a deuilish opinion in the world, that a man cannot go to law, and be in
charity: we must know, that a man may go to law, and yet be in charity: for
to forgive the malice, and to sue for recompense are things indifferent; It is
not so much charity, to forbear the recompense, as it is to forgive the
malice. If therefore a man forgive not the malice, he is out of charity, but
he may sue for satisfaction, and be in charity. The scripture forbids not men's
going to law, but tells them how they should do it: law is not evil, though
contentious men, and unconscionable lawyers, have vilely abused it: but it Gods
ordinance, and may lawefully be used, so it be on this manner.

First, it must not be for every trifle, every trespass, every ill word; but in
these cases, a man is both to forgive the malice, and to remit the recompense,
because he is little or nothing at all hurt by it. For example, A poor man
steals a little meat from thee in his hunger, let the law take hold on him,
but pursue thou him no more for it, then by the law thou needs must* Again thy
neighbors cattle does trespass thee, thou must not go to law for it, the
malice be it more or less, thou must forgive in Christianity and for
conscience sake, and the damage is so small, as that therefore thou may not
go to law for it. For the law is abused, in being executed upon trifles, and
those lawyers shame themselves, and dishonor their profession, who are willing
that every trespass of sixpence damages be an accion in the law* this is one
of the causes of the base and vile names, that are given to the law and
lawyers in these days, because the law is employed upon sueh trifles. And it
is to be wished, that the supreme Magistrate would take order to restrain this
general evil: that contentious men and unconscionable lawyers might not
conspire together, to pester the law with these trifles: and though men be so
unconscionable, as to run to the law for every trespass, yet should lawyers be
so conscionable and so wise, as they should drive them from the law again.
Thirdly, thy neighbor gives the ill words, raises or carries evil tales of
thee: Equity is, not to go to law for every evil word, but to consider that
for the malice, thou art to forgive it, and for the damage it cannot be great,
because many men's tongues are no slander, neither art thou any thing worse for
it, especially when he dare not stand to that he has said, as for the most
part they do not.

The second caution in going to law, is that it must not be the first but the
last means of peace. Law is a kind of war, as therefore war is to be the
last means of public peace, so should the law be the last means to be used,
for the attaining of private peace. All means must be tried, ere thou go to
law, and if none will serve, then is the law ordained for thee, whereby to
recover thy right and to maintain equity, for as to go to law for a trifle,
or at the first, is extremity, and so Injury: so to go to the law, for a
cause sufficient, and after other means used in vain, is Justice and equity,
and no extremity.

Here therefore let all Christians learn, how to go to law; and the rather I
do urge this point, because the law is notoriously abused: and it is almost
incredible, what infinite sommes and masses of money, are daily spent in it most
unnecessarily: insomuch as the lawyers do exceed in wealth, any other sort or
calling for men in this whole realm.

For reformation whereof, let men but learn, and practice the two former
rules: 1. law is not ordained to be a Judge of every trifle: It is a shame to
our law that men be suffered in the common wealth to arreast each other for
debts of small value, so as ten times, and otherwhiles twenty times as much
is spent, for the recovery of them as the principal is. Are not we a Christian
commonwealth? why then have we not the wisdom to appoint another, an easier,
and a directer way for the recovery of such debts, and if there be no other
way, why does not a Christian man stay for it, or loose it rather then go to
law for it? It is a shame for our nation, that there should be at one Assizes
over England, so many hundredth actions of trespasses, wherein the damage is
little or nothing. To reform these is a work worthy of a Prince, and every
man should put to his helping-hand to it.

Secondly, let law be thy last remedy. This rule controlls another foul
misorder in our land. Men are sued, when they would gladly compound: when they
would willingly satisfy by private order, they are compelled to answer by law.
And yet there is a worse thing then this: the law which should be the last, is
not only made the first means, but whereas it should be open and public, it
is used as a close and secret means: it steals upon men (as the phrase is.)
For men are sued before they know, and great charges come upon them, ere they
are told of it, by them that sue them. Is this equity? yea is it not rather
extremity? And yet (alas) how common is it in most places. Let therefore every
Christian man, remember his lesson here taught by the Apostle, Let your equity
be known to all men. But it seems then, will some say, that men may not go
to law. I answer, thou may go to law, though not for trifles, yet for
things of weight, as for the pursuit of a notorious theife, to his due and just
trial: for the title of thy lands: for the recovery of thy just and due debts
of value: and of thy child's portion: for the making straight of great accounts,
for the trial of thy good name, when thou art so slaundered, and by such, as
that thy credit is publicly endangered: for these and such like causes, thou
may go to law, when by other more easy means, thou can not procure a
reasonable satisfaction. For then it is unlawful to sue for the greatest cause
in the world.

The truth of all this doctrine does Paul teach the Corinths, whom he
reprooueth of three faults. 1. that they went to law before heathen Judges. 2.
for every cause. 3. they used no private means of satisfaction, but ran to
the law at the first.

The first of these cannot be our sin, for we have no heathen Judges, in as
much as our state and government, by the mercy of God is not heathenish, but
we have a Christian commonwealth. But the other two are the general sores of
this land; let us therefore labor to heal them and to cover our shame: let us
remember that not Extremity but Equity becomes a christian; and let every man
take heed of this, as he would be known to be a Christian: for the known
badge of Christianity is mercifullnes: the more merciful the better
Christian. For he has tasted deeper of Gods mercies to himself, and therefore
he is merciful to his brother, and the worse Christian, the less merciful,
for he never felt Gods mercies to himself, therefore he cannot be merciful to
his brother. Now to go to law for every trifle, or to steal law upon thy
brother, or to sue him before thou offer him peace, it argues a hard heart and
unmerciful, and far from this duty of forgiving: but to be loath to go to
law, and to put it of as long as may be, and first to give warning, and to
offer peace, and not to do it, but in matters of weight, it argues a
merciful heart, and such a one as is ready to forgive, and such a one in
whom the spirit of God does dwell.

And thus I hope I have opened this duty of forgiving, and forbearing, in such
sort; as a Christian may see how to practice it, with comfort to his
conscience, also without any great loss in this world, or hurt to his estate.

And thus much for the four several duduties and degrees of Private Equity.

Now having opened the nature and kinds of Christian Equity, let us proceed
further in the text. Let your Equity (says the Apostle) be known to all men.
The words import; that it is our duty, not only to know this virtue and the
nature of it, and to be able to talk of it, but in all our affairs public
and private, and in all our dealings with men, so to put it in practice, that
men may see it, and that it may be known to other men: and that they may be
able to avouch for us; that our dealing is upright, equal, and indifferent,
joined with equity and moderation, and free from extremity and oppression:
this is the meaning of that which we are here commanded by the Apostle. And the
reason why the Apostle urges us to make it known, is, because there is a
privy hypocrisy in our natures, whereby we are given to make show of more
then is in us. Against which vice we do truly labor, when we labor to make
our virtues manifest and known to the world, that so the tree may be known by
his fruits: he is a holy and religious man, not who knows, and can talk
well, but he whose religion and holiness is known in the world, and seen of
men: he is a merciful man, of whose mercy men do taste: So he is an equal
and upright man, whose Equity is felt, and found by the^ who deal with him.
Let therefore our actions with men, testify the virtues of our heart, that me^
who live with us, and deal with us, may be able to say for us, that we are
possessed with those virtues; for this is to be truly good, not when a man can
speak well, or tell of his own goodness, but when other men see it, feel it,
and speak of it.

Hitherto of the meaning of the words.

Now that which was Paul's exhortation to the Philippians, shall be mine to all
true Christians: Let your equity be known to all men. You have learned what
it is, and how it is to be practiced: it now remains, that we content not
our selves, with the bare knowledge, but take notice of it, as of a doctrine
belonging to us, and put it in practice all our dealings, public and private,
yea and make it manifest to the consciences of all men* good and bad: so that
every man, with whom we deal, may taste and feel of our equity, and be able
to testify of us, that equity bears rule in all our actions: thus if we do,
we are Christians not in name, and profession only, but in deed and truth.

And to persuade us all to this holy duty, let us use some few reasons to
enforce it: and amongst all the reasons that might be brought, there is none
better, then this here used in the text ( The Lord is at hand.)

But before we come to speak of it, let us consider of one other, which does
most naturally enforce this exhortation: and it is this.

God shows most admirable Equity and moderation toward us, therefore ought
we to show it, one toward another: It is the reason of the holy Ghost, Be ye
merciful, as your heavenly father is merciful. Wonderful is the moderation,
that God shows to man, and it appears especially in four things, whereof two
belong to all men, and the other two concern his Church.

The first Action of God, wherein he shows great moderation toward all men,
is this. A law was given to our first parents, Eat not of this tree, if you
do, you die for it: and that a double death, both of body and soul. But they
ate and so brake the law, and thereby did undergo the penalty annexed* by
force and virtue whereof, they should have died presently, the death both of
body and soul, and this had been no Extremity but Justice, for this was due
unto them by the Justice of that law, which was given them. But now, behold
Gods Equity, and moderation of the Justice of that law, he struck them not
presently, as the tenor of the law, and their desert required, neither with
the first nor second death, but deferres the full execution, laying upon them
(for the present) a less punishment, namely a subjection to the first death,
and a guiltiness of the second, that is, of damnation. Behold a marvelous
mitigation: by the tenor of that law, their bodies and souls should both have
presently died, and been cast into hell, but God in mercy suspends and
deferres the execution of it, and only strikes Adams body with mortality,
whereby he was subject to the first death, and his soul with guiltiness,
whereby he was subject to the second death: by which mitigation it came to
pass, that as Adam by his repentance, afterward quite escaped the second
death, so he tasted not of the first death till nine hundred years after. If a
prisoner counts it a merciful favor of the Prince, or the Judge, when after
his judgment to die, he is repriued but one year, then what a merciful
mitigation was this in God, to repriue our first parents for so many hundred
years? This was the first action of Gods mercy to man, and this concerns all
mankind generally, but especially Adam and Eve.

But the second does more nearly concern all men. So soon as man commits
any sin, even then is he guilty of eternal damnation, because he has
broken the law: for the curse of the law, is not only a guiltiness, but a
subjection to the wrath of god, presently to be inflicted upon the sin
committed, without any intermission: so that so often as a man sins, so often
does he deserve to be plunged soul and body into hell, without being spared
one hour. If therefore the Lord did cast ten thousand into hell in one hour,
he did but Justice, for so the law requires: but see the merciful moderation
of the Lord: though we deserve every hour to be cast into hell, yet is every
hour and minute of our lives, full of the mercy and moderation of the Lord:
so as though our sins cry for damnation presently, yet God staieth his hand,
and does not execute the sentence of damnation upon the sinner, instantly
after his sin, no not in one of ten thousand, but spares every man many
years, some more, some less, but all more then their sins deserve, or the
law requires. We often read, and always find, that God hears the cry of
sinners: but we seldom read, that God hears the cry of sin, for if he
always heard it, when sin cries for vengeance to him, he should turn us all
into hell in one hour: this is a wonderful patience and moderation in God,
and yet behold a greater.

For whereas we by our sins, do every hour plunge our selves into hell, as
a man that violently castes himself into a gaping gulf: see Gods wonderful
mercy, we thrust our selves in, and he puts us back: he staieth us with his
own hand, and so keeps us out. See what a sea of mercies the Lord does power
upon man: for how can that but be an infinite sea of mercies, which is showed
to so many thousands of men, so many thousand times in one hour. If his mercy
did not moderate the extremity of his law, there should not be one man left
upon earth, but all in one hour cast into hell: but God staieth his Justice,
and staieth his law, yea stays us, who our selves would execute the law upon
our selves and so cast our selves into hell, he keeps us out and gives unto
us a longer time to repent. And this is true in all men: to some, he gives
longer, to some shorter, but to every one some, where as the law gives not one
hour to any man, nay the law is so far from giving time torepent, that it
admits no repentance at all, no though a man should sin but once, and
instantly after that one sin, humble himself in repentance and crave
fogiuenes, the law will not accept him to favor, nor yield forgiveness, nor
allow his repentance: for the law can do nothing but this: either justify and
reward him that fulfills it, or condemn and punish him that breaks it,
further then this the law by it self goes not.

It is the gospel which commands us, and teaches us to believe and repent;
and to the Gospel are we beholding for accepting our repentance, which the law
would never do: which indeed is so far from accepting repentance, as it
never intends nor aims at repentance directly in it self: and therefore in
it self, it is worthily called the ministry of condemnation. So then behold
a most straight law, and a most merciful God: so straight a law, as (if that
mercy were not) it would never give us one hour to repent in, nor receive us
to favor though we repented presently, but presently upon our sin cast us
into hell. O therefore taste and see how good and gracious the Lord is: the law
cannot have his extremity, nor the devil his will upon us, who is the Iayler
of the law; and is malicious, though the law be just: and so by the extremity
of the Justice of the one, and the extremity of the malice of the other, no
man should live one hour in the world, were it not for the wonderful mercy
and mittigation of God, who contrary to the course of the law, both accepts
men when they repent, and gives also time to repent, and thus has God done, as
in the beginning with Adam, so in all ages: To the old world, after many
preachers sent, and many hundred years patience, and many thousands of sins
ripe for vengeance, yet God gives 120. years more: O how many millions of
sins did they commit against him in that time? and yet had they repented at
the last, they had been saved, but all was in vain, and therefore in the end
God sent a flood, and swept them all away. Even so, and more patiently has God
suffered us, in these latter days. But how comes it to pass then, will some
say, that we have not a flood as well as they? Surely because his mercy was
great to them, but wonderful to us, we are as evil as they, yea if we judge
aright, and consider duly all circumstances, our sins are far more, yea
far more heinous then theirs were: so that we deserve a flood ten times
more then they did, and if God dealt but justly with us, where he brought one
upon them, he should bring and hundred on us: and if Justice bare the sway, she
should us sweep away, one generation after another, with a continual flood.
But mark the moderation of God, more to us then to them, who deserve worse
then they. He gave us not an hundred and twenty, but many hundredth years, and
brings no floods of Judgments, but spares us from year to year, and from age
to age, that so we may either repent and escape hell: or when our time is come,
drown our selves in damnation, and so be the principal cause of our own
destruction.

It may not unfitly be noted in this place, that sometime God may be said to
cast a man into hell, and sometime man himself. God throws a man into hell,
when for some monstrous and contagious sin, he takes away a wicked man in the
midst of his wickedness, by some sudden Judgment, and so sends him to hell.
But a man plungeth himself into hell, when God gives him leave to live, and
liberty and time to repent, but he continues carelessly in his sins till he
die, and so casts himself violently into damnation. Now such is the
merciful moderation of God, that for one man whom he casts into hell (as he
did Judas presently upon his sin) a hundred wicked men cast themselves into
hell, abusing that time and liberty, which he gave them to repent in, and so
bringing upon themselves swift damnation. Let every man therefore every day of
his life, when he considers the thousands of sins that are committed that
day, and sees no flood of water, fire nor brimstone to come upon us, let him
wonder at gods mercy, and say with the Prophet, It is the Lords mercy that we
are not consumed. Furthermore, this moderation of God to all men, has another
branch. Every man's ill conscience is to him like the fire of hell, and
doubtless the torment of conscience, is a part of the very real torment of
hell: now if every man had but Justice, he should feel presently after every
sin, the very torment of hell, namely the sting and torment of a guilty
accusing conscience: but see the mercy and moderation of God, he inflicts it
not presently, but only gives the sinner a prick, or a little pang (as it
were) when he has sinned, but the raging fury of the conscience, (which is
the greatest hell that is upon earth) he deferres till the hour of death, or
the day of Judgment. When therefore thou have done evil, and feel a prick
in thy conscience, and a cheek, but no more, remember that even then, if God
did not moderate his Justice, thou should feel the extreme horror of thy
conscience, which would ouerwhelm thee as a burden, which is to heavy for thee
to bear.

Thus then we see the marvelous mercy of God: wicked men are his sworn
enemies, for sin is that which offends him above all things in the world, yet
so great is his mercy, and so large is his moderation, that even his enemies
taste of it every day and hour.

Thus much of Gods Equity and moderation to all men.

Now secondly, this moderate and mild dealing of the Lord, is more special to
his Church and children: and that also shows it self in two actions. First of
al, Justice requires that every man should pay his debt: and common reason
tells us, that words and promises cannot pass for payment, but due debt must
be satisfied. Now every Christian man is in a great debt to God: that debt is
obedience to his law, for Christ came to save us from the rigor of the law,
not to free us from obedience to it: but how do we pay that debt? even as he
does, who owes ten thousand pounds, and craves to pay it by a penny a year,
for so we owing perfect obedience in thought, word, and deed, and also purity
of nature, the root of all: we (I mean the best and holiest me^ of all) have
nothing to tender to God, but a few good desires and groans of the heart, and
a seely poor endeavor: all which is unto that which the law requires, like
unto one penny to ten thousand pound. Yet behold the mercy of God and his
compassion to his children: these our desires, and that our endeavor coming
from the truth of our hearts, does he accept for perfect payment, and that man
who has an heart fearing God, and a care and desire to please god in all
things, and in his place and calling endeavors it accordingly, is the man,
whom God loves, and embraces in the arms of his mercy, though he be far
from that, which in debt and duty he owes to God. Thus does God testify of
himself in Malachie: I will spare you, even as a father spares his own son
that serves him. Now we know there is no sparing, nor forbearance like unto
that. A father bids his little son do this or that, which is far above his
strength, the child not considering the difficulty, but looking only at his
duty, and desiring not only to please his father, goes about it, and does his
best, and yet when all is done, he can do nothing to it at all: now the father
rejoices in this willing obedience of his son, and approoueth in his child
the will and endeavor, though he cannot do the thing he bids him. Even so
does the Lord spare his children; he commands us to keep his law, and it
is no more then out duty, which notwithstanding of our selves we can do no
more, then a little child is able to carry a millstone: yet if we willingly
go, when God commands us, and do our endeavor, and all we can, and groan
under the burden, and desire to do more, this our desire and endeavor,
proceeding from faith, and from a son-like willingness, does the Lord accept
for the perfect deed. This is no small moderation, but great and wonderful:
For whereas we owe perfect obedience, and he might justly challenge it, and for
want of it, make us pay it with soul and all, he is is content to take a will,
a desire and endeavor, which is all we can, and is in effect nothing at all.
In this world, that man would be extolled for his mercy, who will take of his
debtor a penny a week, who owes him 100. pound: or that takes all he can pay,
and accepts his good mind for the rest: Oh then how merciful is our God, who
for so great offenses, and so huge a debt, as ours is to his Majesty, is
content to accept of our endeavor, and hearty desire? the heart and tongue of
man cannot sufficiently magnify so great a mercy. Thus much for the first.

Again the mercy and moderation of God toward his children appears thus.
There is not the best man, but he sins, and there is not a sin so little,
but in Justice it deserves a whole world of punishments, yea all those curses
denounced in the law, even all those plagues threatened, Deuteronomy. 28. all which in
Justice should ouerwhelme him, press him down, and crush him to nothing. But
behold the merciful moderation of God, he is content to lay no more crosses
on his children, then by his own grace, (which he also gives them) they shall
be able to undergo, and in the end to overcome also. When his children sin,
(as when do they not?) does he punish them according to the proportion of their
sin? no: for then all the curses of his law should be heaped on them for one
sin; and if he did so, he did but Justice: nay he deals so with them, as it
is not to be called a punishment at all, but rather a chastisement: for a
punishment must be in some sort, proportionable to the offense, but that which
he lays on his children, is nothing at all to their sin: and therefore it is
no punishment properly, but (as it were) the chastisement or correction of a
father, to teach his son his duty, and to reform him, and bring him home
from his evil ways: and therefore not in the rigor of a Judge, but in the
love and wisdom of a father, he first considers, what we are able to bear:
and then lays no more on us, then we may well bear: and which is most
wonderful of all, he gives us strength to bear them. To this end speaks the
Apostle to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 10. There has no temptation taken you, but
that which befalls the nature of man. Whereby he imports thus much, that there
are temptations, and crosses in Gods Justice due for sin, and which he has
in store, ready at his pleasure, which are so great, so heavy, and so
fearful, as the nature of man could not possibly bear them, but should sink
under them, and perish, as did Cain and Judas, and such like. Amongst these an
evil conscience is one, which is so intolerable, as the wise man says, Prou.
14. 18. A wounded spirit, who can bear it? But the crosses he lays on his
children, are always such, as they bear with comfort for a time, and at last
with joy do overcome them. A notable example hereof we have in Solomon, of
whom God says to David, If he sin, I will chastise him with the rod of men:
as if he should have said, I could in my justice, for Salomons great sins,
beat him with scorpions, and bring him to nothing, by my heavy hand, but I
will consider, he is my child, and but a man: therefore will I lay upon him no
more, then the nature of man is able to bear. As God dealt with his son
Solomon, so this is Gods voice to all his sons: unto all my Church and
Children, will I use such lenity and moderation, and in my chastising of them,
I will so abate the rigor of my Justice, that by my hand and rod, they shall
not be pressed down, but rather raised up in new obedience, and learn thereby
to fear and love me more then before.

This should every Christian man seriously consider of, and think with
himself, how much this binds a man to deal moderately with his brother, when
the Lord deals so moderately with him. Thou sinnest, and God chastises thee
most mildly, and lays not on thee the thousand part of these crosses, which
in Justice he might do. Shall the Lord deal thus moderately with thee, for
thy many* and so great sins, and will thou deal so hardly with thy brother,
in his few and small offenses against thee? remember therefore in thy dealing
with thy brother, this dealing of God with thee, and certainly thou can not
forget the one, if thou have tasted of the other. Show thy self therefore,
that thou have been partaker of Gods favor, and that thou have felt in thy
soul, the sweetness of his mercies, by being mild and merciful to thy
brethren: out of that great sea of mercies, which God lets flow over thee all
thy life long, let fall some drops of mercy on thy brother, and remembering
how God deals with thee, deal not thou with thy brother always so hardly,
nor so straightly, as thou may, or he deserves. Let these four merciful
actions of god toward thee, be four strong bonds, to tie thee to the
obedience of this duty, to be mild and merciful to thy brethren, remembering
every day, how moderately God deals with thee, and how far from that
extremity, which thou deseruest. And to move us hereunto, let every man be
well assured, that the more he has tasted of Gods mercy, the more shall men
taste of his mercy; and the more sins that a man has forgiven him at gods
hands, the more will he remit and forgive in his brother; and the more he
feels in his own soul Gods love and mercy to him, and the more near he is
to God by his faith and repentance, the more careful will he be, to deal
gently with his brethren: and the reasons hereof are these.

First, God forgiueth not a man his faults but upon condition, that he shall
forgive his brother, God is not merciful to a man, but upon condition he shall
be so to all men with whom he deals. Secondly, the mercy of God to us, in
forgiving our sins, is not made known to the world by any means more, then
this, when a man is not hard and extreme, but equal and merciful in his
dealing with men. Whereupon therefore it follows, that the further a man is
from God, and the less that he has felt of Gods love to him, the less
moderation will he perform to his brother. Let every man then be ashamed, by
these his extreme courses with his brethren, to make it known to the world,
that he is an Impenitent sinner, himself unreconciled to God, and his sins
unpardoned: and let no man think he shall escape that censure, if he be an
unmerciful man; for certainly it is imprinted in men's dealings, whether they
be in Gods favor, and their sins are pardoned, or no. Let therefore every
man, when his own crooked nature, or the devil makes him boil against his
brother in anger, and urges him to use him hardly and extremely, consider
with himself, and say; I live under God, I am more in Gods hand, then this man
in mine: I have offended God more, then he me: and if I had my desert, I had
now been in hell for my sins: but yet I live, and by his mercy I am spared,
and am here still. But has God spared me, that I should pinch others? has he
been merciful to me, that I should be cruel to others? surely therefore I
will be merciful and moderate to my brethren, more then they deserve, least
God take his mercy from me: and then what shall become of me, but to be thrown
suddenly into hell, which I deserved long ago: nay I will by my equity and
moderation toward my brethren, move the Lord to be still more merciful to
me, without which his mercy, I cannot live one day in the world.

Hitherto of the Exhortation of the Apostle, and of the great moderation of God
to man.

Now follows the Apostles reason, The Lord is at hand. These words bear two
senses, or meanings. The first, of the last judgment: the second, of Gods
presence. The first, is thus framed, if the holy Ghost meant of the last
judgment: Be you equal and moderate one toward an other, for God is ready
in his great and general judgment, to judge all men, and then happy is he
that finds not Justice, but tastes of mercy: and who shall taste of mercy
then, but he that showed mercy in this world? But if secondly, the holy Ghost
meant of Gods presence, then is the argument framed thus: God is present with
every man, and at every action, to testify and judge of it, and either to
approve it and reward it, if it be upright, equal, and merciful: or to
correct and punish it, if it be extreme, and void of equity: therefore let
your equity be known to all men. Both senses are good, but we will cleave
unto the latter. It is then all one, as if the holy Ghost had said; Use equity
and moderation in your dealings, and remember who is at your elbow, stands by
and looks on, ready to judge you for it.

Surely there can be no better reason then this, if it be settled in a man's
heart: for a thief, or a cutpurse, if he saw the Judge stand at his elbow,
and looked upon him, he would not do evil, he would stay his hand, even
because he sees that the Judge sees him, who can presently hang him. A strong
reason with men, and it keeps even bad men from lewd practices. Consider
therefore when the Judge of Judges, the Lord of heaven and earth, stands by and
sees, and marks all thy actions, whether they be toward thy brother, as his
is toward thee. This ought to make the greatest man on earth, fear how he
deals cruelly or hardly with his brother. But worldly men will not be
persuaded of this, but when they are laying their plots to deceive their
brother, and when by injustice, and extremity, they pinch and wring him, they
think in their hearts, God sees them not, nor do they ever think of God,
but labor that God may be out of all their thoughts. This is the cause of all
sin in the world: for thence is it that men's hearts are hardened, and that
they care not how extremely they deal with men, because they think God sees
them not, nor will call them to account for it, and do with them as they have
done with their brother. Hence comes all injustice, cruelty, extremity, suits
in law for trifles, taking forfaitures of leases, and of bonds, and taking all
advantages. Hence comes it, that one man will not spare an other one day, nor
forgive one fault, nor pass by any infirmity, nor put up the least injury,
nor yield one inch from his right: but if his brother offend never so liule,
upon never so apparent weakness, he shall hear of it on both sides, as they
say: and if he deserve ill, he shall have his deserts to the full. Thus hearts
are hardened, affections are immoderate, bowels of compassion are shut up,
love and pity are banished, and in their rooms reign cruelty, and
injustice. Moderation dwells in corners, but extremity is that, which bears
sway over all the world: what is the cause of all this? Surely, first, because
men are unsanctified, and have not repented of their sins, and so they feel
not, that God is moderate, and merciful to them. Secondly, they persuade not
themselves, that God sees them* therefore against this blasphemous thought the
root of all evil, and cause of all sin, arm thy self with this reason of
the Apostle, and resolve of it, that this is the eternal truth of God, and
shall stand for ever. The Lord is at hand: and sees and observes thee, and
all thy doings. Therefore as thou will escape his mighty and fearful hand,
season thy doings and dealings with moderation: and if thou had noo^
cscience, nor no mercy in thee, yet be merciful, remembering who sees thee;
and deal moderately and equally in the sight and presence of so moderate, so
mild, and so merciful a God: so merciful a rewarder of him that deals
moderately, and so powerful a revenger of him that deals hardly, and
extremely with his brother. Let us then end with the Apostle as we began: Let
your Equity and Moderation be known to all men, for God is at hand.

And thus much out of Gods word, of Public and Private Equity: wherein I have
not spoken all I might, but given occasion to others, to enter into further
consideration thereof.

Trin-vni Deo gloria.

