THE COVNSELLOR OF ESTATE CONTAINING THE Greatest and most Remarkable
Considerations serving for the Managing of Public Affairs.
Divided into three Parts.

THE FIRST CONTAYNES THE MEANS to settle an ESTATE. The second, the means to
preserve it. And the third, the means to increase it.

WRITTEN IN FRENCH BY ONE of the Ancient Counselors to the most Christian
Kings, HENRY the Fourth, and LEWIS the thirteenth.

Translated by E. G.

LONDON: Printed by Nicholas O^es 1634.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE RICHARD Lord WESTON, Lord High Treasurer of England,
Earl of Portland, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
Right Honorable:
THey were the words of the wisest King and best knowing man, Pro. 11:14. That
where no Counsest is, the people fall, and where many Counselors are, there is
health: Which words he almost reiterates to strengthen that position: Chap.
15.22. Without Counsel thoughts come to naught, but in the multitude of
Counselors there is steadfastness. And it was the saying of Cicero, the
excellent Orator, and Statesman of Rome: Non viribus, aut velocitate, aut
celeritate corporum, res magnae geruntur, sed confilio authoritate, and
prudentia. Cermenatus lib reg. and rer. etc. cap. 18. tells us, that it was
observed by the most skillful Architectors of the ancient times* The broader
and higher they proposed their buildings, the more solid and deep they laid
their basses: so (says he) since none are more eminent amongst men then
Princes, or bear more weight upon their shoulders then Kings, meet it is they
should have the best Counselors, on whom to lean as upon a firm and steadfast
foundation, to dispose as well of matters which belong unto State as Religion:
And such Osorius tells us, lib. 7. de Reg. instit: Ought to be maximo ingenio
praediti, bonis Artibus exculti, longo rerum vsu periti: In Historijs
diligentissime versati, neque praesentia tantum sagaciter odorantes, sea long
in posterum, quod vtile futurum reipub. sit, coniectura prouidentes. With a
gracious King are we blessed: with such a Council is he furnished: who (as
Rabanus in one of his Epistles informs us:) in plain things search what may
be mystical and obscure. In small (seeming) matters what may be of moment, by
what is near, to conjecture of things remote; and out of parts, to gather a
whole, by which mature consideration they know as well readily to undertake
them, as speedily to dispatch them: Now knowing your Lordship to be such an
one, namely, a Counselor and Statesman, every way accomplished; After
transferring these Remarkable considerations, for the management of public
Affairs; from the natural French into our modern English: And further being
most assured, that your Greatness has ever bin accompanied with Goodness,
and your Wisdom with Clemency, it has bin a great imboldning unto me, to
make a dutiful presentment thereof to your Gracious perusal and Patronage,
not to the purpose that these can be either your Direction or Instruction, (as
being frequently conversant in all the passages of this Nature) but rather to
express such things to your view in our Native Dialect, which I know you to
be most expert in, in the Original. Needless it were to teach Typhis how to
steare a Ship, or instruct Antomedon to guide a Chariot, should I apprehend any
such ambition, I must necessarily incur the aspersion of impudence, or
express such palpable Ignorance as might draw me into a just imputation of
folly: But Right Honorable, such is my Modesty, that by studying to be free
from either, I may euade the aspersion of both: only desiring your Lordships
best construction of these my weak and unpolished labors, which present
themselves so rudely into your presence, whose more weighty employments can
scarcely allow any retired Hour, to cast a second Eye upon that, (howsoever
Naturalized) which (no doubt) you have formerly perused in the Native.
Notwithstanding, Honorable Sir, presuming upon your known Gentleness and
Generous Disposition, I humbly prostrate my self with these my imperfect
labors to your most Judicious Censure, whose least distaste is able to stifle
the hope of the suruiuing thereof even in the Infancy, and whose favorable
approbation has power to give it life unto all posterity*

Your Honors most humbly devoted Edward Grimeston.

A Table of the Chapters, and the Contents therein contained.
Chapter 1. OF the establishment and form of an Estate, and the diversity of
the Governments thereof. Diverse sorts of Principallities, a Royal,
Seignouriall, and Tyrannical; of the Command of a few, and of a popular
Estate.

Chapter 2. Of the advantages and disaduantages of a Popular Estate. Chapter 3.
Of the advantages and disaduantages of a Seignoury or Command of a few. Of the
Seignoury of Venice, and by what means it preserues and maintaynes it self.

Chapter 4. Of the advantages and disaduantages of a Principallity or Royal
Estate. That the Subject has no cause to desire liberty in a Principallity.

Chapter 5. A consideration of the settling of the form of an estate. Chapter
6. Of the dependancy of Estates one of another. Wherein the dependancy of
Estates one of another do consist. The Marks of Sovereignty.

Chapter 7. Of the form of Estates, according to the right of those which
command. Chapter 8. Of advantages and disaduantages of Election in a Royalty.
Inconveniences of an Election in a Royalty. Advantages of the said Election. A
consideration of the Election.

Chapter 9. Of Succession diversely practiced in Successions. Succession of
Women. Reason why they exclude Women from Government in some Estates. Diversity
in the Succession of M^les.

Chapter 10. Of Usurpation, or an unlawful Command. Of the miseries which it
does produce, and the difficulties which are found in it.

Chapter 11. Of the diversity which is found among the Subjects of an Estate.
The diverse conditions of Subjects, varies the form of an Estate. Of Slaves. Of
privileged and simple Subjects. Of Strangers.

Chapter 12. Of the diversity and distinction of Subjects, according to their
Vocations and professions. The Cause of the establishment of Comminalties and
Companies in an Estate. That the Prince ough^ not to cross them, nor suffer
them to attempt any thing above their power.

Chapter 13. Of Religion. Of the efficacy and necessity of Religion i^ an
Estate. Of the abuses in Religion.

Chapter 14. Of the means held in the settling of Religion. Extraordinary
means for the establishing of the true Religion.

Chapter 15. Humane means for the establishing of Religion. The disposition of
people to be considered for the establishing of Religion: Barbarous people
Ciuillized. Who are properly called Barbarians: Barbarous in Religion. Of the
Authors of most part of Religions at this present. Barbarians in their form of
living; In their habits; In their habitations, and in their government. That
the manner of proceeding for the establishing of Religion, ought to be diverse.
Prophecy dispo^e^l^ a people to the establishment of a new Religion: Charges
and ouer-charges dispose the people to change Religion. Diversity of Religions.
Indifferency of Religion makes way to a change. A R^uol^e and Civil Wars
dispose to a change of Religion; As likewise excessive liberty, and contempt of
Religion. The reunion of a Country under the same Prince, facilitate the
settling of Religion.

Chapter 16. Of the parties necessary for those which will bring in a new
Religion. Parts and quallities necessary for such as seek to bring in a new
Religion. That instruction is a powerful means for the establishing of a
Religion. That the zeal of Religion must be accompanied and guided by
discretion. Of Spiritual and Temporal powers, and of their jurisdiction. That
observing of the Ceremonies of an ancient Religion, facillitates the
establishment of a new.

Chapter 17. That diversity of Religion is dangerous in an Estate: How they
ought to carry themselves, to preserve the ancient Belief, in the diversity of
Religions which are crept into the Estate. Diversity of Religions in Egypt.
There ought to be but one religion in an Estate. Diversity of religions which
is dangerous in an Estate, ought to be avoided, yea in the lightest matters.
How they ought to govern themselves to preserve the ancient belief, in the
diversity of Religions which are crept into the State. Of the extirpation of
Heresy, and a new Religion in its breeding, and how they ought to govern
themselves. That it is not expedient nor fitting to seek to root out Heresy
by Arms, when it has taken footing in an Estate. The tolleration of Religions
in an Estate, is less prejudicial then a a Civil War. War against
Heretics fortifies their party, and gives them great advantages. It is
dangerous for a Prince to Arm against his Subjects, if he be not assured of
the event. A good advise to weaken the party of a new Sector religion.

Chapter 18. Of the disorders which happen in Religion: and of the means to
prevent them. Chapter 19. Of the establishing of the Council of Estate: and of
the Qualities and number of Counselors. Of a Council of Estate. Qualities of
Counselors of Estate. The great difference betwixt an Old Counselor and a
Young, for that which concerns their advice: A mixture of Old and Young
Counselors of Estate. Obstinacy a wilful vice in a Counselor. He ought to be
without ambition, and not depending of any other. Irresolution, a dangerous
vice, and to be avoided in a Counselor of Estate. He ought not to be too
confident. Of the change of Counselors of Estate. Of the multitude of
Counselors: who are to be otherwise employed.

Chapter 20. Of the plurality of Councels of State: of the power of a Council,
and of the order in delivering their opinions. The power of a Council. A
Consultatiue voice. A Deliberatiue voice. Equality among Counselors.

Chapter 21. Considerations for a Prince who is to be Councelled. Sufficiency
and capacity necessary for a Prince. Of the manner how to demand Council. To
receive Council. To examine it. To resolve and execute it. Of the flattery of
Counselors: and how the Prince ought to avoid it. Of the truth and liberty
which ought to be in a Councellor of Estate. Of the chief Ministers of Estate.
A good course for a Minister of Estate to free himself duly of his charge.

Chapter 22. Of the form of commanding. Of the power. Of the Law. Diversity of
Laws. The aim and end of the Law. Qualities considerable in the establishment
thereof. Of the breu^ty of the Law. Of the Princes absolute command.

Chapter 23. What we must avoid in the making of Laws. Of the multiplicity of
Laws: and the causes thereof. Of the observation of Laws. Of the severity.
When the Prince may dispense in following the Laws. How they ought to govern
themselves in the severity.

Chapter 24. Of the particular Commanders of the Prince. Chapter 25. Of
Magistrates. A distinction of the Officers and Ministers of an Estate.

Chapter 26. Of the difference betwixt Officers and Commissaries.
Considerations to be made upon a Commission. Of the person from whom it
proceeds. Of the direction thereof. Of the charge of the Commission. Of the
duty of a Commissary.

Chapter 27. Considerations upon the establishing of Officers and Magistrates.
Of the number of Officers: That it is more safe to commit a business to many,
then to one: That the plurality of Officers is profitable to an Estate.

Chapter 28. Of the Creation and Nomination of Magistrates. The Creation and
choice of Officers must be made by the Sovereign, and not otherwise. That the
charges must be distributed proportionally to the Nature and capacity of the
person. Principal qualities required in an Officer and Magistrate. The Vices
and Defects are as well to be considered, as the Virtues and Perfections, in
the choice they will make of Magistrates and Officers.

Chapter 29. Of the form and manner of Creating and making Magistrates and
Officers: and of the time of their charges. Three kinds of Creating and making
Magistrates. The time of their Charges either for life, then for a limited
time. Reasons and Considerations to make Officers for a time. Other
Considerations to the contrary. Change of Officers and Magistrates necessary in
a Popular Estate. Means to hinder the usurpation of the State, by the
continuance of Officers in great places. The practice of the Pope, and the
Seignoury of Venice, in the disposition of the great places of their Estates,
to hinder the usurpation. The practice of Kings and Princes upon the same
subject. That the change of Prime Officers and Magistrates, is necessary for
the safety of the Prince, and the quiet of the Subject. Prudence required in
this change. That they must not give great Commands to those that are borne in
a Province.

Chapter 30. Of the duty of principal Officers and Magistrates. In what the
duty of Officers and Magistrates do consist. Of their duty toward the Laws,
toward the examination and interpretation thereof. How a Magistrate ought to
carry himself in the interpretation of the words of the Law. In the intention
of the Law. Of the reason of the Law, and of the scope thereof. That he must
hold himself unto the Authority of the Law, and not fly subtilties upon
equity. Of the execution of the Laws or ordinances. Consideration for the said
execution. From what time and when the Law or ordinance does bind. What they
are whom it binds. Of the force of Laws and Ordinances. Of Custom. Three
things requisite to make a Custom;

Chapter 31: Of the duty of the Magistrates toward their Sovereign. Wherein
the duties of the Magistrates toward the Pr^nce do consist. Of the Princes
commands: and how the Magistrate ought to carry himself in the allowing and
verifying thereof. The Magistrate ought to obey the will of the Prince,
although it should be unjust. The Magistrates disobedience unto the will of the
Prince, is of most dangerous consequence. That the Magistrate is not allowed to
leave his place, rather then to verify and publish the unjust Command of the
Prince. Causes and reasons for the which has bin brought in the manner and
Custom to verify the Edicts, ordinances, and Commandments of the Prince by
the Magistrates. How the Magistrate ought to carry himself in the execution of
Commandments, there happening a reuocation.

Chapter 32. Of the duty of Magistrates one toward another. Three degrees of
Magistrates, and of the power of either of them. The duty of the Superior or
prime Magistrates. That it is fitting for the Prince to indur^ the judgment of
the Magistrates. Of the Kings procter. The power of a Lieutenant is equal to
that of the Magistrate. The power of the Magistrate is of no force out of his
jurisdiction. Of two Magistrates equal in power; and of the execution of their
ordinances or judgments, upon one another territories. Of the execution of
sentence giu^n by the Officer of a Foreign Prince upon the jurisdiction of
another. Of Magistrates equal in power. Of a body or College, and of their
power and Command one over another. The difference betwixt opposition and
Commandment. That they may hinder one another by opposition before the Act, or
by appeal after the Act, but not to comm^nd.

Chapter 33. Of the duty of Magistrates to private persons. Diverse powers of
Magistrates: Of their duty to pri^ate men in giving Judgment. Of the obedience
and respect of private men to the Magistrate executing his office. Of the
Magistrate wronged. When and how he may be Judge in his own cause. Mildness
and patience req^ired in a Magistrate. Prudence and Gravity without passion.
The duty of Magistrates.

Chapter 34. Of the Justice of Commandments. Rules and Considerations in the
Justice of Commandments: A mixture of the Law with the will of the Magistrate:
Of the temper which the Magistrate ought to observe in the Law. Of the
distribution of offices and dignities, distribution of rewards and punishments:
Harmony in Marriages: Harmony in the division of goods.

Chapter 35. Of the settling of the forces of an Estate. Provision of Arms and
Shipping: Arms offensive and defensive. The quality of defensive Arms. That
they must not be contemned: They augment courage. The quality of offensive
Arms: Two sorts of offensive Arms. Of the beauty and ornament of Arms.

Chapter 36. Of Forts; and of their profit for the preservation of an Estate.
The situation of Forts, necessary and profitable. They must be far from the
heart of the Estate. They must be strong by situation and fortification.
Great, and in a place where they may be relieved. That they must not neglect
the Fortification in places which are strong by situation.

Chapter 37. Of Warfare. Of the advantages of Horse and Foot. Of the choice of
Soldiers. That they may not use Strangers as little as may be.

Chapter 38. Of the number of Soldiers in ordinary Train Bands. Two sorts of
Soldiers. Of Subsidiaries. An order to practice them in the time of peace; and
to prevent their Mutinies. Of their numbers. A means to draw the Subjects of
an Estate, without charge to the Prince, and to hinder the Reuolte and Mutiny.

Chapter 39. Of the form how to make a Levy of Soldiers: of the Place: of
the Age: of the Stature: and of their Vocation. The particular manner of the
Romans. The danger of mutiny upon the change of Captains. Of the choice the
Captain ought to make of his Soldiers. Of the place whence he should take his
Soldiers. Of their Age, Stature, and Vocation.

Chapter 40. Of the Forces at Sea. Chapter 41. Of the Riches of a^ Estate. That
the power of an Estate depends of its riches. What is nec^ssary for the Wealth
of an Estate. Wherein the Wealth of an Estate does consist.

Chapter 42. Of the causes of the abundance and wealth of an Estate: That is to
say, in Tillage, handiworkes: and the commerce with Strangers. Whence the
abundance of necessary things does grow. Tillage well husbandred causes
abundance. The cause of the neglect thereof. That it is not unworthy of a
Prince. Manufactures cause abundance in an Estate. An advice to multiply
Workmen. Three considerations for Commerce. Of Merchandise which we may and
ought carry to Strangers. Of the transport of Gold and Silver. Of raw
Matterials. Of the bringing in and entry of foreign Coin into an Estate.
That the course of foreign Coin ought not to be allowed. Merchandi^e
whereof they should hinder the entry.

Chapter 43. Of the facility of Commerce. Traffic at Sea profitable and
honorable. Advantages which the public and private should receive, if the
Nobility gave themselves to the Commerce at Sea. An order established by the
Hollanders, for the continuance of the Trade at the East I^dies. The great
reputation which they have gotten by the means of trade. A means to establish
the trade at Sea in an Estate.

Chapter 44. Of parsimony or sparing. That Parsimony preserues the wealth of an
Estate. That it imports much for the safety of an Estate. Wherein excess does
consist. Of the excess in buildings. The orders which they observe in Flanders
and the low Countries for their buildings in Towns. Of the excess in
moueables, Followers, Feasts, and Play.

Chapter 45. Of the settling of the Treasure, and ordinary reuenew of an Estate.
Of the ordinary Reuenew of demeanes, and of the establishment thereof. That no
alienation ought to be allowed; much less engagements. Entries and issues out
of the Estate. Tributes, gifts, and pensions. Traffic in the name of the
Public. To deliver money at interest to Merchants: and the advantages which
grow thereby. Of the sale of Offices. The so^rce and spring of their abuses.
The inconveniences which grow by the sale of Offices.

Chapter 46. Of Taxes; and of extraordinary Leuies, Imposts, and Loanes. Diverse
forms of Taxes and Leuies. Of such as are exempt from Taxes. Of the place
where they ought to levy the Tax. The Introduction of Tolles, tributes, and
imposts. Of the valuing of goods practiced by the Romans: Abollished by
Tyrants. Imaginary inconveniences of the said valuation of goods, and without
reason. Advantages which would grow thereby to the State. Of extraordinary
Leuies. Of the mildness, profits, and Justice thereof. Of casual impositions.
Of Tolles and impositions upon Suits. Of Loanes.

Chapter 47. Of the mannaging and good husbandry of the Treasure* That is to
say of the regulating of the expense, and of the abatement thereof. Of the
order of the Expense. Alms. The Charity of the King St. Lew^s. That Alms
never impouerish. The dis^harge of necessary charges in the Estate. Of the
wages of Officers and of Debts. Recompenses to the discharge of the Treasure.
Gifts and gratifications. Establishment of public houses and Se^inaries for
the instruction of Youth, as well in the Liberal Arts, as in Mechannicke.
Seminaries of Piety, Seminaries of Honor, for the instruction of the Nobility.
The profit of the said Seminaries of Honor for the Estate. Expenses for the
commodity and adorning of Towns and Provinces. Cutting off the Expenses. Of
the Justice and necessity for the abatement of Debts.

Chapter 48. Of such as ought to be employed in the mannaging of the Treasure.
Of the choice they ought to make of such they will employ to govern the
Treasure. The commendable custom of the Romans. Youth is more fit to manage
the Treasure then Age. That experience is not so necessary. The Duty of a
Financier or Receiu^r. The form to rule Accomptants: and of those which ought
to hear and examine their Accounts.

Chapter 49. Of the Exchecquer. Reasons and considerations which make the
Exchecquer hurtful to the Public. Reasons to the contrary. Necessary
considerations to lay up Treasure. Prudence, Wisdom and discretion necessary
concerning the Exchecquer. A remedy why the Exchecquer should not trouble or
hinder the Commerce. Difficulties for the guard of Treasure in gold or sil^er.

Chapter 50. Of treaties in general, be it by the enter-view and conference of
Princes, or by their Deputies and Ambassadors. Of the care and mannaging of
Foreign affairs. Estates are like unto great buildings, which should have
supporters without. Of the care a Prince should have of the affairs of
Strangers, ^nd^of his Neighbors. How ^ee should govern himself with his
Neighbors. General Considerations touching the manner of treating. Of the
enter-view and conference of Princes. That there is danger then of the breach
of Friendship, and of the good intelligence which was formerly betwixt them.
That a Prince before he confer with another, must have a care not to breed
any Jealousy or envy against him, nor to fall into any contempt. The
^onsideration of the place of the enter-view must be great in regard of safety.
Which of the two Princes vn^quall in quality, ought to come first to the place
of conference. What Princes ought to do before their meeting, not to give
cause of Jealousy to their Neighbors. Of Deputies and Ambassadors to treat
with a Prince, and of the choice he must m^ke. The qualities of a Deputy and
Ambassador. Of secret treaties, and of the diverse intentions for the which
they are made. That he must watch and stand upon his guard more then ever, when
as they propound any treaty, and especially during the said treaty. That a
treaty ought not to be held firm and assured, if it be not ratified, by the
Prince with whom he treates. Of the place where treaties of Peace, or a League
ought to be made. An Ambassador going to a Prince to treat with him, whether
the Prince be bound to treat with him himself, or by Deputies. Of the sitting
of Ambassadors: Of the power of Ambassadors of either side, of the clauses of
treaties. That they must have a care the clause be not ambiguous. That
general clauses are Captious.

Chapter 51. Of Treaties of Peace and Truce. Diverse intentions for the which
they make a truce. That they must have a great care to the Conditions of a
truce.

Chapter 52. Of Treaties of Alliance. Of D^fensiue Leagues. Diverse
considerations for the treaty of a League. Ordinary Causes of Leagues. Of the
time when a League should be made, and how long it should continue. That the
joint Allies are bound to recover the Country of their Allie conquered by the
Enemy. The contribution of a League. Of the place where the contribution in
money should be deposited. Of the head of the League. Which of the
Confederates should ratify and declare himself first. That an offensive
League and foreign Enterprise does seldom succeed ac^^ording to the hope of
the Allies. Of the causes of the breach of Leagues. Of Leagues betwixt mean
Estates, and of the Defects which are often found. Of the succors of some
against others among the Confederates. Of the Defense of one who is not allied
against an Allie. Of the Alliance betwixt Princes and unequal Estates, that is
to say, of protection. The difference betwixt a Pension and a Tribute. Of
protection. Of the mutual Duty of the protector, and him that is protected.

Chapter 53. Of the differences which grow betwixt Allies and Neighbors: and
of the decision thereof. Of Hostages given for the assurance of the passage of
a Prince, passing through another Estate. The assurance of a treaty. That it
is dangerous for one that is in protection to receive a strong Garrison from
his protector, to make him Master of his Forts, and depositor of the Treasure
of the Alliance. Appointing of Judges for the dicision of differences betwixt
the Allies. Of a Compromise betwixt Allies upon differences which may happen.
Of a Compromise upon a possession. When and how a Prince ought to meddle to
reconcile a difference betwixt his Neighbors.

Chapter 54. Of the rupture of Treaties; and of the constancy and assurance of
the word of a Prince in his Treaties. The means how to fortify a Treaty, to
the end they fall not to any breach, pretexts of a rupture. Of the obligation a
Prince has to keep his word. That force nor fear ought not to dispense a
Prince of his word and promise. That the constancy and assurance of a Prince in
his word is very beneficial unto him.

Chapter 55. Of Treaties of N^utrallities. Two sorts of Neutrallity. Advantages
and disaduantages of a Neutrallity. That a powerful Prince ought not to leave
a Neutrallity without great cause. That Neutrallity is more beneficial^ unto a
weak Prince, then if he made himself ^ party. A consideration to depart from
a Neutrallity.

Chapter 56. Considerations for a Prince, which desires to live in good
intelligence with his Neighbors. How a Prince ought to carry himself upon the
demand which is made unto him by one of his Neighbors of some difficult thing.
He must not be too credulous of that which Princes say, he must favor the
Commerce with his Neighbors: He must cunningly nourish distrusts and
iealousies betwixt them; to gain credit with them; and to testify his good
affection. Of the feeling he ought to have of iniu^ies received from his
neighbors. To pierce into the d^signes of his Neighbor. Of the Introduction
of Ambassadors.

Chapter 57. Of the Charge of an Ambassador or Agent. Of the difference
betwixt an Ambassador and an Agent. The quallities and perfections required in
an Ambassador. Instructions for an Ambassador, how he should govern himself
with Strangers, and in a Foreign Country. Of the privileges of Ambassadors.
How Ambassadors ought to govern themselves toward their Masters. Of their
dispatches.


PART. 2.
Chapter 1. Of the parts and conditions in general, necessary for a Prince and
So^eraigne. The preseru^tion of an Estate consists in the Authority of the
Prince. The love of the Subiect^ is the cause of the Authority of the
Sovereign Diverse means to gain this love.

Chapter 2. Of the parts and conditions necessary for a Prince, to purchase the
love of the people. Effects of the mildness of a Prince. The mildnes of a
Prince consi^ts in pardoning of offenses. Of the clemency of a Prince. To
cherish great men; and to show himself indulgent.

Chapter 3. Of the liberality of a Prince. Two sorts of liberallities. The
excess of a Princes liberallity most prejudicial to an Estate. Necessary
considerations in liberallity. An order to be observed in liberallity. Diverse
kinds of liberallity. Of liberallity which is given to acknowledge service and
merit, or of free will. That the Prince ought to show himself liberal, by
gifts and benefits unto those which may do him service against his enemy, yea
to those of a contrary party. Of the liberallity of a Prince to purchase
Reputation. The manner of giving. Benefits ought to be proportionable to the
time and persons. Recompenses of honor ought to be well husbandred. The
Princes liberallity toward the public. The liberaility of a private man
toward the public, ought not to be allowed. The Princes bounty and
liberallity toward the public, consists in advancing virtue.

Chapter 4. Of the Princes Justice. Justice divided into two parts. Wherein the
Prince should show himself a lover of Justice, even in that which concerns
private persons. Diverse kinds of fraud, against the which particularly, the
Prince o^^ht to show himself affectionate for Justice. Two kinds of violence
in an Estate, which the Prince ought to suppress. Of the grace and pardon of
Princes toward offenders: and of the mis-fortu^^ which many times befall.
Cases wherein the Prince may give pardon. That the grace and favor of a Prince
must extend to the violence which is done unto the Magistrate. Of the choice
which the Prince should make of Judges and Magistrates. Diverse means to make
choice of those which ought to be established in the administration of Justice.
That the Prince should have a care to to preserve Integrity of such as are to
administer Justice. Diverse means to preserve the Integrity of Judges. Wages of
Officers. Inquiries of their misdemeanors. Of compositions made with Officers,
miscarrying themselves in their places, and of the inconveniences which follow.
That a Prince having pardoned an Officer, ought not to leave him in his Charge.
Of Spies in every Province, to inquire of the Carriage of Officers. Secret
informations practiced by King Jews the twelfth, to contain the Officers in
their Duty.

Chapter 5. Of the administration of Justice. Considerations nec^ssary to a
Prince, for the administration of Justice. Of the order and speedy expedition.
Of the expense of pleaders: being far distant from their houses and families.
In the vacation of Judges. In the tax of Registers, Vshers, and and such like
Ministers of Justice. In the Charges of Soliciters, Proctors, and Advocates. Of
the verification of Edicts by the course of Parliament.

Chapter 6. Of the Reputation of the Prince. Of the means by the which a
Prince does purchase authority. Of the Princes Wisdom and Valor. That a
Prince ought to have an universal knowledge of all Sciences. The means to
purchase this general knowledge. The practice of many great Princes. Of
Experience. The knowledge of Histories necessary for a Prince.

Chapter 7. Rules and necessary instructions for a Prince to be held wise.
Chapter 8. Of Deceit and Cunning. That it is lawful for a Prince to use
Fraud, Cunning and Deceit, and in what manner. Diverse kinds of Cunning. Of
Distrust. Of Dissimulation. Diverse practices and intelligences of Princes in
one another Estates. Of Equi^ocations, good words, promises, Letters,
Embassies, and Lies, to get some advantage. Proceedings of Princes, to warrant
themselves, and their Estates from their enemies, unjust of themselves, but
excusable through necessity.

Chapter 9. Of the Reputation of a Prince, and of the means to get it. Means
to get and entertayne courage and valor Means to entertayne himself in
health. Means for a Prince to purchase reputation.

Chapter 10. Of the causes of the ruin of an Estate: and of the remedies which
may prevent it. Of the Remedies against that which may cause the ruin of an
Estate. The cause of the ruin of an Estate. A Remedy against the violence and
force of Strangers.

Chapter 11. Of the interior causes of the ruin of an Estate. Of the nearest
causes of the ruin of Estates: More remote causes of the ruin of Estates. Of
the Defects of Sovereigns which purchase the hatred of Subjects. Remedies
against the cruelty of a Prince. Remedies against Avarice of the Prince. Of the
Defects of a Prince which breeds contempt; more dangerous then those which
cause hatred. Defects in a Prince most prejudicial.

Chapter 12. Of the defects of Magistrates, Officers and Ministers to a Prince.
Corruption. Abuse and bad usage. That change in an Estate is dangerous. A
Remedy against abuse and bad usage. Reformations. Necessary considerations for
a reformation.

Chapter 13. Of the defects in general: Causes of the ruin of an Estate.
Defects and peccant humors in general of the people. Remedies to preserve the
Estate from these defects and bad humors.

Chapter 14. Of diverse sorts of hu^^^rs among the Subjects according to the
diversity of their conditions. Three sorts of persons in all Estates. Means to
contain great men in their Duties. Of great persons which are allied to the
Prince. Of great men in Wealth and Revenues. Of great men which have force and
credit among the people, by reason of their employment in great affairs, and
in governments. Considerations to advance some one in Authority. Inconveniences
which proceed by the continuation of one person in great Offices. Of the poor
and needy. A means to contain the common people in their Duties. Excess and
Usury the principal causes of want and poverty.

Chapter 15. Means to contain Subjects conquered in their Duty. To give unto
Subjects conquered, a share in the government of the Conqueror. Considerations
to plant Collonies.

Chapter 16. Of the nearest causes of the ruin of an Estate. Of conspiracy
against the Princes person. Of the discovery and pu^ent thereof. Of the causes,
and of the means to prevent it. Chapter 17. Of Treason in places, Towns, and
Armies, and other forces of an Estate: and of the Remedies to hinder the
effects. Chapter 18. Of Rebellions, and of the means to suppress them.
Chapter 19. Of factions, and how to stop the effects.
PART. 3.
Chapter 1. Of the increase of an Estate, and the enlarging of Tow^^s. To
increase ours by our own. Diverse means to enlarge and increase Towns. Profit
draws men to live in Towns. The principal cause of profits in a Town.

Chapter 2. Of the increase of an Estate by the procreation of Children. Of
Poligamy or many Wives. Of Celibate, or a single life.

Chapter 3. Of the ^^p^ifying of an Estate by the union of another to ours.
Diverse means to unite another to ours. Protection of the weaker. Gifts and
benefits. Purchases. Engagements. Alliances by Marriage. Adoption, and
Election. Necessary considerations for a Prince who desires to make himself
great by way of Election.

Chapter 4. Of the increase of an Estate by Conquest. Of the Enterprise of a
War. Just causes of a War. The undertaking of a War must be done with
Discretion, and not rashly. Important and necessary Considerations before we
undertake a War. Considerations for the making of War.


FINIS.
THE COVNSELLOR OF ESTATE. CONTAINING THE greatest and most Remarkable
Considerations serving for the Managing of Public Affairs.
PART. 1. OF THE NECESSARY MEANS to Establish an ESTATE.
CHAPTER 1. Of the Establishing and form of an Estate; and of the diversity of
the governments thereof.
THe Considerations which may serve for the mannaging of public affairs, are
of two sorts. Some are drawn from general Rules and Maxims, the which are
usually followed and observed in the government of Estates; and the others from
Circumstances, which fall out in particular occurrents. For as we may not so
rely upon the first that we not examine and exactly weigh the particularities
of a business which may be observed, be it in the Person which must assist; or
in the causes, motives, means, place, time, and other circumstances: So we must
not tie our selves so confidently to these last, as we desist from the first.
If necessity does force us sometimes to dispe^ce, it must be in such sort, as
we reserve a way to return again, and to repair the business.

We cannot prescribe any thing certain for these la^t circumstances, all in
particulars which are infinite, and depending principally upon the sufficiency
and particular experience of him which examines such affairs. Many have
written others, some of which suffering themselves to be transported with
curiosity, have mingled Doubts and Queres more fitting for a School, then
profitable to make use of. But my design in this Discourse is, to gather from
the Ancients and Moderns, (who have treated upon this Subject) that which I
have found most fitting for use and the present Estate.

An Estate what it is.
That which they truly call an Estate, is no other thing but an order, by the
means whereof many Families and Comminalties are governed, having for their
end the good of all in general. But we may also call an Estate, t^ese Families
and Comminalties drawn together under o^^ gouer^m^nt, and be it in the one or
the other sense, we may say that all the general considerations, which may
serve for the mannaging of public affairs, tend either to the establishing,
or to the preservation, or to the increase of an Estate.

Of the esta^^ish^^nt o^ an ^state.
For an establishment many things are necessary, whereof some must be settled
among our selves, and others with strangers; as alliances, intelligences, and
correspondenci^s, wherein consists the care of affairs abroad. Among our
selves there must be established and regulated the form^ of the Estate,
Religion, Council, the manner of commanding the force, and the Treasure, or
Revenues sufficient to satisfy the Charges, and supply the defense, of the
Estate.

The form of Estates is diverse, according to the number; the dependants and
the right of those which Command, Of the form of an Estate.
and according to the diverse qualities and distinctions of those which obey.
According to the number of those which command, Estates are distinguished
principally into three sorts.

The first is tha^, in the which one command^ alone without Companion, the
which we call Principality. The second is that where the most eminent and
apparent Men (which make the least part of the Estate) have the Sovereignty,
the which we call Seignoury. The third is that, whereas the people, or the
greatest part of them under the Name of people command* and this may be called
a popular Estate, or a Commonweal.

But every form of Estate is governed d^uersly: so as of Principalities one is
called Royal, Diverse sorts of principalities.
when as some one commands according to the laws of Nature, and the laws of
the Country, leaving the natural liberty, and the property of goods to every
one in particular, having for their principal end the public vtility: Royal.
and in this manner most of the Western people of Europe are governed.

The other is Seignouriall, Seignouriall.
in the which the Prince is made Lord of their goods and persons, by the right
of Arms and a just War, or by the Custom of the Country, governing his
Subjects as the Master does his slaves; yet not straying from the laws of
Nature: And this government (although it be rough and tedious) is held lawful,
if the conquest be just. For where there is a subject to make War, they hold
that the force is just betwix^ two Sovereigns, which have no superior to
decide their con^rouersie; and that he may prescribe what Law he please to
the weaker. In this manner are ruled and governed all the people of the East
and West Indies, of Afric, and a good part of the Leuant; and even in Europe
the the Muscouites and the Turks govern in this manner.

Tyra^nicall.
The third is unlawful and Tyrannical, in the which he that commands, has no
other aim but his own private profit, and has no care of that of his
Subjects; and for his greatness, revenge, or avarice violates all Divine and
Humane laws: so as he lives in continual distrust of his Subjects, and
intreates them with all rigor and se^erity against Justice. I say against
Justice, for that we may not censure a Prince to be a Tyrant ^y his severity,
the which a good Prince is sometimes forced ^o practice against the custom of
his Subjects; Neither by his guard of strangers, which they entertain not only
for ^afety, but for the obedience, ornament, and attendance of his Majesty:
Neither by his absolute commands, the which are more to be wi^ht for of a just
Prince, then the flattering int^eaties of Tyrants, who draw after them a fear
of an inevitable revenge.

O^ a ^eignoury
A Seigncury which is governed according to the laws, is called lawful; as
that of Venice* and of many Towns in Germany. But being governed by few men,
we call it Factions; as that of Athens, under the Thirty Tyrants whom Lizander
established: That of Rome under the Ten men, and afterward under Caesar,
Pompey and Cr^ssus, and lastly under the Triumuirat.

(...) a popular ^s^ate.
A popular Estate is also governed diversely. For either the affairs ar^ in the
hands of the common people; and then it is rather a tumult and an Anarch^, then
an Estate; as Athens was gouerned', after that Pericles had taken from the
Areopagites the power of judging: Or else the pe^p^e r^ferre the government to
the advice of some men whom they have chosen amongst them; whose power and
charge is limited to a certain time, to the end that every man should have
means to command in his turn; or else their Offices continue during life, to
the end that by this continuation, they may make themselves the more capeable
of affairs. In certain places, and in certain affairs of importance, or of
alliances, peace, or war, every one of the people gives his voice, being
assembled altogether in Common; as in some Cantons of the Suisses; or divided
by Parishes, Trades, Families, Companies, or Cominalties, as in old time at
Athens and Rome.

CHAP. 2. Of the advantages and disaduantages of a Popular Estate.
EXperience has taught us, that we may subsist in all these forms of Estate.
But as there is nothing permanent in this World, through idleness and
negligence the order is many times corrupted, and the State ruined, the which
proceeds from the imperfections and defects which are found in all these
Estates. Wherefore he that will settle an Estate, must consider carefully of
the advantages and disaduantages which are found in either form.

The advantages which they give to a popular Estate, Advantages of a popular
estate
is Justice and Equallity, or without favor or respect of persons; reducing
the civil constitution to the Laws of Nature, which makes us all Equal. Thus
in cutting off the avarice of some, and the arrogance of others, love and
friendship is entertained amongst them, every man enioyes the public good;
and all being employed in affairs, this kind of Estate is commonly most
fertile in great personages: The handy-crafts man by his employment in offices
makes himself a great Orator and a great Captain* Disaduantag^^ of a popul^^
estate.
Yet many have held a popular Estate to be the worst, and most imperfect of all
the forms of Government. For this equallity which they so much esteem, is
against nature, the which gives more graces to some and less to others: And if
it be well observed, there should be neither Magistrate nor officer that should
have supriority above the rest: and this inequality ruins f^iendship instead
of maintayning it. As for the public, there is no Estate wo^se governed then
a popular, there all things are sold as in a Fair (as Plato says) being
governed by men bred up and given to gain. Men most commonly furious, if they
be not terrified, and in their fear irresolute in all their actions, nothing
secret, and difficult to be drawn together at need; and whom in many Estates,
they have bin forced to inuit them to assemble for the distribution of the
public money amongst them.

Their assemblies are always full of disorders, varieties and inconstancy: the
ordinary defects of a multitude. Wise men dare not ^peake, fearing the fury of
the people, who always lay their faults upon their Governors; and Fools
crying out loudest carry it. If you do not hold the people in some fear of
strangers, stirring up some War against them, they will forge a Civil; there
being never any quarrel or envy so great, as amongst those which are equal;
be it to supplant one another; or for that the one cannot live without the
other. The need which they have one of another, being the principal bond of
ordinary friendship: and they are inconstant, being of an humor which cannot
continue long in quiet; unless there be some number of Citizens, who having
credit and agreeing together, stay the violence wherewith the people suffer
themselves commonly to be transported. The Suisses, which are governed in this
form o^ Estate, O^ the Suiss^s.
are assi^^ed by the Country, to the which no man has any great desire, and
which of it self is strong by the nature of the people, who are very gross
and nothing ambitious; being diuerted from dreaming of innouations by t^eir
d^unkennesse, wher^in they spend more of their time, then they have remayri^g,
and would be necessary to think of, for the most quarrelsome and bus^e:
Besides going to the service of Princes, and by the union made among the
Cantons, who being separated from the Sovereignty, one cannot attempt against
all the rest, for want of intelligence; and one attempting against the Cantons
he should have to deal with them all.

CHAP. 3. Of the advantages and disaduantages of a Seignoury.
THe Estate of many Lords, seems to hold a mean betwixt a Principallity and a
popular Estate, Advantages of a Seignoury.
being neither subject to the tyranny of one alone, nor to the confusion of a
multitude: And the Sovereignty being given to the wisest, many see more then
one, and few resolving better then a multitude; it seems that this kind of
Government should be-most desired. And if rich men have the Government, there
is no doubt, but the Estate will be better preserved: Having always bin held
profitable, that such as received most loss by the ruin of the Estate, should
likewise have the greatest share in the government, as having the same interest
with them of the Estate.

Yet experience has taught us, Disaduantages and inconveniences of a Seignoury.
that this form is not more assured then a popular Estate, for where there
shall be many governors, there will always be diversity of opinions; And
every one abounding in his own Judgment, (especially such as have greatest
authority) will find out occasions of Disputes in their deliberations, and
breed factions in the Estate. Their resolutions will be many times discovered,
and being profitable to give the government to one more worthy, if in a
Principality they are many times troubled to find one that is capeable, with
more difficulty shall they pick out many, which may be capeable and worthy of
this Command.

And if they will say that one may supply the defect of another, this would be
difficult among equals; The voices being numbered and not weighed: And admit
this might be done, yet it were not good for the Council, which must consist
of a greater number th^n ordinarily the Lords are. But for the command which
de^^nds upon a resolution of diverse opinions, of men equal^ in power and
credit, it cannot well be but in one head.

Likewise in a combustion and trouble, they have found that the Command of one
alone was necessary, and that it was very unsafe in a time full of Iealousies,
Difficulties, and Distrusts to impart the government of affairs to many. The
Lacedaemonians upon this occasion created their Armoste; The Thessalians him
whom they called Ar^hoes; The Mitileniens their great Achimnete; At Rome they
created the Dictator; At Venice their great Prouidator.

Besides all these inconveniences, a Seignoury as well as other forms of
Estates, is not only exposed to strangers, but more to the Enterprises of a
multitude, whom they must content or keep them in awe by force. To content
them without yielding unto them part of the Estate, were very difficult, and it
were impossible to admit them to offices, without danger to change the
Seignoury into a popular Estate, as it happened at Rome. To retain them by
force, were no safe thing: and admit it might be done, yet the distrust they
should have of them, would be a cause that in the least war attempted against
strangers, they would make use of this occasion, to take Arms and to shake off
the yoke.

In this fear the Lords durst not train up their Soldiers to Arms; and
entertaining strangers to manage the the war, it is to be feared they will
get credit among the people. If they give the charge of this conduct to one of
their Lords, upon the first coffeehouse he shall have against the rest, or
upon the least ambition that shall creep into his brain, he will dis-vnite
himself from them, and make himself the head of a party. So as this kind of
government cannot safely undertake a War, without danger of ruin. So whether
for the division which may grow among them, or for the weakness of power
divided among many; or be it for the difficulty to agree and resolve; Or be it
that the Subjects many times know not whom to obey; Or for that affairs which
ought to be kept secret, are most commonly divulged: This kind of government is
none of the safest.

And that which has caused the Seignoury of Venice to continue so long, Of the
Seignoury of Venice, and by what means it maintains it self*
and to preserve itself against the Enterprises of the people, has not bin
this order so much, as the policy which the Magistrate has used; imparting
some petty offices to the people, yea, and some of the greatest, as that of the
Chancellor; contracting alliances with them contrary to the ancient opinion of
the Roman Aristocracy, which forbad such marriages; borrowing from them to
oblige them to maintain the Estate; disarming them wholly; giving them liberty
in all sorts of pleasure, to make them pliable; giving unto the rich the right
of Burgoisie, and choosing some among the Citizens to be made Gentlemen, to
the end they might live in hope one day to have an interest in the Estate. And
thus satisfying the Nobility with honors, the People with rest and
commodities, inuring their Subjects to war as little as may be, especially by
Land; suppressing speedily all war with strangers, and factions among
themselves, entertaining a neutrality with Princes, not wedding any quarrels;
and changing party as their interest change, thus they maintain themselves.

CHAP. 4. Of the advantages and disaduantages of a Principality.
Advantages and disaduantages in a Principality.
A Principality has its Defects as well as a Seignoury or popular Estate. The
first is the change of Princes, which bring with them new Designs, new Laws,
new Ministers, new Friends, new Enemies, a new manner of living, and new
Alliances.

The second is the danger of falling into Civil wars by the division of such
as aspire to the Crown, especially if there be a right of election: and in the
succession, if the Prince be an Infant, there will be a division for the
government betwixt the Mother and the Princes, or b^twixt the Princes
themselves. So as they have been often forced to avoid this inconvenience, to
give t^^ breeding of the Child to the Mother, and the government of the Estate
to the nearest Kinsman. And if there be a Tutor, there is danger lest he make
himself Master of the Estate, as has been often see^^ among the
Macedonians: If there be many, th^^ are reduced to the inconveniences of many
Lords.

If the Prince be young, and freed from a Governor, young men cause him to
commit a thousand disorders, and to reject all sorts of good Council: And if
he ^^ warlike, he will hazard his Subjects, his Estate, a^^ Person: If he be
subtle and wicked, he will sett^^ a Tyranny: If he be cruel, he will make a
Butchery of his Subjects: If he be luxurious, he will troub^^ the holiest
Marriages of his Estate, which is a thing which does most passionate the
people: If he be c^uetous or prodigal, he will be an exacter; and if he be
simple and ignorant, it will be much worse, suffering ^imselfe to be governed by
men of no merit, who for their own private interest and greatness, will
attempt all manner of villainies under his authority. Yet not withstanding these
inconveniences, it is most certain, (as has been said) that a sovereign
command cannot subsist, (to speak prop^rly) but in one person alone; as they
say that many see better then one alone: But to resolve, to conclude, and to
command, one will do it better then many. As for Alliances of Princes, they
do not always dye with the Princes, there being treaties which are made from
one Estate into another. And in regard of the Princes minority, when it
happens, the affairs are not always found disposed to ^nnouation; and
according to the occasions they may prevent the mischiefs which happen by this
defect.

The other inconveniences are rather particular vices of the Prince, then
defects of the Government, and vices dye with the Princes person, but^not the
vices and abuses of Lords in a Seignoury, nor of a multitude in a popular
Estate, for that Comminalties never dye: But contrariwise as they are
perpetuated by subrogation, so by contagion the abuses which enter into these
companies, pass from one to another.

And in regard of liberty, which is the foundation of other Estates, I hat the
people have no cause to desire liberty i^ a principality.
being only desired to hinder great men from oppressing their inferiors, this
may be provided for by Justice, the which being duly executed in a
Principality, the people has no Subject to desire liberty: for that this
desire would only tend to an A^a^chicall licenciousnesse, which would make
them mo^e miserable then a just and lawful subjection. But that which m^kes
the people unable to judge of the liberty which is in a just Principality, is
that true liberty consisting in not to be wronged, no man does acknowledge
himself bound to him that does not wrong him.

CHAP. 5. A consideration of the settling of the form of an Estate.
BY their defects and advantages which are found in these three kinds of
governments, we may afterward judge (adding thereunto the consideration of the
inclination of the people) of the particular manner of living, and of the
condition of the people and affairs, the which ought to be settled rather in
one place then in another. Among men that are equal and impatient of Rule, as
your Seafaring men be, and such as dwell in Mountains and Forest, by reason
of the austerity and roughness of their manners and living, a popular Estate
would be more proper then any other. Themistocles desiring to settle a popular
Estate in Athens, advanced Seafaring men, and gave authority to Mariners.
Cato said that the Macedonians deserved to be free, for that they could not be
restrained under the rule of him that would command them.

If there be an inequality, one part being richer then the other, and that
wealth has bred some dependence and respect of the meaner sort toward the
great ones, a Seignoury and government of few may be well established amongst
such men.

If in this inequality there be a Division or Discord, some being unwilling to
yield to others; and that there be found some one that has more power and
credit, they must of necessity settle a principality.

After a Battle lost, or some other disgrace happened, a people being amazed,
finding no Council in themselves, they willingly refer the disposition of
their affairs to him or them which promise to preserve them. So as in such an
encounter it is easy in steed of a popular Estate to settle a Seignoury or a
principallity. As contrariwise, a multitude having had some good success, and
growing insolent, it fa^s out that making no a^compt of their Lords, they
change the command of few into a popular Estate, or into a Principallity, if
he by whose means, this good Fortune has befalne them, has credit, conduct,
and courage sufficient to make use of his good Fortune.

I will add, that a fearful and timorous people given to their pleasures,
little careful and incapable of affairs, are better governed and more happily
by a Prince, then by any other kind of government. Where as contrariwise, a
people that is rough, auaritious, presumptuous, and hardy, do unwillingly yield
themselves under a principallity, if it be not very moderate, or altogether
warlicke, in the which absolute commands are supported by force.

It may likewise be said, that a Principallity is maintained better in a great
Estate, consisting of persons of diverse qualities; and a small Estate is more
fitting for a Seignoury or popular Government: for that in a great Estate,
being necessary to train up the Subjects to Arms to defend it, it falls out
usually, that he which is master of the Forces, makes himself likewise master
of the Estate; as it has hap^ed at Rome, and in many other Commonweals.

Contrariwise, a Prince in a small Estate is many times for^ed to become a
Tyrant; and so much the greater and s^uerer Tyrant, as the extent of his
Tyranny, that is to say of his Country, is the less, having no means to draw
from his Subjects (without great oppression) so much money as he shall have need
of for his defense, to the which all his Subjects would contribute willingly
their persons and means, if they were reduced to a republique or popular
Estate.

CHAP. 6. Of the dependence of Estates one of another.
THe form of Estates is diverse, according to the dependence of those which
command. For although we treat only of Estates that have all sovereignty
over their Subjects; yet there are which depend in some sort of another, and
others which do not hold, as they say, but of God and their Swords, having no
dependence of any man.

Wherein consists the dependence of estates (...) to another.
Estates depend of another by tribute, duty, honor, protection, or pension. By
tribute, when as besides the tribute which they owe to some other Sovereigns,
the other marks of Sovereignty remain. By duty, when according to some
obligation they owe succors to some one, be it in money or men. By honor,
when as some Sovereign owes fealty and homage to another, yet with out
preiudizing the other rights of Sovereignty. By protection, when as some one
has put himself into the protection of another to defend him; whereby he is
said to depend on his protector.

As for a Pensioner, he seems to depend no more of him that gives the pension,
nor to be inferior to him, then the other is to him. For although he seems
inferior receiving the pension, yet the other in giving it, makes show that h^
has need of his succors: And when as H^norius treated with the Gots, and
made them his pensioners. Lampadias opposing himself, said, that it was a
paction of Servitude, by the which they made the Emperor tributary to the
Gots. Yet I hold that this ought to be judged by the quality and power of the
Estates, and by the particular con^entions. For the succors may be so great in
regard of the pension, as we might easily discern who had the advantage in
this treaty, and in like manner if there were any necessity in the one, to do*
that which they had stipulated from him; and that what they desired of another,
were left to his free will: whereupon knowledge of the cause the first shall be
inferior to the last.

The marks of Sovereignty which remain, The marks of Sovereignty.
not withstanding these dependances are, to give a law to all in general, and
to all in particular, without the consent of any that are greater, equal or
inferior: To institute the principal Officers: to make leuies of money and
men: to dispose of the principal affairs, not yielding an accomp^ to any man:
to give pardon to condemned persons above the rigor of the Law: To judge
definitiuely and without appeal, to hold this power of himself, and from no
superior: To declare War and treat of Peace; to dispose of the Treasure: to
coin Money, to cast Attillery, to build Fortresses and such like.

CHAP. 7. Of the form of Estates according to the right of those which
command them.
THe form of Estates is likewise diverse, in regard of the right of such as
command: and accordingly their command is called lawful or unlawful, as
well i^ a Principality, Seignoury, as a popular Government. The lawful is that
which belongs unto us, be it by the bounty of him which has power to give it,
or by a just conquest, or else that which is defer^^d by the Laws, the which
has either followed Succession, Election, or Lots. The Lot is more proper for
a popular Government, for that all things are equal; and they seldom make use
of it in the Government of a Principallity or a Seig^oury. Yet Saul was made
King by Lot: And Alexanders Successors after his death divided his Empire by
Lot. At Venice they draw them by Lots which are to choose the principal
Magistrates. But such establishments are not ordinary.

Succession and Election are the most ordinary means to attain unto a
Principallity and Seignoury, w^ereof it is necessary ^o know the advantages and
inconveniences, which we may hope for, or fear.

CHAP. 8. Advantages and disaduantages of an Election in a Principallity.
THe Election in a Monarchy or Principallity is dangerous, Inconu^nienc^s o^
election in a pri^cipality.
for the miseries which the interim or vacan^y does usually breed, whilst they
are about to choose a King, the Estate remaining in an Anarchy, without Lord or
Governor: Like unto a Ship without a Pylot, which owes his shipwreck to the
first Wind. For in the meanetime Thieves and Robers, upon hope to obtain their
pardon from the new King, commit a thousand Villainies: as is often seen the Sea being void at Rome, or, as in Poland, so as the punishment ought to be
doubled, for the excess which is committed during that time.

Besides this, in the pursuit of the Election, you see many factions, whereof
the least is sufficient to ^uine the Estate: the which not able to be
reconciled, they frame parties, which delay the Election, and continue the
int^reigne, with the disorders which accompany it.

But if either party choose whom they think good, then grows a Civil War,
which continues long after. This has bin seen in the Election of Popes and
Emperors: and the Empire has bin void eighteen years, after that William
Earl of Holland had bin sl^ine. For although that Alphonso the tenth King of
Spain were chosen, yet he refused this quality, for the apparent danger, to
take the charge of a^ Estate, exposed to the will of Subjects, to the envy of
Princes, and to the violence of the stranger: And in the mean time the wicked
exceeded in all villainy. Moreover in the Election, an ouerture being made of
many, if they fall to force, the most cunning and rash would carry it, and the
most virtuous would not hazard themselves. If they make themselves Competitors,
and will contain themselves within the ordinary bounds, he shall never be
chosen against the hot pursuit of others, who at need know well how to free
themselves. And be the Election made of one of the Country, or of a stranger;
yet there are great inconveniences of either side.

Among those of the same Country, there will be always icalousie, and the one
will never obey the other: And although they be not all equal in Wealth and
Virtue: yet they will still presume themselves to be such. If they make choice
of a Foreign Prince, his manners being different will not be pleasing: he
will advance those of his Country, in whom he has greatest confidence. If
there fall unto him another Kingdom by Succession where he may command more
absolutely, he will leave the Electife to some Leiutenant: Or if the two
Estates be neighbors, with the one he will make the other subject. They will
always be in distrust, that he will advance his Countrymen, and deprive them
of the right of Election* and he on the other side, will grow iea^ous of his
Subjects, if he has that dessigne: and to purchase their good wills, and
reduce them to what he desires, he will give and engage unto them the demeanes
and Revenues of the Estate, as some Emperors and Popes have done. Behold the
inconveniences of an Election.

Advantages of (...) ^^ecti^n.
The advantages consist more in imagination then in Effect: for to say, that
they choose the better, it is a thing which indeed ought to be, but cannot be
effected, by reason of practices, Factions, and Iealousies: and withal I will
add, that the peoples aim, which has followed this m^anes of Election, has
not bin always to choose the most virtuous and wise: But some have had
respected to Nobility only; others to age, as the Arabians: others to the
greatness of the body, as in Aethiopia: and the Scythians (if we may believe
Aristotle) made choice of him that drank best.

A conside^a^so ^n the ^l^ction.
Notwithstanding what defects soever may be in an Election, yet if it be
received into an Estate, it must be maintained: and they to whom the charge is
given to make the Election must among other considerations adnise to make
choice of a Successor, that is unlike in nature and disposition to his
Predecessor, to the end that of two diverse dispositions, there may be a well
tempered order in the Estate, there being no humor, how well compo^ed soever it
be, which bends not toward some vicious Extremity, from the which by this
means they retire the government of the Estate: and withal they grow wear^ to
see continually one manner of proceeding, the which is never so Exact, as all
the Subjects can rest satisfied: So as by the society of one humor some grow
distasted, and others are discontented, whereby a disorder may grow. It is
therefore Expedient by this variety to retain the Estate. Yet it is a thing
whereof they think least: and we usually see, that although the Election be
free; yet they make choice of him who naturally should succeed, if he be of age
capable to Command: And this they do to prevent the Enuies and partiallities
which the choice of o^e of another house may breed.

CHAP. 9. Of Succession, diversely practiced in Successions.
THe other means to come unto the Government of an Estate received by the
Laws, is Succession the which is diversely practiced: For the Command is
referred to men and women indifferently: or to men, to the exclusion of women.

The Command which is referred inclusiuely to men and Women, has for its
Foundation the Law of Successions, and the Equallity which is betwixt man and
Woman; yet this is also diversely practiced: For either the Command is deferred
to Women, according to the order and degrees of Proximity, observed in ordinary
Successions: Or only in defect of Males, as well in the direct as the Colaterall
Line, unto the fourth degree inclusiuely: As it was resolved by the Cardinals
for the Realm of Naples, as it appears in the Inuestiture of Alphonso of
Aragon, in the Year 1345. and of Ferdinand in the Year 1458:

And although that this Succession of women to the government of Estates be
received in a manner by all the Estates of Christendom: Yet some have rejected
it; Reasons for the which they exclude women fro the government in some estates.
there being no question of the possession of an inheritance, but to command a
Nation: the which seems to be against the stayednes and modesty which ought to
be in that Sex; against the Laws of nature, which has given force and
prudence to men; and against the Law of GOD, which has made the Woman subject
to man. They add hereunto Inconstancy, Fragillity, and loosnesse, vices much
to be feared in this Sex, and* of great consequence in an Estate, their weakness
exposed to the force of Strangers, and to the contempt of Subjects, who will
not sail to calumniate the Princ^ss^ ^f ^he (...) marry: And if she marries
(the which is nece^^ary to have an assured Successo^) it must be either to one
of the Country or to a Stranger. She will unwillingly ^arry to one of her
Subjects, as well for that she will think she ^a^h dishonored her self; as
for f^a^e least her other Subjects, either Equal or greater then he with whom
she has married, would grow into some jealousy; the which would breed
contempt and afterward disorder.

If she marries a Stranger, he shall be envied of his neighbors and suspected by
his Subjects, neither can he hold his life assured to command in a strange
Country, unless he has Forces and Forts whereof he is the master. He will
likewise command the Estate; and the better to assure himself, he will
advance his own, and keep backet those of the Country: An insupportable thing
to all Nations of the World. These are partly the Reasons for the which they
Exclude Women from the Government in some Estates.

There are also some diversities in Estates, where as the succession of men to
the government is only received, Diu^^sity ^n the (...) of (...).
as well for the division, as for the order of succeeding. For the division some
have allowed it: and in the first and second Race of the Kings of France, it
was practiced: But the division which grew thereby, taught the French, that the
Command ought to be in one alone, and that it could not be divided without
ruin of the Estate. The same is at this day observed in England, Scotland,
Spain, and Hungary.

For the order of Succession, some have received none but those that were
legitimate; others for want of lawful i^sue, have admitted Bastards in the
direct line, to the exclusion of Colaterals. And for the order of Succession
amongst the Legitimate, they have also found di^^^^s opinions; as well in the
direct ^ine, to know if the s^nne of the E^dest should succeed his Grandfather
to the Exclusion of his Uncle; as in a Colaterall Line, that is to say whether
in the Succession of a Colaterall, very remote, he which is descended from the
Eldest branch, ought to be preferred to others which are much nearer in degree.
The which Baldus decided long since, for the Succession of this Realm, in
favor of the Bourbo^s, who represented the Eldest branch, tha^ of Vallois
failing* God has confirmd it, in blessing the Arms of K. Henry the 4. with a
miraculous prosperity, to attain to this estate.

CHAP. 10. Of usurpation, or an unlawful Command.
AN unlawful Command is called Usurpation, the which is either made by
onealone, or by few men, or by the Faction of a multitude. That which is done
by one alone, is either practiced upon a Prince, or upon a Seignoury, or
against a Popular Estate: And he which attempts is a Stranger or a Subject. I
will not lay open the manner of their proceedings, nor the means which an
Usurper should hold. It is too common a Science, and too much practiced in
these days, the which deserves rather to be forgotten then taught, for the
miseries which it does procure, Of the miseries it does procure, and the
difficulties they encounter.
not only to the prejudice of those, whom they may ouermaster; but likewise to
those which are thrust on to such interprizes. For if there be difficulty to
prepare the affairs, and bring them to an end, there is no less to maintain
himself. And it is most certain, that there is more difficulty for a Prince
which has usurped the liberty of another, to preserve him self i^ his
usurpation, then it is for a multitude which have recovered their liberty, to
maintayn themselves. For if in a people custom to be guided makes most commonly
the liberty where into they have bin setv^profitable, not knowing what
government mea^es, nor having any understanding of the Estate; like unto a
savage Beast, which had bin fed in a Serraile or Cage, being once escaped
knows not whither to go, having not been accustomed to feed like others,
and not knowing whither to retire, is made a prey to the first that will
captiuate him or inchaine him: Yet it is more difficult to settle a
Principality, for this new greatness is subject to the envy of Neighbors, and
the hatred of Subjects; who joining together, chase the Usurper more easily
away, then he entered into this new Estate. Whereas a multitude which has
recovered their liberty, has no cause to fear the hatred of Subjects, seeing
that all receive benefit by this Enterprise: And the envy of Neighbors is
sometimes pacified by the hatred they bear to him whom the people have
expelled in regard of his bad carriage.

Moreover in a new Commonweal every man contributes freely, and thinks that
what he pays is for his own particular profit: Yea the greatest contribute
willingly, for the desire they have to attain unto some honor by their
contribution. Contrariwise an Usurper has difficulty to find money to
maintain himself, and entertain his Estate, unless he use violence, which
doub^e^ the hatred of his Subjects against him. There are an infinite number of
other difficulties proceeding from the new Command of a new Lord, with whom the
people cannot so easily accommodate themselves. So as for the se^ling of this
new Principality, it is necessary that he reside himself upon the place, to
the end he may the better see the disorders, and prevent them speedily. For by
this means the Subjects shall have more occasion to love him, or to fear him
if they do ill; and he that would assail the Estate, will resolve with more
difficulty.

The usurpations which are made by many, or by the people upon their natural
Prince, are no less unjust; for that they happen not most commonly, but after
the bad government of the Prince. They are in some sort iustis^ed by the
injustice of his actions. That is likewise as unjust, which is attempted
against a Seignoury by the people, the which most commonly grows from the
^niury of the Lords against their Subjects: who being assisted by some one of
the Lords, who separates himself from the rest to join with them, preuayling
in their Enterprises, they commonly change the Seignoury into a tyrannous
Principality.

And it is necessary that in all these changes there should be Injustice, and
likewise violence: unless the change were made as at Venice, the which in the
beginning was governed by the people; and afterward the gate being shut to
those which had retired out of the City, and neglected the Offices of the
Estate, unto those which had them, afterward they made an Estate of many
Lords, without any jealousy or violence. The same happens usually in all
popular Estates, which insensibly change into a Seignoury, when as they receive
Strangers, and impart no Offices unto them. For these by succession of time
e^crease and multiply: and contrariwise the Families of he ancient Inhabitants
being only employed in the charges of the War and State, diminish, so as the
government is found in the hands of the smaller number.

It has happned sometimes, that the greatest part of the Lords having been
defeated in Battle, the people have changed the Seignoury into a popular
Estate: as the Tarrentins did, after the Battle which was given against the
lapiges, in the which in a manner all the Nobility of Tarrnetum dyed. Finally
it is in him that will give a new form to an Estate, to accommodate himself
according to the occurrents of affairs, and therein to follow that whereof the
people may be most capeable.

CHAP. 11. Of the diversity which is found among Subjects in an Estate.
But this will not be sufficient to give form to an Estate, The diu^^^
condi^ions of ^^bi^^^ d^ue^i^^^s ^he ^orce o^ ^he ^st^te.
to regulate and prescribe the number, with the right and dependence of those
which ought to command: You must likewise have a care to the diversity which
is found usually among those which must obey, according to the which they must
many tunes carry themselves diversely. But for that it would be too long a
s^arch to examine particularly the diverse qualities of Subjects, it shall
suffice to make mention of those chiefly which serve in the government.

The first distinction of Subjects is, that they are all free or Bondmen. Of
Bond men.
The Bondman is he whom the right of War has made subject, or that is borne
of a Father that is a Bondman. In old time the Masters had power of life and
death over them: but the cruelty they used, caused this power to be cut off. In
the end Christianity has abolished it am^ngst us, for the charity which ought
to ^e among men, and by this means has preserved Estates from an infinite
number of dangers, whereunto they were subject; for that Bondmen being ill
i^treated, might fortisie an alteration, or attempt themselves, as Spartacus
did. Wherefore some of the Roman Senate desiring to diuersifie the habit of
Bondmen from such as were free, one of the wisest Senators let them know the
danger, if the Bondmen came to number themselves: For they will soon fre^
themselves of their Masters, for the facility they should have to co^^pire by
the sign of their habits:

Yet some v^der color ^f making private men to be better served, and to cut
off the infinite number of Vagabonds, Idle persons, and Bankrupts, who after
they have consumed their estates, pay the world with nothing; have held it fit
to bring Bondmen into an Estate. But this is so far from hindering and
cutting off the number, as it would augment that of Thieves. For a Bondman
having once escaped, will be always forced, (not daring to show himself) to
retire among Thieves: and he is no wife Politician that chaseth Thieves out of
an Estate, but he that keeps them from entering.

In regard of free Subjects, some are privileged, simple Subjects and bound to
all the Laws: Of privileged Subjects.
others are privileged and exempt from some one: some for their Age, others
for their sex; some by particular favor, or by the prerogative of their charge
and vocation; and others are bound to some duties of honor or assistance more
then the rest; as feudataries and vassals.

Of simple Subjects, some are Originaries, Of simple Subjects.
the rest are Strangers. The Originaries are those which are borne in the
Estate, enjoying all the Laws. As for Strangers, Of strangers.
they are entreated diversely in the world. For they draw some either to people
the Country, or Towns newly built; or to weaken their neighbors, or to gain
good wits, who may serve either for Traffic, or in the War, or for the
instruction of Youth, and in this cas^ they are most commonly privileged.
Others come of themselves, either for that they are chased out of their
Country, or with an intent to benefit their Estates. In this case they are so
far from being privileged, as all liberty to dispose is taken from them; and
dying, that which they have accrews to the Prince and State, if they have no
Heir remaining there.

Behold the diversity of their conditions which obey, diuersifying the
government. But the form of the Estate may be also considered by the division
they mak^ of Subjects, according to the diversity of their vocation or
profession.

CHAP. 12. Of the diversity and distinction of Subjects, according to their
vocations and professions.
Diverse orders of Subjects.
IN many Estates the Subjects are distinguished into three orders: As in France,
into that of the Clergy, the Nobility, and the third estate which is the
people. This distinction is followed in a manner throughout all Europe, and
taken from that of the ancient Gauls, who were distinguished into Drindes,
Horsemen, and the common people. In Egypt there were Laborers, Priests,
Shepherds, men at Arms, and Artizans. The Arabians were divided into Priests,
men at Arms, and Laborers; who made three distinct bodies. In some
Commonweals they have been distinguished otherwise, as at Venice, into
Gentlemen, Citizens, and common people: and the Gentlemen into ancients, new
and last, or more new: Yet this last distinction makes but one body. At
Florence they had the great, the popular, and the populace.

But among all distinctions those are very considerable, which are reduced
under certain bodies, Colleges, and Comminalties, whereof some are religious,
as Conuents, Abbeys, and Chapters: Others are political and civil, ordained
either for Commerce, or for the safety of a Town or Country, or for Council
and Justice. Other Commina^ties are composed of Trades and Artizans, divided by
Brotherhoods or Companies; the which Numa brought first into Rome, to quench
the faction of the Sabins and Romans, and to re-vnite these two people into
one, taking away the first division by this second Distinction; which being
reduced into many parts, mi^gled one with another, was much less dangerous.
And afterward Tarquin the proud, to take away all signs of this ancient
Division, mingled their Ensigns.

The like course has bin followed to re-vnite the Estate of Genoa, afflicted
at one time by many Divisions: That is to say, by the Gnelphes and Gibelins;
the Nobility and the people; and that of the Adornes and Fregoses. For to unite
the people divided into so many factions, they made a mixture of the one with
the other, in making a department of Twenty eight families, under the which
they reduced the rest; although they carried not the name of the family,
neither were formerly of the same party. In other Estates they have divided the
people by Parishes or quarters: and in other by Families.

The Subject for settling of such and the like Divisions of the people, The
subject of the establishing of Comminalties and companies in an estate.
must be either to let them understand more easily the Sovereigns command, o^
to retire from them their approbation or advice, upon some proposition that is
made unto them: Or for that factio^s have already brought in such distinctions,
as they are forced to countenance and allow them: Or else as Numa did, to take
away the name of a distinction more prejudicial to the Estate: Or to ease the
Prince of some part of his care: or to give assurance to the people of good
usage, in making choice of a good number among them, for the mannaging of
affairs which concern them in particular: And these divisions are very
considerable, as also their power and aut^ority with the people, and their
dependence of the Prince their Sovereign, as making a part of the form of the
Estate.

For insome Estates the Sovereign cannot resolve any thing of importance,
without these Comminalties, or some of them: as the King of Poland without the
Senate. In others he resolves; but his resolution must be allowed by them, to
the end it may be embraced by the people. In others he resolves in certain
things in the which the Comminalties have but one voice: as likewise in
certain things the Comminalty resolve without the Sovereign. But as the
Sovereign ought to establish this temper in the Sovereignty, That the Prince
ought not to cross the Comminalties, nor suffer them to attempt any thing
above their power.
according to the disposition of affairs and persons: so being once settled, he
must have a care not to cross it vns^asonably; lest that in showing himself a
concurrent in some things, he make himself by the same means equal to his
Subjects, whereof this Comminalty is composed, which will be always supported
by others. As in like manner he must have a care that they attempt not any
thing that is above their power, hindering them upon the least occasion; and in
the beginning: for it is the ordinary of such Companies, to usurp as much
authority as they can, and to grow bold by sufferance.

CHAP. 13. Of Religion.
Of the ^s^icacy and necessity of Religion in on Estate.
AFter the establishing of the form of the Estate, the most considerable is
that of Religion: For it is the cause of good order and good Fortune; And
Fortune the Mother of good success: And so she is not only the foundation,
but the cause of the preser^ation and greatness of the Estate.

Although a people unable many times to be restrained but by fear, yet there
is not any thing more natural, nor more just, nor of greater efficacy in the
minds of men, then that which proceeds from the Reverence which we owe unto
God. And whereas the fear of God is wanting, of necessity the Estate must run
to iuine; or it mu^t be supported by the fear of a Prince, who supplies this
defect: who although he were such a one, (the which is difficult) yet this
Prince failing, the fear would likewise be wanting, and by consequence the
obedience; for for that the Successor can seldom inherit this Authority which
dies with the person.

Moreover many things presenting themselves in an Estate, which he must do, or
hinde^, and which cannot be persuaded by any reasons which may be alleged, men
by their insufficiency not able to satisfy themselves; and force on the other
side being a dangerous instrument handle, which does harm as soon as good,
the authority of man being not powerful enough, we must of necessity have
recourse to the authority of Religion, which amongst people fearing God has no
reply. Wherefore most men which have desired to effect some great and
extraordinary matter* have made use of this means, as the most powerful, were
it for the settling of Estates, or for the reformation. Which is the reason that
in most part of Religions they observe infinite acts of policy, the which the
people would easily flight over, were they not restrained by the respect of
Religion. This care then for the settling of Religion, is one of the chief in
the Estate, for that it ought to be established with all purity, and without
abuses: and where we shall find any brought in already, we ought to cut them
off; Of abuses in Religion.
whereof the principal are diversity of opinions, blasphemy, carelessness, and
superstition.

We will first treat of the chief means which have bin observed in the
settling of Religions.

CHAP. 14. Of the means held in the establishing of Religions.
THe establishment of Religion is either made by extraordinary means,
exceeding the discourse of man, or by humane courses. The first have not bin
employed but to settle the true Religion; and the latter have served as well to
settle superstition and impiety as the truth.

The extraordinary means are miracles and Martyrdom; Extraordinary means for
the establishing of true Religion.
every man persuading himself that the Constancy they seein one that suffer's,
cannot proceed but from the particular assistance of God. For although that in
Paganis^ne, they have seen many Murderers of Tyrants, and others of all
conditions, which have endured unspeakable torments with great patience: Yet
one age of Christianity would furnish many more examples, then all the time
that Paganism continued. This constancy then which cannot be attributed but to
a Divine assistance, every man thinks he has reason to believe, that what
they say that suffer so constantly, proceeds from God, and is true.

As for Miracles, some are reputed such, for that they are contrary to the
common order of Nature; and others for that they are against the common
opinion, who judging one thing impossible or difficult, makes him to seek by
prayers, vows, and promises, succors from above, the which succeeding
according to our desire, we take the event for a testimony of his power, whom
as God we have innocated to our succors, and begin to acknowledge him for such.

Adad King of the Azimites, a people beyond Egypt, having promised to make
himself a Christian, if he wone the victory against the King of the Homerites,
who for the most part were Jews; having obtained it, he sent to demand Bishops
and Doctors from the Emperor Iusti* nian, to instruct him and his people, who
sent him Marcionarius from Alexandria. Clouis after the Battle wone against
the Germans near unto Cullen, made himself a Christian, with the remainders
of the French, who had not yet embraced the Christian Faith; according to a vow
which he had made before the Combat, the which he held very dangerous for him;
and thus he established the Christian Religion among the French, disposed
thereunto by this victory, the which being unexpected by them, considering the
great number of their Enemies, they could not attribute it but to his power, to
whom their King had made a vow.

CHAP. 15. Humane means for the settling of Religion.
AS for humane means they depend partly upon the disposition of the people,
amongst* whom they mean to settle Religion, and partly of the quality of such
as desire to establish it.

For the disposition of the people, The disposition of people co^siderable for
the settling of Religion.
the first consideration we must make, is of their disposition. For some are
barbarous; others ciuillized. We call them commonly barbarous which govern not
themselves as we do, and according to our opinion. So the Grecians, and
afterward the Romans, called all other Nations barbarous, although that Asia
had ciuillized the Grecians, and the Grecians had taught the Laws and Sciences
to the Romans. By the like fotly there are some Italian Writers, who speaking
of the Germans, French, and Spaniards, call them by this name; although there
be not any of these Nations that yields inciuility or policy to Italy.

Our meaning is not to extend Barbar if me so fatre, who are properly called
barbarians.
but to call those Barbarians, in whom is observed a Bru^ishnesse, Ignorance,
Stupidity, and an insupportable rudenes of manners, bei^in Religion, or in
their manner of living, and apparel, or in their habitation, or in the form
of their government.

Of Barbarians in Religion, Barbarians in Religion,
some acknowledge not any Divinity, and yet they are given to Enchantments and
Sorceries: As some Historians write, that anciently the Huns were, when they
came forth of their Country; and that many of those Northern people are yet.
And in America the Brasilsens and Creimeques. Others have some kind of Religion
or rather Superstition, but so far from Reason, as it is no difficult thing
to confute it. Others worship a plurality of Gods, yet not acknowledging any
one for the sovereign Creator. Others acknowledge a Creator, but they worship
the Sun for a Creator, or some other Creature, as in Cusco and Mexico, and
these two last kinds of Barbarians have their Ceremonies, Feasts, and
Solemnities, better Regulated then the two first. There are others which adore
Idols, whose sacrifices in like manner are ordered. Besides these we may hold
for Barbarians, such as have another foundation of Religion then we have.

There is a Rabby, Of the Authors o^ most part of Religion at this day.
which writes that there has bin four Law-giuers, which have divided the
World by their opinions, from which most part of Regions at this day proceed.
The first is Moses, the second Jesus Christ, the third Mahomet, and the fourth
Manes: And this man supposing two principles or beginnings, the one good and
the other bad, and attributing the superior part of the World to the good, who
can do no Evil, and therefore ought not to be prayed unto; and the lower part
to the bad, to whom they must address themselves to preserve them from Evil,
is held to be the Author of that abominable adoration of the Devil, received
in a manner throughout all the Indies, where he has sowed his poison. Of these
four beliefes, the Christian Faith being the only true, we may call the rest
Barbarous.

(...) in the (...) of (...).
Barbarism in the form of living, is limited by us in those which line like
bruit Beasts, without any manuring of the Land; and either seed upon wild
Beasts or of Man's flesh: As the 'Popians in America, Barbar^^s in (...)
cloa^^ing
Barbarism in the manner of their appa^rel^, consists in the nakedness of the
whole Body, or the greatest part thereof as is seen in the East and West
Indies, and in part of Africa.

We hold the habitation barbarous, not only of those which have no certain
place of dwelling, Barbarou ^es in their habitation.
creeping into hollow Trees, or on the top of them, or into Caves, as they find
commodity; whether they live separated or in Company: but also of such who like
unto the Tartarians, dwell in the fields under Tents, or in their Wagons,
changing place according to their pleasure. As for Barbarism in government, it
is observed by the want of Heads, Order, and Policy, Barbarous in government.
where they choose no Commanders but in time of war, like some people of
America.

By this diversity of Barbarism, it is easy to judge that the manner of
proceeding for the settling of Religion, That the manner of proc^e^ing for the
se^ling of ^eligion ough^ to be diverse.
ought to be diverse. For it is certain, that they which by their manner of
living are more like to Beasts then Men, ought to be made capeable of Humanity;
and that to such as by their nakedness, show that they know not what belongs
to honesty and shame, they must first teach them to know it, before they seek
to make them comprehend what Religion is. In like manner they which wander,
scattered and dispersed one from another, must be drawn together into
Comminalties and Policy, so far as their Nature will bear it: And they which
wander sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another, must be stayed and
settled in a certain abode, to have commodity to instruct them.

Then coming to their superstitions, where they may confute the absurdities by
serious Reasons, if they be capeable; or by jests and scoffs they shall make
them grow into contempt of their opinions, falling first upon those whose
foundation is weakest. If there be any thing good in some point of their
opinions, or that has any conformity with the Religion they mean to
establish, o^ i^ indifferent; they need not fear to allow of it: contrariwise
this may serve for the settling of true Religion. S. Paul at Athens took
occasion to speak of Jesus Christ upon the Altar, which was dedicated to the
unknown God. The Apostles to gain credit among the Pharisees (who made the
greatest part of the Jews) spoke daily of the dead: the which the Pharisees
heard the more willingly, for that in the beleese of this Article the Sad^^es
were opposite unto them. It has much auayled for the settling of the Catholic
Religion in America, to find amongst those Idolaters certain Ceremonies,
which in the outward show do much resemble those of the Catholic.

The Nu^nes of the Sun at Cusco, a Town of Peru, made certain Cakes of the
flower of Mahis, mingled with the blood of white Sheep, which they offered in
Sacrifice, and of this Cake they gave a piece to every Stranger that was
present, who eat it in sign of Alliance, Confederation and Devotion to the
Inga; and promised never to do or say any thing against the Sun or the Inga:
And this solemnity was performed twice in the year, in September and December.
Processions at Mexico were in use: and in Peru there were Priests, destinated
to hear confessions after the manner of penite tiaries. They counterfeited the
Mystery of the Trinity, worshipping three Statues of the Sun, the one they
call, the ^ather Sun, the second the Son Sun, and the third the Brother
Sun.

In like manner they had three Images of Cu^que ^ig^a, which is the God of
Thunder, the which they distinguished in like manner by Father, Son, and
Brother. They likewise made use at Nicaraqua of a Cro^^e, which was there
worshipped to obtain Rain. Finally, these exterior confor^^ties, although
applied to a bad use, have been great preparatiues to imp^oy them to better
use.

So must part of those which have sought to settle some new Religion, have
desired rather to borrow the name of the establishment from the ancient, or
from the reformation, then to term themselves Authors of a new opinion; which
in a point importing the Salvation of Man, under this Name of Nouilty had been
suspected. And Mahomet himself, although far from the belief of Christians,
yet ^not to discontent them, except the principal point which is the Divinity
of JESUS CHRIST) has spoken of him with great Reverence: And in regard of him,
he says, that he was come to reform that which his Disciples had innouated in
the Law of JESUS CHRIST.

Prophesies and predictions which may have some referrence to the settling of
Religion, Prophesies d^^ pose a people to the settling of a new Religion.
does likewise dispose the minds of those that are to receive it. The promise
of sending of the Messiah, stirred up the minds of the Jews to acknowledge
Jesus Christ to be he which had been promised. And the Oracles of the Sibylles
was a great means to make the Gr^cians and other Gentles acknowledge that he
was the Son of God. Mahomet falsifying the passage by the which Jesus Christ
promised^ to send the Paraclet or Comforter, says, that it was of himself,
that JESUS CHRIST meant to speak. In many parts of America they had many
predictions and prodigies, which fore-ran the coming of the Spaniard, and
prepared them to change Religion.

Heavy burdens and rigours, Heavy cha^ges and bur^hens dispose a people to
change Religion.
be it that they proceed from the government, or from Religion, may dispose a
people to a milder Religion, if they think to be releiued by this means.
Boni^a^^, Archbishop of Mentz, labored much in preaching to them of Turnigia,
to make them Christians* and in the end not able to win them by the hope of
Eternal life; but having demanded of him if making th^^^elue: Christians,
they should be freed from the (...) they paid the King of Hungary; he promised
and under his leading having vanquished the Hungarians, they became Christians.
The yoke of the Kings of Peru and Mexico, insupportable to their Subjects,
made the conquest of those Countries more easy to the Spani^rds, and likewise
the adu^ncement of Christian Religion much more mild then the superstition, to
the which the Diuill had subjected those Nations.

The Hebrews which were in Egypt, being miserably entreated, yielded easily to
the Religion which Moses taught them, upon the promise he made to lead them
into a Land abounding in all things: although that afterward forgetting their
misery, they returned sometimes to idolatry.

The diversity of opinions in the Religion rece^ned, may open a Gate to another
which they would establish; for that from this diversity grows incertainty in
the minds of men; whereby if another be presented, better accompanied with
show, it is more easily received. Nothing did so much favor the opinion of
Mahomet in Asia and Affricke, as the diverse heresies which were then crept in^o
^ll the Le^ant: especially those which concerned the Trinity, and the nature of
Jesus Christ; as that of N^ Mahomet^^es, Nestoriens, and Ariens, and the do^^ts
which grew of either side upon this Subject: But Mahomet ^o free himself from
these, found no shorter come, then to deny the Deity of Jesus Christ, and by
(...) to overthrow the belief of the Trinity: But that which he^pt most to the
advancement of this (...) was, that he did accommodate the Rule he made for
man^ers to s^nsuality, o^er-ruling whatsoever concerned Christian or Jewish
authority, and forbidding nothing (...) that which the Arabians and Southern
people, among whom he lived might well forbear^; as Wine.

Likewise to recei^e all sorts of of opinions indifferently, (...).
as they do in China, may greatly help to the bringing in of a ^ew Religion,
for the liberty there is to treat openly without fear of blame; the which is
likewise fau^^red by the incertainty of men's minds, which is ordinary in this
multiplicity of opinions.

Reuolts and Civil war do likewise dispose a people to receive a new
Religion, Reuolts and Civil War dispose to the change of Religion.
as well for that force helps the establishment, as for that the head of a
party may countenance his Arms with this pretext, and by an opinion diverse to
that of others, hold those of his party more firm unto him, and better united
among themselves: which is a consideration which Tacitus (speaking like a
Pagan) says that Moses had in the settling of his Religion among the Hebrews.

An vnrestrayned liberty among a people somewhat Civil, and to open a contempt
of Religion, As also excessive liberty and coute^pt o^ Religion.
dispose them no less to receive a new, then too great rigor and austerity.
For besides that man has in him some certain seeds of piety, the which he
cannot long suffer to lie vn^iuitfull, so as he degenerates sometime rather
into superstition then Religion: The contempt of God brings with it so many
other inconveniences in a society and civil connersation, to the which the
Magistrate cannot prescribe a Remedy; as the first which presents it self with
a show of Sanctity, and a desire of reformation, is well entertained and heard
by a^l men: and his opinion is the better received, for that the contempt of
the ancient gives him place in the minds of men. So the opinion of Homer in the
Law of Mahomet, being grown into contempt among the Persians. Ismael Sophy
settled that of Hally, filled with many austerities and ^eremonies. And in the
Christian Religion, God has from time to time raised up great personages, to
restore it by the holiness of their lives, and their good examples, The
reunion of a Country under one Prince, makes the establi^^me^t Religion (...).
when as it seemed most contemned and rejected.

It is likewise no small advantage for the advancement of a Religion in a great
extent of Country, to find it reunited under one Prince, as the Christians did
the Roman Empire: For the Example of the Prince and the chief about him,
which they may gain, draws all the rest suddenly after him: Whereas if the
Country were divided into many Estates, there would be as much trouble in the
one as in a great Empire. Moreover great Courts are more Civil, and more
diuersified with men of diverse sorts of Condition, of which they may draw a
good number, fit to receive a new opinion. The facility they have had to
convert the Mexicains, and Peruans, reduced under great Kings; and the
difficulty there is yet to convert the Brasilians and Cicimeques, which have
not any, witness it sufficiently.

These are the principal Encounters which may dispose a people to receive a new
establishment. But with this disposition the quality of those which seek to
bring it in, and the course they mean to observe, must be proportionable.

CHAP. 16. Of Parts necessary in those that will bring in a new Religion.
MAny parts are necessary in such men: but the principal are authority and
credit, Pa^ts and qualities n^cessary to the b^i^gers in of a new Religi^n.
courage, knowledge, or sufficiency of wisdom. The authority or credit,
grows either from Dignity, Sanctity or force; for the dignity it is certain
that the example of Princes and Great men, strikes a great stroke in such
establishments; and the more if they themselves become Ministers and laborers
in such actions by public exho^tations. Ysaphat, son to Asa King of Judah,
sent Priests with some of the chief of his Court, throughout all the Provinces
of his Estate, to make them receive the Law of God. Osuala King of
Northumberland, desiring to bring the Christian faith into his Estate, demanded
a Pr^acher from Douvald King of Scotland, who sent him Aydan: who being
ignorant of the Saxon Tongue, this King served him for an Interpreter to his
people. The like in the time of our Fathers did the King of Congo in Affricke,
serving as an Interpreter to certain Religious men, whom Emanuel King of
Portugal had sent unto him to preach the Gospel. Godscald, Prince of the
Vandales, who depended of Aldembung, delivered unto his people in the Country
Language, that which the Priests and Bishops had preached in Latin. Iagellon,
great Duke of Lituania, having made himself a Christian to be King of Poland,
in the year 1386. took such a liking to this Religion, as he himself preached
to the Lituanians to convert them. Some have written, that Sicebueles King of
the Visigots, converted by exhortations fourscore and ten thousand Jews, for
the which in the decretales he is called most religious.

We must not doubt but the authority of Moses, who was a great Captain, and
had made War long against the Aethiopians for the Kings of Egypt, did assist
him much to free the Hebrews from Servitude, and to make them receive the true
Religion.

Holiness of life is so corrupt and licensious an age, Holiness of life.
gives credit to him that makes profession. This means is particular to Jesus
Christ and to his Apostles, who being borne of an abject condition according to
the World, have advanced themselves by their holy and miraculous actions, above
the greatest powers of that time. Ismael Sophy was desirous in the establishing
of his opinion, to make use of this voice: But force and other humane means,
have contributed more then his exterior Devotion.

They which could not imitate his Sanctity, have bin forced to purchase to
themselves authority, to suppose Miracles and Dreams, and after the manner of
Min^s, Sertorius, and other Law-giuers of times past, make the World believe
that they had a particular communication with God, as Mahomet did, who had
tamed a Pygeon, the which came picking in his Ear before the people, to the
end he might persuade them by this show, that the Holy Ghost changed into a
Dove, did suggest unto him the fooleries of his Alcoron. But among the
demonstrations of a holy life, nothing does so much draw the people as
austerity, to the which the Commons will hardly believe, that any man will
submit himself, for ambition, vanity, or lying. And yet ^here have bin
Philosophers in times past, which without any devotion have affected it, to
give credit to their opinions; and many times the ambition of such men is
greater, then of such which openly contend for Crowns and Kingdoms: The first
doing like men that Row, which turn their backs to the Ports where they
desire to arrive.

As for force, it is of all the means by the which a man may purchase
authority, the most powerful; the rest without its assistance succeeding
seldom. Yet we have found by Experience, that it has bin of small use in the
settling of Religion, if the force has not bin such as it can receive no
tolerable opposition, and that the minds of men have not bin formerly disposed
to change: and yet withal this, we find not any example, unless it be in some
petty Estates.

Charlem^ine, who sought to employ it against the Saxon, without this
preparation advanced little, although he joined Prudence with Instruction to
force, for the settling of the Christian Religion among those people: And after
he had attempted all means, for his last remedy, he was forced to transfer a
great number of them, into Flanders and Brab^nt, and to draw from thence
Christians to mingle amongst the Idolators, which remained in the Country, and
continued there long after.

The Turk ^ath done the like, having drawn many of his Religion which were in
Asia, to plant them in Europe, and transported a great number of Christians
which were in Europe into Asia. And yet we see that hitherto the Turk has
wholly expeld the Christian Religion out of his Estate, although he has
employed many other means.

Hence we may conclude, that if with Force, which received no opposition, he
could not prevail; it is a mere madness for certain men ignorant of the
Affairs of the World, to propound to make use of Force against those, who
fortified with intelligence among themselves, and good Conduct, may not only
defend their opinion by Force; but also endanger the sum of the Estate. But
reserving to treat more particularly of this Question hereafter, I will come
to another kind of Force or constraint, which depends upon the Authority of the
Magistrate, and concerne^ the punishments and burdens, and the exclusion of
Heretics and Infidels from honors.

As for punishments, it works no greater effect then armed Force, which is
usually joined unto it; and sometimes these punishments borne with Constancy,
produce a contrary effect to that which was expected; as we will relate more
particularly hereafter the Reasons. As for heavy burdens, although they seem
more mild, yet we may well fear the inconvenience.

From the example of Martyrdom, which is in punishments, if they convert not
speedily, heavy burdens ruins them by little and little. St. Gregory writing
to Bishop Ianvyer, for the Conversion of the Pessants of Sardinia, advises him
to charge them with Taxes and Labor. In Spain they have done the like with
the Moors, who not withstanding have multiplied. The Turk, besides the
exclusion from honors, which is a means joined to that of heavy burdens,
practizeth the like with the Christians, taking Tribute of their own children.

Charlamaine used it against the Hungarians, after that he vanquished them,
leaving the Idolators nothing but their Lives, and giving their goods to such
as would become Christians. Sometimes the exclusion from honors, without any
heany burden, has prevailed much for the conversion of great men, and of a
mean condition, among a people ambitious of honor. Ingo Prince of the Vmides,
received none to his Table but such as made profession of the Christian
Religion, preferring the meanest before the greatest of another Religion.

Sufficiency.
Sufficiency consists in the Knowledge and ability to instruct and dispute.
Instruction is made either by word or writing: Instruction.
And that which is done by word, is either public or private, in such places
where they fear that the belief, which they seek^ to establish be not allowed
in the beginning; or when as they desire to win some great man, whose example
may serve for the conversion of others. They use private Instructions, as a
preparatiue to public, the which is done by Preaching, or by public
Lectures of Books concerning the Divine Service: As the Law of God was
anciently taught by the Reading thereof before the people. And as among the
Christians they Read the Epistle and the Gospel, with the Simball of the
Creed; simple means and without affectation; and of no less edification (if
in this simplicity they cause them to be understood by the people) then the
Preaching of some, who deliver many times their own Fancies more then the
Gospel.

In times past they found it not strange to Translate the Holy Scripture into
the vulgar Tongue. Netgher, a Religious man of Saint Gal, under the Abbot
Bernard, Translated the Psalter in the French tongue, which was then but rude.
Alfred King of England did the like into his Language: Hestad, also King of
England, caused the Holy and Sacred Scriptures to be converted and turned into
English: And Beda, (called the Venerable.) Translated the Gospel of Saint John
into English.

In Preaching two things are necessary: Preaching:
the one to understand the vulgar tongue, in the place where they Preach
perfectly: the other is to bring some exterior ornament to persuade. The first
Jesuits that went into Iappon, for that they rashly under took this
Enterprise, before they did well understand the Language, in steed of
instructing they were laughed at, by reason of the many incongruities and
errors they committed in this Language. Disputation requires an active Spirit,
to satisfy all difficulties that may be encountered in such matters. But order
is very necessary o^ wherein two (...) are especially to be considered. The one
is, that it is more ease to oppose a Religion, whatsoever it be then to
maintain and defend it, for all Religions having in them something which is
above the capacity of man's understanding, it is no difficult thing ^o
contrad^^t such a belief by humane reason. Wherefore they must first shake
the opinion received, before they come to plant a new. The other point is, in
such disputations to begin with things known, and confess of ^yt^e^ side), to
come unto those which are contradicted and not yet received.

This means of Instruction is the mildest, and most proper to attain to the
settling of Religion, Instruction a powerful means for the bringing in of a
Religion.
how much soever it differs from the opinion rec^iued, and amongst what people
soever: Especially if they, begin to teach young children, before they have
bin instructed in the old belief. The Jesuits, seeing they could not prevail
in the conversion of the Brastlians, a nation altogether brutish and in humane,
they could find no other remedy, then to draw their children unto them by
gifts; and kind usage, and this people suffered them to go the more willingly,
for that they always brought back some thing, besides instruction which they
received. In Peru, in the beginning they made use of poor blind men, who being
received by them and well used, went afterward up and down repeating that
which they had learned: and seeing nothing they delivered it to all sorts of
people indifferently, with more assurance then if they had bin clear sighted.

The opinion of Aly in the Law of Mahomet, which has been embraced by the
Persians, was divulged, (as the Histories of that Country relate) by thirty
thousand slaves, which Tamberlaine had given to Tegel, predecessor to Ismael
Sophy, to cause them to be instructed in that belief. Charlemaine, erected
many Colleges and Seminaries of piety among the Idollaters whom he had
Conquered, and reta^^ed twelve children of the Saxon Princes, as Hostages, to
cause them to be instructed in the Christian Religion. The Turk takes the
fifth of all the Christian children, and causes them to be bred up in the Law
of Mahomet. The Xerif seized upon Morocco and Fez, having by Pilgrimage, and
the show of a holy life, gotten some credit among the Moors: He bought a
thousand slaves, which he bred up in his opinion, grounded (as he pretended)
upon a more pure interpretation of the Alcoran: and having instructed many with
such Disciples; and his sons having some advantages against the Christians,
turned their Arms against the Kings of Fez and Morocco, Prudence.
and settled themselves in their places with their Religion.

Prudence, is next to Piety, the principal part which they should have, which
undertake such an enterprise, and so much the more necessary, for that many
times an indiscreet zeal hinders his function, That the zeal of Religion must
be accompanied with conduct and Prudence.
and ruins that which he would Establish. And although that the counsels of
these zealous persons succeed sometimes; which notwithstanding is but seldom,
God having given prudence to men, to serve them for a guide; all having not
deserved that God should daily employ his power to work miracles.

Ananias having persuaded Isates King of the Adiabones, and his mother to
receive the Iewish-Religion, held it fit that he should forbear to cause
himself to be circumcised, until he had disposed his people. But Eliazar the
Gallilean pressed him to do it, and not to prefer the fear of men to the grace
of God. Which was the advice of a Divine more zealous then discreet; the which
although it succeeded well at that time, their spirits being better prepared
then the Prince expected; yet it were dangerous to follow it in all Encounters.
For the Apostle commands that zeal should be guided by Knowledge. We know in
our time, that this rash zeal has done more harm to the Catholic Religion
then good.

I doubt, whether to this inconsiderate zeal we should not attribute that
opinion, Of Spiritual and temporal powers, and their jurisdictions.
which some have of the greatness of the spiritual power, by the which and
their Rules, they minister cause of Jealousy to all temporal powers, the
which they submit unto it, against the ancient belief and the custom of
former ages. A proceeding quite contrary to that of Jesus Christ; whom the
Jews desiring to surprise by this means in the crime of high treason, and to
bandy the Magistrate against him, declared openly, that his Kingdom was not of
this world; and commanded to yield unto Caesar that which was Caesar's,
although he were a Tyrant, and an Usurper of another man's liberty.

After him his Apostles have spoken of the civil Magistrate with honor and
respect, commanding to obey him; and it cannot be found, that by virtue of the
Spiritual power, they have advised to attempt any thing against the
Magistrate. It is true, that among Christians, the Spiritual power has been
always much respected; but only when it has bee^e practiced in matters which
are merely Spiritual, the which loses the dignity and grace, which is due
unto it, when it deals in matters which are temporal terrien.

These be the bounds which have always been set in France, betwixt the
Ecclesiastical lurisdiction and a Regal power: and with this distinction the
Christian Religion, has been preserved above a thousand years in France,
without any blemish. But inconsideration or ambition, which is usually blind,
has proceeded further, to breed a Jealousy among all Christian Princes. For
by a consequence altogether absurd and foolish, they would make the World
believe, that the obedience of the Subject toward his Prince, the which being
a temporal thing, cannot be reputed but temporal, may be prohibited by the
Spiritual power, the which notwithstanding has no power nor Jurisdiction over
temporal things. The which is a means not only to hinder, that such Princes
as are distracted from the ancient belief; do not re-vnite themselves, seeing
they cannot do it without dimunition of their authority and power: but also
makes others, which are not yet separated (to free themselves from this
subjection) leave it, or favor all which oppose themselves to this Doctrine,
never insisting upon the errors, which they may add thereunto.

There is as little wisdom to ^rosse the Rules of a received policy, The
obser^ntion of ceremoni^s of an ancient Religion, facilitates the settling of a
new.
if they were not altogether impious: neither must they press to change the
Religion of the conscience, if without impiety this appearance may be preserved.
The ancient Christians, made no difficulty to apply unto the Divine Service,
many of the Jewish and Pagan ceremonies. In diverse changes of Religion happened
in our time, Luther in Germany, and Peter Martyr in England, have carried
themselves more discreetly, having retained the greatest part of the ceremonies
of the Catholic Religion, approved therein; then they which have made their
Religion bald, and destitute of all ornament; and to make it the more savage,
and to seem more different from the common belief, they have changed the
names and terms by an in^ise^ee^ vanity.

Behold part of the principal considerations which they must observe in the
settling of a Religion. Let us now see how we are to carry our selves to
preserve the ancient belief; amidst the diversity of other Religions which
are crept into the Estate.

CHAP. 17. That the diversity of Religion is dangerous in an Estate: how they
ought to carry themselves to preserve the ancient Belief, in the diversity of
Religions crept into the Estate.
IN old time the Kings of Egypt, entertained this diversity in Religion among
their Subjects: Some worshipping a Dog, others a Bird, and some a Crocadile
with other things according unto their fancies: which was a tyrannical
practice; to the end their Subjects might not agree to control and reform
their Actions.

But it is certain that if in the Concord of an Estate, consists the good and
quiet of the Subjects, There ought to be but one Religion in an Estate.
it is more expedient to re-vnite themselves all in one Religion when they may.
For Religion is the cyment which binds the Quicksilver, that draws together
all the members of the Estate into one perfect union: And contrariwise there is
nothing that does more dis-unite a people, then the diversity of opinions, or
the use of diverse ceremonies in matter of Religion. Hence have proceeded the
most violent and furious passions, that cuer troubled an Estate, and the life
of men: Diversity of Religion dangrous in an Estate.
And in this point all other interests are so employed, as it has drawn with
it all that, which makes a part of the honors, goods, and fortunes of men. For
Religion the children have left the Fathers cause; servants have denied their
masters service, and subjects their fidellity to Princes. Finally all natural
rights and offices of humanity have ceased, whereas Religion has resisted:
Every man esteeming that which he follows to be the most pure, and the true
manner of worship, and condemning all that which is not conformable to his
belief.

It must be a^oyded even in light things.
Wherefore we must fly this diversity, even in light things: for that a
multitude being incapable to judge of things by themselves, nor by reason or
motion in Religion, suffering themselves to be carried away by chance and
apparent shows, contrary to that which Faith should persuade them, above the
perception of their understanding: when they have once shaken some opinion
which he had in Reverence, he presently falls into the like uncertainty of the
other pieces of his belief; which have no more authority nor ground with him,
then those which they have already shaken.

How they must govern themselves to preserve the ancient belief, in a
diu^^sity of Religions.
Finding then this diversity in an Estate we must consider whether it be little
or great. If it be small, and the parties of the new opinion weaker then that
of the ancient Religion, be it in number of men, or in retreats of
intelligences, it will be no difficult thing to suppress them: No more then if
in a great Estate, this opinion had not taken footing but in one corner, or in
one or two Provinces; as that of the Albygeois had done in France. For the rest
of the Estate being secure, it is easy for the greater party to suppress the
less, by the conquest of these Provinces. But if this opinion has crept into
all the parts of the Estate, although they that follow it make the lesser
number, yet we must consider if we are in the beginning, Of the rooting out of
Heresy and new Religion in the (...), and (...) they ought to carry them*
(...).
or in the strongest fit of the disease.

In the beginning such weeds are to be pulled up as soon as they grow, the
which must be done by secret Executions, and not as they ^aue usually practiced
by public punishments; if it be not of some opinion that is very difficult to
persuade: For that the Example of Martyrdom mooues many to pity, makes others
obstinate, and draws some to be more curious to examine the reasons, for the
which a new Preacher, who has nothing in show but what is holy, suffers so
constantly: and few will persuade themselves, that any man will for so small a
matter loose his life with so much dishonor; and so by this gate many enter
into that Comminalty: so as instead of retyring the people by the example of
punishments, they inuit them: as being certain that the terror thereof,
works a contrary effect in a new opinion, which ha^^ a show of sanctity, and
of the truth and falsehood whereof they may doubt, then in other crimes, the
which are generally condemned in all men. For to search the bottom of every
man's conscience, were to kindle a fire in the Estate, add to discover a
mischief, which were more expedient to hide, and whereof the scandal were
dangerous. We have seen many Realms and Principallities preserve themselves
in peace, The tolleratio^ of two Religions in an estate are less hurtful then
a civil War.
with the exercise of two different Religions; but there was never any but has
bin ruined by the course and continuance of Civil wars: and the conditions by
the which they may make two Religions agree together, would not only be less
hurtful to an Estate, but more supportable to private persons, then the lest
civil war, which shall be attempted upon this subject. For although there may
be some found amongst Heretics, who, either for want of Instruction in their
new opiuion, or for want of courage, think to be persuaded by Force, that they
do meritoriously suffer the pains which they endure, and therefore were easy
to reduce: yet I will say that in such affairs, for that a firm persuasion
must preceede the resolution which such men have taken to change their first
manner of living, in a point which does wholly import their salvation; it is
dangerous to employ Arms. For some striking sail, and continuing amongst us,
serve underhand to those of their party by many means; if it were but only in
giving advice or dispersing of bruits, which may assist their affairs. Others
which have more generosity, persuaded of the injustice of the harm which they
cause them to suffer, continue resolute and obstinate: being the ordinary of
the spirit of Man, to grow more resolute the more it is resisted, and gives
way when there is least opposition. For the more that that man loves his
liberty, and yet abuses it, the more he hates servitude and constraynt, in the
which notwithstanding he carries himself better then in the enjoying of his
freedom.

All men tend naturally to the contrary of that which is desired of them, War
against Here^icks (...) then patty, and give, (...) advantages.
and affect more willingly that which is forbidden. Fear and necessity
maintain men best in their Duties. They force them to know themselves, to
resume courage, to allie themselves together, and in the end to frame a party
within the Estate; which upon the least good success which shall befall it,
(Fortune not always assisting the greater number) it fortifies it self, as it
proceeded from the Justice of their cause, and that GOD fought for them, so as
by this good success many being persuaded to follow it, they increase the
number of their partisans: and it falls out most commonly, that the
discontented, and such as desire to work their own ends, join with them.
Moreover, this Sect, as I have said, being dispersed over all the Provinces of
an Estate, and the Prince not able to have Armies in them all, whilst that he
assailes them on the one side, they attempt upon another, surprising some place
of importance; or standing upon their defense, they cause an Army to ruin
itself most commonly before some paltry place.

I will add hereunto, that if they be the weaker in number, they will be found
in effect the stronger by their vigilance and intelligences which they have one
of another: For that Union is most commonly stronger in a mean number, then in
a greater; and in an opinion received by their own choice and election, then
in that which is received by custom, in the which man shows himself usually
more negligent. Besides this, the intelligence is better observed amongst man
that are assailed, or that fear to be so, by reason of the necessity of the
defense, then among the assailians. For to assail proceeding from a free will,
they are sooner wearied then the defendants.

Moreover, there is nothing more dangerons for a Prince, then to make trial of
his forces against, his Subjects, It is dangerous for a Prince to arm against
his Subjects, if he be not assuof the event.
if he be not well assured of the success. This were to arm and show the Lion
his paws to fight against his Master, to make himself the Head of a party,
making the head of the contrary faction equal to his power. And it has bin
always held a Rule of State, that the most powerful should never make an
Enterprise upon the weaker, without assurance of the event, For the weaker is
always in fear, that the stronger can do any thing, until he has made
trial of the contrary; and when they find how far the forces of the stronger
may extend, he falls in his reputation. Wherefore in this case the best advised
Princes have done like wife Pylots, A go^d advice to weaken the party of a new
Sector Religion.
who flip their tacklings in a storm, knowing that the res^stance they should
make, would be the cause of a general shipwreck. But if he forced of
necessity to go to Field upon this quarrel, and that their courages puffed up
too much, cannot be humbled but by Arms; he must before they have gotten any
advantage, grant them tolleration of their Religion, in places where they may
give the least scandal, to such as are opposite unto them, and in all other
things make them inferior: The which they will yield the more easily unto, for
that in this first beginning, there is nothing but the conscience that does
threaten them; and having found their own weakness, they will be content to
have gotten this point, never refusing places out of the way for their
exercise: for that by this means they shall be more assured, less exposed to
the view of their Enemies, and by consequence less subject, to their surprises.

To draw unto him the heads of a new Religion.
As for the ambition of Commanders, it will be easy to prevent, for that they
will be usually few in number, in entertaining them by promises, presents, and
hopes; having a watchful eye over them, and employing them abroad in
honorable charges and affairs, yet where they may neither get credit, nor do
much harm; and therest which desire to be advanced to honors, and yet have
small power of themselves, they may feed them with hope, that in changing
their opinions, they may attain to that which they desire. This being done,
the rest will be easily maintained, in having a care that they which follow
the Princes Religion, and are favored by the Prince, may not do them any
wrong or injury in hatred of their opinion.

Institution of Commanders.
They may by the same means, erect Seminaries, to breed and instruct a good
number of persons in the true Religion; Out of which they shall choose such as
are most sufficient and capable, and whose lives may serve for an example of
well living, to place them in Eclesiasticall dignities.

Orders of Knigh^s his to de^end and maintain the an^ient Religion.
In certain Realms they have used to make orders of Knighthood, whose chief
profession was (when it was necessary to use force) to maintain their Religion
by Arms, and they had for their recompense many benefices, which we affected
unto them; which institution is not to be neglected, for that there are two
sorts of those which stra^e from the true Religion. The one agree upon the
foundations, but they contend upon the interpretation; and these may be
instructed: The others do absolutely done the grounds, whereby the Doctrine of
Religion is supported. These not able to be drawn by the instruction of the
true Religion, there rem^n^th nothing but miracles, and a Divine
Interpretation, which are Supernatural means, whereof God does not make use
to all persons: and force amongst humane means. Wherefore these Millitary
orders of Knights, may profit much in an Estate, and may also inuit those of a
new opinion to submit themselves unto the old, to the end they may be
partakers, or their children, of these honors and Recompenses.

Moreover, it will not be inconvenient, that a Prince which reigns in an
Estate divided in Religion, To draw unto them the most learned and cap^table of
a new Religion.
should labor by presents and promises, to draw unto him the most learned and
capable of such as are contrary unto his Religion: And in case they will
return, to advance some of them to great dignities, to the end he may bind
them the more by the preservation of their dignity to maintain the Religion,
and to give experience to others, who will be invited by this Example. For what
ambition soever they shall discover in him that shall be advanced, having gotten
Authority, the Example of his advancement, will make others think of it. And
if the Prince can, divide them in opinions, or otherwise he shall do well; for
that the weaker the body of this Sect shall be, the less cause the Estate shall
have to fear; and there growing some diversity of opinions amongst them, he
shall fa^our that which approaches nearest to his Religion; or by this
division he shall endeavor to make them weaker, and more resolute what they
should follow.

But when he shall see a Sect grow old, To bear down and ruin the temples
least frequenced.
and that the abuses should begin to distaste most part of them which follow
it: He may do like unto Theodosius, who seeing the Temples of the Pagans in a
manner all abandoned, he caused some to be beaten down, and the rest to be
applied unto the devotion and service of the Christian Religion.

Mahomet had found a remedy to preserve his Religion Not to (...) Religion.
from these innovations, forbidding them to Preach or dispute: the which if it
had been well observed, there had been such a diversity of Sects, in the
Interpretation of his Alcoron.

But a Duke of Muscouie, to keep his Religion entire and vnfoyled, the which is
grounded like to ^urs in the Administration of the Sacraments, and in the
Preaching of the Gospel, caused all the Homi^ies and Sermons of the Holy
Greek Fathers, to be turned into his Language, to be rep^ated publicly in the
place of Preaching, and read particularly by the Subjects* freeing himself by
this means from the ignorance of the multitude, and from the novelties which
Preachers might have brought in, in publishing their inventions and dreams;
and by this means confirming his Subjects in the belief of those holy
Fathers. Wherefore the principal end must be, to keep the anc^^nt Religion, to
have but one, if it may be, to hi^der (...) one from taking footing in an
Estate, and in (...) not effect it without troubling the vniu^rsall peace of
the Subject, we must govern our selves as I have formerly spoken.

Let us come to other disorders which commonly (...) in Religion, the which w^e
must foresee in its esta^^^shm^nts, to prevent them when they shall happen.

CHAP. 18. (...) disorders which happen in Religion: and of the means to
prevent them.
(...).
BL^tp^emy consists in perjury, and inscandall, or de^^^ction. Perjury is when
we call God to witness of a lie, Scandal is when we mock at Religion.

Carelessness regards chiefly the service of Religion, Carelessness in Divine
service*
and is the more to be feared, for that by this degree they mount to impiety.
For Religion consisting more in affection and zeal, then in discourse; when as
the heat of zeal if grown cold, Religion is lost by little and little.

The third abuse is Superstition, Superstition.
withdrawing the belief made to the service of God, and bringing in scandalous
things of no moment.

As for the first, which is Blasphemy, Rem^dies against Blasphemy and
n^gligence.
, they must establish rigorous punishments: and to hinder the second, which
concerns Divine service, it must be enjoined very strictly. But the remedy of
the last, must come from the care of Prelates, who for this ^ffect ought to be
chosen vigilant and Religious; Against Supersti^ion.
and they must be prohibited from bringing in of any new thing, upon pretext of
Devotion and Piety, neither in the belief nor in the Ceremonies of Religion,
without exact knowledge of the cause. As for that which concerns the ground of
private Men's consciences, we must leave it to the duty of Ministers, who being
chosen good men, there is no doubt but they whose consciences they govern,
would be so in like manner.

CHAP. 19. Of the settling of a Council of Estate, and of the quallities and
number of Counselors.
THe form of the Estate, and Religion being established, there follows the
settling of a Council; Of a coun^^^ o^ estate.
wherein two sorts of persons are to be considered, that is to say, they which
Counsel, and they which are Counseled. In those which Counsel, we must know
the qualities which are necessary for them; in what number they ought to be;
the power which is given them; and the order they are to observe in giving
their opinions: For to examine affairs, it is done according to the ability
and capacity of every one of them.

The first quality of a Councellor of Estate, is to be old, Qualities of
Coun^^llors of estate.
and to have experience. I join these two together, for that experience cannot
be but in a man that is already ancient, and age without experience would be
here v^profitable: Age and expe^ience.
for that in such affairs the knowledge of the particular humors of Princes,
of people, and of great men is most necessary: the which cannot be obtained but
by a long experience: the which although it be not repugnant unto reason, yet
it has a different means of understanding the affairs, whereof they cannot
have a certain light, to make a conjecture of that, which with reason would be
fitting to do upon the point which they will put in execution, if they have
not first seen the trial in some other place.

Moreover, age will add much more authority and credit to the resolutions of a
Council, (...)
consisting of ancient men, then if it were composed of young, how sufficient
and capable soever they were, who cannot have the reputation of good
Councillors: For such as shall be as young as they, will think they are as
well advised; and such as are more ancient, will hold themselves to be wiser.
And in matter of Estate, opinion having no less force, but many times more
effect then truth; there is nothing more dangerous, then that the Subjects
should have an opinion, to be wiser then their Governors. So as the
presumption being always, that the older are wiser then the young, there is no
doubt, but they are more propper for Council, and more resolute for a long
exercise, to hear, weigh, and resolve of great affairs.

A^^^ent difference betwixt an (...) Councellor of estate and young, for that
which concerns* Council.
There is another difference betwixt ancient and young Counselors. These last
having their blood hot, and having never been deceived by Fortune, insist
commonly upon Councels, which have more magnificence and show then safety.
Whereas on the other side, old men as well by reason of their natural
coldness, as of their experience, the which by the course of their life they
have gotten, to have executed many things in vain the which they could not
bring to a good effect, they, more willingly embrace the safest party,
misfortune causing them to bandy their spirits, and to open their eyes to
discover the danger. The which young men cannot, do so well, who have not had
experience of the variety of Fortune, nor have observed the circumstances of
such particular accidents. A most necessary thing in a man that will give
Council; a small circumstance of more or less, does many times cause a great
variation in affairs. This experience being only found in ancient men, their
advice ought to be esteemed the better. Yet I mean not to speak of such as
are come to a decrepitage. Age fit for Council, must be strong and vigorous,
to the end that the resolutions of a Council of such men may not be too dull
and timorous.

Wherefore with these ancient men that are cold and slow, it will bevery fit to
mingle some of a middle age, A mixture of old and young Counselors of estate.
approaching to 50. years; and that both the one and the other past their time
in many employments, in the which they have seen diverse sorts of affairs
treated and negotiated, and have therein made known their discretion,
fidelity, and industry; and by this means give assurance, that they are worthy
and capable to hold this rank, Di^cretion, fidelity, and resolution in a
Councellor.
without staggering or falling For a Councellor of Estate must be an honest
man, faithful to the Estate, and firm in his resolutions; yet without
wilfulness and obstinacy: a most dangerous plague in a Council, where it is
necessary sometimes to obey the storm, to strike sail, Wilfulness a
dangerous vice in a Council of estate.
to leave the ordinary course, and retire sometimes into the Haven, to the
which in the end they will sail when they see the Wind prosperous. And
although there be some one thing resolved, yet if it discover some apparent
danger, it is not against custom to change opinions. For Prudence does not
consist in an obstinate will, to do a thing resolutely; bu^ amongst many
different parties which Fortune presents unto us, to choose the best and the
most commodious, to attain unto our end. Wherefore some have bin of opinion
that they should propound that a little before, which was to be resolved upon;
least that doing otherwise, and some one having bin of a bad advice, without
due consideration, he should not grow obstinate unseasonably, and strive to
maintain his opinion, rather then to leave it. Yet in affairs whereas they
that have credit, are interessed, it is not fit to make the proposition, if
they be not assured to be able to resolve it speedily: otherwise it would give
them means to make parties and factions, and to prepare hindrances and lets.

A Councellor of Estate must likewise be without favor ^o some, He must be
without ambition and not depending of any.
or hatred to others, or ambition for himself; having no other aim but the
public good, and that he depends not of any other Prince, be it by fealty or
homage, or by obligation or by pension: but rather that he run the same
fortune with the Prince whom he serves; to the end he may know, that it
concerns him to suffer the evil, and enjoy the good, proceeding from the
Council which he has given. Marc. Anthony the Philosopher and Emperor,
ordained that the Senators of Rome, which were not Italians, should at the
least have the fourth part of their Estates in Italy, to make them more
careful, to think of the preservation of the Province, where the seat of the
Empire remained. And Pl^^^ writes that Traian the Emperor had formerly
decreed, that such as sued for any Benefices, should have the third part of
their Lands in Italy; not holding it reasonable, that such men should make use
of Rome and Italy, as of a retreat, and not as of their Country.

Yet I would not herein set a general Rule, there having bin many found, who
although they had their retreat elsewhere then in the Estate of the Prince
whom they served, have notwithstanding carried themselves faithfully, upon hope
that if they should lose the goods which they enjoyed in the Estate, of their
Master, yet they should always have means to live elsewhere.

And contrariwise we have seen some which had not any retreat but in the
Estate of their Prince, whom the good fortune of the Enemy has made careful
to enter into treaty to save their Estates; the which happily they would not
have done, if they had means to live elsewhere. It is likewise certain, that
in affairs where we have no interest, we judge much better, then when as we
put our interest in Balance with our opinions in Council.

He that looks over Gamesters, and is not possessed neither with the hope of
gain, nor the fear of loss, will give a better judgment of the carriage of
the game then he that playe^: And he that in a Council has not any fear to
lose his Estate, and who brings neither affection nor passion, will always
take the most honorable party: And he which has any interest prevented by his
own opinion and fear, will willingly incline to that side by the which he
thinks to save himself.

A Councellor of Estate must not be too sudden and rash, for that
precipitation of its nature, A Councellor must not be rash and precipitate.
is blind and indiscreet; a good deliberation having need of time, to make a
good resolution, being impossible in a short time to consider and weigh the
inconveniences duly: and withal pr^cipitation cannot come but with
indiscretion, or little judgment; and both the one and the other hurtful in
council. Irresolution a dangerous vice in a Councellor and to be aucid^d.


Irresolution is another vice, into the which he must be very careful not to
fall; for he must resolve upon (...) party, and forget all the rest; lest that
by remembering them, he does not break and dull the vigor of the mind,
necessary for the due execution of great Enterprises, and withal the constancy
which he must bring in matters that are doubtful and difficult: neither must
he think that there is less difficulty in the party which he has left, then
in that which he has chosen.

The causes thereof.
In some one-ignorance to be able to examine affairs causes irresolution; and
these ought to be rejected from Council. Others are Enemies to inconveniences:
So as although that with reason they ought to embrace the thing which is
propounded unto them; yet being amazed with the pains and difficulty, which
do always accompany great affairs, they remain in suspense and doubt,
whether they should endeavor to attempt it.

Subtilty.
Other have such subtle spirits, that to all things that are propounded, they
find contrary reasons; and being (as often it happens) of small courage, they
never (unless it be upon necessity) resolve; And they never want reasons to
cover their fearfulness, the which will ever have more power over them then
reason, and experience to have many times trembled in vain. For resolution
proceeds not from the spirit, but from the courage: And these men are so much
the more dangerous, as they are more subtle and cunning, and have more
dexterity to cover their difficulties. He must not be too confident.
But as he may not be resolute, so must he not be so confident of himself, as
he stop his ears to the advice of others; or that relying upon our own
forces, we do not draw into consideration those of our Enemies, yea sometimes
hazard and fortune, which has a good share in the greatest actions, to the end
we may foresee that which may happen. For distrust is the Mother of
foresight, Other qualities necessary for a Councel^^ of Estate.
and foresight the Mother of safety.

Patience is another quality, very necessary in a Council of Estate, not only
to endure opinions contrary to his own, but also to have his reasons weighed,
blamed, Patience.
and contradicted, and to hear many follies which grow amidst their
discourses, even from great Personages. He must hear I say with patience, or
without Jealousy or desire to be followed in his opinions, and not to do as
many which please themselves, to be the Authors of a new ouerture, who with a
spirit of contradiction, full of bitterness, trouble themselves to reprehend
the reasons of such of the Council as are their Enemies, be they never so
good. A vice altogether insupportable. Yet notwithstanding it is not forbidden,
to draw into agitation the reasons of another: but it must be done with
respect; and thereby he shows that he does not seek to divide or surprise the
resolution, but it suffices him to have his reasons understood, and the
inconveniences of a contrary opinion. Eloquence.
Besides these qualities which concern the judgment of integrity, a Councellor
of Estate must know how to explicate himself, and to make his reasons be
understood: and they which of purpose obscure their reasons and intention, for
the uncertainty of the event, are bad Counselors, which understand not what
belongs to Council: for that good Council is measured by the reasons, and not
by the event, no man being answerable for that which happens against all
discourse and reason.

But above all things it is required to be secret: Secrecy.
for a Council divulged, profits no more then a Mine blown up. Of the number
of Counselors of Estate.
Wherefore it is necessary that the number of Counselors of Estate, should not
be great: for in a great number this inconvenience is ordinary.

It is likewise good to charge Counselors often: Of the change of Counselors
of Estate.
for that being nec^ssary they should be instructed in affairs, it would fall
out that their charge would end before they should be able to see those which
were begun, finished, and before they should understand the course and
proceedings; the which is necessary to settle a judgment: This course not able
to be so well represented by the report which others might make, but they might
fail in some particulars, whereon they might ground their opinions. But if for
the quality of the Estate it be necessary to change them; at the least they
must provide in such sort, as the Council be not changed all at an instant:
but having ordained a certain time for every Councellor to assist, their
charges must expire at several times, and the greatest part of the ancient
must remain to instruct the new in affairs, who growing ancient in their
turns, shall instruct others that shall enter.

Of the great number of counselors of estate to be imployde elsewhere.
And if through the ambition of some, the Council of Estate (which ought to
consist of a small number) be too full: the which does usually happen in sick
and corrupted Estates, it shall not be unfitting to employ them elsewhere,
attributing to the greatest part of these Counselors, some Jurisdiction which
may approach in some sort the affairs of Estate; as Philip the fair King of
France did of his Parliament: Charles the Eight with his great Council, and as
they do at this present with the Privy Council. This means is not new, but
has bin anciently practiced by Tiberius, Nero, and some other Emperors
toward the Senate of Rome, making them to forget by little and little the
knowledge of State affairs, by the attribution of a contentious Jurisdiction,
which was in the end established by Adrian in this Senate, in form of an
ordinary Jurisdiction.

CHAP. 20 Of the plurality of Councels of Estate. Of the power of Council, and
of the order of giving their Opinions.
O^ many Councels of Estate.
IN Spain there are many Counsels of Estate, distinguished according to the
diversity of Realms and Provinces, which are united to that Crown. They may
likewise in erecting many Councels to facilitate the expedition of affairs in
a great Realm, employ the more honest men profitably, and prevent surprises;
distinguishing them according to the diverse parts of the Estate, which are,
Religion, Justice, War, Policy, the Treasure, the care of Government, and the
intelligences as well without as within the Estate: This last ought to be
annexed to the Sovereigns person; accompanied with few, least that a great
number should breed confusion, and discover the secret.

As for that of Religion, it should have care to maintain Religion in
Reverence: and if there were many which they were forced to tolerate, it
should serve to cause them to live in peace one with another, and to decide
their differences. That of Justice should not be employed but to order the
differences of Jurisdictions, and to judge those, whereof Justice should be
forbidden to take knowledge.

That of War should serve to regulate the Soldiers both Horse and Foot,
providing for the Munitions, places of strength, Ships of War, Garrisons, and
generally of all that which may depend of a Military order and care. That of
Policy should order the Commerce and Trade with the manufactures, and should
make all establishments necessary, for abundance, the safety, the beautifying
of Towns, the assurance of ways, and the commodity of Rivers. That of the
Treasure should regulate the leuies of money, the assignations, and all that
which concerns the dispensations of the Revenues of the Estate.

Yet there being many affairs so united, The means to avoid the contrariety
of Ordinances.
as they seem to belong as well to one Council as another; to avoid the
contrarieties of Ordinances, if many Councels should take notice of one
business, the most expedient would be, that these Councels should ^aue no
other charge, but to examine that which should be propounded unto them, and to
cause the diversity of their opinions to be reduced to writing, with the
reasons of either side; the which should be read in a Council composed of the
heads of all these Councels, and of two other Counselors of either of them,
chosen by the Council it self, according to the quality of the business; All
which being assembled for the readi^g of the said opinions, they should have no
more to do, but to resolve the business thus digested and examined.

I know that in an Estate, whereas all things are ouerruled by the head of one
or two, who desire to govern the Prince, he that should attempt any thing for
the good of his Estate, they would presently persuade him, that these Councels
would be so many comptrollers which he should give unto himself: That he was
sufficient to provide for all, and that all must depend upon his will, and not
oblige nor subject himself to another man's Reason. But under pretext of
maintayning the Princes Authority, these people seek to continue their own to
work their ends, never representing the Princes affairs but by a cross
means, which may serve their own designs: they engage him many times in
Councels, which prove very prejudicial to his honor, reputation, and Estate.

The power of a Council.
In regard of the Councels power, it ought only to consist in giving Council,
and not to command, Commandment being inseparable with the Sovereignty: And in
Estates, whereas Counselors command that which they Council, they may not
only be termed Counselors but Sovereigns, and if the decree or sentence
seems to have any command in it; yet it is certain that without the
Soueraig^^s commission, no more then the sentence of the Judge it cannot be
executed.

A (...)
In some Councels they have received two kind of Laws: and they have given
power to some to make an ouerture of some affairs, the which having bin
propounded by them, they retired, and left others to deliberate; the which they
call a consultatiue voice. A deliberatiue voice.
Others had power only to deliberate, and to resolve, but not to propound.

Wherefore to take away this superiority in a Council, and to entertain an
equallitie among Counselors, Equallity among Counselors.
the which is of great force to maintain the liberty of opinions; it is fit
that the Counselors should have a consultatiue and deliberatiue voice. Yet
forasmuch as it is necessary to propound, and to bring some order in all sorts
of Companies; it is fitting that he which has something to propound, should
impart it to him that holds the first place in the Council, provided always
that he has no interest.

There is another diversity for the order of opening, Order in giving their
opinions.
either beginning by the greatest, and of most authority in Council, to the
end that the younger and least capable, might more easily choose the best
party, and the soundest reasons: Or in beginning to take the voices of the
youngest and inferiors, and causing them of most authority to give their
opinions last; least that the liberty of advice might not be cut off by the
authority of great men, who are factious and ambitious, and admit no
contradiction.

Which two kinds of delivering their opinions may be practiced according to
the equallity, that is among the Counselors. For if they be equal in power,
it seems most fitting that the most sufficient should deliver their opinions
first: Whereas contrariwise if the Council be mingled with great Lords, and
men of a means condition; they which have least power, must deliver their
opinions first; yet causing them which have only a consultatiue voice, to
deliver their censures first, who prepare the way to such as have a
deliberatiue voice, representing unto the Council all the reasons of either
side, and propounding their own advice: In doing whereof if they err, they
shall be reformed by the others without Jealousy; for that an ambition to
speak, draws after it many times the envy of some, and the jealousy of
others. Augustus demanded their opinions without observing Rank, or Age, to
the end that every man should be^ attentive to the propositions that were made,
and without staying for the advice of next neighbor, he might be always ready
to deliver his own.

I will add one thing, whereof we must have a special care in Council, which
is to call into the deliberation of some business of hazard, they to whom we
are to give the Execution. For it seems that calling t^em, it will make them
more cunning and advised to avoid the dangers which may fall out in the
Enterprise, the which they mean to recommend unto them. Yet it may be of such
a nature, as the difficulties which they shall ^eare, will present themselves
in the Execution, may discourage them and make them grow cold, in danger to
give over the Enterprise. Behold that which ought to be principally considered
in those which give counsel.

CHAP. 21. Considerations for the Prince which is to be Counsell^d.
AS for him that is to be Counseled, we must consider his sufficiency, the
manner of demanding Counsel, to receive it, examine it, to resolve and
Execute it.

S^ffi^^ency and Capacity (...) for a (...).
In regard of Sufficiency, they have always held that there are three sorts of
persons. Some have such a vigor of Spirit, as they alo^e can better resolve
their affairs, then a whole company would do; in the which besides the fear
that the secret would be divulged, the number of good men would be so much the
more rare, as they of whom it is composed are great. Others have not this
vigor or Spirit, but a natural docillity to hear the advice of others, and a
judgment to discern good from Evil: And these, as they are inferior to the
first, so are they Superior to the last; who not able to take advice in their
own heads, and contemning the advice of others, know not how to make choice of
the sounder party.

And although it seems that the first have not any need to seek the counsel
of another; yet as well to free himself from presumption, as to give the more
authority and credit unto their Enterprises, they must communicate them; and
confess that Sufficiency is never so great in any one person, but that many
may add something unto it. And although that this Sufficiency be very
commendable, yet it is dangerous in a Prince, who easily falls into presumption;
and it seems that the docillity which is found in others, yiedling an Ear to
Counsel, is the more safe. Yet if these bring not Judgment to discern good
from evil, this mean Sufficiency would be as dangerous, as if he referd
himself wholly to the Counsel of others: which is an Instrument, whereof they
have sometimes made use to ruin many Estates; for that where the Council shall
consist of incapable men, as well as the Prince; a thing which usually falls out,
when as the Counselors are chosen by him, for that every man seeks his like;
and we much acknowledge some Sufficiency to judge of that of another man, to
make the Election: and in this case the Estate is the sooner drawn to its
ruin, when as the number of Counselors is greatest. But if they whom the
Prince has called to his Council, he worthy and fit to support the burden of
the Estate; and that the Prince be not capable to make choice of good parties
and occasions, and to add the conduct which shall be necessary in the
executions; this council will be fruitles to him. Besides, the Counselors of
Princes are accompanied with ^ealousie one against another; and tending all to
one end, they fi^de out many times public Councels, and make them serve to
their own private interests, striving by many cunning practices, to frustrate
the Designs, and to hinder the increase of reputation one of another. Whereby
it happens, that the Prince having not (for the little sufficiency that is in
him) that authority among his Counselors which were necessary to keep them in
awe, and to hinder the course of these Divisions; nor yet Judgment to discover
the particular Desig^es of every one; he remaynes among so many Counselors,
rather confounded and irresolute, then counseled. Besides that in such a
Council of Wise men, and full of valor, which serve a Prince of little
understanding, there is never so much Friendship and Affection as were to be
desired in Cou^cellors. For that seeing their Prince more inwardly then other
men, and knowing his imperfections and weakness better, the order of Nature
bears it, that in the end they fall to contemn him, the which afterward does
easily turn to hatred; for that the Minister which has some merit in
himself, scorns to obey a man incapable of his Greatness, and unworthy of
his Fortune, long. After hatred and contempt follows the infidelity of
Counselors; so as the Prince must either be sold, or turned up and down
according to the occasions of the will of those which shall be about him, who
in their Council will have more regard to their particular advancement, then
to the greatness of their Master.

A P^i^ce then that desires to reign in his Estate, must make himself capable
to govern, and manage affairs: not that I would advise a Prince who has
sufficiency in himself to have no man about him to give him Counsel; bu^
rather I be^eeue that one of the greatest foundations of his reputation is,
when they shall have an opinion that his own judgment and proper intelligence
of affairs, is assisted by a wise and faithful Council; which is the thing
for the which he must most labor.

But this Council how wise and adui^ed soever, must always be surmounted by
the judgment and capacity of the Prince, so as they must rather serve for an
accessory; then a principal in the government of the Estate: that in
commaundments they acknowledge themselves inferior to the Prince, and not
carry themselves as equals: that in occasions and affairs of importance, they
may rather have power to alt^r, and to make known the difficulties and
inconveniences, but not to resolve: And in a word, the Prince has need of so
much spirit, as his Council may assist him to govern, but not teach him to
reign.

We will therefore conclude, that as a Prince has need of himself, to
maintain himself in life, so harh he need of a good Council, to maintain
the affairs of his Estate: and as without it he cannot be termed a man, so
without Council he cannot be held a Prince.

Wherefore having made choice of those which may Counsel him, Of the manner to
demand Council.
he must carefully take occasion to demand their Council: tha^ is to say,
neither too long before the Enterprise, least it should be discovered; nor too
late, for fear that the Council should prove unprofitable. And if he doubts
that the business will not be held secret, being propounded in a full
Council, or that some of his Counselors for the interest of some great man,
dare not deliver their opinions freely; and he may receive their advice
separately and in secret, and reject the reasons contrary to the Council which
they have given him, to the end he may the better judge what party he shall
embrace; without tying himself to number the voices, but rather to weigh him;
for affairs of Estate ought not to be governed according to the plurality of
voices, if the reasons of either part be then so strong, as they are uncertain
what party they should follow. But above all t^ings a Prince mu^t have a care
in affairs of greatest importance, nor to discover even unto his Counselors
of what opinion he is: Least that they which counsel him should rather se^ke
to furnish him with reas^ns to confirm his opinion and to please him. For
Counselors ought to declare freely what they hold in their consciences
honorable for him, and safe for his Estate.

Some one would oblige the Prince to assist himself at all manner of Councels,
asw^ll to take knowledge of all the affairs of his Estate, as to discover the
capacity of his Counselors, to hinder factions which grow in Council, to
moderate the passions and iealousies of his Ministers, to give more Authority
to his Resolutions, and by his presence to cause the affairs to be treated of
with the respect and gravity that is requisite and necessary.

Yet there being many things which are treated of in the like Councels,
depending of Justice, policy, or the Treasure; besides that this would
ouer-burthen the Prince, in making him to employ the greatest part of his time
in these affairs; he cannot do it without abasing his Authority and Majesty
too much, by this too frequent communication; and it will suffice, that he
assist at most important affairs, or at those whose resolution may increase
his Reputation, contenting himself to provide for that which concerns Peace
or War, with the saf^ty and quiet of his Estate.

An^ to p^euent the inconveniences which happen daily in Councels, where the
Prince does not assist, and to draw the same advantages without assisting,
which he should have by his presence being there, the course observed by the
Grand Seig^our is somewhat considerable. For in the place where they hold the
Diuan or Counsel, there is a window, by the which (without being seen) he may
hear all that is spoken and past in his Council: So as his Counselors
uncertain whether their master hear them or not, observe the same respect,
the same modesty, and the same manner of proceeding, which they will do in his
presence: and after they have held the counsel, they go and make report unto
him of what has past; the which they dare not deliver falsely, not knowing
whether the Prince have heard them. And thus he is informed of all that has
been propoun^ed in his Council. and hears himself if he will, or by some
other, the reasons of all sides; and then after the reports which is truly and
certaynely made unto him, he presently resolves without any demunition of his
Majesty.

The Prince having demanded the advice of his Counselors, To receive counsel.
he must receive it from them all with an equal countenance; without hating
him, which has given him bad counsel: unless he discover some malice. For
Councels having no force if they be not allowed by the Prince, he having found
them good, it is a sign that he has judged, and has been moved by the same
reasons, like to him that gave them: So as the error of judgment having bin
common to both, the blame and the fault ought not to be imputed unto the
Councellor alone: And for that they have never in any Estate established
^ecompences or punishments for good or bad counsels; which are held such
commonly not by the reasons, but by the events, whereof no man can be any way
answereable.

We must therefore diligently Examine, To examine.
an advice or counsel; consider the thing in its self, with all the
circumstances and dependances; prefer the safety of the Estate to all other
considerations; and then to seek the profit by honest courses, which consist
in all the the parts which we represent in this treaty, very necessary for the
establishment, preservation, and increase of the Estate.

Afterward the Prince must duly consider of the Execution of that which they
counsel him; for the Council being of doubtful things, he must advise
whether Fortune may have a greater share, in that which he means to undertake,
then wisdom: and if he finds that he has more need of Fortune, he must beware
how he imbarque himself, especially if the contrary succeed to that which he
desires, he incurres more loss, then he can hope for profit, succeeding after
his desire.

But if necessity reduces him to this point, that he must either loose or
hazard; it were better to tempt Fortune, the which although it did not succeed,
yet at the least he should have this contentment, to have done what lay in him.
Otherwise, he may not lightly imbarque himself in a dangerous Enterprise,
although that at the first sight the peril be not so near. For besides the
danger that every bad resolution carries with it, it draws after it likewise
to maintain it, an infinite number of such like, for that things cannot
remain alone, but are bound one unto another, and inchayned together.

Wherefore we may not have so much respect unto the present, as we forget the
future. For althoug^ that the accidents of Fortune are in such variety, and so
frequent, as they may hinder us from a certain foresight of the future: and
that to have regard to an imaginary fear of a thing which may be or not be, it
seems that this were to embrace the shadow, and to leave the body or
substance.

Yet the greatest part of Errors which are committed in deliberations proceeds
from this, that men suffer themselves too much to be carried away with the
affect^o^ of the present; the which how little soever it be assisted by
Fortune, it seems that it has always greater force and vigor, then the
strongest respect we can imagine of the future. Wherefore he must show himself
very stayed in such affections, and as for the affection of the present, he may
not forget the consideration of the future: but he must accustom himself to
set that which is to come before his Eyes, with such a resentment and
apprehension, as if he saw it or touch it. So he may not for a fear a far
off, forbear to remedy a present mischief.

He may not likewise suffer himself to be carried away by any Example that is
alleged, if all the particularities do not concur. For although that these
comparisons may join at some corner, and that all things hold by some
similitude or likeness: yet there are very few Examples which do not hault:
And the relation which is drawn from Experience, is many times defective and
imperfect, if it be not assisted by discourse and Reason.

Then he must examine the quality of the person which gives the advice,
especially his interest, and above all things he must refuse to counsel a
flatterer, and inuit him that counsels, to speak freely and with courage.

If for the respect of the greatness of the Prince who is counseled, it be
necessary to flatter him; Of the flattery of Counselors and how the Prince
should avoid them.
the Prince shall consider, if the flattery of him that counsels him, (who must
sometimes use, as they say, words of silk) proceeds from cunning and subtilty,
which the Councellor does use to persuade him to that which is for his good; or
with a design to get credit by his pleasing, he enters into this flattery: For
in this last case, the Prince must stop his Ears, and open them to him that
speaks freely, there being no condition of men, that have so great need of
true and free aduertisements then Princes, who undergo a public life, and are
to satisfy and content the opinion of so many people, which as they are
accustomed to do any thing that may divert them from their course, they find
themselves insensibly engaged in the hatred and detestation of their Subjects,
for occasions many times which they might well avoid, without any interest of
their pleasure, if they had been advised and directed in time.

But the manner whereby most Princes live at this day, few men are found that
will practice this Trade, being the office of true Friendship toward the
Sovereign, in a rough and dangerous trial; So as they must not only have
much affection and freedom, but also courage. Flattery is far more safe; for
that by pleasing, it seems they draw nearer unto Friendship: and for that it
is more agreeable to him whom they flatter, it is also more easy for him to
practice that means to flatter.

Contrariwise Truth and Liberty, as if they approached near to contempt,
cannot be so safely practiced with a Prince. Of the truth and liberty which
ought to be in Counselors.
They have their circumscriptions and limits: and many times it falls out, that
(as the World is) they leave truth in the ears of Princes, not only without
fruit, but with prejudice to him that speaks it.

If then the Prince will assure himself on that side, he must encourage one or
two of those which approach nearest unto him, and whom he knows to be best
affected, and freest from contempt of him, Of the prime Ministers of an estate.
to deliver freely unto him in what manner they receive his actions; and he
must choose such men of a mean fortune, and are notwithstanding satisfied and
content, to the end that on the one side they may have no fear to touch their
Masters heart to the quick; least they should thereby lose the course of their
advancement; and on the other side being of a mean condition, they may have
the more communication with all sorts of people. A Prince is not to be
credited, when he brags of his courage, to attend the encounter of his Enemy,
for the service of his glory; if for his profit and advancement he cannot
endure the liberty of a friends words; having no other effect nor aim but to
pinch him by the Ear, the rest of the operation being in his own hands.

We read in the Turks History, that a Bassa called by his Master to the
government of the Estate, A Wise act of the first Minister of an estate to
discharge his duty.
and made Vezir, which is the first charge of the Empire next to the Grand
Siegnour, holding himself not very capable of this charge, he drew certain
Persons secretly unto him, who had charge to collect whatsoever they heard
spoken in the City of Constantinople touching the government of the Estate, to
relate it unto him: And by this means being aduertized of all that was found
good or bad, and of that which they desired to be done or not done, he
governed himself in such sort, and without the help of any other Council,
all things succeeded to his desire, and accomodating his actions to the will of
the people, he was admired by them, who before held him to be incapable of
this charge.

This may be practi^ed by the Prince; but yet he may not forbear to make
choice of a good Council, to examine the propositions of that which by this
means they have discovered, to be desired of the people. In this manner it
shall be easy for a Prince to resolve, be it that he take the advice of
every one secretly and apart; or being assembled, he cause them to deliver
their opinions openly, to the end that by the communication of their aduisoes,
the resolution may be more easy to take, either in following the greatest
number of voices, or in making choice of his opinion that seems the best; and
the resolution taken, the execution must follow with all possible speed;
Celeritie making all things easy, as well for that of it self, it is active
and full of vigor, as for that it gives no leisure to cross a business in
the execution, before they can oppose it.

CHAP. 22. Of the form of Commanding.
THe fourth establishment to be made in an Estate, is the form of Commanding,
in the which we must consider two things; the power of the Commander, and the
justice of the commandment. The power of him which commands is either
sovereign or inferior. Of the power.
The commandment of the sovereign is, either general, or particular: The
general consists in the laws which the sovereign establishes, under which
we comprehend the ordinary orders, customs and statutes.

The law is as it were a pledge and a general safety, which Princes give unto
their subjects, Of the law.
for the entertainment of contracts, and their course of living, which ought
to be maintained and observed, especially amongst them for the general good of
the Estate. For reason alone which God has put into man, being unable to
retain him within the bonds of his duty, and custom to live ill, having made
so great an impression in him, as neither prayers nor admonitions are able to
retire him; it has been needful to employ the authority of laws* and the
force of the Prince, to reduce every man to reason, for fear of punishment,
and by the Establishment of certain rules, to a sure order in the Estate, and
to confirm judgments in Justice. In effect it were dangerous, to leave all to
the judgment of men, in the multitude whereof will grow a confusion of
opinions, if they had not some rule which they ought to follow, and they might
more easily be carried away by hatred or favor: the which cannot happen to
Law-giuers, who making Laws for the future, are not transported with any
private passion but for the public. For although that the Judges were wise
and without passion, yet it is more easy to find a small number of wise men
which establish the Laws, and the for me o^iudging, then to find such a
number as is necessary to be Judges. Moreover, the Laws are made with mature
deliberation, and Judgments are given suddenly according to the occurrents of
affairs: so as the rule is more safe taken from the Law, then if the Prince
gave it himself.

The Laws are of diverse sorts, Diversity of laws.
according to the diversity of Subjects, for the government whereof they are
made. For some rule the power of Offices and Magistrates, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil; and distinguish the function of their Charges, their
Jurisdiction, honor, and pre-eminence one upon another. Others rule the
Treasure; others the military Discipline; others the general Policy; others
Justice, as well in regard of the quality of persons, of contracts, treaties,
and commerce among men; as for the punishment of Crimes, the order and form of
proceeding in Judgments by the parties and Judges. Some are made to contain
the Subject in his duty toward the Prince and Magistrate, and to maintain
Concord and Peace. Finally, the Law must have for his principal end the good
of the Estate, and to provide for all the parts thereof, and for the
inconveniences that may annoy it, and not for any particular profit for him
that has made it: The aim and end of the law.
Otherwise the Reverence which has caused it to be received, would part and be
separated from such commandments, and there would remain nothing but the sole
authority and power. For although they say, that the will of the Prince is a
La^, yet this must not be understood of all that comes into his fancy and will
to do; but only of that which ^e may justly desire: for that the Laws ought
to be made and published, to amend and correct the nature of things, for the
which they mean to establish them, and not to second the appetite of him that
makes them: We must therefore consider in making of Laws, the qualities which
must concur in a Law. The first is, Qualities considerable in the
establishing of laws.
that it be according to public honesty, observing the dignity of persons and
things: that it be just as well for the end whereunto it ought to tend, which
is the public good only, as for the authority of him that makes it, who in
establishing it, ought not to exceed the power that is given him. There is
another quality which concerns the form, to the end that Equality and
proportion may be kept, as in the imposition of Judges: for otherwise it were
not a Law, but a violence, to the which in conscience we are not bound to obey,
but only ^o avoid scandal and sedition. It must likewise be peaceable and
quiet according unto Nature, and the condition of such as ought to obey, and
are Subjects, grounded upon natural reason, and accommodated to the quality of
affairs, and the customs of the Country. For there are laws which are good
in one Country, but would not be so in another. The Laws in like manner must
be fitting for the time, being necessary to govern the Estate, as a pilot does
his ship, according to the wind that blows, and not lightly established.
Moreover, the Law must be profitable to all, or to the greatest part; plain,
least its obscurity breeds some error; brief, and according unto some without
preface, with the commandment only.

Of the shortness of the law.
Yet others are of a contrary opinion. For although that the principal
intention of the Law ought not to be to teach the reason for the which it is
made, no more then the Physician, who is not called by the sick Patient, to
give him a reason of his prescriptions, but to cure him, having more need of
health then Doctrine: yet for that they make Laws for men capable to
understand that which is necessary for the public good, the Prince ought (as
a common Father) not only to make known unto his people the end of the Law,
but also the reason, that he may know that the Ordinances of his Prince are no
less full of reason then command. It is true, Of the absolute com^and of the
Prince.
that when as by such mildnes^e and humanity the Prince preuayles nothing with
his Subjects; then he may with a sufficient excuse v^e his absolute command:
For his duty binds him t^ practice all means to move and induce his Subjects*
to well doing, yea, to employ force, the which in it self is not bad, if it be
well used. For although that the Laws ought not to be against men, yet they
are made to command men; and for that pleasure does many times deceive men,
delighting in things which are pernicious and hurtful; the Prince in making a
Law, must not have any regard to the pleasure or displeasure which his Subjects
may take: but it shall suffice him, that those things which he ordaynes or
commands, may be good and profitable to the public. Yet this is not to say,
that he should not proceed in those courses which may breed a popular
contentment; but contrariwise he must have this principal object after the good
of the Estate. Behold what we are to follow in the establishment of a Law, let
us now see what we are to fly.

CHAP. 23. What we are to to a^oyde in the establishing of L^wes.
AMong other things we must have a special care not to establish any Laws but
such as are very necessary. Of the great number of laws, and the cau^es
thereof.
The multiplic^ty of Laws is ra^^^: then a testimony of confusion then good
orders: For few Laws suffice to entertayne good men in their Duties, and to
punish the wicked if they be well observed. The number of Laws proceeds
commonly from two causes, the one is the ambition and vanity of, those which
command, who to gain the reputation of well ruling, will provide for all, yea
for matters of small moment. The which is a cause that being of this quallity,
they are not observed, and the people accustoming themselves not to obey Laws
of small importance, they afterward do easily dispense with themselves from
doing that which Laws of greater importance commands. Wherefore it is better
to leave the care of such great and weighty things to the Magistrate, who may
provide according to occurrents.

The other cause, from whence the multitude of Laws do usually proceed, is the
bad inclination of the Prince, who having an intent to domineere over the
Magistrates and public, in his particular appetites and affairs, makes what
Laws he can to offend in particular, either those whom he fears or such as he
hates: or of that, from whence he thinks he may draw some profit for his own
particular.

I come unto the observation of Laws, without the which, the establishment
were fruitless. To this observation two things are necessary: the example of
great men, and of those which command; and Severity. For as the Laws
prescribe unto Subjects the rule of well living, Of the observation of laws.
so the Prince ought to give an Example for the observation and entertaynment
of the Laws: And the Prince is called the living Law of the Estate, not only
for his intelligence and power to make a Law; but also for the observation of
that, which they teach by way of commaundment, the Prince by his Example
commands it. When I say the Example of the Prince, I speak not of his person
alone, but of those of his train, of his nearest Favorites, and of the
greatest personages: For it would little avail him to observe the Laws, if he
suffer the great men of his Court to break them. Wherefore he must have an Eye,
for that the Subjects of a mean condition cannot receive a greater contentment
then to see the actions of great persons conformable to the common rule,
conceiving an opinion thereby to have some equality and participation with
them, in acknowledging them equal in this obedience.

As the example of the Prince serves to inuit men to do well, Of severity.
so severity retires and hinders those (whom impunity might abandon) from doing
evil. This severity notwithstanding does not extend to search out and punish
the most secret offenses; but those which may be the cause of bad example.
Likewise it is certain that the punishments or dayned by the Laws, are more
in regard of the scandal then for the Crime, whereof God is the principal
revenger, and not so much to punish the offense past, as to strike terror into
the wicked for the future, by the rigor of punishment, not to commit the like
fault. And although the intention of the Law be not to hinder any man, yet for
that men sometimes commit errors, When the Prince may dispense wi^h ^h^ laws.
which deserve (either in regard of the person which commits them, or for some
other good respect) compassion and mercy: in this case the Prin^e may moderate
the rigor of the Law by a favorable temper, or give him an absolute pardon, if
the Subject deserves it; and that herein he cannot bring impunity in other
things, or in equality which breeds scandal to good men to the prejudice of
the Estate.

For this effect pardons must not be too frequent, but for a Subject that is
full of merit, How he ought to govern himself i^ severity.
and they must be pleasing to the most part. But when he shall be forced to
show himself severe, as it is necessary sometimes, that in the disobedience of
the Subjects the Prince should be rigorous: if punishment may be called ^igour:
this ^igour ingendring usually fear, the which seldom accompanied with love,
he must amidst his actious of severity, extend his bounty to good men: and then
the fear which was full of hatred, will be converted in^o Reverence. This
shall suffice for that which concerns the general commands of the
Sovereign, which are made by Laws, Ordinances, and other such kind of
commands.

CHAP. 24. Of the Princes particular Commands.
AS for the particular Commands which are made upon occasions which happen
daily, the form is in a manner equal: for that it ought to be constant in
that which they have first undertaken to establish, and not to change upon
every difficulty which may happen, but contrariwise they should strive to
surmount al^ the crosses which may present themselves. This form of Command
shall be like unto the other accompanied with severity, being needful to p^euent
disobedience in small matters: for that this vice like unto others, grows by
degrees. But above all, he which commands, must deal in such sort, as the
Sovereign command may depend wholly on him, and be tied to his Person: not
that the Prince should therefore draw unto himself all the government, and the
whole mann^ging of the Estate: for besides that he should find himself
^uer-bu^thened, and that in the multitude of aff^ires th^re will be many ill
cared for, and worse executed, ^e should change his Principality with euny; and
his subjects seeing themselves deprived of the administration of Offices, would
grow cold in the affections which they ought to bear him. But the Sovereign
authority ought not to be imparted to any one, nor the distribution of
Recompenses and Offices, nor the absolute command of forces; least that he to
whom the Prince has given this power changing his affection and will, should
take occasion to a^tempt against the Estate, having the commodity ^f such an
advantage: whereof there are but too many examples Histories.

We have treated of the Commandments of a Sovereign power: Let us now observe
the form of their Command, whose power is inferior, and to whom the charges
of the Estate are distributed, to have care and to watch over that part of the
Estate which is committed unto them.

CHAP. 25. Of Magistrates.
IT being necessary that of all the parts of an Estate, there should not any
remain without government; one alone being unable to embrace all; being
likewise unfit, that the Sovereign should be troubled in matters which may be
done better by those which are inferior unto him: it has been held necessary
to give order, that this supreme authority, yet without suffering any
demuniti^n, should be dispersed into many parts; and that power should be given
to a certain number of men, to hea^e, ordain, or provide particularly, for
affairs of least importance, and the which are all so many branches of the
Sovereignty, out of which they grow, and are supported as by their stem, and
by the which reciprocally the Sovereignty beings forth flowers, leaves, and
fruits.

The distinction of these inferior powers is diverse, Distinction of Officers
and Ministers of an Estate.
according to the diversity of the parts of the Estate. For some are ordained
to free the Prince from the care and particular safety of the Provinces, and to
watch over them; as that of Governors: Others have the care of Religion:
Others of War^; Others of the Treasure; Others of Policy* others of Justice;
Others of Judgments, which must be given upon the controversies of private
persons, or for the punishments of crimes; Others must have an eye to the
affairs abroad; as Ambassadors or Agents; Others are destinated to assist the
greatness of the Prince, to d^spose of his house and train, and to s^rue him
i^ his Court.

And as every one of their parts is subdivided into many others; so according
to these subdiuisions, the charges are in themselves distinguished into
functions: and in this diversity there are some which have power to command,
proceeding from the sole authority of the Prince, or from that of the Laws,
the which have attributed this power to the Office. Others are erected for the
service of the Estate; Others for the execution of commandments.

Some having distinguished public Offices, a^cording unto honor,
jurisdiction, and command. For some are without honor, jurisdiction, or
command; and in this rank they place all those which are destinated for the
service or execution of the superiors commandments, as Registers, Notaries,
Cryers, Sergeants, Trumpets* and such like. Others are with honor, yet without
power to command or to judge; as Ambassadors, Counsels, and Secretaries of
Estate, Receivers of the Treasure, and most part of the Officers of the Princes
train. Others have honor and jurisdiction, but no power to command, as
Prelates. Others have honor and power to command, but no jurisdiction, as the
Consuls in old time at Rome, and at this present the governors of Provinces,
and the Kings Procurators. Others have honor, jurisdiction, and power to
command, and these are properly called Magistrates.

CHAP. 26. Of the differences betwixt Officers and Commissaries.
IT were a fruitless thing to busy my self here, to Discourse particularly
of the duties and power attributed to every public office: For that it is
diversely practiced, not only in several estates, but also in the same Estate,
as it is held most expedient for the public good, to increase the power of
the one, and to diminish that of another. And relating only that which is most
generally observed, I will content my self to add unto these former
distinctions one other, which is drawn from the form in the which a power is
given to those which are employed in public charges.

For charges are gi^en either by Office or by the way ^f Commission: If in an
Office, Of officers and Commissioners and of their difference.
he that has the charge is called an Officer: If by Commission he is termed a
Commissioner. The charge of an Officer is regulated by the Law, or by the Edict
of the erection of the office: and by the letters of Commission the charge of a
Commissioner is limited. This difference is betwixt an Officer and a
Commissioner, that the charge of an Officer is ordinary, and has a perpetual
course, although that in regard of the person the Exercise be limited to a
certain time* and the charge of a Commissioner is extraordinary, and reuokable
at the good pleasure of him that has given the Commission.

There are four things to be considered in a Commission: The person from
whence it proceeds; Consideration to be made upon a Co^^ission
the Direction; the Charge; and the time when it is to expire. In regard of the
first, Commissions proceed either from the Sovereign, or from his Officers, or
from other Commisioners deputed by the Sovereign, Of the person from whence
it proceeds.
who may commit, there happening some lawful let, unless it be forbidden, or
there be a question of State, or of the life and honor of some persons: For in
this case they cannot sub-deligate.

Of the directi^^^^ a Com^ission.
For the direction, a commission is directed either to an Officer, or to a
private person: If to an Officer, it is either a thing depending of his Office;
and in this case, the the letters are neither Executorie of his duty, then
letters of commission, if the time or place be not changed; and differs from
that which is mentioned in the Edict of the Execution of the Office. In this
concurrence^ the ordinary knowledge is to be preferred before the commission;
even as the quality of the Officer is preferrable to that of a Commissioner,
and the acts of the Officers more assured then those of Commissioners. But if
it be a matter which belongs not unto them, in regard of their Office, and that
there be a difference in some circumstance; then he cannot get it as an
Officer, but only in quality of a Commissioner.

Of the charge of a Commiss^on.
In the charge we must consider the end, for the which it is given us; and the
power we have by it. The end concerns either the instruction, or the
knowledge of some business: And the power regards the decision, judgment or
resolut^^n, and the comm^ndement for the execution of that which we have
resolved. I call instuction all that which is to be done, to bring a business
to an Estate ready to be resolved and determined. The knowledge given unto a
Commissioner, is either of factor of ^ight; or of both together, wherein he
shall carry himself, as w^e will she^ by and by, treating of the duty of the
Magistrate toward the commandment of the Prince: the power to judge is g^uen
either definitiuely, and without an appeal, or without execution if there be
an appeal; or else with power to (...) in execution that which we have
resolved, notwit^standi^g any opposition or appelation, and without prejudice
thereof. For the power of Command, either it is given the Commissioner for the
execution of that which he had ordained; or the Commissioner is commanded to
execute that himself, which another had decreed, having no power to command a
third: And this last kind of Commission, is directed to inferior Officers, who
are simple executioners of the commandments of their superiors.

From the consideration of that which I have said we may gather, The duty of a
Commissioner.
that the duty of a Commissioner is to r^gulate himself, according to the
terms of his Commission, the which he may in no sort exceed. For although
that this general clause be inserted to carry himself according to the
quality of persons, and as he shall see matters disposed, he may add or
diminish to the instructions that are given him in writing, according to his
wisdom and discretion: Yet this must be understood of the accessory of his
charge, and of the smallest matters, for of those which are important he may
not dispose without special command. For although they refer it to his
wisdom and discretion; yet the ignorance of a Commissioner were not
excuseable, this clause being to be understood according to the examination of
an honest and sufficient man, especially when it concerns the public good of
the Estate.

It remains now to know when the Commission expires. It cease, if he which
granted it comes to die: Of the time when a Commission should expire.
if the thing or person for the which the charge is given, be no m^re in
being: If he which has given the Commission reuokes it; if the Commissioner
during the Commission, obtaines an Office or Magistracy, equal to him who
granted the Commission, so as the business be entire* or that being begun
it may be left, without prejudice to the public or to private persons.

CHAP. 27. Considerations upon the Establishment of Officers and Magistrates.
THese distinctions known, many other points are to be considered in the
Establishment of those, to whom this power of Command under the Sovereign, or
to manage other affairs concerning the Estate is attributed, be it by Office
or Commission; but principally we must consider the number of those that are to
be employed: The authority of him which has established and employed them; the
qualities of those whom they put into offices; the form of proceeding in these
Establishments; the time they ought to remain in Authority; and finally the
duty of principal Magistrates, as well toward the Sovereign and the Laws, as
to other Magistrates that are equal or inferior, and toward particular
persons.

^ the number o^ ^ffi^e^.
The number of Officers or Ministers in one charge is b^an^ed by many; and yet
it is more safe to commit a (...) to many ^^en to one. First, for that they
watch one another, The (...) a (...) then (...).
and as it were through jealousy, every m^nst^ies up i^ compa^^^n to Execute
his charge the better: And (...) ^^uer it many times happens, that after they
have made E^^^tion of some, they do not answer the opini^n that was conceined
of them; in which case there b^i^g many, one helps and releiues another. The
more they are, the more difficulty they will be corrupted; and if a^y be, their
corruption shall have the less force to commit a bad (...); ore alone, or few
having no power to (...) many, and it is a difficult thing that all should
agree together to deceive.

Mor^ouer the ordinary i^conueniences, as sicknes^e or other natural
hindrances, befalling a Minister, if he be alone, his charge (which it may be
is necessary for the public) will remay^e in suspense and without exercise,
and the public affairs by this means delayed, not without prejudice to the
Estate.

As for the plurality of Officers, which grows from the plurality of Charges,
the charges being distinguished one from another, so as they cannot be
confounded; so as this plurality is so far from being hurtful or
prejudicial unto the Estate, as it is profitable. By this means no part of
the Estate is neglected: you content and pacifi^ the ambition of many, who
living privately in idleness, would seek to employ themselves in some
innovation: and you bind them to the preservation of the Estate, for that they
would fear that an alteration would change the order, and by consequence
impair their authority.

But as in this diversity of charges, I^conueniences g^owing from the plurality
of officers; and the means to a^oyd them.
we must provide that confusion may not trouble, neither the Officers in their
charges, nor private men in their business: We must avoid irresolution which
is ordinary in a multitude, and the tediousness of affairs, which happens
when as many take knowledge of one thing one after another. Irresolution will be
aduoyded, not in reducing the affairs to the Knowledge of one alone, or of
two, but to a competent number, according to the quality of business, and
those must be unequal, to the end that the plurality of voy^es may decide the
business, and that they may not be subject to be divided in opinion. The
teadiousnes would be avoided in cutting off the degrees of those which are to
take Knowledge one above another; and it seems that two degrees would suffice.
But they must avoid in the one and the other, a plurality in the charge of the
treasure of the Estate, where the people is oppressed, by the fees or rights
attributed to Officers: the which may be done by two means. The first in
giving more honor unto Offices, and less wages and fees: And the other in
giving them hope to ascend by degrees unto greater dignities.

This means likewise will serve to make the greatest affect and seek the
meanest Offices, making them know that they cannot come to the greatest before
they pass through the others; and there will always remain a place for the
Princes favor, making choice of one among many which are in the same charge,
to raise him unto a greater dignity, and this order may also serve to cause the
affairs to be managed with more Integrity. For they which desire to advance
themselves, will fear that doing otherwise they shall be rejected when they
desire to rise. In like manner the Capacity will be greater in such, as shall be
ad^anced to more eminent charges. For that having past through many degrees,
they will have more knowledge, both of the affairs and of the manner how to
manage them.

CHAP. 28. Of the creation and nomination of Magistrates, and Officers.
THE Magistrate or Officers, even the principal ought to be made by the
Sovereign, The creation and choice of officers, must be made by the Sovereign
only.
being one of the greatest marks of Sovereignty. The which I mean not only
for the creation and erection of offices, but for the choice of persons: there
being no greater error (although ordinary in Princes) then to rely upon some
other, for the choice of a man to advance him to so^e Office.

And we must not wonder if they be ill served, although their intent be good;
nor if the Laws be so ill executed: For that having no will to take the
Pains, to search out and examine the merit of their principal subjects; they
cannot dispose of Offices proportionably to their Natures and capacities. For
besides that there is a difference, That the charges must be distributed
proportionably, according to the nature and capacity of them.
in regard of the understanding betwixt affairs of importance, and those of
less moment in the Execution: there must be more courage in the greater, and
less subtilty in the less: which are two principal parts which seldom join
together: no more then in Iron tools, where we see that a knife for that it
has the edge finer, will do an effect that a Hatchet cannot do; and he that
will employ a Hatchet like unto that of a knife, he shall make it unprofitable
to cut any hard substance, wherein they employ it usually: so as they must
employ every tool to the use for which it is made.

For although that affairs ought to be managed by discretion, and not by
inclination: yet it behoues the wisdom of the Prince, to know that most part
of the affairs of this world are governed more by inclination then otherwise.
Wherefore he must cunningly make use of this defect. For Nature has given to
every man's condition some good thing in exchange of some defect which is found
in him: if it has given to some one a flownesse to begin, it has likewise
imparted an obstinacy to continue and finish the work, ballancing his
negligence with pers^uerance. To those which by Nature shall be sudden and
hasty, and who in regard of their impatiency, strive to do things out of
season; she has given hardiness, by the means whereof they have effected
great matters.

These Defects being common among men, the Prince shall accommodate himself,
and distribute the charges according to every man's humor and inclination; and
to treat a business, it shall suffice to inform him whom he means to
employ, of the grounds and substance of the business, and to leave the rest to
him to manage according to his natural inclination, be it grave, modest,
severe, or otherwise: for that they may use diverse means tending to the same
end; and if it be forced, the business will not succeed. But in making choice,
he must consider, that the humor and sufficiency may be proportionable to the
business, and to the humor of those with whom he is to treat. The same must
be observed for all those whom they employ in charges and public affairs.

And although it were to be desired that in the mannaging of affairs,
Principal qualities required in an officer and Magistrate.
they might have men that were discreet, and of great sufficiency* yet for that
these two qualities do seldom mee^e together in so high a degree as were to
be desired; it were better to choose them of a mean understanding, so as they
be honest men: for that his sharp subti^ty proceeds from choler, to the which
such men are subject to suffer themselves to be tran^ported for a small matter;
And moreover having a good conceit of themselves, and a bad of others, they
can hardly agree with any man. Besides they are usually of small foresight,
for the little leisure their promptness gives them; and for the passion which
blinds them, they are many times desirous of novelties. For never allowing
those orders which are made with a mature deliberation and their quickness of
spirit, furnishing them with others, which in their opinions seem better; they
strive to purchase belief, and in this attempt they sometimes cause trouble.

They which are of a mean understanding, support the accidents which happen
more easily; and when as they find themselves in an Estate well ordered, and
governed by good laws, they maintain themselves long. Such men most commonly
are inclined to Fleagme. And if by a breeding contrary to their nature, they
have not been stirred up to ambition, they obey more willingly then the rest;
for that their humor being gross, the impression which nature has bred, is
more firm, and the desires and appetites stronger.

The vl^es and defects are as well to be considered as the virtues, in the
election of Magistrates and Officers.
But in choosing Magistrates and Officers, they must not only consider the
virtues of Men, but also the vices and natural defects, which they may have;
and to observe if these defects be so powerful, as they may hinder him in the
exercise wherein they mean to employ him. As for example, in a Judge, there is
no doubt but a just Man for his Justice ought to be chosen; but if he be
fearful, assure your self, if he be to give sentence against some great man,
he will leave Justice to adhere to safety. Moreover a Magistrate must love and
understand the Laws: For loving them he will observe them; and loving and
understanding them, he will make others capable to observe them.

But to make the choice of Officers easily, An easy means to make a good choice.
the means would be (as we have formerly said) to make many degrees, and to
choose out of the last degree, him whom they mean to advance to the next, and
so from degree to degree: For they should know by their actions what they would
be before they make choice of them.

This shall suffice for the principal qualities of Magistrates and Officers.
Let us now come to the form of making them.

CHAP. 29. Of the form and manner to Create and make Magistrates and Officers:
And of the time of their Charges.
THey are made either by election or by lot, Three kinds of creating and making
Magistrates.
or by both together. The election or choice is referred to one alone who names
and chooses whom he pleases, which is the ordinary manner in all
principallities; or else it is referred to many; and is done either by voice,
or in lifting up the hand and voice; By election. By lot.
or by billets or by beans. The Lot is cast, either upon certain Citizens, out
of which they will choose some one to employ in some charge; or upon all those
which are of the same age or the same condition, out of which they will
likewise by Lot draw one or two to advance them to some Office. The Lot and
choice concurres together diversely. For either they choose a certain number by
voices, out of which afterward they desire to draw one to be an Officer; or
having drawn many by Lot, they give them power to choose one amongst them, By
lot and election together.
which is held most capable.

In this difference it is to be observed, that the discontent of those which
are not chosen is the less, when the Lot proceeds the choice, then when the
choice goes before the Lot. Wherefore in places whereas hatred is
irreconcilliable, it were better to make use of this last kind, then of the
first.

Let us now see what time Officers ought to remain in the exercise of their
charges. This is diversely observed. In some Estates they continue them during
life: In others they are limmited to a certain time. The continuance of
Officers is either for life or a certain time.
In some for a year; in others for two; and in others, although they were
continued in their places during life, yet being many in the same charge, they
made them serve alternatiuely one after another.

They which have been of opinion to make Officers temporary, Reasons and
considerations to make Officers for a time.
and not to continue them during life, had for their principal consideration
to abate the insolence and pride which a long command brought with it; as also
to have means to call Officers to an Account, having given over their charges,
fearing they should not be able to draw them so easily, being still in
authority: In like manner to prevent the impunity of those, which had
transgressed in their Offices. To make many pertakers of the Estate, not only
to satisfy the ambitious, to cut off discontments; but also to recompense many
good men, and to make more capable of affairs, and to stir them up to the care
of the public. Some also have been of this opinion, to hinder that the
government might not be usurped by few men, who would make the rest subject:
having been often seen by many examples, that the continuance of command has
made usurpations easy, not only upon popular estates, but also in
principalities and seignouries; the Offices and charges for life having been
made hereditary and patrimonicall in many estates.

They which would perpetuate them, Reasons and considerations to perpetuate
Offices during life.
have had other consideration: For that making the Magistrates Annall, or for a
short time they leave their Offices before they are informed of their duties;
so as the Estate falls always into the hands of incapable men, and by these
sudden and frequent changes, most part of affairs remain undecided, Wars
begun left imperfect, Suits and differences laid by, and punishments and
executions delayed. There is another consideration, which is, that the time
being short, the Merchants study to do their business speedily: and this
change brings nothing, but new starued hors-leaches, which must be filled;
whereas they which are already full by their offices, might give more ease unto
the people.

And as from new servants grows the envy of Families, so from new Magistrates
proceeds the fall of Estates, which bring new Counsels, new designs, new
Laws, new Customs, new Edicts, new kinds of living, and new Judgments.
Tiberius to withdraw the great men of Rome from the knowledge of public
affairs, and to assure those the more whom he employed in Offices, he
continued them during life. Wherefore to avoid the greatest part of the
inconveniences which are found in either party; you must consider the form of
the Estate, and the humor of the subjects.

Popular Estates are maintained by the continual change of Magistrates, The
change of Offices and Magistrates necessary in a popular Estate,.
to the end that every one according to his quality may have his part, as they
have in a sovereignty, and that equallitie (the nurse of a popular Estate) may
be the better entertained by the annual succession of Magistrates; least that
the custom of commanding long, should cause some one to desire to seize upon
the Sovereignty: the which is a consideration which they ought to have in
Seignouries, and Estates governed by few persons.

In Principallities it is not needful to teach Subjects to Command, but to
obey. And being necessary to retain them in their duties, they cannot assure
themselves but of few to maintain the rest. Means to prevent the usurpation
of the Estate by the continuance of officers ingreat charges.
Yet to prevent that the continuance of a great charge should not make some one
dream of the usurpation of the Estate, they may in continuing other Officers in
their places, balance the power of great men, in giving them companions as
great as themselves: or after the expiration of some time, to cause them to
pass from one charge to another, which has more honor but less power.
Wherefore some have held it fit, to distinguish the charges whereon the force
depends, from those to whom they will give authority; and to make others above
them, who shall have more honor then authority or power.

This course is observed by the Pope and the Seignoury of Venice. The practice
of the Pope and Seignoury of Venice, in the disposition of great charges to
prevent usurpation.
The governments depending on the Church, the authority is given to a
Clergyman for the government, but the force is committed to another, who
depends immediately on the Pope; yet having charge, in that which shall concern
the government, to assist the resolutions of him that has the authority. In
governments depending on the Seignoury of Venice, a Gentleman of the
Commonweal commands: and for the Forces a Captain of the Seignoury, who has
charge to assist him. But in neither of these Estates, the Governor and he
which commands the Forces, are not linckt together, as the one would favor the
usurpation of his Companion. For as the Governor would not allow of his
usurpation that commands the Forces, for that it cannot be done but against
his authority: so he cannot expect and assistance from him, fearing that having
made this ouerture, and the other making show to yield unto it, being Master of
the forces, the authority of the Estate and governor being weakened by this
enterprise, he would chase him away, and make himself Master of the
government. And these charges being not the most honorable in an Estate, but
there being others more eminent, those which enjoy them, aiming at the honor
of the others, study not to settle themselves there; but contrariwise some
affect to be made Cardinals, and to be drawn from those places, and the others
to attain unto the chief Offices of the Seignoury.

Kings who have but one sort of people to employ in governments, make use of
other means, The practice of Kings and Princes upon the same subject.
some make governments triennall, and not only the governments of Provinces,
but also of Cittadels and Forts, causing that these depend not on the others:
but in certain things, and accompany the Governor with forces; which are not
particularly at their devotion, but only ^o far forth as the Governors
shall contain themselves in the Princes service. But if the Governors cannot
be changed, they may change the forces which ought to assist them.

But forasmuch as the Prince ought to be Master, That the change of principal
Officers and Magistrates is necessary for the safety of the Prince and peace of
the people.
and dispose freely of great places, it seems that he might give them for a
certain time; and the affairs so requiring it, they might continue them to
the same persons, if he thought it fit; if not he might take them into his
hands, and deliver them to others, without any cause of coffeehouse to those
from whom he had taken them. For this express limitation of time would work
two effects: The one that they which are advanced to these places; entering into
them, would resolve to leave them: the other, that being certain they must go
forth, they will never think to become Masters, and settle themselves: whereas
the time not being limmited, every one will strive to continue in his place,
and there to build his designs; but also will desire to bring in after him
some one of his Children or Kinsmen. And if the Prince desires to retire him,
he must buy his place of him, or cause it to be bought by some other; which is
to bring in a venality, more shameful and dangerous in an Estate, then any
other abuse that can be imagined. We will therefore conclude, that this change
in the government of Provinces, and the command of great Troops or Companies,
be it of Soldiers or others which have great authority in the Estate, is
necessary for the safety of the Sovereign, and the peace of the Subject.

But for that in doing this altogether, they which would desire to continue in
their charges, Prudence required in this change.
might plot together and trouble the Estate, to maintain themselves; he must
change them one after another, causing the time of their charges to expire at
diverse terms.

That you may not give great commands in a Province to those that were borne
there.
There is another consideration which has been discreetly and wisely made in
great Estates, not to give great commands in a Province to those which are
Natives, not only to avoid the Iniu^tices which such persons may commit as
well in favor of their Kinsfolks and Friends, as in hatred of their Enemies;
but also to avoid the contempt of his Authority which gives these charges,
which proceeds commonly from the Jealousy of those of the Country, who hold
themselves equal, and sometimes greater then he that is advanced. But if he
that is made Governor be so great, as they need not fear this Jealousy,
yet the Prince must make use of this means, to avoid the swelling authority
which he may get in the Province by his own means, or by that of his
Kinsfolks and Friends, to the prejudice of his Master. Our ancient Ordinances
conformable therein to those of the Romans, had therein very well provided,
especially in regard of Bayleifes and Seneshals, who were the ancient
Governors: But they have been and are yet very ill governed and observed.

It auayles not to say, that to facilitate the obedience of Subjects, they have
been forced to take this course; the Subject obeying more willingly one of his
Province, who he thinks would have the same affection like himself for that
which concerns the good thereof, the which a Stranger and unknown unto him
would not do, whom he imagines to be unlike in humor and will. For this were
to make the Prince subject to his Officer, and to make the obedience of the
people depend more on the credit which the Officer has, then of the Authority
which the Prince ought to have over his Subjects, who obey not the Prince, but
so far forth as it shall please the Officer; and the Officer losing his
credit, the Prince shall be no more obeyed.

But if in a new Estate to settle himself, it is very fitting to make use of
those which have most credit with his Subjects, the Princes authority having
not yet taken root in their minds; but I will not thereby infer that he must
continue it: but contrariwise this authority being acknowledged, to settle it
absolutely, the obedience must immediately depend, and they must obey the
Officer so far forth as he has authority from the Prince, and not for the
particular credit he has among the people.

CHAP. 30. Of the duty of the principal Officers and Magistrates.
AS for the support of the body, it is not sufficient that the Head be in good
Estate, but the other members in like manner must do their function: So in an
Estate, it is not sufficient for the Prince to do his Duty, but the Officers,
and especially the principal Magistrates of the Estate, should likewise do
theirs.

But I should be tedious, if I would relate here all the whole Duty of every
Officer: only I will deliver in general terms that which concerns the Duty
of such as have Jurisdiction and command together, or the one and the other
divided; as those which are more considerable and worthy of observation in the
mannaging of the Estate. Their Duty is considered in four diverse Subjects:
either toward the Laws, or toward the Sovereigns Commandments; Wherein the
Duty of Officers and Magistrates do consist.
or toward the other Magistrates; or toward private persons. Under the Name
of the Laws we comprehend the Ordinances and Customs, which oblige the
general. For the regard of Ordinances, the Duty of the principal Magistrates
is, Of the duty toward the laws.
to examine those which they will make, in that which belongs to Justice,
decency, and public profit and commodity; and from the consequence to make
their remonstrance unto the Sovereign before they declare or publish them, if
they find any thing to be reformed and amended.

As for those which are already received, they must cause them to be strictly
observed, and restore the old abolished for want of use, before they put them
in execution: otherwise it would be a very unjust thing, and resenting tyranny,
after they had for a long season contemned an Ordinance, to proceed suddenly
against those who having not observed it, had made a breach: The common error
being not only excusable, but also held for a Law, if the Law of Nature does
not resist.

But for that the Laws are not sufficient to govern an Estate, for that they
ordain only in general, the Lawgiver, or Prince being unable to foresee an
infinite number of particularities which happen in affairs: For this cause the
Magistrate is established, to examine the particularities, and to accommodate
the Law thereunto by a just and upright interpretation; the which is taken
either from the words of the Law, or from the intention of him that made it, or
by the induction or conclusion which may be drawn from it.

In regard of the words of the Law, How the Magistrate ought to carry himself
in the interpretation o^ of the words of the law.
you must observe these Rules: First, not to take them nor interpret them
contrary to the intention of the Lawgiver: Secondly, you must see if the other
clauses of the Law do correspond and agree with the interpretations which we
give. But if by reason of ambiguity, and the diverse significations of words,
there be obscurity, they must seek the proper signification either from the
common manner of speaking, or from that which was peculiar to him that drew the
Law; if it did not plainly appear, that the intention of the Lawgiver had
been wholly contrary to the proper signification of words.

If there be found a double interpretation, taken from the propriety of words,
and the common use of speaking; they shall follow the mildest; and if the words
be obscure, they must have recourse to custom, and to that which is practiced
in that regard. But if the interpretation be notwithstanding doubtful, they
must follow that which shall be most proper for the matter, to the which it must
be referred. And if notwithstanding all this they cannot draw any
interpretation suitable to the business, or to reason; he must cause it to be
interpreted by those who have made the Law; or cause a declaration to be made
by the Sovereign. Thus the Magistrate must carry himself in the
interpretation of the words of the Law. In the interpretation o^ the int^n^ion
of the law.
But in the interpretation of the intention of the Law, there are other Rules:
either they restrain the Ordinances to certain ^ases, or they extend them to
many others then those which are specified. They restrain the ordinances
commonly, when as the reason which seem to have been the cause of the
ordinance, does not extend but to certain cases, and cease in all the rest,
in regard of certain circumstances; for the reason of the Law failing, the
disposition can take no place.

But to seek out the reason of the Law, we must consider, whether it be
expressed by the Law it self, or gathered by the Interpreters; and to draw from
thence the condition of things whereof the Law speaks, or if it be uncertain.
For if it be expressed by the Law, either the Law is formal in the case that it
is in question, and then without doubt the Law must be followed; Or if it be
not altogether formal, you must consider whether there be not some contrary
Circumstances which hinder the reason of the Law, that it takes not place in
the business that is in questi^n: And they shall do the like, if the reason
be not expressed in the Law, of the execution whereof they treat, but in another
fact upon another subject. But if the reason be gathered from Interpreters, you
must see if they can yield no better: And then you must follow it, restrayning
it; if it be particular, and extending it if it be general. But if it be
doubtful, and ordaynes generally, you may not in this doubt in any sort
restrain the effect of the Law, unless it be in things that are odious and
hurtful: And whereas the Law shall be limited in certain cases, they must
not easily extend it to others upon pretext of equity, unless there were an
Identite of reasons, especially in things which concern the rigor of the Law,
whereas the case not expressed is held for omitted. But in such occurrents, they
shall govern themselves according to the common Law, to the which all the
Ordinances, if it may be, must be referred; to the end that in all the Laws
of the estate, uniformity may be observed, and natural equity followed,
whereby all the actions of men should be governed, and regulated.

Wherefore the case not being expressed in the Law, Examinat^on of the reason
of the law.
but only the reason being known whereon the Law is grounded* It shall be
easy to examine if this reason may take place, in that which presents it
self, in concluding from the general to the particular, from the principal
to the accessory, and by the other means of induction. Thus allowing one of
the contraries which have no mean, we may induce that the other is forbidden:
And in like manner, if the Law forbids one thing to avoid a mischief which may
follow; we may induce that it likewise forbids all other things, which may
breed the like mischief, although they be not expressed. And so many
consequences may be drawn from the Laws, and referred to diverse examples,
whereof the reason would be easy to apply from one to another.

Wherefore to recollect my self, That we must stand to the authority of the
law, and make no questions upon equity.
and to explain more at large what I have said, as long as the Law is
certain, we must stand firm to its authority, and make no subtle
distinctions upon equity: For that the Laws are published to be observed in
their terms and tenor, and not to be disputed of: I say so far forth as it
is plain and not obscure. But if it be obscure, they shall follow the
interpretation that is most received by use; so as it be not altogether
contrary to natural reason. But if use fails us, we must in the diversity
of opinions, follow that which is supported by example: yet we must examine
the example duly, to see if they agree in the cause, and principal
circumstances.

When as use and examples fail, they shall choose the opinion which shall
approach nearer to natural equity then to rigor; and that which shall be
more conformable to the intention of the Law, then that which shall be drawn
from the subtle interpretation of words: And that which shall be taken from
the true Interpretation of words, then from similitudes and conjectures: For
that all similitudes halt; and conjectures never conclude directly: Or from
that which shall be received, or most conformable to that which the ancients
have held, for that we may not slightly leave the opinion of the ancient. But
when we cannot judge which opinion is the most just, we must consider which
is the safest, and that which is approved by most men, and by the wisest, more
sortable to the business that is in question, and which has in it less
inconvenience.

Behold how the Magistrate ought to carry himself, in the interpretation of
the Laws. Of the execution of laws and ordinances.
The other part of the Maiestrates duty is the execution, for the which he must
enter into other considerations: And first from what time the Law or ordinance
ought to take place; when they bind the Subject; and who they are that are
bound. For the first, you must understand that the last ordinances, being
contrary to the precedent, From what time the law o^ ordinance does bind.
derogate from them: But the last cannot take place, but for differences to
come, and not for those which are decided, or hanging in judgment by appeal.
And the ordinance is in force from the day of the publication, and from that
time it binds every man for the future, which is for the second point.

(...) are (...) a (...)
For the third, the Princes law does not bind the subjects which are gone to
reside in the territory of another Prince. Yet if the ordinance be prohibitiue,
they must consider if the prohibition or defense be made in regard of
something, which is in the territory of him which has made the ordinance: For
then a stranger or the subject of another Prince should be bound. But if it be
in regard of persons, that the prohibition is made and in favor of the
subjects; the Princes subject is bound not to contradict it, although he
remain in the territory of another Prince. But if it be in hatred of the
subject, he that is out of the territory of the Sovereign, which has made
the ordinance, is not bound. If the prohibition be made for solemnity, which
they desire to have observed in some act, it does not oblige the subject out
of the territory of his Prince, for that in the observation of solemnity, they
regard the place where the act is made.

As for other persons whom the ordinance may bind, they must distinguish
whether they be named in the ordinance by their names, or specified by their
quallitie and condition, or if there be no designation. The name or the
condition being specified, the ordinance does not extend to those which are of
another name, and another quality. But if there be no quality specified, the
ordinance binds not only all those which gave consent to the publication, but
also such as remain in the place where it is observed, were they strangers:
whence this distinction proceeds, that in things that are personal, proceeding
from contracts, solemnities, and acts of voluntary Jurisdiction; they must
follow that which is observed in the place of their abiding, but in that which
is of the realitie of things; they shall be bound to that which is received in
the place where the thing is situated.

Ordinances are in force, Of the ^^^ce of laws or ordinances.
not for that they are written or just, but in regard they are commanded and
made by the Sovereign. For he that should obey the Law only for that it is
just, should not obey it as he ought, this Justice being subject to debate. So
customs have the force of law, for that they are re^eiued and allowed by the
Judgment of the people: And although there may be some exception, so as it be
not against the Law of Nature, the Magistrate is bound to observe them, and to
cause them to be observed by others.

Of Custom.
But it is lawful for the Magistrate to extend or restrain the Law with the
reason in certain cases. Yet he has not the same power with a custom, the
which consisting more in fact then in Law, and in the particular use then in
reason, he must observe it with the circumstances, with the which it has been
received. To make a custom to have the force of a Law, three things are
required.

Three things required to give force to a Custom.
The first, that it has been brought in from the beginning to be observed for
the future. For you cannot authorize by this name that which some, (aiming at
another thing, or by the indulgence or conniuency of the Magistrate) have
sometimes done: For that a custom cannot take its beginning from a casual or
rash use, but from an use continued by a common observation.

The second point necessary to authorize a custom, is the reiteration of many
the like acts; not so much to endure a plurality of examples, as a consent of
opinion, by the frequency of these acts; and by this consent two Acts suffice
to confirm a custom.

The third and last thing required for the approbation of a custom, is the
time of ten years at the least; some hold thirty years that the consent in
this manner of living should continue: And that Custom shall be of the more
authority when it is fortified by the longer prescription of time.

CHAP. 31 Of the duty of the Magistrate toward his Sovereign.
THe Duty of the Magistrate toward his Soueraign^, consists in the respect and
obedience he owes, Wherein the duty of the Magistrate to the Prince consists.
not only to the Princes person, in whose presence all the power of
Magistrates is held in suspense, as the Stars lose their light in the presence
of the Sun, (the Magistrates being not brought in, what power soever they
have, but to supply the presence of the Prince, their Sovereign) but also to
the commandments of the Sovereign: the which as they are of diverse sorts, so
the duty of the Magistrate^, is to carry himself diversely for the enrolling or
ver^fying thereof.

For either the commandment consists in the knowledge of the Cause, Of the
commandments of the Prince, and how the Magistrate must carry himself in the
verification.
and in this case the power of the Magistrate remains entire: Or the
commandment gives him knowledge of the right, but not of the fact: and in this
case the Officer ought notwithstanding to enquire of the fact, although the
Prince had assured him to be well informed of the truth: unless he had
expressly forbidden him to take notice: For then the Magistrate may not
proceed: Only he may (the fact being notoriously false) acquaint his
Sovereign with the truth, and yield to that which he should reply upon his
remonstrances. But if the Letters did only give him knowledge of the fact, and
not of the right and merit of the grant; the Officer ought to obey, so as it
be nothing against the right of Nature: If notwithstanding if it be against the
Laws and general ordinances, or that it may bring some inconvenience or
prejudice to the Estate, or to a part thereof; he may make his remonstrances,
not once only but twice or thrice.

The Magistrate ^ught to obey the will of the Prince, although it were unjust.
But if notwithstanding the Prince will have the Officer proceed to the
verification, he must do it, although the matter were unlawful. For although
it be certain, that the Prince may not command any thing that is unjust, nor
that is subject to scandal or reprehension, or which may be rejected by his
Officer: Yet for that by the constraint, which the Sovereign is forced to use,
the ignorant multitude is moved to disobedience, and to contempt of his Edicts
and commands, as being published and received by force: The duty of the
Magistrate is, not to bandy himself against his Prince, what error soever he
commits: For this were a Rebellion in the Estate, and to bandie the Feet
against the Head. It were much better to yield under the Souera^gne Majesty
with obedience, then in refusing the commandment of the Sovereign, to give
an example of Rebellion to the subjects.

There are some which proceeded farther, and hold, that if the Prince commandes
the Magistrate to excuse some wicked act to his subjects, it were better to
obey, and thereby to cover and bury the remembrance of a wickedness already
done; then by refusing to irritate and incense him to do worse, The
disobedience of the Magistrate to the will of the (...) bad con^equence.
and to cast, as they say, the helm after the hatchet: As Papinian did, who
refusing to excuse the Parriside committed by Caracala, on the person of Geta,
caused this Emperor to exceed in all sorts of cruelties; whereof he felt the
first fury: This resistance having prevailed nothing, but brought an
irreparable los^e to the affairs of the Emperor, as well by reason of his
death, The Magistrate is not (...) the (...) of his Prince.
as of that which followed.

The Magistrate is not allowed to leave his Office, rather than to publish the
unjust will of the Sovereign, for that it would be a dangerous ouerture to
all the subjects, to refuse and reject the edicts and will of the Prince, if
every man in his charge might leave the Estate in danger, and expose it to a
storm, like unto a Ship without a helm, under color of an opinion of
Justice, which it may be would be affected by some fantastique brain,
without reason, but to cross a contrary opinion. Wherefore in all Councels,
they hold this rule, to make the Counselors range themselves to the two
greatest opinions. For although it seems strange, to force the conscience of
those, to whose Wisdom and Religion they have referred a business, to be
examined, and to give their advice: yet for that the variety of opinions might
hinder the conclusion, it has bin held most reasonable, yea necessary, to use
it in this manner: The rule of wise men which cannot fail, is, that of two
unjust things they follow that which is most just, and of two inconveniences to
avoid the greater: Otherwise there would never be an end of humane actions. If
the command be so unjust, as without wronging their conscience, they cannot
pass it; some Magistrates to avoid the disobedience, and not to charge their
consciences in verifying it, have incerted; by the express commandment of
the Prince, many times re^terated.

The manner of verifying the Edicts, Reasons why the custom of verifying the
Princes Edicts has been brought in by the Magistrate
ordinances, and commands of Princes by the Magistrates, has been brought in,
in some estates, to make the people more willing to obey them: Who having not
capacity to judge of things by themselves, and being more inclined to
distrust, and to calumniate the will of the Prince then approve it: And the
Prince on the other side being i^^roned by importune Courtiers, who without any
regard of duty, or of justice, nor to the good of the Estate, seek by new
inventions to work their own ends, and to get them authorized by
circumuenting the Prince: It has been held convenient for the Prince, to
cause his will to pass by such solemnities, to the end they might be received
by the people; and that being examined and found contrary, or prejudicial to
the public good, they might be refused by humble remonstrances; which wipe
away the disgrace of the denial: and serve the Prince for an excuse, to free
himself from the importunity, and injustice of great men.

It remains now to know, how an Officer ought to carry himself in executing a
command, if there comes unto him a reuocation, the business being begun. Some
hold opinion, How the Mastrate ought to car^y himself in the execution of a
commandment after a Reuocation.
that if the execution be so much importing the Estate, as not being finished
there would happen some inconvenience, that notwithstanding the reuocation he
ought to proceed: If not, he must leave the business as it is. But for the
first, it is necessary that the danger of the Estate be euedent and known to
all Men, and not to the Magistrate alone, who might be suspected to have
proceeded lightly, or with spleen, passing on after the Reuocation.

CHAP. 32. Of the duty of Magistrates one toward another.
THe duty of Magistrates, and the manner of proceeding which they ought to hold
one toward another, is regulated according to the power which they have,
whereof in most Estates they make three degrees.

The highest is of those, who in some part of the Estate, have power to
determine without appeal. Three degrees o^ Magistrates and the power of either
of them.
The Prince only may command them; the middle sort obeyed these, and commanding
those which are of a lower degree, who have not any command over the Officers,
but only over particular persons. We may call the first superiors or
principalls; the second middle or subalterne; and the last inferiors. The first
have power to command all Magistrates and Officers, without exception; or only
certain Officers subject to their Jurisdiction. They which have power to
command all in general without execution, ought not to be brought into the
Estate, for the change that such a power might usually cause. For there being
but one degree to climb, and to make themselves Masters, ambition does teach
it speedily; and every man does the more easily endure it, for that all men are
accustomed to obey them.

The duty of a Superior or principal Magistrate is, The duty of a Superior
or principal Magistrate.
to contain those that are under him in the terms and duties of their
charges; of whom he may be Judge, and not they of him in quality of a
Magistrate; but as a private person. And as for the Sovereign, although they
may judge in their own cause, to whom God has given power to dispose without
Judgment, as Xenophon says; yet it is much more fitting for the Sovereign,
That it is fiting for a Prince to endure the Judgment of the Magistrate
to suffer the Judgment of his Magistrates, then to make himself Judge in his
own cause; provided always that the business does not concern the
Sovereignty, or his particular person; but to the end that Majesty may not
suffer diminution of its greatness, or that the splendour of a Royal Name may
not dazell the eyes of the Judges: It has bin wisely advised in some Estates,
that the Sovereign should not plead but by his procuratour, and would never
assist in Person.

And as in the power of the Prince, the power of Magistrates is held in
suspense; so in the presence of superior Magistrates, The power of a Lieutenant
equal to that of the Magistrate.
the power of Inferiors has no effect. The which is understood, not only of
superior heads and Magistrates, but also of their Lieutenants who are therein
held the same thing, as being but one power distributed to two. Wherefore the
Lieutenant cannot determine any thing, his chief being present. Yet the
Magistrate may take notice of an injury or wrong done by his Lieutenant. The
power of the Magistrate is of no effect out of his territory.


But that which has bin spoken of the power of Superior Magistrates over their
inferiors, must be understood in their territory, their seats, and in the
limits of their Jurisdiction, out of which they are but private men, without
power or command.

Magistrates which are equal in power, or have no dependence one of another,
Of two Magistrates equal in power and of the execution of their decrees in
one another territory.
cannot be commanded nor corrected one of another. But if there be question
to execute the decree or Judgment of one in the territory of another, they
must use honest entreaties and clauses of request. Yet where there shall be
question of the interpretation of a decree made by one Magistrate, another that
is his equal may not take knowledge: For every one ought to be the
interpreter of his own will.

And in regard of the sentence given by the Officer of a Foreign Prince, Of
the execution of a ^entence given by the officer of a foreign Prince upon
another^ territory.
for the execution whereof in the territory of another, there should be a
Commission of entreaty: The judges of this Prince to whom the Commission is
directed, may not examine the Judgment, least the stranger be induced another
time to do the like, an^ to dissolve the Judgments whereof they should demand
the execution; the which would be done more through jealousy of the Estate,
then for any injustice in them. Yet if there be question of honor, or life,
they may not execute the Judgments of foreign Magistrates, if they have not
known the merrite of the cause, and seen the informations. And Princes owe
this respect one unto another, for the good of Justice, not only to punish the
wicked, which sly from one Estate into another; but also for the Exemplary
punishment, which ought to be made upon the places, are bound to yield the
natural subject to his natural Prince, unless the Prince to whom the
fugitive is retired, ^indes that he is unjustly pursued; for in this case, he
ought not to yield them: Yea he is forbidden by the Law of God, to restore a
Bondsman which is fled into another Man's house to avoid the fury of his Master.

But a^t^ough the Magistrate may not command his Equals, Of Magistrates equal
in power in a body* or college, and of their command one over another.
yet in a body or college consisting of many equal in power, the greatest
part may command the less. For in this case they that are superior in number,
are likewise superior in power. So as the lesser part cannot command the
greater, nor yet hinder it. Yet one Tribune at Rome opposing, might hinder the
acts of all the rest: the Romans making a difference betwixt opposition and
command; The difference betwixt ^pposi^ion and command.
for that hinderance and opposition is less then a command, and does not
induce any superi^^^^^ like unto a command.

But Colleges having no superiority one over another, they cannot have any
command, That they may hinder one another by opposition before the act, or by
appeal after the act, but not by command.
but they may well hinder one another; this hinderance growing rather from a
contrariety in an equal concurrence, then from any superiority. This may be
grounded upon the general Rule of all those which have any thing in Common,
amongst which he that hinders, has more force, and his condition in this case
is better then his that seeks to proceed; and among many Laws, that which
forbids, is of greatest force. But if before the Act, a Magi^trate may hinder
his Equal by opposition; yet after the Act he cannot do it by any other
means, but by appeal to the Superior.

CHAP. 33. Of the duty of Magistrates to private Persons.
THe duty of Officers or Magistrates, Foundations of the duty of Magistrates to
private p^r^^ns.
to particular person has two principal foundations. The one is grounded on
the power which is given to the Magistrate by the Edict or Letters of
Commission: the other upon the seemlinesse which consists in the particular
carriage of the Magistrates person, to be able to maintain himself in credit,
reputation, and authority, with those over whom he is to command.

Diverse powers of Magistrates*
And although that the power of all Magistrates regards generally the execution
of the Law, the which without the Magistrate were idle: Yet the power of some
is more strictly limited then that of others. For some are bound by the Laws
and Ordinances to command and use the power that is given them, in that form
and manner that is prescribed them, without adding or diminishing any thing:
And in this case they are but simple Executioners of Laws. To others they give
more liberty, and leave many things to their discretion and judgment. Wherein
notwithstanding they must so govern themselves, as they do not any thing that
is extraordinary without a special command, or that may not be easily
required, Of their duties to private persons in giving sentence.
that they are not forced by some strong and powerful necessity, or an
apparent danger. But in these things where the diversity of circumstances is a
hinderance that he cannot specify, or set down in particular the power, as in
the arbitriment of Princes, the Magistrate may according to his conscience
decree without a special command. But therein he shall avoid to affect the
reputation of pitiful as well as of cruel: For cruelty although it be
blameable, yet it retaynes the Subjects in the obedience of the Laws: But too
much Clemency causes the Magistrate to be contemned, with the Laws and the
Prince which has made them. Wherefore the Law of God forbids them to take
pity of the poor in Judgment: But one of the things most requisite in a
Magistrate, is to make the gravity of offense known, as well to make offen^ers
understand what they have deserved, as to induce them to repentance: And in
doing so the punishment will have less bitterness and more profit. Wherefore
the principal Rule of the duty of a Magistrate to private persons, Of the
(...) persons to the Magistrate, executing his charge.
is to use the power that is given him, well; and private Men, reciprically owe
him all obedience, in executing his charge, be it right or wrong, so as he
exceeds not the terms of his power or Jurisdiction: For then they may
contradict his ordinances by appeal or opposition; and if he proceeds, he must
make a distintion, whether the grieuance be irreparable or not. If it may be
repaired, they shall not oppose by fact, but by course of law: but if it be
irreparable, they may oppose by fact, yea with force; not to offend the
Magistrate, but to defend the innocent.

As for injuries which private men do unto Magistrates, it is certain that
the Magistrate being wronged he cannot be Judge in his own cause; Of the
Magistrate wronged when and how he may be Judge in his own cause.
unless it be for some irreverence or injury done unto him publicly, in
executing his Office. For in this case it is lawful for the Magistrate being
wronged to punish such Men, for the offense done unto the particular person of
the Magistrate. For this reason if a Body or College of Judges has bin
wronged, they may censure and condemn those which have done the offense, not
to revenge the injury done unto them, but to the Estate, whose Majesty is
wronged by the contempt they have made of them.

As for obedience, it seems requisite, Mildness and patience required in a
Magistrate.
that the Magistrate should carry himself to private persons with all
mildness and patience; yet in such sort, as the dignity of his place be not
vilified; as it would be if he should endure any indiscreete words in his
presence, and not take exception: Or a countenance of little respect.
Discretion and gravity without passion.
But especially, as he ought not to show himself rough and difficult of
excess: So he must not grow familiar, laugh, or jest with private men; but to
speak little, with discretion, without making show of any passion of choler,
Envy, Jealousy, or such like, which may diminish the opinion which they have
of him.

Wherefore to collect in few words that which concerns the duty of
Magistrates, The duty of Magistrates.
they must learn to obey the Sovereign, to bend under the power of their
superiors, to honor their equals, to command the Subjects to defend the poor,
to make head against great men, and to do Justice to all.

CHAP. 34. Of the Justice of Commanding.
AS the form of commanding is diverse, so is the Diversity of power, which
according unto Justice, observes diverse Rules to make the commandments just.
For in certain things according to an Arithmeticall proportion, it makes all
the Subjects equal: Rules and considerations in in the Justice of comandments.
In others it enters into consideration of the quality, and follows a
Geometrical proportion: In others according to an Harmoniacall proportion, it
neither follows an equality altogether, nor a similitude; but taking a
consideration of other differences, it mingles the one with the other by a
certain temper and accord.

An harmoniacall p^op^r^ion followed in many things.
And as that which they seek most in the settling of an Estate, is Concord,
which cannot be without some harmony or correspondence of the parties one with
another: This last proportion is followed in many things; as in the form of
government, in the distribution of Offices, honors, dignities, and
recompenses, in the establishment of punishments, and for the peace and
greatness of families, in Marriages and divisions of successions.

An Arithmeticall proportion followed in others
But in contracts and treaties betwixt man and man, and in that which concerns
the performance of promises, which they make one unto another, or the Judgment
of that which belongs to every man, whereas Faith and Integrity ought to be
equal in all men, of what quality and condition soever they be; they must
observe an Arithmeticall proportion: and not to imitate Cyrus, who condemned a
little man that had too long a Robe, to give it to a tall man, and to take the
tall man's which was too short, insisting more upon seemelinesse then to Justice.

But in the imposition of charges which are burdensome, and necessary for the
support of the Estate, A Geometrical proportion in the imposition of
burth^nsome Offices for the support of the Estate.
they must observe a Geometrical proportion, charging the rich, who have more
to lose by the ruin of the Estate, then the poor: the which in a manner is
generally observed. For although that the Nobility seems therein to have more
privilege in some Estates then the Countryman, by reason that he pays no
Subsedies, and does not contribute any thing by way of imposition: yet the
personal service which he does many times perform at his own charge, is much
more then that which he should pay by way of Subsedy, if it were imposed upon
him; besides his person which he does employ, the which the Countryman does
not. And in this particular, a Geometrical proportion is observed, in that
they leave unto the Gentlemen (who have honor more in recommendation then the
Clown) honorable charges, the which gives them means to approach nearer unto
the Prince, and have some honor in them: which is the reason which makes them
more willing to endure the burden, discommodity, and charge, which is far
greater then that which is imposed upon the Countryman. But as I have formerly
said in other parts of the Estate, they must approach as near as may be to a
harmoniacall proportion, from whence proceeds that mixture which they make in
most parts of Estates, of the Law, with the will and opinion of the Magistrate.
The Law is made for all in general, and all are equally bound to the
observation thereof* A mixture of the law with the will of the Prince.
but the Law not able to foresee all the circumstances, the will of the Prince
or Magistrate in its execution, must add such a temper, as there may not
follow any inconvenience or absurdity; and to bend according to the
Circumstances of the business, and to regulate it according unto natural
Equity, which is the soul of the Law, the which in a Prince extends to declare
and c^rrect the Law according unto reason; and in the Magistrate, to extend or
restrain it as the case shall require. And he that would have the Law only
take place in an Estate, he should fall into an infinite number of
inconuenie^ces and absurdities. For either he must make a Law upon every
particular Fact that may happen; the which is impossible, and admit it were
Feazable, i^ would breed a confusion of Laws: or else he must leave many
things unprovided for, and in others commit many I^iustices, never insi^^ing
upon the circumstances, which are sometimes contrary to the reason of the Law.

There ^i be n^^esse inc^nuenience, if they suffered the will of the P^i^ce or
Magistrate to wander uncertainly, Of the temper a magistrate should ^dde unto
the law.
without any establishm^nt of the Law, whereon as upon a Rule they might ground
themselves. For besides the variety, diversity, or contrariety of ordinances,
or Judgments which might grow, the which in the end would make them to be
contemned, they should open a Gate to all violences and In^ustice. But as two
Simples in extremity of cold and heat, are so many poisons; and yet composed
and tempered one with the other, make a wh^^es^^n^ Medicine. So by the mixture
of the Arithmetica^l and Geometrical proportions, which separated would (...)
^he Estate, grows a harmoniacall accord and prop^r^i (...) which serves to
maintain it.

In the distribution of Offices and dignities, an equallity cannot be observed,
Of the distribution o^ (...) and dignities.
without Injustice and prejudice to the E^^ate; all being not of one quality
and capacity: And it mig^^ so ^a^l out, that the most important and difficu^t
ch^ge might fall upon him that is least capable; and a^ Office of no moment to
him that is sufficient. Moreou^r if you will c^oo^^ those of one quality only,
to give them the cha^g^s, ^e^old the rest that are excluded will be
discontented; i^ a^^ would be well satisfied, if they see, that the Gate be not
shut against them: and they would not take it ill, that as the Capable ought to
be preferred before the incap^ble: so the Gentleman finding himself as capable
as the Plebeian, should be preferred, and the rich before the poor, in Offices
where there is more honor then gain: and the p^ore before the rich, in those
where there is more profit then honor. And if the Offices be associated or
doubled, to make a harmony of the one with the other, they must mingle those
that have where-withall to supply in one sort that which they want in the
other, otherwise there will be no more harmony then if they should separate the
accords that are n time, the which would make no pleasing found if they were
not together.

Yet in this Subject we have a regard to merit, which is the bond, which may
make the poor and Countryman equal, to the rich and Noble, being without
merit. And therefore they must according to ^ue^y man's deserts, g^ue the purse
to the most Loyal: Arms to the most Va^liant: Justice to the Honestest:
Censure to the most Entire: Toil to the strongest; the Government to wisest;
and the Prelateship to the most devout: notwithstanding preferring in the
equality of merit, such as are best qua^lified to them that are less.

We may say as much of Rewards and Punishments, weighing not only the merit of
the Fact, Distribution of r^wards and punishments.
and the quallities of persons; but also the circumstances of time and place,
or such like. In regard of Peace of the marriages of Families, and the
preservation of Houses, it is likewise very necessary to supply the defect
which is in the one, with the Excess and abundance of the other. So there is
no better M^rriage (as the ancient said) then of Riches with Poverty: And among
Merchants there is no society more safe, then of a rich idle man, with a poor
man that is diligent. And in the inequality of the conditions of persons, if
there be not some quality to supply the defect of the meaner, there can be no
accord. The marriage of a rich Country Woman, with a poor Gentleman would hold
firm, but of a poor country Woman with a poor Gentleman, they will easily
disagree.

Harmony in the division of goods.
In like manner in the division of successions, it seems this harmony ought to
be kept. For as many inconveniences follow, leaving the disposition of goods to
the will of the Man; who most commonly disinherits his Children upon the first
motion of choler, or makes choice of the most incapable to prefer him before
the rest: So the Law which requires that the succession should be equally
divided, is unjust; for that the dignity of families is lost, and a great
succession divided into many parts, comes to nothing. And the Law which hau^ng
too much regard to the dignity of families, adiudgeth all to one, or little to
the rest, without doubt is nothing just. But that which has regard to the
quality of goods, distinguishing those that a^e ^ropper and hereditary to the
house, and those which are newly purchased, giving some advantage to the elder
above the younger, and to the Males above the daughters, regulating this
aduatnage according to the number of his Children, and leaving something in the
free disposition of the Father, seems to be more just, and more ap^roaching
to this harmoniacall proportion, which ought to be followed as much as may be,
in all sorts of commands and Establishments. And this shall suffice for the
form of Commanding, as well in that which depends of power, as of Justice.

CHAP. 35. Of the Establishing of the forces of an Estate.
THe order which ought to be entertained in the settling of the forces, being
more Military then pollitique, shall be treated here succinctly.

The forces whereof we mean to speak, are those by the which we may repulse
the attempts of our enemies; the which if the Estate be Maritiue, would be of
two sorts, to the end we may resist both by Sea and Land.

The provision of arms and ships, Provision of Arms and Shipping.
is the first part of the force; some hold it the greatest treasure of a
Prince; and Iustiue writes that Phillip of Macedony* made himself thereby
fearful of his enemies. I know that many have held, that in a great Estate,
there might inconveniences happen by this great provision of Arms; for that
he that has a will to mutine, to arm those of his faction, and to deprive
the Prince of the means to make use of this provision, will make a design to
sease upon the place where it is kept. But by the same reason, we must not
draw together any treasure, to supply us in an unexpected necessity; nor to
fortify any places, least that coming to loose our money and our places, our
enemy should grow the stronger, and we the weaker.

But Wisdom preuents these inconveniences, the which we must employ to keep
these advantages, and to make use of them before the enemy comes to seize of
them: And if he does seize of them, we may not therefore conclude, that the
provision ought not to have been made; but that it is his fault that has made
it, not to be able to keep it. It is certain, that a Sword or a Knife would
cut him that knows not how to handleit, but we may not therefore say, that
we must neither make Sword nor Knife. So in all sorts of parties, there are
inconveniences: But those which by foresight may be prevented, should not
hinder us from doing that, which may otherwise serve us.

Under the name of Arms we do not only apprehend that which serves a Man to
cover him, Arms offensive or d^f^nsiue.
and to assail his enemy; but all carriages and necessary munitions for the
War, be it Offensive or Defensive; as Engines, Artillery, Powder, Ladders,
Bridges, Cordage, and such other things, whereof they have need in many
millitary Exployts, and which it concerns the wisdom o^ the Prince or
Sovereign to provide, in such quantity, a^ when he shall be assailed, or would
invade another, ther^ may be nothing wanting, for not able to provide such
things in a short time, it were to be feared, that before he should recover
that which is necessary, his Enemy would get such an advantage over him, as he
shall hardly afterward recover it.

Quality of desensiue arms.
But laying aside the discourse of the diversity of Arms and Engines of War,
I will only propound some general considerations for the Arms fit for men,
whereof those which are defensive ought to be light of carriage, (those that be
heavy or pondrous commonly hindering more then they serve) difficult to pierce,
and proportioned in such sort, as they may not hinder the necessary motions for
a Combat.

That they ought not to be contemned.
Many relying too much upon their Valor, have contemned this kind of arms, as
fit for men that were afraid. Yet the Roman Armies, in the time of Gratian,
having demanded leave to abandon their Cuyrasses, and then their Head-pieces;
found themselves so weak when they came to fight with the Goths, as they were
cut in pieces: whereby it appeared that arms make a part of the force, and I
will add, of courage. For besides, that Iron is more hard to 'peirce then the
flesh, he that finds himself covered, takes more courage to join with his
Enemy, for that he is not so much exposed to blows. They reproacht a Captain;
who armed himself completely, that he seemed to be afraid: No says he, but I
arm my self that I may not fear.

As for offensive Arms, they must be light, to the end they may not tire or
weary those that use them, Quality of of^en^iue arms.
and likewise easy to manage; sharp and well steeled, to pierce the better,
O^ the Pike,
and withal to continue the longer. Some demand them long to strike a far
off. Philop^mon caused his men to use the Pike ^e o^ And Iphicrates made his
Soldiers to carry them twice as long then they had formerly done. They
attribute the victory of Gosta^us against Christian King of Denmark, to the
length of the Swedish pikes, which were three foot longer th^n those of the
Danes. And Gui^hard^^ writes, that Vitelosi Vrsi^o, with pikes a foot and a
half longer then those which the Soldiers of Pope Alexander the sixth carried,
won the battle against them betwixt Sarra and Bassan. Others have better
allowed of short Arms, being of better use in a strait or a throng; as Cyrus
and the Lacedaemonians.

Besides this, there are two sorts of offensive arms: Two sorts of offensive
arms
some to shoot, cast, or dart; and others which they hold continually in their
hands; of both which kinds they must make good provision, being all necessary
in an Army. The Parthia^s have many times vanquished the Romans with their
Bows, fighting ^ far off: And the Romans as Vegetius writes, have many times
gotten great victories, by the means of certain long darts, called
Marciobarbaz.

There is another quality, which some have desi^ed in Arms, that they should
be fair, gilt, and enricht, so as they may be pleasing unto the Eye, thinking
that this gives courage to the Soldiers; the which Xenopho^ and Caesar have
allowed. Others holding that this was of no use, but to kindle the avarice and
courage of the enemy, have thought it better to have the arms without any
ornament and bare, as those which strike more terror.

To resolve the most expedient in this quality and contrariety, we must know
those whom we mean to arm, Of the beauty and ^rnament of Arms.
and those against whom we are to fight. If the first by this vanity of
ornament, are to be the more encouraged, and that the same vanity may breed
admiration and amazement in the Enemy; it shall be fit to use it. But if we
have to deal with men which know what belongs to War, we must rather seek
horror then ornament in our Arms. Wherefore a Prince making provision of
Arms, he shall do better to choose those that are good then fair, and simple
and plain, rather then enricht, as well to avoid the charge in so great a
provision which it behoues him to make; as for that they are more durable, and
no less profitable then the other.

CHAP. 36. Of Fortresses, and of their profit for the preservation of an Estate.
FOrtresses do also make a part of the force of an Estate: and they which have
been of Opinion, that they should not build any, have been confuted both by
reason and use: so as there have been few found, unless they were some petty
popular Estate, that will follow their Council. The Grecians and Romans who
had less need during their Empires, then any other Estate, for that all
submitted themselves under their yoke, entertained Cittadels at Corinth,
Tarentum, and Rhegium: And if the Capitol had not been strong, the Empire of
Rome had been smothered in the Cradle by the Gauls.

The Estates in which are no strong places, are conquered by one Battle.
England has testified it; and the Persian, relying only in the great number
of his Men, has lost in one battle a great extent of his Country, the which
the Turk has since preserved by Forts. For although that Fortresses alone
cannot much assist an Estate, yet being seconded by Arms, they make it
invincible; and there being no Armies on foot, they give you leisure to raise
them, and after a Route, to Rally your Men together to ^enew the War. Yet
this is not to say, that the estate which has most sorts is the strongest: For
it is impossible to guard many w^ll; and some being ill guarded, they prove
more prejudicial to the Estate, then profitable for the defense. It must
therefore have few, but well furnished with Men, Victuals, and Munition of
Wa^re.

They must likewise be in a necessary situation or at least profitable. The
situation of Fortres^e^ n^ces^ary and proffitable.
Necessary situations are those which being vnfort^fied, make the Country to
lie open, and expose it to the invasion of Enemies. Profitable situations are
those, by w^ose means they may guard a rich Town and well inhabited, and may
serve for a retreat unto the people. They must likewise be remote from the
heart of the Estate; They must be far from the heart of the Estate.
to keep the Enemy and danger far from it, to the end that whiles the Enemy
bu^^es himself in assailing them, the rest of the Country may be in peace,
and we may have means to prepare our selves to resist him. And if the forts be
not only far off, but at the entry of the Enemies Country, they will be
the more safe: For they will not only give us means to defend our selves, but
also to annoy our Enemy in his own Country.

Besides this, Forts strong by situation and Art.
forts ought to be strong both by situation and by fortification. Forts strong
by situation, are those which are built upon high and sharp Mountains, and of
hard access, or which are ^uironed with La^es, the Se^, Pooles, Ri^er^, and
Marshes, and have all commodities necessary for the entertainment and succor
of a Garr^son. Those are strong by hand, which are flancked to purpose, with a
good Wall, a large and sound rampire of Earth, with abroad and deep ditch, and
they must make more account of the rampire then of the Wal^, and of the ditch
then the rampire. A fort must likewise be great* to the end it may be capable
of many M^^ for the defense, and to annoy the Enemy the more* (...) be able to
entrench themselves within.

They must be situated where they may be relieved.
It must in like manner be situated in such sort, as it may be relieved, for
soon or late they take that place by force or obstinacy of a siege which is
not relieved. Wherefore they have held those places strong, which have a Port
of the Sea, hard to stop up, and is not commanded. For this back door makes
them as it were impregnable, having means daily to receive refreshing of
Victuals, Munition, and Men, and to discharge themselves of their wounded and
unprofitable Mouths for defense.

And although that the situation of a place be strong for defense; and such in
some part as they hold it inaccessable; yet they may not forbear to add what
they can to make it stronger: For we have seen that many places have been
taken, by those parts which they had neglected to fortify, for that they held
them inaccessable. So Carthage was taken by Scipio toward the Poole. Antiochu^
the great, took Sardis, by that part which was the strongest, where he found
there was not any Sentinel, s^ing birds to build their nests there without any
disturbance.

CHAP. 37. Of the Warre-like Discipline.
THe third part of the force of an Estate, consists in the warlike discipline,
that is to say, in Soldiers of good experience and well disciplined. And
herein we must observe that the force does not always consist in the number,
but in the resolution of the Soldier, and in the experience or conduct of the
Commander. In all the battles which have bin given, it is observed, that few
men have fought; and those few, according to the resistance that was made, have
won or lost the battle; and as the kinds of arms make the Soldier stronger
or more feeble, so they have demanded what force is most beneficial; either
that on Horseback or on Foot.

Polybius says, Of the ^^uantages of Horse and Foot.
that it were better that our foot were a Moietie less then that of our
Enemy, so as we be stronger in Cauallerie, then if we were equal in all:
The which may be true in a Combat; having bin often seen, that when as the
horse are routed, the foot seeing themselves far from any retreat, hau^
been forced to yield sometimes in gross, without striking stroke: But in all
the course of the War, it is most certain that the Footmen do the greatest
service, were it but at sieges and defenses of places, and that they may fight
in all places, which the horsemen cannot do.

Those Nations which have made use of Horsemen only, have sometimes gotten
great Victories; as the Partbyans have done: But when they were to besiege or
defend a place, they advanced little. Also those people which put all their
forces in horsemen, do^ it, for that they cannot keep their rancks and order
which is ne^essary for Footmen. And to recompense this defect, they make use of
the violence of Horse in a Combat, and of their swiftness, and readiness in
Enterprises of War, which are executed more speedily with Horse then Foot, who
march heavily.

But the better is, An Army must consist of hor^e and foot.
that the Armies of an Estate should consist both of the one and the other,
that is to say, of Footmen to serve for the body of an Army; and Horsemen, for
arms and legs. Wherefore the Prince besides the provision of Arms, and other
necessaries for War, must be careful that the Cauallery may be well mounted,
and provide that they may have horses in his own Country; for he cannot be
termed strong and powerful in horse, if he be constrained to have recourse in
that regard to his neighbor, who in time of war may fail him.

I have said formerly that the force did not consist in the number, but in the
bounty and courage of the soldiers; yet for that they are not all borne such,
we must chooseas near as we can, those which promise so much; and by
Discipline make them such, and endeavor to instruct and train up others. Of
the choice of Soldiers.
For the choice many have made a question, whether we should draw them out of
our Subjects, holding that the Prince, which innures the Subjects to War,
thrust himself into danger to receive a Law from them, and have held an
opinion, that it was more safe to employ Strangers. But there have been
Princes which have not employed their Subjects indifferently, but only the
Nobility of the Country, as the Kings of Poland and Persia: the which have made
them strong in Cauallery, but weak in Foot. Some others having a distrust and
jealousy of the Nobility, would make no use of their service; but to make head
against them, have armed and put forces into the hands of some of the Common
people. The Turk has put his forces into the hands of Subjects of the
Countries which he has conquered; but this has bin in making them Turks by
Education. For causing the Children of Christians to be taken in their younger
years, and to be instructed timely in the Law of Mahomet, breeding them up to
toil and labor, until that they come to an age fit to bear Arms, they
continue as natural Turks, not knowing other Fathers then the Grand Seignour,
who have caused them to be sed and brought up; nor other Country then that,
for the guard whereof they are entertained.

We must employ Strangers as little as may be.
To decide this question, we must understand that every Estate is weak which
cannot subsist of it self, and whose force depends of another: And he that
supports himself wholly upon foreign forces of a Sovereign and independent,
he makes himself as it were a Subject and dependant of another; and exposes
his Estate, not only to the invasion of the Stranger of whom he depends,
(being often seen that most part of those which have called Strangers to their
Succors, have been a prey to those which succourd them:) But also the
stranger failing him either for that he is troubled to defend himself, or for
some other occasion, he remains at the mercy of his Enemy.

Besides this, the stranger fights more for gain and his own private
interest, then for any good will he bears him. As gain draws him, the same
gain may divert him, and draw him to the Enemy. The Celtiberians subborned
first by the Romans, abandoned the Carthaginians; and afterward corrupted by
the Carthaginians, left the Romans. Employing none but Strangers, the Enemy not
able to hinder the levy, may slack and stay it in the greatest necessity of
the Prince: The which has fallen out too often in Suisser-land, to the
prejudice of France. And the Enemy inuading the Nation, from whence you draw
your Soldiers, many times in your greatest necessity, these Strangers are
forced to abandon you, to go and serve their Country; as the Grisons did, who
were in the service of King Francis, when as Iean Jacques do Medices invaded
their Country. Finally, the treason the Mutiny, ruin, and as I have said, the
usurpation of an Estate is more to be feared by the succors of Strangers, then
we can expect any advantage.

Add to all these considerations, that they are in fight, their Companies ill
filled, fearful, rude, and oppressors of the Subjects; to the great charge of
the Prince, consuming in the Levy, and before they can join with us, much
time and much money. But I do not hereby infer that we should altogether
reject Strangers: For they may serve with our own Soldiers; whom by this
means we shall spare, and upon whom we may settle our chief force; and not as
some Estates do, cause them to undergo all the toil, expose them to
assaults, and to all dangerous exploits, and dispense with the Strangers.

CHAP. 38. Of the number of Soldiers in their ordinary trained Bands.
IT rests to know what number of Souldiersought to be entertained in an Estate.
This cannot be truly regulated. For we must have regard to that which the
Estate may bear, and to his forces that may assail us. Only I will say, Two
sorts of train Bands.
that in many Estates they have established two sorts of train bands. The one
ordinary, consisting of men raised and bred up to the War, having no other
vocation or profe^sion. The other is subsidiary, composed of Men which have
sometimes followed that profession, or are capable to do it, with the which at
need they may fill the Companies, or raise new, and who in time of peace shall
employ themselves in their particular affairs, being sometimes practiced in
Military exercises, when as the Commanders shall draw them together.

Returning then to the first, they must not be in great numbers; but the number
must be such, as they may resist, as well to avoid the charge of their
entertaynment, Of the number ^of Soldiers ^o^ the trayn^ and.
as the mutinies and reuolts, which happen among such men, when they feel
themselves strong and in great numbers. And in a mean Estate sow have ruled
it to 6000. Foot, and 1200. Horse; in a greater, double the number. But if they
must diminish any thing, it were better to do it in the Foot, which may be
easily filled again, then in the Horse, which cannot be so soon raised, being
necessary to spend money for their furniture, and time for the exercise both of
Man and Horse.

Of Subsidiaries
As for Subsidiaries, some have thought that they ought rather to be retained
under some privileges, not prejudicial to the public, then entertained with
pay whilst they do dot serve. But it would seem more expedient, to make them
serve one after another three Months in the year, Order for their exercise in
time of peace: and to hinder their Mutiny.
near unto the Governor of the Province where they shall live, in giving them
pay for that time: During the which they shall be practiced in all sorts of
exercises, serving to their profession: and going out of service after their
Quarter is ended, they shall leave their Arms in the Town where the Governor
remaynes, every man returning to his own home, leaving the place to such as
are to succeed them. Being thus practiced three Months yearly, you shall
keep them still in Alarm, and they will be always ready to march. And
making them to leave their Arms after the service, you shall have no cause to
fear any Mutiny: The which they may make more feeble in dividing these
Subsidiaries into no greater troops then of four and twenty Soldiers, which
troops shall not depend of any Commander but the Governor, or of him whom the
Sovereign shall at times commit: yet every one having his Captain apart, to
train the Soldiers; and when as they mean to employ them, they may reduce
them into Companies of hundreds or two hundred men, as they shall think good;
and may give them a Captain to command them, Of the number of Subsidiaries.
during the expedition. By this means for the full pay of a year of 6000.
men, you may entertayne in your Estate 24000. Subsidiaries, trained, practiced,
and ready to march, and assure your Provinces against all sorts of Mutinies.
And if you will train up more without any charge, Means to tra^ne the
subjects of an Estate to War without any charge to the Prince.
they may give commandment unto the Youth of the Town where they shall
practice, and thereabouts, unto a certain age, to come at the time, and to the
place of the said Exercises, where they may give them Arms to practice with
the rest.

This were, some one would say, to make too many Soldiers in an Estate, which
might fau^^ur a ^euolt. But being disarmed and reduced into small t^oupes, And
to hinder a reuolte and mutiny.
their Captains having taken an Oath to the Sovereign only, and the
Soldiers not depending on them but for the Disciplin^, and not for the pay:
And moreover, being disarmed, but when as they enter into service, there being
but one fourth part that enters at a time in the Provinces, the other three
parts may serve to oppose against such as being armed, would attempt any thing.
So as with a little foresight which they may use in this conduct, it will be
easy to divert the inconveniences which they may conceive of this order. There
remains now the form which they ought to hold in leuies.

CHAP. 39. Of the form how to make leuies es Soldiers: Of the Place, Age,
Stature, and Vocation.
The parti^ular ^o^^e of the Romans.
THe Romans who could not have their Soldiers depend wholly upon the Captains,
observed a particular form; which was that of a great number which were
enrolled, the Captains did choose one after another in their turns: And in
this manner the Companies were as it were equal both in force and valor of
Soldiers. But the Captains having little credit among^t them, they saw many
mutinies fall out among the L^gi^ns. The which was the cause that they found it
expedient that every Captain should make choice of those whom he was to
command; being likely that they which present themselves to be enrolled under a
Captain, would be more obedient unto him, then they whom they shall enroll
against the^^ will.

The same inconu^nie^ce of a mutiny happens, when to a troop consisting of o^d
Soldiers, (...) of a (...) upon (...) ^aptaine.
they give another Captain, t^en him under whom the Soldiers have bin
accustomed to fight: For t^^s ^ew Captain having no means to get credit
suddaiuly, the least subject that presents itself to the Soldiers to mutine,
they embrace it, being not restrained neither by the respect nor fear of their
Captain. Yet an exact Discipline will easily help and remedy this.

Wherefore it seems more safe, that every Captain make choice of those whom
he is to command. Of the choice which the Captain ought to make of his
Soldiers.
I say choice, to make a difference from the greatest part of the leuies which
are made at this day, into the which they receive all sorts of men. The which
ought not to be; and no man ought to be admitted without an attestation from
the place of his dwelling, A good order if it were well observed.
of his quality and how he has lived; to the end they may exclude all Thieves
and Robbers, which creep into the Troops; and that the Soldier offending,
they may punish him in his person or in his goods, when he returns into his
Country. And to this effect the choice being made, the Soldiers ought to be
presented to the Officer, or Commissary of the War, to see if they be of the
quality required.

And, although we may find good Soldiers every where; yet it seems that not
only the ordinary, Of the place whence they must take the Soldiers.
but also the subsidiary ought to be chosen and taken rather out of the Country
then in Towns; for that in the Fields they find them stronger and more rough,
be it to strike, or to endure the discommodities of the War: And the
Subsidiaries which are not in continual practice of the War, being dispersed
here and there, they cannot so easily draw together to make a mutiny; as they
might do if there were many in one Town.

As for the Age, they must choose them young, Of the Age o^ the Soldiers.
above Seventeen or Eighteen years, and unto Thirty or Forty, as well to
have the more agility, force, and courage, as to be more venturous, pliable,
and obedient to the Commandments that shall be given them. For the stature, Of
the statu^e.
the greatest and most manlike make the greatest show: But if in a little body
they find a strong complexion and courage, they may not reject him.

Of his vocation.
But for that by their manner of living, they may settle a Judgment of the
complexion and force both of body and mind: They must have a care not to choose
Soldiers (but as little as may be) which are accustomed to some sitting Trade,
that is soft and effeminate; but rather to choose them out of Trades, in the
which they must be exposed to heat, and cold, to rain, wind, Sun; Or which
are accustomed to blood, to strike, to march, and to labor. The Leuies of men
of War thus made, they must be trained and governed. And thus much for the
forces at Land.

CHAP. 40. Of the forces at Sea.
THe like shall be also followed in the forces at Sea; In the which besides the
order they must observe for the building of ships, they must also have a care
to provide a good number of Pilots and Mariners; and for the Galleys, to
furnish and exercise their Rowers, whether they consist of Galley-slaues or
voluntaries. For the which they must provide in good time to accustom the
Slaves to do their duties, and to make the Soldier get firm footing at Sea.

These forces at Sea are so necessary in an Estate that is Maritine, as without
them the Prince cannot be termed strong nor powerful. For besides that in a
short time they may seize upon his Ports, before he shall have any advice of
the Enterprise; and these being seized, this Port being hard to stop up the
Enemy will keep it long: He must make an account not to recover any thing by
the Commerce at Sea, but from the hands of his Neighbors, who will prescribe
him a Law, and entreat his Merchants ill. Let us now come to that which is
necessary for the settling of the Re^enewes of the Estate.

CHAP. 41. Of the Riches of an Estate.
EVery one agrees that to make an Estate powerful, it must be rich; That the
power of an Estate depends of its riches.
Riches being the principal sinews that supports it. For although that many
poor Estates have made themselves to be redoubted: Yet this has rather
happened by the division of their Neighbors, and the fault of some others,
then for any advantage there is in the poverty of an Estate.

The Lacedaemonians in their poverty, Of the Lacedaemonians.
during the division of the Grecians, have been for a time Masters of all
Greece. But when as this division ceased, their greatness (which could not
long subsist with this defect) decayed presently.

The Venetians and Genois, although poor in the beginning, have sometimes held
a part of Greece; Of the Venetians and Genoi^
even that which was near to the Archipelagus: But this happened, during the
division which was in the Leuant for the Empire of Constantinople.

The Romans themselves in their poverty, had no other advantage; Of the Romans
then the weakness and division of their Neighbors, whereof they could make
better use then any other, receiving some into their City, ruining others;
sending Collonies to neighbor Provinces; allying themselves to those whom they
could not easily vanquish, and making use of their Succors and means; and
finally establishing in conquered Countries, affairs, toles, and tributes, for
the pay of their Soldiers, and for to supply the other charges of the Estate.
And they have been so careful to enrich their City, as many times this care
has made them shut their eyes to an infinite number of thefts and spoils,
which were practiced against their Ministers, whom they employed in the
Provinces. It is then most certain that an Estate cannot be termed powerful,
vn^esse it be rich. Yet every Man does not agree, wherein the wealth of an
Estate does consist. Some have measured it by the great treasures; others by
the revenues; and others by the fertillitie of the Country. But as there is
no treasure so great, but a long War may exhaust; nor any revenues so
abundant, but in a long and tedious enterprise, they may be forced to engage
them: so the fertillitie alone of an Estate would be unprofitable, if the
public had not means to make use of it, and by gentle leuies to draw
succors from private persons.

Wherefore besides the abundance of all things fit for the life and service of
Man; What is necesary for the riches of an Estate.
the parcimony or sparing of p^iuate persons, is necessary to make an Estate
rich: As also the facillitie to make use of their means. For as we do not
call a Prodiga^l man rich, who spends all he has: So what abundance soever
there be in an Estate, we will not term the Subjects rich, who by their ^ot
and excess consume all this great abundance, taking from the public the
means to draw any succors from them.

(...) the (...) an (...).
We will therefore conclude, that the riches of an Estate consists in all
things ne^essary for the life and service of Man; in the parcimony of Subjects;
in the greatness of Lands and ordinary revenues; in the facillitie of
ordinary leuies; in the government of the Treasure, and in the Exchequer.

CHAP. 42. Of the causes of the abundance of the wealth of an Estate: That is
to say Tillag^: Manufactures and Commerce with Strangers.
Abundance in an Estate proceeds from three necessary things: Whence the
abundance of necessary things proceed
From the Earth; from Manufactures, which comprehends all Manual and
Mechanicke Arts; and from the Commerce we have with Strangers, under the name
of Earth I comprehend the labor of the Land; the entertai^ment of Woods,
Forests, and Trees, which may by their fruitfulness contribute something to
the use of Man; The digging of Mines for metal, stones, and mineral druggs.

As this point is the fountain of all the riches of the world, Tillage w^ll
husbaded causes abundance.
so it ought to be more carefully husbanded by the public: And yet it is
that which is most neglected, having left a liberty to every Man to do with
his own what he pleases, under a false proposition, that every Man being
careful to find out that which will be profitable unto him, knows how to
husband his ground, so as nothing well be unprofitable: And yet experience
teaches us the contrary. For most part of Lands being possessed by the
Nobility, Clergy, or others employed in public affairs, few reside upon
the Lands; The cause of the negligence thereof.
so as they are occupied by Farms, who enter like unto glearers, which draw
what they can, having no interest in the future. And of those which reside upon
their Lands, some through ignorance, others by negligence or bad husbandry
content themselves with the revenues of their predecessors, being loath to take
the pains, or complaining to advance that, that should be necessary to plant
or cleanse a piece of Land that lies waste to dry up a Marish, to settle a Race
for breeding, or to do such like things as may better their Demesus.

Some one it may be of little Judgment will say, that this care is unworthy of
a Prince and of the public. But to this we may answer, that all Princes
have not so held it, That it is not unworthy of a Prince.
Massisusa cleansed the greatest part of Babary. And in our time we know the
improuements which the Venetians have made in Polesene of Rouigo: That of the
great Duke of Tuseany toward Pysa and Areso, and that of the Duke of Ferrara,
in the Valley of Comachy^, and that which the Hollanders do daily. Wherefore
some have held it fit, that the public should take upon them this care to
quicken the diligence of some, by the orders which might be made, according to
the places; and to punish the negligence of others, by Fines, Amercements, and
Seisures of the Lands neglected.

Manufactures cause abundance in an Estate.
As for Manufactures, the number of workmen gives the abundance; but the good
give credit to the Merchandise. The great number would not be unprofitable, but
also hurtful, if they were not good. To have them such, you must seek for
them: And if we have them not among our selves, we may draw strangers by
Privileges, in giving unto some according to their industry, some honest
entertainment. To multiply the workmen, they may erect public houses of all
sorts of Manufactures, as has been propounded, in the which they may instruct
the poor. And as this Establishment should be chiefly made in their favor,
so the reuenew of these houses may be taken upon that whith is affected by the
Cannon^, and ancient Ordinances for their Entertainment.

Some one, to the end they may banish idleness, which is at this present in
Monasteries, (many persons unfit for contemplation and study being therein, and
many against their will) have propounded to restore the ancient Monastique
discipline, which was to employ in certain works and manual Arts, at houers
of leisure: those that were not fit for study and preaching. The which did also
multiply manufactures. Others have likewise been of opinion, to bind the
Masters, who serve themselves with young Boys to cause them to pass a
certain Age in learning of a Trade: And so by these means an Estate in less
then twenty years, would be furnished with more workmen then were needful.

The Comme^ce and Trafique which is made with the stranger, Commerce with the
stranger causes abundance in an Estate.
is the third point which produces abundance in an Estate, for the settling
whereof there are three considerations to be made. The first is of things which
we are to carry, and not to carry to the stranger, The second is of things
which we must receive from strangers, and their entry into our Estate; Three
considerations for the Commerce.
or not to receive them and to banish the Commerce, The third is the facillity
and ease of Commerce accompanied with safety.

The Merchandise which we ought to ca^ry to strangers, Of Merchandise which we
may and ought to carry to strangers.
, with whom we have Comme^ce, are those whereof we have abundance: Of which
after the Estate is sufficiently furnished, we may allow the trade. As
contrariwise, those whereof we have want may in no sort be transported; nor in
like manner those, whereof our Neighbors may make use to our prejudice; as
Arms, Horses, Sails, and other things destinated to the^se of the Sea or
War.

The transport of Gold and Silver is likewise forbidden in all Estates; Of the
transport of Gold and Silver.
but these prohibitions are very ill observed. And as they are necessary, to
hinder the want of these mettalls, which are fought after by all Nations,
deprive us not of the means to make use of them, for that they are hunted
after by our Friends and Allies: So we must have a care, that it may not
trouble nor altar the Commerce. And to speak truth, these defenses thus
general which they have made, are impossible in the execution, seekeing to
maintain the Commerce with our Neighbor: Unless it be, that we forbid to
Negotiate otherwise then by exchange, and permutation of Merchandise. The which
may be practiced, in regard of the Merchandise, which is not very necessary,
and not in regard of those which are necessary for us, and whereof we cannot
pass. We are forced to have recourse to our Neighbors, and to take a law from
them, in either giving them other Marchandizes which may be a^ necessary for
them as theirs for us, or in paying them ready money.

And in this last case many have held, that the safety which might be added,
was, to allow of the transport of Gold and Silver, in giving caution to bring
back within a certain time the quantity in Marchandizes, for the which the
transport has been allowed, the public having no interest therein;
presupposing the necessity of this Merchandise, and that it cannot be
recovered by exchange from another.

Of raw stuffes.
Among those things which ought not to be transported out of an Estate, are raw
stuffes; but not manufactures, for that you take the means from your workmen,
to employ themselves and to live; and from your Estate the means to enrich it
self by the means of manufactures, the which in certain works exceed the
price of the substance. And they are so far from suffering these stuffes thus
raw to go unto strangers: as the Estate which knows what belongs to
husbandry, not satisfied with those which grow amongst them, draw them from
their Neighbors, to put them in work, and by this means to enrich
themselves, selling them thus wrought even to those who many times have sold
them the said raw stuffes.

Behold the things which we ought not to carry to strangers, by the which it
is easy to judge of those, which we ought to desire they should bring unto us.
For if we retain those things for the liberty which may come unto us, by the
same reason, if we want them, we must seek the means to draw them from our
Neighbors.

And in regard of Gold and Silver, Of the beginning of str^age Gold and Silver
into an Estate.
the entire ought to be allowed: ut not the course of Foreign Coin among the
people, for that there is not any assurance among Princes touching coins,
every one seeking to deceive his companion, and to draw the Gold and Silver out
of one another Estate, That the course of forra^gne Coin ought not to be
allowed in an Estate.
in raising the price of coins more then they are worth in their Neighbors
Estate, or in weakening the allay of their coins, the stamp, greatness,
thickness, and weight, remaineing still the same. So as giving them entry,
upon an opinion they have, that they are still according to the ancient
standard, the people find themselves full, before the trial can be made, and
the abuse discovered: The which if you think to remedy in decrying them, and
causing them to be carried to the Mynt, for the price of their bounty, your
Subjects shall sustain a great loss. On the otherside if you suffer this
abuse to continue, they will by little and little draw all the good coin out
of your Estate, to reduce it to the weak Allay of your Neighbors, and then
return it unto you again thus satisfied. Wherefore to hinder this exchange of
coin, they shall hinder the course of foreign coins among the people, to
the end that they which have any, may carry them to the exchangers appointed
for that effect, who shall give them the value esteemed according to their
interior bounty: And they carring them to the Mynt, as they shall be charged:
They shall also clipp in pieces the foreign coin which they shall receive,
in the presence of those that bring them, and they shall be converted into
current coin. So they need not to fear the falsifications of strange Coins,
nor the raising of the Prince: And they shall not be able to draw your current
money out of your Estate, but in bringing Merchandise to the value.

Merchandise whbreof we ought to s^op the entry.
The things whereof we must stop the Entry, and the Commerce in our Estate,
are those which serve for ^yot and excess, the which is the chief means to
impouerish an Estate; as precious stones, exquisite perfumes, spices, not much
necessary, and stuffes, the which serve only for Pomp and show. But if the
abuse be so inueterate, as we cannot hinder them by a prohibition, we must
charge them with such great customs and imposts, as the stranger may have no
desire to bring them, fearing he shall not retire his Silver, and the subject
to buy it, in regard of the dearness. For although that some times this
consideration does not restrain the subject, from buying such Merchandises;
yet by this means he grows poor, the public shall be the more rich by the
great imposts, the which shall supply the place of punishments for excess in
private persons.

CHAP. 41. Of the facillitie of Commerce.
AS for the facillitie and ease of Commerce, it depends of many things, for the
which it is needful to provide: And first for the commodity of the carriage
of Merchandises by Water* Land, Cart, or otherwise; The carriage of Merchandise.
They must provide to make the Rivers Nauigable: The Ports safe, to keep the
ways and passages in good Estate, and due reparation, and free from Pirates and
Thieves. Not to suffer any Monopole which may hinder the liberty of traffiqu^:
Monopolis fo^bidden.
And if it be discovered to punish it rigourously; to inuit Strangers to
bring us the Merchandise which we cannot want, Of the discharge of customs.
by the discharge of Customs and imposts, as much as the necessity of the
Estate will bear.

To Establish such Laws for affairs, Faith and assurance in affairs-Speedy
Justice.
as there may be faith and assurance amongst negotiators; and in case of
difference, speedy and summary Justice, especially in that which concerns
strangers, who forbear to traffic in a place, no less in regard of the
tediousness of Suits, as for the treachery of those of the Country. And for
that a permutation cannot be made without a certain price set down upon
Merchandises, and that they cannot Negotiate with all sorts of people by
exchange, but it is needful to make use of Money: The price and estimation
thereof must be certain and firm; otherwise they should bring a confusion
into the Commerce. But besides this, the interior bounty and value of this
Coin must be easy to judge of, That Silver and Gold are sufficient for all
sorts of Coin.
not only by the weight, but by the eye and sound if it may be. The which may
be done, if they resolve to make use of the mixture of mettalls, no farther
then it is necessary for a remedy; gold and silver suffizing to make all sorts
of Coin.

For in regard of the Coin, if they will not divide the mark of Silver into
eight thousand pieces, as they have sometimes done in Lorraine, for the
Angeuines, which Rene Duke of Aniou and Lorraine caused to be coined, whereof
the two hundred were worth but six pence, and forty a souse of base French
Money; they may reduce them to a third part thereof, to make the pieces more
solid; which may be stamped with a bodkin; making no use of the Copper, whose
price is unequal and variable in all Countries, and moreover is subject to
rust.

Contratiwise the price of gold and silver, The prise of Gold and Silver in
proportion one of another
has changed little, and they have inmpt'vsually in proportion, as one or two,
little more or little less; and the mark of gold vallewed at twelve marks of
silver. Herodotus writes, that in his time a pound of gold was worth thirteen
pound of silver. I do not say, but there has been some Ages and some
Provinces, in the which Gold has been dearer: But this has not been
general, nor of long continuance. Wherefore making the coins of one Metal,
and of a certain weight, greatness, thickness, and well coined in the form
of a medaille that is cast; as the Grecians, Latins, Hebrews, Persians and
Egyptians, in old time did: It would be a hard thing to be deceived.

There is another thing, the which does greatly decay trading, To bring
M^rchants into credit.
which is, the contempt they make in many Estates of those which deal in it,
holding this vocation to be sordid and base. So as they which have gotten a
little wealth, retire themselves speedily, to embrace an other vocation, to the
which the people carry more respect and honor, then to this.

In truth we must confess, that there are certain affairs which should be
left to the poor and common people, Trading at Sea profitable and honorable.
to enrich them. But there are others which they only can execut that are rich;
as that at Sea, which is the most profitable in an Estate, and to the which
they should attribute more honor then they do here: For i^ in all Estates
they have thought it fitting to inuit the Subjects by honor to the most
painful and dangerous Actions, the which might be profitable to the public;
This being of that quality, they should propound and attribute more honors to
those that shall deal in it. And if Nobility has taken its foundation from
the courage of Men, and from their valor; there is no vocation in the which
there is so much required as in this. They are not only to encounter and strive
amongst men, but sometimes against the four Elements together; which is the
strongest proof that can be of the resolution of a Man. This has been the
occasion, that some has been of opinion, that they should open this door to
Merchants to attain to Nobility, so as the Father and the Son has continued
in the same trade; and to suffer Noblemen who are commonly the richest in an
Estate, to practice themselves (without prejudice to their condition) in this
commerce at Sea, which would be more honorable unto them, then to be usurers,
or Banckers, as in Italy; or to impouerish themselves, in doing nothing but
spend, and never gather. Hence will grow many advantages both to the public
and private. To the public, Advantages which the public and private should
receive if the Nobility gave themselves to the Commerc^ at Sea.
For that they that should deal in the commerce, having means, courage, and
sufficiency for this conduct, it would be far greater, putting more Ships
to Sea and better armed, whereof the Estate at need might might make use for
its safety, and would carry the reputation of their Nation far. The which
they cannot do, who being poor, and having no stock but from others, have
not the courage to hazard themselves in a great enterprise. And for the
particular, this commerce being wisely managed, what hazard soever they run,
there is more to be gotten then lost: And if the Gentlemen apply themselves,
without ruining themselves in expenses, or importuning the Prince with
demands, they shall do more in one year at Sea, then in ten at Court. It
availes not to say, That a Gentleman will sooner turn Pyrate then Merchant.
For holding that order which may be prescribed in their Imbarquing, they may so
mingle them one with another, as it would be a difficult thing that all should
agree to commit a villainy. Finally experience has taught, and does daily, that
where the richest have dealt in this Commerce, it has enrich both them, and
the Estate under which they lived: And at this day the examples of the
Venetians, Portugalls, Spaniards, and Hollanders have made it known unto us.

These last being less rich then the others, And order settled by the
Holland^rs for the continuance of the^^r (...) to the East Indies.
but not less courageous and hardy, have settled an order for the continuance
of this commerce to the East Indies, which deserves to be known, which is,
that after they have found by many voyages, which some private Men have made,
that they ruined one another by this concurrence; they advised in the year
1602. to crave leave of the general Estates, to traffic into those parts
before all others, during the space of one and twenty years. The which was
granted them, in regard of five and twenty thousand Florins, which they
promised to pay unto the Estate during the first ten years. Thus reduced all
into one Company, Amsterdam had a Moietie, Middleburg in Zeland a fourth part;
Delphe, Rotterdam, Horn, and Enehusen had either of them a sixth parth: And
the whole stock of this union amounted to six Million of Livers, or six
hundred thousand pounds sterling.

For the direction of this trade, and the interest of the Associats, they have
established in either of these Towns a certain number of Administratours: At
Amsterdam twenty, at Miadleburg twelve, and in either of the rest s^auen. And
if any one dies, the Chamber of the place names three, of which either the
Estates general, or the Magistrate of the Town chooses one.

These Chambers, choose seventeen among the administratours: that is to say,
Amsterdam eight, Midleburg four, Delphe, and Rotterdam two, Horn and Enchusen
two; and the seventeenth is chosen alternatiuely, sometimes at Middleburg, and
sometimes at North Holland: The which are called together to resolve jointly,
of how many Ships, and with what Equipage and furniture, they shall make the
fleet which they mean to send, and to what Fort or Coast they should go.
This assembly is held six years together at Amsterdam, and afterward two
years at Middleburg, and then again at Amsterdam. By the conditions of the
accord, the Ships must return to the same Port from which they parted; and the
spices which are left at Middleburg, and other Chambers, is distributed amongst
them by the weight of Amsterdam; and the Chamber which has sold her spices,
may buy from other Chambers.

By this order they have hither to continued this Commerce with reputation, not
as simple Merchants only; The great reputation which they have gotten by the
means of this Trade.
but as if they were Sovereigns, they have made in the name of the Estates an
alliance with many Princes of those parts; As with the King of Sian, Quadaen,
Patam, Iohor, the Heir of Malaca, Bornean, Achim, Sinnatra, Baretan, Iocotra,
and other Kings of Iatta. They have made themselves absolute Masters of the
Island of Amboyne, where they have settled a president which gouerns in their
name. At Banda they have a Fort for a retreat, where they must deliver them
the Spices at a certain price. In Ternate they have another, a Mile distant
from that of the Portugals. At Magnien^ they have three: At Motire one: At
Gilolo they have taken that which the Portugels had built.

From this example we will conclude, Means to setle the commerce at Sea in an
Estate.
that the only means to settle the commerce at Sea in a Nation, in the which
the best purses will not hazard themselves in these Enterprises; is to force
the Merchants which trade at Sea in certain places, to join one with another,
and not to make their traffic a part. For although that negotiating a part
the gain would be the greater, when the Enterprise succeeds happily: yet we
must consider, that the loss which may happen, would wholly ruin him that
attempts alone: And if in making a Company the gain be the less, yet it is
more assured; and the loss being borne by many, it is less to every one that
is interessed.

Thus dividing the Trade according to the Coast and places where it is made,
they may make diverse Companies; that is to say, one for the Trade of Ginnee;
Another for the Leuant by the Mediterranean Sea; One for the East Indies;
Another for the West Indies beyond the line; Another for that on this side the
line; And one for England, Noruage, Sweden, and other Northern Countries:
forbidding them to attempt one upon another, and to all other private Subjects
which shall not be of the company, to negotiate in those places upon great
pen^lties.

CHAP. 44. Of Parsimony or sparing,
That pa^simony p^e^e^u^s the ^iches of an Estate.
AS abundance is the sourse and fountain of the riches of an Estate, so
parsimony is that which preserues it, consisting in the cutting off of
superfluous and unnecessary things, part whereof come from abroad: so as
hindering the Entry of those, they shall provide in that regard for sparing.
Eor if excess creep not in among the Subjects, the Stranger shall not grow
fat, to the prejudice of the Estate, but the other Subjects shall taste of the
advantage. Yet this is not to say, that excess is tolerable, although that
nothing go out of the Estate, to the which the extreme poverty of some, and
the great wealth of others may breed much trouble. But if some growing poor by
excess, that which is lost, is divided into so many purses, as the public
shall not be able to make use of the increase of their means, which ^eceiu^
the advantage by this excess; this would be likewise worse: For the others
remaining poor, it would be so much advantage lost for the Estate. Whereas if
he that spends, retained his expenses within the bounds of necessity, and
conuenience without excess, he should be always found to have means to
succor the public a^ ^eed. Parsimony impo^ts ^uch ^or the ^a^ety of an
Estate.
But this moderation does likewise import much for the safety of the Estate.
For great men being they which usually run into these expenses after they
have ruined themselves, they are either a charge to the public to be
maintained and entertained by it: or receiving nothing from the public, they
abandon themselves most commonly to many innouations and enterprises
prejudicial to the Estate. And therein some Princes are deceived, who hold it
a greatness to entertain this excess in their Courts. Against exc^sse
It is only mere vanity which ruins those which follow it, and depriues them
of the means to continue the Service, which the Estate might expect from them,
if they governed themselves otherwise: For that at the end of ten years at the
most, a Gentleman grows so poor, as he is forced to retire, and to hide
himself in his house, and most commonly much indebted, being no more able to
show himself in the Equipage of others of his condition. Whereas if Princes
restrained them, so as no man might spend more then his Revenues will bear,
they should be served longer by their Nobility, and should not be so often
importuned with demands, recompenses, and reproaches, that they are ruined in
their service. Wherefore be it in regard of Strangers, or inconsideration of
the Estate, they must cut off excess, but especially that which brings with it
the ruin of people and of great families. When rei^ excess death consist.
This Excess is principally in great and sumptuous buildings; in moueables,
apparel, and ornaments of the person; In the train of servants and
attendants, in shows; in Banquets and Feasts, in Plays of show and hazard. For
the first, it seems that the greatness and sumptuousness of buildings, O^
excess in buildings.
turns in some sort to the benefit of the public, and that they ought not to
forbid it, but rather inuit every man to build for the ornament of Cities and
Towns. But as a general prohibition would be something prejudicial to the
public; so the free and indifferent tolleration of this expense, is hurtful
not only to the public but to the particular. It ought to be allowed to a
great man, and a rich Subject, who has few or no Children, to spare his
Crowns, to employ them in the Ornament of the public. This cannot be termed
Excess. Neither would I hinder many Treasurers and partisans, who have done
their business with the public, and profited largely, to make the like
expenses. But if in stead of building of private houses, they will raise some
public Edifices, I would esteem them the more: But yet I would desire to
add two restrictions; the one, that they should not build with any Materials,
but such as are found in the Estate where they live: The other to forbid them
guilding and enriching with Gold or Silver, which ought not to be allowed, yea,
rather in public buildings, there being nothing that does so much decay Gold
and Silver in an Estate, as the like works.

As for the common and private buildings, they may without this great expense
provide in building for the ornament of the public, An order in the low
Countries for buildings in Towns.
after the manner which they observe in many Towns of Flanders and the Iowe
Countries: where the order is such, that he which means to build, takes not
only the plot from those which are deputed to that end by the Magistrate, but
also the project of the front, or face of the building, the which must answer
upon the street: The beauty whereof consists more in a certain proportion,
then in any enriching either of stuff or workmanship: And it shall be most
commonly made according to the front of some near house, of small charge,
according to the which they shall rule them selves for the height and fashion
of the Doors, and other exterior parts. So as in succession of time all the
houses of a Street (building according to this project,) are found alike, and
by this resemblance and proportion, they are very pleasing unto the eye.

From this policy there redounds unto them another advantage, which is, that
the workmen by the establishing of this order, being advertised of the form
how they are to make the Doors and other parts which must answer upon the
Street; they have them ready long before: So as private men that will build,
they have presently raised their houses, which are for the most part of brick,
finding that little stone that shall be necessary ready cut. It is therefore
easy to cut off this excess, and to provide for the ornament of Town^s, in
restrayning every man in his buildings according to his means, that the front
may be answerable to the nearest houses, if there be observed in them any
proportion or pleasing prospectiue: Making the public places spacious, the
Streets large, straight, and long; yet in such sort as neither the great heat,
nor cold may annoy passengers: for therein chiefly consists the beauty of a
Town.

The excess of moueables, Apparel, and other Ornaments of the person, must
in like manner be cut off; Of the excess of moueables.
as precious Stones, Enamell, Embroideries, Stuffes of Gold and Silver, and all
strange Manufactures of great price. If they will adorn themselves with Gold,
they may allow it in chains without Enamell; in the which the loss cannot be
great: For the which the Ordinances of France have well provided, and the
Magistrates very ill.

That excess which consists in a great train of attendants, is excused upon
two considerations: Excess in a great train.
The one which regards the commodity of those that will be attended, the other
upon the feeding and employing of many men, the which being poor, and having
no employment, would be forced to steal or to dye for hunger, if they had not
this retreat. In regard of the first consideration, if the number of Servants
were regulated according unto the commodity, it were no excess: But to feed
many unprofitable Mouths, which we might well spare without any want, it is
vanity that makes us do it. As for the second, which is to employ many
profitable persons to all other things, this is so^farre from doing good to the
public, as by this retreat they inuit many to be idle: which if they
wanted, they would fall to learn some trade, or thrust themselves into the
War and serve the public The Ven^tians, A g^od order made by the Vene^^ans.
have better then any other provided for this point. For not able to regulate
the number, which was necessary for the commodite of private persons, they have
cut off that which served only for show, which is the atendants in public:
Not suffering a Gentleman, how great and rich soever he be, to be followed
with above two servants, giving him liberty to have as many in his house as
he shall think good. The which is the cause, that not able to make use of
this vain train in public, every man keeps but wh^ he* needs in his house.

But as the ordinance is more easy to execute in a Town, then in a Princes
Court, whore, for that the discommodities are greater, they have need to be
served by a greater number, and must likewise satisfy the vanity of the
Court: The Italians and Spaniards, who are in this regard good husbands, seeing
themselves forced to this train for a time, make use of Men whom they retain
with them, for daily wages; and knowing how much they are to give them by the
day, they are not tied to seed them, nor to keep open house for them, as they
do in France and Germany: And going from Court, this troop is dismissed, there
remaining none but the ordinary train; and thus they satisfy vanity and good
husbandry altogether. I confess that this point would be hard to reform in
France, every Man des^^ing to eat his means in good Company. Yet there might
be some course taken that might diminish their disorder.

The excess of Banquets and Feasts, is that which is most esteemed, ^x^ess^ in
Fe^st^.
especially among the Northern Nations: But in effect it is the most
superfluous and beastly. I do not say but upon some occasion, as in public
rejoicing and marriages, it is fit to make more expenses then we do in our
ordinary cour^e of living; but yet we must fly superfluity, and provide
principally for neatness, order, and seemelinesse, which must be regulated
according to the number and quality of persons whom you treat. Wherefore it
imports the Estate and private Men much, that this should be reformed.

In regard of Plays, those of hazard are forbidden in all Estates: But the
defenses are so ill observed, Excess of Play.
as many great families ruin themselves thereby. As for Plays of show, as
Tilting, Turneyes, and Masks; those that may quicken the courage to Virtue,
as the two first, ought not only to be allowed, but the Nobility should be
invited unto it; yet so, as the expense may not seem greater then the valor;
carrying such a moderation, as it may not ruin any Man; and in regard of those
which have no other ground then vanity or love, and being apish followers,
whereof most part of those which have employed themselves therein, have been
afterward ashamed; they deserve not only to b^e forbidden, but scor^ed at as
ridiculous. Wherefore these doors being shut, by the which the faculties and
means of private Men flow away incensably, there is no doubt, but those
streams which run from this abundance, whereof we have spoken, will so
swell, that when the public will make use, they may well do it without
drawing private Men into necessity.

These two foundations being laid, of the abundance of all things necessary,
and of the parcimony of Subjects, we must now speak of the settling of the
Finances, or ordinary Revenues, the which have been diverse according to the
diversity of Estates.

CHAP. 45. Of the Establishment of the Finances, or ordinary Revenues of an
Estate.
MAny have Established the principal reuenew of an Estate, or public
demesus, which is the most honest, Of the ordinary reuenew of the Demesus and
of its Estblishment.
the most just, and the most safe, there having been certain Lands and
Demesus reserved, to be let out to farm, and given to particular men for a
time or in perpetuity, in paying the Rents and Revenues, wherewith they had
been charged toward the Prince. In some Estates this reservation has been
of a Moietie, in others of the third part of the territory, and in others of
less.

This Establishment is hard to make^ unless it be by the means of a full and
absolute conquest, by the which it is lawful for the Victor to prescribe what
Law he pleases to the vanquished; but being once made, he must be
maintained without any alienation; But likewise an engagement and no
alienation, That an alienationis not to be allowed much l^sse an engagement.
for that the engagement in the end grows to be an alienation, by means of
the necessity which the Prince has always to be releiued upon new affairs
which happen. So as he is so far from being able to redeem it, as he is
pressed to make new engagements, the which being made for a far less value,
then the alienation would be, the Prince finds himself deprived of his
Revenues for a small relesse; and it may be said, that it had been profitable
to sell, then to engage. But to do better, we must not allow neither to one
nor the other: And if he cannot find money otherwise, he must not engage but
the use of it for a certain time, the which expired, the Prince may re-enter
into his Demesus.

The second means, which they make use of to raise a stock of Treasure, are
the entries, Entries and going forth o^ the Estate.
and going forth to Merchandise, Havens and Ports, as well upon strangers as the
Subjects: An ancient and general course, iu^t, lawful and most profitable,
with the conditions which we have mentioned speaking of Commerce; which are not
to suffer the tra^ique of things which are necessary for life, until the
subject be furnished, nor of raw stuffes, to the end the subject working them,
they may draw profit from the manufactures: To suffer the trafique of those
which are wrought, and the bringing in of that which is raw by strangers: But
they must moderate the imposts, of necessary things, which are brought unto us
from abode.

Some likewise have esteemed Tributes, Gifts, Tributes, Gifts, and Pensions.
and Pensions, which they receive from strangers, for an ordinary Reuenew. But
this being not sufficient for the entertainment of charges, it cannot be
called a stock of Treasury; although it may serve to increase the stock.

The fourth means is in trafique which they may make in the name of the
public or Prince. Trafique in the name of the public.
As there are many trades unworthy of a Prince or public, so there are some
which require a great stock, the which may well be allowed them. Yet it would
seem more profitable, in regard of the theft which Factors do commit, to give
the money which they have in reserve, to those which trafique, To deliver mon^y
at ^nterest to merchants.
upon good cautions and sufficient assurance, with a mean interest (as they
say Augustus did) then to trafique. Hence would grow three or four advantages.
The first it would increase the public money. The second, it would give
means to private men to profit and gain: And the third, that they should save
by this means the public money out of the hands of importune beggars,
flatterers, and favorites; Of the ^ale o^ Offices.
and prevent the facility of a prodigal Prince. There is another kind of
trafique which is used in some Estates, the which is the sale of offices and
public charges, which is not only dishonest, but most pernicious: And yet
this abuse is gone so far, as this trafique Is not only received but
carefully handled, as an ordinary stock of the Treasure.

The sourse and begi^n^ng of this a^use.
To prevent it, it is necessary to know upon what pretext this abuse is crept
in. As all new inventions are grounded upon public necessities; so this has
been advanced under this pretext. Seeing that in regard of the multitude, of
those which might aspire to charges, Princes refer themselves to courtiers,
and to such as were about them, to make choice of Officers; And Courtiers
having no other aim, then to work their own ends, propounded unto Princes,
those which promise them most money underhand, to be preferred before their
Competitors: So as although the Prince did not sell the Offices, yet they were
venall, the profit going to particular men that were about them: They found it
more reasonable, seeing the abuse was such, and that growing from the ordinary
carelessness of the Prince, it would be difficult to reform; that the
public should the trafique, by the means whereof it might be eased in some
other charges, then to suffer it to be done by private persons.

In truth this mischeife is less then it was, seeing the public profits
something thereby; but yet not withstanding it is evil, and most preiuditiall
to the Estate: For the which there is more remedy, but to quicken the
vigilancie of the Prince, or of those which have charge of the public, to
make choice of those which are to be advanced: being more fit (for the
Officers) to leave unto them the choice and the Election, to the end that
gratifying him whom they hold most fit to serve, he should be more bound unto
them, and show himself more ob^dient then he would be, if he had obtained it
by his own merit, or for money. But for that it is impossible that the choice
could be made in the confusion of so many Competitors, which might pretend to
one Office: the Princes seeming to have some excuse therein, the means above
propounded might serve for a Remedy, Establishing many degrees in the Offices
of every profession, as well in Arms, Justice, the Treasure; as Religion; and
prescribing a certaiue time, that every one ought to remain in every degree,
before he can pretend to mount higher; For that it would be more easy for the
Prince, to choose out of the number of those which had served their time, him
whom he pleases, to advance him to the next degree, there being some place
void; then it is after the manner they now live. And for all this they should
cut off nothing of the Princes favor. Inconveniences which grow by the
venallity of Offices.
For he that is thus advanced, should be only bound to him and not to any
other. Whereas having no means to be known unto the Prince but by the
mediation of other persons, whose knowledge he has bought for ready money; he
is many times more obliged to the Groom then to the Master, for the favor he
receives; but much more to his purse: And by little and little the affection
of Officers, toward the Prince, is lost by these courses, there being none of
all those which practice these means, but blames them, and esteems the Prince
less which suffers them, then if they proceeded another way.

The Prince should be better served, not only with more affection and
fidelity; but also with more diligence and sufficiency. For the Officers
coming to the highest and supreme degrees, they would be much more capable,
as has been said; And every Man desireing to make himself known to his
Prince, to be preferred before his Companion, would serve with envy, and
endeavor to make himself to be observed by some service. Whereas the Officer
in this venallity, having no other hope to advance himself then by his purse,
seeks what he can to profit, be it by right or wrong, to have means to
purchase some greater Office, wherein he may benefit himself better. But we
will leave this reformation to another time, when they shall be more capable.

CHAP. 46. Of Subsedies, of Extraordinary Leuies, Imports, and Loane^.
THe fist means to make a stock for the Treasure, is taken wholly from the
subjects; whom they have shorn after diverse manners in many Estates, and in
some they have flead them. This means cannot be excused but upon necessity:
But if it be necessary it is likewise just; the safety of the people and the
preservation of the Estate being the Supreme Law.

Of Subsedie^.
The most ordinary manner to leuy upon the Subject, is by way of Subsedy, for
the goods which he enioyes; the which also has been diversely practiced,
according to the diversity and condition of subjects and goods. Clergy M^n and
the Nobility in some places, are exempted with their goods, Diverse forms of
Subsedies and Leu^es.
of what condition soever they were. In other places they made the Subsedies
real, exempting the Feodall, or noble-lands; the persons as well of Nobles as
Ecclesiastiques, having submitted themselves to contribute for their rural
goods which they possess* In some Estates and other places they have exempted
the Nobles and Ecclesiastiques, and the lands which they held in their own
hands; but they have not exemptted their Farmers.

To dispute which is the most just of all these forms of Leuies, were
unprofitable. For this Establishment has not been made according to the rules
of Judgment; but according to the facility and disposition which they have
found in people, to receive one form more th^n another. Yet if any ought to
enjoy an exemption, it seems that Gentlemen, Of those which ought to be
exempted from Subsedies.
who are bound to a personal service, and to contribute for the defense of the
Estate, not only their goods but also their lives, may with Justice be
exempted from this kind of imposition; seeing that the burden which is imposed
upon them, is much more greiuous and heavy then that of the Cannons.

In regard of Clergy men, the respect and reverence of Religion has held them
long exempt: But in the end in those places especially, whereas the Subsedies
are personal, Justice has wrested out of their hands, some succors for the
public, whereof they make a great part; which succors, although they be not
called Subsedy, but a chautatiue grant; Yet vnder^ a milder name it has the
same effect. As for others, some have been exempted, partly to preserve the
respect due unto the Offices which they hold of the Prince; and partly to
authorize and maintain the Leuies, and to punish the disobediences. Others
have been exempt, for the fear of some sedition and Rebellion, and for the
good of peace only: So as they use the like policy with them, as they do
with the Clergy; and draw Succors from them under the Names of Loanes and
borrowing.

As for the place where the Subsedy is to be levied, either at the Man's
dwelling house, Of the place wh^re they are to make the leuy of the Subsedies.
or at the place where his Lands and Goods lie: Many hold opinion, that the
most just were, to leuy the Subsedy in every place, where the man that is
subject to the Subsedy has goods, by reason of the frauds which are committed
usually by such as have goods in many places who se^ing themselves charged at
the place of their abode wi^h a great Subsedy, proportionable to the estimation
of their goods, retire themselves either to a Town that is freed from
Subsedies, or into some place where they pay not so much; whereby their Subsedy
is laid upon others. But if the Subsedy were laid upon their goods, they should
cut off this abuse, which does much import the poor people.

These difficulties are found in the laying of the Subsedy, as well in regard
of the exemptions pretended by many conditions of men, Introduction of tolles,
tributes, and imposts.
as for the inequality and disproportion in the laying thereof among such as
are subject: and the faculties of every one upon whom it should take hold,
being unknown, it had ministered occasion to seek many other courses, and to
impose many duties sometime upon proprieties, sometime upon Legacies, and
testamentory successions, left to strangers; upon carriages as well by water as
land; upon Wine, Meal, Salt, and other Merchandise; upon Contract, Seals,
Waights, and Measures: Of which tolls every man insensibly pays his part; the
Merchant making the advance of those which are levied upon the Merchandise, the
which he retires afterward from parti^ular persons which they buy of him.

Yet some which disalow of this diversity of poling and tributes in an Estate,
holding a Subsedy the most just, if it were well ordered, Introduction for the
nu^bring of goods.
have thought to bring in a certain and settled order, whereby they might
regulate themselves in drawing from every man the number of his goods. This
order has been practiced in many Commonweals; but never more happily, nor
with more advantage to the Estate, then in that of Rome.

To say that this expedient is more proper for a Commonweal, Practiced by the
R^m^ns.
then for a principality, there is little color, seei^g that when it was
established at Rome, the Estate was governed by King Seruius Tulliu^; and
continued under all the Emperors which sought to govern justly. Ab^lished by
Ty^ants.
And contrariwise the Tyrants which sought by the means of a small number to
govern, tread under foot, and oppress others, to enrich some, and to
impouerish others; Finally, to turn all topsie turuey, for that they would not
discover their Iniustices, violences, and tyran^ies; have neglected this order,
laying their exactions with more impunity upon the weak, then if they were
divided among them all with a just proportion.

To say likewise, Imaginary inconveniences of the nu^bring of goods.
that it were a hard matter to expose the poverty of some to scorn and
contempt, and the wealth of others to envy; it is a very bad reason to hinder a
good establishment: For never man of understanding, in that which concerns his
good, made any account of envy or scorn. But besides this we may say, that on
the other side envy would cease against such whom they held rich, and have
nothing; and the scorn against such as have some wealth, who notwithstanding
were held poor. It is certain that the deceitful Merchant, who has a
design to steal the goods of another by playing banquerout, will say, that it
is not good they should know the course, traffic, and negotiations of
Merchants, which consist many times in papers and credit; nor that they should
discover the secrets of Houses and Families. But he that is an honest man, and
will be known for such, for a good husband, and not a deceiuer, will ground
his credit upon his Discretion, and not upon the uncertainty of his affairs;
and will always take delight, they should know his estate and manner of
living: And there is no man which does not more willingly lend an ear to a
poor man, who shall be known for an honest man, and a good husband, then to a
rich, which shall be held for a bad husband, and of little faith.

But in recompense of these imaginary inconveniences, Aduant^g^s which will
come unto the ^st^^^*
an infinite number of advantages redound to the Estate, by the establishment
of this order. For thereby they should know who are prodigal, banquerouts,
cozeners, and Usurers; how some gain so much, and others spend: And moreover,
the penalties of Judgments and condemnations, would be easy to regulate by
the Judges, according to the ability of every man's estate. The deceipts which
are practiced in Marriages, Sales, Bargains, and in all public and private
negotiations, would be discovered and known: An infinite number of frauds
which are used touching Successions and portions, would be auerred, without
inquiery, or rather charges of Law; and they should prevent falsehoods and false
Witnesses, which are practiced daily. But besides these advantages, to return
where we left, the facility wou^d be great in a necessity to draw succors from
the Subjects without iniu^tice, not oppressing one more then another; as it
falls out usually, some bearing the whole burden, and others being discharged.

This facility of extraordinary leuies is the fourth point; which may cause an
Estate to be held rich. Of ^x^ra^rdinary l^uies.
For we shall in vain brag of the abundance of an Estate, and of the
ordinary stock of the treasure: the which as we have ^ayd, how great soever
it be, may be exhausted, and sometime i^gaged, if the public in an urgent
necessity may not be releiued by some extraordinary leuy, which may be done
without Injustice, disco^tentment, or insupportable oppression of any part of
the Subjects, which would draw after it reuolts, seditions, and intelligences
with the Enemies.

T^is numbering of their goods being unable to be brought in, to equal every
man in such sort of contributions, they must have a recourse to other means,
the most just and plausible that can be devised, according to the quality of
Estates, and the condition of times, the which being unable to set down now in
particular, it shall suffice to say gene^all, that the imposition which extends
it self universally o^e^ all the Subjects, of what condition soever they be,
is the most gentle, the most profitable, and the most just: For that every man
paying, every man pays the less, then if it were levied of a less number;
and yet it is far greater; wherein it is more profitable to the Estate: And
it is more just, for that every man having an interest in the preservation of
the Estate, every one is likewise bound to contribute. But the principal part
of Justice would be^ if it be proportioned and laid equally among them that
contribute, according to the proportion of every man's estate; If the leuy be
made without rigorous executions, especially against the person. The contrary
whereof does usually happen upon levy of the Subsedies, the which being
imposed upon view of the Country, as they say, and without any certain
ground, the goods of every man being unknown to direct them, and leuying it
upon the poorest, they cause them many times to dye in Prison, which is a
poverty resenting Barbarism: Or to get some delay of payment, the poor man
must satisfy the Avarice of Receivers, and Sergeants, which ruin him by such
concussions, the which many times exceed the principal of the Subsedy.

But if some considerations be just, to exempt certain conditions of persons,
Of casual impositions.
or that making the imposition general, some trouble is to be feared*; they
must have recourse to those that are casual As after the Civil Wars at
Rome, they settled the twentieth part of Successions and Legacies, which were
left to Strangers or Collaterals. And before in the time of War likewise, at
the request of the Consul Manlius, they ordained the twentieth part of
infranchised men.

In Scotland Malcolana having sold all the Kings Demesus, the Estates of the
Country agreed, that the Fees changing hand, should pay unto the King a
certain right of redemption.

Impositions likewise and customs may be justly Of customs and impo^itions.
laid upon all that which may corrupt the manners of the Subjects, either to
contain them, or to han^sh them away. This reason was the cause that in some
Estates they have charged suits with diverse duties; and in others they have
only punished them that sled from them, imposing great amercements upon them
that sailed; and in others they have punished rash pleaders, which lost their
causes; as at Athens and Rome. Those likewise which may be established without
opposition, which come from some Body united and of authority, may be received
for the facility of their establishment, to the which they have many times more
regard in such things, then unto Justice. But if the necessity be such, as they
must provide a speedy remedy, and that they cannot attend the time, which would
be necessary for the establiment, and the leuy of an imposition: there is no
other means, then to make use of voluntary borrowing^, upon those that are
best able, Of voluntary borrowing.
whom they shall pay at a prefixed time without sailing, to the end they may
maintain the credit of the public, and that whenever the like necessity
should happen, they might find the purses of private men open to succor him.
But if he cannot find money without interest, he must to the end to stay the
course, provide for the payment both of principal and interest by the same
assignation, the which shall be delivered into the hands of such as lend, as
well being assured by this means of their due, they might lend another time
more freely: As for fear, that this assignation remaining in the hands of
those which manage the business, it should be otherwise disposed of, whereby
the the Prince should not only ^oose his credit, but should find himself at
the end of the time charged with great interest.

CHAP. 47. Of the mannaging and good husbandry of the Treasure: That is to say,
of the ordring of the expenses, and the cutting it off.
THe ground of the Finances being found, we must order the mannaging, which
consists in two principal points. The one concerns the husbanding of it, the
other the quality of the persons which are to be admitted to this mannaging.
The husbanding has two parts, that is to say, the order and governing of the
expenses, or if it exceeds the receipt, the cutting off part of the charges.

Touching the order of the expense, if in all things that which concerns God,
is to be preferred, Of the order of the expenses.
the same must likewise be observed in the Treasure. Wherefore the first
Chapter of the expense, must be of Alms, wherein he may not be sparing. Alms.
The Kings of France have had goodly examples in St. Lewis, who founded and
endowed Twenty eight Bodies or Colleges, as the Seigniour of I^inuille says;
And had daily in his train one hundred and twenty poor, Charities of the King
St. Lewis:
and in Lent two hundred and forty, feeding them with meat from his Table. So
he lived in great honor, feared of his Enemies, reverenced by his Friends,
adored by his Subjects, and after he had Reigned Forty four Years, he left
two Sons, whose posterity have Reigned, and do yet over the French; and his
Realm exceeding rich, and flourishing to his Successor, recommending
especially unto him, that he should be devout toward Almighty God, and
charitable unto those who are poor and miserable. Alms do never impouerish
an Estate, Alms do never impouerish
nor a family, but contrariwise they enrich them with all sorts of blessings.

The second Chapter of the expense must be the freeing of the charges of the
Estate, The freeing of charges neces^a^y for the Estate.
but first of those which are necessary for its safety; as the pay of
Soldiers, Munitions, Artillery, Ships and Vessels of War, Repayrations and
Fortifications of Towns and important places, entertainment of Spies, and
finally all the Expenses, as well ordinary as extraordinary, necessary to
warrant the Estate, against the invasion of strangers, or the revolt of
Subjects. Of the Fees of officers and debts.
Next must follow the Fees of Officers, especially of those, by whose means
they hold the rest in their duty and obedience, these making a part of the
safety. Then follow the debts, which I place next to the necessary charges for
the safety: For that if by the means of these charges, the Estate be not
secure, the debts cannot be assured.

Recompenses to the discharg of the Treasure.
After these come Recompenses; with which they shall not charge the Treasure as
little as may be, for the which the King must bestow Offices and Dignities, and
accustom all the great Men not to seek any other kind of Recompense, which is
of most share and more durable, then that which is made by money. For a Prince
which aduanceth some one to hon^r that has done him service, Th^^e which are
made by offices and dig^ ni^es are to be p^^erre^ before that which is done by
^oney.
he publishes the merit of him whom he recompenceth, and his favor withal,
the which remains continually in the mind of him that receives it; And it
lasts as long in the minds of the people, as they see him, who has received it
in this degree: And moreover the remembrance which they have, to have seen a
Man gratified for his merit, many by this means are invited to serve, seeing
services so honorably rewarded* whereas to recompense in money, few know it,
and the grace many times continues no longer then the money lasts.

The Prince may likewise recompense his servants, to the discharge of his
Treasure, in procuring either for them or theirs, marriages and alliances of
advantage; Not thereby to force his Subjects, for that were tyranny: But he
that sees himself debarred of the Princes favor, is glad sometimes to
approach by the means of the alliance of one, that is in grace with his
Master, though otherwise inferior in means, and family; Especially when the
inequallity is not such, as he may receive some dishonor by the alliance.
Knowing then how to husband these kind of recompenses, the greatest part of
great services will be rewarded; and recompenses of small services will be of
so little moment, as they will not greatly charge the Treasure.

After recompenses follow gifts, the which must not be done at pleasure: Gifts
and gratifications.
But as recompenses are made for services done, gifts must likewise be for
services, according to the quality and impo^tance thereof, as also to the
quallity, sufficiency, and power of the person, the Prince must moderate his
bounty, A Prince must give to many little and often.
and give not to one alone, but to many, little, and often. I say to many, for
that in giving to one alone, the envy is great, the grace little, and the
ingratitude of him that rece^ues, may one day be hurtful. I say little and
often, especially in money, which is soon consumed, for that the great expense
in gifts wast the Treasure, and accustom those that receive them, to moderate
dem^unds. Small bounties often reitterated, are as it were insensible; the
grace is the more durable in the minds of those which receive them, and the
desire and hope in continuing the service to receive daily, bind Men the more.
I except the gifts that are made to Ambassadors and Foreign Princes, the
which are done for reputation, and to show the magnificence of him that gives
them, or of his Estate, and may in no sort be omitted where they have been
accustomed.

Election of public houses and Seminaries for instruction of youth, as well in
the liberal Arts as Mecha^^ck.
The expense which follows, is that which has been propounded by some, for
the breeding up and instructing of youth, to that whereunto they shall be found
fit, (especially the poor) as we have formerly said, by the Erecting of
public houses, for manual Arts, and all sorts of manufactures: Whereunto may
be added the building of Seminaries for piety, and the study of Divinity,
Seminaries of piety.
and other learned vocations; and some for the excercises of honor and virtue
of the Nobility. In many Estates they have provided a great number of
Seminaries, for piety and the sciences; but the greatest are so ill governed,
as they are become unprofitable, by the disorder which is found in them.

Seminaries of honor for the instruction of Gentlemen.
As for Seminaries of honor and virtue, I mean those places which are
destinated for the instruction of the Nobility, which are to be employed in
Arms; in long and dangerous voyages; and in the mannaging of public
affairs: Whereof hitherto they have made small account. And yet the safety and
reputation of an Estate, especially of a principallity, consists in those of
this condition: Who, if with that greatness of courage, which is not natural
unto them, they join industry and prudence, which may be gotten by exercises
and instructions, fit for their profession; there is no doubt but many would
have been more capable to serve the public, then they are.

The profit of the said Seminaries of honor ^or the Estate.
It were a great Art both of policy and wisdom, if the Prince should cause
the young Gentlemen of his Estate to be bred up in those places, whose Fathers
have not the means to undergo the charge of such an instruction, as is
necessary for them of this condition: And there to entertain the^ at the
charge of the public, unto a certain Age, to ^e distributed and do service
in the troops and garissons, affecting c^^taine places of honor unto them, with
suffi^^^^^ ^^terta^ment, to the which they may be ad^a^ced a^^r they have
se^ued some time. For besides that these M^n, governing all the affairs of the
Prince, they would be more faithful unto him: The Gentlemen who find
themselves burdened with many children, and who for fear to leave them
miserable, become housedoues, to husband both their lives and goods, would
hazard the one and the other freely for the Princes service, and not be
diuerted for the care of their Children, whom they knew could not one day fail
of preferment, as well by reason of the institution, as for the beginning of
employment for the Princes service, which should be assured unto them. And the
charge which should be made in these Seminaries, would be recompensed by the
service, which the whole Nobility, would be thereby invited to do, willingly
and freely to the public: And the troops, especially those of Foot, would
be found with more order, discipline, fidellity, and courage, being filled
with young Men of good houses, bred up with honor and obedience, then they now
are, being for the most part Men of no moment, Ryotous, and drawn together
from all parts.

After all these expenses, come those which may serve either for the commodity,
Expenses for the commodity and decoration of Town and Pr^uinces.
or the decoration of Towns and Provinces; as conduits of Water, structure of
Bridges, repairation of ways, Churches, Royal Palaces, Pyramides, Tombs,
Statues, Collosses, and other public buildings: But with this restraint,
never to enter into those expenses, until the sparing of the so^me which is
necessry, be first made. For to multiply the Subsedies, to make Palaces, more
stately then necessary, were to leave a remembrance of his tyranny, aad a
perpetual testimony to posterity, that they have built with the blood of the
Subjects.

Behold the principal husbandry which consists in the order of the expense.
Cutting off Expenses.
But the stock of the Treasure being not sufficient, to bear all these
charges, most part of which seem necessary; they must seek the means to
raise the Farms, and fall to the cutting off of debts, especially of
interests, of Fees, and of excessive gifts, rather then to come (as they have
done in many Estates) to make new impositions. In an Estate where the Prince
finds himself ill assured of the will of his prime Men, they have observed the
course which Eumenes used, to borrow of those that were ill affected, to the
end that interessing them in the Estate, and the loss thereof, for fear of
loosing their debt they help to maintain it. But if they find some
hinderance to assure themselves elsewhere, this means would be but weak.
Wherefore a Prince must never borrow, unless it be in an urgent necessity:
For there is nothing that does so much harm to a bad husband, (as the public
is many times) then credit.

Of the justice and necessity of cutting off of debts.
I know that many hold, that this cutting off of debts or wages is unjust: as in
truth it is, if the Estate has wherewithal to pay: But if the sparing of the
ordinary Reuenew be not sufficient to satisfy, the necessity makes this
cutting off necessary and just. For to satisfy it by a new imposition, were to
repair one injustice by another more general, and to draw most commonly from
the poor to give unto the rich; in which cutting off part of the interest of
debts, will not prejudice so much, although it be great, as a Subsedie would do
the Poor. I do not say, that among those to whom the Prince is indebted,
there may be some one found, to whom this cutting off would be hurtful: But
for one of that quality among the Princes creditors, there would be five
hundred of the poor reduced to beggary, if they should by that means pay the
debts due by the Estate: the which I understand of Estates which are already
ouercharged with great impositions, and likewise with great debts.

CHAP. 48. Of those which ought to be employed in the government of the
Treasure.
AS for the quallity of those to whom the mannaging of the Treasure ought to be
committed, Of the choice they ought to make of those which are to manage the
Treasure.
if Men could be known, there is not any one, but would make choice to deliver
it into the hands of the most loyal: But making this choice most commonly by
hazard, I say that although we suppose him to be an honest Man, to whom we
will give this charge; yet we must not take neither a poor Man nor a needy,
nor one that is too powerful, nor of too great authority. The first for fear
that through necessity he be not invited to rob us; and the other least that
he steal from us too boldly, and having robbed us, we are not able to call him
to an account, and to punish his thefts.

There is besides this an ordinary fault which is committed in this subject in
many Estates, which is, that they make a trade of it apart, and profession of
the managing of the Princes purse. So as he that enters into it, instructs
himself as to an Art to do his own business; the which he cannot do but
with the prejudice of the public: Thus the elder they grow, the more learned
they are, that is to say prejudicial to the Estate. I do much commend that
ancient custom of the Romans, A commendable custom of the Romans.
to employ young Men in the mannaging of the Treasure, before they advanced
them to any other Offices: For this is to give them occasion to show their
discretion, and for the hope to be one day something more, to encourage them
to do their duties well, and to manage the public Revenues. Besides, this
youth is less auaritious then another Age, and more innocent, and less hardy
in deceipts, easy to be discovered: Youth more fit for the ma^naging of the
Treasure then Age.
So as the Romans leaving them but a short time in these charges, to be
advanced to other honors, they came forth more innocent then they entered.

To say that a long experience is necessary in these places, to manage them
well, That experience is not so much necess^ry.
this were to endeare the trade. The greatest policy in the Treasure to serve
the public, is to have no other but discretion; and to know how to write
down that which he receives and paies; to recover that which he receives not,
having charge to make the recovery, and to follow exactly the commandments and
ordinances of those which have power to ordain. There is no factor in a shop
but understands this. But I will confess, that to know how to steal from the
public cunningly, and to cover and disguise his thefts, he must have a long
experience of ill doing, be it to defend the falsehood of an acquittance, of the
omission of a receipt, of a false reprisall, of a disguising of parties, and a
secret composition with those that are to receive; with other courses o^dinary
to those which deal in this trade; Not meaning to tax honest Men.

Some to make accomptants more diligent to make their receipts, and to hinder
them that they may not maliciously (as it often happens) make reprizes, A form
to regulate Accomptants.
or to ease some more then others, or to use it for their own particular, or
for some other design; have held it fit to regulate their Fees proportionably
to that which they are to receive, and to diminish the^, according unto that
which they shall leave in reprizes, to the end that being interessed in their
own particular, they would be more exact to make their receipts. Others have
given their receipt to make the abatments, with charge to make it good, and not
to bring in any not soluable: The which would seem more just.

As for those which ought to hear and examine the accounts, besides the choice
that they are to make, of the honestest men for this ^ffect; it is necessary to
bind them, to judges according to certain^ forms and orders, which have been
held fit to hinder the abus^s which accomptants, or themselves might commit:
And especially to draw particular Notes of the distribution of the Treasure,
which they shall enjoyne the accomptant to verify, upon those of the receipt
and expense, without any means of dispencing, for any occasion whatsoever; but
afterward he may address himself unto the Prince, if there be any reason to
^ase him.

But as the Prince is not always at leisure, Of Accounts and of those which
are to hear and examine the Accounts.
nor sometimes of experience to regulate and direct his own affairs; and that
moreover, he is importuned by an infinite number of beggars, whom if he should
satisfy, his Treasure would be found too short: To free himself of the
hatred, which the denial of so many demands might purchase him, and to
discharge himself of the importunity; the custom is to send such suitors to a
Council consisting of rough and severe men, more inclined to refuse then to
grant; and who know how to moderate the denialls which they make, as they do
not deprive those which are refused of all hope, to be satisfied in some other
thing: For rough and contumelious denialls, may distaste many, from employing
themse^ues in the Princes service, although the Prince make not the denial:
For that as they love the dog for the Masters sake, it falls out often, that
when the dog bites too sharply, in the end they take exceptions at the Master.

CHAP. 49. Of the Exchequer or sparing of Treasure.
Con^iderations which makes the ^eaping up of Treasure hurtful to a Pu^lique.
THere remains to speak of the Exchequer, the which some have held hurtful
to the public, even that which is made to heap up Treasure, drawing apart
great sums of Gold and Silver, God forbidding it Deutr^nomy. This many times
has caused some to attempt against Estates: As the son of Tygranes, who
besieged Sop^one, a Town in Armenia, which Pompeys Army, to have his Fathers
Treasure. Moreover this gathering together ruins the Commerce and traffic of
the Subjects; and does not hinder the ruin of the Estate, when as the affairs
are thereunto disposed. Sardinapalus l^ft forty Millions of Gold to those which
slew him. Darius left fourscore to Alexander who vanquished him. And many times
the Father, who leaves much Gold and Silver to the Son, leaves him withal a
speedy means to ruin him. For a young Man relying upon his Treasure, thrusts
himself into impossible enterprises, which are above his fo^ces; hates peace;
contemns the friendship of his Neighbors; Enters into War not only
unnecessary and of little profit, but also hurtful.

Yet custom is contrary, as also reason, if we had the consideration of
heaping up of Treasure: For that to gather toget^er money when as necessity
does press, that were too late: For that the bruit of Arms, causing traffic
to ^^ase, Tillage, and the gathering in of fruits, the customs and imposts by
co^s^quence would decay; and the Sub^ect^ (imp^uerished by the lodging of
soldiers, ^^d the holding of the Fields) will be unable to p^y.

But there must be two considerations added for the gathering in of Treasure.
Considerations necessary for the gathering of Treasure.
The one to make it equal to the other forces of the Estate, that is to say,
of persons, whom we may employ, and of Munition of Victuals and War, which are
nec^ssary for us; whereof we must make a Magazine or storehouse before we
gather Treasure. For to hope that without it, the Treasure alone which we
gather will preserve us from ruin, were a vain thing; and the examples above
mentio^ed show it sufficiently. The other considerations is, not to draw
together so much Gold and Silver, as it may incommodate the commerce and
traffic of the Subjects: For this were to dry up the spring of the Treasure.
If the Sea should retain all the waters of the Rivers which disgorge
themselves into it, and not ^eturne them to their fountains, by conduits under
ground; it would dry up the Rivers, and in the end grow dry it self. Wherefore
they which will show any discretion in heaping of Treasure, Prudence and
discretion necesary for the gathering ^f Treasure.
have considered in gross the quantity of money, which goes forth and ^nters
yearly into an Estate: And if there enters more then goes forth, they have
held that a Prince might lawfully, and without any interest of the commerce,
lay up yearly in his Exchequer, as much Gold and Silver, as the entry exceeded
the going forth. But if the entry has not exceeded the going forth, they have
held and with reason, that the Prince ought not to lay up any Treasure.

But in this case there is another Remedy, of which we have formerly made
mention* which is, that after nec^ssary charges are paid, A ^emedy to the end
that sparing may not hinder the Commerce.
the Prince having means to spare somethi^g for his need, he may distribute
it upon moderate in^erest to the Merchants of his Estate, taking necessary
security, (as we have said Augustus did) to y^ild it at a c^rtaine time. For in
this manner, the assuranc^s being good, this supply would be as ready as if it
were in his Coffers: And the interest being such as the Marchan^ may gain
ther^by, the commerce is no way diminished by this sparing, but rather
augmented, and the Subjects and Prince enricht by this means.

But men have been much troubled for the guard of Treasures of Gold and
Silver. Difficultie^ for the keeping of the Trea^ure of Gold and Silver.
The Kings of Peru, kept it in great Massies, of Gold and Silver: The Romans in
Lingotis in the form of Tyles; The Kings of Morocco caused Massy Boules to be
made, which set upon the top of their Mosquees or Temples; Some (to be guarded
more religiously) have put them into Churches. As the guard in a Commonwealth
is not uneasy, so in a Principality or Monarchy it is most difficult. For
they have not so much cause to guard it from thieves, as from their own
Princes, who for their private pleasures, or by the importunity of some
flatterers, scatter that in one year, which their predecessors have gathered
in many. So Caligula spent in one year, seauentie and seven Millions of Gold,
which Tyb^rius (as they write) had drawn together: And Carcalla consumed in
one day, that which Seuerus his Father had spared in Ninteene years.

Wherefore as it is most fitting, that few men should know what is laid up in
the Treasure, least that being too much, it should provoke some through Envy to
se^ke to get it; or being too little, it should make us to be contemned of our
Enemies: So many have held it fit* to ordain not to touch the Treasure, but in
the great necessity of the Prince and State, and by the Council of the
Magistrates, of greatest authority.

CHAP. 50. Of treaties in general, be it for the enter-view and parley of
Princes, or by their Deputies and Emb^ssadours.
EStates are like unto buildings raised high, O^ the car^ and ^^^^ging of (...).
the which although they be built of good m^^erials, and strong Walls, yet to
subsist long, they have need to be supported and underpropped without with
Buttresses, Pillars, and Arches; For that being threatened as well without as
within, they must be rampired against all forces. Wherefore the care of the
affairs of Strangers, especially of his Neighbors, is most necessary for a
Prince, and for any man that shall be called to the Rule or Goue^nment of the
Estate.

This Care consists in three principal points. How a Prince should gouern^
himself with his neighbou^s.
The first is how he shall govern himself with his Neighbors. The second
consists in gaining some credit among them, to have a part in their
deliberations. The third and last, being unable to pass without them, to get
means to pierce into their Designs. The manner how to govern himself with
his Neighbors, depends of the manner of treating with them, and of the
observation of treaties, according unto the which he must govern himself.
The manner of treating depends chiefly of the condition of persons and of
affairs. Yet there are some general considerations which deserve to be known.

The first is in the ouerture, which is made to treat, it many times
happening, Ge^^^^ll consider^t^^^^ (...) the manner (...).
that of two Princes which are Enemies, the one will not seek unto the other
for an Accord, so as the ouerture must be made either by some greater Prince,
or by some Neighbor that is a Friend to both: and sometimes the Ministers of
two Princes meeting accid^ntally together, if they be employed. Argenion, and a
Steward to the Duke of Mantoua, m^eting at Creal Carragio, to condole in their
Masters names for the death of Marquess of Montferrat, made an ouerture for
the treaty of peace, betwixt Charles the eight and Lewis Sforse. King Ferdinand
of Aragon has employed Monks to that effect, Religion giving a free access
to those of this condition, and liberty to speak and propound what they will.
The Ouerture to enter into treaty being made, the Princes resolve to parley
themselves, to the end the treaty may be more secret; or they depute
Ambassadors to that effect.

Many have not allowed of this Enter-view of Princes, although they were
Friends: Of the ent^rview o^ Princes, where they may be a^^pt^^e o^ the
^^^^ndship and good (...) which (...) ^^m^^^y (...).
And pa^ticularly Philip de Comiues, observes many examples of the meeting of
Princes, who being fo^merly good Friends, have become ^nemies after this
Enter-view. Yet I hold that in such affairs we cannot prescribe a certain and
g^nerall Rule; Histories teaching us, that other Princes have parled; and yet
no hatred has ensued: So this depends rather of the Estate of affairs, and of
the conformity and diversity of humors, and manner of li^i^g, of the Princes
and their people, then of the E^t^r-view. That of Lewis the twelfth of France,
and of Ferdinand of Aragon at Sauonne, past fairly: As also that of the
Emperor Charles the fifth, with Pope Clement the seventh at Bolonia; and that
of the same Pope with Francis the first. A Prince be^^^chc p^^he^ ^ust have a
c^r^ not to p^ocur^ E^^y or ^^alous^^ ag^^^ him, no^ (...).


But it shall be discretion in a Prince, before he comes to that, to consider,
if at this parley there may not someth^ng fall out that may breed jealousy or
envy against him, or that may draw him into contempt of him with whom he
t^eat^s. The Emperor Maximilian the first, having appointed a place and Day to
parley with King Lewis the twelfth, came to the assignation. But fearing that
he should not appear so well accompanied as Lewis the twelfth, whose train
was in better order then the Germans, he anoyded this Enter-view, which might
have bred some contempt of him and his with the French; and sought a pretext
before he parted, or the King arrived, excusing himself upon the War which
the Venetians made in Friuly, whether it was necessary for him to transport
himself speedily. The place of parley is likewise v^ry considerable, as well
for the safety, as for the honor which he receives, whom they go to find in
his own Palace.

The consideration of the safety is commonly the principal. And the distrust
which King Francis the first had, Of safety.
that under pretext of a parley with the Emperor Charles and the Pope,
whereunto he was invited during the hostage of his two Sons in Spain) they
would retain him, made him refuse to come. The same consideration has
sometimes been the cause, that two Princes being Enemies, have parlyed upon a
Bridge, made to that end upon a common River, with bars and shuttings betwixt
them; least that the Princes which parley, or those which follow them, falling
into contestation for something, should not attempt one against the other: As
it happened at the parley betwixt Charles the seventh, then Dolphin, and the
Duke of Burgundy, who was slain by Tann^quin Du Cha^tel: which was the cause
that this manner of parling was observed between King Edward of England and
Lewis the Eleventh. But Lewis Sforse having demanded to have the same* form
observed and kept, being to parley with Charles the Eighth in his return from
Naples, they refused him, as to one who ought not to treat with the King as an
Equal, to whose fidelity he did wrong, to demand such assurances. Yet this
has no certain Rules: But they goue^ne themselves in such things according to
the confidence which they may take one of another.

The ordinary course is to choose for these Enter-viewes, either a neuterall
place belonging to some common Friend; or a place upon the frontire, or an
Island; to regulate the number of those which shall accompany the Princes: And
if the jealousy be great, they may specify the Arms, which every one may
carry in these Enter-viewes.

But if of two Princes, the one goes home unto the other, he is bound to do
him the houour of his House: And if the Prince be inferior unto him, he must
send forth the Chief of his Court to receive him: But if he be his equal in
quality, as being both Kings, although there be some debate betwixt them for
precedence, if he come first to the place where the treaty is to be ^ade, he
must go himself.

In the Enter view which was betwixt King Lewis the twelfth and Ferdinand of
Aragon at Sauona, which then belonged unto the Fren^h King, Lewis the twelfth
at the approach of Ferdinands Galley, (before he could land) entered into it,
accompanied only with his Guard; to ^estifie his confidence, and thereby to
assure King ^erdinand of that which he should find in him: And at their going
to land, King Lewis left the right hand to Ferdinand, who lodged in the Castle,
as the most honorable place; and himself went to the Bi^^^ppricke.

When two Princes unequal in quality, parley, some hold that it is for the
inferior to come first unto the p^ace of meeting, (...).
there to attend the greater. Yet the contrary has been most commonly
observed upon this reason, that the less ought to go unto the greater. So as
^e is to go first unto the place where the parley ^s to ^ee made: And this was
particularly practiced, at the enter-view of Pope Clement the seventh, and King
Francis the first, although that Marseilles were in the Kings sub^ection.

It is presumed that two Princes do not meet for small matters, What Princes
ought to, do before their Enter-viewes, not to put their Neighbors in
Jealousy.
the which does many times put their Neighbors in Jealousy of these
Enter-viewes: they must find out some apparent and important pretext, the
which may be pub^ished to free their Neighbors from all Jealousy, under
which they may treat what else they please. When Pope Cl^m^^t the seventh came
to Marseilles, to treat the Marriage of his Niece, with him that was afterward
King Henry the second; this treaty might have been crossed, if they had known
the Design; he borrowed the pretezt of a general peace, and an Enterprise
against Infidels, the which could not put the Neighbors in Alarm, carrying a
fair show, and having in it many particularities, which deserved to be treated
by mouth, be it for the taking away of all difficulties the more easily, or for
the holding the business the more secret.

If they hold it fit to treat by Deputies and Ambassadors, as it is the
ordinary, Of Deputies and Ambassadors to treat with a Prince, and of the
choice they are to make.
the more safe will be to choose a man of a mean condition, experience in
Negotiations, and who understands no less the Estate, affairs, and
dependancies of him with whom he treates, then the Estate and affairs of his
own Master: Qualities of a Deputy or E^bassadour.
Neither must he be interessed in the business whereof he treates. This was an
Error, to commit the soliciting of the difference of the Duke of Ferraria, to
Alberto Pio, Ambassador for France with Pope Iulio the second, Not to be
interested in the business he treates of.
who in steed of pacifying the said Pope against the Duke, he incensed and
urged him the more; fearing that if the said Duke were reconciled to the Pope,
he would get the other Moiety of Carpy, which the said Alberto Pio enjoyed.

I have said of a mean condition, Of a ^^ane condition.
for that the great Men of an Estate are not fit, as well for the just fear
they may conceive of them, that under color of treating, they should suffer
themselves to be practiced by the other side; as for that they have sometimes
interests and reasons, which concern them in their particular, to the which
they do willingly acco^modate the affairs of their Master, and to his
disadvantage: Besides there is seldom found so much patience and sufficiency
in Men of this condition, as is needful in such Negotiations. Neither may they
choose men of a base condition, as Lewis the Eleventh did who employed his
Barber; least that he with whom we treat, or his Deputies, do not find
themselves contemned by this choice. Yet in secret treaties, they stand not
much upon the choice, and these last are commonly most proper, as those of whom
they have least distrust: Unless they hold it more fit to make use of
Ambassadors, which reside with the Prince, with who^ they mean to treat; of
some Prisoner taken in the War, as the treaty of the League, made betwixt King
Lewis the twelfth and the Venetians, by Andrew Gr^tty then Prisoner to the King.

(...) ^cre: (...) of the (...) ^^^enti (...) which (...) made.
These secret Treaties are usually made when there is question to make a League
one with another. They are made for diverse intentions: But most commonly to
entertain and deceive him with whom they treat, or to surprise his enemy, or
to assure himself of two enemies which make War, treating with one secretly,
and the other openly. Pope Alexander the sixth, promised King Ferdinand by a
breife, to assist him for the defense of Naples, in case that Ferdinand should
promise to do the like for the Estate of the Church. The League which was
treated betwixt Lewis the twelfth and the Venetians, was so secret, as neither
Lewis Sforse, nor the Pope, did ever know what had been treated, until the
Army was ready to march. The treaty of the same French King, which Ferdinand
King of Spain, was no less secret, to break the League betwixt Spain and
England, the King of England having sent a Herrald to the King of Spain, to
summon him to perform their League, who arrived at the same time when as the
peace betwixt France and Spain was proclaimed.

Pope Lee the tenth. Having made a League with the Emperor and the King of
Spain, treated with Lewis the twelfth, not by a Public instrument, but by a
scedule under his own hand, to the end the business might be carried more
secretly, and that he might assure himself of all sides. The same Pope
treated afterward secretly with the King of Spain, for the defense of Italy:
Yet meaning to entertain King Francis the first, to slacken the preparations
continued to treat with him, sometimes demanding one thing and sometimes
another, to the end that the one being denied him, he might have a Subject to
break when he should see his time; and to make the French King believe, that
necessity more then his own free will, had induced him to treat with the
Spaniard, with whom he had long before made a secret treaty. And distrusting
that the King would not yield to that which he should demand, he made dluers
ambiguous and irresolute answers. The same Pope made another secret League,
with the Emperor Charles the fifth against King Francis the first, and when he
was forced to declare himself, made show to treat a new with the Ambassador
of Spain.

It is one of the ordinary policies among Princes, and wherewith the best
advised do sometimes suffer themselves to be abused, I hat they must stand
most upon their guards when they pr^pound a treaty, and ^^pecialy during the
treaty.
to propound a treaty to betray his commpanion, Pope Iulio the second, to win
time to make his preparations against the Duke of Ferrara, he entertained King
Lewis the twelfth, making show that he would agree. The proposition of peace
made by Lewis the twelfth upon the difference for the Du'chie of ^ill^^, was a
means to chase the F^^^ch out of that Duchy, the general of N^^ma^dy, having
(...) upon that Subject to make a ^^uy of Grysons, and thinking to spare the
Ki^gs money lost that Estate. The same Pope Iulio the second, to the end nee
might busy the same King, sent his Nuncios to treat a peace, with power to
conclude it, but with certain limitations, which might breed a doubt of his
intention. And having recovered his health, he continued the same treaty, and
at the same time made another offensive League with the Venetians and the King
of Aragon, against the said King. After these practices, the King of Aragon,
and the King of England, kept the French King in doubt, of the League made by
them, to the end they might hinder his preparations. The Emperor Maximillian
the first, to have means to revenge himself of the French King, by a
fraudulent reconcilliation interrupted the treaty which was made betwixt the
said King and the Venetians, and hindered the preparations of War which the
said King might make, making show that he would treat a peace with him.

The Spaniards, to interrupt the League which was ready to be made, betwixt
the Princes of Italy and Pope Clements the seventh, after the battle of
Pauia, propounded unto the said Pope to treat an accord. The which not only
hindered the League, and stayed the preparations of War which he might make;
but also caused him to discharge the troops which he had drawn unto him for
his safety. Hugo de Moncada, made other prepositions of an accord to the same
Pope, to make him the more negligent to think of his defense.

Bourb^n, leader of the Emperors troops, entertained the Pope with an accord,
whilst the Army marched toward Rome. The Goufalonier of Florence, to keep
Pope Clement from attempting any thing openly against the City, entertained
him with hope of some secr^t pra^^ises. The Spaniard (who in matter of State
make no great difficulty to break their faith,) do more usually practice this
policy then any other Nation.

Alexander the sixth, (as Guichardin says,) to busy his enemies excused those
things that he could not deny, and devised those were doubtful, pacifiyng some
with promises and good looks, and assuring others by diverse means, treating
with them a part, to the end he might breed a iealousiy among them, and
disvnite them.

Gonsalue in the treaty which he made with the Duke of Calabria, swear upon
the holy Host, that he would send him into France to his Father Frederick.
But the interest of State prevailed more with him, then the opinion of Men, or
the fear of God; so as he sent them into Spain. He makes the like reckoning
of the faith which he had given to Duke Valentine by his safe conduct;
Notwithstanding the which he sent him Prisoner into Spain; But Ferdinand of
Aragon his Master sent him back. For having sent Phillip Archduke of Austria
into France to treat an agreement upon the difference, for the division made
of the Realm of Naples, betwixt him and King Lewis the twelfth, in regard of
the limits and bounds: Notwithstanding that the said treaty had been sworn by
the French King on the one side, and the said ArchDuke on the other, as
procurator for the Kings of Spain, And that they themselves had likewise
sworn, upon the holy Evangelist, and the Crucifix to confirm whatsoever he
should do; yet under diverse precepts, forbear to ratify it, to the end that
the longer the French King should remain in this su pence, the longer he
would stay to make his preparations to succor his Men: who for want of
releife, having bin forced to abandon the country, the said Kings of Spain,
Notwithstanding their solemn Oath, would hear no more speech of ratifying the
treaty made by his Son in law.

From all these examples we may gather, that during a treaty, we must watch
more carefully, and make our selves the stronger, not only to frustrate our
Enemies of all hope to surprise us, but to the end that the consideration of
our forces may make us obtain conditions of more advantage: And we must not
hold a treaty firm and concluded, unless it be ratified by the Prince with
whom we treat; especially if the treaty be made with a Prince whom they
detayne Prisoner. That a treaty ought not to be held firm and assured, if it
be not ratified by the Prince with whom they treat,
For the force by the which he has been constrained to promise, will always
dispense him to re-aduise himself. Pope Clement the Seventh, refused to
ratify the Conditions which the Duke of Ferrara, when the said Pope was a
Prisoner; saying, that it was an unworthy thing, that a man in life should
approve of that which had been done in his Name, whilst he was dead. And King
Francis the first excused himself to accomplish the treaty of Madrid, upon
the inhumanity which Charles the fifth used toward him, to extort from him the
Cessions which he made: All which took not place, although the King had given
his Children in hostage. As in the parlies of Princes, the place where the
enter-view is to be made, Of the plate where the treaties of a peace ^ra league
is to be made.
is very considerable; So is it in treaties of peace, which are made by
Deputies. If it be to choose a League, there must be a convenient place, not
too far from the confederates, to the end they may have a more speedier
answer of the difficulties that may happen. When as the Kings of France and
England were to treat a League with the Princes of Italy, they resolved to
treat in France, to be the nearer to England. Pope Iulio the second, meaning
to treat with the Emperor and the French King, desired that the Ambassadors
should come to Rome, to the end he might gain the Emperors Minister by kind
usage, promises, and benefits, to persuade his Master to dis-vnite himself
from the French King. The which he of France refused to do, being neither
reasonable nor honorable to treat a peace in the house of his Enemy, how great
soever he were. So as the usual course is to choose a neuter place.

But the question is, An Ambassador going unto a Prince to treat whether he is
bound to treat himself with him, or by Deputies.
if an Ambassador having agreed to go unto the Prince, with whom he is to
treat, whether the Prince be bound to treat with the Ambassador himself; Or
depute some of his Council for that effect. This last manner of proceeding is
the most usual, as well to preserve the dignity of the Prince, which cannot be
maintained amidst the contestations which happen in conferences; as for that
Princes are usually little practiced in such negotiations. And the example of
the Bishop of Gurgia is not therein to be followed; who going to Pope Iulio the
second upon his request to treat with him; and the said Pope having deputed
three Cardinals to that effect, he deputed three Gentlemen to confer with
them, excusing himself upon other affairs: For therein the said Bishop
carried, himself, not as a simple Ambassador, but as Lieutenant to the
Emperor, to the which quality he had been received at Rome by the Pope.

The Deputies being assembled, Of the sitting of Embassador^
their seats are considerable, they having no power to quit any thing of the
rank which their Masters ought to hold. The first place is at the head or end
of the Table, if there be one: The second is the first on the righthand; and
the third is the first on the left hand of him that is at the end. And if there
be many Deputies to one Prince, they usually sit all on one side, to have the
more facility to confer together, if it be needful.

The seats being resolved, the Deputies are to see the Commissions of either
side, and to consider of them: Of the power of Ambassadors on either side.
For that from thence does grow the assurance which they may have of the
proceeding of the treaty; there being Commissions so general, and so
ambiguous, as thereby they may easily judge, that he which has given such to
his Deputies, has no will to conclude any thing: for that under these
ambiguous and general terms, he has a desire afterward to ground a new
breach. Some desiring to defer the conclusion of a treaty, whereof the motion
seemed reasonable on either side, they have concluded in requiring the Prince
of the contrary pa^ty to consent unto them before they ratify it. The which
Pope Iuli^ the second did, seeing himself pressed by the Cardinals, to make a
peace with Lewis the twelfth, who propounded certain Articles of an Accord
unto him: whereupon the gave Commission to the Cardinal of Final, and to the
Bishop of Tiuolly, to transport themselves to the French Court, and there to
treat; promising to ratify the said Articles which had been propounded unto
him, if the King consented. But he neither gave them Commission, nor power to
conclude them, having no will but to gain time, and to frustrate the instance
which the Consistory made unto him for this pacification.

As for the clauses of treaties, there can be nothing certain prescribed, O^
the clauses of treaties.
this depending of the differences, for the which the treaties are made, the
which are infinite, be it for peace or truce, for the restitution of that which
they pretend to have been unjustly taken from them, or for the Cession of
rights, or else for limits and bounds; the which if they cannot regulate, they
put them in sequestration or suspense, or they make some Act which may
interrupt the prescription of him that holds them; or else for a passage, with
consignation of hostages, or of Forts for the assurance; Or else for an
offensive or defensiu^ league, or for neutrality, whereof I will treat
hereafter. Principal considerations*


But the principal considerations we must have, are not to use, nor to speak
for a person which is odious to them with whom we treat; not to yield to the
first demands though just, but to resist them stoutly: And yet if the danger
be emment, we must not study so much to Negotiate with advantage, as to
provide for safety: And especially to have a care, They must have a care that
there be no equiu^cation in the clauses.
that the clauses may not be Equivocal and of a double understanding, or so
general and indefinit, as they may breed a doubt in the interpretation of the
treaty. The Spaniards are Masters in such practices. Isabelle of Castille, and
Ferdinand of Aragon, circumuented Charles the eight when he restored unto them
the County of Roussillon, upon condition they should not hinder him in the
conquest of Naples, they adding by another clause, that they meant not to be
bound to any thing that might prejudice the Church: Reserving unto themselves
thereby a liberty to take Arms, if they were required by the Pope; as Lord of
the Fee of the Realm of Naples. And in truth after the restitution of the
County of Roussillon, they began to exhort the King rather to turn his Arms
against Infidells, then to make War against Christian Princes; giving hope
under hand to the King of Naples and to the Pope, to be releiued by them; and
preparing by these e^hortations, to break with King Cha^les, when the occasion
should be ready, and the Pope declare himself.

The same Spaniards deceived the French in the treaty for the division of the
Realm of Naples, betwixt King Lewis the twelfth of France and Ferdinand of
Aragon, upon the equivocation of the denomination of the Provinces, made
diversely and in diverse times; the French thinking the confines should be
regulated according to the ancient denomination, and the Spaniards according to
the new, which they caused to be expressed in the treaty: They which treated on
the French party, never considering, that in the diversity of Names, they are
governed according to the pr^sent use. The protection taken by King Lewis the
twelfth, of Bentineth, with Bolonia, upon condition he should not prejudice the
rites of the Church, the which was interpreted with no better faith. For
whilst the King was an enemy to the Pope, he interpreted the rites of the
Church, for that which the Church enjoyed when he took the protection: And
afterward being united to the Pope, he restrained this protection to the
person and goods of Bentineth.

That general clauses are captions.
General clauses are always captions; as those for the defense of Duke Sforse
in the Duchy of Millan, which did not free him, but that they made his process,
for that he had had a part in the practices of Moroue with the Marquess of
Pesquiere, against the Emperor Charles the fifth; who in the treaty he desired
to make with the Pope against the French, propounded some general clauses, to
the end that upon the difficulties the Pope should make, he might have time to
provide for his affairs. These are the most general considerations, which
they may have in treaties.

CHAP. 51. Of treaties of Peace and Truce.
THe treaties which they make with Neighbors, are either with enemies, or with
friends; or with persons which desire to continue Neuters with us, T^eaties of
Peace.
or we with them. The treaties which are made with our enemies, are either for
a time or perpetuallPerpetuall, as the peace which is made to compose all
differences, and the War that is undertaken for conquest or for repairation
of injuries, or to restore the Commerce and Hospitality.

O^ T^uc^
Treaties which are made for a time with our enemies, are called truces, the
which are either general for all the Estates of the one or the other Prince,
for all persons, and for all sorts of Commerce: Or else they are particular,
for certain places, for certain persons, and for the Commerce; and sometimes
they do not extend it but of a suspencion of Arms. And when any one is bound
by alliance, not to make peace or truce without the consent of his Ally, and
that they doubt of his consent; they add in the treaty, that it shall take
place for all those which the contracters shall name, and they set down no
prefixed time, but that it shall continue until he shall refuse, and some
Months after: As that which was made betwixt King Charles the eight, and the
King of Spain, and that betwixt Pope Clement the seventh, and Don Hugo de
Moncada, Ambassador to the Emperor.

Sometimes a general truce holds the place of a peace, as that of a hundred
years, betwixt the Acarnaues, and the Ambracoltes; and that betwixt Castille
and Portugal: And these are commonly made betwixt Princes that are equal in
power, and will not quit any thing of their rights by a peace; and yet desire
to live quietly in the Estate wherein they are, satisfying by this means the
point of honor.

Such treaties are many times less Subject to rupture, That treaties of trece
are less Subject to rupture then th^se of a peac^.
then a peace which is made perpetual, for that he which finds himself
greiued with a treaty that is perpetual, seems to have some reason to leave
it, seeing the greiuance cannot be otherwise repaired. But if the time be
limited, he has no cause to complain, for that he may (the time being
expired,) pursue that which he thinks ought to be granted him: And if they
have a will to continue the truce, there is nothing so easy as to renew it.
And admit they were well assured of the friendship, yet time causing friendship
to grow cold, they have also need to be renewed by new treaties. Seeing that
treaties being grounded upon the interest of Princes, which change with the
time, it is needful to change them at the end of the time, or to break them
off wholly, and it would bee^ means to avoid the treacheries and periuries,
which are committed usually in the ruptures of treaties.

A truce is likewise made to advance a peace and to treat it. Diu^rs
intentions for the which they make a truce.
It is in like manner sometimes for the more honest discharge of a league which
they have made with some other Prince, whom they have accustomed to comprehend
therein: so as a peace following it, or the truce being not accepted by him,
they take occasion to leave the l^ague, it being not his fault that leaves it,
that the war was not ended. And although it seems that a truce cannot by its
condition prejudice the pretentions in the principal, yet it is most certain,
that if he which is chased out of a contentious Estate, consents that during
the truce, the commerce shall be forbidden to his subjects, he does wholly stop
that gate; as Lewis the twelfth did in the truce which he made with G^nsalu^
after the conquest of the Realm of Naples.

CHAP. 52. Of treaties of Alliance.
THe treaties which are made with our neighbors as friends, are treaties of
Alliance, equal or unequal: the equal is either of simple freindship only,
for the entertainment of traffic, or for aid and succor, that of succors
is for the defensive or offensive, and sometimes for both together with or
against all men, or against certain Princes and Estates, and their All^^nces
are contracted, either from Estate to Estate, and for the preservation of the
Estates one of another; in which case by the death of the Prince they may not
be interrupted: or else they are contracted betwixt Prince and Prince; and
then, after the death of one of the Princes, they must enter into a new treaty
to continue it, if there be not a certain time prescribed by the treaty, to
the which the alliance must continue after the death of the Prince, or else
they are made from an Estate and Prince to an Estate, and from an Estate to a
Prince; where after the death of the Prince, it is necessary, if not of a new
treaty, at the least of some confirmation of the precedents: Sometimes
Alliances are contracted for an Enterprise, and for one effect only, in the
which the Allies are inter^ssed, and it may be called by the name of a league.

These leagues are commonly defensive, Of defensive leagues.
but in effect they tend to attempt against some one; and there are secret
Articles for it, as in that of Cambray against the Venetians, in the which they
borrowed the pretext of Religion and the peace of Christendom. In the league
which was made before against Charles the Eight, betwixt the Pope, the King of
Romans, the King of Spain, the Venetians and the Duke of Millan, they borrowed
the pretext for the defense of on^ another Estate, reserving a place for such
as would enter, and in the secret Articles it was agreed, that the Spaniards
which were in Sicily, should help Ferdinand of Aragon to recover Naples; the
Venetians by Sea should invade the Maritine places; the Duke of Millan should
hinder the succors that came from France, and possess himself of Asti, where
the Duke of Orleans was; and that the Kings of Romans and Spain, should either
of them in their parts invade France, when as Lewis the twelfth and Ferdinand
of Aragon united themselves for the conquest of Naples, they likewise took a
pretext that they would afterward make war against the Turks. Diverse
considerations for the treating or making of a league.


But besides the pretext, there are many things to be considered in the treaty
of a league that is to say, the cause why they join in league, belt for
offense or defense: The particular interest of every one of the Leaguers, and
his intention which seeks to unite himself: With what Princes or Estates they
make it their courage, constancy, faith, and means; the commodities of their
Estates to assist the League: and how they shall hinder those which present
themselves to enter, which are not fit for our Design: against whom it is
made. If he be a powerful Prince of himself, assisted by Friends, having
^acility to invade the confederates, either by himself, or by the means of
his Friends, and his courage, when they are to make the League, and how they
may excuse it, and whether the time of the League be precisely limited to a
certain number of years, or whilst the Enterprise shall last. The
contribution of Allies how it should be ordered, as well in the leuy of
Soldiers, as in munitions of War and Victuals, who must first ratify the
treaty among the confederates, if there be many heads, or one alone, for the
execution and ordinary causes of the Commonweal of the League.

The ordinary causes for the which they make a league, are either to facilitate
a conquest; ^rdinary cau^^s o^ ^^a^ue^.
as that which was made betwixt Lewis the twelfth, and Ferdinand of Aragon for
the Realm of Naples: Or to balance the forces of one that is more mighty, in
hindering him that he grow not greater, or diminishing his power. The Athenians
undertook to succor the Egyptians, not only to dimi^ish the power of the
Persian, as Diodorus wri^es, but to increase their own by the alliance of the
Egyptians.

A defensive League which has no other benefit but a n^cessary def^nce, and in
the which mean Estates are in a man^er equally in^eressed, last usually longer
then an offensive L^agu^, which is voluntary, and from the which either of the
Co^se^era^es will easily part when he has no more interest. So as in
ballancing the interest of the one and the other, he that shall find himself
accompanied with distrust, and an opinion to be irreconciliable to the common
Enemy, would prove the most firm in the League.

But with all this we must consider the wisdom, courage, and means of him
with home we join in League. Other considerations for the treaty of a league.
And as we may not choose him so powerful, as having prevailed over our common
Enemy, he may make no subject unto him: So we must not choose one that is light
and inconstant, and of small means. They write that inconstancy, irresolution,
and the timerousnesse of Pope Clement the Seventh, ruined all the affairs of
his Colleagues. The Venetians would not join in League with Pope Alexander the
sixth, having had ill success, being joined in League with Sixtus and Innocent,
for that Popes coming to dye, they leave Successors which have other
intentions and designs.

But the commodity or discommodity of Estates near or far off, is very
considerable, as well in regard of those which unite themselves, as of those
against whom they make the League. And upon this consideration all the Leagues
which they have propounded in Christendom against the Turk, have gone to
smoke: The danger of the Turk being held by Christian Princes uncertain and
far off, and regarding more the Estates of some, then of others: Being unable
but with much time and labor to possess their minds with this necessary ardor
to attempt against him.

By the like reason a League with the Turk is of small profit to a Christian
Prince, who has his Estate remote from him, unless it be for the trade of the
Subject; as well for the great distance, as for that the manner of living of
the one differs so much from that of the other, as there can grow no confidence
betwixt them.

But if some one seeks unto us to be received into our league, whom we hold
not fit for our design; they may propound such hard conditions unto him, as
he would lose his desire. In like sort, if we be sought unto to enter, either
we excuse our selves upon the fear of some Enemy, against whom we must
reserve our forees; as the Venetians did for fear of the Turk, when as they
were sought unto by Charles the Eight, or else we will demand conditions of
such advantage for our selves, as he which seeks unto us may not yield unto.

To say when we are to make a League, it cannot be precisely done* this
depending upon the condition of affairs: Of the time when we are to make a
L^^gue.
But we may well say, that some have held that we must not make a League, but
after that the greatest Prince had imposed hard conditions upon those with whom
they made account to join in League, and had by this means prepared to unite
themselves for their discharge. This was a Consideration which Pope Clement the
Seventh had, to defer the conclusion of the League which was treated against
the Governor of France, and the Princes of Italy, during the Imprisonment of
King Francis the first; thinking (as it happ^ned) that the Emperor (seeing the
uncertainty of this League) was likely to impose harder conditions upon the
King; the which the King would never observe, and so he should be forced to
continue in the League of Ital^, to free himself: Whereas if the League had
been made before his Enlargement, it would have made the Kings Conditions more
mild, and more easy for the Emperor, in freeing the King to draw him from
the other Confederates. Behold how every man does husband the necessity of his
Neighbor, the which being wisely exami^^d, may serve to judge of the time when
a League is to be made.

O^ (...) ti^e of the ^o^tinu^nce ^o a le^gue.
For the time of its continuance, the League betwixt the Florentins and Luquois,
against the Pisans was limited by the treaty at three years. And the first
Leagues which were treated among the Suizes, That the Colleagu^s are bound to
the r^couery of the Country of their Allie conquered by the Enemy.
were also limited to a certain time. Others have no other limitation but the
and of the Enterprise for the which it was made. But the question is, if the
Enemy taking the Country, for the defense whereof the League was made, whether
the Confederates be bound by the League, to assist him who has lost it in the
recovery. Some have held that the defensive did not extend so far.
Notwithstanding if there were no treaty which had co^cerned this conquest, yet
it would seem more reasonable to comprehend the recovery in the defensive, if
it be general. For as it has for its end to preserve the Allie in his Estate,
and that to attain unto it, the forces must not only remain in the Country
of the Allie, to attend the Enemy, but after denuntiation of the Wa^, and other
acts of hostility done by the Enemy, they must enter into his Country, to the
end to prevent him or to divert him, from attempting any thing against the
Ally; the offensive being judged by the agression, and not by that which
follows: By a stronger reason they ought to enter into the Country conquered
from the Ally for the recovery thereof. So most commonly these excuses are not
pretended, but by such as either fail in their faith, courage, or means to
make the recovery.

Contribution is one of the points of a League most diffi^ult to regulate. Of
the contribution of a league.
It is made either in men or money. The men are entertained by all; or by him
only that has need. The defensive League betwixt the Kings of France and
England against the Emperor, contained a reciprocal Succors of ten thousand
men, if the War were made by Land; and of six thousand if it were made by
Sea: And in all other occasions the French King was bound to assist the King of
England with twelve thousand Lances, and the King of England him of France
with ten thousand Foot, at his charge that had the need.

In the League which was made betwixt the Emperor Charles the fist, Pope
Clement the seventh with the other Princes of Italy (except the Venetians) for
the defense of Italy against the French King, the Emperor was to contribute
monthly thirty thousand Ducats; the Pope with the Florentins twenty thousand;
the Duke of ^illan fifty thousand; Ferrara ten thousand; Genoua six thousand;
Sienna two thousand; and Luques a thousand; And it was concluded, that besides
this, there should be a stock of the like sum, which might not be employed
until they saw the preparatiues made to invade Italy. In the League of the
Cities of Greece against the Persians, the co^tribution whereof Aristides made
the tax, mounted to eight hundred thousand Tallents. In the league which some
Cities of Greece made with the Lacedaemonians against Athenians, the
contribution came yearly to a thousand Tallents: And the order for the l^uy of
soldiers was, that two lightly Armed should pass for a Man Armed at all
pieces; and four Men Armed at all pe^ces for a Horseman.

The contribution concluded in money, there are difficulties sometimes found,
(...) place (...) dy^ or (...) m^n^y.
for the place of keeping it. The Cities of Greece thought that the custody of
their contributions was safe in the Temple of Dele. But the consideration of
Religion could not prevent it, but that under the pretext that Dele was not
strong enough, the Athenian: found means to carry it away, and to employ it to
the particular use of the City. That which may be spoken herevppon, is not to
deliver the money into the hands of the strongest, for fear they shall not be
able to call him to account, nor to lay it in so weak a place, as it may be
exposed to the force and violence of the strongest, or to him that shall first
take Arms.

The contribution being settled by the confederates they must name a head of the
League, if they will not assail the enemy but of one side: If of diverse, they
must name many. And herein they do many times find themselves troubled for
that the most powerful of the confederates, desires commonly to have it
referred to him, or to some one of his, who gouerns the conduct of the War,
according to his Masters affairs, and not those of the other Allies. The
other head of the League of the Princes of Italy, with King Francis the first,
would not assail Millan after the taking of Pauia, for fear that Millan being
taken with the Duke, and the Venetians, assured from the Imperialists, they
should retire from the League, or contribute more neg^igently: And therefore he
took a pretext to go and free the Pope who was a Prisoner. Antonio De Leua,
in the League which was made by all the Princes of Italy, except the Venetians,
with Charles the fifth against the French, was made general, with charge to
stay in the Duchy of Millan, which depended of the Emperor.

A League concluded by the Deputies of the confederates, there sometimes falls
out a difficulty, Which of the confederates ought to verisie and decla^e
himsel^e first.
who shall ratify and declare himself first. In the League which was made
betwixt King Francis the first, the Pope, and the Princes of Italy, the King
refused to ratify, until the Pope and the Venetians had ratified before him;
and wrought so that he drove the Colleagues to declare themselves, and to begin
the War, whilst that he treated secretly for himself, to the end he might
make his conditions with more advantage: And for fear lest his Colleagues on
their side should show him the like prancke, he prevented them.

That kind of League which is made for an enterprise, That an off^nsiue league,
and for an ^n^erpriz^ ^ucc^^d^ seldo^e acc^^ding to ^he hope of the Allies.
succeeds seldom, according to the hope of the Allies, if the enterprise be
long. For besides that the preparations be long, the opinions diverse in the
pursuit, the resolutions inconstant, the interests of Princes or Estates in
League, may change with time, or by the practices of him, against who^ they are
in League, in withdrawing some one of the^, or making him to suffer more loss
then the rest. For seeing himself ill defended by his confederates, as he did
hope, and that he was in more danger to loose then his companions, he studies
to retire himself, and to make his accord apart* As the Venetians did with the
Turk after the loss of Cypres.

O^ the causes of the rup^ure of Leagues.
The most ordinary causes of the rupture of Leagues, are distrust, and
jealousy; as if one of ^he confederates had had conference with the enemy
without the consent of the rest; If that which serves for the safety of one
diminishes the safety of another; If they find inconstancy, variety, or
cowardice, in any one of the confederates; If one of the confederates
increases, and makes some usurpation, without the consent of the rest; if he
treates with the ^nemy, not com^rehending the other Al^ies, but as adherents.
King Lewis the twelfth left the League of the Venetians, for that they had made
a truce with him, and had presumed to name him only as their adherent.
Sometimes to break a League, they invent some occasion, which puts the
Leaguers in division one against another. In which case as long as he has hope
that this division may make them dis-vnite themselves, he must have a care not
to assail them.

O^ ^eagu^s ^etwi^^ mean ^^tate^, and of the de^^cts w^^ch a^^ ^ften (...).
I have said that Leagues which are made betwixt mean Estates for their
necessary defenses, are usually most durable. Yet they are not without great
defects. For they have not any authority among them, be it Council or
otherwise, which may command them all, and reconcile t^em in case of diversity
of opinions, or a division; For that holding themselves all to be Sovereigns,
they will Establish nothing above them: And to fall by degrees to an accord, in
all their differences which may happen, it is a difficult thing yea impossible.
On the otherside lea^ing their differences to grow old, they may be of such a
condition as they draw after them an irreconcilliabl^ hatred,

Another defect is, that to the greatest part of their Assemblies and Dyettes,
they send men new in affairs, fearing to give authority to any one among them
above the rest. So as most part of those which come to these assemblies, having
little or no knowledge of affairs, their opinions are to make report to their
Superiors, and not to resolve any thing; this power being seldom given them.
Hence grow many delays, which in certain encounters may be very prejudicial
to the Estate. There is another ordinary defect among them, that they seldom
agree upon the sum of the contributions necessary for their defense, nor of
the keeping of the common Treasure: So as when there happens any need, they
find themselves troubled to provide in time.

But behold how Princes allied, Of Succour^ one against another among
confederates.
do sometimes find themselves troubled to govern themselves; which is when
as three Princes allied, the one makes War against another, and demands
succors from the third: In this case if the treaties of alliance be only for
friendship, it is certain he is not bound to give any succors. But if the
treaties carry an offensive League, he must succor the most ancient, allied
by a precedent alliance. If the precedent alliances have been made both at one
time, he must succor him that is allied in an offensive and defensive League.
But if the League be offensive and defensive of either side, he may not succor
any of them: but he may mediate a peace, and cause the difference to be judged
by the common Allies, as it is usually observed: And let him know that will not
enter into arbitrament, or being entered will not yield to judgment, that he
will succor the other. No^withstanding most commonly in such occasions, they
balance their Estate: And looking more to safety then to justice, they succor
him who being succored may weaken the powerful, who is more to be feared.

They may aid particular Allies, and common Allies, if they be wronged by one
of the Allies. Of the defense of one that is no^ allied against an Ally.
But he which is not comprehended in the treaty of alliance, cannot be defended
against him that is allied without breach of the alliance: That which they may
do for to suppress it, is to write unto the Ally: and to entreat him to use
him ^o^rteously: which is the offer which the Romans made unto the Capuans, who
complained and demanded Succors against the oppression of the Samnites, allied
to the Romans. But if the oppressed yield himself a Subject, as the Capuans
did; then the Prince being obliged to the defense of his Subjects against all
men, he then may and ought to succor them against his Allies.

An unequal alliance is that, which is contracted betwixt Princes or Estates,
unequal in honor or in power, Of the unequal allia^ce betwixt Princes and
Estates ^ that is to say of protection.
and with unequal conditions; the one acknowledging the other not for Master
or Lord, but by honor, as the more powerful and the better qualified; And
some for Protector: And these treaties are made with those Estates which take
or give pension, or which put themselves into protection.

We have formerly said, that a pension differs from tribute. For tribute is
paid by the Subject, or by him who to enjoy his liberty, Difference betwixt
pension and tribute.
pays that which is agreed upon to him that has forced him to do it. A
pension is ^eld voluntary, from him that is in our protection, or from him that
is in all other things equal to the treaty of alliance, to hinder the
pensioner that he join not with the Enemy, or to have aid and succors from
him.

The true protection is that, whereas one takes upon him the defense of another
freely without reward. Of protection.
Yet some have balanced honor with profit; and have received a pension from
those whom they have taken into their protection: And these men have thought
that by a pecuniary interest, they did bind the protectors more to succo^^
them, then if he were only bound by Oath.

By the Law of protection, he that is protected, owes all respect and honor
to his protector: Of the mutual duty of the protector and he that is
protected.
Against whom if he attempt, or s^ayes from his Duty, it is lawful for the
protector to assure himself, yea, to make himself Master. They of Genoua
having submitted themselves under the protection of the French King, upon
certain conditions; and being afterward revolted, the King changed the
conditions into pri^iledges, to the end it might be in his will to deprive them
when he should think good. But if the Protector for the good of his Estate,
finds it convenient to leave the protection of him, over whom another Estate
has some ^retentions; he may consent that the difference may be referred to
Justice, and to Judges to determine it: As Lewis the twelfth would do in the
difference which the Pope had with the Duke of Ferrara, whom he had taken into
his protection, and whereof by this means he sought to free himself. In like
manner the protector ought to defend and succor the protected, and use him
well: Otherwise if he entreat him ill, he may withdraw himself from
protection, and seek another protector.

CHAP. 53. Of the differences which happen betwixt Allies and Neighbors: and
of the decision thereof.
ANd for that the Alliances not only of protection, but also those which are
equal, made it with more powerful Estates, draw after them the subjection of
the weaker; And that there may betwixt Equals (be it upon this Subject or some
other) happen many differences, which may breed occasion of breach: they must
in treating provide for the safety and the decision of differences. Some have
assured themselves of the mutual faith simply, the which at this day is but
weak in many. Others have demanded hostages: the which ought to be of such
consideration, as the Prince or Estate which gives them, may not be long
deprived of them, without prejudice by their absence. King Francis the first,
being freed from Prison, and after many inhumanities showed him by Charles the
fifth, who let him go not through courtesy, but for fear of the League of
Italy; yielded to give his children in hostage, hoping he might recover them,
either by accord, or by some other means, the delay of the recovery being the
less troublesome unto him, for that they were in their courage: And so being
at his choice either to give his children, or twelve of of his principal Men
of his Realm, he desired rather to give his children, whom he might spare,
then the others, which were more necessary for his service and enterprises.

Sometimes they demand hostages of either part, when as either of them that
treates, Of Hostages.
promises to put something in execution, which they doubt they would not do
without hostages: And this ought to be done according to the distrust they may
have one of another. But if the question be, that the one executes before the
other, it is for him that is to execute last to give hostages. There was a
memorable dispute betwixt the Ambassadors of the Emperor Charles the fifth,
and those of King Francis the first, after his discharge from Prison, whether
that the French King should retire his Army our of Italy, before that the
Emperor had delivered him his children. They promised on the Kings behalf to
put hostages into the hands of the King of England, for the penalty which
should be imposed for want of retiring his Army, after he had received his
children: And the Emperor made the like offers, to restore his children, when
the Army should be retired; and to give Hostages for the sure payment of the
penalty, which should be degreed for want of satisfying; Saying that there was
no color he should trust the King, who had once deciued him. Whereunto the
French Ambassadors replied, that the more he pretended to have been deceived,
the less the King ought to trust him, for that this opinion might induce him
to fail the King: And besides the offers were not alike; for that it imported
the King more to have his Children, then for the Emperor to see the retreat
of the Kings Army out of Italy; and therefore the assurance were not alike.

It has happened that without any precedent treaty, Hostages for the assurance
of a Princes passage, through another Estate,
then the demand of a passage, they have willingly given hostages to a Prince,
which desired to pass through the Estate of another Prince, which was an enemy
or susp^cted unto him. The Archduke Phillip, to pass from Spain into
Flaunders; the King sent him many of the greatest Men of his Kingdom, for
hostages and assurance of his passage through France, the which the Archduke
caused to be sent back again, as soon as he entered into the Realm. Many
have demanded strong places, to assure the victors. And others for the safety
of a passage, for a conquest which they meant to make. As Charles the Eight did
going to Naples, to many Princes and Potentates of Italy. Others have ratified
the treaties by marriage.

But the greatest security, The assurance of a treaty.
that the condition incerted in the treaty may be pleasing to both parties, and
fitting for the Subjects of the affairs which presents it self, It is
dangerous for an ally to receive a strong Ga^^ison from his protector, or make
him Master of his Forts, etc.
ballancing the interest of the one with the interest of the other.

And to prevent that the alliance or protection change not into Subjection, we
must be very careful not to receive a Garrisson, from the allie or protector
stronger then our own; and much less to make him Master of our Forts, or to
make him Guardion and depositary of the Treasure of all the alliance; as the
Grecians did the Athenians, who consented, the money which should be every
year levied of the General, should be put in Appollos Temple, and afterward
carried to Athens, there to be kept. So as the Athenians, being seized of their
Allies purse, they made themselves protectors, and of protectors Mai^ers; And
so they not only became Masters of the Treasure, but they caused the
appellations of all the other Cities to come before them, at whose charge they
trained up their Citizens and made them Soldiers.

^s^^blishment of Judges, for the deciding o^ differences betwixt allies.
As for the dicision of differences, the ordinary course is to constitute by the
treat a certain number of Judges, with power of either side, in case they
should be divided in opinions, to name an Vmpire, to decide differences, and to
cause the contrauentions which they should pretend to be made of either side to
cease; Or else to agree upon some great person, to whom they might refer
themselves. A thing which I confess is very difficult, but yet if'it might be
done would be more convenient. For his authority would mediate an accord more
easily betwixt them, who being equals, cannot directly refuse War nor demand
peace.

They have likewise usually had recourse unto compromise, Of compromise betwixt
Allies, upon differences which may grow betwixt them.
when as Judges are not appointed by the treaties, or when as they are suspect
to one of the parties. For although the compromise does seldom succeed, and
comes to be effected, yet it works this effect, to cause all force to cease,
and holds the difference in suspense for a time, and most commonly the
intention of the party is no other, who sometimes before the comp^omise draws
a secret promise from the Arbitrator, not to pronounce sentence without their
consent: as in the compromise which was made betwixt the Emperor Maximillian,
and the Venetians, in the Popes person, who was not limited neither for time
nor power, by the publque Act which was drawn; the like secret promise having
been formerly made by the Pope to either party. Yet in the end the Pope,
seeing they could not agree, and that this delay was imputed to him, he gave
sentence, notwithstanding his promise: Yet with this prouiso, that if the
parties did not ratify that which he had decreed by his sentence should be of
no effect.

In this compromise made in the person of the Emperor Charles the fifth, for
the difference which was betwixt the Pope and the Duke of Ferrara, as well for
the right as for the fact, the Emperor promised the Pope, not to pronounce
unless he were pressed by him; and to the Duke of Ferrara, that finding that he
had right to Modena and Reggium, he would give sentence; and that finding
otherwise, he would suffer the time of the compromise to expi^e. And for
assurance it was agreed, that the Duke should deliver Modena into the Emperors
hands, as sequestered. Afterward Judgment to the benefit of the Duke, whereof
the Pope complained much, for that the Emperor had not proceeded according to
his secret promise: But the Emperor excused himself upon the pursuit which
his Nuntio had made unto him to pronounce.

They seldom compromit upon the possessory: Of a^compromise upon the
possessory.
For he that is spoiled ought before all things to be restored. This was the
answer which the Florentins made to the Emperor Maximillian, whom he invited
to compromit to his person the difference they had with the Pysans, neither
relying upon his will, nor upon his authority. Yet they may compromit upon
the possessory, with charge to pronounce, without adding unto it the petitory;
this being chiefly ruled, by the confidence which they conceive in the
arbitrator, chosen by the compromise, who in a difference of State, is not
always found such, as they may wholly rely upon him.

And as peace is generally to be desired, yet if there be betwixt Neighbors
some Subject which trouble their intelligence, When and how a Prince should
deal to reconcile a difference betwixt his Neighbors.
as it would be a policy to show himself displeasing; so it were wisdom
not to grow passionate to reconcile them. They observe a notable indiscretion
in the Cardinal of Amboise, and very prejudicial of France, to have mediated
an accord betwixt Maximillian and Ferdinand of Aragon, touching the government
of Castille, this accord having been the cause that afterward they joined
together against Lewis the twelfth: And n^thing but the vanity and ambition
which this Cardinal had to attain unto the Popedom (in making these two
Princes favorable unto him) made him to enter into this mediation.

The cause wherein we must labor effectually to reconcile our Neighbors, is,
when we have need to be succored by them. So Lewis the eleventh treated a
peace betwixt Sigismond of Austria, and the Suisses, to use their s^ruice
against the Duke of Burgundy: And Lewis Sforse dealt in the accord betwixt
Maximillian and the same Suisses, to be succored by them. But let us return^
to treaties.

CHAP. 54. Of the breach of Treaties: and of the constancy and assurance of the
word of a Prince, in the Treaties.
TO the end we enter not into the rupture for a small business^, Means to
assure a treaty that they may not enter into rupture.
they practice in those which great Men make among them, to draw in all the
rest that be less to be therein comprehended, as well for the assurance of
their Estates, as to entertain the greatest in an equal balance, least that
the one should rise and oppress the other. But to make use in such treaties,
the oppression must be special and particular: otherwise they may have just
cause to be ignorant, that under this name of Allies, they which are not named
are comprehended:

And although that the breach of faith be to much practiced in such affairs,
Pretext of rupture.
yet there are few Princes found, which have not sought some pretext before
they break: Some have pretended to be circumuented by error. Others have
excused themselves by the charge of the Estate of affairs, great wrongs, or
inevitable loss, and apparent danger of the ruin of their Estates. Which are
the causes, wherein some say that an oath is not obligatory; the condition by
reason of the oath being impossible or unjust. To these limitations they add,
Of the obligation a Prince has to hold his word.
that they must not keep their faith with an Enemy of the faith, nor with him
that has broken his, nor with a Subject, nor with a Theife. But if it be not
lawful to keep a man's faith in all these cases, it is not likewise lawful to
give it. If it be lawful to capitulate with such men, it is necessary to hold
that we promise. The which I understand, when the word is given by him that may
give it; and that they ^elye upon it. For if they take hostages, he that gives
them, is freed from his Faith; for that in receiving hostages, he that receives
them, has relinquished the assurance which he had in the faith of him that
gives them: And if the promise be made by a Captain for his Prince without
special Warrant, this word given binds not the Prince.

That force nor fear cannot di^pence a Prince of his word or promise.
Some Lawyers would judge of Treaties, as of particula^ Co^t^acts, and more
enlarge the conscience of Princes. For as a private man is not bound to that
which he has promised by force or fear, they have thought (but foolishly and
maliciously) that this Maxim should take place in Treaties, which are made
betwixt Sovereigns: which is in effect to banish faith from all such public
Negotiations. For there is no Treaty but is usually made in Arms, by force, or
through fear to lose either life, or goods, or liberty, or the Estate; which
are causes of just fear, and may shake the most constant.

(...) pre^^xts o^ (...).
Some Princes desirous to show themselves more religious in these ruptures, have
taken subject upon the ambignity of some clauses in the Treaty, or upon
equiuocaon, as Charles the fist did upon these words, Ev^ig and Euig, to
retain the Landgraue the Hesse: Or they seek some other occasions, attempting
against those whom their Allie is bound to defend: To the end that drawing him
to Field, he may lay the Envy of the ^rupture upon him.

That the constancy and as^^^tance of a Prince ^^ his w^rd is of great (...).
But the most beneficial course for a Prince or State is, to make himself to
be known constant and firm in his word. For although such an occasion may
happen, as he might get advantage b^ h^bre^ch of his faith: yet the opinion
which they may conceive of him by this action (which he must not trust unto)
will make him lose many advantages, which a loyal Prince may have, finding
himself discharged of many securities, which they demand usually and justly
from one of whose faith they doubt.

CHAP. 55. Of Treaties of Neutrality.
LEt us come to Treaties of Neutrality, the which seems natural to Princes,
who neither love nor hate anything absolutely; but govern themselves in their
Friendships according to their interests. And in effect Reason of State is no
other thing but Reason of interest.

Neutrality may be of two sorts. Two sorts^ of Neutrality.
The one with Alliance of either part: The other without Alliance, and without
any tie to the one or the other; which is that, that may properly be called
Neutrality. The first Rules subscribed by the conditions of the Treaty. The
second has no Rule, but the discretion of the neuter Prince, who must carry
himself in such sort, as he may not make show that he inclines more to one
side then to another. And for that the Affairs of Princes are not always in
one Estate, the Difficulty is to know when the Prince should leave this
Neutrality, and when he should maintain it.

The advantages of Neutrality are, The advantages of a Neutrality.
that he which is Neuter, is honored and respected of both parties, for the
fear that either of them has, should declare himself against him: He
remains Arbitrator of others and Ma^ter of himself: He enioyes the present,
and according unto occasions preuents the future. A Neuter is without any
professed Enemy, and offends or Wrongs no man openly; so as giving no advantage
over him, they are troubled to find a pretext to do him harm,

Di^aduantages of Neutrality.
The disaduantages are, that a Neuter satisfies neither the one nor the other;
and so remains: He does neither purchase Friends, nor free himself from any
Enemies; and in the end is made a prey to the Victor. And many have held it
more advantage to hazard himself to vanquish with a companion, then to remain
in an Estate, where he is assured to be ruined by the one or the other.

That a powerful Prince should not leave a Neutrality without cau^^.
To resolve this point, a powerful Prince has no need of Council. For in
what fashion soever he remains, he may maintain himself, and prescribe a Law
to others. Yet I hold that without great occasion he should not declare
himself. For that whilst others ruin themselves by War, he fortifies
himself with means; he may in the end make himself Judge of their
differences, and compounding them mildely with honor, he preserues their
Friendship, and maintaynes their Estate.

But in a weak Prince, what part soever he takes, it will be hurtful unto
him; especially if he be in the midst of two more powerful Estates then
himself. That a Neutral^^y is more be^eficiall to a weak a Prince then to
embrace a (...).
Yet I will say, that speaking generally, a Neutrality is more beneficial to a
weak Prince; so as they which make War one against another, be not
altogether barbarous and inhumane. For although a Neutrality does not please
either party; yet in effect it wrongs no man; and as he which is a Neuter, does
not serve, so he does not hurt. And then the event of the declaration which he
should make, rather for the one then the other, depending upon the uncertain
issue of the War, he should have no cause to say, that this part is more safe
then a Neutrality. And to change his resolution without an assurance to better
his affairs, were not to carry himself wisely.

But if the Neuter be pressed by necessity to declare himself, Considerations to
leave a Neutrallity.
he must do it for the most powerful of the two parties, following the
Council of that Roman; that either he must make himself the strongest, or
be a friend to the strongest: Unless he saw that joining to the weaker, he
might balance the power of the stronger, and by this counterpeze reduce them
to reason. The safety of Estates consisting chiefly in an equal counterpeze of
power in the one and the other, and the greatness of a Prince drawing after it
the ruin of his Neighbors; it is wisdom to prevent.

But power is considered in this subject diversely: Either absolute or
conditional; Absolute power is that which we measure by the concurrence of
the greatness of Forces, Treasure: Munitions, and other Millitary
preparations. A conditional power is that, the which although it be less then
an absolut, yet it is more fit to succor us, or to do us harm. In this the
Neighborhood is of very great consideration; for that a Neighbor Prince of
mean forces, may more easily or sooner hurt or succor us, then a great Prince
which lies far off. Near succors are always sooner ready and with less
charge: For we may discharge a part when as time and occasions shall serve: If
he be remote, he arriues too late after the occasions to defend us, and too
soon to oppress us. The greatest part perish by the way; and when he is
arrived he has more need of rest then to battle; and being unable to send
them back so far, we must still bear the charge and oppression.

Hi^ron King of Syracuza, could well observe these considerations, the
Carthaginians being Masters of a part of Sicily, he allied himself with them
against the Romans: But the Romans being grown the stronger in the Country,
he fell to their side, and continued the War with them against the
Carthaginians, who were then more remote from the Island then the Roman (...)
^ter we have made consideration of the force, we must likewise consider of the
courage and constancy of the Prince, with whom we are to join. But if he be
light and has no stay, how powerful soever he be, it is dangerous to engage
himself with him: But if with these advantages he knows how to prosecute his
designs with resolution, they may boldly engage themselves with him.

CHAP. 56. Considerations for a Prince that will live in good intelligence with
his Neighbors.
THe Prince that would live in good terms with his Neighbors, must first
consider what Treaty and Capitulation he has with him, and govern himself
accordingly, always showing himself a Lover of Peace and Concord; desirous to
live in Amity, and a great obseruer of Treaties; not enduring that any breach
should be made, how small soever; aad being done to cause it to be repaired.

If any difficult thing be required of him, he shall neither grant it, How a
Prince ought to (...) himself in a demand made unto him by one of his
Nei^hbours o^ ^ome diffi^ul^ thing*
nor refuse it, but in ballancing their business, he shall labor to have his
goodwill allowed for the effect: And if he which seeks has sent an express
Ambassador, they shall send him back with Presents, and promise to dispatch
other Ambassadors to make answer, And to the end he may avoid the
coffeehouse, they shall balance this delay with some benefit, if may be of
more importance then that which they have demanded: For that the Injury does
not move so much as the benefit is pleasing.

If the Prince treating with his Neighbors, has need to demand or use any
thing from them, To dema^d something of his Neighbors.
he must have a care to maintain his Dignity, and therefore he may not be
too hasty: for that we show our selves to be too resolute for something; and
they seeing the instance which we make, will hold our necessity to be greater
then it is: The which will make them more holding, and make them believe, that
^ we shall be the more bound unto them, if they grant it, although they reap
the like benefit themselves. But if a more powerful man requires something of
us, We must not refuse that which is demanded, if it does not much prejudice.
which being granted does not much prejudice us, and being denied, may draw a
war against us, which he had prepared against another; We must not deny it.
This was an Error which the Florentins committed, seeking in the beginning to
oppose the passage of Charles the Eight, having not therein followed the
Counsel which had been given to Cosmo De Medicis, not to oppose himself
against John of Anio^; notwithstanding that the Pope and Duke of Millan were in
League with Ferdinand King of Naples, against whom John of Aniou made War.

We must not lightly believe that which Princes say, We must not be too
credulous in that which Princes say.
and whereof they make show; but consider, that their own interest will make
them forget it, and to some their faith, if they have any color to break it.
The Prince must likewise favor the traffic and commerce with his Neighbors,
for the good and profit which may redowne to the one and the other.

He must consider of the means how he may with dexterity nourish the distrusts
and iealousies which are, Politiquely to nourish distrusts and iealosies
betwixt them.
or may be betwixt them; But he must be warie*hee be not known to be the
Author. And contrariwise if they have a conceit, he must be the first that
must seek to take it away; and in all that which may breed some jealousy of
him, he must prevent it in time: And he must excuse the fault which is
discovered, and deny that, whereof the Neighbors are not, nor cannot be
hereafter assured: He must seek with all diligence to mollify the most
powerful, by fair deportuments and promises, and sometimes to pacify the one,
and sometimes the other, as well to make them the more negligent, as to labor
in seeking them severally to cast them into some distrust one of another.

To testify his good will unto them.
The Priuce shall offer unto his Neighbors that which he cannot well refuse,
before they demand it, to the end they may acknowledge his good will.
Especially if there be need of succors, he shall show himself ready; yet
without giving cause of Jealousy to others, in making them know the Justice
of these succors, and of his intention, raising those whom he succors from
the shame, the which does usually accompany him that demands. This is the first
precept to make them have confidence in us.

O^ the resentmen^ he must have of Iniu^ties ^eceiued by his neighbou^
The second, to breed confidence, is not to enter into any resentment of
injuries against those, whom we desire to make confident of us, unless it be
a matter of great importance: And we must suffer courage to sleep, and awake
prudence: But if our honor constraines us to make some demonstration of an
injury received, we must lay the fault upon the Minister, and complain of
him; so as they may not think we hold our selves wronged by the Master. For by
the very opinion which a neighbor Prince might have to have wronged us, he
would enter into distrust of us, from distrust into hatred; and hatred it may
be, would draw after it another wrong, and an alliance with our Enemies, not
only to assure himself, but to an^oy us: The remembrance of an injury being
many times stronger in him that does it, then in him that receives it;
especially betwixt Princes, whose spirits are very incapable to take confidence
one of another. Above all we must be wary how we enter into threats. For
although our Neighbor be weaker then we are, and that his timerousnesse might
give us cause to hope for some advantage by our threats: Yet it might so fall
out, that from fear he might pass to despair, the which does usually guide
timorous spirits, as well into desperate resolutions, as inconsiderations does
the rash. But Misfortune carrying us to a rupture, and having the Ambassadors
of our Enemies near us, who then may be suspect unto us, we must consider of
the means to dismiss them. Some have therein proceeded mildly, and others
^or^ roughly. Some to discharge an Enemies Ambassador, have given leave to all
other Ambassadors which did reside with him; and then calling back those of
his friends, suffered his enemies Ambassador to depart.

The Emperor Charles the fifth, advertised of the League which was made against
him, would not dismiss the Ambassadors of France, England, and Venice, until
his own were in safety* But he set Guards upon them of France, Venice, and
Florence, causing them to be conducted thirty Miles from his Court, with a
prohibition not to speak unto them, nor for them to Write: To him of Millan as
his Subject, he was enjoined not to part from Court; And as for him of
England, there was no alteration.

Let us come to the third point. To pierce into the designs of his Neighbors.
It is a great advantage to pierce into the designs of his Neighbors, and to
have gained some confidence with them: For the entire is seldom found. But not
able to prevail by this means, he must do it by Discourse, by Wisdom, and
by the Knowledge a Prince ought to have of the quality of their Estates, of the
defects and advantages which are in them, of the humors, design, and
inclination of the people, of great Men, and of the Prince; and principally of
this last, whose principal motions and manner of living he must seek to
discover, to judge of his wisdom and courage; then the discontentments,
divisions, and the heads of parties which are in the Estate, their pretexts,
credit, of whom they depend, and how far it may extend, the Council,
Treasure, Justice how it is managed, and with what satisfaction of the people
or great Men: Moreover what the forces be, and the number of Soldiers and
Captains, with the sufficiency of the chief among them: The strong Towns and
Fortresses; and to know the defects there are to defend them, and the
advantages to assail them: The Munitions of War and Victuals: wherein the
commerce and traffic does consist, and how it may be incommodated: The
commodity or discommodity of the Entries of the Country: The Fertillity
Barronnesse, extents or ^malnesse of the Estate: and of other Neighbors, his
allian^es and dependances with other Princes, as well near as remote: Their
actions and deportments past, as well toward us as others: Their present
Estate, and whereunto they seem most to incline. In which search, we must use
diligence, wisdom, and secrecy, least we give them cause to distrust us. All
this may be learned from friends, which the Prince may have in the Estates of
his Neighbors; or by spies, whose intelligences he must duly examine before
he believe them; And by reason, interest, or appearance, sound if they be true.

Of the introduction of Ambassadors or Agents.
But for that all these courses are full of suspicion among Princes, and are
dangerous for such as employ themselves to give these intelligences; every
Prince having the like interest, to know what is done with his Neighbor, and
desiring to show the confidence he has in him: Princes have agreed to receive
Ambassadors or Agents; who in effect (under pretext to entertain the good
intelligence betwixt their Masters) serve many times to discover the ground of
Estates, and the designs of Princes. Wherefore seeing that by this means
Prinentertaine one another, it is fitting to know the quality, the charge, and
the privileges of an Ambassador or Agent, the which we will set down here,
as they have been gathered by some of this Age.

CHAP. 57. Of the charge of an Ambassador or Agent.
AN Ambassador and Agent is the same thing, if we consider only the function
of their Charges: The difference betwixt an Ambassador and Agent.
But they differ for the honor and respect they bear more to an Ambassador
then to an Agent. An Agent has charge to represent the affairs only: But an
Ambassador ought to represent the greatness of his Master, and his affairs.
Wherefore for sufficiency, the A^^nt ought to have as much as the Ambassador:
But for wealth and that which concerns show, it is not so necessary for him as
for the other.

Neither the one nor the other, for that which concerns the Body, Qualities
and perfections required in an Ambassador.
ought (if it may be) to have any imperfection, as to have one eye, to be
pore-blind, squintey'd, lame, crooked-backe, or extremely foul and deformed:
But contrariwise he must be of a pleasing Encounter, and not counterfeit, left
he be ridiculous or contemned. He must not likewise be sickely nor dainty,
lest the discommodity of the ways, or the change of the Air make him
unprofitable for his Masters affairs. His Countenance must be grave and
serious, yet mingled with mildness and a pleasing aspect. For his Age, he must
neither be too young, nor too old, as well for the force and disposition of the
body, as for that of the mind. For the conditions of Fortune, he ought to be
chosen of an honest condition, and Noble if it may be: Princes holding
themselves contemned, when they send Men of little worth unto them; as Lewis
the Eleventh did, who employed his Barber to execute this charge.

As for the profession whereon he ought to be chosen, that depends of the
quality of the affairs whereon he is to treat, or of the Prince to whom he
is sent. For if they treated of means to make War, it would be no more
proper to send a Churchman or a Lawyer, then if they treated of some right of
bounds, or made some conference of Religion, to send a man making profession of
Arms. For his goods, an Ambassador ought to have in a mean proportion. A
poor or needy man how sufficient soever, is nothing fit for charges of expense
and show. But of all things they must have a care not to send a poor
Ambassador, after one that was rich, and who had made an excess of expense;
For the first having accustomed those of the Province to this expense and
charge, the other coming after, and not doing the like, he will be much less
honored and respected; And by consequen^s do his Master less service. He
must not likewise be distasteful to the Prince to whom he is sent, but rather
they must choose one that may be pleasing unto him: Yet for all this he must
not be a subject, nor dependant, nor tied by oath, nor any other bond, to him
with whom he is to reside. The example of that which Duke Sforse did to the
Esquire Merueilles teaches us, not to choose another man's Subject for this
charge. For the sufficiency, he must have a quick apprehension and natural
Judgment. He must be practiced in the affairs of the world, and especially in
those of his own Country, and of that where he is Ambassador.

And for that the life of man is too short, to attend a fit experience for the
sufficiency which is necessary: he ought to be conversant with all sorts of
Histories, which he ought to have read with judgment, waighing all the
Circumstances of Actions which are there represented: To know the diversity of
the establishment of Estates, and the reasons, if it may be, of this
diversity; to understand the right of limits, and represailes, the genalogies
of Princes, and the pretentions of Kings upon the Estates of other men. Their
forces, means, alliances, and manner of living, he must likewise be resolute
and courageous in that which he has wisely de^iberated; but above all he must
be secret in affairs of importance, and discreet in his speech* He must not
detract, nor speak evil, especially of any Master, nor of the Prince where
he remains: He must speak freely of his Masters pretentions, if there be
question to maintain them.

An Ambassador chosen with these qualities may serve worthily and profitably.
Yet I will add hereunto the manner, how some of our time have held he should
govern himself, but more succinctly. Instructions for an Ambassador, how to
govern himself in a strange Country.
First he must furnish his Family with modest and respective Men, not
insolent, quarrellers, or scandalous: Otherwise he is in danger to receive an
affront, either in abandoning his servants, or not being able to stay them from
punishment. This done, he must make an ample instruction, least he be
disauowed, the which shall follow word by word, especially in affairs whereas
terms strike the stroke; not promising any more, although he knew he should
not bedisauowed: But before the promise, he shall hold the business in
suspense until he has power. Moreover he shall instruct himself, from the
Mouth of him which had gone before him in the said charge, and shall retire
from him the Treaties, instructions, and papers of importance: And parting he
shall give to have some one in the Princes Court, which may Negotiate his
business, and give him advice of all that passes; for many times the
Secretaries of Estate are so employed, as they have not leisure to satisfy all.

If he goes for some particular affair, he must stay as little as may be
upon the way, as well to prevent the advice, which might be given of the
particular subject of his Embassy; the answer whereof he should find ready,
having by his stay given them leisure, either to illude it, or to cross it: As
for that according to the quallitie of the business, he might ariue so late,
as they would mock at him. As Tiberius did of the Ambassadors which arrived to
condole the death of his Children se^uen Months after: And he in mocking
lamented the death of Hector, who was dead many hundred years before. The same
reason requires, that they should demand audience as soon as they can, unless
he finds the Court in mourning, or in open War, or some other accident of
importance which serves for an excuse. He shall from the beginning show his
gravity, oftentation or pride in his Countenance or train his courtesy and
affability, accompanied with an honest carriage and modesty; hisexpence
according to the places where he is. The Northern people desire a Table well
garnished: Spain, and Italy, look more to followers and attendants, and to
that which serves for show; In the Leuant the greatest expense is in presents:
But above all he must regulate his expenses according to his entertainment,
and the means he has to spend. For it is unseemly to live of borrowing in a
strange Country.

The manner of treating is also diverse. In Germany and Suizerland, they must
have more money then words, more good cheer there then Art: In other Estates
honor, complements, and Orations, are better received; and in others the
consideration of Religion has more force. An Ambassador ought to be wary,
least by too much diligence and affection, he do not augment the suspicion,
which they may have of the subject of his coming, and discover it by too much
Art and talk; all things disguised aff^cted and amp^ified, naturally breeds
suspicion. They which demand succors do many times make their affairs so
weak, (thinking to move pity,) as they are so far from moving those, from
whom they crave succors, as they make them afraid to embarque themselves with
miserable persons. In such occasions he must march himself discreetly, and
weigh his words: And the countenane in this does sometime impart more then the
thing it self.

Above all things he must not treat with any other Prince, of that which
concerns his Commission, but with him to whom he is sent. This was the answer
of the Ambassadors of Florence, to the Emperor Maximillian, to whom they had
been sent, he having appointed the^ to confer with the Duke of Millan, who
should give them an answer for him: But they refused to do it, as a thing
exceeding their Commission. And although his instructions ought to be as ample
as may be: Yet affairs being subject to change, in a shorter time, then there
is betwixt his parting and arrival, the Ambassador must, as they say, make
War by the eye: as if he had been commanded to use mild words, and yet
finds it more convenient to speak boldly or to change, or omit something
mentioned in his Commission, he must govern himself with great
circumspection. But he may not stray from his intention, unless he see that in
leaving it, he may prevail in that which he has undertaken. If he be
constrained not to do some things contained in his instructions, and that the
business is not subject to delay, he shall import it to two or three of the
most understanding Servants, that his Master has. (if happily there be any in
the Country where he resides) to the end that the business succeeding ill, he
may avoid the reproach, to have done it alone and without Counsel.

There are certain things that are subject to disauow; as proud and insolent
words, which an Ambassador might have used; or threats and practices which he
attempts in the Estate where he resides, if it be without command: And
therefore he must contain hinselfe, within the terms of his charge and the
modesty that is required. It is fitting he should maintain the Dignity of his
Mai^ter: But it must be without contempt, or offense to him toward whom he
issent, And to the end he may discover all the passages in an Estate, he must
be frequent and daily in Court, but when as the Prince retires himself
privately for his pleasures: For then he should make himself suspect or
importune. And in popular Estates, he must assist all dyets meetings and
assemblies: Or if he sees that this may breed some contempt, he should send
some one of his. Besides money, which discouers the secrets of Princes, the
entertainment of his Table is ofsome force. And although that all the
intelligences which come from this sort of people which follow Tables, be not
always current; Yet sometimes he shall meet with good ones. Wherefore he must
weigh them, and attend the progress and issue before he Judge of them; and
observe not only what is said, but what is done. He must for this effect write
often, and to many parts, to the end he may be the better advertised; and never
respect the charge which cannot be better employed.

He must visit the principal Counselors, the Secretaries of Estate, and
amongst others him, who has the division of Foreign affairs; he shall do
the like to those which are in credit and favor with the Prince, although but
of mean condition; applying himself in some sort to the custom, and manners
of the Country, and how others have done before him. He shall inform
himself discreetly of the present Estate of the Court; and how every Man
stands in authority; wherein this authority consists, either in reputation and
honor, or in effect and contention, every one according to his rank and
degree, winning unto him if he may, the domestiques and fauorities of those
which have authority. Having news from all parts, he shall still find
occasions to discourse and parley with the Princes and great men, with pleasing
subjects, to be merry with them; or if they be otherwise, and concern them, to
condole, or to advise them to prevent it.

He must visit the Ambassadors and Agents of other Princes and Commonweals,
which reside in the same Court; but soberly, lest he give them occasion of
jealousy. He must be wary not to discover himself wholly unto them, whatsouer
they be; but rather seek to draw from them, then to leave any thing of his
own, to the end he may always be the first to send the advice and pleasing
news. And if the affairs which he pursues, succeedes not according to his
desire, he shall make no show of it, nor seem to have any distrust or bad
opinion of the Prince and others, with whom he negotiates. When he shall be
entreated to do them any courtesy, he shall study to value it at as high a
rate as may be; yet he must do it speedily and freely, letting them know, that
he desires above all things to give them contentment and satisfaction. He shall
commend and magnify the persons, the means, the greatness, the Country, the
Laws, the manner of living, and whatsoever concerns the Nation; yet with such
modesty and discretion, as there may be no show of flattery. He shall likewise
extol the affairs of his Master with the like modesty and dexterity, to the
end they may not grow jealous of him. When he shall find some stop in that
which he desires to do, he shall not insist too eagerly upon it, although he
had an apparent reason: But he shall with dexterity approve the reasons in
part, and by other means seek to attain his Design. When it shall be
needful to do or say any thing contrary to their will or liking, he shall
excuse it in such sort, as they shall conceive that it proceeds not from the
Ambassador, but from such as command him, and that he is sor^y t^ do it,
considering it does not please him; yet ^ustifying the business by the best
reasons he may, and giving them some hope of other things which shall be
pleasing unto them. If they charge him to carry bad and distastefull words, he
shall do better to cause them to give them in writing, rather then to
pronounce the words.

And if he finds that by one means he cannot obtain what he desires, he
shall leave the business for a time, and refer it to some other occasion,
which he shall find they desire of him, or shall have need of something; and
then with dexterity he shall renew his demand, and so persuade them with grace
and mildness. When he i^to obtain any thing of importance, he shall lose no
time to cause it to be dispatched, but shall solicit the expedition, yet with
mildness and modesty: And if it con^sts in a promise for the future, he shall
cause them to set it down in writing, and contrariwise he shall be careful
not to oblige himself nor his Master, but as late as seldom as may be.
Entreating and contracting, he must cause the treaty to be set down in plain
terms, not ambiguous nor captious, according to the terms and clauses of
precedent treaties. It is certain that refusing flatly, or making a business
full of difficulties, they offend him whom they refuse: Therefore an
Ambassador not able to grant that which they demand of him, he must either
give them other Counsel and direction, to attain to that which they desire;
or he shall testify his good will by other gracious effects, and honest
speeches which may palliate the denial. An honest man, (such as he ought to be
that executes this charge,) must not be found a Liar, especially in matters of
importance; for that there is nothing does make him lose his credit more. He
must therefore be wary not to deliver doubtful things for certain, nor trust
wholly to the word and report of others: But he must allege his Author, or
else say, that he had learned it from a good place, when he shall not dare to
name the person. He shall do the like for things which concern his Master,
the which he must deliver on his behalf. When they are such as there is no
great certainty, or else may receive a change, he must deliver them with all
discretion and stayednesse, lest he be reproached that they are circumuented by
this means. And if it should happen that he could not well excuse a
contrariety, yet he must cover and disguise it with some pretext, in regard of
his Master by all means possible; and for himself likewise, purging and
justifying himself, that he had never any intent to do a bad office, nor to
make a bad report, nor to be author and instrument of deceit. The which must
take place, when he is constrained either through the necessity of affairs, or
by the commandment of his Master, to deliver one thing for another. The which
he may not do often, lest he lose all his credit. But it sometimes falls out,
an Ambassador lies without thinking of it: For that when one Prince means to
deceive another, he first deceiues the Ambassador whom he sends, to the end
that delivering that which he holds to be his Masters intention, his reasons
may be more forcible, assuring that which he speaks more boldly, having less
intention and assurance of that which is dissembled. Wherein the Ambassador is
not only excusable, but worthy of pity, in that they are distrustful of him,
and mean to make him carry the Babble, and to serve as an instrument of
deceit. Moreover he must not rely too much on those with whom he negotiates,
neither yet wholly despair for those things which happen; for that affairs
change easily, and affections likewise according to occurrents: And many times
that which seemed impossible at one time, grows easy afterward; and so the
contrary.

But one of the principal points whereof and Ambassador takes care, is to
maintain the rank and dignity of his Master, especially with the
Ambassadors of other Princes. For Princes do not subsist, but by the greatness
and opinion they have of them: It argues a contempt if their rank be
contested, and an Ambassador must must rather loose himself, then quit any
things: And if the Prince with whom he remains, favors him that makes the
attempt, after that he has made instance to be maintained in his rank, he
ought to retire. And for this point, it is usually observed in many places
among Ambassadors, that they which come first, go to visit those which came
last, although that the first commer go before them in rank.

O^ the privileges of Em^a^^adou^s.
Let us come to the privileges which the Ambassadors have in a strange
Country. The principal is, that by the Law of Nations, they are inviolable,
that is to say, in all freedom and safety: But it is in their Country to whom
they are sent. For that if they pass through the Country of one that is Enemy
to their Master, although allied to the Prince to whom they are sent, yet it
would be necessary to take this pasport, being not in that regard respected as
an Ambassador, if he practices any thing against the Estate, or the Princes
person with whom he resides: For he cannot defend himself by the Law of
Nations. And we must not doubt but having violated his Faith first, wherein
the Law of Nations does chiefly consist, but the Prince near whom he remains,
and against whom he has attempted, may cause him to be punished. Yet for that
it may be that the commandment to attempt, proceeds from the Master, and that
punishing the Ambassador, it were to fall upon the stone, and not on the Arm
that cast it. Some Princes have used it more discreetly, content^^g themselves
to seize upon these undertakers expecting ^he avow or disavow of the Master:
And being unable to draw either of them from him, to presuppose a confession,
and then send them to their Master. Moreover, if the Ambassador commits any
private outrage against one of the Princes Subjects with whom he resides,
unless it be to defend the dignity of his charge, or of his Master, many have
held him justifiable before the Prince where he lives. For there is a great
difference betwixt the Dignity and Authority of a Prince, in the Country of
another Sovereign. He may well retain his Dignity, but not his Authority.
But the most safe and the more seemly were before he do reason to the party,
to demand it from his Master, who in that case would not deny it him so soon
as in matters of Estate, and it is a means to free the Prince from slander of
Injustice toward the Ministers of another Prince.

As for his Domestickes, there is no doubt but they may be punished if they do
ill. And if they or any other having sailed, retire into the Ambassadors house,
he may be summoned to yield them, and to suffer Justice to search his house:
Otherwise after this denial the Justice may do it, for that the house of an
Ambassador ought not to serve for a retreat and Sanctuary to the wicked. Yet
this search may not be done by simple S^rgeants, no more then the Summons: But
it must be executed by the Judge of greatest Authority in the place,
accompanied with men of honor, with excuses, entreaties, and courteous words,
as well to testify the respect which they bear to the Dignity of the
Ambassadors Master, as to prevent the insolency and indiscretion which
doevsually accompany Archers, Sergeants, and such other sorts of Ministers. But
in stead of punishing the Domestickes of an Ambassador, after they have made
their process unto condemnation, and caused the Civil party to be satisfied,
some have pardoned them in his favor whose Subjects they are, sending them
back with the process. Or if there be no such intelligence betwixt the two
Princes, as the one will not be beholding to his copanion, they may procure
some common Ally underhand, to make the demand: To whom the Prisoners being
delivered, he may send them to the Prince whose Subjects they are.

Some Ambassadors have persuaded themselves, that they had all jurisdiction
over their Domestickes, even to put some to death. But this is not grounded
upon a reason, if the Prince with whom he resides does not give him leave; as
they say the Turk tollerates it with the Ambassadors of Christian Princes.
Yet they may detain those Prisoners in their house, which practice against the
service of their Master, until they have advertised him, and receive an
answer; provided that they whom they detain, be not admitted as Ambassadors
by the Prince, or Estate where they are: For in that case they are in freedom
and safety. Behold how Ambassadors ought to govern themselves with strangers in
a strange Country. We must now see being in those charges, how they ought to
carry themselves to their Masters, to whom they serve as eyes and ears.

How Ambassadors ought to carry themselves toward their Master.
Some have held that an Ambassador ought to give advice to his Master, of all
that is spoken indiscreetly against him, for that the aduertisment may come
from some other, then from his Ambassador, who in such things ought to be
careful not to be prevented, wherein we cannot give any certain Rules. Yet if
the word has escaped either in ^ho^ler, or from a passionate spirit, were it
the Prince himself; being not spoken publicly, it were more discreetly done
to conceal it from his Master, then to deliver it. For the Master that neither
would nor could break, would seem offended at such a report, if the Estate of
his affairs will not suffer him to demand satisfaction: And on the other side
sometimes, in taking exception at an injury, he seems to confess it. But if
the Ambassador finds it more expedient to conceal the words spoken by the
Prince with whom he resides; he shall let him know, how much his Master would
hold himself wronged, if they were related unto him: But that knowing the good
which grows to both the Estates, by the Friendship in which the two Princes
have lived, he had rather therein fail of his duty, in not making this report,
then to be the occasion of trouble, and breach for a word spoken in choler.

It is to no purpose to say, that in doing this, it were to show himself wiser
then his Master; or that he must deliver all, and conceal nothing. For that
which offends Princes, and inuites them to resentment, is not so much the
offense in it self, as the opinion they have, that the world knows they have
been wronged; and if they do not seek some revenge, they should make a
breach in their reputations, and inuit others to affront and contemn them. So
as the wrong being not published and known to all Men, and the Ambassador
making it known that for the good of peace, he would conceal it from his
Master, it does no way touch the reputation of the Prince, who otherwise being
held to be courageous, they would always believe, that if the report had been
made unto him, he would not have endured it without revenge: There are many
things which Princes are glad to have concealed; but those principally, for the
which they cannot provide, without greatly incommadating their affairs, these
ought to be dissembled and concealed from them.

As for dispatches, Of their dispatches.
it is certain that they seldom know what an Ambassador does in his charge^,
but by that which he writes. He must therefore show himself by his dispatches,
which must be grave, short, close couched, and mingled sometimes according to
the Subjects, with passages of Sentences, yet seldom: And to be the more
intelligible, some hold it fit that he should articulate every private action
apart, not troubling himself with a continuance, and bond of clauses in diverse
affairs, and he must acknowledge in all his letters, the reception of those to
the which he makes answer. If he enforced to write many letters upon the same
subject, and to the same place, as it happens usually, he shall do well to
diuersifie the terms and style as much as may be, to the end they may not be
like unto a Notaries Indenture, and that they which have received the like
letters, coming to confer them together, may not think that he has
entreated them equally; every man esteeming of himself not only better then
he is, but also more then his companion.

He must have a care not to write any thing to his Master for true, concerning
those with whom he negotiates, if he has no testimony by Letters, or that he
knows it from those in whom his master has confidence, the which he ought to
name: For that the change which may happen in a business, might cause a
reproach and bad conceit of the minister, with his Master, either of
lightness, or of little foresight. He shall be always esteemed to do more
then to write, and to give them good hope when he shall see day, before he give
them assurance and certainty of the business. As for the particular of the
Ambassador, as we have said before, besides the Secretary of Estate, who is to
receive his Dispatches, he must have some one which may give him advice of that
which passes. He with some other friends, must do him all sorts of good
offices, in commending and praising his Services and dexterity. And the
Ambassador on the other side, shall labor to have others write; especially
men unknown to commend his industry and labor, absence causing a decay of
opinion, and makes them sometimes forget the worth of a man, if by these
practices they be not revived.

THE COVNSELLOR OF ESTATE. OR, A COLLECTION OF the greatest and most Remarkable
Considerations serving for the Managing of Public Affairs. PART. II.
CONTAINING THE MEANS how to preserve an ESTATE.
CHAPTER I. Of the parts and conditions in general, necessary for a Prince and
Sovereign.
Having treated of that which is necessary for the settling of an Estate, we
must consider of the means how to preserve it. It is not sufficient to build a
strong ship to make a long and tedious Voyage; but we must withal provide a
good Pilot to govern it, and to seek means to calke it, and trim it when it
takes water, and to be able to resist the waves of the Sea, and the violence of
the Winds and storms without shipwreck.

The preservation of the Estate consists in the authority of a Prince.
That which serves for the Establishment, does likewise serve for the
preservation of an Estate; but we must likewise have other means to preserve
this order, the which consists either in the authority of him that commands or
in the remedy which they must find, against that which might ruin the Estate.
The Authority of him which commands, proceeds either from the love of the
people, or from his own reputation.

The Love of the people cause the authority of the Sovereign.
Love alone would suffice him that has once gotten it, were it not that he
cannot promise any thing to himself from the inconstancy of Men, who love to
day and hate to morrow, without any subject or occasion. Wherefore he which
commands, must assure himself of Men long before, and not attend until he be
reduced to the point of necessity. For then the danger being eminent, it is no
more time, for that their faith is then shaken, and by this search he gives a
testimony that he fears: the which many times does hasten the Princes ruin,
and makes them fly from all reconcilment with him.

Diverse means to gain his good will.
This Love is gotten by many means. The Beauty, Behavior, Carriage, pleasing
Countenance, and Courtesy, are sometimes of great force. With others Nobility,
and reputation of their predecessors has been of great use, although that
they had not any other part that was recommendable. Among the Inhabitants of a
City or Town, riches may likewise do something, if they use it as they ought.

CHAP. 2. Of the parts necessary for a Prince to purchase the Love of the
People.
But to treat in general of the parts necessary for a Prince to purchase this
good will, we will reduce them to three, Mildness, Bounty, and Justice.

From Mildness grows the peace of the Estate, the fidellity of the Subjects,
and the Establishment of affairs, Effects of mildness in a Prince.
there being nothing that does more force the people to honor their Lord, then
the natural mildness which he shows, and practices to their good. Rygour
makes him to be feared, and consequently not beloved, and this fear and cold
Friendship lasts no longer, then the occasion of fear continues. But mildness
governed with discretion, remains in the heart, and produces its effect,
whilst that Men which have received pleasure and profit live. This mildness
is practiced by the Prince principally, in three points. The first, is to
pardon offenses, but not those of the Estate; and to pardon those, who being
discovered can hurt no more, and by using clemency unto them, may get some
reputation; but not to those who may mutine, and who by no means cannot be
persuaded to submit themselves to reason: Mildness to such is cruelty to all
others. It is cruelty I say to pardon a wicked Man, if by the impunity which
does follow, we be forced afterward to dipp our hands deeper in blood.

It is a stupid bounty, and a simplicity without discretion, to pardon all, and
to suffer all. The excess of clemency, conuerts it self into a soft and
effeminate nature: And if this bounty be not mingled with rigor, and facility
with authority; it is mere carelessness blamable in a Prince, for that in
suffering one fault, it soon draws after it another. Clemency is comendable
toward an Enemy dejected and humbled: But whilst he wauers and stands in
terms against us; it is weakness, amazement and fear, not to dare to
resent it, he must therefore use mildness with discretion, yet in such sort,
as they may always find the Prince more inclined to mildness then severity.

To cherrish great Men.
The second point, when they discover mildness, is chiefly to cherrish great
Men, and the chief of the Estate, and according to occasions, others: For that
every Man esteeming himself of more worth then he is, they grow easily
discontented if they make no reckoning of them. The third point, by the which
he which commands may testify his mildness, is in showing himself indulgent
in things, wherein the people take delight; Provided always that they fly
excess and disorder. For by this means they mollisie the savageness of the
Subject, they divert him from undertaking; and make every one more joyful in
his vocation. Yet he must not suffer himself to be carried away with this
indulgence, as through negligence, and the little care he had to provide for
his Estate; but with a design and discretion restr^tiue in his time. For this
effect he must also provide, (as we will show hereafter) for the abundance of
Victuals and commodities, to the end that he may thereby testify the care he
has of his people, and by this care the affection he bears them. For if the
people should fall into necessity, or into a dearth of Victuals, this
mildness and indulgence would prove unprofitable; and the Prince would loose
much of the Love of his Subjects: there being nothing that does so much
discontent them, as such discommodities; especially when it grows either
through the Monopoles of the Prince, or the excess of custom.

CHAP. 3. Of the liberality of the Prince.
LIberallity is of two sorts, Two sorts of liberality.
the one practiced to the benefit of private persons; and the other to the
profit and advantage of the Public. The one and the other well husbanded,
serves to purchase Love to the Prince. For although he cannot extend his
bounty to all in particular, for that it would be impossible his revenues
should suffice: Yet a liberal Prince is beloved of every man; For that every
man hopes to taste of his bounty according to his degree, making him his
Friend; although that the facility of giving ruins the Estate sooner, then too
great sparing. But no Man enters into consideration, how much sparing is
necessary for a Prince, for the general good of his Estate: For that the
number of those is small which does in particular to hinder that which belongs
in general to all. And yet as excess is blameable in all actions, so it is
most prejudicial to the Estate in this: And we have seen in our time, The
excess of liberality in a Prince most hurtful to the Estate.
that moderate giving has been a weak means to purchase the Subjects love
to the Prince: For it reiects more then it gains; and if it be employed
without respect of merit, it proves a shame to him that receives it, and is
received without grace.

The Subjects of a Prince excessive in gifts, makes them excessive in expenses,
and importune in demands. They govern themselves not according unto reason but
to custom: That which is received is no more accounted of: They love not
liberality but for the future. Wherefore the more a Prince does exhaust
himself in giving, the p^orer he grows in Friends; and from excessive
prodigallity, does usually g^ow the poverty of a Prince: From poverty exactions
and hatred in like manner. For the number of those from whom he takes by
exaction, being greater then the Friendship of those to whom he gives; the
Prince is in danger not to command long. If then he be reduced to one of these
extremities, it were more expedient for the Prince to be poor and not hated
of his Subjects, then to be hated and rich. For although that for a time he may
force obedience, yet i^ cannot be durable: And although that he which spares,
seems in outward show to do good to few, yet not exacting from the Subject
he does good to all, whereas a prodigal Prince does usually good but to few.

We must therefore be careful to use this virtue well, thereby to purchase
love. For although that the gifts and benefits, be in some sort in the liberty
and free will of him that gives: yet it has certain distinctions and laws
which restrain it, and especially in that which concerns the Prince;
Considerations necessary in liberality.
who being but a simple dispencer of the Public Treasure, he ought not to
employ it without hope of some profit to the Public. Wherefore he must
consider what he gives, to whom, and when. For it is not needful to give to
all that demands; as if the demander and des^ruer were one and the same thing:
Likewise betwixt those which have deserved, he may not give to all that beg,
for it would be found that they which have least deserved, have tasted of his
liberality, and not the rest.

And as the payment of a Bond ought to go before liberality; otherwise it
would be injustice to give, at the charges of those to whom we are indebted: So
Merit must be recompensed, before we do good to him that has not deserved:
And before Merits, services ought to march; and before services, debts and
Bonds ought to be discharged. It is the Law of Justice, not to do wrong to
one, to gratify another, The which is very ill observed by the most part of
Princes, who therein follow the nature of other Princes, which is, rather to
do that which proceeds from their own will, then what is commanded them by
Justice, or that whereunto they are bound: For that in the first they
acknowledged themselves Superiors, and in the second Inferiors; the
recompense showing the merit and valor of him to whom it is given.

Wherefore the benefit or liberality of the Prince, proceeds either from the
acknowledgment of service, Diuer^ kinds of liberality.
or of merit, or of his own free will; or to inuit and draw some one to love
him, or to corrupt him, or to purchase the reputation to be liberal.
Concerning the first two sorts of bounty, they are necessary, as well for the
satisfaction of those which receive them, Of the liberality which is used for
the acknowledgment of service and merit.
as for the contentment of the General, who by the example would be invited
to conform their actions to the good of the Estate. For the acknowledgement of
a benefit is no less esteemed, then if the liberality proceeded from a free
will: For that the good and pleasure which they do, proceeds many times from
the abundance of wealth, and the great power which he has that gives, as well
as from good will: But acknowledgement cannot come but from the desire he had
to do good, so as although to give and do good, be more to be desired, yet
the content which they feel, is peradventure more comme^dable, as proceeding
only from a francke and free courage.

And it is that whereof among private persons we have experience, that the
benefit which comes from a bond or debt, is more pleasing then that which comes
unto us from the free will of another: For that in this consists the content of
the giver, who charge is with a bond which binds us; and which in some does
rather engender hatred then Friendship; especially if the benefit exceeds all
Satisfaction. In the other, besides the pleasure to receive the benefit, we
receive content to see that we acknowledge the former good which we have done
them.

And although that they which love us, deserve to be requited for their
good will toward us, as being the principal part of the benefit: Yet it
deserves rather to be recompensed by a Prince, with kind usage and good words,
then by effects; the which he must keep to recompense effects, otherwise his
Revenues would not justice. Yet if he finds that some for want of this,
withdraw themselves from him, although unjustly and with out cause, it shall be
necessary that he retain them by the mildest means he can, and rather in
doing them good, then in ^mploying threats, who according to their natural
disposition, might be the more incensed.

That a Prince (...) show him (...) liberal to those which may se^ue him
against ^is ^nemy, be they o^ a con^r^ry pa^^y.
The Prince may also bestow gifts and benefits of those, which may serve him
against his Enemy; I say to those which are of a contrary party, to draw them
unto him. For as it is a vice in them to suffer themselves to be corrupted, so
it is a virtue and wisdom in the Prince to corrupt and gain them. And as some
have not allowed of this expense, for that the advantage which we expect is
doubtful, having to deal with traitors, who may as well betray the Prince
which gives the^, as him they serve: Yet the general experience is contrary;
being most certain that the Minister which takes, sells himself, be it that
the money binds him, or that the shame to have received, stays him from
failing of his promise; Or that the fear to be discovered makes him to be
suspected of him he serves, and to him that gives him, which were a means to
ruin him with the one and the other, forcing him of necessity to keep his
word with him that has corrupted him; being in his heart grown
irreconciliable to him whom he has res^lued to betray. Besides few men of
quality suffer themselves to be corrupted, unless they be transported, by
some hatred, contempt, or desire of Revenge, which they have conceived against
him whom they serve: Or they are not disposed in heart and a^f^ction, to love
him which corrupts them, there being nor^ but base spirits, or needy persons,
which suffer themselu^s to be cor^upted for mere auar^ce.

The liberality which is used to particular persons, to purchase re^utation, Of
the liberality of the Prince to purchase reputation.
extends commonly either to strangers, or to Subjects, which do not know nor
frequent the Princes Court, who ought to have in no ^^sse recommendation those
which a^^ remote from his Court, then others which are daily in his eye: For
that the greatnes^e and majesty of the Prince does not take its foundation and
increase to know, but to be known of many: And the honor and reno^n^ to aid
and do good to another, should b^ too ^uc^ ^^strained, if his succors and
benefi^s should proceed no farther, then to such persons whom they see and
know. Behold wherein usually the bounty of Princes to private persons is
employed,

In their manner of giving they must ob^erue three things. The first, The
manner of giving.
not to g^ue at the request of a third person, to the and that he which
receives may be bound unto him, and not to the other, by who^e importunity he
gives. The ma^n^rof giui^g must be in such sort, that although it be for an
acknowledgment or recompense, yet they to whom it is given, receive the benefit
with an obligation; otherwise the gift were fruitless, and is held for a
payment, and not a liberality; so as they enc^urage him that receives, to
demand g^ine, rather then to acknowledge that which they hau^ given him.

The t^i^d is, to give in the view of all men, to purchase reputation. For
although that in a private lib^tality this were not commendable; yet this
manner is necessary in the Estate, where the Actions of Princes must be
apparent and visible, neither must they be unfruitful; And it suffices not to
do a pleasure; but you must make him that receives it, acknowledge that it is
done to such an intention. As for the measure of benefits, they must be
proportionable to the time, and to the persons, Benefits must be propo^tio^a^le
t^ the time.
as well of him that receives, as of him that gives. And for the time,
sometimes a small succor given in necessity, obliges not only more then a
great gift would do at anot^er time; but sometimes causes an Enemy to fo^get
all the wrongs he had received, there being two things in concurrence in this
benefit, either of which may do much for a reconcilliation, and by consequence
for love. The one is, for the benefit and pleasure he does him, in the best
time that could be; I mean at need. The other is the assurance that he which
receives the benefit, takes of his good will that succors him so opportunely.
Thus he must observe the time to give esteem to his ben^fits, to the end the
Debt may be the greater. As for persons, the humors being diverse, the Prince
must observe the humors of his Ministers, not only as I have said, to impart
their Offices unto them, but also* for his recompenses: For that some demand
honors, others ^iches, according to the which he must govern himself.

And for that there are more men found which affect Riches, ^ecompences (...)
li^n^ur m^^t ^ee well (...).
then honor; and that being willing to satisfy every man's desire, he should
be forced to exhaust his t^easure: He must (as much as may be) encourage his
Subjects to seek for Honors, as recompenses which can not impouerish him; and
yet use it in such sort, as it may seem that he does not give them without
discretion and election. For when as Honor is imparted to unworthy men, it
b^gins to be contemned, and to lose this Title of Honor, as likewise he may
not mingle it with profit, for that many would make more esteem of profit,
then of Honor.

If the liberalities of Princes toward private persons, does get them
good will, not only from those which taste the fruit, Libe^^lity of the (...)
tow^rds ^h^ Publ^qu^.
but also from all others which participate in hope: That which the Sovereign
practices toward the Public, as being more profitable, and ex^nding to more
persons, should pu^chase unto him more generally the affection of the people:
As the Succors which the Prince gives in public calamities, in famine,
plague, dearth, burning of Towns, War, invasion of Enemies, Earthquakes,
inundations, and such accidents. For that the Prince alone may give this
releife, being necessary to have means which exceed the ordinary: The reason
of Estate will not allow that any private person, although he were able to do
it, The Liberality of a private person toward the Public is not to be
allowed.
should enter into this kind of liberality, which it may be would advance him
in the love of the people before the Prince. And in Commonweals and popular
Estates, ^ome private person having attempted to show their bounty, have been
punished, as men which sought by this means ^o seduce the people, and to
usurp the Estate.

Seeing then that this liberality is fitting only for the Prince, he must
practice it as much as may be, and not suffer occasion to be lost. There is
another sort of liberality, which the Prince may practice to the benefit of the
Public, Liberality of the Prince toward the Public, which consists in
advancing virtue
no less importing then the other: which is to advance to virtue, by the
establishment and foundation of Seminaries of Piety and Religion, of Schools
and Colleges for all sorts of Sciences which may serve the Public: Of Houses
of Honor and Virtue, for the practices and exercises which may serve in War;
and of other places for all sorts of Worke-men and Artizans, for the bringing
in of Manufactures, whereof I have formerly treated.

CHAP. 4. Of the Princes Justice.
Justice is generally bel^ued and desired: But when they will practice it
ag^^nst priu^te persons, the commis^ration they hau^ o^ a con^emned man, or the
color of some contrary reasons, joined to interest and obstinacy, make the
rigor and severity odious to many. Wherefore in a manner in all Estates, the
exercise of Justice has been divided into two parts. That which concerns the
punishment of crimes, Justice divided into two parts.
and the deciding of controversies betwixt man and man, has been left to the
Magistrates and inferior Officers to the Prince, to free him from the envy and
hatred which condemnations draw after them: And that which concerns the
distribution of D^gnities; honors, charges, recompenses, pardons, and rewards,
has been retained by the Prince, to gain the love of the Subjects. Yet the
Prince, even in that which concerns p^iuate men, wherein the princ^ ought to
show himself a (...) of Justice in ^^gard of private men.
may show himself a lover of Justice, and by this means win the affection
of his people, not incurring any envy by the establishment he shall make of
Laws, necessary to supp^esse the fraud and violence of his Age by the choice
he shall make of good men to administer Justice: And by the care he shall take
to keep them in awe, in p^escribi^g the form of the administrati^n o^
Justice. The frauds most usually practiced in an Estate by private persons, are
disloyalty, usury, falsehood, frauds, and M^nopolies; by the which some grow
suddenly rich, and some extremly poor; whence many times grow the despai^e of
those who^ they thrust into innouations; and the insol^ncy of the others which
maks the^ insupportable: and from the one and the other grows trouble, and in
the end the ruin of the Estate follows. Against this kind of disorder and
abuse, the Prince must show himself affectionate for Justice, by the o^dayning
of ^igorous punishments against such as shall be surprised; as also in blaming
them in his discourses, according to the occasions which shall be offered, and by
admonitions and exhortations to Judges in general, not touching any one in
particular, and of persons otherwise odious.

And particularly usury or interest, Against v^ury.
(which cannot be defended) ought to be regulated at much less then the
ordinary gain of those which borrow, (be they Merchants or Laborers) may mount
unto; to the end that the poor in borrowing of the rich, may lay, and pay that
which they are forced to borrow; and thereby avoid the ruin of the poor by
usury, and that of the rich by banquerupts whereof they are the cause. As for
violence which is committed in an Estate, it is of two sorts, Two sorts of
violence in an Estate which the Prince ought to suppress.
the one is of Thieves and Robbers, who by open force and Arms, trouble the
safety of private persons: against the which the Prince has a double reason to
oppose himself, as well for that all force ought to be in his hands, as for
that he is Established to mainetaine the peace and safety of his subjects, not
only against strangers, but also among themselves, and the Prince which comes
and does not give order, loses the love of his Subjects, and exposes his
reputation to contempt, which makes him in the end loose all his authority; and
is in danger that these Thieves seeing themselves strong, will trouble him in
his Estate: But this is easily prevented in lending a strong hand to Justice,
and causing those to assist, which are appointed for the apprehension of such
persons.

The other so^t of violence contrary to Justice, is the oppression of the poor
by great Men, Of the oppression of the poor^.
be it that it is made by the unlawful exactions of money, or of day works,
beating, or other ryotts, to prevent the which, the Prince must not only in
his ordinary discourses cond^mne this ma^^er of proceeding, thr^atning them to
be punished, without taking notice of any person in particular; but also that
which shall concern the punishment of private men, he must l^aue free to the
ordinary Justice, to dispose according to the Laws, without assisting the
delinquents with any favor or pardon; as many Princes usually do, who trouble
the order of Justice by such impunities, and ruin their Estates by maintayning
such people. And we have often seen, that a Prince has saved the life of some
such man, (...) Princes (...) to (...), ^n (...).
who in a combustion has been the first to raise the Subjects, and to draw
his sword against him. This is the recompense which such Princ^^ deserve. They
come by degrees to pride and disobe^^ence, as to all other vices. He that has
dared this day to coa^^^ne the Law and the Magistrates, to morrow will co^t^^ne
the Prince who has made the Law, and ha^h established the Magistrate; and if
occasion be offered will attempt against him.

I mean not for all this to tie the Princes hands, so as he may not give a
pardon: (...) wherein (...) may (...).
There are cases in which Iust^ce does allow it: But besides when as some great
and public profit requires it; as if it be for a man, from whom the Public
has d^awne great and famous S^ruices; or if by the punishment there will
follow some trouble in the Estate: The Prince in this case for a gre^t^r good,
or to avoid a great mischief, may dispeace and pardon him. But before he
resolve, he must examin^ duly what he intends ^o do, and he must not flatter
himself in his considerations, to favor some one ^g^inst Justice, which
considerations he shall keep secret, l^^t they draw unto a consequence: And
moreover, before he comes to that, if there be any particular interest, it must
be satisfied with such contentment, as there may be nothing to be desired,
neither from him which has offended, nor ^^om the Princes justice.

Among all the violences and oppressions which great Men commit, the most
dangerous to an Estate, and which ought to be less supported by the Prince, is
that which is done against the Magistrate, That the grace and savor of the
Prince not extend to have violence done against the Magistrate.
either in executing his charge, ^or in hatred thereof. For this is to attempt
directly against the Public, and to overthrow the order of Justice, making
(by the impunity of such violences) the Magistrate fearful in the execution
of the Princes will. He that endures these violences, not only seems to love
Justice and the public good but little, but also makes them think that he
fears to punish them by the ordinary course of Justice; and in such
conniuences he loses both the love of his people and his reputation.

The second point wherein a Prince may show his ^ffectio^ toward Justice, Of
the choice a Prince ought to make of Judges and Magistrates.
is the choice which he shall make of those which shall administer it for him:
As contrariwise, the indifferency which he shall show, to make use of the first
commer^, will discover his carelessness. I mean to speak here not only of
those which are destinated to judge the controversies of private persons, but
also of all such as under the Princes Authority, have any power or command,
according unto which they may do something justly or unjustly. For Justice is
mingled and practiced in all actions, be they private or public. Every man is
a Judge in his charge. And we must not say, that there being good Justice, we
may not punish those who under the Princes Authority shall offend in other
Offices. For besides the Difficulty which is sometimes found, the same may they
say of Judges. But the Princes foresight may pass farther, and hinder the
mischief and injustice as much as may be. It is the last remedy to punish; and
we must do what possibly we may not to come unto it. To prevent all this,
we must use choice; whereof few Princes dream, and the contempt of this
choice in some Estate^ is p^oceeded so far as Offices are given to them that
will o^fer most. An apparent sign that these Estates are near unto their
ru^ne.

I (...) m^anes (...) t^o^e which ^re to be established in the administ^a^ion
o^ Iust^ce.
Some Princes have had this care, to propound in public the names of those
whom they meant to send into Provinces, to see what might be objected before
they sent them. Others have made Rolls, of those that were to be employed in
Offices, causing themselves to be informed sec^etly by good men: And others
have chosen them according to the opinion of the people. But the safest means
is that whereof we have spo^en, to cause them to ex^cute the meanest Offices
from deg^ee to degree, before they were advanced to others of great importance.
For then more men are able to testify of their Experience and Discretion; and
their Actions being as it were public, and apparent to all the World, it is
more easy to judge (...) petty charges they will accustom themselves to do
well, for the desire they have to be advanced to greater: And admit they would
transgress, besides that the evil cannot be great, it may be easily corrected.

(...) the (...) must (...) ca^e to (...) the (...) to do^ (...).
But this is not all, to have chosen such as must attend Justice (although that
it would be more then half the work, to have chosen them good and capeable
men) but man changes; and many times amidst the malice of men which are
reported unto him to judge, he learnes to be malicious. Wherefore the Prince
must always have an open eye to maintain them in Integrity: And this
demonstration which he shall make, in reproaching them for some fault which
they have committed, will in a manner suffice in an Age that is not too much
corrupted: But in another, he must according to occurrents add to his helping
hand, to pr^uent the mischief. (...) means (...) the (...) of (...).


One of the means to avoid the evil, and to pre^erue the integrity of
I^dges, is, after that h^e has made choice of honest men, to give them means
to enentertaine themselves in serving the Public: To the end he may draw them
from the thought, which necessity might force them to, to gather goods by
unlawful means. Others have held Officers in awe by inquieries made from time
to time. But the Commissioners of these searches being as well subject to
corruption as the rest, this course has not been long observed.

Moreover, Of the compositions with offic^rs, misbehauing* themselves in their
charges, ^and of the inconu^niences which follow.
Princes thrust on by the harpies of the Court, have many times made use of
these means, rather to gather together money, then to reform disorders: I
here having been (under the like pretext) a public concussion drawn into
many Estates, the which has equalled (by the means of general and particular
compositions which have been made) good men with the wicked; No man how good
soever, being desirous after a long vexation of imp^isonment, and proceeding to
run the hazard of a Judgment of Commissioners; whereof some are many times
partisans, or depending of partisans for such compositions, or rewarded by the
Fines and Confiscations which they make; and for a small matter would hang a
man to have his clothes.

Another mischief which is committed in such compositions, is, that by the
means thereof the wicked remaining still in his Office, under hope to be freed
another time at the same rate, do worse then they did before: And he which is
an honest man, seeing himself compelled and forced to pay a Fine for an
oftence which he has not committed, resolves to do it, as well to
re-embource himself, as to have means another time to satisfy the avarice of
the Authors of such searches. That a Prince having pardoned an Officer, may
not suffer him in his charge.


Wherefore they must either make no enquieries, or else they must finish them
by the course of Justice. But if in such things the Prince will show savor,
and pardon some one man's life: At the least after he is reprehe^ded, he may
not suffer him to continue in his place, as well to take from him the means of
ill doing, as not to make the charge contemptible, and himself ^dious, in
maintayning a person therein, who has been held of a bad life. Of Spies in
cuery Province to inquire of the carriage of Officers.
There are Princes which have made use of spies, w^om they sent throughout the
Provinces, to inquire of the actions of officers: And these for that they were
unknown, might easily enter into all places, and observe the actions of one
and another, and sometimes do bad offices unseasonable for the honestest men,
yet the Prince being wise and not relying upon the report, but tying them to a
secret proof, and without any brute, may make use of it, and ought not to
neglect this means.

Secret delations practiced by King L^wis the ^w^lfth to contain his Officers
in their du^y.
Lewis the twelfth who was called the Father of the People, for that he held a
strict hand over justice, making his ordinary abode in Blois, examining
himself secretly, those which come to Court from all parts of his Realm, and
sometimes passengers of that which was done, as they had heard spoken in the
place from whence they came, and especially of great Men, and of his Officers;
and finding by report of many, some aduisoes conformable, against some one, he
caused him to be put into the hands of Justice, to inform of his life, and to
punish him: And in this manner he contained every man in his duty. Secret
delations have been brought into Scotland, by an ancient Edict of Conan King
of Scotland, the which they say is yet practiced at this day, and is called
Indict: But better by the ordinance of Millan, by the which in all their Towns
there must be a hollow Trunk in the chief Church, whereof the Governor has
the Key, into the which it is Lawful for any man, to cast the lybell of
accusation secretly, containing the crime committed, the time, the p^ace, the
offenders, and the witnesses; and this ordinance gives a moiety of the
confiscation to the ^il^tor: which is a great mea^es to facilitate the
pu^ishme^t of crimes.

CHAP. 5. Of the administration of Justice.
IN the form of the administration of Justice, Consideration^ necessary for a
Prince, for the administration of Justice.
among private persons, the Prince ought to have an eye of the order, to the
speedy expedition, and to the putting off of charges, and ordinary expenses,
which they consume in pleading, the which many times exceed the principal.
Order is as it were an essential part of Justice: For where there is
confusion, there can be no Justice: and to avoid this confusion, they must
provide that no jurisdiction attempt not against another. For the which they
must have a care, not only among those which are of equal power,
distinguished by places, or by certain kinds of causes: But also betwixt
inferiors and superiors. Contrariwise they must strictly bind the parties
upon great penalties, to follow their suits by those degrees, and in that place
which is appointed for them by the Law: And the Prince must hinder, that by
Euocations either to himself, or to some other of his Subjects, there may be
^o contrauention without great cause.

In the speedy expedition, the Prince shall testify his affection to the good
of justice, in taking away the power of Judges (...) p^olong delays, and
favor those that fly from tryal^, i^ shortning as much as he may, by the
adnice of the m^st judicious of his Estate, the style, and form of their
ordinary proceeding, as well in Establishing Fines and Amercements against
those that fail and de^ay, as in diminishing the degrees of Iuridiction, The
expense of pleaders.
and other tediousne^se in p^ediang. As for the expense, the pleader suffers in
three or four sorts. The one, when he is forced ^o go ^arre from his house
and family: For besides that he is not able to attend his domestique affairs
during his absence, they perish most commonly in regard thereof; the charges as
well of his voyage as of his return, are much greater then in his house. The
remedy hereof is, to settle in a great Estate Judges in every Province, and if
it may be, in the midst, to the end that the extremities may not be too remote.
I mean not only of Judges, which may judge in the first instance, but also of
those to who^ they will give power to judge definitiuely, for ordinary causes,
and which dese^ue not the change of a journey of a hundred, or six score
leagues.

Another expense is for the vocations of Judges, who as we have said, Of the
vocations of Judges
ought to be honestly entertained by the public, and private men freed of
that charge. But if they fear that their vocations being reduced to ordinary
wages, many amongst them would neg'ect to labor: They may conclude that the
sum appointed by the public for the payment of their vocation, shall be
divided amongst them according to their labor, which shall be taxed by the
whole company. There being nothing so unseemly for a seat of Justice, then to
take money from the hands of one of the parties, yea his just Fee; and yet
there is nothing so ordinary in this age, in a manner in all Estates.

Another expense is of Registers, Vshers, and such other ministers of Justice,
whose taxes they must not only Regulate, Of tax of Registers, Vshers, and
such other Mi^is^^^rs o^ Justice.
but also limit the time, in the which they ought to deliver the expeditions to
the parties, and that upon great penalties. For a party which sees that he may
spend much, will be willing to give unto a Register halse that which it would
cost him, besides his tax, then to grow obstinate, to pay nothing but the
tax, set down by the orders, and to be constrained to consume twice as much
in s^aying to attend his expedition. Of the expense o^ (...), and (...).


But the greatest and most excessive expense, is that of Solicitors, Proctors,
and Advocates, which is a very difficult thing to order: And some have held,
that we must leave this means to those of this quality, to enrich themselves
in serving others, there being Grooms as they say of all prizes. Yet if they
could set down an order, which might be easily executed, it would be a great
benefit for Justice: But having not bin hitherto found, at the least it would
require the fore-^^g tand Justice of the Prince. to provide in such sort, as
poor Men desiri^g to recover their own, might be^ freed from this change.

For this effect it has bin sometimes propounded, to oblige those, which
desire to come in time to great offices of this profession, before they should
attain unto any, they should undertake the pursuit of causes freely, and that
it should not be lawful for them to take any Fee; upon pain of concussion,
and to be made v^capable ever to enter into any office for the future. These
being commonly Men of means, desirous to win honor and in an Age when desire
is most ardent: will strive in Envy one of another to protect the poor, when
as for their recompense they should propound unto them, some place being void
of those whereunto they aspired, to prefer^e him which had defended the
greatest number. Besides the benefit which the poor should reap, the Public
should have advantage; in that they which should enter into these charges, had
given some testimony of their integrity and su^ficiency: Whereas the custom is
at this day, to place Scholars coming from School, in the companies of
Judges, with little Learning and less experience, and having given no proo^es
of their discretion.

There is another point wherein the Prince may likewise testify his affection
to the good of Justice, Of the verificaion of Edicts by the ^ourse of Parli^^nt.
when he submits his Laws and Edicts to the judgment of those, to whom he has
referred the last appea^es of his Justice, before he ^auseth him to be
executed. The Kings of France, above all others, have bin curious to be held
Iusticers: And although that otherwise, they have made profession of Arms and
War, more then any other Princes, yet they would be in all places, in their
Seal, and in their throne of Justice. But above all others they of the last
race, have affected this Name to be great Iusticers; having brought in the
verification of their Edicts, by their Courts of Parliament, before they will
cause them to be executed; stopping the mouths of such by this formality, as
would impug^e their commandments with injustice, in giving more authority to
the execution, and preserving themselves from surprise and importunity.

CHAP. 6. Of the Reputation of the Prince.
Of the mean^s how a Prince may p^rchase repu^at^on.
THe reputation of a Prince, is the other part which gives him authority. It is
gotten by many means. But we will begin with the principail, which are
Prupence, and Valor. Prudence serves him as an eye to see, Of Prudence and
Vallou^ in a Prince.
and to consider all things. Valor serves him as a hand. Without the one he
should be like a blind Man, and without the other weak and unable. Prudence
gives him Counsel, and Valor force. The one commands and the other executes.
The one discouers the difficulties of enterprises; and Valor breaks them.
The one designs affairs; and this finisheth them. The one sharpens the
Judgment; and this fortifies the courage.

That a Prince mu^t have a general know^edge of all Sciences.
Prudence to be such as it ought to be in a Prince must be accompanied, with a
general knowledge of all sorts of Sciences, not exactly, as to make a trade
and profession; but he must know as much as is necessary for him, to
distinguish truth from falsehood, and to understand those which discourse
according to occurrents. His profession is not to be an E^gineere, to build
houses, to make a Bridge, or to be a good Cano^neere: But to know those that
are most fit; and iudiciously to make use of Men of all sorts of professions.
Neither must the Prince be amazed at this knowledge, which is required in him
as of a thing impossible, amidst the variety of affairs and occupations, which
they of this quality have usually; nor to distrust his understanding and
capacity: For there is nothing therein but is most easy.

And among other means to get this general knowledge, the principal is to
have about him a good number of Men, great in all sorts of Sciences, as
D^uines, Philosophers, Mathematitians, and Captains, for whom (be it attable
or else where,) he may in few words learn that which cannot be apprehended in
many months at school: To give them a subject of discourse, in walking, be
it on foot or hors-backe, going a hunting, and in all other occasions; to keep
them prepared, so as presenting themselves before him, they may be ready to
deliver something that is rare and excellent. Yet he must remember, if he
means to have them discourse before the world in his presence, to advertise
them secretly sometime before, of that which he means to propound, to the end
they may be prepared; for the most sufficient may be surprised: And not to
reprehend him before the world; the which would do wrong to his reputation,
and that of the Prince would likewise suffer, for that they would conceive he
had made a bad choice. Thus the Prince employing the time only, which others
spend in the encounters of iesters, he will in a short time be as learned as
shall be necessary for him.

Alexander, Julius Caesar, Charlemaigne, The practice of many great Princes.
Charles the wise King of France, and Alphonso the tenth King of Castille, had
not want of affairs and im^loyments: And yet they found l^isure to read, and
^ome to write. Alphonso the first King of Naples, who in his time had as many
affairs and c^osses as any other of his quality, said, that a Prince without
Learning was an Ass Crow^ed.

Experience is the Mother of Prudence, for that many things seem grounded upon
reason, Of experience.
and easy in famil^^r discour^e; the which being put in execution, ^ucceed
not, as they conceive: but contrariwise they have found some impossible. Two
sorts of experience.
Experience is of two sorts. For either we get it of our selves, by that which
we obs^rue, and whereof we are eye witnesses: O^ by the report of others. The
report of others, is either of the living, or such as are dead. In regard of
the first, although it extends not far, by reason of time; Yet it may embrace
many places, for that Ambassadors, Spies, Marc^ants, Soldiers, and such like
persons, who (either for pleasure, or for affairs, or for some other subject,)
have been in many places, and have found themselves in diverse Encounters, may
teach us many things for our conduct.

The ^nowledge o^ histo^ ry necessary for a Prince.
But History passes much farther, and with much more profit: For there is seen
the life of the world, the manner* and fashions of Nations; the diverse
Establishment of Estates; the beginning, progress, midst, and end, and the
causes of the increase, and ruin of Empires. There may be learned the causes,
for the which some Princes raig^e peaceably, and others in troubles and
conbustion; Some in making war, and others in being prodigal; And some stayed
in their expenses with dignity. But to relate here all that is necessary to
Prudence, we must make a repetition of all that is formerly spoken, this treaty
tending only to this point, we will content our selves to propound some
rules, which concern only the Prudence of the Prince.

CHAP. 7. Rules and necessary instructions for a Prince to be held wise.
A Prince may easily judge by himself what may be the deliberations of all
others of his condition. Interest is the part and reason which preuailes, and
makes the resolutions, bend to that side where it shows it self: And
therefore he must neither trust to Friendship, alliance, league, nor any other
Bond, if there be no interest.

A Prince must oppose himself against a mischief in its breeding, and
resolutely: For that disorders grow, and fortify themselves in such manner
with time, as they surpass our forces. But when the mischief exceeds the
forces of the Prince, then he shall do well to defer it, for that with time
matters may change: and he that has time, as they say has life. He may not
consent that they put any thing in deliberation, which may cause change or
innovation in the Estate: For that the propositions which are made in the
Princes Council, give him credit, how strange and pernicious soever they be It
is a sign that there is some difficulty to discover the good and evil that is
in this subject, seeing they bring it into consultation.

He must not think in his resolutions to be able to avoid all inconveniences:
For that cannot be. There is no generation of things in this world, how good
soever, but a corruption has gone before it. But he must weigh the
inconveniences, and choose the party wherein there are least, and most easy to
prevent. He may not embrace many Enterprises at once: For he that embraces too
much, gripes not fast: But he must assure his Estate before he attempts a
War of a long continuance.

He may not quarrel with one more powerful then himself, but dissemble the
injuries of the mighty, and the offenses which cannot be punished. To yield
sometimes to time, and rough encounters is Wisdom: And in a strong storm to
strike fail, and to accommodate himself ^ith the strongest, yea with
disadvantage, to prevail over the weaker. And thus the Prince shall increase
the courage of his Men, and make himself fearful to his Enemies: It being
not Wisdom to commit himself to hazard and Fortune, for a light matter.

The Prince may not make any sudden change, for that it cannot be done
without violence; and violence does seldom producean effect that is durable.
Being ready for the execution of an Enterprise, he may ^ot defer it, unless
he finds an apparrant danger in the execution: For time may breed more harm
then good. He must likewise prefer old things before new, rest before
trouble, the ce^taine before the uncertain, and safety before hazard.

He may not break nor attempt against powerful commonweals, unless it be
with great advantage, and in a manner a certain hope to prevail. For the love
of liberty to such as have it, is so strong; as it is a difficult thing, yea
impossible to root it out: And moreover the E^te^prizes and designs of
Princes, die with them; but the resolutions of such free Estates are immortal.
He may not likewise break with the Church for a small matter. For that many
other Princes, who would be glad to work their own ends, under pretext of
Religion, and of succouring the Church, will be glad to join with it: And the
Wars of Princes against Popes, are of great expenses and little profit.

We have spoken formerly of the election of Ministers; we will add here, that
he must have a ^are they may be equal to the affairs, not superiors, nor
inferiors. For that they which esteem themselves capable of a greater matter,
then that which is committed unto them, neglect it, and contemn it; and they
which are incapable, and cannot discharge the place, disgrace and are
prejudicial to those that employ them.

If his Estate be great, to discharge himself of some humors, he may
entertain a War with some of his Neighbors: Yet he may not continue it so
long, as he shall make his Enemy too Warrelike: But shall make a peace with
him, although he himself were the stronger. For by this means he shall give
a Law to the treaty, and may preserve his advantages, and then begin War with
another: He shall make himself powerful and fearful to all, being still
Armed, and having Men inured to War. This is the Turks use with his
Neighbors, who has settled himself in his conquests by this means: It being
a great indiscretion in a Prince, to forbear to make a peace, until he can
make no more resistance. For then all the conditions are to his disadvantage:
And admit he would not continue the War against some one of his Neighbors;
Yet he may not wholely relinquish Arms; for that a disarmed peace is weak.

But he must have a special care not to attempt a War against his subjects;
and if he be pressed to it, let it be with great advantage, and end it speedily:
For the more the War continues, the more his subjects are incensed and
estranged from him; so as they can neither obey him, nor afterward trust in
their Prince. Wherefore he must not oppose himself directly against a
multitude: For admit he should prevail (the which notwiths^anding would be
difficult) it cannot be without loss of the love which they bear him. But
like unto good Mariners, he shall take aside wind, when as that in the Pope
is contrary; and shall make show to give that, which he cannot hinder nor take
from them. But above all he must be wary in divisions of his Estate, not to
r^maine partial; and in the place of Prince to make himself head of a party.
The Enterprises wherein courage is necessary, must be performed with Celeritie,
the which will give us the advantage which we want, and which we cannot have
by our own forces. Celeritie strikes suddenly; and against force if we have
time, we may fortify our selves with that which is necessary to resist.

The one puts an Enemy in disorder, and the other breaks him: And it is more
easy to disorder him and then break him; then to break those at the first
charge, that are in order. Yet there are certain enterprises, in the which we
must use time and patience, not rash violence; for that delay weakens with time
and occasion; and it is more easy to weaken then quite overthrow a business,
then to force it suddenly.

Above all things the Prince must study to know the opportunity of occasions,
for his enterprises and affairs; which is no other thing but an encounter of
many circumstances, which makes that easy which before seemed eifficult. He
may not commit the execution of a^ Enterprise to him, which is not of advice,
it should be attempted; For that the will cannot be followed by the effect,
if the understanding does not incline thereu^to, and serve him for a guide: And
he which has not held a busi^esse easy before the Execution wi^ find more
difficulty in the Execution. He must consult naturally of Enterprises: But, as
I have said elsewhere, he must leave the means of the Execution, to the
discretion of him to whom he commits it. For the Execution depending for the
^ost part, upon opportunity and present occasions which vary continnally, to
limit it is no other thing, then to entangle the Minister, and to spoil the
business.

A Prince must not think in flying to preserve himself in mischief and
danger; but he must oppose against it: For that in flying, he not only
follows, and fa^ls upon us; but witha^l many other da^g^rs grow: Whereas in
making head we stay him, and then we repulse him in time; and the danger most
commonly dissolues to nothing. In consu^ting of an Enterprise, he must avoid
sharp Counce^l and full of subtilty; for they seldom succeed, and a few
crosses make them unprofitable: As also those which have mo^e show and vanity
then a good foundation. In the Estate he must build upon that which is solid
and firm: As likewise he m^st fly th^se which are full of expenses, and above
his forces and means. But he must fo^low Council grounded in reason upon
safety, and little subject to be crossed by acciden^s. Yet he that assailes, must
hazard somet^mes: But when the question is to preserve, he must commit nothing
to Fortune. Wherefore slow Councels are more fitting for great Princes, which
have more need to preserve, then to get, and those which are sudden will be
more proper for conquerours.

But in doubtful occasions which are urgent and precipitate, there is nothing
worse then slow and middle Councels. Courage will be always more profitable,
and less prejudicial, unless they be resolved wholly to yield. In affairs
where the reasons are strong on all parts, and where it is in a manner
impossible to see and choose that which is most commodious and profitable, (the
which breeds in us doubts and perplexities) the best is to incline to that
party, where there is more honesty and Justice. For although it miscarries; yet
we shall always have a satisfaction remaining in us, and a glory outwardly,
and to have chosen the best: Besides, no man knows what might have happened,
if we had chosen the contrary party. Finally if we doubt which is the best,
or shortest way: We must hold the stra^ghtest.

We must not in difficult affairs, diue into all sorts of inconveniences, not
in accords and treaties, trouble our selves wi^h nice points, which grow
usually in treating: But we must look to the maine, and to assurances. I
might add here^n^o an infinite number of other rules, the which might ^e^ue a
Prince to make him to be held Prudent in practicing them. Yet I do not hold
that in matt^r of State, he should so tie himself to rules and maxims, as he
should not pe^ze and weigh the circumstances, and particularities of affairs:
For he may encounter with such a circumstance, as he shall be forced to take a
resolution contrary to maxims. But the greatest sig^e of p^udence in a Prince,
is to be secret: Otherwise he should betray himself; and none of his
resol^tio^s would succeed.

CHAP. 8. Of Cunning or Policy.
ANd for that they make two sorts of prudence; the one which is guided by the
ordinary maxims of honesty and Iusti^e, and the other which consists mo^e in
surprises and deceit, which they call cunning: Many have doubted, whether it
were expedient for a Princes reputa^ion, to make use of this last. Wherein I
will speak my opinion here; but I will deliver that of one of our time, who
has written upon this subject: Who holds that Fraud, Cunning and Deceit, if
they be without vice or wickedness, may be allowed unto a Prince for the
Pub^ique good, and for his defense and preservation; but not to offend any man.
It is his duty, to procure the Public good, and the health of the people.
^his is the foueraigne Law, by the which the Prince ought to govern all his
actions.

Wicked men should have too much advantage, if by cunning they mig^t not repel
their cunning. It is law^ul^ to ^^^e^d a^ Estate with the same Arms, with the
which they a^^aile it. It is not tolerable to turn the back to honesty and
justice, but sometimes to g^e about it and coast it. But the more distinctly to
explicate this, we will borrow the disti^ction which he makes, of diverse sorts
of cunning and deceipts: Some are light; others great; Diverse sorts of cunning.
and some ^eane and indifferent. The light he not only allows to Princes but
commands them. The mean he tollerates. The g^eater he fo^bidd^.

Among the light, he puts distrust and dissimulation. Distrust is as necessary
in a Prince, as credulity is hurtful. So it has been called the strength of
prudence; that is to say, to wa^ch, to believe nothing lightly, and to have an
eye to all things. He must therefore trust few Men, and those long known and
often tried. And yet he may not so slipp the line in such sort, as he does
not always hold it by one end, and have an eye to it: But he must cover and
disguise his distrust, yea, in di^r^^^i^g he must make a show to have some
confidence. For open distrust offends, and inuites another as well to deceive
us, as too much indiscreet confidence. They have many times had a desire to
deceive him, whom they have found fearful to b^e deceived: And on the other
side, an open confidence binds some to guard loyalty. From distrust they come
to dissimulation, Of dissimulation.
which smothe^ the forehead, and couers the thoughts, no less necessary for a
Prince then the first. But he must learn how to play this part cunningly,
without excess or foolery, making open profession of simplicity, cherishing
those that are free and open, as enemies to dissimulation; and that in small
matters the Prince p^oceede openly, to the end they may hold him for such in
greater.

Another sort of deceit, and ordinary among P^inces, are the practices and
intelligences which they have in the Estates one of another; O^ the practices
and intelligences ^^ Princes in the Estates one of another.
drawing cunningly the hearts of their Neighbors, officers, servants, and
confidents, to discover their secrets, and to cross the designs of their
Masters, and sometimes to lead a hand to some Enterprise against their Masters
person. This has proceeded so far, as it has sometimes corrupted even the
Wives of Princes. This is done by two means: Either by persuasion, making use
of the discontentments which great men have of their Masters: Or by money which
is the most usual course. And many have held this manner of proceeding allowed
against an Enemy, a rebellious or suspected Subject, yea, against any stranger
with whom they have no alliance: But against his Fri^^ds; Allies and
Confederates, it is treachery, which ought not to be practiced as they do at
this day.

Of Equivocation, fair words, promises, letters, Embassies, and lies, to
obtain ^o^c (...).
There are Princes to whom all sorts of means are just to gain some ad^antage,
and to attain to their design: who have made use to deceive by Equivocations,
fair words, promises, Letters, Embassies, yea, and by lies, to obtain that
which they could not otherwise do, by reason of the difficulty of time and
affairs. Plato allows this deceit, so as it be for the good of the Subjects.
Yet to make this proceeding just, The proc^eding of Princ^^ to defend
themselves and their Estates from their Ene^ies, ^^i^st in themselves, but
^^^^^bl^ by (...).
there must be a necessity; and it must be in a t^oublesome and confused time;
and not only to advance the good, but to divert some great mischief, and
against the wicked.

There are other kinds of proceeding, frequent enough in Princes, to preserve
t^emselues and their Estate from their E^em^^s; the which cannot be excused but
by n^cessity: And the Prince which is reduced to this point, m^st know that it
is a misery for him to ^ee himself forced to leave the ordinary course of
Justice, for the safety of his Estate, and he may not proceed but with some
feeling of grief; but he must carry ^imselfe therein like a Father, when he is
forced to cauterize, or cu^ off a member of his Child to save ^is life. I will
set down here some examples: As to put those secretly to death, and without
form of Justice, which cannot be punished without trouble and danger to ^he
Estate. If they deserve death, the Prince who may dispense with the other
forms, may likewise dispense for the safety of his Estate. To clip the wings,
and shorten the means of some one which mutines and fortifies too much in the
Estate, and makes himself fearful before he has a commodity to attempt. T^
diue by authority into the purses of his rich Subjects, in some necessity and
poverty of the Estate. To revoke the privileges given to some one, or to some
Comminalties, or particular men, to the prejudice of the Sovereign and the
Estate. To seize upon some neighbor place, for fear that another holding it,
he should make War against us and ruin us.

All these things are in themselves unjust; but this injustice is balanced by
necessity and public profit. Necessity as they say, has no Law: And the
Prince reduced to these terms, must know not only how to command according to
the Laws, but also how to command the Laws themselves. All is, that the
Prince does not forge this necessity and constraint himself, for to satisfy
his conetousnesse or ambition: For in stead of p^rchasing the reputation to be
wise, he will cause himself to be esteemed an unjust and inhumane Tyrant.

CHAP. 9. Of the reputation of a Prince; and the means how to get it.
Valor is another part which serves to reputation, and it is of such
importance, Valor the cause of a Princes reputation.
as power is much inferior unto it. Valor procures power; and without
valor power is lost. This is seen in many Estates, How important and
necessary i^ is in a Princ^.
the which with small forces have been conquered by valor; and others ^or
want of valor have lo^t themselu^s with their power.

And although that va^our consists chiefly in the interior and courage: Yet
to maintain this courage, he must have care of the exterior. A Prince may
well be couragiou^, if he be sickly and incommodated of his healt^, and that
as they say, his legs fai^e him: his cou^age may be commendable, but very
unprofitable for him and his Estate. Wherefore he must have a care of two
things. Means to get and entertain this courage and valor.
The one to entertain this v^g^ur of spirit, and to keep it in action, by a
desire of honor and glory, be it by the reading of valiant exploits of War,
performed by great Princes and Captains, or by the conversation of courageous
and wise men, putting them often upon the Discourse of great Enterprises, which
they or others have done; or be it by the consideration of that which concerns
the Duty of a Prince, and the shame and contempt which they of his quality ^un
into, which have been b^se and Cowards.

The other care which a Prince ought to have, is to entertain himself in
health, and to get an able and strong complexio^. Sobriety and moderation in
Meats, serve greatly to p^ese^ue ^ealth, as g^uttony and drunkenness alters
much. And from thence proceed indigestions, crudities, gouts, and a^^ other
diseases. Continency is likewise of great force; there being nothing that does
more weaken chaste men, nor that debilitates the spirit and body more, then an
excessive lasciviousness. The forces likewise increase with exercise, as that
of Hunting, or others which consume the humors of the body. And to frame a
strong and able complexion, he must in good time accustom himself to cold,
heat, watching, hunger, to water, wine, and to all courses of life: The
encounters being so diverse, to the which a Prince must accommodate himself,
that one failing, sometimes this defect makes ma^y things impossible unto him.

There are yet many things to be done, Diverse other means for a Prince to get
reputation.
which may serve a Prince to get reputation: As to cover his defects and
weak^nesse cunningly, is a great means to to preserve his credit: To make show
(yet without ostentation) of his fo^ces to those that are more weak: To fly,
and show himself an Enemy to vanity and much talking, but to do more then he
speaks. To talk gravely, and with a solid Judgment: to maintain his word,
the testimony of courage and a firm Judgment: To be constant in adversity,
and moderate in prosperity. Not to hazard himself in enterprises, unless he
be assured to prevail; and ^auing attempted one, not to give it over, lest he
show himself to have had little judgment in the beginning, and of as little
courage to end it. Not to busy himself in petty Enterprises, but to seek
occasions of great ones, especially in the beginning of his Reign: For that
thereby they settle a judgment of that which will follow. He must not seem to
depend on the council and will of another; for that were to establish a
Superior and companion, and to make his insufficiency known.

He may not employ himself in things which are under the dignity of a Prince;
as Nero busied himself in Singing, to make Verses, and to be a good Coachman;
D^mitian spent his time in Shooting and in taking of Flies; and Aropas King of
the Macedonians, employed himself in making of Lanthornes; Valentinian to make
Images of Wax; Rene Duke of Anion, and Earl of Prouence to paint, Chilperic
King of France, and Thibant King of Navarre, to time; and Alphonso King of
Cast^lle in Astrology: But he shall employ himself to know his Estate, and
that which may serve for the good government. The vn^formity of life in a
Prince, and the co^stancy in his commands does also breed him reputation.

He must likewise treat his affairs with dignity, and not by men which are of
a base and vi^d condition. The baseness of Ministers does vilefie h^s
affairs, and the weakness ruins them; and both the one and the other makes
the world believe that the Prince distrusts great men, or that he fears to be
discovered, inferior in affairs, by those which shall have more
understanding, or that he has ^o judgment in making such a choice. But he may
not suffer great talkers to approach near unto him, nor admit them to his
secret affairs, for fear least they should discover his actions and designs,
by an itchi^g desire which such Monckies have commonly to babble.

He must not grow familiar with all sorts of persons, nor show himself to
often but upon great occasions, and with a countenance and bell auiour full of
Majesty: And in his extraordinary joy heaviness or choler, he shall not show
himself at all; but shall pass his first motion in his Cabinet, and out of
the sight of his followers: His habit must be grave and modest without
extrauagancy, he s^all avoid extremities in all his courses, showing himself
neither slow nor rash, but he shall rather incline to the first then to the
last; for the first has a dependence of Prudence and ^rauity, and the other of
lightness and rashness; he must make more account of truth then opinion, and
have a care that all that proceeds from him may be great, accomplished,
excellent and admirable, finally that he do less and do it well, that he
suffer not any disobedience which may be drawn into example.

That the affairs of importance may depend upon him alone, without imparting
it to any man what favor soever he bear him, as the authority to make Laws,
to give privileges, to make peace or war, to give pardons, to make choice of
his principal Ministers, to impose Taxes, Subsidies, and other leuies of
Money, to fortify places, to cast Orduance, to recompense others out of his
Treasure, to advance to Dignities or such other things as he ought to reserve.

By Mag^ificence he may likewise get reputation, as by the structure of
public Buildings, Palaces, Churches, Fountains, Fortifications of Towns
and such like places, which redowne to the benefit of the public. Religion
likewise known to be in a Prince, imports him much for his reputation, for
showing himself to be full of Piety, the people will conceive that he will be
likewise just, and that he will not undertake any thing but with the assistance
of God: Wherefore it imports him much to make esteem of Churchmen, which are
known to have probity and sufficiency in them, to retain some about him, to
procure a good reformation in the Church by mild and lawful means, without
Trouble, Schism, or Division, to dispose of Benefices to capable men, to have
care of the poor, and finally to employ himself in all works of Piety.

By these last means a Prince may in time of Peace maintain his reputation,
having no need in time of War to seek for other particularities then his
own valor: The which showing it self in occasions which shall present
themselves, will maintain* them always in credit and reputation. But if in
the time of Peace they desire something more of him, there being people to whom
he must give a subject of discourse, and busy them in the consideration of
their Princes actions, otherwise they contemn them: The Prince must employ
himself sometimes to reform Justice, sometimes the Treasure, sometimes the
discipline of War, and always to make some new Establishment which may serve
the Estate. Augustus having brought all his affairs to an end, and finding no
more subjects to entertain the people of Rome with his actions, he employed
himself to reform the Callander.

So in the like encounters, the Prince must seek all means to quicken his
reputation in the spirits of the subjects, and to make them believe that he is
not idle, giving them occasions to speak well of him, and hinder them from
detracting and speaking ill.

Having discoursed of the means, by the which a Prince might get or maintain
his authority; Let us see the means and remedies, which may be found for that
which may cause the ruin of the E^ate. To know if the remedies be proper, we
must likewise know the disease.

CHAP. 10. Of the causes of the ruins of Estates: and of the remedies which
may be found.
The cause of the ruin of Estates.
THe works of nature fail by two kinds of causes: whereof some are exterior,
and others interior. The exterior are Fi^e, Sword, and such other violences.
The interior are the excess and corruptions of the first qualities. In like
manner States are ruined either by foreign force and violence, or by the
corruption and disorder that is with it; but more rarely by the first alone
then by the last: And we have seldeme seen any Estate ruined by foreign
force, which was not first corrupted within it.

Yet let us speak something of the ordinary means, by the which we may
prevent a foreign force. A remedy against the violence of strangers.
Either the Prince that is assailed by this force, is equal in power to him
that assailes him, and in all means and necessary advantages for his defense:
Or else he is weaker either in means or for that he has not his forces ready
to oppose. If he be equal, he may foresee his enemies dessigne: And if he
has any just and tolerable pretext to make an offensive War, he must not
stand upon his defense. Among Princes which make War, he that lays the cloth
(as the proverb says) pays the reckoning. For, besides that his country is
ruined as welby his own Army, as by that of his Enemies, the amazement is
greater among his Subjects; And he will not dare to hazard a Battle, which
would endanger his whole Fortune, for that loosing it, he shall not only loose
his men but also his Country: Whereas his Enemy may adventure it with far
more advantage, his Estate beiug secure, and whatsoever happens he can loose
but men.

But if the Prince be weaker then his Enemy which innades him, he must procure
him some greater Enemy, or many which may effect that which he cannot do
alone. He must likewise practice factions and divisions with his Enemy, and get
intelligence with some one of his prime Counselors or great Men, and with
those that have most authority and credit with his Enemy; to the end they may
diswade him from this War, or divert it, or make it unprofitable, in
slackning the executions, or giving advice of his designs, to the end he may
oppose himself in time.

But if the practices be such, as they may breed a fear in his Enemy of a
revolt, Treason, Sedition, or a civil war; they will be much better and of
greater force. Defensive Leagues with his Neighbors, or with the Neighbors of
his Enemy, may be of great use, who may grow jealous of his power. For the
fear which his Enemy might have, that inuading one, all the rest may go to
Arms, would retain him.

Besides this, the Prince must keep good guards upon all the principal
passages of his Estate, and place strong Garrissons in his Forts, who may stay
the Enemy, and by a long siege cause him to loose much time, and many men; and
by this means consume his provisions, and waste his Army, whereby he may be
the better able to encounter him; And if he be able to raise an Army, he must
choose a strong place at the entry of his Country, and lodge it in such sort,
as he may be neither forced to fight nor to dislodge, to the end he may hinder
his Enemy from passing on. But having neither forces' nor forts upon the
passage of this quality; or the Enemies forces being such, as they are not to
be stayed by this means: Some in this case have themselves wasted their own
Country, on that side where the Enemy was to enter, causing all to retire into
the heart of the Estate, depriving him not only of all provision of Victuals,
but also of other commodities, Mills, Ouens, Lodgings, and other employments,
whereof an Army is seldom wholly furnished. The first against the Polonians,
and the second against the Turks forces, have assured their Countries for a
time, in laying a great part of the confines waste. And the Muscouite being in
a Country which does abound in Wood, shut himself up in a short time; So as
Steven King of Poland, meaning to pass into Muscouie, was forced to spend much
time in cutting down the Woods to make a passage for his Army.

And although that he which is assailed be the weaker, yet there has been
some, which have carried the War into their Enemies Country, to make a
diuersion as Ag^th^cles did, who being besieged by the Carthaginian^ in
Siracusa, resolved to leave a sufficient troop to maintain the Siege, and to
imbarke with the rest, to transport the War into Affricke. Boniface, Earl of
Corsegus, did the like, in the year 822. to retire the Sarasins out of Sicily.
The which succeeded the more happily, for that the Carthaginians, the
Affricans, who were the inuaders, having not foreseen this policy, had not
provided for their Countries. And it is a general rule, that we must assail
an Enemy where he least suspects.

But if the Enemy be so powerful, and has such an advantage over us, as there
is no means to resist him, rather then to lose all, it were better to yield
something: And if he may be freed for ready money, in making as they say a
Bridge of Gold to his Enemy, he shall escape good cheap. The which has been
happily practiced by the Florentins, Venetians, and Genois, or else he must
seek the protection of some Prince that is near or far off, yet so as he
may be relieved in time, or the Enemies Estate annoyed. So the Capouans finding
themselves pressed by the Samnites, put themselves under the protection of the
Romans. The Genois were sometimes protected by the French, and sometimes by the
Dukes of Millan. Pope Iulio the second, made use of another policy, to divert
the French from the Siege of Ferrara, selling it to the Emperor, with hope
after the War to redeem it again for money: So as the French having no will
to break with the Emperor, gave over their Enterprise.

There have been some Princes, who finding no means to resist, have made
choice rather to yield to Fortune, and to abandon their Country, then to see
it ruined; hoping that the affairs changing, their Subjects not wholly ruined,
would call them back more willingly then if they had bin chased away by an open
rebellion, or that growing obstinate to maintain themselves, they had bin
punished by the Enemy: This succeeded happily to Ferd^nand of Aragon, chased
from Naples by Charles the Eight: To the Venetians when they abandoned their
Towns upon the firm land, to the league of Cambrag: To the Duke of Vrbin, who
seeing himself* unable to make head against Caesar Borgia, abandoned his
Country, having first ruined all the Forts of his Estate; hoping that being
well beloved of his Subjects, upon the first alteration they will call him
back, as they did.

But for that they seek to surprise him who^ they mean to assai'e by force,
and to attain unto it, they devise other pretexts to arm, to the end they may
circumuent their Neighbor: And in like manner, when as two powerful
Neighbors make War together, and afterward come to conclude a Peace, either
of them seeks to free himself of his Soldiers, at the cost of some one of
his Neighbors: The Prince which shall find himself to have such bad
Neighbors, must presently arm, and stand continually upon his guard whilst
his Neighboursare in Arms.

These are the most general and ordinary Remedies against foreign force, the
exterior cause of the ruin of Estates.

CHAP. II. Of the interior Causes of the ruin of Estates.
THe interior Causes from whence the ruin of an Estate may grow, are of two
kinds: Some are near, others are remote. The near causes of the ruin o^ an
Estate.
The nearest are conspiracies against the Prince, or against the chief
Magistrate, under whole authority the Estate is governed: The treason of
Towns, strong places. or Armies: The Rebellion of Subjects against the Prince;
and the Division into factions and parties. But for that these causes grow from
a precedent corruption in the Estate, being but the effects of remote causes;
we must seek the mischief farther off to provide a Remedy. The causes which
produce these effects, Of the remote causes which ruin Estates.
proceed either from the defect of the Sovereign, or of the Magistrates, and
others which have the chief charges in the government of the Estate; or
through the defect of other Subjects, which are considered either in general
under the name of people, or relatiuely by the reason of their subjection; Some
being borne subjects to the Prince to whom they obey; others are subjects by
conquest, that is to say, borne under another Prince, but have been since
conquered by him to whom they obey, or else they are considered according to
their condition, quality, and power, which they have to trouble the Estate.

Among the defects which may be found in the Sovereign Person, Of the
Sovereign de^ects which engender the Subjects hatred.
those which may breed the Subjects hatred and contempt against him, are most
prejudicial. Those which engender hatred, are cruelty and covetousness.
Cruelty shows it self in the executions of such which he causes to be
punished. Avarice in the leuying of money and exactions upon his Subjects. To
remedy the first, A remedy ^gainst-t^e Princes cruelty.
he must deal as little as may be with the punishments of his Subjects: but
refer the Judgment of such things to the ordinary course of Justice. But if
for the good of the Estate, and for the little assurance there is in Judges, he
be forced to interpose himself, he must do it seldom, and make it known
that he does it unwillingly, and only in consideration of the public good,
to the end he may retain good men in their duties, and divert the wicked from
their bad intentions: Neither must he show any choler, and above all things he
must forbear to be present at Executions; That the punishments must be
ordinary, and not unusual, and that in punishing diverse for one fact, there
must be an equality of punishments observed. But if by the death of one alone
he may preserve the rest, he ought to do it. And if there be many that be put
to death, he shall cause them to suffer altogether, to the end that by the
continuance of execution it may not renew the hatred.

Some have held it fit to sweeten the hatred of an Execution, to punish the
Minister which has done it, if he be of that quality that he has deserved it.
Yet I hold this manner of proceeding unjust and tyranuous; especially if it
tends to death, whereof they ought not to make so flight an account. Yet a
Prince may in necessity, having no other means to free himself from Envy,
chase him away, laying the fault upon him, and making show that ^he hates him
for the same Subject, for the which he is odious unto the people: But wholly to
abandon, him were baseness. Moreover he must sweeten rigorous Executions by
benefits, yea, by gifts out of the confiscation of the parties goods which is
executed, to such as be discontented with the Execution, to the end it may
appear that not covetousness but only Justice has brought the Prince unto
it. To remedy the second, A remedy against the Princes avarice.
he must make it appear, that the leuies which he raises, are grounded upon
the necessity of the Estate* there being no Estates without tributs, customs or
Subsedies, the which are necessary to satisfy the expenses, without the which
the Estate cannot subsist and be maintained. Impositions must be made with
equality, according to every man's goods and faculties, without hatred or
favor, and with moderation; not insupportable nor sordid; not too frequent nor
new, nor under unusual names; They must be levied with modesty, without
covetousness, cruelty, or violence, and by honest men; and he must punish
those severely that mis-^ehaue themselves.

Finally, he must make it appear by the expenses, that the money is employed
for the necessity, good, and preservation of the Estate, and not for the
Princes riot or prodigallity, to advance men of no worth, and to satisfy their
pleasures.

As for the defects which engender the Subjects contempt of their Prince, there
are diverse sorts. Of the Princes defects which cause contempt.
Some grow from weakness of age; as Minority or a decrepit age. Others from
nature; as deformity, or a bad aspect, the natural dullness of the mind,
deafness, and other indispositions of the body. Others proceed from Fortune;
as to be unfortunate and without support; with such other defects, which can be
hardly remedied.

The principal remedy is, not to show himself upon all occasions, whereas
these defects may be more visible. Tyberius finding himself not so affab^e as
Augustus, would never come among the people to Plays and Theaters, as Augustus
did: but kept himself close and retired, and never showed himself but in
great actions, for the which he had prepared himself long before. So the
Prince must as much as may be hide his imperfections; and not show himself
in public, but well prepared according to his dignity, and if it may be,
recompense the defect of nature by some advantage of the mind.

There are other defects, which breed a contempt of the Prince in the Subjects
minds, Other defects of a Prince which breed contempt.
the which proceeds only by his own fault, and may be easily avoided: As
irresolution in his Counsels; lightness, inconstancy, and injustice in his
commands, negligence in his affairs, and seeming to depend of another, or
tying himself so strictly to some private person, as he trusts him with all
the affairs of the Estate; an ordinary indiscretion in many Princes. The only
remedy to prevent all this, is to do the contrary, and to follow that which
we say must be done to purchase reputation. The Princes defects wh^^h breed
contempt are more de^^gerous then those which cause hatred.


These are the defects which engender hatred* whereof they which procure
contempt are most dangerous. For contempt gives courage to those that desire to
undertake whereas cruelty and a^rice, although they breed hatred; yet such as
a^e fearful: And moreover by cruelty you diminish the number of your Enemies,
and amaze the rest* and by avarice and exactions you make them v^^ble. But the
most prejudicial defects are those which breed hatred and contempt both
together: As lasciviousness and d^unkennesse; the one for its beastliness,
and the other for the scanda^l and trouble of Families, which it does usually
draw after it. Wherefore the Prince must not only fly from them, but avoid
the suspicion.

CHAP. 12. Of the defects of Magistrates, Officers, and Ministers to the Prince.
THe defects, abuses, and disorders of those which have any charge and
government in the Estate, the which may further its ruin, are of two sorts.
For either these abuses proceed from corruption which is found in particular
persons, of whom they have made a bad choice, or have been corrupted with
time; or else it proceeds from some bad custom, the which under pretext of
good, and by a bad interpretation of the Law, or of an order made in the
establishment, has been brought in.

To remedy the first, the best course will be, that seeing the choice was bad,
to make another. But therein he must use his discretion: For that all changes
are dangerous, and that sometimes seeking to prevent a misch^efe, the remedy is
found worse then the disea^e. Lewis the Eleventh meaning to reform France, A
change ^n^n Estate is dangerous.
changed all his predecessors Officers, whom in the end he was forced to
restore, to avoid a general reuolte.

If this corruption may be easily punished without trouble in some of the
principal, and that the example of punishment may reduce the rest unto their
duties; he must do it with severity. But if he cannot effect it, he must draw
those which nourish these abuses from their acquaintance and familiars; And
employ them in some other places with honest men, who may serve as comptrolers
and examples to do well, and to keep them in awe.

No man is willingly bad for nothing, either it is to do pleasure to some one,
from whom he hopes for support; or to revenge his own injuries, or those of
his Friends; or for covetousness, the which he cannot well practice without
confident mediators. Take him therefore from his acquaintance, and out of the
hands of his Enemies; mantaine him against the g^eatest, to the end he may not
fear any future wrong: There is no doubt that there being no man to whom he
may entrust his corruptions, nor whom he may distrust, he will be
indifferent in that regard, and will have no thought but to do well: But
retire him before he may enter into strict familiarity with any man. And so of
a man how corrupt soever, you may make good use of him for your service; if he
be not altogether impudent and depraved: In which case being easy to discover
his practices, it will be as easy for the Prince to cause him to be punished.

But if the abuse be in the bad administration of Laws, A remedy against the
^buse of Laws.
or of the establishment which has been made of some order; he must either by
interpretation, or by change, or by abrogation of the Law or order, provide for
it. But for that it would be a difficult thing, that they which made their
profit by the abuse, should willingly yield unto it, if they be many in number,
he must make himself the stronger, as Licurgus did. For in such affairs they
are commonly ill assisted; the partisans of the reformation being cold, and
they which profit in the abuse, (who have the pretext of Custom and the Laws
for them) are more violent to preserve that which brings them profit.

Considerations necessary for a reformation.
But the Prince must first consider duly, if that which he means to establish,
will hold: For that abuses which have taken a deep root, are hardly pulled
up; and sometime it is mo^e fit to live with these abuses quietly in an Estate,
then seeking to take them away, to put all into co^fusio^. It is a body which
has an infirmity, the which you must strive to cure, yet in such sort, as you
put not the patient in danger of death. It is a Philme in the eye; yet the eye
has not ^wholy lost its sight: If you cannot clear it without loss of the
sight, it were better to leave it there.

Above all in a reformation you may not make a Law that looks too far
backward, and makes us enter into the search of that which is past long since;
Neither must they establish an order altogether new: But you must gently and by
little and little reduce them to their first institution, and not pull up the
Tree to plant another in its place; but set it by. The string which makes an
Instrument out of tune, must be gently straind, until it be in tune, and not
broken. We know the defects and inconveniences of an ancient estab^ishment; but
we are ignorant of the inconveniences of a new.

But if the order were so perue^ted, as it were impossible to make use of it;
yet in the establishment of a new, you must retain the same terms, names, and
qualities of the ancient^ for that the people feeding themselves more with the
show of truth, the face of antiquity in such establishments has more authority
with them; and novelties a^e suspected unto them, and less esteemed. But if
you cannot retain the ground of this antiquity, you must color the innouatio^
with the names of the ancient establishments, to give it credit, and to make
the people think that the^e is ^it^le alteration. An advice which has bin
practiced by all such as under pretext of reformation have sought to usurp an
Estate: But this may be more justly put in use by a lawful Prince, for the
good of his Subjects, and to facilitate the reformation which he intends to
make: In the which he has great reason not to engage himself, if he do not
confidently believe to bring it to effect. Besides the disgrace which he shall
receive, he should by his weakness countenance the mischief, and despair of
the remedy: Whereof I say that he ought to make himself the stronger. The
which I mean not only of an armed force, but also of the inclination of the
greatest part of his Subjects. And if it may be he must so work underhand, as
he may be required and solicited to provide for it; besides that it will make
his design easy, all the honor will be due to him. And if there be any envy,
he may easily discharge himself upon those which have required him. But if the
Prince doubting the event of a necessary reformation, desires to make it rather
by some one of his Ministers, then to engage himself: In this case some have
advised rather to take but one, to whom he may give all authority, then many.
For although it seems more convenient, that this reformation should be
countenanced by many, to the end it might carry the greater weight, and be the
better received: yet the diversity of opinions that is in many heads diversely
interessed, be it for themselves, or for their Friends and Kinsfolks, in this
reformation; the length there will be in making them resolve; the difficulty
in this plurality to make them keep s^cret, many small surprises, policies,
and cunning, which they must sometimes use, to attain unto this good; and in
case the business does not suceeed, being more difficult to dismiss many, for
to free himself of the envy and shame to have attempted this reformation
without success, then they may do in one person: Wherefore it seems more safe
for the Prince to employ but one. But the preservation of the order
established, must be left to the care of many; For that many having once found
the benefit, will not willingly yield to leave it: And a multitude being
irresolute among themselves, tend rather to leave affairs in the Estate they
are in, then to change them, v^lesse they be thrust on by some apparent
profit, or by some Man of credit and authority. Hence it comes, that the
companies of greatest authority in an Estate, oppose themselves more willingly
to all innouations, how good soever; And consent not to the change of the
ancient ordinances, although they be accompanied with abuses.

But for that the same men, which made their profit of the abuse before the
reformation, continuing still in those places where the abuse was committed,
will find means sufficient to frustrate ^^: Some have been of advice to
change them, and to employ them else where: and others to attribute the
knowledge of the contrauentions which have been committed to the prejudice of
this reformation, to other Judges, then those of that body which they mean to
reform. Yet therein they must govern themselves, according to the facility or
difficulties which are found in such Establishments,

These are the principal considerations, which ought to be o^serued in a
reformation; besides those which private occasions, and the quality of
disorders may breed in our minds. Let us now come to the disorders which proced
from the Subjects, and may advance the ruin of an Estate, if they be embraced
by the Enemy.

CHAP. 13. Of the Subjects defects in general, which cause the ruins of an
Estates
ALthough that natural Subjects owe all obedience to their Prince, The most
general defects and pecant humors of a multitude.
and it is their good so to maintain themselves: Yet the nature of a multitude
is so inconstant, as it cannot long subsist in one Estate. Having no
employment, they invent some themselves, and forge a thousand designs to their
own disadvantage.

Peace and abundance, are the things which should give a people the greatest
subject of content, and contain them, for that they cannot change this
condition without impayring. But the one in the end makes them idle; and
idleness being tedious unto them, they employ their spirits to think ill; and
which is worse, to do mischeife. The other makes them stately, proud, and
intractable; who like unto pampered Iades, kick many times at their Masters
that have fed them. But in danger and fear, they are tractable and easy to
manage, loving after their own pleasure, and fearing at the discretion of
another, and never judging but by passion. For although* that some one have
done evil, yet if the people love him, they persuade themselves that the
action had some good ground: And if they hate him, although he has done well
and virtuously, yet they interpret all to a bad sense, and attribute a good
action to a sinister intention, and a bad dessigne.

In all that which they affect, they look rather to an app^rant profit, then
to that which is just and honorable; And if in show there be any thing to
hazard, or to loose, although the end may be happy and successful, yet they
will always be of opinion to abandon that party. They never embrace affairs
but by the show, without examining the importance, if it be any thing remote;
They hate the present affairs, as those whereof they are most sensible; they
forget a mischeife past, although it be far greater then the present; They
love those which are turbulent in their actions and of sudden execution. They
usually slander the actions of the Prince and his Governors, and complain;
Yet they are easy to reduce, when they see themselves forced to obey, and that
they have no head nor any seeds of division. They hope more then they ought,
and endure less then they should. They attribute to want of will and judgment,
that which proceeds from the want of power and means.

They are desirous of innouations, and easy to move upon the first wind;
Credulous, increasing reports and news, and publishing usually that which is
most forbidden; they follow the multitude, not knowing why; full of Envy,
Suspicion, and distrust: ingratfull for the benefits they have received, and
reuengfull of injuries, yea of another man's; little careful of the Estate, and
loving nothing but an vnrestrayned liberty, whereof they are soon weary:
finally doing nothing by election, but all by hazard.

B^hold a part of the blemishes and defects of a people considered in general:
Whereon most part of those which have attempted against another man's Estate,
have grounded their designs, making use of them by many practices, according
to occasion and the condition of affairs. And although there be many among a
multitude free from these imperfections: yet being drawn together with the
rest, the greatest number carries it, and most commonly they houle (as they
say) with the Wolves. One fool or rash man is sufficient to stopp the mouths
of many wise, and to make them all loose the course of reason. And most
commonly that which they condemn in particular, being in a throng, and with
the rest they like of, and allow; be it that we are restrained through fear
to oppose our selves to the common way, which is usually the worst, and
sometimes composed of the most fools, the most imp^dent, and the most
mutinous; or be it that by this contagion, we feel the like passions which
transport the rest, and with the like heat we suffer our selves to be carried
to the same resolutions.

The Ancients finding all these pecant humors in the peoples minds, to
entertain and busy them, Remedies to cure the Estate of these defects and bad
humors.
and by this means to divert them from doing evil, have sought out diverse
means. The Grecians entertained them with sports, Comedies, Tragedies,
Wrestlings, and Olimpique Games. The Romans added thereunto Swo^d-players,
representation of Navel Battles, and the combats of wild Beasts. The Kings
of Egypt busied their Subjects in the construction of Pyramides and buildings,
although for the most part unprofitable. The Christians in some places, when as
they fear the peoples disposition to mutine, have employed them in
Processions, Prayers, in the visitation of Oratories and Churches, with other
extraordinary devotions, as Cardinal Borromeo did often at Millan, and others
in other places. But when as all these means have not been forcible enough to
retain them, they have stirred up a foreign War, not only to divert the
peoples minds by this object; but also to entertayne them a little with the
fear of a common Enemy, and to free the Estate from those pecant humors,
which being still retained might ruin it.

But sometimes the Estate is so composed as it would be dangerous to
entertain a continual War, either for that they are weak of Men and
means, or for fear that giving the commandment to some one, he should get
unto himself the authority of Arms. The which cannot be but prejudicial in
all Estates: The Prince being unable to be still conductor of his Armies,
without hazarding of his person too much, and leaving a great part of his
Country ill provided for. In a Commonweal this would be of more dangerous
consequence; if they do not govern themselves in that respect like unto the
S^iffes, who desiring rather to make War for another, then for themselves,
send forth their most busy and turbulent Men to serve Princes, to purge the
Country.

Behold the most ordinary remedies which are practiced, to preserve themselves
from these bad humors of the people, considered in general. But there are
others which are particular, according to the diverse conditions of persons,
whereof the people consists; and others which must be practiced with a people
Conquered.

CHAP. 14. Of diverse sorts of humors among the Subjects, according to the
diversity of their Conditions.
Three sorts of persons in all Estates.
IN all Estates there are three sorts of persons. Great Men who have power,
credit, and wealth: The poor and miserable who want all, and the meaner sort.
These last are usually more quiet and easy to govern: The rest are more
difficult, for that great Men by the commodity which riches brings with it, do
hardly abstain from doing Evil. The miserable for the necessities wherein
they find themselves, are commonly vicious and capable of all parties.

The Credit, all^ances, and wealth of great Men, makes them intractable, little
obedient, and sometimes insupportable; and pride and presumption gives them
courage to undertake: Contrariwise the miserable, are easily moved to any
insolency. The actions of great Men are accompanied with violence: Those of
the poor and needy with fraud and malice. But the meaner sort, having neither
so great means which might make them grow proud, nor power to attempt; Neither
being in such necessity, as they should be thrust into extraordinary actions,
they desire rather to preserve the certain, then to run after the
uncertain: and so they are neither transported with ambition, nor oppressed
with necessity. Presupposing then that this sort of Men continue in their
duties, let us examine the two others.

There are several sorts of great Men: Means to contain great Men in their
duties.
Some are so near unto the Prince by alliance or kindred, as they may in time
pretend unto the Estate. Others, who being Lords of great possessions, enjoy in
the Princes Estate, Lordships, and Revenues of great consequence. The third
kind is of those, who by their valor or wisdom in the government of
important affairs of the Estate, have purchased credit and reputation with the
people, or among the Men of War. The fourth are they, to whom the Prince has
committed his forces, his governments, and his chief places.

Many Princes before they had any subject of suspicion of an Enterprise, Of
great Men allied to the Prince.
have grown jealous of their near kinsmen. Alexander meaning to pass into
Asi^, put all his nearest kinsmen to death, except one of his base brethren,
whom he had no cause to fear. This villainous and barbarous course has past
for a rule of State among the Turks. The Kings of Ormus, before they were
expelled by the Portugalls, put out the eyes of all their nearest kinsmen. The
which it may be they learned from some Emperors of Constantinople. The Kings
of China, and those of Aethiopia, shut them al up into one place, from whence
not any one comes forth, but he that is to succeed in the Estate.

Christendom is more happy: For although we have seen that Phillip the
second King of Spain has bin forced to put his Son to death, for some
jealousy he had conceived of him; yet this is not ordinary. And the Kings
entertain themselves with their kinsmen, making much of them, and entreating
them courteously, yet not trusting them with all their forces, which may give
them means to attempt, nor yet crushing nor disgracing them, to the end they
may not despair: And by this honest and courteous course, they take from them
both the means and desire to do evil.

They which are great in means and Revenues, are the sinews and strength of
an Estate, whom they may not in any case ruin, as some Ministers of Tyranny
have conceived, but they must be preserved to maintain the Estate. And those
Estates where there be not any, are exposed in Prey to the first loss of a
Battle: For that having no Man that has credit to draw them again together,
being unfurnished of support and council, they presently resolve to yield upon
the first amazement. The which has been often seen in Egypt. Contrariwise
those Estates which have been powerful in Nobility, although they have been
often overthrown, yet they have easily recovered themselves. France and
Persia, the English and Spaniards, with those of Tartary and the Turks, have
sometimes been oppressed and brought low: But by the means of the Nobility, who
have more courage and conduct to maintain the Estate then the people, they
have always recovered themselves.

And to say that such kind of people may trouble the Prince, this may sometimes
happen, if the Prince be a Tyrant, which seeks to oppress them, or wants
council and courag: As they whom the Carliens, and Capets, caused to retire
from the government of the Estate. But never an able and sufficient Prince, who
knew how to make use of Men of this condition, ran any bad fortune with them.
The means to make profitable use of them, is to countenance them with
Majesty, to do for them in occasions which may be offered; to employ them
near his person with honor and magnificence, rather then to commit his forces
and all his authority into their hands: And they which shall be suspected of
lightness and inconstancy, to cause them to be accompanied by men which may
watch and observe their actions. This is the Council (as they write) which the
Emperor Charles the fifth gave unto the deceased Philip King of Sp^ine, to
employ great men, and to retain them near unto his person in the most
honorable places, and give those of Command to men of a meaner condition: But
his Son neglecting this advice, in the person of Don John of Austrea, drew
himself into danger of an inconvenience.

As for the two other sorts of great men, they cannot be such but by the
Princes means. Of great me^ which have force and credit with the people by
reason of his employments in great affaire^.
Wherefore it is easy for him to prevent the inconveniences which this
greatness may cause; and the fault must be imputed to himself, seeing it was
in his power to hinder it. The means which may be used herein, are common to
either. For some have been made great, and have gotten credit, for that they
had the force and authority in their hands; And the others are great by reason
of their birth. The principal means then to prevent the inconveniences which
may grow, is in the choice, wherein the Prince must observe four
considerations.

The first is, that he commit not his forces and authority to any that are
borne great; Considerations to advance some one in authority.
as they of whom we have formerly spoken: For that he cannot add so little to
the greatness of such men, but he shall equal them unto himself. The other
considerations are, that he make not choice for a great command, or to lead a
great Army, of a man that is audacious and vnder^aking, or of one that is too
cunning and subtle: Much less of a person that is inconstant and light,
inclined to f^are and hope, and subject to follow the Enterprises of another,
or to be surprised by someone.

The second means is, not to continue great Charges, as the governments of
Provinces, of strong places, and of a great troop of Soldiers long in one and
the same person, to the end he may avoid three inconveniences. The first,
lest that governments by little and little be not made hereditary and
patrim^nicall, (...) o^ ^^eat p^aces in one (...).
as they have done in all places of Fees; and in France of the ancient E^rle
^o^nes, Duchess, and Marquesats. The other i^co^uenience is, that the Prince
depriues himself v^adu^^^ly of the means to make use of a better subject, who
may i^ time discover himself unto him. The third is, that i^ may be he to whom
he has given this charge, may through indisposition grow unable, or by Age
unfit, or through pa^sion or some particular design, be prejudicial to the
Estate. The fourth means is, never to give the great command of a Province to
any one that is borne there; lest that by the means of his Kindred, Alliances,
and Friends, with the favor he may have from the Prince, which will purchase
him many servants, he finds not means to perpetuate himself.

But if either by a bad establishment, or some bad custom, the Prince finds
his Estate otherwise disposed, he may gently provide for it, in suppressing and
drawing to himself this great authority and power; or dismembring it into
diverse charges, which may depend immediately of himself. And if he cannot
reduce the Governors to such terms as he holds it fit for his safety, some
have he^d opinion, that he should strip them by little and little of his
forces, in providing for his places of strength, and causing the Garrissons to
be changed every three years; and in like manner to have the Governor assisted
by one or two of his chief Counselors, without whose advice he might not
resolve any thing: Thinking that by this means they should not only prevent
the Governors Enterprises, but also make them more careful to do that which
concerns the Princes service, seeing their actions observed.

The poor and needy are no less dangerous to the quiet of the Estate then
great men, Of the poor and needy.
and great men which have had a will to mutine, have made use of them: For that
the present Estate being contrary unto them, they desire a change, hoping to
change their condition; and a. midst the disorder and violence to free
themselves from the necessity wherein they live. Means to contain the common
people in their duties.
The means to shelter himself on that side, is to hinder this necessity in an
Estate; but principally excess and usury; for that excess begins poverty, and
usury brings it to extremity. Necessity may likewise be prevented, Excess and
Usury the chief causes of poverty.
bringing in abundance; And especially by employing the common people in all
sorts of Manufactures, as Vopiscus writes they did in Alexandria, where the
gouty and blind found means to get their living.

Solon in Athens bound the Fathers to teach their Children a Trade, upon a
penalty to be deprived of all succors and respect which the Children owe unto
their Fathers. In China the Children are bound to follow their Fathers Trade,
and for such as had not any, they employed them about their public buildings;
as Augustus and the Kings of Egypt did. To conclude, they must employ such
men, and not leave the Estate in the hands of the needy, and of men which have
nothing to loose. And thus much concerning the restraint of natural Subjects.

CHAP. 15. Means to contain conquered Subjects in their duty.
THe Subjects which have bin conquered either by force, or by treaty, are
usually more difficult to govern then the natural. Wherefore besides t^a^
which we have spoken conce^ning the Natural, we must ob^erue with these more
discretion and precaution. To gi^e (...) ^^^iects in (...) an the (...).
The principal and most general means to contain the Subjects by conquest,
in the obedience of the Prince which has conquered them, is to give them such
interest in his government, as they may have a fear to change, left they
should impair their condition: Otherwise the peoples inclination being
contrary to the C^nqu^rour, the Principality will be like unto a Tree without
roots, which owes his fall to the first wind.

The mea^es which we have said are necessary for a Prince to purchase love and
reputation, Mildness and (...)
will much import him with this kind of Subjects: And amongst others mildness
and clemency. (...)
He must likewise favor Religious men, and such as be learned and virtuous,
which shall be found in the Country, for that the people do commonly govern
themselves to g^od or evi^^, according to the consciences of ^uch kind of men.
He must in-like manner make much of great men, and employ them in honorable
charges; Yet out of the Country of c^nquest: (...).
And in like manner to give them Estates and S^ignouri^s ^^se-where: He must
observe the contracts, co^u^n^io^^, and priui^edges under which the Country was
ye^l^^ed; for that one breach made by the Prince, makes them to fear the less
of the rest. He must breed up ^^ny Y^u^g men of their conquered Country, He
(...).
after the manner of his natural Subjects: As Alexander did thirty thou^and
young Persians, of whom he m^de choice, to be instructed after the Macedonian
manner.

The Romans erected Colleges and Seminaries, upon pretext to ciuillize the
Nations which they conquered; but in effect it was to employ them otherwise
then in the War, an^ to train them up after the Romans manner. And they
which were best conceipted of their intentions, said, that it made a part of
the Servitude, under which they reduced the Provinces which they conquered. The
Turk holds another course in the b^eeding up of his Ianizaries, the which
although it seems violent, yet it is grounded upon reason and judgment. For
choosing them among the Christians Children, he fortifies his power, in
weakening his Subjects which are most suspected unto him. You must make
Marriages betwixt them and his natural Subjects.
Marriages and Alliances help much to join and unite a conquered Province
with the natural Subjects. Alexander purchased much love of the Persians,
having married a Persian Lady. And as Titus Linius says, there was nothing did
so much hinder the Cap^uans from accommodating themselves with Hannibal, then
the private alliances they had contracted with the Romans.

The Romans also made use of another means, having interessed in the
preservation of their Estate, the greatest part of the neighbor Provinces
conquered by them, receiving them into their City, giving sometimes to private
persons, and sometimes to a whole Province the right of Burgeois^e, and making
them sharers in the honors of the City. But to reduce them wholly to the form
of natural Subjects, The Conqueror must bring his own Language into the
conquered Country.
by little and little they brought in their own Language; as since the
Arabians have done in all their conquest. And William the Conqueror, and
before him the Saxons in the greatest part of England, not suffering the Laws
to be written or published but in their languages, nor the audiences for the
dispatch of affairs and Co^missions for Letters patents; The contracts of
private men were past in the same language, to the end they might force them
mildly to learn it.

He may not c^ange the Law^s and Relig^^^ o^ the conq^^^ed c^u^t^^y but with
great Iudge^ent.
As for the Customs and ancient Laws of the Country, which co^c^rne only the
ordring of private men's goods, and not the Estate, nor the obedience due unto
the Prince, he may not change them: Or if he does, it must be done by degrees.
For what Justice soever there be in a new Law, the people being not accustomed
unto it, will suspect it. But if the change of Laws be prejudicial to a
Conqueror, the change of Religion is much more, there being nothing wherein
the people grow more obstinate, then to retain their ancient Religion. Yet
this will be no hinderance, but by the erecti^g of Colleges and Seminaries of
Piety, the Conqueror may bring in Learning and Knowledge, by means whereof
g^^ning daily someone, he may by little ro^te out that of the Country without
force. And if he cannot speedily attain to his design, at the least he shall
have this advantage, that those of the conquered Subjects which adhere to his
Religion, will be confident unto him, and making show to favor them, the rest
will be soon reclaimed.

But whatsoever the Conqueror be to bring in newly among a conquered people,
be it Religion, Customs, Tributes, or Laws: the establishments must be made
whilst the amazement of the conquest last; and that the people are in fear of
worse. For if you suffer them to k^ow themselves, and to grow assured; besides
the difficulty you shall find to make them taste these Innouations, it is to
be feared they will make use of it for a pretext of revolt.

Forc^ is a powerful mean^s to contain conquered (...) ^^ their duty.
But if all these means prove too weak, (as they will be with an untamed
multitude) to keep such people in awe and obedience, there is no other means
to contain them, then to make use of the same force which conquered them. The
Romans have employed whole Armies: yet mutinies being too ordinary, and of a
dangerous consequence in these great Bodies, this example has not been
followed by the ^i^est Conquerours: But instead thereof they have made use of
strong Forts and good Garrisons, well commanded and governed. And some have
therein imi^ated the Romans in planting of Collonies, the which are of less
expense, and seem more mild; The planting of Collonies more vni^st and
difficult.
but in effect they are more unjust in their establishments* For that you must
ruin many people to settle them with commodity; and moreover, they are
difficult to settle, as well for the choice of men which you are to send, as
for the planting of any good order amongst them, to make them, live in p^ace.
If you send of the chief men of your Estate, y^u unfurnish it, if they be many
in number; if few, they will make themselves Masters of the rest. If you take
them all poor, as the Romans did, disorders will easi^y grow amongst them; and
to live at their own pleasures, they will at need join with them of the
Country against you; as many Roman Collonies have done against the Romans. But
if you gather them out of diverse parts of your Estate, they will hardly agree.

Yet if the conquest were of so great an extent, Considerations for the ^etling
of Collonie.
as the expense would prove excessive, to maintain them in their duties by
force, you may make use of this means with these considerations; First your
Estate must be such, as sending a good number of your Subjects to that end, you
may not unfurnish your self: That the War had so unpeopled the conquered
Country, as after the conquest you shoold not be forced to commit so open an
injustice, as to ruin part of the Inhabitants for the planti^g of Collonies.
These spoils and vnpeoplings are excusable during the time you are in Arms:
But afterward they can admit no excuse, what considerations soever are brought
to the contrary, and this vnpeopling made during the War, gives place and
excuse to a Collony.

The third consideration is, that you must send Soldiers which have been
accustomed to live in discipline and order: The which must not be so old, as
they cannot accustom themselves to the place where they shall be planted; nor
yet so young, as they shall be incapable of Discipline; but being mingled one
with another, they may live together with some good order and equality.

(...) co^q^e^ed subjects (...) ^^ duties.
Besides this means they have added three others to contain untamed Subjects.
The first is, to abate and mollify their courages: The second to weaken them
of forces, and to take from them all means to do evil, when you cannot make
them loose the desire. And the third to keep them from assembling together, or
from joining with their Neighbors. To attain unto the first, some as the
Turk has ruined the Nobility and the Princes, to take from the people all
means to assemble, To mol^i^ie the (...) of a conquered (...)
and make a head under some Commander of courage. Others have suffered them to
abandon themselves to d^unken^esse, and to all sorts of incontinency and
pleasure. But these means are tyrannical and filthy. Numa who was wis^r and
more moderate, to mollify this barbarousnesse, which Romulus had entertained
among the people of Rome, made use of Religion, to the end he might retain by
the fear of the Gods, those whom the fear of men could not contain; and for
this effect he caused Statues and Altars to be erected at the Corners of
Streets, to the end that the people might generally be retained by the presence
of Religion which they had before their eyes. In the Christian Religion diverse
sorts of Orders and Rules have bin instituted, the which besi^es the good which
concerns Religion, pu^ge the World o^ many savage humors, which happily wou^d
do much m^^chiefe. Others have invited people to give themselves to all
Mechannicke Arts. For besides that the mind is diuerted from evil by this
employment* most comm^^ly they which are bred up in shops, have no desire of
troubles, nor War: And admit they should affect it, they should find
themselves unfit, neither would it be successe^u^l there being more loss for
them then ga^ne. Others under pretext of privileges, exempt a conquered people
from going to the War, and by little and little make them unprofitable by
this exemption.

Some have held that imbarking them in the study of Sciences and Learning, it
was a good means to make them desire rest. Yet in bringing in the study of
Sciences, you must distinguish them: For those which may serve for the War,
must in no sort be imparted to the people, nor those which teach to command:
But only such as are fitting studies, as Divinity, Physic, Astrology, or
such like, the which so entertain their minds, as they joy in no other thing
when they know them, and make their spirits melancholy, depriving them of that
viuacity which is necessary for military actions. Some others have held that
busying, a riotous and contentious people in suits, was necessary, not only to
employ their minds, but also to give them means to vomit out this bitterness
and bad humor, whereof every one has a part, without troubling the Public:
And in regard thereof they have filled Estates with diverse Offices, in some
sort to content the most ambitious; and by the jealousy of the maintaining of
their authority, to bind them to the preservation of the Public. But in the
practice of all these means, they must first observe the humor of the people
with whom you are to deal; and make use of that whereunto you shall see them
inclined, and acco^modate your self accordingly, as occasion and time will give
you leave. As for the disarming of a conquered people of their forces and
means, they proceed after diverse manners. To weaken a conquered people.
The first is, to take from them all sorts of Arms: And not only the use, but
also the matter and making of them; for in a mutiny and combustion, they may
make use of it: As also the use of Horses and of Ships of War. To keep their
commanders about you, either for Council or under color of some charge: To
employ the Youth which have been already trained up to Arms, out of the
Country: as Caesar did, meaning to pass into England, who carried with him
all the Young Men, assuring himself by this means of the Gauls, and making
use of them against those of great Britain. He likewise under the color of
hostages, v^furnished the Towns of their principal Men, and of such as might
either serve for conduct or Council. The Emperor Heraclius to weaken the
Sarasins, entertained four thousand Arabians, which were their principal
force. We have said that the Turk weakened the Christians, in taking their
Children to be instructed in his Religion, and by this means fortifies
himself. The Desmaneling of Towns and strong places, which a Prince will not
or cannot keep, is also necess^ry; For fortresses in Towns have many times
encouraged the Inhabitants to a revolt, as Tacitus writes of Jerusalem.

There remains the third means, which is to hinder these people from uniting
themselves, To hinder the v^ion of a conque^^d people.
and making a head; for their union will hold the place of force. Some Kings,
or rather Tyrants of Egypt, have made use of the diversity of Religions, to
keep their Subjects in division; Others have entertained iealousies and
distrusts among them, and sometimes hatred betwixt Neighbor Provinces. Others
have kept their Subjects in fear: by certain secrets and hidden searches,
causi^g him to be punished speedily, which was found to have any will to
Mu^ine: And some have written that the inquisition in Spain, although in show
it were Established for R^ligio^, yet they have sometimes made it serve for an
in^^rument of Estate.

Some have of a Conquered Province made three or four; as the Romans did of
Macedony, which they divided into four, that is to say, Amphipolis, S^lorica,
Pella, a^^ P^ll^gonia. And besides this Paulus Aemillius, commanded ^he great
Men to pass into Italy with their Children, and after this diuisi^n, the
Provinces were forbidden to contract any alliances one with another. Others
have forbidden a conquered people all sorts of assemblies, allowing them
neither public Council, nor Comminalty, nor Brotherhood; as the Romans did
at Capoua, leaving them no form of public command. The Turks in like manner
has forbidden Bells, not only to the Christians, but through his whole
Empire, fearing (as some hold) that at the sound thereof, the people should
gather together for some design then for devotion. The Souldans of Egypt
fearing the multitude of the Inhabitants at Caire, crossed the City in many
places with trenches, and broad and deep ditches, to take all means from the
people in a Mutiny to assemble suddenly together.

But to hinder a new conquered people, from uniting themselves with others,
besides these means they have restrained them from all commerce with
strangers, forbidding them to go out of the Country without le^ue, as some
write of England, Muscouie, and China, and not suffering any strangers to enter
without pasport, keeping guards and secret spies upon the Ports and passages.
But if you cannot prevail by these means, some have bin of opinion to
transport them to other places, as they of the mountains of Genoua, were
drawn into the plain by the Romans. Aurelian transplanted the Daces on this
side the Danowe; Charlemaigne the Saxons into Flanders, and the Turk many
people of Asia into Greece.

These are the means, whereof they have made use to prevent a future
mischeife, that is to say, the effects of th^se first causes of the ruin of an
Estate. But if they have been forgotten, or prove too weak to stay the
Subjects minds, and to keep them from running to nearer courses to ruin the
Estate: th^n you must of necessity, use remedies fit for every one of these
causes, to preserve it.

CHAP. 16. Of the nearest causes of the ruin of an Estate* Of a Conspiracy
against the Princes person. Of the Causes thereof: Of the means to avoid it:
Of the discovery and Punishment.
Conspiracy against the Princes person.
AS the Prince is the Axeltree whereon the Estate turns; so a conspiracy
against his person succeeds acording to the desire of the conspirators, or
draws after it many times the ruin of the Estate, to prevent the which they
make use of four means, the first is, not to do any thing that does usually
inuit the Subjects to such conspiracies, Means to preuen^.
the second to cause himself to be guarded, and not to suffer any unknown
person to aproach near unto him, the third is to observe the actions of his
guards and of his familiars and great men, the fourth to cause such as shall be
surprised, to be duly pu^^ished. Causes of a cons^i^acy.


In regard of the first, the causes which draw men usually to such wicked
designs are these: an injury received from the Prince or a fear to receive
one; the ambition of great men and of favorites, the desire of liberty, and
the zeal of Religion. The iniu^y which they (...) to receive from the Prince


An Injury is of three sorts, for either it concerns life, honor or goods;
and they which have been thrust on through fear of their lives, have most
commonly prevailed in their enterprise: for the despair wherein they are,
makes them to hazard their lives more freely, to save it by the loss of the
Princes, who seeks to take away theirs, running no worse fortune in this
hazard then to loose that which could not otherwise preserve: and therefore a
Prince should not reduce any man, be he great or small in that extremity. And
injury done to the honor is great in a person of courage, and Bodille
testified it, who flew Childeric which had caused him to be whipped: But of all
iniu^ies, that which concerns the honor of Women and the Bed, is one of the
most powerful in such enter^^ises, whereof there are many examples; An injury
which concerns men's Estates is not so violent, and few men to recover their
goods, or in revenge of that which has been taken from him, will hazard their
lives: and yet in a great courage, the reueng of any injury whatsoever is much
to be feared.

As for the ambition of great men and favorites, it does produce more
conspiracies then injuries, for that the weak although they have received an
injury from the Prince, they cannot hurt him for want of comodity and support;
But great men who have both the one and the other, and ambition withal, which
is sometimes no less violent then revenge, gives them more means to prevail
in such designs: yet there are seldom such enterprises, but when as the
Prince has suffered some one to grow to that power, that he wants nothing but
the Crown.

Wherefore the first means to avoid this danger, is to humble such men by
degrees; as if he cannot suffer them to live without hazard to make them away
speedily: As Tiberius did of Scianus, the Second is to appoint successors after
him, if he has no Childeren: be it by Adoption or Election, provided always
that the Laws of State allow it: But these successors must not be so great and
powerful, as they may have a^ will to make the like enterprises, desiring
rather to make themselves Masters of the Estate, then attend the succession;
For the which Augustus knew well how to provide by the Adoption of successors
in many degrees, supporting and strengthening his Government even by this means.

The desire of liberty.
The desire of Liberty does likewise produce a powerful and strong effect in
the minds of Men, who are otherwise ill affected to the Prince, and he must
have a very strong bridle to restrain them, when it is once entered into the
minds of a multitude, who have the more courage, when they constantly believe
that all means are lawful to dispossess an usurper, or a Prince whom they
hold unlawful: This it is which has produced in former time, so many
Murderers of Tyrants, and with the like desire they were thrust on, which
conspired against the Dukes of Florence. The inconsiderate zeal of Religion.


I am ashamed to put Religion in this number, and to make it the cause of so
many wicked enterprises, as has been practiced against Princes; there being
nothing so impious, nor so contrary to Religion, as such Murders. Yet the
Jews Books are full of such examples: And in truth it is contrary to
Religion, to believe that God would punish wicked Princes, and free his people
by this means, and that the Divine justice make use of such instruments, as
Men do of Hangmen, to execute his decrees: But if for this reason the end have
been sometimes good, and the event to the honor of God; yet the action in it
self is bad: They be Rods, which after the punishment are good for nothing but
the fire, so the Jews to hinder the consequence of such actions, have
represented them as done by the express commandment of God: And yet certain
Divines, fuller of malice then Piety, have sought to draw consequences from
thence: and of a Religion full of Piety and mildness, have made an Altar of
impiety, pouring for the blood of Kings and Princes, upon pretext of a contrary
Religion, wherein they have followed the proceeding of the old man of the
Mountain, who bred up many young Men to such enterprises, promising them
another life full of unspeakable pleasures and joys: who being transported
with the hope thereof, exposed themselves freely to death: And without any
other Army, his Estate (although of a small extent) kept all other Mo^arches
and Potentates in fear to be murdered, forcing them to seek his Friendship,
and some to pay him a Tribute to live in safety: So as in the end the Kings of
Armenia were forced to root out this Race of Assassins.

To preserve himself from all these sorts of undertakers, you must understand,
Ordinary defects in conspiracies.
that all conspiracies do not always succeed, by reason of some defects,
whereof some one does usually fall out in such attempts. The first is, for that
having resolved to observe a certain order in the execution, most commonly the
particularities which they have foreseen, do not impe, and will do less, if
the Prince does not impart to any man, whether he means to go, or what he
intends to do long before; but does so vary in his actions, as none but
himself is able to divine of the time when he means to part, nor of the place
whither he intends to go, nor where he means to stay, nor how he will be
accompanied. The second defect is, that many times the Executioners heart
fails him, either by an amazement which seizes on him* seeing the Prince to
look on him, and to observe his countenance; or his courage fails him and
grows mild by the good countenance he shows him.

Wherefore many Princes suffering all men to approach near unto them, do not
forbear to observe such as are unknown unto them: So as he which has a will
to attempt, is easily discovered in lifting up his Arms, or in approaching too
near unto him; and his constant look would be sufficient to make him grow
into distru^^ that he was discovered, and divert him from his Enterprise.

Other Princes having suspicion of some, have purposely cast forth word^ of
distrust, which notwithstanding might be interpreted in a double sense, and
speaking them they have observed the countenance of those whom they distrusted,
to the end they might discover their hearts. The third error is the little
discretion of him that attempts, as he that meant to kill Commodus, entering
into the Ampitheater; before he gave the blow began to cry out, behold what the
Senate sends thee. For these words aduertized Commodus, and gave his guard
means to prevent him, wherefore Guards are necessary for a Prince, not only
for a sign of his greatness, or that being accompanied with force he may have
the more authority: But likewise to preserve him, and to observe the
countenance of such as approach near unto him.

The manner of passing before Princes, although it seems to be practiced only
for honor, yet it was beneficial to Pandolpho Tyrant of Syenna, against whom
Iulio Belanty, his Son in-lawe, had laid an ambush in his house, by the which
Pandolph^ was accustomed to pass, to go and visit a Friend of his which lay
sick; But Pandolpho staying in his lodging, to speak to some one, it gave
time to them of his train to go before; who by this means without thinking
of it, discovered the Enterprise: Whereas if after his accustomed manner, he
had gone first, he had been in danger to have been surprised.

The fourth Error is a false imagination, or an accident not foreseen. They
which had resolved to kill Caesar, seeing Popilius one of their companions to
discourse long with him, they had a conceit that he spoke of the Enterprise;
which made them resolve to advance their design, feareing that in staying
longer they should be disco^ered. A word may sometimes divert such Men. An
accident not foreseen discovered the Treason intended against James King of
great Britain; and a letter sent by one to a friend of his, not to be p^e^ent
at the assembly of the Estates, not giving him any other reason, made them
careful to visit all places about (...) House at Westmi^ster, where the
Prince and Peers were to assemble: Where in a Cellor under the great Hall, in
the which the Peers were to sit, (where the King with the Queen and their
Children, were to assist in person) they found a great quantity of Gunpowder,
and Fagots, to blow up the Chamber and the whole assembly.

Some Princes have gone priui^y armed when they went in public; as they say,
Cosmo de Medicis did. The Turkish Princes after that Batazet had been in
danger to be slain by a Der^is, have not suffered any unknown person to
approach near unto them, which is not accompanied by two Capigies, or Vshers,
who hold those that go unto him by the Arms: And this custom is practiced
with the Ambassadors of Princes. There are many other means which are
diversely practiced, according to the persons, time, and place. Yet the most
general is, to have a good eye to the Enterprises which may be attempted
open^y. But that which is most to be feared in Princes, is poisoning: the essay
which is taken of his Meare and Drink, cannot warrant a Prince. Some have
accustomed themselves to take Counter-poison, as Mitridates did. But the safest
way is to have faithful and vigilant persons about him, to have a care of it,
besides the ordinary Officers, which are appointed to prepare the Princes Meat
and Drink: And these must not be known if it may be, lest they should corrupt
them, as they may do the ordinary Officers. He must likewise have confident
persons, to watch and observe the actions of such as they may distrust, (which
is the third remedy to frustrate the effect of a conspiracy) And if they be
such as they ought to be, it will be a difficult thing but they will discover
what is practiced. The discou^^ of (...).


Conspiracies are discovered by two means; either by the report of another, or
by conjecture. Report proceeds either from the little fidelity, or from the
little discretion of those to whom the Treason is imparted. This little faith
is usually found among men: For such a business cannot be communicated but to
him that is a dear friend to the undertaker, or to one that is discontented
with the Prince, against whom they conspire. To find such a Friend that will
willingly expose his life to an apparent danger, it is very difficult: And
admit you find him, yet you cannot be assured of his Courage, although you
have tried him in other affairs. Moreover to measure a man's fidelity in this
subject, by the coffeehouse he has of the Prince, were great indiscretion.
For the undertaker having discovered his intent^ons to this discontented
person, he gives him means to recover the Princes favor. Wherefore the hatred
he bears unto the Prince, must be exceeding great, or the undertakers must
have much authority and credit with him, to make him to keep his Faith: For
the malecontent desiring nothing more then the Princes grace and favor, he
shall have a good occasion to hope for it by the discovery of the enterprise.

By the little indiscretion which is likewise in such men, conspiracies are
commonly discovered, either in speaking too much, or before such as he ought
not: like unto Brutus Sons, who having conferrd with the Tarqui^s
Ambassadors before one of their Servants, they were discovered by him, to have
conspired against their Country. Cataline acquainted Fuluia with his design,
who discovered it to Cicero; Diuis discovered the Treason which he had plotted
against Alexander, to a young youth named. N^^homachus, who revealed it to
C^balinius, and ^e to Alexander.

The Treason of Sceninus against Nero, was discovered by conjecture; Sceninus
having the day before the Execution of the Enterprise, made his will and
commanded Milichus his freed man to sharpen his Dagger; he enfranchised all his
Bondmen, and caused many Rowlers to be made for the binding up of wounds: So
as this freed man doubting that these preparations were for some such
Enterprise, advertised Nero, who by his means discovered the other
conspirators. In like manner Spies prying up and down, may by the
indiscretion, lightness, or malice of another, or by conjecture, have some
light of that which passes; and they must especially observe the actions of
discontented persons, and of such as may better their condition by the Princes
death.

It remains now to know, Of the punishment of conspiracies.
(after the discovery of such Enterprises) how to punish them fitly and
seasonably. For many times it may be done vnsitly: And instead of amazing the
confederates which are not yet discovered, you shall thrust them on to effect
their design. Sometimes they shall incense and inuit others to make attempts,
in stead of diuerting them by the punishment of the first. The Prince being
advertised of some Enterprise against his person, before he publish it or seek
to punish it, he must seek to discover it with all the particularities and
circumstances, if it be possible, measuring the condition of the conspirators
with his own. If the Conspirators be strong, he must resolve upon some other
pretext to make himself the stronger; and in the mean time he must dissemble,
bestowing favors and gifts upon the Conspirators, left that finding themselves
discovered, they attempt not openly.

In the conspiracy of the two Legions (which the Romans had left for the guard
of Capona against the Samnites) who had resolved to sack the Caponans, the
Senate having given charge to Rutilius the new Consul to prevent it; to kill
them asleep, he caused and commanded it to be proclaimed, that the Senate
had decreed they should continue there still in Gar^isson: So as hoping they
should always have time to execute their designs, they deferred it. But when
they saw that they separated them, sending some one way, some another, they
resolved to put it in execution as they did: The which they would not have
done, i^ after this first policy they had taken order to have been the
stronger before they had divided them. Wherefore a Prince that will have time to
discover or punish a Treason, he must cause the conspirators to have an
opinion to find a more fit occasion to execute their designs: And he must not
be rash in such things, if the danger be not apparent in staying. For the
punishment is made for two principal ends. The first is to free himself of
such dangerous persons; and the second to terrife others by the example of
punishment, from attempting the like. Whereas by haste the Prince not only
looses the fruits of the punishment; but also he hazards his person.

And although that punishments seem necessary; yet if the subject or the
condition of the business be such, as mildness and clemency may bring more
reputation and safety to the Prince, then the impunity of the danger, he shall
do well to show it in such an action. Augustus pardoned Cunia three times, and
by the last assured his life more then he had done by the punishment of all
others, whom he had caused to be executed for the like attempts. The unexpected
Clemency of a Prince to some one, the which proceeds not from fear and
cowardice, does not only bind him to be faithful, but does mollisie the
bit^^rnesse of his Enemy, who grow the more incensed by punishments; the which
being held unjust, by such as hold the same opinion of the Prince with the
undertakers, they think ^t lawful to be revenged, as they would be of an
injury or some violence done to the Public, or to some private person.

CHAP. 17. Of the treason of Places, Towns, and Armies, and other forces of
the Estate: and of the remedies to prevent the effect.
BY the Treasons which are practiced upon strong places, or upon Towns of
importance, or upon Armies or principal forces, Estates are brought to their
ruin. The only remedy is in the foresight, by means of the choice which
they shall make of those to whom they shall give the command: And he must have
a special care to choose men that are not covetous, ambitious, cunning, or
dissemblers, light, or inconstant; or easily subject to discontentments; or men
that have great support and credit, and are undertakers.

Having thus provided for the Election you must not so join the authority of
command with the forces in one man, as when you would you shall not be able to
sep^rate them: And not only he which has the Authority, but also they which
command the particular forces, must depend immediately of the Prince, with
charge notwithstanding to obey him, to whom the Prince has given the authority
of command, unless he receive a Counter command. And it is of no force to
say, that if they which are to depend not wholly upon him that is to command
them, he cannot answer for that which they give him incharge. For if the
Prince trusts him, he must likewise trust; and watching over the forces,
aduertize him if they do not as they ought, and do not obey that which is
commanded them according to the duty of his charge.

Some in like manner (as I have formerly said) have held it fit, not to
continue great commands in own man, especially in one place, whereby the
custom of obeying him, the Subjects may tie themselves too strictly to him,
and give him means to dispose of the Province where he commands. These are the
remedies to prevent the greatest treasons: For the rest which are made by
intelligences with petty companions, as in corrupting a Centinell or a
Corporal that shall be in guard to seize upon a Port, they may easily avoid
it, in drawing the guards by lot, and by the care and dillig^nce of the
Captains. And if they be aduertized of some practice which the Enemy makes
with the Soldiers and Inhabitants of a Town, they may cause some to make show
to be of the intelligence, who addressing themselves to those whom they have
reason to distrust, they may easily discover the truth.

CHAP. 18. Of Rebellions, and of the means to prevent them.
COnspiracies and Treasons are most commonly secret and hidden, and are plotted
by few men, the which makes them more difficult to discover, and more easy to
punish. Contrariwise Rebellions and Factions are made more openly; but as they
cannot be attempted without great numbers, so they are with more difficulty
pacified and punished; and do more usually draw after them the ruin of the
Estate then the former. But to know how a Prince ought to govern himself in a
Rebellion, he must consider whether he be stronger or weaker then the Rebels;
and he must hold himself the weaker, although they were equal in forces; for
that he may not hazard his authority upon a doubtful event, as it is ordinary
among equals. If he be the stronger, he must prevent it in the beginning
speedily and secretly; cutting off the Heads and chief Commanders, before they
know they are taken; and then present himself with courage to suppress it, to
the end he may amaze the Rebels: And if he be far from the place where the
Rebellion is made, he must approach; as the Emperor Charles the fifth did, who
passed from Spain into Flanders, to suppress the rebellion of the Gantois,
the which succeeded happily. For to abandon the place where the Rebellion
begins, or to retire far from it is held a fear, the which blemish and
impair the credit and authority of the Prince, and encourage the heads of the
party, and makes the People more bold and insolent. But if he finds not
himself the stronger, and to have some great advantage; without retiring
himself too far from the place where the Rebellion is made, he must make
show to have a will to yield to that which the people desire of him, to give
them time to grow cold; especially if they have no Commanders of credit and
authority.

Sometime a small matter may be able to reduce a people to their duty: And in
such Encounters subtle and in ^entiue spirits are fit, as likewise those which
are popular and eloquent, to entertain and to draw a mutinous multitude to
their duty, by fear, distrust, and hope. That familiar and popular course
which Menenius Agrippa observed with the people of Rome, by a Comparison of the
division of the members from a humane body, succeeded better to pacify them,
then if he had fallen upon more serious reasons. The invention which Calaminus
the Capouan made use of, to save the Senators of Capoua from the hands of the
people, was no less witty: For joining himself to their party, and applauding
them in all things, seeing them resolute to put their Senators to death, he
propounded unto them that they should begin first with him that was most odious
unto them, but withal he let them know that the Estate must not remain
without government, and that before they put him to death, they must make
choice of some other in his place. So not able to agree, and passing from one
to another, they found that they whom they mean^ to put to death, were much
better then the others whom they intended to choose in their p^aces: And to the
people were pacified.

Sometimes i^ such mutinies and combustions, they have made use of the occasion
of an Eclipse, or of some extraordinary sign from Heaven, or of some
unexpected misfortune; where with the people being touched and amazed, suffer
themselves to be persuaded to return to their duties. A Man of authority and
credit with the people, may prevail much in such occasions. Soderin
Archbishop of Florence, coming f^^th in public with his Pontifical Robes
and his Clergy pacified the Florentins, who were in combustion one against
another. And as in some places Preachers have been the Firebrands of sedition,
and the trumpets of War, in others they have served to pacify them, and they
have made good use of them. But if the people cannot be suddenly rec^aimed, and
that the popular mutiny passes into Rebellion and a settled reuolte: you must
then seek to reduce them by degrees, disvniting them, and gayning some of the
commanders underhand, by promises and benefits; or putting them in distrust of
the people, and in jealousy one of another.

If neither of these remedies will prevail, he must yield to that which the
people demand, either in all, or in part: For that love and reputation being
the foundation of the Princes Authority, if the Prince in yiedling seems to
diminish his reputation in some sort, yet thereby he shall preserve the
affection of the people, who being pacified, he may by other means recover his
reputation. And yet in such occurrents he may so carry himself, and use such
dexterity, that accommodating himself mildly to the peoples inclination, he
shall seem to grant that willingly which they extort from him by force; being
necessary that the Prince to maintain his authority, make show to will and
desire that which he cannot hinder, and so to apply his will to his power. And
to the end he may make it known that it is a thing which he desires, he must
seek to draw some apparent advantage for his greatness: There being few
actions in the Estate, from which the Prince either in effect or in show may
not draw some advantage; although in another thing he be damnified: And it
shall be a part of Wisdom to show himself more joyful of the advantage
which he receives, then discontented for the disadvantage which his Enemies
sought to procure him.

The Turkish Emperors although they be powerful, have been many times
constrained to yield some of their Ministers to the Ianizaries to be put to
death: The which a well advised Prince should never do, if his Ministers had
not otherwise highly offended; but seeing himself reduced to this extremity,
he should give them means to escape, yet dissembling that it is with his
consent. For besides that it were a cruel Injustice, to deliver an innocent
man into the hands of a furious multitude, the shame will redowne upon him,
with a disdain, and a distrust of all others, whom he should call to serve
him, who will rather govern themselves, according to the will of those which
had credit with the people, then to his desire. But if the Ministers are found
to have carried themselves ill, the Prince may take this occasion to cause them
to be punished by Justice, to pacify a popular mutiny: Although it were more
discreetly done to prevent it, then to stay until he were urged to do that
by force, which for his own good he should have formerly done.

CHAP. 19. Of Factions and of the means to hinder the effects.
THere remains now to speak of Factions, for the last and most ordinary
causes for the ruin of Estates. They are seldom framed among the people,
unless great men be of the party: For they grow either from the private
quarrels of great men, who imbarque the people on their sides; or from the
subject of some reformation; or for the government of public affairs. If
they grow from particular quarells, the Prince must speedily force them to
refer the cause to his Judges, or to Arbitrators, without making show to
favor the one more then the other. This was that which King Francis the first
did, in the suit depending betwixt Madame Lonyse his Mother and Charles Duke of
Bourbon, who revolted upon this subject.

But if the controversy cannot be reconciled, for that the proofs fail on
the one side, although that by strong presumptions, the fact be in some sort
apparent; or if it concerns the honor of one of the parties in the decision
of the business: the Prince must separate them, employing them out of his
Estate in some honorable charges, the one far from the other; And he must
Entertayne them thus divided, until that either their credit be diminished
with the people, or that time has made them forget, or at the least temper
their hatred. If (as it happens often) to the private quarrels of great Men,
they add some public pretext, as of reformation, Liberty or Religion: The
Prince not able to hinder the course of these factions, he must join with the
stronger to ruin the weaker: Wherein having once prevailed, he must free
himself by diverse means (yet lawful) of the chief Commanders with whom he
had joined, either employing them out of the Estate, or causing them to be
punished for their private offenses.

But if the Prince comes not in time to ruin the one nor the other, for that
they are equal, and that his Counterpease cannot weigh down the balance; he
must attend, that by the Event of some misfortune to the one, they may find the
weakness of that side, to ruin him wholly. Yet if in this case the heads of
the Factions, and not the Prince, be to reap the Honor and fruits of the
Victory of one of the two parties; the Prince shall do more wisely to balance
the one with the other, and to make himself rather an Arbitrator or a Judge of
their pretentions, then a party: For that he should make himself to those,
against whom he should declare himself: and should not thereby gain any
Authority or credit amongst those, whose party he should embrace, into the
which he should not be received by the partisans, but to countenance their
designs, and not for any affection they bear him, having already engaged
themselves to him, who had first advanced his standard, and had presented
himself unto them to be their Leader, and to assist them in their designs;
And they will attribute to the credit of their Commander, that which the Prince
should afterward do for them.

The principal Remedy must be used in the beginning: For that when as the
parties are once framed, the Prince must rather study how he may live in this
corruption of State, then to think of the means how to take it away. For if
either of the parties have an advantage, he will not abandon his Arms, until
he have ruined his opposite: wherein the Prince shall have a double loss; the
one is he shall lose a great part of his Subjects; the other is, that the head
of the faction being fortified with credit, he may cause him to lose the rest,
and usurp his Estate. But if both parties be equal, they will contain
themselves through the fear they have one of another. And the Prince has no
other remedy, then to breed a jealousy and distrust among the Commanders of
one and the same party, making many equal in in honor and dignity, to the end
they may not agree to obey any other Head then the Prince; or advancing some of
those which obey the Heads of parties, to greater dignities then their
Generals, to the end they may disdain to obey them. This must be practiced
with such as have many followers.

THE COVNSELLOR OF ESTATE. OR, A COLLECTION OF the greatest and most Remarkable
Considerations serving for the Managing of Public Affairs. PART. III.
CONTAINING THE MEANS to increase an ESTATE.
CHAPTER I. Of the increasing of an Estate by the enlarging of Towns.
AN Estate is increased either by multiplying or husbanding that which is our
own, or by adding unto it, To increase our own by our own.
and drawing unto us that which is another man's, by lawful means. Our own is
multiplied either by manuring the land; or by enlarging of Towns, especially
those which may serve for defense, and to make head against an enemy; or in
taking care of the procreation, breeding up, and education of Children: In
regard of the manuring of the Land and that which depends thereon, it has
been reco^mended formerly, in treating of the wealth and the revenues of the
Estate.

Diverse means to enlarge and amp^ifie Towns.
As for the enlarging and amplifying of Towns, it is done after diverse manners,
either in drawing together people disper^ed here and there in the Fields, in
many scattered Houses and Villages, and reducing them into one place, as
Theseus did at Athens, and as they say it is practiced at Brazeele, as well to
Ciuillize that people, as to have the better means to instruct them in the
Christian Faith: Or else people fearing the invasion of some strange Nation,
have reduced themselves into some place that was strong of Situation. By this
means Veni^e was amplyfied and built. The ancient Spaniards retired themselves
to the Moun^aines of Bi^^ay and Aragon, when as the Moors held Spain* The
Persians flying before Tamberlaine, some retired themselves to Mount Taurus*
others to Anti-Taurus, and some to the Islands of the Caspian Sea, where they
peopled many Towns. Pisa was en^arged by the Ruins of Genoua, when it was
sack^ by the Sarrasins. The coming of Attilla was the cause of the beginning
and foundation of Venice, the greatest part of the best families of Italy being
retired into the Towns of the Adriatique Sea, to avoid the fury of so
powerful an Enemy. London and many Towns in England have been peopled by
French and Flemmings, being chased out of their Countries in regard of their
Religion.

The pleasantness and beauty of some Towns, for their Situation or their
buildings, ^he pleasant^^^^^ of towns.
have drawn many to frequent them. The structure of the Pyramides in
Alexandria, the bounty of the Air of Mitilene, Smirna, and Rho^es, made many
Rom^ns resolve to leave Rome, and to make their abode there: The which has
been the cause of the increase and amplyfying of those places. Profit draws
Men wonderfully to live in towns.
But profit is that which draws most Men to live in a place: The which
although it be of diverse sorts, yet it proceeds from three principal caus^s,
the which must concur for the enlarging of a Town; The commodity of the
sci^uation, Principal causes of profit in a town.
the fertility of the Country; and the facility of commerce.

The commodity of the Situation consists in two things; The commodity of the
Situation.
the one to send forth that whereof we have abundance; and the other to
receive that from others which we want, which two must concur together in
one place, to people it and make it great. Otherwise if it were but a simple
passage, it would not be enlarged no more then the ^^ands of the Terceres, the
which although they serve the Portugalls for a passage to the Indies, yet are
they nothing the better peopled: And Flushing, although it be a great Haven,
where many Ships ariue; Yet it is but a very small Town. Whereas Venice,
Lisbone, Genoua, and Antwerpe, having both Commodities joined together, have
made themselves great.

The fertility of the Neighbor Country, The fert^lity of the Coun^r^y.
makes not a Town to be the better peopled, but helps to maintain it being
peopled from other places: For we have seen and see daily, many Towns
Sc^tuated in a barren soil, as Genoua, who have made and maintained themselves
great: Necessity sharpening and qui^kening the Inhabitants spirits to labor
and industry.

The facility of co^merce proceeds from the easy transportation of
Merchandise, be it by water or by land, Of the facility o^ c^^m^rce.
in a plain Country or a hilly, they having the commodity of carriages: Yet
the conduct by water is more easy and of less charge. A ^auigable water is
either by Sea, or rivers, or la^es, or cha^nels, made with men's hands with some
stops; or Pooles, as that of Miree in Egypt, which they write, had fify Mi^es
in compa^se. But of all the transportation by wat^r, that by Sea is much more
commodious and profitable: And the Town which has it, and is accompanied with
a good Port, whereas Ships may ride safely from winds and the violence of
storms, may make it self great with little industry.

Religion a means to enlarge a Town.
Religion has sometimes served to enlarge the City of Ierus^lem: For the Jews
sacrifice being Celebrated only there, every Man ran thither, and many made
choice of it for their abode: And many Villages have of late been made Towns,
in regard of the Religion which they have tied unto them by Pilgrimage^.

The erecting of Schools and Universities, of all sorts of Sciences, The
Establishment of (...) and (...).
have served ot^ers to amplyfie them, being a means which Princes have
p^act^^^d, not only to stay their Subjects, who going to study ^ut of their
Estate, carry forth the money, and bring home strong manners, most commonly
pernicious to their Country; but also to people those places where their
Elections were made, by the ^ucc^^^s of their Subjects and strangers.

The (...).
The Election in like manner of some Seats of Justice, whose Iuris^iction has a
great extent, and is well peopled, may also serve: Especially in that sort as
it is used in most of the Estates of Christendom, where they must spend much
time, and disburse much money to recover t^eir own. For the frequentation of
those which come from abroad, with their long stay, cannot but bring g^^at
means which remains there. (...).
The Erecting also of Manufactures, if there be any, or of stuffes, which are
particular to a Town, and sought for by others, may also increase it. Some
Towns have been peopled by the exemptions and privileges of Princes, who
have drawn Inha^itants from all parts: They ^sed this mea^es to people
New-Hauen; and the Duke of Tuscany does the like for Liuor^e. The residence and
the abode of the Nobility and Gentry in Towns, Residence of the Nobility.
serves likewise to enlarge and amplify them. For besides that such Towns are
commonly better built; the Nobility are more curious to have policy
entertained, then when it is composed only of Merchants, who dreaming only of
their gain, and to do their business, have most commonly little care of the
Public, unless there be many rich men which have theigouernment: For then
the wealth and commodity which they enjoy, gives them the same courage with the
gentry, and they govern themselves after the same manner. But besides this,
the Prince must assist them with some public Revenues to that effect. The
comparison of the Towns of Italy with those of France, shows what difference
there is betwixt Towns inhabited by Gentlemen, and those which are not. And
the Towns of Flanders and Germany, which are in the hands of rich Merchants,
yield nothing in beauty to those of Italy.

The residence and abode of the Prince for a long time in one Town, does much
increase and amplify it; The residence of the Prince.
whereof the example is but too familiar in all Estates: And the reason is for
that the affairs and the treasure are brought thither as to its Center; the
which does not only draw those which are necessary for the Princes service,
but also Merchants and Artizans, who go where there is commodity and gain.

CHAP. 2. Of the increase of an Estate by the Procreation of Children.
But they strive in vain to increase an Estate by the manuring of the Land,
and peopling of Towns, if they do not provide to husband it, and to favor
the generation, breeding up, and education of Children; being the only means
we have of our own, to people both Countries and Towns. Augustus after the
Civil war, found this care not only worthy of himself, but necessary for
the Estate, propounding great privileges to such as had three Children, and
yet to favor a single life as much as might be.

Of Poligamy.
Some people have thought they had provided well by Poligamy, allowing one man
to have many Wives; as well not to tie the fruitfulness of a man, to the
barrenness of one Wife, as to multiply generation: Yet experience has taught
us, that whether that a man being employed in many places, cannot commonly get
Children which live long; or not able to extend the care of a Father to so many
Children through necessity, or otherwise they cannot a^taine to ripe age; the
Country which make use of Poligamie, find not themselves better peopled then
others. The Turks raise greater Armies then the Christians, but this grows
from the extent of the Country which they possess, for that they make ^o
other profession but Arms. For he that shall compare the people which is now
in Greece, with that which it was before the Turk entered, shall find it much
less peoled then it has been.

Of Celi^ate.
It is true that Celibate or a single life indifferently allowed to all sorts
of men, is many times the cause of the decay of people in an Estate.
Charlemaigne being borne in an Age full of devotion, in the which the greatest
Men made themselves Monckes or Clergy Men, although that otherwise he was
much respective to that which concerns Religion, he held it not fit to suffer
any one that would, to make himself a Moncke. For besides that you may not
allow good Men to abandon the Estate, it is a means in making profession of a
single life to loose the race. Good Men come from good, and the valliant as
they say produce their like; and therefore they must make use of them for the
good of the Estate. But as a single life is seemly for men of the Church, and
that there must be some: it seems necessary to cut off, or at the least to
hinder hereafter this infinite number, which unfurnish the State of Men which
would be very convenient and fit for other places, and who for the most part
become a scandal and reproach to the Church; Experience showing sufficiently,
that such an excessive multitude, is not capable to be reduced to its first
order and institution: And whereas a small number well entertained may edyfie
by their example, this great number incapable of discipline ^uines all, and are
a shame to their Mother which has brought them forth and entertained them.

But for that many times they make use of their retreates, rather to discharge
Families which are poor, then for any devotion, for the which they were
chiefly instituted; and likewise that an infinite company of poor are kept
from marrying, least they should leave their children miserable: It seems that
the erecti^g of Seminaries in all professions, (which we have formerly
mentioned) should prevent this fear and the inco^uenie^ces which it breeds;
^etling them in such sort, as no one should want a retreat nor entertaynment
in serving the Public: whence would grow its increase, and the peace of
Families. These are the means to increase and multiply our own, by our own.

CHAP. 3. Of the increase of an Estate by the ^nion of another Man's to ours.
Diverse (...) to unite another man's to ours.
THe lawful means to draw another man's, and to unite it to our own, are of
many sorts* The Romans knew how to manage them with great wisdom and
dexterity. The first whereof they made use, was to draw and unite unto them the
people whom they had conque^^d; as they did them of Alba and the Sabins. The
second was to ruin the Neighbor Cities, and by this means force the
Inhabitants to retire to Rome. The third, to grant the right of Roman
Burgesses, to the greatest and most powerful of their Neighbors, uniting them
by this mea^es to their Estate, and binding them to the defense ther^of. The
fourth to treat equal alliances under the name of Society, as with the
Latins; or under the name of Friendship; as with the Kings of Egypt and Asia.
Protection of the weake^.
They have also made use to increase their Estate by the protection of the
weaker; as they did taking that of Capoua against the Samnites, and of Messina
against Hieron and the Carthaginians.

Some Princes of our time have made good use of this means, having changed the
protection into an absolute Seignoury, some under color of the disloyalty of
the Anones; others by the consent of the Auories themselves; Some upon
pretext, that they had not been satisfied, certain sums of money which they
had employed for the Defense thereof: And some for the only consideration of
conueniencie, and to serve for a defense to their Estate.

The Romans have also made use for their increase, of the benefits of Kings,
their Friends, and Allies, Gifts and benefits.
who have made them heirs of their Kingdom by Testament, as A^talus King of
Asia did; and Anichomede King of Bythinia. The Genois had Pera in gift from
Michael Paleologue Emperor of Constantinople. Cabo Ioanin, likewise Emperor
of Constantinople, gave Metillin to Francis Cataguse, a Genois. The Venetians
had Veggia from John Phano; Francis Forse had Sauonne from Lewis the Eleventh.
The Emperor Frederick the third, gave Modena and Rhegium to Borso Duke of
Ferrara: The French Kings have had Dauphinie by the Donation of Humbert the
last Dauphin; and Prouenc^ by the Testament of Charles of Aniou the last Earl
of Prouence.

Other Princes have enlarged their Estate in purchasing from their Neighbors
that which lay convenient for them, there being no Traffic more beneficial,
nor more honorable to a Prince, then to purchase that which cannot be valued.
Pope Clement the sixth, took Auignon and the County of Venice, in payment of
the arrerages due by Ioane the first, Queen of Naples, and Countess of
Prouence, in regard of the pention which she ought for Sicily; Others have
written for the Realm of Tunis. Sforse Attendulo had Catigola from Pope John
the thirteenth. The Florentins had Arrezo from the Seignour of C^sse, for forty
thousand Florens of Gold; and Liuorne from Thomas Fregose for one hundred and
twenty thousand Ducats. They have also purchased Cortona for Ladislaus King of
Naples, and Pisa from Gabriel Visconte.

Some have taken their Neighbors Estate in Mortgage, (...)
the which lying conveniently for them, they have (...) restored, the
i^g^gement being past into a mere alienation. The Electors of the Empire, sold
their voices to the Emperor Charles the fourth, to choose his Son ^e^eselaus
King of the Romans, for one hundred thousand Crowns a piece, the which the
Emperor being unable to pay, he engaged unto them sixteen imperial Towns,
the which they have ever since en^oyed with the Title of Sovereignty. Jews the
Eleauenth of France, held in Mortgage the County of Ro^sillo^, from John King
of Aragon for four hundred thousand Crowns, the which King Charles the Eight
yielded up afterward for nothing: whereby he lost an occasion to enlarge his
Territories: But he had a better conscience then the Florentins, who retained
Borgo Di San Sepulchro, which Pope Eugenius the Fourth had pawned unto them for
five and twenty thousand Crowns. The Polonians retain Liuenia by engagement,
for six hundred thousand Crowns, which they disbursed in the War made for
the Tenton Order, against the Duke of Musco^ie, in the Year 1558. But since
the War was ended, they neither speak of re-embur^ment nor restitution.

By Marriages and Al^iances the Prince may likewise enlarge his Estate, the
house of Austria, which comes from the Earls of Asourge in Suisserland, who
were about four hundred years since of little account, have by this means
increased in Estate, as we see at this day: That is to say, by the Marriage of
Itha, Heir to Raoul of P^ulendorfe; of Bergantia, with Albert of A^burge
Sir^amed the Rich; of Het^ngis Heir to ^lrich Liburg, Landgraue of Alsacie,
with (...) called the Wise, Son to Albert the Rich; of Elizabeth Heir of
Aus^rea, Carnithia, Tirol, and (...) with the Emperor Albert the first; of
Mary the Heir of Burgo^dy, Flanders, Brabant, and other Provinces of the
Netherlands, with the Emperor Maximillion the first; Of Ioane the Heir of
Castille, Aragon, Sicily, and Naples, with Philip Archduke of Austrea; Of
Anne, the Heir of Hungary and Bohemia, with the Emperor Ferdinand, Brother to
Charles the Fifth: And of Isabel of Portugal, Mother to Philip the Second, King
of Spain, with Charles the Fifth. This example shall suffice to verify the
increase of Estates in a Prince by this means. Adoption is another kind of
portion, by means whereof they of Aniou, Adoption.
and afterward they of Aragon have been made Kings of Naples and Sicily,
having been adopted by Ioane.

The Polonians have enlarged their Estate by the election of their Kings,
Election.
choosing them among the neighbor Princes who had their Estate near unto
them: and so they of the house of Iagellon being called to govern their
Estate, they have wrought so as they have joined Liuonia unto it, whereof they
of Iagellon were Dukes, and in making the Nobillity of Prusia, and Podolia,
equal to that of Polonia, they have increased and assured their Estate with
these two Provinces; But to return to the Election, if it be a Prince which
seeks by this means to increase himself, Considerations necessary for a
Prince which desires to make himself great by Election.
he must not so much rely upon the inclination of the people, and the
considerations which they may have for their private advantage; but he must
bring that which may assist and help him in this pursuit, as Money, Force,
and Intelligences: Especially if there be Competitors, who are to make use of
the like means, and that the affairs and persons are thereunto disposed.

The ordinary course in the Election of Popes, is to give their voice to that
Cardinal which is most in credit, joining thereunto the consideration of
private Interest, of Friendship, and the remembrance of Bonds for benefits
received, with hope to be favored for the same election by him to whom he
gives his voice, if he happens to fa^^e of it. But as they which run a Race,
many times hinder one another, and whilst they strive, ^ third man gets to the
Mark before them; so commonly we see, that they whom they think should be
preferred before the rest, stick fast by the way: Wherefore they must not
only rely upon credit. Charles of Austrea, who after was chosen Emperor, to
attain unto this Dignity, he not only distributed two hundred thousand
Crowns among the Electors, (as King Francis had done for his part) but he
caused Leuies of Soldiers to be made in Germany, and his Army being ready, he
made it approach to Frankford, under color to keep the Election from being
forced; whereby he encouraged his own party, and caused them to yield unto
him which waue^ed, and he terrified Brandeburge, who held the party of France,
so as he durst not discover his intentions. As for practizes, Charles carried
himself more cunningly then Francis the first, for having first of all
labored for the exclusion of Francis, he had thereby assured himself of the
Electors, who he knew would never agree to choose one amongst themselves, by
reason of their emulatio^s and dissentions; and that opposing one against
another, the^ which should be excluded, would more willing^y give their voices
to a third man, then to him that had ^pposed against them. Contrariwise the
French Embassad^urs laboring not for the exclusion of Charles, but feeding
themselves with the hope which the Archbishop of Mentz, and the Marquess of
Brandeburge gave them, that this election would succeed to the benefit of King
Francis, remai^ed abused, wherein Pope Lee did in some sort help, yet contrary
to his intention: For although he desi^ed not that King Francis should be made
Emperor, no more then the King of Sp^ine, but some third person, he
entertained the first with hope, to the end that when he should see himself
wholly excluded, despite should make him employ his practizes against the King
of Spain in favor of some Germans, and that having purchased no credit with
him, he might not grow distasted, but might then favor this design openly.

We will therefore conclude, that in every Election the first consideration
must be, to labor for the exclusion of Competitors; being certain that many
will sooner agree for the exclusion of one, then they will for the Election of
another; and yet engaging them by this means to offend the Competitors, you
bind them to think no more of them. But if many agree to reject you, you must
have recourse to time, and delay the Election as much as may be, to the end
they may grow weary and separate themselves.

CHAP. 4. Of the increase of an Estate by Conquest.
But the most ordinary means to enlarge an Estate, is by Conquest: And to
attain unto it you must know how to attempt it, to make war and to avoid
it. Of the enterprise of War.
For the Enterprise of war, you must fly two things: Injustice and rashness.
To the end the War may be just, he that undertakes it must be a Sovereign,
and the cause and end must be just. The just causes to make War are our own
defense, and that of our Friends: The just causes of a War.
the revenge of our injuries and theirs: The just pretentions we may have to an
Estate, and our Divines add not only the defense of our Religion, but its
advancement and propagation by the way of Arms, and some the extirpation and
rooting out of a contrary: But others hold that War is a bad means to plant
piety.

As for rashness he must likewise avoid it: and for this effect before he
resolve to war, A War must be undertaken with discretion, and not ^ashly.
he must see either some apparent profit, or that he is forced by some great
necessity, but above all things before he undertakes it, he must assure his
Estate both within and without. Within, in giving contentment to his subjects,
justifying his taking Arms, and making them to allow of it, to the end that if
need be, they may assist him: without in renewing the Leagues with such as may
assist us, or annoy our Enemies, or with those that may succor them, diuerting
them from their Friendship. They must also resolve, whether is most profitable,
either to make war by Sea, or by Land, or by both, and in what place. Wherein
although there be no general Rule, yet it would be of great advantage to
strike rather at the head, then at the arms or legs; and at the place where
the Head of the State remains, then at any part more remote. As likewise he
must consider the place where the Enemy fears most to be invaded. The which
the French unto this day, (in the Wars which they have had with the
Spaniards) have little observed. For by many examples it may be verified, that
the thing which the Spaniards have feared most, was left the French should
invade him by Spain. King Ferdinand of Aragon, although he were invaded by the
County of Rou^illon, and was then stronger then the French, yet he would not
entertayne the War upon this frontier, as Guschardin says. And the same
Author writes, that the said King having taken Navarre, more by the amazement
which the English forces gave, then by his own, he would proceed no farther;
holding it no discretion to begin a War on the other side of the Mountains
with the French King, least he should remain in the subjection of the people
and great men of Spain, who being armed within the Country, might have sought
to advance their own Estate: And therefore seeing the forces of France turn
toward Italy, ^ee dismissed his Army which was upon the frontier of Navarre,
without inuading France as he had promised to his Colleagues, being united for
the defense of Italy against King Francis the first.

It serves for no purpose to pretend to the contrary, the bad success of the
voyages of Perpignean and Navarre by the French: For in effect there is no
History which does not attribute that misfortune to the want of foresight and
negligence of our Kings, and to the bad conduct of their Ministers: For admit
they should not find victuals sufficient in Spain to entertain their Army,
yet France which ioynes to this Frontier, is not so needy, nor so far off,
but by Sea or Land they might be easily relieved, and Spain on that side being
more barren, it is certain that the want will be greater for the Spaniard then
for the French.

But to return to general considerations, they must foresee and provide for
all the inconveniences which may happen in such an Enterprise, waighing
exactly, and comparing our forces with those of the Enemy. And for that a
Prince does seldom conquer by force only, he must observe if there be in the
Estate which he means to invade, any of those defects which is said might
serve for the ruin of Estates, to the end he may make use of them.

To make Warr^, A consideration to avoid War.
he must have recourse to Military wisdom and judgment, which deserves a
more ample discourse, and therefore I will now leave it. But to avoid War,
one of the principal considerations is, to embrace a fit time to treat a
Peace to his advantage: And therefore he must not have an obstinate desire
wholly to conquer a Province, what hope soever good Fo^^une has given him, but
he must study how to make profit of his advantages, and to assu^^ that by
peace which he has conquered: In imitation of the Turk who holding this
Maxim has never restored any thing of Importance which he has gotten; but
all remaining in his possession, in less then three hundred years he has
built an Empire fearful to all his Neighbors.

But the consideration a Prince ought to have in his increase, is that he make
his profit of it; it many times falling out, that if an Estate newly conquered,
be not governed with great discretion and Judgment, it does rather weaken, then
make the new conqueror more powerful, especially if this increase, ministers
matter of jealousy to the Neighbor Princes: For thence grow many designs and
Leagues against him. Thus drawing into consideration the advantages of a
conquest, he must likewise have a care of the means to maintain and preserve
it, whereof we have formerly spoken.

FINIS.

