A TREATISE OF MAN'S IMAGINATIONS.

SHOWING

His natural evil thoughts:
His want of good thoughts:
The way to reform them.
Framed and preached By M. Will. Perkins.

Matthew. 12. 33. Either make the tree good, and his fruit good, or else make the
tree evil, and his fruit evil. PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the Vniuer
sitie of Cambridge. 1607.

And are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Crown by Simon
Waterson.

To the right worshipful S. Thomas Holcroft knight, with the virtuous Lady
Elizabeth his wife: grace, and peace.
THat weighty charge of Solomon (Right worshipful) to every son of wisdom,
for the Pro. 4. 23.
keeping of his heart above all watch and ward, may well persuade us, that some
matters of great importance depend thereon: Among many (because my gates may
not be great before so small a city) I will touch one. There is a strange
desire, not of earthly but of spiritual powers: after the possession of man's
heart: God says, Pro. 23. 26.
, my son give me thy heart; and to him indeed the right belongs: Yet thorough
man's transgressio^ Satan has got such hold thereof, that unless it be by
divine power he will not be kept out; and though we hear not Satan's voice,
yet his See Acts. 5. ^. Luke 22 3.
dealing bewraies his meaning, that above all things in man he desires the
heart. Once he strove about a dead man's body, Moses body, Jude 9.
but doubtless his purpose therein was to have set up an Idol for himself in
the hearts of the living. But what is man's heart that it should be so desired?
Surely in substance little, but for employment almost infinite: It is a
Treasure Mat. 12. 35.
whereout man brings all his actions good, or evil: It is a temple wherein is
either the Ark of God, Hinc fons boni, and peccandi origo. Hieron. ad
demetriad.
or Dagon for the Devil: Yea, it is a August. in p^. 148.
palace wherein dwells, and a throne whereon sits either Christ, or
Satan, the Psalm. 24. 7.
king of glory, or the Ephesians. 6. 2*
prince of darkness: and Qui, posse di^ ipse imperabit ibid. Aug.
he that keeps possession will there exercise dominion. Neither may we think
that one heart wilsuffer both these; Mat. 6. 24.
no man can serve two masters; God will have all or none; Quia ^it ibi p^rs
aliqua Diabolo discedit Dens iratus; and possidet to^u^ diabolus. August in Ioh.
if any part be shared from him, in high dispeasure he leaves the rest, and so
the whole falls to the devil. Now since the case stands thus with man's heart,
does it not nearly concern every one to know his own estate in this behalf:
to wit; what kind of treasury, whose Temple; whose palace and throne his heart
is, that if all be well he may rejoice, and so keep it for the Lord; if
otherwise, then seek redress betime.

To this purpose serves this present treatise: wherein as in a glass may first
be seen, the fearful state of man's natural heart, The sum of this Treatise.
full frought with evil thoughts, void of good consideration and so most fit
for Satan: Then after do those blessed means appear, whereby man's natural
heart may be reformed, to become the temple of God, the seat of grace, and a
Cant. 6. 1.
bed of spices for the welbe loved to feed upon. And these are points of that
importance, that whosoever neglects them, may say farewell grace; and bid
adue to god himself: for in the heart, if at all in man, ^ust these be seated.

Now the publishing hereof being committed unto me, I present the same unto
your worships, and under your protection desire to commend it to the church of
God. It would too much enlarge my gates to annex the manifold reasons which
move me to this choice on your behalf; only this I pray; (that seeing it is
the first fruits of my labors in this kind wherein I had full power of free
choice in my dedicatio^) it may intimate to you both, mine unfeigned hearts
desire of that ever-lasting good I wish unto your souls; and also testify in
part my thankful mind for your manifold favors to me, and mine who depend upon
you.

Now God Almighty bless your worships with your children and family,
according to your several necessities of his mercy and goodness, for soul and
body, in this life and for ever. Cambridge. Aug. 20. 1606.

Your worships in the Lord Thomas Piersonn.

To the Reader.
KNow (good reader) that for my furtherance in the publishing of this tract at,
I had the authors owns draught of the plat-forme of it; beside two perfect
copies of all his sermons. I have for plainness sake divided it into Chapters
and sections: for the better effecting whereof, I was constrained to transpose
two of the uses, otherwise I doubt not, but every one that heard it preached,
will judge me to have dealt faithfully with the God^y author. The Lord bless
it to thy good.

The Contents of this treatise.
CHAP. I.
The unfolding of the text whereon the treatise is grounded. page 1.
CHAP. II.
The Illness of man's natural thoughts: and how they may be known. page 19.
CHAP. III.
Man's natural evil thoughts concerning God. page 30.
CHAP. IV.
Man's natural thoughts concerning his neighbor page 101.
CHAP. V.
Man's natural thoughts concerning himself page 122.
CHAP. VI.
Man's natural want of good thoughts or consideration; with the fruit thereof.
page 152.
CHAP. VII.
The use of the doctrine of man's natural Imaginatio^s. page 165.
CHAP. VIII.
Rules for the reformation of evil thoughts. page 184.
CHAP. IX.
Of spiritual considerations concerning God. page 201.
CHAP. X.
Of spiritual consideration concerning our selves. page 218.
Genesis 8. 21. And the Lord said in his heart, I will henceforth curse the earth
no more for man's cause: for the Imagination of man's heart is evil even from
his youth.
CHAP. I.
The unfolding of the text, by way of preparation to the Treatise.
IN the former part of this chapter, Moses has faithfully related the drying
of the waters after the stood; and Noah's sacrificing unto God, with Gods
acceptance thereof. Now in this verse and the next, he records such laws and
decrees as God made with Noah touching the restoration of nature perished by
the flood; as well for the sparing of the creatures from such like destruction,
as for the continuance of his providence in needful times and seasons, meet
for their future preservation. These words contain the first of these laws:
wherein we may observe three points; Moses his preface to this law; the law it
self; and the reason thereof.

I. The preface; And the Lord said in his heart: These words must not be taken
properly, for God has not an heart as man has, neither speaks he as man
does; but hereby is meant, that God determined and set down with himself this
law and decree.

In this phrase of speech, note this one thing: If it had pleased him, God
could have spoken to man by a voice, the hearing whereof would have confounded
him: but as here we see, he does abase himself, and as it were lay aside his
honor and might, and speaks unto us after the manner of men, even to the
capacity of the most simple. Which teaches us, that it is the good will and
pleasure of God, that not only the learned, but even the unlettered and most
ignorant should know and understand the holy Scripture: for else he would never
have penned them in a phrase and style that does so well accord to the
capacity of the simple.

II. Point. The decree it self: I will henceforth curse the ground no more for
man's cause. This is the peremptory law of God touching the restoration of
nature: wherein are contained two things: first what God has done: secondly,
what God will not do hereafter. The thing that God has done is, the cursing
of the earth: for he says, I will curse no more: implying that he once cursed
it.

In this observe, that God may truly be said to be a cause of curses, and to
curse his creatures: not only for that he does ordain and decree all curses,
but also because he inflicteth them upon the creatures: yet so as the same is
always most justly deserved by sin, before it be inflicted of the Lord. And
so must Gods cursing of the earth be understood in this place, as a fruit of
his wrath for the sin of man: accordingly God is said directly to Isa. 45. 7.
create evil, because whatsoever afflictions, curses, and punishments are in
the world, they are ordained and inflicted by God upon the creatures for the
sin of man.

This plainly confuteth the common opinion of ignorant people, who hold that
all good things, as peace, wealth, joy, and felicity, come from God: but all
evil, as affliction, calamity, curses, and judgments, come from the devil,
and God only suffers the^. This is a most erroneous and blind conceit,
which fills many a soul with much anguish and impatience: for what comfort
can he have in the time of trouble, that is persuaded it comes wholly from
the devil, and the hand of God is not therein? We therefore must learn to
reform this opinion, and know that crosses, and troubles come from God. This
David knew well, and therefore when Shemi cursed him, and railed on him, he
forbad Ab^shai to touch him, because (says he) 2. Sam. 16. 10.
what if (or, it may be) God has bid him curse David: so Joseph tells his
brethren, who most traitorously sold him into Egypt, that Genesis 45. 5.
the Lord sent him before them.

Secondly, here consider the impulsive cause that moved God to curse the earth
by a flood: it was not in the earth, but in men: I will henceforth curse the
earth no more for man, that is, for man's sins. In the new Testament there
are two especial sins recorded for which God sent this curse: first, carnal
security. They were choked with worldly cares, and drowned in earthly
pleasures: in the days of Noah, they did eat, and drink, marry, and give in
marriage, Matthew. 24. 38. Secondly, the contempt of the Gospel in the
ministry of Noah, who preached an hundred and twenty years unto them, while
the Arc was in building, but they were disobedient, as 1. Pet. 3. 2^.
S. Peter says, following their own pleasures and delights. Whereby it
appears that these two sins, Security, and contempt of the Gospel, are most
grievous sins: for these brought destruction not only upon all mankind (Noah
and his family excepted) but even upon all creatures that lived by breath.

Now look as these sins were in the old world, even so are they rife in this
last age; according to the prophecy of our savior Christ, Luk 17. 26.
as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the days of the son of
man: and as this is the state of the whole world, so it is the state of this
our Church; most men are drowned in the pleasures of this world, and choked
with the cares thereof: for howsoever they will hear the Gospel preached yet
few apply their hearts to believe the same, showing forth the power thereof by
repentance from dead works, and amendment of life in new obedience. But we must
know, that if these two sins brought a curse, even destruction upon the old
world, then no doubt they will bring a fearful curse upon this age, though not
by water, yet some other way that shall countervaile the flood, and therefore
we must lay these things to our hearts, that unless we abandon security, and
worldly lusts and withal do repent and believe at the preaching of the
gospel, we shall see that gods heavy curse will fall upon us; for if we match
the old world in sin, we must not look to come behind them in judgments.

The second thing in this decree is, what God will not do hereafter, Namely:
curse the earth any more: this must be understood of that particular curse,
which the Lord laid on the earth by waters, when he drowned the world: for the
general curses that were laid upon the ground, and on mankind for Adams sin,
remain still, and shall not be taken quite away till the end of the world: so
that the meaning of this law is, that the Lord will no more drown the whole
earth for the sin of man by a flood.

Here then we see the cause why the sea being as raging and stirring as ever
it was, does notwithstanding keep it self within it bounds, and not ouerflow
the world: and why the clouds being as full of water, as ever they were do
not power down more floods upon the earth to destroy it. Surely it is by
virtue of this particular law, and decree of God, whereunto the sea and clouds
become obedient, I will henceforth curse the earth no more. And here we have
just occasion to take knowledge and veiw of our own wretched and damnable
estate how we are sold under sin: for howsoever we were created blessed, and
happy, yet by our fall in Adam we are become far worse then any earthly
creature; for each creature in his kind, as the sun, the moon, and stars,
the sea, and clouds, and all other obey the commandment of God: but man of
all creatures having laws given him of God to keep, rebelleth in breaking the
same, and to him it is meat and drink by nature to live in the transgression
of gods commandments: Thus by comparing our selves with the brute creatures,
we may learn to humble our selves, and to be abashed when we see them which
were made to serve us, to go before us in obedience to the laws of our
creator.

III. Point. The reason of gods decree, in these words; for the Imagination of
man's heart is evil, even from his youth. At the first this reason may seem
very strange, that God should no more curse the earth for man, because the
Imagination of his heart is evil; In all likelihood God should have said the
contrary, I will still curse the earth because the Imaginations of man's heart
are evil; for so he says, Chap. 6. verse 5. 6. that seeing all the
Imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart were only evil continually,
therefore he would destroy the man from the earth, and from man to beast, and
every creeping thing: How can both these stand together? Ans. Thus; In the
sixth chapter the Lord says, he will once destroy the world by water, because of
the wickedness of the Imaginations of man^ heart: and here he says, he will not
proceed to curse the earth again and again by the same punishment, because
the Imaginations of man's heart are evil, even from his youth; as if he should
say, I have once drowned the world for the wickedness of man's inventions, but
if I should thus proceed to deal with man according to the wicked imagination
of his heart, I must bring every year a new flood upon the earth, because I
see the frame of man's heart is evil continually.

Here then observe, that God in the preservation of mankind does temper and
moderate his justice by mercy: for if he should deal according to man's
deserts he should every day bring curses upon him; yea, so soon as a man is
borne he should be destroyed; but God deals not so rigorously, he mingleth
mercy with justice, whereby the whole frame of heaven and earth, the state of
man and all societies do stand: That which Habacuke prayed for, Hab. 32.
In justice, or wrath remember mercy, the Lord has performed ever since the
flood, yea since the fall of Adam.

There be three great and weighty causes, which moved God to temper justice
with mercy for the preservation of mankind and other creatures: first that
hereby he might show his patience and long suffering toward the vessels of
wrath, (as the Apostle Romans ^. ^2.
speaks) that is, toward such as will not repent, that at the last day they
may be most justly condemned: Secondly, that there may be a company of men
upon earth which may worshipe God; for God has special care of his own
glory among men, and therefore tempers justice with mercy in their
preservation, that they might glorify him: Psalm. 130. verse. 4. there is
mercy, or pardon with thee, that thou may be feared; that is, whereas (oh
Lord) thou might in justice throw all men to hell suddenly, yet in mercy
thou pardonest the sins of some, for this end that they might worship thee:
fear being put for worship and obedience. Thirdly, and principally, that the
elect, and chosen of God might be gathered; for God in his eternal counsel,
and decree has appointed and set down a certain number of men unto whom he
will give eternal life, and for their cause does he spare the whole world
from daily destruction: but when that number shall be accomplished, then
shall heaven, and earth go together, and the world shall be no more.

And here by the way, this third cause of the continuance of nature, must teach
us our duty; to wit, that seeing it pleases God in mercy to give us liberty
to live a space of time in this world, some twenty, some thirty, ^ome
forty or fifty years, and that for this end that herein we might be
fitted for his kingdom, when as in the rigor of his justice he might have
cast us to hell in our mothers womb, or so soon as we were borne, we
therefore must be careful not to despise this long-suffering and patience of
God, but rather labor in the fear of God, that it may become 2. Pet. 3. 15.
salvation unto us, by our conscionable endeavor in all such means unto the
end, as he has sanctified for the working of the graces of life in the
hearts of his children. And thus much for the reason in general.

CHAP. II.
Sect. 1. The illness of man's natural cogitations.
THat we may the better perceive in this reason the state of man in respect of
his natural Imaginations, the words are more particularly to be unfolded. For
the Imaginations of man's heart, etc. The heart in Scripture is taken sundry
ways: sometimes for that fleshie part of man in the middle of the body, which
is the fountain of vital blood: sometime, for the soul of man: sometime, for
the faculties of the soul: and sometime for the middle of any thing, as Psalm.
46. ^
the heart of the sea, Mat. 12. 44
the heart of the earth, that is, the middle thereof. Here it is taken for the
understanding faculty of the soul, whereby man uses reason: which S. Paul
calls Ephesians. 4. 23.
the spirit of the mind.

By Imaginations, he means the frame, or framing of the heart. And this is
taken two ways: of some, for the natural disposition of the understanding
after the fall of man: of others, for that which the mind and understanding by
thinking frames, plotteth, and deuiseth; that is, for the effect thereof. We
may take it both ways, yet I rather approve the latter: for Chap. 6. 5. the
Lord says, He will once destroy all flesh; and gives this reason, for the
frame and thought of man's heart is evil continually. Where by thoughts or
Imaginations can nothing else be meant, but that which is devised and plotted
in the thoughts of man's heart: so Solomon speaking of an heart which God
hates, says, it is framing or thinking thoughts of wickedness. Prove. 6. 18.

By man's heart, we must not understand the heart of some particular persons, as
of those that lived in the old world alone, but of all men generally: man
being put for whole mankind.

Is evil, that is, it imagines, and thinks that which is against the law
of God: From his childhood; that is, so soon as he begins to think, to
reason or conceive of any thing, so soon does he imagine and conceive that
which is evil: so that the whole meaning is this, The mind and understanding
part of man is naturally so corrupt, that so soon as he can use reason: he
does nothing but imagine that which is wicked, and against the law of God. The
words thus explaned contain in them two maine points touching the frame of
man's heart by nature. The first is this;

The imagination and conceit of every man is naturally evil.

This appears not only in this place, but else where. Romans 8. 5. The wisdom
of the flesh is (not an enemy, but emnitie against God. Again, such as the
fountain is, such are the streams that flow thence; But our mind and
understanding the fountain of our thoughts, is by nature sinful; Tit. 1. 15.
To the impure their minds, and consciences are defiled; And again, 2. Cor 3.
5.
of our selves we are not able to think a good thought; and therefore the
thoughts that come from thence must needs also be corrupt: Man's imagination
stands in thoughts; the understanding devises by thinking: And these thoughts
of the Imagination are all naturally wicked: Math. 13. 19.
from the heart: (says Christ) proceed evil thoughts: and Solomon says, the
thoughts of the wicked (as all men are by nature) are an abhom, nation to the
Lord.

Sect. 2. How the natural thoughts of man may be known.
Seeing that natural Imagination is practiced by evil thoughts, we must
something consider of the natural thoughts of man: And herein handle these two
points: F^rst, whether the thoughts of man may be known; secondly, what the
natural thoughts of man be.

For the first; there are two ways to know man's thoughts: either directly
without means, or indirectly by means. The first way is proper to God alone:
for no creature in heaven or earth can immediately and directly know the
thoughts of man: this Solomon confesses in his notable prayer to God, 1. king,
8. 39. Thou only know the thoughts of all the children of men. Ierem. 17.
9. The heart is deceitful and wicked above all things; who can know it? ver.
10. I the Lord search the heart, and try thereines.

The second way to know men's thoughts is indirectly, and by means: which be
three, by instinct from God; by revelation from the Scripture; and by signs.
First, by an extraordinary instinct: so did ^. king. 6. 9. ^2.
Elisha disclose the king of Syrias counsel to the king of Israel: and by the
same means, he told his servant 2. king. 5. 26.
Gehezi what he did behind his back, when he took gifts of Naaman the
Assirian. And so did Act. ^. ^.
Peter tell Ananias and Saphyra of their false conueyances with the money that
they took for their possession. And yet here we must understand that when God
revealed these secret thoughts to men, it was only in some things at some
times, and for some special causes: whereupon Nathan was feign to revoke his
counsel, which he gave to David for the building of the house of God, 1.
Chron. 17. 2. 4.
when he knew the will of God more perfectly. And so was Elias deceived, when
he said he was left alone, of all Israel that served God: for 1. king. 19. 1^.
God told him he had reserved seven thousand, that never bowed the knee to
Baal, which Elias knew not. Secondly, men's thoughts may be known by Revelation
from Scripture: for therein that spirit speaks evidently which knows the
frame of the heart: and hence it is, that in the ministry of this word the
thoughts of natural men, are made manifest. 1. Corint. ^4. 25. Thirdly, man's
thoughts are known by signs; as speeches, and actions: thus Peter knew the
Act. 8. 21,
heart of Simon Magus; and Paul the heart Act. 13. 10.
of Elimas. And thus may any man know the thoughts of another, eue^ as he may
know the tree by his fruit, and the fountain by his stream.

Besides these three are two other means added whereby to know men's thoughts:
one by the Papists, and an other by the Astrologians. The Papists say, the
Saints in heaven know men's thoughts, not directly of themselves, but by
reflectio^ in the glass of the Trintie. But this is a mere forgery of their
own, which Isaia never knew, saying thus of the Saints departed; Isa 6. 3. 16.
Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not, but thou Lord art our
redeemer. And the Saints under the altar cry, Rev. 6. 10.
How long Lord, how long will thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that
dwell on the earth? giving us to understand that they are not so sharp
sighted, as by the glass of the Trinity to see into the day of the last
Judgment, and therefore not into the thoughts of men's hearts. So that there are
only three ways to know the thoughts of men: and so they may be known.

CHAP. III.
Of man's natural thoughts concerning God.
Having found that the thoughts of man may be known; we come now to see what
be the natural cogitations of every sinful man. Although they be almost
infinite in themselves, yet they may be reduced to three heads. They either
concern God, or a man's neighbor, or else, a man's own self. Of this thought;
There is no God.

Touching God, there be in man four capital evil thoughts. First, That there
is no God: which as it is first in order, so it is the most notorious, and vile
damnable thought that can be in a natural man. And that this is one of the
thoughts of man naturally, appears by the express testimony of God
himself, who knows the thoughts of man better then man does. Psalm. 10. ^.
The wicked thinks always there is no God. And again, Psa. 14. 1.
The fool has said in his heart, there is no God.

Touching this thought, observe these four points. First, in whom it is:
Secondly, how a man by thinking should deny God: Thirdly, what is the fruit of
this thought, and fourthly the examination of our hearts touching this thought.

For the first: 1. In whom this thought is.
we must not think that this wicked thought is only in some notorious and
heinous sinners; but it is in the corrupt mind and Imagination of every man
that comes of Ada^ naturally, not one excepted, save Christ alone: so the
fool of whom David Psalm. 14.
speaks must be taken, Psalm. 10.
not for some special sinner, but for every man that lives uncalled and
without repentance, how civil so ever his life be other ways; though some
shame restrain his tongue from uttering it, yet by nature his corrupt heart is
prone to think there is no God This is made evident by S. Paul, Romans 3.
who going about to prove that al men are sinners by nature, aleadgeth for his
proof diverse testimonies of Scripture and particularly out of these two
Psalms before cited: whereby he gives us to understand, that the fool there
mentioned, must be understood of every natural man. But it will be said, that
it is ingrafted in man's nature to hold and think there is a God, and therefore
every man does not deny God in his heart. Ans. We must know that these two
thoughts, There is a God, and there is no God, may be, and are both in one and
the same heart: the same man that by the light of nature thinks there is a
God, may by that corruption and darkness of mind that came by Adams fall,
think there is no God: for two contraries being not in the highest degree, may
be in one and the same subject: as light and darkness in the same house:
heat, and cold in the same body.

II. Point How does a man by thinking deny God in his heart? How a man by
thinking denies God.
Ans. Two ways first, by turning the true God into an idol of man's brain:
secondly, by placing somewhat that is not God in the room of the true God. For
the first, the Imagination of every man naturally, without further light from
the word of God, does turn the true God into an idol: and therefore Paul
says of the Galatians, that before, their vocation, Gal. 4. 8.
they did service to them which were no gods; and of the Ephesians, that Ephesians.
2. 1^.
they were without God in the world: even because they did not in their minds
conceive of God aright, and accordingly worship him, though the wiser sort
amongst them did acknowledge one God the creator of heaven and earth. And
therefore David says plainly, that Psalm. 96. 5.
all the gods of the Gentiles are Idols, or vanities: nay, as the Apostle
says, devils. 1, Cor. 10. 20. That which the Gentiles sacrifice, they
sacrifice unto devils and not unto God.

Now man's mind turns the true God into an Idol, by three notorious thoughts,
which are the root of many damnable sins in this life, first, by thinking
that God is not present in all places, whereby god is robbed of his attribute
of Omni-prese^ce: for the true God being infinite must be in all places; which
when the heart of man denies, it imagines God to be such a one as he is not,
and so turns him into an Idol; and that man naturally thinks thus of God
the scripture is plain, Job. 22. 12. 13. wicked men are brought in speaking of
God, as though he were shut up in heaven, and had nothing to do in the world:
Is not God on high in the heaven? and behold the height of the stars how high
they are. How should God know? can he judge, etc. so the Psalmist expresses
the thoughts of the wicked in their practice of sin, God hides away his
face, and will never see: and the Lord shall not see. Psalm. 94. 7. yea they who
seek the deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, whose works are in
darkness, say, who sees us? who knows us? Isay. 29. 15. Secondly, by
thinking there is no providence of God, whereby he orders and disposes all
things in the world particularly: That this is an other natural thought the
Psalmist shows plainly, bringing in the wicked man, saying thus of God, God
has forgotten, he hides his face, and he shall not see. And the prophet
Zephanie brings in the sinner speaking thus of God, that he does neither
good, nor evil. Thirdly, by thinking there is no justice in God; this is done
when men Imagine with themselves, that albeit they proceed in the practice of
sin, yet God will not punish them according to the threatening of his word; If
we doubt whether such an Imagination be in man's heart read Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20.
where Moses directly forbids the people to say in their hearts. I shall have
peace though I walk in the stubbornes of my heart; this is that Psalm. 1^. 3.
blessing of a man's self in sin, which David charge upon the covetous, and
wicked. Thus they sin that Amos 6. 3. Amos. 9. 10.
put far away the evil day; and say, the evil shall not come. Hereby God is
robbed of his Justice, and made a God all of mercy such a one as will not
punish sin, and so indeed is made an Idol of man's brain.

The second way whereby a man denies god in thought is by placing in the room
of the true God, an Idol of his own brain: This men do, by thinking some
other thing beside the true God to be their chiefest good: thus voluptuous men
make Phil. 3. 19.
their belly their God: and covetous men make Coloss. 3. 5.
riches their God by placing their felicity in pleasure, and in riches: for
look what a man thinks to be the best thing in the world for him, that is
his GOD, though it be the devil himself, or any other creature. And for this
cause is the devil called the God of the world, 1. Cor. 4. 4.
because the men of this world judge their own courses, wherein they serve the
devil, the best thing in the world for them, yea far better then the
service of god, and therefore give their hearts thereto: for affection follows
opinion, and that which a man affects most, he must needs think best of;
and therefore what a man affects most, that makes he to become his God, so
that judging other things beside the true God to be best for him, he must needs
place the^ in the room of the true God, and so in his imagination donie God.

III. Point. The fruit of this thought.
What is the fruit of this thought: for thereby we shall best judge, what a
cursed thing this is, to think there is no God: This thought brings forth
the most notorious sins that can be, eue^ Atheism it self; which is a sin
whereby men sundry ways deny God: And it is twofold, either in practice, or
in judgment.

Atheism in practice is that sin whereby men deny God in their deeds, lives,
and conversations; and so declare this thought. This is a most horrible sin,
and a huge burden to the whole earth; and yet many that live in the bosom of
the Church are foully tainted heerewith. This Atheism in practice has three
special branches: Hypocrisy, Epicurisme, and Witchcraft. Hypocrisy is a
sin whereby men worship the true God, but yet in a false manner, giving unto
God the outward action, and hold back from him the true worship of the heart.
Epicurisme is a sin whereby men contemn God, and give themselves wholly to
their pleasures, spending their time in eating, drinking, and other delights
and not seeking or fearing God: and this is the sin of the richer sort in
this age: Witchcraft or Magic is that sin whereby men renounce the true God
and betake themselves to the aid, counsel, and help of the devil, either by
himself, or in his instruments: This is a large sin, and a great part of
Atheism, and many are taynted with this sin, either because they are
practisioners of witchcraft, or else do seek help of such.

Atheism in judgment is that sin, whereby in opinion and persuasion of
heart men deny God. And this likewise has three degrees: first, when men hold
and accordingly worship the true God, creator of heaven and earth, but yet so
as they conceive of, and worship him otherwise then he has revealed himself
in his word. To this first degree we must refer the three great religions of
the Turk, of the Jew, and of the Papists: for as they stand at this day, they
are three great parts of Atheism.

The Turk worshippeth God the maker of heaven, and earth and likewise
reuerenceth Christ as man, acknowledging him to be a prophet, yea, a more
worthy prophet then his Mahomet; And yet his religion is Atheism: for he
co^ceaueth of god out of the trinity, and so worshippeth nothing but an Idol.

Again, the Religion of the Jews, at this day is a part of Atheism: for
howsoever they hold one God, and acknowledge the books of the old Testament
for the Scriptures of God, yet they worship not that God in Christ, and so
instead of the true God, frame an Idol in their own brain; for as Christ 1.
Ioh. 2. 23.
says, whosoever denies the son the same has (...) not the father, so that
they wanting Christ, and by consequent the father also, indeed and truly have
no God; but as Christ told the Samaritans John. 4. 22.
they worship they know not what.

Thirdly the Religion of the Papists at this day is a part of Atheism: we must
indeed distinguish it from the two former: for in word they acknowledge the
Trinity in unity, and unity in Trinity, and their doctrine of the union of
Christ's two natures in one person, is according to the scripture: But yet if we
mark the drift, and sequel of their doctrine in other points, we shall find
it to be close Atheism: As may be prooved by two reasons: first because the
true God who is the creator of heaven and earth, is infinite in Justice, and
mercy: But according to the doctrine of the Papists, God is not infinite in
Justice, and mercy: And therefore to them is not the true God: for first, Gods
Justice according to them is not infinite: for they teach that a man by his
own proper works of penance (which be finite and imperfect) may truly
satisfy god for the guils of temporal punishment. 1. Bellar. Lib. 7 de poenit.
c. 7.
Secondly, they make thou only of God imperfect by Rhem. on romans 8. 17. sect. 4.
^^pe^cing up the some with man's merits in the work of Redemption: for Gods
mercy is either every way mercy or no mercy, as Paul says. Romans 1. 6
If it be of grace it is no more of works, or else were grace no more grace,
and if it be of works it is no more grace, or else were work, no more work.
Secondly* the Christ of the Papists is a false Christ; this will appear by
plain reason out of their doctrine: for first they spoil Christ of his true
manhood by their doctrine of real presence, wherein they hold that Christ's
body is not only in heaven, but really and substantially in all places, where
the sacrifice of the mass is offered, thus they make it omnipotent, and so
quite take away the nature of a body. Secondly, they disgrade Christ from the
three offices of his mediatorship: first from his kingly office, by Rhem. on
ephesians. 1. 22. sect. 5.
placing the Pope in his Room, and stead, as his deputy in Christ's presence:
for they give power to the Pope to rule the Catholic Church, and to make
laws to bind men's consciences, which be things proper to Christ alone: where
in they do as much as if they should take the Crown from Christ's head, and
set it on the Popes: for to claim regencie in the presence of the lawful
prince is to proclaim rebellion against the prince; for commission of
vicegerencie cease in the presence of him that appoints it; now Christ is
always present with his Church, Math. 28. 20. And therefore the Pope by his
claim must needs thrust Christ out of his office. Secondly, from his priestly
office, which consists in satisfaction, and intercession: Christ's
satisfaction they nullify by Rhem on Romans 8. 17. sect. 4.
joining therewith the satisfaction of men's works, for thereby they make it
imperfect: And they rob him of his intercession by Rhem. on 2. Co. 1. 11.
sect. 3
communicating the same to Saints; yea, they exalt the virgin Marie far above
Christ in this work, for they pray her to ask the Father, to command Christ
her son by the authority of a mother, In officio be (...) Mari^.
to do thus, and thus, for them, and so make Christ her underling. Thirdly,
from his prophetical office, by making the Pope the infallible judge of all
controversies: avowing, that they rather desire to know the ancient
institution of Christian religion from the Popes mouth, in annot. sup. did.
40. c. s^ papa. Edit. Greg.
then from holy writ. Now thus robbing Christ of his offices, they make him
a false Christ: and so wanting the son, they cannot have the father, for he
3. Ioh. 2 23
that has not the son has not the father: and therefore popish religion
wanting the father and the son, cannot be a true religion, but mere
colored Atheism in judgment.

The second degree of Atheism in judgment is when men place some Idol in
rome of the true God, houlding the same for their God: thus did the Gentiles
sin in worshipping the son, and the moon, and the stars or other
creatures.

The third degree is, when a man does avouch, hold, and maintain that there
is no God at all; this is the highest degree of Atheism and the most notorious
sin that can be, and all such persons as maintain this cursed thought, are
unworthy the common breath of men: for if that man shall die the death, and
that worthily, who shall avouch his lawful prince to be no prince, how much
more ought he to die the death, though he had a thousand lives that shall
affirm the true God, to be no God? Thus we see the fruits of this evil
thought whereby the haynousnes of it does plainly appear.

IV. Point. The examination of our own hearts touching this thought whether it
may be found among us or not: Examination of this thought.
doubtless every one will labor to clear himself hereof; And the reason
wherewith many do sooth up themselves is this, because they never felt in
themselves any such conceits as this, that there is no God. But we may easily
deceive our selves herein, for a man cannot always discern what be the
thoughts of his own heart: There be in man two kinds of cogitations, or as one
may say reasons: the first is a single cogitation, whereby a man simply
thinks, or knows, or judges this or that; and this is properly called the
mind: The other is a reflex cogitatio^ or reason, whereby a man judges that he
knows or thinks this or that; and it is commonly called Conscience. Now
since Adams fall, the conscience is corrupt by original sin, as be all other
powers of man's soul; whence it comes to pass, that conscience can not do
his duty in giving true testimony concerning man's Imaginations: but a man may
think evil, and yet his conscience not tell him: and therefore we may nor
say, because we feel not these evil thoughts in us; therefore we have them
not, or we are free from them. 3. Signs of this thought


But that we may the better examine our hearts, we must come to the signs
whereby this evil thought is best discerned. David in the 14. Psalm sets
down three signs hereof: first, v. 2. 3.
A disordered life: secondly, v. 4.
not calling on the name of God by prayer; thirdly, v. 6.
contemning of them that put their trust in God. Look where these are to be
found, there is this evil thought, That there is no God. Now if we examine
our selves by these signs, we shall find this wicked thought to be amonst us:
for first, many indeed are content to hear Gods word; but where is that man
that reformeth his life according to that he hears? Certain it is, as their
conscience can witness, few turn unto God unfeignedly, few do break of
their course in sinning. Now this unreformed life is an infallible token of
this damnable thought.

Secondly, the exercise of prayer and invocation on the name of God, is rare
among men: no doubt many a touched heart does every day unfeignedly call on God
for grace. but yet generally this is true: men go on from day to day, and from
year to year, and never pray unto God for supply of grace. Indeed men plead
for themselves, that they use to pray: for they say the Lords prayer: the
Creed, and the ten Commandments: but we must know; that with many this
practice is nothing, but a vain repetition of words; for prayer is an action
of the heart, and not the labor of the tongue, and lips only: so to say the
Lords prayer is not to pray, for the words thereof may be repeated with the
heart of an Atheist.

And thirdly the contempt of them that put their trust in God, is rise among
us: for who is so much scorned and reproched, as he that makes profession of
religion? Now may that complaint be justly taken up by the servants of God,
Isai. 8. 18. Behold, I, and the children whom the Lord has given me, are as
signs and wonders. And, He that refraines from evil, makes himself a pray to
the evil tongue. Isa. 59. 15. Yet let these scoffers know, what ever they be,
that seeds of Atheism do possess their souls.

To come yet more particularly to the trial of this thought in our selves:
Whosoever denies the presence of God denies God. Now let the conscience
answer, whether we be not afraid to sin in the presence of many mortal men,
and yet in the presence of God do make no bones thereof, so the eyes of men be
turned from us. Now what is this but either flatly to deny the presence of
God, or at least to yield more fear and reverence to men, then we do unto
God? Again what is the cause why men use oppression, and injustice, deceit,
and lying in their wordly affairs? Is it not because this thought of Atheism
does possess their hearts, that God regards not these outward things? Durst
men directly sin against God in seeking these outward blessings for natural
life, if they did rightly rely upon Gods providence, knowing every good gift
to come from his bountiful hand? Lastly, let the conscience speak, does not
thy heart while thou go on in sin, say thus unto thee, God is merciful, I
will heareafter repent, and so shall I escape punishment? If a man do well
observe his own heart, he shall find therein this vile thought, which directly
ouerturns the infinite justice of God, making him a God all of mercy, when as
indeed he is as well a God of Justice as of mercy. By all which it is more
then evident, that naturally this vile thought runs in man's heart, There is
no God.

Use. Hereby then we must learn to see what vile, miserable, and wretched
sinners we are in our selves; though we had no actual outward sins, yet this
damnable thought makes us accursed: If a man Eccles. 10. 12.
curse the king in his heart, the sin is so great, and heinous that the
fowls of heaven shall disclose it: How horrible then is this sin for a man in
his thought to curse God, the king of kings, and Lord of Lords? This therefore
must humble us in our selves before the Lord.

Again, hereby we must be admonished to use all good means whereby we may
come to see, and know not only the gross actual sins of our lives, but
especially this damnable thought of our hearts; few there be that do see it,
and therefore we must be earnest with our selves in searching our own hearts,
to find out this and such like abominations that be in us. And thus much for
the first evil thought.

Sect. 2. Of this thought; The word of God is foolishnes.
The second damnable thought of man's natural heart concerning God, is this;
The word of God is foolishness. This thought must principally be understood of
the Gospel, as S. Paul declares, saying, 1. Cor. 1. 2^.
It has pleased God by the foolishnes of preaching, to save them that believe:
where he calls the Gospel of Christ foolishnes, not that it was so indeed,
but because the unconverted v 23.
Corinthians, and other Grecians, judged the preaching of Christ crucified, the
most foolish thing in all the world. And in the next chapter he says, 1. Co^
2. 24.
The natural man, that is, he that is not effectually called, perceives not
the things of the spirit of God: to wit, that a man must repent of his sins,
and believe in Christ for the pardon of them, if he would be saved; they are
foolishnes unto him. Nicodemus answer to Christ makes this plain, Ioh. 3. 4.
esteeming regeneration (without which Christ said no man could enter into the
kingdom of heaven) to be a man's return into his mothers womb, and a birth
from thence again.

This wicked thought must be understood of the law of God also; the heart of
man by nature judges the threatenings of the law to be untruths, and so
foolishness: hence the Lord by Moses forbad the people when they heard the
threatenings and curses of the law denounced against them, Deuteronomy. 29 19.
To bless themselves in their hearts, saying, We shall have peace: hereupon
he denounces a woe to them that deride his judgments threatened, and say, Isa.
5. 19.
Let him make speed, let him hasten his work that we may see it, etc. As if
they should say, we do not believe that any such things shall come to pass:
like to the mockers of whom Peter prophecieth, 2. Pet. 3. 3. 4.
who walk after their lusts, and say, Where i^ the promise of his coming?

Now that this is a most damnable thought may appear Fruits of this thought.
for first, hence arises that deuilish and carnal opinion of sundry men,
Machavelisme.
that think, and hold religion to be but humane policy to keep men in awe,
and so use it as a politic devise to exercise men's brains to keep them from
sedition, treachery, and rebellion: Secondly, Apostacy.
and departing from the faith; The Galathians were a worthy Church planted by
the apostle Paul, yet even in his time they began to fall away to another
Gospel, which made him to marvel; and the reason was this, Galat. 1. 6.
they were not contented with that simplicity, which is in Christ, but would
join with him, the observation of legal ceremonies. The like we may say of
those famous Eastern Churches, as those seven Churches of Asia, planted by
the apostles; wherein the truth flourished for a while, but not long after the
Apostles times they fell into many damnable heresies, as Arrianisme, and such
like. Yea about six hundred years after Christ, they embraced the damnable
religion of Mahomet. In the West parts also, were worthy, and famous Churches
planted by the Apostles, and their successors, as in Italy, France, Germany,
Spain, and England, who about the same time of 6. hundred years after Christ
fell to Papisme, which spread it self over all Europe and further (some few
Churches of Greece excepted) In which religion men abandon the Gospel, of
Christ, and betake themselves to another Gospel by adjoining to the truth of
Christ, their own devises: And this Papisme, has reigned ever since, till now
of late, and so has Apostacy taken place in those Churches which the Apostles
planted; The cause whereof was in the wicked and sinful heart of man,
judging the gospel foolishnes, whereupon men were contented to yeilde
themselves to any other religion, rather then to that simplicity of truth,
which is in Christ Jesus. We now in England by Gods special mercy, hold, and
teach the word of God: but if God should alter our religion with the times, the
greatest part of men among us would forsake the truth, and cleave to any other
religion, and that only upon this ground, because they judge the Gospel
foolishnes: Let any man among us broach an error, or heresy, and it shall have
patrones at the first, be it never so vile and absurd, and protectors
afterward: When that brutish heresy of the family of love took shipping in
Germany, and arrived in England (though it be an opinion void of common
sense) yet it had applause amongst us, and was received of many, and would have
spredde it self further if the preaching of the word, with the care of the
Magistrate, had not suppressed it. And the reason hereof is this; man's mind
by nature is full of darkness; he cannot without Gods special grace, perceive
the things of God, and so he judges the gospel foolishnes, and embraces
error, rather then the truth, yea loves darkness, rather then the light,
because his deeds are evil, Ioh. 3. 19.

For the examination of our hearts touching this badde thought; Examination for
this thought.
After due trial we shall find, that the minds of most among us, are
possessed herewith: for we are indeed content to come into the assemblies
where God is worshipped, and we do submit our selves to the ministry of the
word to be taught and instructed: Therein we have our own personal sins
displaid, and reproved, and withal very fearful and terrible curses of the
law denounced against us for the same, both judgments in this life,
judgments in death, and also judgments eternal after this life: Now let the
conscience answer, what is the cause when we hear these things, that we be
not moved, why are not our hearts touched with grief and sadness, when we
hear Gods judgments due unto us for our sins daily denounced against us? Some
indeed there be whose hearts tremble at the word, but small is that number:
If a man run thorough the streets, and cry fire, fire, our hearts are
suddenly stricken with great fear: but the minister of god, may stand and cry
fire, fire, the fire of hell which is Isay. 30. 33.
kindled by the breath of the Lord like a river of Brimstone as the Prophet
speaks, and yet men's hearts are nothing moved: what is the cause that we
should be so affected with the burning of an old house by temporal fire, and
be not afraid at the voice of God, which proclameth unto us eternal burning,
with the fire of Gods wrath? Surely the cause is this, our hearts are
forestalled with this false imagination that the curses of the law are
foolishnes, and that there be no such torments as the world denounces; It
will not sink into the heart of a natural man that his sins are so heinous,
and Gods judgments so terrible against them, as the word makes them: And
till such time as this damnable thought be taken away, men's hearts will never
be touched with the threatenings of the law; this is a bar to stop the way
to all such passions as the law would work.

Again, when the minister of God speaks of the pardon of sin and of
eternal life by Christ, who has his heart melting for joy in regard of this
salvation? Though men be daily taught the doctrine of salvation, yet who
learneth the same? Though men be called upon to come into the kingdom of
heaven, yet few strive to enter in: though we be daily exhorted to repent,
yet few turn to the Lord* all which be branches of the Gospel; but men
believe them not, because their hearts be filled with this damnable thought,
The Gospel of Christ is foolishnes: When the Israelites were restored from
captivity in Babylon, it was as Psalm. 126. 1.
a dream unto them: now if that temporal deliverance seemed a dream, what a
dream will this spiritual deliverance from the captivity of hell and death,
to the liberty of the sons of GOD in grace and glory, seem to be? And
indeed to a natural man it seems foolishnes that God should become man, and
that Christ by death should free men from death, and by suffering the curse of
the law, should take away the same from us, and by his righteousness should
justify us unto life: all which notwithstanding be points of the Gospel. This
also is the cause why after long teaching there is little turning, or faithful
obedience yielded unto the Gospel: neither will it be better with men, while
this evil thought abides in them.

Use. 1. If this be a truth, that every natural man thinks the word of God
to be foolishnes, then we must learn this lesson of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 3. 18
He that seems to be wise in this world, must become a fool that he may be
wise, that is, he must reject his own natural reason, and stop up the eyes
of his natural mind, like a blind man, and suffer himself wholly to be
guided by Gods spirit in the things of God, that thereby he may be made wise
unto salvation.

Secondly, we must hereby learn to make earnest prayer unto God Ps. 119. 18.
for the opening of our eyes, that we may be able to understand the Gospel of
Christ, and know the right meaning of that word of salvation: for of our selves
we can never understand it, unless the Lord instruct us by his spirit: Ioh.
6. 65.
No man comes unto me, (says Christ, that is, believes, except it be given
him of my father: But verse. 45.
every one that has heard, and learned of the father, comes unto me. Thus
much of this second evil thought.

Sect. 3. Of this thought; I will not obey Gods word.
From the former arises an other most vile thought, in the heart of every
natural man, as a branch of the same; namely because the word of God is
foolishnes, therefore I will not perform obedience thereunto. That this is the
natural thought of man, Job teaches plainly; for he brings in the wicked
(that is, every sinner) saying thus to God, Job. 21. 14.
Depart from us, we will not the knowledge of thy ways. This the wicked man
says, not with his mouth, for none is so far past all shame, that dares thus
blasphemously speak against God; but thus he says in his heart, his
affections speak it, when he purposed with himself, to cast off the yoke of
God, and to live after his own lusts: and therefore they say further, v. 1^.
Who is the Almighty that we should serve him? as if one should say, It is a
disgrace to me to abase my self to serve God; I will not do it. The Prophet
Jeremy brings in the Lord saying thus to his people, Ier. 6. 16.
Stand in the ways, and behold, and ask for the Old way, which is the good
way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls: but in the
same place the Jews answer, We will not walk in thy ways. Shall we think
that they durst thus impudently answer the Lord with open mouths? No surely;
But the Prophet in these words sets down the purpose of their hearts who
hardened the same obstinately against the word, when they were exhorted to
repentance and obedience before the Lord. Our Savior Christ compares himself
to a noble man that goes into a far country; now when he is gone, the
citizens of his country send messengers after him to tell him, Luke 19. 14.
that they will not have him to reign over them. Which though it be properly
to be understood of the nation of the Jews, who did indeed say so to our
Savior Christ, yet it may also be extended to all impenitent sinners, who say
in their hearts; Christ shall not reign over us: for so long as a man is
uncalled, he carries a purpose to live in sin, some in this sin, and some
in that, and so doing, says in his heart, God shall not be my God, I will not
submit my self unto his laws, Christ shall not reign over me. This is plain
and manifest by men's behavior, when they are reproved for their sins: Tell
the covetous man of his avarice, the swearer of his blasphemy, and the dru^kard
of his drunkenness, etc. will he humble himself in conscience of his sin?
Nothing less: but his heart will swell against thee, as his fury and
impatience will soon be wray; and the reason is, because he never thinks of
his own estate, how by creation he owes homage unto God, as to his creator:
for his purpose is to go on in sin, and when he is reproved for the same,
his desire is crossed, which he can not abide, and therefore rages; showing
thereby manifestly, that in his heart he says, he will not obey Gods
commandments.

For the examination of our hearts touching this thought: Examination for this
thought.
whether did we ever think thus with our selves; I will not obey Gods
commandments? Doubtless every man will answer for himself, that he abhors this
thought. And yet after just trial it will appear, that generally this thought
is rife among us: for though we hear the word, and receive the Sacraments the
pledges of our salvation, and will be counted the members of Christ, yet what is
the cause that there is so little knowledge of God, and obedience to his word?
And why do men in their callings show forth so small love, so little mercy,
justice, and good conscience? The truth is, that though some have these things
in them in some measute, yet the body of our people is generally void of these
good virtues, and fruits of the spirit: he that has but half an eye may see
it: for where is that religious keeping of the Sabbath that should be? where is
that serious performing of worship unto God which ought to be? All which argue
that the heart is corrupt and deceivable, and says indeed to God, I will not
obey thy word; Lord depart from me. What man almost is there that says with
himself, Oh miserable man, what have I done?

The Use. By this wicked imagination we may see how hard a thing it is truly
and soundly to convert a sinner unto God, and how easily a man may deceive his
own soul, and beguile the world by hypocrisy: for a man by long exercise in
the word may have a great measure of knowledge, and withal good wit, and
memory, and with them utterance; and by a common gift of the spirit, be able^e
we must^ word truly, and to conceive prayer to good purpose; and withal have a
cankred heart toward God, poisoned with this damnable thought, I will not obey
the word of God: for every man that has inwardly in him a purpose to live,
though but in one sin, his heart is not upright with God, neither be Gods
graces, as faith, and repentance, sound in his heart: for true repentance is a
purpose, and resolution to leave all sin, and to please God in all things.

Sect. 4. Of this thought; It is a vain thing to worship God.
The third wicked imagination of ma^^ heart concerning (...) thing to worship
God. This Job shows to be true: bringing in the wicked man saying, Job. 21.
15.
what profit shall I have if I pray unto God: we must not think that he said
thus with his mouth, but in his heart: And the prophet Malachie brings in the
Jews saying, Mal. ^. 3. 14.
It is a vain thing to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his
commandment, and that we walked humbly before the Lord of hosts: Yea
righteous David, a man after Gods own heart, was overtaken with this evil
thought, when he said, Psa. 73. 13.
certainly I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in Innocence:
whereby it is plain, that this is a natural evil thought in every man.

Yet here we must remember, that this evil thought comes not into the mind of
man at all times, but only at such time, when occasion is offered, as namely
when a man is called on, to the service of God, which upon some occasion he is
desirous to omit; Then will his mind range about for liberty from Gods
service, and so will he bethink himself of the wicked man's estate who never
served god, and yet is in better case outwardly then the godly man is; And
hereupon he begins to say in his heart doutbles, It is a vain thing to serve
God.

For the examination of our hearts touching this thought; Examination for this
thought.
after just trial it will be found among us, as the state of all sorts of
families will declare: Among the poorer sort you shall see men labor from
morning to Evening, and take great pains to provide for the world, but in the
mean time where is the worship and service of God* where is prayer and
thanksgiving, morning, and euenning? Surely it is neglected, and the reason is
because they think thus in their heart, so that I may have provision for the
world, it is no matter whether I serve God or not. Come to the rich man's house,
and there you shall see them spend their time in eating, drinking, gaming, and
such delights; but the worship of God is not regarded, for thus they think
with themselves, If they may have their pleasure all is well. Come and reason
with ordinary men, and exhort them to use the means of salvation, and show
forth love unto religion sincerely: Their answer is, they will do as they have
done, and as their forefathers did before them; they trust their souls are as
good to Godward as the best: And for ought they see, none are worser then those
that have so much preaching, and therefore they hope to be saved though they
do not follow it so much: And this also comes from this evil thought. It is
in vain to serve God. Mark also in those places where the Gospel is preached;
If any seem to make more conscience of sin, and of serving God then others,
they are made a byword and a mocking stock, and their profession is turned to
their reproach: which argues plainly that man's thought is this, It is a vain
thing to serve God. Nay, take a view of the whole world, and you shall see every
where, men give themselves to will worship: No nation is so barbarous as to
deny unto God all worship; but do they give unto him that which he commanded
in his word? Nothing less: It is either the mere invention of men, or
altogether stained therewith: This is most evident with the Turk, the Jew, and
the Papist: yea our common sort of protestants have their will worship: for
generally they content themselves with the mumbling over the words of the
Creed, the Lords Prayer, and ten Commandments, persuading themselves that
by the bare rehearsal of the words, they have sufficiently served God. Now
would we know the cause hereof; as also why men are so slack and cold in
prayer, so careless, and vnreuerent in hearing Gods word? Surely it is nothing
but this vile Imagination bewitching our souls, that it Is a vain thing to
serve God; This quenches the spirit, and hinders all good motions that be in
our hearts.

Sect. 5. Of man's thought of distrust.
The fourth evil thought concerning God, is, a thought of distrust, thus
framed in the mind;: God does not regard me; God will not help me; God will
not be merciful unto me: This thought made entrance unto the fall of our first
parents: for first Eve looked upon the fruit, and saw that it was beutifull,
and then entered into her heart a thought of distrust after this manner; It may
be it is not true which god has said to us concerning this fruit, and it may
be God regards us not as we think he does, in that he denies us this fruit;
here upon her will and her affections were carried to the breaking of Gods
commandment, and so she sinned by disobedience, and Adam also sinned. When
the people of Israel murmured in the wilderness a Moses sinned a sin for he was
debarred entrance into the land of Canaa^: Number. 20. 12.
Now what was Moses sin for both he and Aron v. 6.
prayed to the Lord, and checked the people saying hear oh ye rebels, etc.
And at Gods commandment he brought water out of the rock? Surely his sin was
secret even inward unbelief and distrust in Gods promise, for when he smote
the rock, he might think thus with himself; it may be that God will not
now give water out of the rock; and this seems the more probable because he
went beyond his commission in smiting thrice upon the rock, when God bad him
only to speak v. ^.
unto it. This evil thought takes hold of religious David also: Psalm. 31. 21.
I said in mine have I am cast out of thy sight, as though he should say,
Heretofore I have found Favor with God, but now in mine adversity I am
utterly rejected: Again, Psalm. 116. 21.
I said in my fear, all men are liars; that is, when fear of death took
hold of me, then I thought that Samuel lied unto me, when he said I should
come to the kingdom over Israel. The children of Israel did often bewray
this thought of distrust; when they were pinched with hunger, and famine in the
wilderness, they say, Psalm. 78. 19. 20.
can God prouid a table for us in the wilderness? can he give bread and flesh
for his people? As if they should say, we think he cannot, nor will not: Yea
the Apostle Peter was not free from this thought, for when Christ walking on
the waters, commanded Peter to come unto him, he came out boldly, and walked
toward Jesus, but when Mat. 14. 30.
he saw a mighty wind he began to sink: whence came this? surely from a
thought of distrust which he had in his heart to this effect: It may be god
will not support me in this my walking: and that this or some such thought was
in his heart appears by Christ's answer to him saying, h oh thou of little
faith, why did thou doubt? By all which it is evident that this is a
natural thought in the mind of man which at some time troubles the most
righteous man that is.

Now touching this thought of distrust, two things are to be skanned: Time of
this thought.
first, the time when it takes place in man's mind; and secondly, the danger
of it. For the time; This thought does not always take place in the mind of
man, but only in the time of some danger, affliction, and temptation; and
especially in the time of sickness, and in the pangs of death. Thus in his
grievous affliction was righteous Job troubled with this thought of distrust:
for then he complained, that i God did hate him and gnash upon him with his
teeth, and as his enemy, sharpened his eyes against him; yea, that v. 12.
he made him as his butt, and mark to shoot at. And Dauide in a greiuous
trouble of mind, thus complained: Psalm. 77. 7.
Will the Lord absent himself for ever? And will he show no more favor? Is
his mercy clean gone for ever? Does his promise fail for evermore? has God
forgotten to be merciful? etc. Whereby appears, that in his affliction he
was greatly troubled with this distrustful thought; and there is no man
living, but when trouble and affliction comes, he shall feel in himself these
thoughts of distrust. Indeed while peace, and ease continue, presumptuous
thoughts possess the mind; but when the days of peace be gone, and
troublesome times approach, then presumptuous thoughts give place, and
thoughts of distrust, come in their room and stead.

II. Point. Fruit of this thought.
The danger of these thoughts of distrust is very great, as the fruits
thereof declare: for hence arise; first, all horrors, and terrors God does not
regard me, God will not save me, then the trembling heart is this thought
troubles the mind of the wicked, and of the repentant person also: for
desperation is nothing but the strength of this thought of distrust. Thirdly
this weakneth Gal. 2. 20.
Christ died and shedd his blood for me; God the father will be merciful
unto me, and save me: But this distrustful thought causes a man to say the
clean contrary. Christ died not for me: God will not save me: so that where
this thought prevails true faith is not, neither can take place.

Use. Considering the danger of this distrustful thought is so great, we must
be admonished in the fear of God to use all good means, while the days of
peace do last, that it take no place with us in the day of trouble, and
temptation: Means against distrust.
The means to repress it are the preaching of the word, and the sacraments
of Baptism and the Lords supper.

For the first: the word of this thought of distrust; for when the promises of
mercy in Christ, are offered unto gods people in the preaching of the word by
a lawful minister, it is as much as if Christ himself in his own person
should speak unto them, by virtue of Gods ordinance. If God from heaven should
say to any man, mercy belongs to thee, he would believe: if God say to
Cornelius, boleeue thou, and my mercy belongs to thee, Cornelius will believe:
if he say to Peter, believe thou, and my mercy belongs to thee, Peter will
believe: and if he say so to Marie Magdalen she will believe. Lo here, when
the minister of God, out of Gods word, says to any man, believe thou, and
repent thou, and Gods mercy belongs unto thee; it is as much as if the Lord
should call him by name particularly, and say unto him, believe thou, and
repent, and my mercy belongs unto thee: yea, it is all one as if God himself
should say, I am thy father, and thou art my child, if thou will repent, and
believe.

The second means which Baptism. If an earthly prince give a pardon to any
man, and put the man's name in the pardon, and his own broad seal unto it,
the man will never doubt of his pardon, but believe it. Behold, in Baptism
God enters covenant with miserable wretched man, and herein makes promise of
life unto him; yea he puts the man's name in the covenant, sealing the same
with his own seal: and therefore the party baptized, must believe against
this thought.

The third means, is the but these being the principal, I omit the rest.

CHAP. IV.
Of man's natural thoughts against his neighbor.
NOw we come to the evil thoughts of man's natural heart against his
neighbor. And to find them out we must have recourse to the second Table of
the moral law, which was penned with respect to Gal. 3. ^9
the corrupt estate of man, forbidding that which man's corrupt heart thinks
naturally against his neighbor: for every commandment thereof is spiritual,
forbidding not only the wicked actions, evil words, and gestures, but all
corrupt affections, yea all evil Imaginations of man against man.

These thoughts of man against his neighbor be of two sorts; either without
consent, or with consent. Thoughts without consent, are the very first evil
motions of the mind which a man conceiueth against his neighbor, to which the
will never gives consent, and these are forbidden in the 10. commandment,
Thou shall not lust.

Thoughts with consent of will are such, as a man conceiving in his mind does
withal desire, or purpose in his heart to practice: and these are forbidden in
the fifth, sixth, seventh, eight, and ninth commandments; by reason whereof
they may fittely be reduced to five heads. They are either thoughts of
dishonor, against the fifth commandment; or thoughts of murder, against the
sixth; or thoughts of aduletrie, against the seventh; or thoughts of theft,
against the eight; or thoughts of disgrace, against the ninth commandment.

Sect. 1. Of thoughts of dishonor.
First, a thought of dishonor is any thought that tends to the contempt and
abasing of the person of our neighbor, in respect of our selves. And it is
then conceived in our minds, when we think thus of all other men beside our
selves: such and such a man, is far inferior unto me, a base and
contemptible fellow in regard of me. Example hereof we have in the Pharisie, a
man strict in profession, and zealous in his religion, who comes to the
Temple to pray with the Publican: now mark what he says, Luke 18. 11.
Oh God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, or as this Publican.
Which words proceed from such a proud thought as this; Lord I thank thee,
all other men are far inferior unto me: I do far surpass the common
sort: this Publican is a base fellow, and no body to me. If any shall imagine
that this thought is not in every mnn, but in some few proud persons; I answer,
it is by nature in every person living without grace: and therefore S. Paul
gives this commandment, That Phil. ^. 3.
every man in meekness should esteem others better then himself; giving us
to understand, that by nature all men think best of themselves, and esteem
others far worse then themselves.

The Use. If this thought of dishonor be in all men's hearts, then behold what
a palace of all Satanicall and damnable pride the heart of man is naturally:
Iud. 1. 7.
it is like unto the table of Adoni-bezek at which he sat in a chair of
estate, and made others, even kings, to eat meat like dogs under his feet,
with their thumbs cut off: such an one is every man by nature, he lifts up
himself, saying, I am the man, and treads his brother under his feet, as no
body unto him. And this is the cause of much strife and hurt in all humane
societies: this causes many iarres, much skorning, and great contempt among
men in word and deed.

Now that we may reform this thought in us, we must learn to say as Job did
after he had been afflicted, and came to see his sins: Job. 39. 37.
behold, I am vile: and with Abraham, Genesis 18. 27.
I am but dust and ashes: and with David, I am a worm, and no man, Psalm. 22.
6. yea with Paul, Romans 7. 24.
we must labor to see our misery by reason of sin: and that will help to
pull down the pride of our hearts.

Sect. 2. Of murdering thoughts.
The second evil thought of man against his neighbor with consent, is a
thought of Murder, or of any thing that tends thereto. Of this we have
particular examples in Scripture. Deuteronomy. 15. 9. The Lord forbids the Jews to
have this murdering thought in their hearts: I will not relieve the poor, I
will not do good unto them; giving us to understand, that this was the common
thought of the Jews, or else he would not have forbidden it: yea the Lord does
there set out this thought by two signs; first, an evil eye, when a man
turns his countenance from the poor, or looks on them without compassion:
secondly, unmerciful dealing, when a man will not help the poor by gift,
according to his ability. And because all actions proceed from thoughts, the
heart being the fountain of our deeds, hence it appears, that this
murdering thought against the poor, is rife in this age: for where is the man
that does pity the poor, and does good to them according to his ability?
nay, the Lords complaint against the Jews may be fitly applied to our times,
in regard of cruelty and oppression: The spoil of the poor is in your
houses: what have ye to do, that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the
faces of the poor. Isa. 3. 14. 15.

The second example of a murdering thought, is concerning Gods Church, and it
is this. I will do some spite or hurt to them that worship God. For proof
hereof, read Psalm. 74. 8. David brings in the Babilonians, Edomites, etc.
saying thus one to another against gods people the Jews: Let us destroy them
all together; and Psalm. 83. 4, Let us cut them off from being a people. And
let the name of Israel be no more in remembrance. Now as this was their
thought, so is it the thought of all men naturally: for that which was the
disposition of Babel, Edom, Moab, and Amnon against Gods Church, is the
disposition of all men naturally; for look how general the hatred of man is,
so general is the purpose of mischief against those that profess religion:
for all men by nature are haters of Gods Church, and people; so Christ says to
his disciples, Matthew. 24. 9.
ye shall be be hated of all nations for my names sake; Ioh. 16. 2.
Yea, whosoever kills you shall think that he does God good service, and
therefore this thought of doing mischief is as general, even in the mind of
every man by nature. This further appears by the continual persecution, that
has ever been raised agaiust Gods poor Church, since the beginning of the
world: It began at Abell, soon after the giving of the covenant of grace to
our first parents, and has continued to this day, and shall abide unto the
end: so that if carnal men could look into their own hearts, they should
there behold this murdering thought against Gods people. This murdering thought
comes from another wicked imagination, set down by S. Peter: who brings in
the wicked of this world, 1. Pet. 4. 3. 4.
thinking it a strange thing, that Gods children do not, as they do, and
run not with them unto all excess of riot: living in drunkenness,
fornication, and such other abominations; for this cause do they conceive
hatred, and purpose mischeife against Gods people, and so will continue, till
God give them grace to repent. If any shall say this thought is not general,
for Nabuched-nezer Danie. 2. 48.
an heathen man showed favor to Daniell, and highly advanced him. I answer, it
is true he did so; but that was a work of Gods special providence who
procured him favor, and disposed the kings heart to affect him, as he did also
the heart of the chief Daniel. 1. 9.
Eunuch; Otherwise Nabuchad-nezzer naturally did nothing but intend mischeife
against Gods Church, as his rage against the three children did evidently
bewray, Dan. 3. 19.

A third example of this murdering thought I add, which every minister of
gods word may observe by daily experience, and that is this; when men's faults
are particularly rebuked in the ministry of the word, and the quick, as it
were touched by applying the word to the conscience; then will the heart of a
natural man, thus conceive of the minister that reprooueth sin; This man
means me, he has some spyte, and malice against me, that he thus reprooveth
my particular faults; when as the minister knew them not to be his personal
sins: but it is the power of the word that ransaketh the sinful heart: this
is the fault of all carnal hearers, who will hear quietly till their faults
be rebuked, but then they think maliciously of the preacher; Thus Herod dealt
with John Baptist, he heard him gladly for a while, Mark. 6. 20. but when he
was rebuked for his brother Phillips wife then he cast John in prison: Luke 3.
19. 20. And if conscience might be judge, many an hearer would be found to
have an Herod's heart toward Gods minister.

Sect. 3. Of thoughts of Adultery; theft; and disgrace.
The third thought of man touching his neighbor, is the thought of Adultery;
which is the thought with consent to any unchastity. Such a thought had Judah
concerning Tamar his daughter-in law, when Genesis 38. 15. 16.
he judged her an whore; and desired to lie with her. And with such thoughts
was Ammons 2. Sam. 13. 2.
heart so sore vexed that he fell sick for his sister Tamar: This makes a man
an Adulterer in heart before God, though actually he commit not the fact: Mat.
5. 28.

The fourth is the thought of Theft, which is the thought with consent of
beguyling or wronging another in his goods or substance. This is that Imagining
of iniquity, and working of wickedness upon their beds, in coveting of fields
-- against which Micah. 2. 1.
Micah pronounces a woe. And this thought also possesses their hearts, that
with the wicked Israelites wish the time were come, wherein they Amos. 8. 5.
might make the Epha small and the Shekell great, that is, lessen the measure,
and inhance the price, and falsify the weights by deceit.

The first evil thought is a thought of disgrace, which some way tends to
the reproach, and debasing of our neighbors good name; as when a thing is well
done, to think and judge it to be ill done, or when a thing is a miss to
judge it worse then it is: Thus Elie thought disgracefully of Hannah deeming
her to be drunk, saying, 1. 8. am. 1. 13 14.
put away thy dronkennes, when she prayed devoutly from a v. 15.
troubled soul to the Lord; Thus Eliab David's eldest brother thought
disgracefully of David, when he showed himself willing to encounter with
Golyah that reviled the host of the living God saying; 1. Sam. 17. 28
I know the pride and malice of thine heart that thou art come to see the
Battle, when as indeed the spirit of God put that motion into his heart to
take away the shame from Israel, as the happy event declared plainly. So when
our savior Christ spoke most comfortably to the sick of the Palsy, saying,
Math. 9. 2
be of good comfort thy sins are forgiven thee; then the cursed hearts of the
wicked Pharisees thought thus in themselves, u this man blasphemeth. v. 4.
And when the gift of the holy Ghost, was sent upon the Apostles, causing them
to speak strange tounges to the great admiration of men of diverse nations,
then some of the malicious Jews thought they were drunk, saying scoffingly,
they were full of new wine. Act. 2. 13.
And this thought of disgrace is in every man naturally bringing forth
continually the fruits of disgrace, as Envy, Strife, Emulations, Dissentions,
and Debates: for love thinks not evil; but naturally true love is wanting in
all men: and therefore they cannot but think evil of others.

We see the five evil thoughts of man's natural heart against his neighbor;
touching which two things are yet further to be skanned, to wit, when these
evil thoughts do arise in the mind; and in whom they are. For the first:
it is true, that they do not at all times arise in men's minds, but then only
when occasion is given, at which time they arise so soon as it is given: for
man's heart is like to tinder, or dry wood, which burns not of it self, but
so soon as fire is put to it, then presently it kindles. When you come to
talk with a natural man, it may be for the present, he thinks not to lie;
but give him occasion to lie, and then he soon bethinkes himself thereof and
will not spare to utter it if it may make for his advantage. And the like we
may say of malice, Adultery, Theft, disgrace or any other sin against our
neighbor: Do but minister occasion there about to the natural heart of man,
and he thinks of them, and without Gods grace restraining, or renewing him,
will bring forth the same in action.

The second point. In whom are all these evil thoughts? Answ. In all men
naturally without exception, till they be renewed by Gods special grace: Yea
the truth is, these thoughts do every where abound; for look what men do
practice, that first of all they think, for the thought is the beginning of
every action; But in the world all sins against the second Table, do abound,
as the practice of Dishonor, of Murder, Adultery, Thefts, and Disgraces, and
therefore these evil thoughts from whence these actions come, must needs be
common.

Use. By this we may see what a huge mass of corruption the natural heart of
man is, without gods special grace; for thoughts of dishonor make a man's heart
a palace of pride like the table of Adoni-bezek: Also thoughts of cruelty make
man's heart a slaughterhouse: Thoughts of Adultery make it a most filthy
stews: Thoughts of theft make it to become a den of thieves, wherein all
manner of fraud, and bad dealing is plotted and devised: And lastly thoughts of
Disgrace make^ it a fountain of backbyting, debate, slander, and reuiling: And
therefore howsoever the outward life may be ordered ciuillie, yet without Gods
grace man's heart is most vile: And those that plead their good nature, and
good meaning, are here confuted, for naturally the heart, thinks all evil
against his neighbor.

CHAP. V.
Of man's natural thoughts concerning himself.
Sect. 1. Man's proud thought of his own excellency.
THe third kind of man's natural evil thoughts, are such as concern
himself, and they are principally four.

The first may fitly be termed a thought of Pride, whereby every man
naturally thinks himself most excellent, and far to exceed all other men
whatsoever: thus the Prophet Isay brings in Babylon speaking in her heart,
that is, thinking, Isay. 14. 1^.
I will ascend into heaven, and exalt my throne above or besides the stars of
God, as if she should think with her self, I am far more excellent then
any other what soever, and therefore I am to be exalted from the earth to
heaven, and to be matched with God himself. And the Prophet Zephame brings
in Ni^iue speaking thus in her heart, Zeph. 2. ^^.
I am, and there is none besides me: And so the proud Pharisie in his private,
and secret prayer to God says, Luke 18. 11.
I thank thee Lord, that I am not as other men, meaning that he is more
excellent: And the whore of Babylon The Heretical Church of Rome.
is brought in saying of her self, Revel. 18. 71
I sit as a Queen, and am no widdowe and shall see no mourning. All which
places show this to be the nature of man, to exalt himself in his own heart,
above all others. If any shall say, hereby no more can be proved but that
this thought is in some proud and insolent persons; I add therefore, that as
our first Parents in the beginning, did learn that proud lesson of the devil,
Ye shall be as Gods: so we being in their loins when they sinned, and
descending from them by ordinary gineration, do together with our nature
receive that corruption from them, whereby we think thus proudly of our
selves, that we far excel others and are as little Gods on earth in respect of
others. Indeed the most will say for themselves, we abhor this proud
thought, neither did we ever find it to be in us: But we must know that the
lesser we discern it in our selves, the more it reigns in our hearts; and the
more we discern, and bewail it, the lesser place it takes in us.

Now touching this thought of pride, two things must be observed: the danger,
and the highest degree of it. The danger of this thought.
For the danger of this thought; The outward affecting of strange fashions in
apparel is a wonderful pride; But the most vile and wretched pride of all, is
that spiritual pride of the heart whereby a man despises all other, in
regard of himself, and thinks himself far better then any. This I manifest
by sundry reasons, as first, from the fruits of this inward pride: for hence
do slow many damnable sins; in men's lives and conuersations: Fruits of
inward pride.
Ambition, whereby men are not content with that estate, wherewith God has
belssed them: but do seek by all means to be advanced to higher dignity
and Presumption, whereby men dare enterprise things beyond their calling, and
above their power, taking upon them more then boasting, whereby a man speaks of
himself more then is seemly, and extolleth himself above his desert.
Fourthly, Hipocrysie, when a man pretends he has that grace, and religion
Obstniacie, when a man persisteth in an error, and Contention, whereby men
strive one against another in word or deed, without Affectation of Novelties,
especially

danger hereof appears hence, that where this thought of pride reigns (as
it does in all men naturally) there the spirit of grace dwells not: Mary in
her song says well, Luke 1. 51.
God scatters the Imaginations of the proud, that is, of those which have
this conceit of their own excellency above others: and S. James; Iam. 4. 6.
God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble: yea, thus says he
Isa. 57. 15.
that is high and excellent: he that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is the
holy one: I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble: But he that
lifts up himself his mind is not upright in him, Habak. 2, 4.

of this sin, that when all other sins die in a man, this thought of pride
dies not: nay, when other sins are mortified, and Gods graces come in stead
thereof, yet this will then revive, and make the graces of God, matter whereon
to work: as when an ignorant person attaines to some knowledge; this pride
will take occasion from that gift of God to puff up the heart; yea when a man
in true humility of heart shall renounce the actions of pride, yet the^ will
pride be working, for this is a fruit of pride to think well of our selves,
because we are not proud, The height of this thought


II. Point. The highest degree of this pride is, when a man thinks himself
to be equal with God. This is a most notorious, nay an abominable height of
pride; and yet the truth is, some men have come hereunto. Thus the king of
Babel thought of himself, when he said in his heart, Isa. 14. 14.
I will ascend above the height of the clouds and will be like the most high.
It may seem strange that men should think thus of themselves; but we must
know, that men may do it two ways; first, when they think they have power of
themselves, whereby they are able to match or counteruaile the power of God: so
thought Nabuchad-nezar when he said, Daniel. 3 15.
who is that god, that can deliver you out of my hand? such a thought had proud
Pharao in his heart, when he said to Moses and Aaron, Exodus 5. 2.
who is the Lord that I should hear his voice, and let Israel go? Secondly,
when they take to themselves the honor of God, and think it to be due to
them: Thus did Herod Act. 12. 22.
when by silence he approved the blasphemous voice of the people, who cried
unto him, the voice of God, and not of man. And thus Antichrist sitting in the
temple of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
exalts himself above all that is called God, or worshipped: Now that man of
sin is the Pope of Rome; for howsoever in word he humble himself, and call
himself the servant of servants; yet indeed through the pride of his heart,
he sits as God, taking unto himself that honor which is proper to God:
Bellar. de Romans pontil. lib. 4.
for he claims power to prescribe new rules of Gods worship, to forgive
sins, to make laws to bind the conscience properly, yea to open, and shut
heaven, and to dispose at his pleasure of earthly kingdoms; he takes upon him
to dispense with the moral law, and with Apostolical constitutions: all
which belong to God alone, and none dare claim them to belong unto him, but he
that matcheth himself with God; and this is the highest decree of pride.

The Use. By this every man may see what he is of himself, what a cursed and
proud nature he carries about with him: for every man naturally when occasion
is offered thinks highly of himself, and basely of others in regard of
himself. Let us therefore take notice of this Satanicall pride that is in our
nature, and strive against it, for who would not be ashamed to say with the
proud Pharasie, I thank thee Lord, I am not as other men, etc. or with the
arrogant Jews, stand apart, touch me not, I am holier then thou, Isay. 65. 5.

Sect. 2. Man's thought of his own righteousness.
The second evil thought concerning a man's self is this, I am sufficiently
righteous, and I need no repentance. That this is the thought of every man
naturally appears by the Lords commandment to the people of Israel,
forbidding them to say in their hearts, when they were placed in the promised
land, Deuteronomy. 9. 4.
that for their own righteousness the Lord brought them in to possess it.
Whereby he gives us to understand two things: First, that as the Jews did
there, so every man thinks himself to be righteous. And secondly he thinks
that God does give his blessings unto him for his own righteousness: for the
Lord uses not to forbid such a thought as men naturally have not in them: so
in like manner when Jeremy rebuked the people for their sins, they said,
Ierem. 2. 35.
they were Innocent and guiltles, they had not sinned: And the Church of
Laodicea says thus of her self, Rev. 3. 17.
I am rich and need nothing; that is, I abound in spiritual graces. This is
the thought of the proud Luke 18. 9. 10.
Pharisie, who trusts in himself that he is just, and therefore braggeth unto
God, that he is not such and such, but he does this, and that, he fasteth, he
gives Alms, paieth tithes, etc. and in plain terms his heart says this, I
am righteous, I need no repentance: for of such Christ spoke when he said,
Matht. 9. 18.
he came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance. And again, I say
unto you, Luke 15. 7.
that joy shall be in heaven for one sinner that conuerteth, more then for
ninety and nine just men which need none amendment of life: where we must
observe that Christ means not, that there are in deed some so righteous,
that they need no amendment; but he speaks according to the opinion, which
some have of themselves, to wit, that they are righteous, and need no
repentance: by all which it is more then manifest that this is a natural
thought of a man concerning himself.

This evil thought reigns in our age and time as all the former do:
Examination for this thought.
for come to an ignorant man that has not been instructed in religion, reason
with him touching his estate, and ask him whether he can keep the law of God
or not; he will answer, he can; he loves the lord his God with all his heart,
and his neighbor as himself: Ask him how he looks to be saved; his answer
is by his own righteousness, and for his own goodness. If due examination
were made, this would be found to be the thought of many that live in the
Church among us; and there is none by nature free from this thought.

Hereby then we may see that the thoughts of every man, be he what he will, are
plain papistry, for Popery is natural: One chief pillar and ground thereof
is Justification, and salvation by works; which opinion every man brings with
him from his mothers womb: And so it is in the point of merit, men naturally
think they receive the good things which they have from God, for their own
righteousness.

Secondly, hence it appears that it is a matter of great difficulty, to
bring a man thoroughly to renounce his own righteousness and soundly, and
heartily to embrace true religion, and the righteousness of Christ by faith.
This is no less then the change of Nature; and yet this must every man do,
that will be saved, he must be come nothing in himself, that he may be all in
Christ Jesus; which is as impossible to nature, as to change water into fire,
and therefore men had need to beware how they put off the time, and neglect the
means in which God shows his power in working this change in the hearts of
his elect.

Thirdly, hence we see the evident cause of that preposterous course of the
world, which most men take in spending their wit, and strength, some for
riches, others for honors and pleasures, and in the mean while they can spare
no time for religion, to seek Gods favor in Christ, and the graces of the
spirit: It may be they will afford a good word unto Religion, but yet they
regard it not in respect of other things. And this is the behavior not of
some few, but of all sorts, and degrees of men naturally. Now the cause hereof
is this cursed evil thought, whereby men persuade themselves, they be
righteous, and need no repentance, and till this thought be rooted out of man's
heart, he will never value the word and religion of God according to the worth
thereof, so as with the good Merchant he will part with all that he has, rather
then he wiil be frustrate of this pearl. Math. 13. 45, 46. Indeed men use to
plead thus for themselves; we confess our selves to be sinners, and
therefore we cannot think such a wicked thought, that we need no repentance;
But we must know, that both these may well stand together, in the wicked heart
of man; he may confess himself to be a sinner, and yet think that he is
righteous: for is not this* the common practice to make great sins, little sins
and little sins, no sins? Do not men cloth vice in virtues robe, and turn
out virtue in the rotten rags of vice? Is not drunkenness counted good
fellowship, and kind neighborhood? Is not swearing made the token of a brave
mind, and Pride counted decency; and fornication, but a trick of youth; and
covetousness esteemed good thrift, and carefulnes? On the other side, is not the
more sincere profession of religion termed precysenes, Puritanisme, Hypocrisy,
and such like? does not he that refrayneth the common sins of the time, make
himself a pray to the mouths of the ungodly? Now where these things are,
though the mouth say, I am a sinner; yet the heart thinks I am righteous, and
so it is apparent this thought is common among us.

Sect. 3. Man's thought of security in the day of peace.
The third evil thought concerning a man's self is, a thought of security; in
the time of peace and prosperity, men say thus in their hearts, I am free from
all Gods judgments, I am in no danger of hell, death, or damnation, but sure
enough of salvation. It may be thought, that none is so bewitched of the
devil, as to have this conceit of himself, but the scripture is most plain
in the proof hereof: Psalm. 10. 6. The wicked man, (such as is every man by
nature, as we showed before) says in his heart, I shall never be moved nor
be in danger. And the Prophet Isaiah brings in wicked men saying, Isaiah. 28.
15.
we have made a covenant with death, and with hell we are at agreement: which
must not be understood as done indeed (for death, and hell will make league
with none) but only in men's wicked Imagination, persuading themselves, that
they be in no danger of hell, or of the grave: for so much the next words
import, that, though a scourge run over and pass thorough, yet it shall not
come at us: yea righteous David was overtaken heerewith, for in his prosperity
he said in his heart, Psalm. 30. 6.
I shall never be moved; much more then is it the thought of every natural
man, to say with the rich fool upon the increase of outward blessings, Luke
12. 1^.
soul, soul, take thine ease, thou have enough, nothing can hurt thee.

The use: By this we may come to the knowledge of a thing which falls out in
all ages worth our diligent observation. It has pleased god from time, to time
to send his prophets and ministers to call his people to repentance: thus did
Isay, Jeremy, Ioell, Amos, and the rest; yea the Lord himself (as Zeph. 3. 5.
Zephanie says) rises every morning, and brings his judgments to light,
which should turn men from their sins, he fails not, and yet the wicked
will not learn to be ashamed.

To come to our own times: it has pleased God to stir up many worthy
ministers unto us, who spend their time, and strength, in laboring to bring
men to repentance, and salvation; but yet who is he almost that turns from
his sins? yea the Lord himself, as in former times, so now does preach from
heaven by his judgments, as famine, plague, etc: and yet by lamentable
experience, we see that the body of our people remain secure, they are Ier.
48. 11.
settled on their lees, and Zeph. 1. 12.
frozen in their dregs: no man stirs up himself to say, Ier. 8. 6.
what have I done? now the cause hereof is nothing else, but this cursed
thought of security, whereby a man says thus in his heart, I am free from
Gods judgments. Read Matthew. 2^. 37. As it was in the days of Noah (says our
Savior Christ) so shall it be in the days of the coming of the son of
man: they did eat, drink, marry wives, and give in marriage, and knew
nothing till Noah entered into the Arc, and the floode came and took them all
away. Quest. How could it be, that they should know nothing seeing Noah had
preached unto them of the floode an hundred and twenty years before? Ans.
Surely it was as if they had known nothing, for they would not believe him, it
would not sink into their heads, much less settle in their hearts, that GOD
would destroy all the world by waters: and so may it be said of these times;
we know nothing; though we be called to repentance by the ministry of the
word, yet we will not repent; and though we hear of Gods judgments, we
think our selves free from them, and will not believe till the beesome of his
wrath sweep us all away, Remedy.
as the flood did the old world.

Wherefore to redress among us this damnable thought of security, let us
consider our grievous sins in particular, and set before our eyes the curse
of God, both temporal judgments, and eternal death, due unto us for the
same. It is the applying of Gods heavy wrath that must make us shake off this
secure Thought, which the rather we must do, though it be grievous to the
flesh, and as a pange unto death in a natural man, because till this thought
be removed, the saving graces of Gods spirit will not take rooting in our
hearts.

Sect. 4. Man's faint thoughts in time of distress.
The fourth and last evil thought of man's heart touching himself is this; In
time of misery he says, his crosses are greater and worser then indeed they
are. So Iobe complains in his affliction, that Job. 6. 2. 3.
his grief and misery was heavier then the sand of the sea shore. And the
Church in great affliction calls thus to passengers, Lam. 1. 12.
Behold, and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow which is done
unto me. And that it is the thought of every man's heart naturally, appears
by experience: for let a man be in distress outwardly, or else touched in
conscience for his sins, when you shall labor to minister comfort unto him
according to Gods word; he will answer, that never any was in like ^ase to
him, so grievously tormented and afflicted as he is. And indeed it is the
property of man's natural heart, to esteem Jonah. 4. 8* 9*
little crosses to be exceeding great, yea oftentimes to deem that to be a
cross which is none at all: the reason is, the want of judgment rightly to
discern the state of their affliction, and the want of strength to support it
as it is: for if thou be faint in the day of aduersitte thy strength is small.

For the remedy of this evil thought, Prou. 24. 10.
first we must seek to rectify the Imagination, by bringing the mind to a
right con^eit of the affliction: this is a special course to be observed in
dealing with the^ that be oppressed with any distress: for a strong conceit
of a man's own misery does many times more hurt, then the misery it self:
therefore be sure the judgment be well informed, and then the cure is half
wrought, and the cross half removed. This done, the party afflicted may
well consider the desert of sin, in the endless torments of the damned,
which the Lord preuenteth in his children by temporal chastisements in this
life: 1. Cor. 11. 32
for when we are judged we are chastened of the Lord, that we might not be
condemned with the world: And so laboring to be humbled for sin, and to lay
hold on gods mercy in christ, through whom all things, even afflictions, work
together for the best, no doubt he will be able to say, Mich. 7. 9.
I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him and
Psalm. 43. 5.
why art thou cast down oh my soul, why art thou so disquieted within me?
wait on God; for I will yet give him thanks; he is my present helper and my
God. Thus much of man's evil thoughts concerning himself.

CHAP. VI.
Of the want of good thoughts in every man naturally
Sect. I. Good thoughts about temporal things be much wanting.
Having spoken of man's natural evil thoughts concerning God, his neighbor,
and himself: we come to the second point to be observed in the text; to wit,
That there is a want of good thoughts and consideration in every ^^an
naturally: for the Lord here faith, his thoughts are evil from his youth.; and
Chap. 6. 5. They are only evil every day: now look where evil is only and
continually, there good must needs be wanting altogether.

This want must be considered either in respect of temporal, or of spiritual
things. By Temporal things I mean such worldly affairs and actions as
concern man's natural life; wherein though good consideration be not taken
quite away, yet we must know that the same is corrupt, and very weak and
imperfect, even as reason is; and there is much want in every man in this
behalf. Eccles. 4. 8.
There is one alone (says, Solomon) and there is not a second: which has
neither son nor brother, yet there is none end of his travel, neither can
his eye be satisfied with riches; neither does he think for whom do I
travel --? here behold a notable example of this want of good consideration
about earthly things; that a man should spend both his wit and strength in
heaping up riches, and knows not to whom he shall leave them. But we need not
be inquisitiue for examples: for we may daily observe in our selves and others
apparent want of good consideration in these worldly affaries: which must not
seem strange unto us, seeing that reason it self, the ground of consideration
is greatly blemished, through the corruption of nature, about these earthly
things.

Sect. 2. Good thoughts in matters spiritual be altogether wanting.
In things spiritual which concern the kingdom of God, there is in our
nature an absolute want of good consideration, herein of our selves we have no
good thoughts: we are not of our selves (says 2. Cor. 3. 5.
Paul.) sufficient to think any thing, that is, any good thing, as of our
selves: The whole body of the Gospel is therefore called a mystery, because
the things therein contained and revealed are such as, 1. Cor. 2. 9.
never came into man's heart to think. This want we may observe especially in
four things: 1. in respect of Gods presence and providence: 2. of Gods
Judgments: 3. of our own sins: 4, of our duty to God.

First. man by nature does not think of, The first good thought wanting.
or consider Gods presence and providence to behold and to remember all his
ways in thought, word, and deed: hereof the Lord complains against Ephraim
and Samaria, Hos. 7. 1. 2.
saying; they have dealt falsely -- and they consider not in their hearts that
I remember all their wickedness: And the same is the state of every natural man
being left to himself; for all by nature are equally corrupt with original
sin, and so are destitute of this good thought: which yet may appear the
more plain by this, that naturally man's heart is possessed of the clean
contrary, to wit, God shall not see, God will not regard, as has been showed
before. Page 39. 37.
And indeed it is a work of grace to have the heart rightly affected with this
thought, God beholds all my ways, he considers and remembers every thing I
do; flesh and blood can not attain unto it.

Secondly, a man by nature does not consider or think of the Judgments of
God, The second good thought wanting.
temporal and eternal due unto sin: This thought was wanting in the men of
the old world, though Noah preached unto them an hundred and twenty years of
the gecerall deluge, yet the consideration of it took no place in their
hearts; and therefore it is said, Matthew. 24. 38. 39.
they knew nothing till the flood came and took them all away: from the want
of this thought it came to pass, that Genesis 19. 14.
Lotts sons -- in law, thought their father had but mocked, when he told
them that God would destroy Sodom. Hence it was that the Luke 12. ^^.
Rich fool blessed himself in his heart, saying, soul, soul, take thine
ease, and never bethought himself of any danger till it was said unto him,
verse. 20.
O fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul. And shall we think this
thought is now wanting at this day, seeing Christ has said, Mat. 25. 37.
as it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be at the coming of the son of
man?

Thirdly, a man naturally does never bethink himself, The third good thought
wanting.
of his own sins; he has no purpose of heart seriously to examine his life
past, or to repent of such sins as he finds in him: This appears by the
Lords own complaint against the Jews, who were so far from turning from
their sins, that not one would say in his heart, Ier. 8. 6.
what have I done? nay, when they had committed most sottish Idolatry, Isay.
44. 16. 17. 19. 20.
in making an Idol God of one part of a tree, with the other part thereof they
had roasted their meat and warmed themselves, yet they considered not this in
their hearts, neither had they knowledge or understanding to say, I have burnt
half of it in the fire, I have baked bread upon the coals thereof; I have
roasted flesh, and eaten it; and shall I make the residue thereof an
Abomination?

Fourthly, The fourth good thought wanting.
a natural man does not consider what duty and service he owes unto God: his
mind is wholly bent to his own ways, but the Mat. 25. 18.
Lords tale^t lies hid in the ground wrapped up in a napkin: Hereof the Lord
complains against the Jews, Ier. 5. 24.
that they said not in their hearts let us fear the Lord our God: hence it was
that the, Mat. 25. 3. 8.
foolish virgins did content themselves with the blasing Lamp of an outward
profession, and never be-thought themselves of that oil of grace, which God
required in all those, that would enter with Christ into his bridechamber, till
it was too late: And the slight serving of God at this day, declares the
general want of this consideration.

Sect. 3. The fruit of this want of good thoughts.
Here further we must know that this want of good consideration is a grievous
evil and a mother sin, from whence as from a fountain, streams of
corruptions and transgressions both of heart and life do issue forth; first,
hereby we are disabled from yelding unto God that obedience of heart which his
law requires; for how can we love the Lord with all our thought and mind; and
our neighbor as our selves, as God Luke 10. 27.
commands, when as naturally our hearts are void of all good thoughts toward
God, and toward our neighbors? Again, whence comes sinning with an high
hand, when men sin, and will sin? whence comes it that men bless themselus
in their sins, and flatter themselves in their own eyes, while they go on
in sin, but from want of consideration of Gods presence, and of Gods
judgments? This Abraham knew well, and therefore said of the people of Gerar,
because Genesis 20. 11.
they wanted the fear of God, that is, all consideration of Gods presence, and
of Gods judgments, therefore they would kill him for his wives sake. Whence
also comes that sensuality, whereby men addict themselves wholly to the
profits, pleasures, and honors of this world, never minding heaven or hell,
but from want of consideration of their duty to God? If men did use to call
themselves to account for their sins, or did set before their eyes the
judgments of God due unto them, it could not be that there shoud be such want
of contrition toward God, or of compassion toward their brethren, as every
where abounds. And the like might be said of many other capital sins, all
which proceed from the want of good consideration. Where, by the way, we may
observe, that our common people do far deceive themselves in this persuasion
of themselves, that by nature they have good hearts, and good meaning: If you
charge them with the sins of their lives, they will straightway plead their
good intention, and say, though they sometime fail in action, yet they mean
well always. But the truth is, naturally well meaning, and good consideration,
spiritual things is altogether wanting. And therefore while men do soothe up
themselves in their good meaning, they deceive their own hearts through
ignorance of their natural estate: and they must know, that they can never
come unto Christ that they might have life, till they be quite gone out of
themselves in regard of such conceits.

CHAP. VII.
The use of the former. doctrine.
Sect. 1. That the Scripture is the word of God.
Having seen what evil thoughts be in every man naturally, and what good
thoughts be wanting in him: it follows now to make some use of this doctrine
concerning man's natural Imaginations.

The first use shall be against all Atheists, who think the Scripture to be
mere policy, devised by man to keep men in awe. But we are to know, that the
holy Scripture is no devise of man, but the very word of the everliving God;
which I thus demonstrate out of the former doctrine: The Scripture says in
general, that all the Imaginations of every natural man are evil and that
continually. Now it does not only affirm this in general, but declares it
also in particular; for elsewhere it shows what those particular evil
thoughts be, which the natural mind of man frames concerning God, his
neighbor, and himself. Again, the same Scripture says in general, That
good thoughts and considerations, are naturally wanting in every man; and
elsewhere it declares in particular what those good thoughts be which enter
not into the mind of a natural man: both these have bin plainly showed out of
the word of God. Now hereupon it does necessarily follow that the scripture is
the word of God: for let the cunning Atheist show whence it is that the
scripture does declare man's thoughts; he cannot say, of man; for no man
knows the thoughts of another; nay he cannot find out his own thoughts:
neither can he ascribe it to any angel good or bad; for the mind of man is
hid from them; they know not man's thoughts. It remains therefore, that as
God alone is the searcher of the hearts, so that Scripture which declares unto
man what be his thoughts, is the only word of the same God; Indeed God used
man for his instrument, in the penning and delivery of the scripture, but he
himself by his spirit is the sole author thereof.

Sect. 2. That man has no free will to good by nature.
The second use shall be against the Papists, who ascribe to man's will a
natural power to that which is truly good, Bellarm. de great and lib. arbit. l.
16. c 15. sect. 10.
as by it self to co-worke with Gods grace in the first act of man's
conversion. But the charge of evil here laid upon the frame of man's natural
heart by God himself, does teach us otherwise: for look how far the frame
of the mind, which is the principal part of the soul, is corrupt for
thoughts and Imaginations, so far is the will, the inferior part of the
soul corrupt in willing. But the mind is naturally so corrupt that it can not
think a good thought, and therefore answerably the will by nature is so
corrupt, that it can not will that which is truly good. If it be said, that man
has liberty of will in humane actions and in civil duties: Answ. he has,
but yet such actions proceeding from a corrupt fountain, are sins in every
natural man, howsoever for the matter of the works they may be called good,
being such as God himself ordained.

Sect. 3. Of the timely preventing and suppressing of wicked Imaginations
The third use shall be for admonition unto them, to whom is committed the
education of youth, as Parents Masters, Tutors, etc. that seeing the
imaginations of man's heart are evil from his youth, therefore they must all
join hand in hand betime to stop up, or at least to lessen this corrupt
fountain. Parents must sow the seeds of grace into the minds of their young
children, that if it were possible, even at their mothers breasts they might be
nourished in the faith. Thus dealt Lois and Eunice with their young Timothy:
for Paul says; 2. Tim. 3. 15.
he learned the holy Scriptures (...).
of an infant. Then as their children grow in descretion and use of reason,
they must be Ephesians. 6. 4.
nurtered in religion, and have the grounds thereof by often repetition driven
into their hearts: for this is the best means to free their minds, though not
altogether from natural Imaginations, yet from the force and poison thereof:
for Pro 22. 15.
folly is bound to the heart of a child, but the rod of teaching, that is,
instruction with correction, will drive it away from him: yea, when as the Pro.
29. 15
child set at liberty makes his mother ashamed. yet will Ibid. 27.
the son that is well instructed, give his father rest, and yield delight
unto his soul. Further, where Parents leave, there Masters and Tutours must
take hold, building up that good foundation which is laid to their hand, that
by them also the stream of man's natural Imaginations may be stopped: yea,
though parents should neglect this duty toward their own children, as too
many do at this day, yet each godly master, if he desire to have Gods church
in his house, must in struct his family, as Genesis 18. 19.
Abraham did; and labor for circumcision of heart both to his children and
servants, even as Genesis 17. 23.
Abraham did circumcise not only those that were borne in his family, but
also those that were bought for money. Both Parents and Masters are careful
to prevent diseases, and to break off sickness at the beginning in their
children and servants, which by continuance might bring bodily death, oh then
how careful ought they to be, to stop betime the course of natural
Imagination in them, which without the special grace of God, will bring
eternal condemnation both to soul and body? And the rather must this course
be taken in youth, and that betime, because custom, whether in good or evil,
is a second nature: for Pso: 22. 6.
teach a child in the trade of his way, and when he is old he will not depart
from it: But, Ier. 13. 23.
can the blacke-Moore change his skin, or the leopard her spots? then may he
also do good that is accustomed to do evil: herein the vices of the mind,
are like the diseases of the body; by longer continuance they grow more
incurable. Yea, all that study and read the Scriptures, either for their own
private, or for the public good, must seek by prayer to God for the
sanctification of their minds from this evil corruption* least being left
unto themselves they become vain in their imaginations. David a man according
to Gods own heart, prayed at least ten times in one Psalm. 1^9.
psalm for the teaching of God in the understanding of his law: oh then what
great cause have we so to do, whose Coloss. 1. 21.
minds are naturally set in evil works; being blind in the things of God,
not 1. Cor. 2. 14.
able to perceive them: but on the contrary, wholly prone to invent and to
embrace that which is evil.

Sect, 4. Of repentance for evil thoughts
The fourth and last use shall be for practice to every child of God: for if
the Imaginations of man's heart be evil from his youth, then there must be
repentance for secret thoughts which never come into action; yea, though we
never give consent of will thereto. When Ioell proclaimed a fast, and called
the people to humiliation, he biddes them Joel 2. 13.
rent their he arts, and not their garments: and Peter said to Simon Magus,
Act. 8. 22.
repent of this thy wickedness, and pray God that if it be possible, the thought
of thy heart may be forgiven thee: both which places do plainly show, that
true repentance is not outward in change of speech or attire, but inward in the
change of the thoughts of the mind, and affections of the heart. And hence it
is that Paul prays for the Thessalonians, 1. These. 5. 23.
that they may be sanctified throughout, in soul, in body, and spirit, that
is, in the mind, where is the framing of the thoughts. Now if sanctification
be required in the mind, then must there be repentance of the sins that are
therein. This duty the Lord himself vouchsafes to teach, and therefore we
must make conscience to learn and practice it, if we would be truly turned to
the Lord. And to move us hereunto, consider the reasons following.

First, the curse of God, even the pangs and torments of the damned, 1. Reason.
both in this life and after death, are due to the person of man for his wicked
thoughts: for cursed is every one (says Deuteronomy. 27. 6.
Moses) that continues not in all things that are written in the law to do
the^: so that he which breaks the law but once, and that in thought only, is
accursed, because he has not done all things that are written therein. Now
wicked thoughts are a breach of the law: for Solomon says, Pro. 14. 22. and
Pro. 15. 26.
Do not they err that imagine evil? and again, The thoughts of the wicked
are an abomination to the Lord: yea, the want of good thoughts is a breach of
the Law: for Christ Mark. 12. 30.
says, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy thought: and therefore
wicked thoughts must needs deserve this curse. The fall of the devils was
most fearful and irrecouerable, and (though it be not certain, yet) most
Divines agree in this, that their sin was first in thought; and therefore
wicked thoughts are deadly evils. Also to show the wickedness of evil
thoughts, God has set this brand upon them since the fall of Adam, that by
them not only man's body, but also his mind and memory, are far sooner
confounded then by outward accidents; this was not so by creation, and
therefore it is the heavy curse of God upon them.

Secondly, these wicked thoughts be the root and beginning of all ^uill in
gesture, 2. R^ason.
word, and deed; there cannot be an action before there be a thought: for this
is the order whereby our actions are produced: first the mind thinks; then
that thought delights the affection, Order of producing actions.
and from that comes consent of will; after consent of will, comes
execution of the action, after executiou comes trade and custom by often
practice: and upon custom (if the work be evil) comes the curse, which is
eternal death. How great a cause therefore have we to repent us of the wicked
Imaginations of our hearts? The old world indeed was drowned for their actual
abominations, but no doubt, the Lord had great respect in that judgment to
their wicked thoughts, which were the root of all: and therefore he mentions
them as a cause of the flood. Genesis 6. 5.

In this repentance, 1. examination of evil thoughts.
three things are required; first, a due examination of our heartr concerning
these imaginations; which we may take by the knowledge of those points before
handled, of man's natural thoughts concerning God, his neighbor, and himself:
And to further us herein we must remember that all the evil thoughts before
mentioned be in us naturally, so as if we be left to our selves, when occasion
is offered, we will conceive them in our minds; as that there is no God; that
the word of God is foolishnes, etc. Again we must hear Gods word preached
attentively, and apply, not only our outward senses, but our minds also
thereto, that so it may enter into our hearts; for the word of God, working in
the heart will discover unto a man what be his thoughts: This word (says the
holy Heb. 4. 12.
Ghost) is mighty inoperation, and sharper then any two edged sword, it
enters through even to the dividing a sunder of the soul and the spirits, the
joints and the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart: At the preaching of this word the secrets of the heart of an infidel
are discovered; if all prophecy (says 1 Cor. 14. 25.
Paul) and there come in an infidel, or one unlearned, he is rebuked of all
men, and judged of all, and so are the secrets of his heart made manifest,
whereupon he falls down, and worshippeth God, saying plainly, God is in the
prophets indeed. 2. Prayer for pardon of them.
Secondly, after examination, we must pray for the pardon of our evil
thoughts; A plain commandment of this duty, Peter gives to Simon Magus Act.
8: 22
pray to God says he that the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee: And
undoubtedly he that has not grace to pray for the pardon of his evil
thoughts, has not true repentance in his heart. 3 reformation of evil
thoughts.
Thirdly, we must seek to reform our mind of evil thoughts; this is a
further matter then reformation of life: And it is expressly commanded by the
holy ghost. Ephesians. 4. 23.
Be ye renewed in the spirit of your minds, that is, in the most inward and
secret part of your souls, even where the thoughts and imaginations are framed
and conceived: This duty must be remembered; for Christian religion consists
not in outward shows and behavior, (though thereby we may give comfortable
testimony of Gods inward graces) but it stands principally in the mind, and in
the heart, which must therefore be reformed with the powers and faculties
thereof.

CHAP. VIII.
Rules for the reformation of our evil thoughts.
Sect. 1. Our thoughts must be brought into obedience to God.
FOr the reformation of our thoughts, 1. Rule.
sundry rules must be observed: first, That we bring all our thoughts into the
obedience of God. Every man will grant that words and actions, must be in
subjection; but I say further, every thought in the mind must be conceived in
obedience to God, and no otherways: Solomon Prove. 20. 18.
says, establish thy thoughts by counsel, which may admit this meaning, that
a man must not conceive a thought in his mind, unless he have counsel and
warrant from the word of God so to think: And S. Paul. says. 2. Cor. 10. 5.
The weapons of our warrefare (speaking of the preaching of the gospel) are
not carnal but mighty through God to throw down holds, casting down the
Imaginations, and every thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ; giving us to
understand, that those who submit themselves to the ministry of the word must
be of this mind not only to be conformable thereunto in word and action, but
in every thought of their mind, even those must bow the knee to Christ:
howsoever with men we say thought is free, yet with God it is not so* And
indeed he which has effectually received the grace of Christ, will endeavor
to yield obedience as well in thought, as in word and action: Whatsoever things
are true (says Phillip. 4. 8.
Paul) Whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, pure, and
pertain to love; whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue,
if there be any praise, (he says not only do v. 9.
these things, but) think on these things, where the commandment is plain,
that a man's thoughts must be holy, pure, just, and of such things as are
praiseworthy and of good report, that so they may be conceived in obedience to
God.

Sect. 2. Of the guarding of our hearts.
The second rule for the reformation of our thoughts, 2. Rule.
is given by Solomon Pro. 4. 23.
keep, or countergard thy heart above all watch and ward, that is guard and
keep thy heart more the^ any thing that is watched or guarded, whether city,
house, treasure or such like; and the reason adjoined shows the necessities
of the rule; for out of it come the issues of life.

In the right guarding of the heart, 3. Things in the guarding of the heart.
three duties must be performed: first we must covenant with our outward
senses, resolving fully with our selves by Gods grace, that none of them shall
be the instruments, the beginning or occasion of any sin in heart, or life.
This covenant Job. 31. 1.
Job made with his eyes, not to look upon a maid, to lust after her: And David
Psalm. 119. 37.
prayed the Lord to direct and keep his eyes from beholding vanity: Now look
how these holy men dealt with their eyes, so must we proportionably deal for
all the outward senses of our body; bynding them all, after their example, from
being the means of provocation to any sin: This duty is most necessary,
for the outward senses be the doors and windows of the soul, and unless
good care be had thereto, the devil will enter in by them and fill the soul
with all corruption.

Secondly, 2
we must observe our evil thoughts, and at their first arysing, stop and
restrain them, not suffering them to take any place in our hearts: this is a
special means to preserve and guard the heart; for from the thoughts proceed
all bad desires, corrupt affections, evil words and actions: the mind must
first conceive before the will can desire, or the affections be delighted, or
the members of the body practice any thing, so that whatsoever is of a loose
life, and bad behavior, it comes from the profaneness of his heart in evil
thoughts: neither can it be hoped that any man should reform his life that
will not guard his heart, and keep his mind from wicked imaginations: the
devil cannot work his will upon man's affections, or prevail over man's will
but by thoughts, and therefore it is necessary, that the first motions of
evil in the mind be restrained at the beginning.

Thirdly, we must with all care cherish and maintain every good motion of
Gods spirit that is caused in us by the ministry of the word, or by the advice of Gods children: for these are the sparks and flames of grace, which
Paul means when he says, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.
quench not the spirit.

Sect. 3. Of the elevation of the heart to God. 3. Rule.

Thirdly, for the reformation of our thoughts we must often use elevation of
mind and heart to heaven, where Christ sits at the right hand of his
father. Thus did David unto thee, Psalm. 25. 1.
oh Lord, do I lift up my soul: And Paul, saying of himself and other
Christians, Philip. 3. 20
that they had their conversation in heaven, signifies thus much, that not
only their studies and meditations, but also their dealings in the world were
heavenly. S. James James. 4* ^
bids us, draw near to God, now which way should a poor wretch here below,
draw near to God, but by lifting up his heart to the throne of grace in
heaven, that so God in mercy may draw near unto him by grace? The Lord has
instituted in his Church the use of his last supper, wherein the giving and
receiving of bread and wine does represent and seal up unto us our communion
and participation of the body and blood of Christ given for our redemption:
Now the principal action on our behalf therein required, is this Elevation of
the heart unto God, as well for the contemplation of Gods infinite mercy in
Christ, and of Christ's endless love to us, as for the application of his
merits to our own souls by the hand of faith, as also for the spiritual
resignation of ourselves in souls and bodies, by way of thankfulness, to him
that has redeemed us. Further touching this Elevation we must remember, that
it ought to be our continual and ordinary action unto God: for as it is with
him that keeps a clock, unless he do every day wind up the weights, which
are always going downward, the clock will stand; so it fares with us; our
hearts are ever drawing toward the earth, and the things here below, by
reason of that body of sin Heb. ^2. ^.
which hangs on so fast, and presses down; and therefore we must endeavor
by Gods grace continually to lift them up to heaven: The Apostle bids us, 1 Thessalonians. 5. ^^
pray continually, not that we should do nothing else but pray, but his
meaning is, that we should every day, and every part of the day so often as just
occasion is offered, lift up our hearts unto God. But of all other, there be
three especial times wherein we must use this heavenly Elevation: first in
the morning, by prayer, thanksgiving, or both, before the cogitations of any
earthly affairs come into our minds, that so we may give unto God the first
fruits of our thoughts every day. Secondly, in the evening before we lay down
our bodies to rest, for who knows when he lays himself down to sleep
whether ever he shall rise again alive? Thirdly, at any other time of the
day, wherein we receive any blessing from God temporal, or spiritual, or do
feel our selves to stand in need of any of his gifts, or graces; for seeing
every good gift comes from him, is it not reason we should give this glory to
his name; to lift up our hearts to his throne of grace, whenever we
receive or expect the same from his bountiful hand?

Sect. 5. Of the assurance of our particular reconciliation with God.
Fourthly, 4 Rule.
for the reformation of our thoughts, we must labor to be assured in our
hearts by Gods spirit, of our particular reconciliatio^ with God in Christ.
This is that knowledge of the love of God which passes knowledge, for which
Paul, Ephs. 3. 14. 19.
bowed his knees unto the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the behalf of
the Ephesians: in regard hereof Paul Phillip ^.
esteemed al things loss, yea to be dross and donge. Now when this assurance
is settled in our hearts, it will purify not only the will and affections,
but also the first motions and thoughts of our minds: He that has in
himself this hope (says, 1. Ioh. 3. 3.
S. John purifieth himself as God is pure. For when a man shall be truly
persuaded in his heart, that of a vile sinner, even the child of wrath, he is
made the child of God, and a vessel of honor acceptable to God, enjoying his
love, and favor in Christ, then will he reason thus with himself, has God
of his endless mercy vouchsafed to receive me into his grace and favor,
that otherways should have been a fyrebrand of hell for evermore: oh then,
how should I suffer my mind, my will, and affections, to be any longer the
instruments of sin, whereby I shall displease so gracious a God, and cast my
self out of his love and favor: nay, but I will employ my soul which he
has redeemed with all the powers and faculties thereof, as weapons of
righteousness for the advancement of his glory.

Sect. 5. Of spiritual consideration.
Lastly, 5. Rul^*
if we would reform our thoughts, we must give our selves to spiritual
consideration or meditation. By Spiritual consideration I mean any action of
the mind renewed and sanctified, whereby it does seriously think on those
things which may further salvation. This consideration I call spiritual, to
distinguish it from earthly plotting care, whereby natural men show themselves
wise and provident for the things of this life, though in the matters of God
which concern salvation, they be blind and ignorant. Also I add, it must be
an action of a mind renewed and sanctified, because the natural man perceives
not the things of the spirit of God, ^. Cor. 2. 14.
they seem foolishnes unto him, and therefore he cannot give his mind unto
them.

Now the excellent use of this rule will plainly appear by the fruitful
practice of it in the Prophet David: for what was more usual with him then
spiritual and heavenly meditation? sometime upon Ps. 119. 55.
God himself; sometime Ps* 119. 97.
on the works of God; sometime Ps. 119. 59.
on his own ways: and Ps. 119. 98
continually on Gods word: now sanctifying this duty by prayer, as it is
plain he did continually, Psalm. 19. 14. Let the meditation of my heart, oh
Lord, be acceptable in thy sight: hence it came to pass, that he professed
an Ps. 119. 11^
hatred unto vain inventions, which are the proper effects of an unreformed
mind: and on the contrary, by this godly practice he Ps. 119. ^^*
got more understanding the^ his teachers; yea he attained to this excellent
state of a renewed mind, that Ps. 16. 7.
his raines, whereby he means the most secret part of his soul, taught him
in the night season. And in reason we may perceive the truth hereof: for
seeing contraries do mutually expel one another, what can be more effectual
to purge the mind of evil thoughts, then to exercise the same with spiritual
considerations: for when through the blessing of God, these shall take place,
the other must needs be gone: in regard whereof it shall not be amiss
somewhat to insist in the handling of them.

CHAP. IX.
Of spiritual consideration concerning God.
Sect. 1. Of the consideration of Gods presence.
Spiritual considerations serving for the reformation of our thoughts, does
either concern God, or our selves. That which concerns God contains many
branches, but I will insist in four especially. First, touching Gods presence,
whereby a man does think and so resolve himself, that wheresoever he is, he
stands before God, and that all his thoughts, words, and deeds are naked in
Gods sight: David's heart was filled with this consideration, when he penned the
139. psalm: for that whole psalm from the beginning to the end serves to
express this holy cogitation of Gods presence: the like impression must we
labor to have in our hearts touching Gods presence: for it is the most notable
means, to cleanse the heart from evil thoughts, to restrain the will and
affections from wicked delights, and to keep in order the whole man, causing
him to stand in the awe of Gods commandments. David says, Psalm. 19. 9.
The fear of the Lord is clean; meaning thereby, that that man which has the
fear of God in his heart arising from this consideration of Gods presence,
has a clean and pure heart. This consideration also is a notable means of
comfort in the time of trouble and danger: hence David Psalm. 23. 4.
says, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear
none evil: for the Lord is with me: and hence it was that Psalm. 3. 6.
he would not be afraid for ten thousand of the people that should rise up
against him.

Sect. 2. The consideration of Gods judgments.
The second consideration touching God, is of his judgments, not only those
which were done of old, and are recorded in the Scripture, or other histories;
but even his late judgments which we behold, or hear to fall upon Kingdoms,
Towns, particular houses, and persons, must we carefully lay unto our hearts.
Of the want hereof the Lord complains among his people saying, Ier 12. 1^
The whole land lies wast, because no man sets his mind on it: giving us
to understand, that the neglect of due consideration of Gods judgment brought
desolation to the whole land, and therefore the want thereof is a maine and
grievous sin, bringing further judgments with it.

God has sundry times sent his judgments among us; generally by plague, and
famine; and particularly on sundry families, and persons; but who regards
them? Wherefore unless we will double Gods judgments upon us, let us
remember our duty, and seriously think upon them. And that this consideration
may be profitable unto us, we must do three things: first, we must carefully
observe, mark, and remember them: Psalm. 119. 52. I remember thy Judgments of
old, O Lord. The Lords people were much wanting therein, as Psalm. 78. 11. 42.
Secondly, we must apply them to our own person in particular, so as the
thought thereof may make us afraid, though they befall others. When Hab. 3. 16.
Habakuck in a vision saw the judgments of God, which were to come upon the
Chaldeans, the consideration thereof was so powerful with him, that it made
him tremble and quake In a family when the father beats his servant the
child fears; and when one child is beaten, then all the rest cry: even so
when God our father powers down his judgments, though upon the heathen, yet
we must fear; but when any of his children are afflicted, it must strike
soar to our hearts. Thirdly, we must make use of Gods judgments that light
upon others, by applying them to our selves. When certain men brought news to
our Savior Christ of an heavy judgment upon some Luke 13, 1, 2, 3.
Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their own sacrifices,
immediately our Savior labors to bring them that told him to make use thereof
for their own good, saying, that thereby they ought to be moved to
repentance: for they that were slain, were no greater sinners then the rest:
and therefore except they who told that news did amend their lives, they
should also perish. So that whenever we see or hear of any judgment of God
upon others, we must thereby be moved to repent: and thus doing, we shall
come to a right consideration of gods Judgments.

Sect. 3. The consideration of Gods word.
The third consideration concerning God, is of his word. David makes it the
property of a blessed man, Ps. 1. 2.
to meditate in the law of God day and night: and he professes of himself,
that Ps. 119 97.
it was his meditation continually: yea oftentimes he promises to v. 15.
meditate in Gods precepts, to v. 16.
delight in Gods statutes. This is Luke 2. 51.
Mary's praise, that she kept in her heart sundry things which Jesus spoke.
And so ought every child of God, high or low, daily and continually to meditate
in the word of God. But, alas, this duty is little known and less practiced:
men are so far from meditating in Gods word, that they are ignorant of it.
Among many families you shall scarce find the book of God: and such as have
it, for the most part, do little use it. The statutes of the land are by very
many searched out diligently, but in the mean time the statutes of the Lord
are little regarded: oh that men knew the sweet comfort Romans 15. 4.
of the Scriptures, then certainly they would account their meditation therein
Ier. 15. 16.
the joy and rejoicing of their heart.

Now the right consideration of Gods word consists in three things: first, we
must observe the true sense, and meaning of that which we hear, or read;
secondly, we must mark what experience we have had of the truth of the word in
our own persons; as in the exercises of Repentance, and Invocation of Gods
name, and in all our Temptations: this is a special point in this meditation,
without which the former is nothing. Thirdly, we must consider how far forth
we have been answerable to Gods word in obedience, and wherein we have been
defective by transgressions. Again in the word of God, there be both
commandments, and promises: The consideration of Gods commandments is a
notable means to direct, and moderate, not only our words, and deeds, but
also our secret thoughts and desires: for if before we think, before we will,
or speak any thing, we would first consider that god commands us to think, to
will, and speak thus and thus; this would mightily stay, and suppress in us
all corrupt Thoughts and desires, all evil words, and actions: The promises
of God likewise duly considered would greatly further us in good Thoughts: for
to them that think on good things, shall be mercy and Truth. Prove. 14. 22. The
cause then why many that know the will of God, so much fail in particular
obedience is because that with their knowledge, they do not join this serious
consideration of Gods commandments, and promises, and apply the same to their
occasions.

Sect 4. The consideration of Gods works.
The fourth consideration concerning God, is of his works: for as David says,
Psalm. 11. 2.
The works of the Lord are great, and ought to be sought out of all that love
him. This consideration binds us to enquire, and search what be the works of
God toward us; his work of creation, his providence, preservation, with all
other his works of mercy and Justice in us, and upon us: whether ordinary: or
extraordinary: The prophet Esaias. 5. 11, 12.
Isay denounces a woe against those that had the harp, and vyoll, Timbrell
and Pype, and wine in their feasts, and regarded not the work of God, nor
considered the work of his hands; whereby we may see that the neglect hereof,
is a grievous sin, and yet it is the common sin of this age.

Now for the better performance of this duty, we must thus proceed; first we
must consider our creation, how the Lord gave us being, when we were nothing;
and how he made us reasonable creatures, and not brute beasts, yea, he created
us in his own image, when as he might if it had so pleased him, have made us
Toades, and Serpents: Secondly, we must consider his good providence over us,
how he has preserved our life from time, to time, and saved us from many
dangers: And his great patience must not be forgotten, how he has spared us
from the righteous Judgments of our sins; he might have cast us into hell,
in our mothers womb, or so soon as we were borne for our original sin:
But he has given us a large time of Repentance. Here also we must consider
his exceeding favor in the time and place of our birth, and life: he might
have suffered us to have been borne among Infidels: but behold we were borne
in the bosom of Gods Church: he might have deprived us of the means of our
salvation, his holy word and Sacraments; but in his tender mercy he has
vouchsafed them unto us, to bring our souls to life. He might have, Isay. 63.
17.
hardened our hearts against his fear, and blinded our eyes against his light,
Romans 11. 8.
but yet he has enlightened our minds to know his truth, and softened our
hearts causing us to cry unto him for the pardon of our sin; he might have
Romans 1. 28.
given us up to a reprobate sense, when we swerued from his testimonies, and
reguarded not the knowledge of his will: but lo, as a loving father he has
often Heb. 12. 10.
chastened us. for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness: He
might have left us comfortles under the reproach of the wicked, but he has
vouchsafed us his spirit, for our everlasting comforter. Thus must we duly
consider of all these wonderful works of God toward us, and not like the
men of this world, think on nothing but pastimes, honors, and commodities;
This will be a notable means to keep our hearts from evil thoughts: for
whose heart will not relent toward his God, that so many ways has tasted of
his bounty toward him? yea, this consideration will be an exceeding stay
and comfort to our souls in the day of trouble, and distress: so Solomon
says: Ecles. 5. 15. 16.
Behold the work of God, and in the day of affliction consider: A natural
man cannot away with trouble, if sorrows increase upon him, he is ready to
make away himself, which comes of this that he can not consider the works of
God, for he that can rightly meditate on Gods goodness toward him in all his
works, shall be able with patience to support his soul under the greatest
cross. A practice hereof we may see in David who being in a most grievous
temptation, so as he cried out, Psalm. 77. 8.
Is the Lords mercy clean gone? has he forgotten to be merciful, etc. Did
yet recover himself by the consideration of Gods former works of mercy, and
of his v. 11. 12.
wonders of old, whereof he had experience in his own person.

CHAP. X.
Of spiritual considerations which concern our selves.
Sect. 5. The consideration of our own personal sins.
THe considerations which respect our selves are six: First, we must consider
our own personal sins; as well the corruptions of our hearts, as the
actual Transgressions of our lives. This was David's practice; Psalm. 115. 59.
I considered my ways says he) and turned my feet, into thy testimonies.
The Jews likewise in their great affliction, stirred up themselves to this
duty, saying one to another; Lam. 3. 40.
come let us search, and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord.

In this consideration of our sins, we must do three things: First,
seriouslly call to mind in what manner we have sinned; whether of ignorance
or of knowledge, of weakness through infirmity or of wilfulness through
presumption: Secondly, we must duly waighe the greatness of our particular
sins, even of the least of them, remembering this, that by every sin we
commit, Gods infinite majesty is displeased, and his justice violated:
Thirdly, we must consider the number of our sins; which we shall nearest
attain unto, by searching out our Thoughts, our wills, and affections, our
words, and actions, all which being diligently observed, will make us cry out,
that they be in number as the hairs of our head, and the sands by the
Sea-shoare. Quest. But what if a man have truly repented him of his sins,
must he still use this consideration of them? Answ. Yes verily, although he be
assured of the pardon of them: so did David after Nathan told him thy sins
are forgiven; he penned the 51. Psalm, and when he was high in Gods favor,
he prayed still for the Psalm. 25. 7.
pardon of the sins of his youth: for howsoever God in mercy put our sins
out of his remembrance upon our true repentance, yet we must never put them out
of our remembrance, so long as we live in this world; because the consideration
of them, though they be pardoned, is a notable means both to move us to
renew our repentance, and also to make us watchful against sin in time to
come.

Sect. 2. Of man's misery through his sins.
Secondly, we must consider the misery into which every one is plunged by
nature through Adams fall, and his own sins. This was Jobs meditation,
saying, Job. 14. 1.
Man that is borne of a woman, has but a short time to live, he is full of
misery: and so goes on most notably describing the misery of man: yea, this
was Salomons consideration in the whole book of Ecclesiastes, from the
beginning to the end.

Now that this consideration may take place in our hearts, Man's natural
misery branthed out.
we must enter into a particular view of this our natural misery: the
principal branches whereof be these: first, a separation from all fellowship
for as Isai Isa. 59. 2.
says, Our sins have separated between God and us: and this is the special
part of man's misery. Secondly, society and standing in this, that man by
nature bears the image of the devil, and withal performs service unto him
in the practice of lying, injustice, cruelty, and all manner of sin.
Thirdly, all manner of as ignominy in good name, pains and diseases in the
body, losses, and damages in friends, the horror of a guilty conscience,
which is in it self the beginning of hell torments: for it is our accuser unto
God, our Judge to give sentence against us, and the very hangman of our souls
to condemn us eternally. Fifthly, the second death, which is the full
apprehension of the eternal fury but upon the whole man both body and soul,
and that for ever? No tongue can express, nay no heart can conceive the
greatness of this terror, and therefore it must be an occasion both to begin
and increase true repentance in us daily.

Sect. 3. Of our own particular temptations.
Thirdly, we must consider our own particular Temptations wherewith we are
most assaulted through the malice of Satan, and our own corruption. Be sober
and watch (says 1. Pet. 5. 8.
Peter) for your adversary the devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking
whom he may devour. This was Paul's practice toward the incestuous man, whom
he had enjoined to be excommunicate, for after he heard of his repentance,
he gave direction that he should be received into the Church again, least
he were swallowed up of over much heaviness, and so Satan should circumvent
them: for (says 2. Cor. 2. ^ and 11.
he) we are not ignorant of his enterprises. If foreign enemies should
seek the invasion of our land, not only our magistrates, but every ordinary
man well affected to his Country, would bethink himself what coast were the
weakest, that thither present defense might be sent to keep out the enemies;
even so, seeing the devil does assault us daily, we must enter into serious
consideration of our thoughts, wills; and affections, and see in what part we
be most weak, and in what inclination Satan may most easily prevail against
us, which we shall best epsy by observing the sins of our lives; and this
will make us arm our selves against him by Gods grace, even in the weakest
parts, that he break not into our hearts, to the ruin of our souls.

This consideration concerns all men, not only the dissolute and sinful,
but even those that have received most grace. It were infinite to go through
all the temptations of Satan* consider this one for all, An ordinary and yet
most dangerous temptation.
whereby he kills many a soul; Through the whole course of men's lives, he
labors to fill their hearts with carnal security, and to bring them to
neglect the ordinary means of salvation; this done, he seeks to keep them in
this estate all their life long: but in the end he takes an other course, for
when death approaches, then he seeks to strike their minds with oblivion of
gods mercies, and to fill their souls with terrors in regard of their sins,
and of Gods judgments due unto them; that so bereauing them of all hope of
mercy, he may bring them to final despair: We therefore being forewarned
of his deadly fraud, must seriously bethink our selves of this temptation, and
cast with our selves every day how to avoid it. This we shall do if we shake
off carnal security, and negligence in the means of our salvation: and
provide betimes for the assurance of Gods love and favor, that when death
shall come, we may be free from the terror of an evil conscience, and have
strong hope, and consolation in Christ Jesus.

Sect. 4. Of our particular end.
Fourthly, we must consider our particular end. The Lord complains of the
want hereof in his own people, Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
Oh that they were wise, then would they consider this; They would consider
their latter end. In this consideration three points must be observed: first,
that the time of death is uncertain, no man knows when he must dye:
secondly, that the place is uncertain, no man knows where he must dye:
thirdly, that the manner of his death is uncertain, none knows by what death
he shall glorify God and therefore that we may not deceive our selves, we
must think that most fearful, and grievous ends may befall us, in regard of
the bodily pain, and torment, eue^ then when we little fear or suspect any
such thing. This consideration will be a notable means, to stir up our
hearts either to begin, or renew our repentance: when wicked 1. King. 21. 27.
Ahab heard of his fearful end, he was humbled: And the Ninivites being
told of their sudden destruction, Jonah. 3. 56.
repented in Sackcloath, and Ashes, and turned to the Lord.

Sect. 5. Of our straight account at the last day.
Fifthly, we must often consider with our selves, and that most seriously, of
that straight account, and reckoning of all our thoughts, words, and actions,
which we must make unto God at the last day of judgment. This is the
principal consideration of all, and the want hereof a fearful sin, arguing
great negligence, ignorance, blyndnes of mind, and hardness of heart: If a
Traveller come into an Inn, having but one penny in his purse and call for all
manner of dainty fare, and provision, spending sumptuously, will not al men
judge him void of all consideration, since he has nothing to pay, when his
account is to be made? lo, this, or worser is the most men's case, who in this
life pursue their profits and pleasures, with all eagernes, they care not how,
never regarding that reckonning which they must make unto God, at his terrible
day of accounts with all the world: and therefore though the former
considerations will not, yet let this take place in our hearts, to move us to
a daily forehand reckonning with God in the practice of true repentance, and to
employ the good gifts and blessings we receive from God, like good servants,
unto the best advantage of his glory, that when this account is to be made, we
may give it with joy, and not with fear. And that this consideration is
effectual to this purpose, Solomon teaches in using it as his farewell with
dissolute youth, with whom otherways he has little hope to prevail, saying
Ecclesiast. 11. 9.
go too thou young man, take thy pleasure in thy youth, yet know, that for all
this, thou must come to Judgment. But how powerful it is with Gods child, we
may see in Paul, Act. 24. 15.
who professes of himself that in regard of this account, he endeavored to
have always a clear conscience toward God, and toward men.

Sect. 6. Of our present estate toward God.
Lastly, we must seriously consider of our present estate toward God, whether
we be in the state of sin, or in the state of grace; whether we belong to the
kingdom of darkness, or be true members of the kingdom of Christ: It is not
enough to be in the Church, but we must be sure, we be of the Church; For many
wolves, and Goats be in Gods fould; They went out from us (says S. 1. John.
1. 19.
John) but they were not of us: And therefore Paul advises to this
consideration, saying, 2. Cor. 13. 5.
prove your selves, whether you be in the faith or not. The want hereof was
the fearful sin of the foolish virgins, Mat. 25. 3.
who contented themselves with a show of religion, having the blasing lamps of
outward profession; and labored not for that oil of true grace, which might
enlighten their souls to the fruition of Gods glory: yea, this is the common
sin of this age, men bless themselves in their good meaning, saying they
hope well; and do not through search, whether they be true members of gods
Church or not: Now if after trial it appear, that true faith and repentance
be wanting in us, which are the seals of Adoption in Gods children then with
all good conscience, we must use the means appointed of God to obtain these
graces for our assurance; the comfort whereof will be so precious unto our
souls, that we shall abhor to admit such wicked Imaginations into our minds,
as any way tend to deprive us of it.

These are the considerations which respect our selves; whereunto if we give
our minds in a constant course, as also to the former which concern the Lord,
observing withal the rules before prescribed, through Gods blessing upon our
endeavor, we shall undoubtedly find by good experience, that evil thoughts
shall not prevail against us: but being reformed in our cogitations, we shall
send out of our minds as from a cleansed fountain, such streams of good
words and works, through the whole course of our lives, as shall redound to the
glory of our God, the good of our brethren, and the consolation of our own
souls, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father, and the holy
Ghost, be praise in his church for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

