A True Report of three strange and wonderful Accidents, lately hapened at
PERNAW, a City in Lifflande.

Wherein is contained a Prophecy of the great Dearth and Famine, which (by
reason of the wars in those parts) has there come to pass in the year
last past, 1602.

And also of the great Victory lately atchiued by the great Sophy, who with
the aid and assistance of the King of Persia, overthrew the Turkish Emperor
with all his forces near unto the River Euphrates.

Truly translated out of the Dutch printed Coppie, printed at Nimmegen,
printer's device: woman (?) holding book and large palm

At London printed by R. B 1603.

robed figure with staff in left hand

A true Report of three strange accidents which lately happened at Pernaw, a
City in Lifflande etc.
WE find (gentle reader) in ancient Histories, and principally in the works
of that famous and learned writer Flauius Josephus lib. 7. cap. 12. that before
the lamentable and woeful destruction of Jerusalem, there appeared many strange
signs both in the air, and among the people, namely there was seen right
about the said City a dreadful Star, in form and fashion of a Sword: as
also that in the dark night clear day appeared and was seen in the Temple:
that a Cow brought forth a Lamb, and which was most strange, a certain man
went up and down among the people, continually for the space of seven years
before, not ceasing with woeful cries, to forwarne and admonish the people to
forsake their wickedness: fore showing the destruction of the place.

The very like, yea and almost the very same accidents signs and wonders,
have lately happened within this whilome most pleasante Country of Livonia, in
the City of Pernaw: for in the year 1599. upon Saint Lukes day, a certain
Merchant of the said City, having (according to the custom of the Country)
enuited many of his friends and Neighbors to a feast at his house, among the
rest also, enuited thither a certain old man of the same City whose name was
Style, a man of the age of four score years or thereabout, known to all the
inhabitants there to be borne deaf and dumb, and had so continued all his
life time to that day.

This old man being placed at the table among the company, and seeing the great
and horrible abuse of the good guiftes and creatures of God which were there
provided, by those abominable vices of gluttony and drunkenness, and not being
able to endure the sight thereof, by the just judgment of God presently leapt
over the Table, and with a fierce and stern countenance, turning his eyes
toward the people, and wringing his hands as a sign of the great sorrow which
he conceived at his heart, burst forth in these speeches to the Company which
were present.

Alas quoth he (my dear friends) how can you be thus merry, when a man seeing
this abominable abuse, to the high displeasure of almighty God, might well
loathe to live any longer in so wicked a time. Therefore (dear brethren and
sisters) repent, repent I say, for the punnishment of the Lord God is near at
hand: with great storms and ouerflowing waters, will he destroy the wicked,
and nothing but affliction and punnishment shall be their portion.

Such dearth that year shall be that the people shall not find any food for
nourishment, nor any way to escape by reason of the troublesome war to come:
great plague pestilence and murren shall destroy both young and old, therefore
live ye as if presently ye should die, for surely it is at hand: great and
horrible wonders shall ye hear, and see many strange and monstrous Children
borne, as a looking-glass both for rich and poor.

The people with great admiration and astonishment came running together to see
this miracle which had happenned, and the Company which were enuited being
dashed with this sudden accident, haueing now given over their pastime and
being sore amassed were with one accord attentive to the speeches of the old
man, perceiving as well by his strange gestures as by the suddainnes of his
speech that this was Gods only doings: and being moved with great fear and
horror, asked him at what time all those things should happen: wheruppon the
said dumb man thus presently replied.

Ere the year 99 be come and past, the Lord God in his just anger and wrath
will draw his sword, therefore repent you of your sins, for the day of
judgment is at hand.

These words spoken, the man was again bereft of his speech, and became dumb
as before, feeling him self presently sick, and the next day after he died:
and was honorably buried, being accompanied to ye Church, by an infinite number
of the inhabitants there, who greatly lamented for his death.

The next day after his burial, there was a certain woman brought forth a man
child, with a natural face before, and behind like the scull of a dead man,
his right arm also was like a Sword, and the other like a Rod: which child
lived two days and no longer.

After this the Lord showed an other, no less fearful sign of his
indignation and wrath, for just over the said City of Pernaw, was perfectly
seen in the clear Firmament or Sky, a Beer and Coffin, covered all with
black: which sight endured from four of the clock in the afternoon, till
eleven in the same Night.

Therefore good christians, consider first the sudden and fearful speech of
the Dumb, secondly, look upon the monstrous birth and shape of this Child,
and lastly, meditate upon the fearful sign seen in the Air, and thereupon
with an humble and penitent heart, imagine the Tragical end of all, pitying
the afflicted Country and people of Lyffeland, and let their hard fortune be a
warning to thee, that thou sin no more presumptuously.

And as ye heathen Poet says. Foelix que^ saciunt aliena pericula cautum,
that is to say, happy is he which can beware by other men's perilles: make thy
self happy with this warning, and do not with the wicked and stubborn
Jews, contemn and scorn, this gentle admonition, and fore-warning of the
Dumb, least God in his Justice bring a worse Plague upon us, then he did
either upon those Jews or upon this Country of Lyffeland.

FINIS.
A True Report of the great Victory lately atchiued by the great SOPHY: who
with the aid and assistance of the the king of Persia, overthrew the Turkish
Emperor with all his forces, near unto the river Euphrates.

Truly translated out of the high Dutch Copy printed at Hamborrow. 1602.

printer's device: woman (?) holding book and large palm

At London printed (...) 1603.

A true Report, of the late victory atchiued by the great Sophy: together with
the king of Persia, upon the Turks etc.
WHereas the great Turkish Emperor with all his Army, munition, and
preparation, was come to the River of Euphrates, being strong both of Horse and
foot, about three hundred Thousand men, and perceauing that Morath general of
ye Persians, had caused the Bridge to be pulled down there, yt was made over
the said River, and that he was marched on the other side, and hard by a
mountain did prepare and strengthen himself with ye forces sent unto him by
ye great Sophy, with those he had before, so that the Persians were strong
about Foure-score and ten Thousand men, amongst the which were about twenty
Thousand, whereof every one of them, had two horses for a man.

The Turk could not have so much inteligence to understand if the Sophy
himself were personally present in the Camp, or no: or if he yet were in
Persia for more forces, which he especially did fear.

Because therefore he could not pass over the River, he in all have caused the
bridge to be builded again, and sent over the said River two Genneralls called
Bellerbyes with their forces, to wit Bellerby of Gretia and Bellerby of
Natolia, but he himself tarried on this side of the water till the next
morning.

Now about two hours before day breaking the Gennerall Moreth fell in the
Camp of Bellerby of Grecia, who had encamped himself somewhat far off from
the Bellerby of Natolia, and most valiently came upon him with such a force
and power, that he upon a soddaine most speedily did overcome all his Ensigns
and Lents, and overthrew and slew all his Camp.

The Soldiers of the Camp of the Bellerby of Natolia heerwitha^ll were put in
such a fear, that they ran in to the River, and passed over to the Camp of
the great Turk,

The Turk seeing this ill success, presently planted his Ordenaunce in good
order one by an other, and placed the same right against the Enemy which was
on the other side of the water: and because they thould not see the Ordinance,
he commanded that some Companies should be placed and stand before the said
Ordinance, with this token, that when the pieces of Ordinance should be all in
readiness and charged, they should sound Alarm and the said Companies standing
before the said Ordinance should part aside, and so to discharge the said
pieces of Ordinance upon the Enemy.

This determination being agreed upon, and fire being put to the aforesaid
Ordenance, many of them did hurst and fly abroad, and slew and hurt a notable
number of men, yea and many of the Turkish Army: by the noise, cry, and tumult
whereof, many Horses and Mules, with those that were on the backs of them did
leap into the River and were drowned,

The Sophians and Persians which had sustained great loss of men by means of
the Ordinance, retired on the other side of the Mountain, and it was supposed
that at that time were slain and shot to death about Twenty thousand Sophians
and Persians.

They retireing so backwards as is aforesaid, the Turk with all his whole
Army passed over the River, and marched toward the Mountain where the
Sophians were encamped, who had divided themselves into four parts or
squadrons, keeping close together: and when they saw that the Turks came
upon them, they were glad, and most valiently met and sought with them so that
on both sides many men were slain: but the night ouertooke them, which was to
the advantage of the Sophians for it was not possible that they could resist
and withstand and lounger against the great force and power of the Turks,
therefore by Night they all did fly to the Mountain, the Turks for
darkness could not follow them, as they were minded and would feign have done
and so the Turk tarrying in the fields that Night purposed and concluded the
next day to leave all his footmen with the pieces of Ordinance behind him and
with horsemen only to pursue the Enemies and by these means unawares to
surprise and take the Town of Tauris, before those of the Town should hear
of the overthrow of the Sophy.

But on the other side, the Persians and Sophians, which dilligently did look
to themselves, and had great care to the matter, concluded with themselves,
that ten thousand men which were the day before newly arrived, should march
against the Turks, and when the Turks should come upon them, they should
flee, as if they voice overcome, and the rest of the Sophians and Persians,
which were yet about twenty thousand, should come behind the Turks, and
compassed them between them both, and without doubt they should speed well,
and overcome their enemies. The next morning, the Turk seeing that the enemy
was yet so near at hand, he thought they had not bin able to fly any further
for darkness, came upon the^ with great force: but they presently according to
their agreement did fly, and the Turks not thinking on this martial policy,
did pursue them till noone, and being come to a small River, because they were
somewhat weary, and tired, encamped themselves on the said Rivers side and
there dined: and after dinner the fresh Turks leaving the wearied and tired
Companies with all their treasures and spoils behind them, thinking the next
night unawares to surprise the Town of Tauris, did pursue and chase the
Persians and Sophians, in their fained flight.

But when they came to the Town, in all have a post came to the great Turk
about two hours in the night, who certified unto him that the ennimie had
ouerthrown and slain all his footmen which he had left behind, and that they
had gotten the pieces of Ordinance, and still were coming with all their forces
behind him.

The Turk hearing such news, and thinking on the great treasure that he had
left behind him, presently went back again, and the Persians and Sophians
which heertofore did fly, turned also back again, and saw that their forces
did follow and pursue the Turks behind. The Turks which tarried with the
treasure on the said water side, perceiving their Enemies did break up and
run away, the Persians and Sophians being before and behind the Turks, came
fiercely and valiantly upon them, and did great hurt amongst them.

The great Turk much discontented, seeing that the Ennemie had so craftily
compassed and brought him in the middle between them, begun a most hard and
hot battle, wherein the Sophians and Persians got the victory: which when
the Turks saw, they did fly out on the one side, for otherwise it was not
possible for them to escape.

The Turkish Emperor himself, when he saw that all his forces did fly, and
that all his Ensigns were taken, did likewise fly to save his life, and came
with a most swifte horse to Amasia, and tarried in Natolia till the romnant of
his Army (which was very little) was gathered together: for the Turks did
nothing but fly all the Night, and al those which were slack in running, were
all cut down: and those that came over the River pulled down the bridge made
by them before, to the end the Persians should not pursue them: but the
Persians and Sophians being glad of the victory, as Conquerours of the field,
went home again: although they would feign have prosecuted their victory, had
not the most part of their forces been slain

Performed in Anno Domini. 1602

FINIS.
A True and Lamentable Report of the miserable and pitiful present state of
the Country of LIVONIA, (commonly called Lyffelande) concerning the great
Dearth and Famine now being there, [by reason of the VVarres] in such sort
that one Neighbor and Friend does kill an other and eat them, the like never
before, either seen or heard of. ()

Written by credible and great personages of that Country, unto the reverend
and learned Conrado Schlusselborrow, Doctor in Divinity, and Superintendant in
the City of Stralsunde in Suetia.

Truly translated out of the high Dutch Copy printed at Hamborrow. 1602.

At London printed by R. B. 1603.

A true Relation of the miserable and pitiful state of the Country of L.
IVONIA, assicted with great Dearth Famine etc.
MOst Reverend and learned Doctor, occasion serving at this present time I
could not omit to certify unto your worship the lamentable and pitiful
estate of this sore afflicted country of Lyffland, for surely the just wrath of
God by reason of our manifold sins, is kindled against us.

And first by reason of these wars, many thousand men were slain and put to
ye sword on both sides, as well Germans, Dutchmen, Swedens, Polonia^s: as also
other nations, amongst the which many without any respect of person, sex or
age most truelly were racked, martyred and burned, yea the fruit in the
Mothers Womb was not spared, the little Infants were taken and held up by the
feet, and without any mercy most barbarously massacred and cut into pieces.

Secondly, there was here such wonderful and strange diseases and sicknesses
almost amongst al men, that they did fall down in the streets and fields, and
became mad and senseless yea and the most part died thereof.

Thirdly there was never such great dearth and famine, especially amongst the
poor Husbandman and Country folk, insomuch that Many did eat the dead
carions that they found in the fields, as Horses, Cats, Dogs, and also the
very shoes of their feet, yea one Christian body has eaten an other: and
especially which is most wonderful and never heard of before. That in the
Town of Salis two Daughters did eat their deseased Father, and also a woman
did eat her deseased husband. And at another place one neighbor sent his
child to one of his neighbors to fetch or carry something, who took the child
and cut his throat, and whilst he was taking out the intrailes, the Father of
the child [who die marvel of the long tarrying of his Child came and
perceauing that his Child was slaughtered in manner aforesaid, was in a mighty
rage, and fought with his neighbor who likewise killed ye father of ye child,
and dressed him for meat and eat him. Such fearful and heavy accidents do
daily happen with us in Lyffland. God almighty most graciously deliver us and
show his mercy upon us.

Dated at Pernaw, the fourth of September. Anno 1602.
A true Copy of a Letter written and sent from the Castle of Osel, of the
miserable estat^ at this present time of Lyffland: Written by M. Frauncis
Rappen the elder Gentl. unto the reverend father M. Peter Dvdderstedten,
Preacher in ye City of new Pernaw. ()
Reverend and learned father, Friend and Kinsman. I and all my household with
all our hearts are very sorry and most pitifully grieved to he are the miserable
estate, which you by reason of the fearful raising of wars, have sustained,
we likewise here in these places are troubled and plagued with famine (God
Almighty show his mercy upon us, and save us and deliver us from it) insomuch
that if it pleased God we had rather to choose a plague for it. Seeing that not
only the poor people staruing and famishing do fall down and die in the
streets and ways, going one neighbor to an other, and do still strive and
fight for dead cattle which die of the murren, and most gree dely do eat the
carions of the fleide and do not regard how unnatural it is to devour dead
swyne, dogs and catte^ but also one Christian and friend kills and eats
another, the parents do dress for meat their children when they are dead by
reason of the great Dearth, for the Enemy has wasted: spoiled all the
Country; and robbed every one of their goods, for which causes you have been
constrained to go with your wife and family out of these countries into Germany.

And although we would feign give double money for Corn, we can here get
none seeing all is gone, partly spoiled and wasted upon the Fields, and partly
by reason of the cold Summer it could not ripe, insomuch that all my Tennantes
cannot furnish nor provide me of a bushel of corn to relieve my poor family,
who for very hunger do starve and famish which most pitifully does grieve my
heart.

I pray the Lord of Heaven mercifully to look upon us, and deliver us from
this most lamentable estate.

Dated at Osel the 22. of September. 1602. Your worships friend Francis Rappen
the elder.

FINIS.

