A FAITHFVLL AND plain exposition upon the 2. chapter of Zephaniah: By that
Reverend and Judicious Divine, M. W. Perkins.

CONTAINING A powerful exhortation to Repentance: As also the manner how men
in Repentance are to search themselves.

Published by a Preacher of the word.

With a Preface prefixed, touching the publishing of M. Perkins his works. And
a Catalogue of all such particulars thereof, as are to be expected.

The fifth Impression.

Prou. 28. 13. He that hides his sins shall not prosper. But he that
confesses and forsakes them, shall find mercy.

At London, printed by T. C. for William Welby. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful, my very worthy and Christian friend, Sir William
Gee, knight, one of his Majesty's honorable Counsel in the North. Recorder of
the Towns of Beuerley and Hull, and one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace in
the East Riding of the County of York, a true friend of learning, and piety:
and to the virtuous, and religious Lady his wife, Grace and peace from God, etc.
AMongst the many reasons (Worshipful Sir) which have persuaded me that
Popery cannot be the true Religion, this is not the least: the insufficiency
of their doctrine of faith and repentance: which two things, though they be the
chief and principal points in religion, and so necessary, that he, who does
not but know, and practice them aright, can never be saved: yet I dare avouch,
Canitius in Cate^hismo. Costerus in Enchiridio.
that the faith and Repentance of the Romish church, as they are taught by many
of the best approved Papists, are no better the^ such a faith, and such a
repentance as an hypocrite, and a very reprobate may attain unto. Indeed, to
insist upon repentance only (they make many fair florishes, they call it
penance, they make it a Sacrament, Corradus, Nauarrus, Loper Sairus, Grasffius,
Hallus, and many other.
and say it is a board that saues a man after shipwreck, and write great
volumes of it, and of confession, and of Cases of Conscience, (as you good Sir
in your own reading know better then I) and yet alas, when all is done, it is
but a shadow of repentance; and indeed how can they teach aright the doctrine
of repentance: which err so fowly in setting down the justice of God, and the
vileness of sin: Which two points a man must know, else he will never
repent: but Popery misconceiuing the justice of God, teaching it not to be
infinite, in as much as it needs not an infinite satisfaction, and
misconceiuing the nature of sin, teaching every sin not to be damnable, nor
to offend Gods infinite justice, erring (I say) in these two, how is it
possible they should conceive aright the nature of repentance? by which a man
seeing his sins, their foulness, their punishment, and his own misery by
them, confesses them, bewailes them, fearing Gods justice, flies from it, and
craves forgiveness of his mercy: and lastly purposes, and indeuoureth to
leave the^ all, and to lead a new life. The serious consideration hereof,
has often made me wonder, why many popish treatises, being in some sort
exhortations to repentance, should be so accounted of as they are by some: for
though I confess, there are in some of them, good and wholesome meditations,
and many motives to mortification, and good life, yet would I gladly learn
of any man but this one thing, how those exhortations can be pithie, or
powerful, sound, or any way sufficient to move a man to repentance, when as,
not those books, not all Popery is able to teach a man sufficiently what true
repentance is.

If any man reply: I will therefore learn the doctrine out of the Protestants
books: and use the Papists for exhortation only: I then answer; Is it not a
more compendious, and convenient, and a less scandalous course, to seek
exhortations out of such writers, as do teach the doctrine aright? nay I doubt
how it is possible to find a powerful exhortation to repentance in any
Papist, who erres in the Doctrine: the reason is manifest, because Doctrine is
the ground of exhortation: and if the doctrine be unsound, how can the
exhortation be any better? Let us therefore leave these muddie puddles, and
fette our water at the Fountain: the water of life, at the fountain of life:
I mean the doctrine of faith, and repentance, at the written word of God, and
at such men's writings as are grounded thereupon, and agreeable thereunto.

Now, Deering, Greenha, Bradford, and many.
amongst those many instruments of God, who have labored with profit in this
great point of Religion: namely repentance, drawing their doctrine out of the
breasts, of the two Testamens of Gods book, I may well say, (to say no more)
that this man of GOD, Master Perkings, deserves to have his place: whose
labors, whilst he lived, and his yet living labors, what they deserve, I had
rather others should proclaim, then I once name: who profess my self to be
one of those many, who many truly say, that by the grace of God, and his good
means principally, I am that I am: But leaving him in that glorious mansion,
which Christ the Lord of the Harvest has prepared for him: and now given him:
I return to my self, and do humbly praise the Lord of heaven, who gave me
my time in the University, in those happy days, wherein) beside many worthy
men of God, whereof some are fallen a sleep, and some remain alive unto this
day) this holy man did spend himself like a candle, to give light unto others.

The scope of all his godly endeavors was to teach Christ Jesus, and him
crucified, and much labored to move all men to repentance, that as our
knowledge has made Popery ashamed of their ignorance: so our holy lives might
honor our holy profession. And as repentance was one of the principal ends,
both of his continual preaching and writing: so especially and purposely has
he twice dealte in that Argument.

First, in his Treatise of Repentance: published, 1592. wherein briefly (as his
manner was*) but soundly, pithily, and feelingly, he lays down the Doctrine,
and the very nature of Repentance: and after the positive Doctrine, he
touches some of the principal controversies and difficulties in that
doctrine, but afterward thinking with himself, that he had not seriously and
forcibly enough, urged so great and necessary a lesson as Repentance is,
therefore shortly after, being desired and called to the duty of Preaching, in
that great, and general assembly at Stirbridge Fair, he thought it a fit
time, for this necessary and general exhortation to Repentance: to the
intent, that as we were taught the Doctrine of Repentance, in the former
treatise: so in these Sermons we might be stirred up to the practice of it.
And certainly, (good Sir:) I judge there could have been no matter, more
fit for that assembly, then an exhortation to repentance: for as the audience
was great and general, of all sorts, sexes, ages and callings of men, and
assembled out of many corners of this kingdom, so is this doctrine general
for all: some doctrines are for parents, some for children, some for scholars,
some for tradesmen, some for men, some for women, but repentance is for all:
without which, it may be said of all, and every one of age, not one excepted:
No Repentance, no salvation.

These Sermons being in my hands, and not delivered to me from hand to hand,
but taken with this hand of mine, from his own mouth, were thought worthy for
the excellency, and fit for the generality of the matter, to be offered to
the public view: I have also other works of his in my hands: of which (being
many,) I confess my self to be but the keeper for the time, taking my self
bound to keep the^ safely, to the benefit of Gods church, of whose treasure
upon earth I make no question, but they are a part: and I heartily desire you
(my good friends) and all other faithful Christians, to solicit the Lord in
prayer for me, that I may faithfully discharge my self of that great charge
which in this respect lies upon me: and that his grace and blessing may be on
me and all others, who are to be employed in this service, wherein (had the
Lord so pleased) we could heartily have wished never to have been employed:
but that his life might have eased us of the labor: and that as I begin with
this, so I, or some other better able (which I rather desire) may go forward,
undertaking the weight of this great burden, and not faint, till he have made
a faithful account to the Church of God, of all the Jewels delivered to our
trust.

And now these first fruits of my labors, in another man's vine yard, as also
all that hereafter do or may follow, I humbly consecrate to the blessed spouse
of Christ Jesus, the holy Church of God on earth, and namely to the Church of
England, our beloved mother, who may rejoice, that she was the mother of such
a son, Master Perkings, but forty years old at his death.
who in few years did so much good to the public cause of religion, as the
wickedness of many years shall not be able to wear out. But first of all,
and especially, I present the same unto you (my very worshipful and Christian
friends) who (I must needs say) are very worthy of it in many respects.

1. For the matter it self, which is repentance, my self being able to
testify, that you are not hearers, but dooers, rise in knowledge, and rise in
the practice of Repentance: insomuch as I dare from the testimony of my
conscience, and in the word of a Minister, pronounce of you that as you have
heard and known this doctrine of repentance, so blessed are you, for you do
it.

And 2. for him who was the author hereof (whose mouth spoke it from the
feeling of his soul, and whose soul is now bound up in the bundle of life: I
know, and cannot in good conscience conceal the great delight you have always
had in the reading of his books, the reverend opinion, you had of him living,
and how heavily and passionately, you took his death and departure: therefore
to cheer you up in want of him, I send you here this little book, his own
child, begotten in his life time, but borne after his death: observe it well,
and you shall find it, not unlike the father, yea, you shall discern in it
the fathers spirit, and it doubts not, but to find entertainment with them, of
whom the father was so well respected.

And for my self, I spare to rehearse what interest you have in me, and all my
labors, it is no more then you worthily deserve, and shall have in me for
ever: you are the fairest flowers in this garden, which in this place, I after
others have planted for the Lord (or rather God by us): And two principal
pearls in that Crown, which I hope for, at the last day from the Lord my God,
whose word at my mouth you have received with much reverence, and with such
profit, as if I had the like success of my labors in others, I should then
never have cause to say with the Prophet, I have labored in vain, and spent
my strength in vain, but my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my
God.

And if I knew you not, to be such as take more delight in doing well, then in
hearing of it, I would prove at large, what I have spoken of you: yet give me
leave to say that, which without open wrong, I may not conceal, that beside
your care, knowledge, and godly zeal to religion, and other duties of the
first table to God himself, your charity and piety to the needy distressed
Christians, at home and abroad: your merciful dealing with them, who are in
your power; your benevolence to learning, and namely to some in the
University, do all proclaim to the world those your due praises: which I
(well knowing your modesties) do spare once to name: neither would I have
said thus much, were it not for this cold and barren age, wherein we live,
that so, when our preaching cannot move, yet your godly examples might stir
up. Pardon me therefore I pray you, and think it no wrong to you, Ps. 11. 16.
which is a benefit to Gods Church: Apoc. 2. 10.
But go forward in the strength of the Lord your God, 1. These. 5. 24.
and hold on in that happy course you have begun, be faithful unto the end,
the Lord will give you the Crown of life: faithful is he, which has
promised, who will also do it: proceed (good Sir) to honor learning in your
self and others, and religion especially, which is the principallearning, and
proceed both of you, to practice religion in your own persons; and in your
family, hold on to shine before your family, and amongst the people, where you
dwell, in zeal and holiness: hold on hereby, still to shame popery, to stop
your enemies mouths, and to honor that holy religion, which you profess, to
gain comfort of good conscience to your selves, and assurance of eternal
reward: and lastly, to encourage me in those painful duties which lie upon
me: for I openly profess that your religious zeal and love of the truth,
with many other good helps, are principal encouragementes in my ministry,
and especial motives unto me, to undertake the charge of publication, of so
many of the works of this holy man deceased, as may not in better manner be
done by others. But I keep you too long from this holy exhortation following;
I therefore send you it, and it to you, and from you, to the Church of God:
for I dare not make it privately yours and mine, wherein the whole church has
interest, as well as we: It was Preached in the field, but it is worthy to be
admitted into our hearts: I found it in the open field, but upon diligent
view, finding it to be Gods corn, and a parcel of his holy and immortal
seed, therefore I brought it home, as good corn deserves: And as it is Gods
corn, so in you, I desire all holy Christians to lay it up in Gods garners,
that is, in their hearts and souls.

And thus committing this little volume to your reading, the matter to your
practice: you and yours, to the blessed favor of that God, whom you serve:
and my self and my endeavors, to your hearty love, and holy prayers, I take
leave: From my study; August. 7. 1607.

Yours in Christ Jesus, ever assured, William Crashawe.

TO THE CHRIStian Reader, and especially to all such as have any copies of the
works of Master Perkins, or intend any of them to the Press.
FOr as much as there has been lately signification made, of diverse of Master
Perkins his works hereafter to be Printed, in an Epistle to the Reader
premised before the Treatise of Callings, and the signification being but
general, might peradventure give occasion to some, to set out some particulars
(without the consent of Master Perkins his Assigns) as imperfectly as are
these two Books, entitled, The Reformation of Covetousness, and The Practice
of Faith, justly and truly (for ought that I see) censured in the aforesaid
Epistle. It is therefore now thought good to mention the particular Treatises,
and works of his, which shall hereafter (if God will) be published, for the
benefit of Gods Church: I do therefore hereby make known to all, whom it
any way may concern, that there were found in the Study of the deceased, and
are in the hands of his Executours, or Assigns, and preparing for the Press.

1. His Expositions on the Epistle to the Galathians.

2. On the Epistle of Jude.

2. His Book of the Cases of Gonscience.

3. His Treatises, 1. Of Witchcraft. 2. Of Callings.

All these he had perused himself, and made them ready for the Press,
according to which Coppies by himself so corrected, some of them already are,
and the rest will be published in due time. And here upon we desire all men
who have Coppies of them, not to offer that wrong to that worthy man of God, as
to publish any of their own, seeing the coppies hereof which are to be
Printed, are of his own correcting: but rather if they can help to make any
of them more perfect by their Coppies, they may therein do a good work to
the benefit of many, and much comfort to themselves.

And further, I do hereby make known, that I have in my hands at this
present of his works, taken from his mouth, with my own hand, hereafter (if
God will) to be published, with the allowance of our Church, and for the
benefit of his Children, these particulars.

1. His Expositions or Readings on the 101. psalm.

2. On the 32. Psalm.

3. On the 11. chapt. to the Hebrews.

4. On the 1 2 and 3. Chap. of the Revelation.

5. On the 5. 6. and 7. chapt. of Saint Matthewe.

2. His confutation of Canisius, his little Popish Catechism.

3. His Treatises, 1. Of Imaginations, out of Genesis 8. 2.

2. Of temptations, out of Matthew. 4.

3. Of Christian equity, out of Phillippians, 4. 3.

4. Of the Callings of the Ministry, out of two places of Scripture.

5. Of Repentance, out of Zephaniah. 2. 1.

Besides many other particular Sermons, and short discourses made upon
several, and special occasions: of all which, some are already published by
others, and some by my self: and all the rest that remain, as they be the
Jewels of Gods Church, so did I willingly dedicate them to the public and
general good, Judging it were a foul sin in me, or any other, to
impropriate to our sins, or our own private use, the labors of This, or any
other learned man, which are in my opinion; parts of the Treasury of the
militant Church: And as it were wrong to the Church, if I should conceal them,
so doubtless were it to him and his children, if I should publish them for
mine own alone, and not for their benefit. If I do, I think it may be
justly said unto me, or whosoever does so, Thy money perish with thee. And
what herein I have said for my self: I know I may boldly and safely say,
for his Executours or Assigns, which have or had in their hands, any of
those which were found in his Study: In the publishing of all which, as we
do intend to deal truly with the Christian Reader, and not to commit any
thing to the Press, which has not either been written or corrected, by the
Author himself, or faithfully penned according to the truest Coppies, taken
from his own mouth, and since by others of sufficiency and integrity,
diligently perused: some purpose to refer them to the benefit of the Authors
wife and children, as much as may be, wishing that upon this Caveat, men would
not be so hasty (as some have been) to commend to the world, their imperfect
notes, upon a base desire of a little gain, both to hinder the common good of
the Church, and to defraud the said parties of their private benefit, to whom
in all equity and conscience, it does principally appertain: And desiring all
who have any perfect Copies of such as are in my own hands, that they would
either help me with theirs, or rather take mine to help them. That by our
joint power, and our forces laid together: the walls of this worthy building,
may go up the fayrer, and the faster. And so I commend them all to Gods
blessing, who endeavor to commend themselves, and their labors, to God, and to
his Church.

Your brother in the Lord, W. C.

AN EXHORtation to Repentance.
Zephoniah. Chap. 2. ver. 1. 2. Search your selves, even search you o Nation,
not worthy to be beloved: before the Decree come forth, and you be as Chafe,
that passes on a day.
THe Prophet in the first Chapter of this Prophecy, rebukes the Jews of
three notable crimes, Idolatry, fraud, and cruelty. In this second he
exhorts them to Repentance, and withal reprooueth some of their special
sins. In the three first verses he propounds the doctrine of Repentance,
and adds some special reasons to move and stir them up to the practice of
it. In propounding the doctrine of repentance, he directs it to two sorts of
men. First, to the obstinate and impenitent Jews, in the first and second
verses. Secondly, to the better sort of them, in the third. So that the sum
and substance of these two first verses, is a brief and summarie propounding
of the doctrine of Repentance to the obstinate Jews. The words contain in
them five several points, touching the doctrine of Repentance.

1. The duty to be performed, Search.

2. Who must be searched? your selves.

3. Who must do it? The Jews: who are further described to be a nation, not
worthy to be beloved of God. These are in the first verse.

4. In the second verse, the time limitting them when to repent, before the
decree come forth: that is, before God put in execution the judgments which
are already decreed and appointed for them.

5 A forcible reason urging them to do it, which lies hid, and is necessarily
employed in the 4. point; namely, that there is a decree against them, which
wants nothing but execution, which also shall come, unless they repent, whereby
they shall be fanned: and if they shall be found to be chaff, they shall fly away
with the wind of Gods justice. Of all these points in order.

For the first, the holy Ghost says; Search your selves. The words are
commonly read thus. Gather your selves; which though it be good, for that in
Repentance a man gathers himself, and all his wits together, which before
were dispersed, and wandered up and down in vanity: yet I rather allow their
translation who read thus. Search or fan your selves: but either of them may
stand, because the word in the original does comprehend both significations;
yet it seems that to search, or sift, fits this place better, considering the
same manner of speech is afterward continued in the word Chafe: so that the
meaning of the holy Ghost seems to be this: Search, try, and fan your
selves, least you be found light chafe, and so fly away and be consumed
before the Justice of God.

Concerning this duty of searching, let us observe first, that the holy Ghost
urging the Jews to repent, uses not the word Repentance, but bids them search
themselves: yet meaning, he would have them to repent: giving us to understand,
that no man can have true and sound repentance, but he who has first of all
searched and examined him self: and this stands with good reason, for no man
can repent, who first of all does not know himself, and his own
wretchedness. But no man can see into himself, nor know himself, but he that
does diligently search himself: so that the beginning of all grace, is for a
man to search, and try, and fan himself, that thereby he may know what is in
himself: that so upon the search, seeing his fearful and damnable estate,
he may forsake himself and his own ways, and turn to the Lord. Thus
speaks the holy Ghost in the hearts of holy men; Lam 3.
Let us search and try our ways: and mark what follows; and turn again
to the Lord: as though there were no turning again unto the Lord, but after a
searching of our selves. With this testimony of the holy Ghost, agrees the
testimony of all holy men's consciences, who all know, that the first beginning
of their turning unto the Lord, was a searching of themselves. Let any
repentant sinner ask his conscience, and call to mind his first calling and
conversion, and he will remember that the first thing in his Repentance was
this; that he searched into himself, and looked narrowly into his ways, and
finding his ways dangerous, and his case fearful, did thervpo^ resoule to take
a new course, and turn to the Lord for pardon and mercy, and for grace to enter
into more holy, and more comfortable courses.

The man that passes upon ridges of mountains, and sides of hills, or that
goes over a narrow bridge, or some dangerous and steep rocks, at midnight,
fears not because he sees no danger: but bring the same man, in the morning,
and let him see the narrow bridge, he went over in the night, under which
runs a violent stream, and a bottomless gulf, and the dangerous
Mountains and Rocks he passed over, and he will wonder at his own
boldness, and shrincke for fear to think of it, and will by no means
venture the same way again: for now he sees the height of the Mountains; the
steepness of the hills, the cragginesse of the Rocks, the fearful downfall,
and the furious violence of the stream underneath, and thereby sees the
extreme danger, which before he saw not: therefore he wondreth, and rejoices,
that he has escaped so great a danger; and will by no means be drawn to
go that way in the day, which he went most carelessly in the darkness of the
night, but seeks another way (though it should be far about:) So a sinner in
his first estate, which is natural and corrupt (as we are bred and borne)
has a veil before his face; so that he sees nothing: the wrath of God, and
the curse due for sin, hell, and damnation, seeking to devour him, he sees
them not, although (living always in sin) he walks in the very jaws of hell
it self, and because he sees not this fearful danger, therefore he
refuses no sin at all, but rusheth securely into all manner of sin: the
night of impenitencie, and the mist of ignorance, so blinding his eyes, that
he sees not the narrow bridge of this life, from which if he slide, he
falls immediately into the bottomless pit of hell.

But when as Gods Spirit has by the Light of Gods word opened his eyes, and
touched his heart to consider his estate, then he sees the frail bridge of
this narrow life, and how little a step there is between him and
damnation; then he sees hell open due for his sins, and himself in the
highway to it: sin being the craggy rock, and hell the gaping gulf under
it; this life being the narrow bridge, and damnation the stream that runs
under it.

Then he wondereth at his miserable estate, admireth the mercy of GOD in
keeping him from falling into the bottom of hell, wondereth at the
presumptuous boldness of his corruption, which so securely plodded on toward
destruction, and being ashamed of himself, and these his ways, he turns his
heart to the God that saved him from these dangers; and sets himself into more
holy ways, and more comfortable courses, and confesses that ignorance made
him bold, and blindness made him so presumptuous; but now he sees the danger,
and will by no means go the same way again: and thus the searching and
seeing into the foulenes of sin, and the danger thereof, is the first
beginning of repentance, and the first step into grace.

This doctrine teaches us what faith and repentance is generally in the world.
All men say, they believe, and have repented long ago; but try it well, and
we shall find in the body of our Nation, but a lip Faith, and a lip
Repentance: for even when they say so, they are blind and ignorant of their own
estate, and know not themselves, that because they are baptized and live in
the Church, therefore they are in Gods favor, and in very good estate, when
as they never yet were reconciled to God: and are so far from it, that they
never yet saw any sins in themselves, whereof they should repent: as a man
traveling in the night, sees no danger, but plods on without fear: So the
most part of our common people, in the night of their ignorance, think and
presume they love and fear God, and love their Neighbor; and that they have
ever done so: Nay, it is the common opinion that a man may do so by nature,
and that he is not worthy to live, who does not love God with all his heart:
and believe in Jesus Christ. But alas poor simple souls, they never knew
what sin was, never searched nor saw into their own hearts, with the light
of Gods law, for if they had, they should have seen such a Sea of corruption,
that then they would confess it to be the hardest thing in the world, to love
God, and to believe in Christ, and forsake sin: it is therefore manifest,
that they have not yet begun to Believe or Repent, nor have entered into the
first step of grace, which leads to Repentance, for that they have not
learned this Lesson, which the Prophet teaches: that is, to search themselves.

Furthermore, let us in the second place, observe better the signification of
the word: it signifies to search narrowely, as a man would do for a piece of
Gold, or a precious Jewel, which is lost in a great house: Or as a man may
search for Gold in a Mine of the earth, where is much earth, and but very
little gold Oar.

Here we may learn, that in true Repentance, and conversion, we must not
search so only, as to find the gross and palpable sins of our lives: but so
as we may find those sins which the world accounts lesser sins, and epsy
our secret saults and privy corruptions. Some corruptions seem more near a
kin of our nature, and therein men hope to be excused, when they forsake many
other greater sins. But a true penitent sinner must search for such, so as a
good Magistrate searches for a lurking traitor which is conveyed into some
close and secret corner, and he must ransacke his heart for such corruptions,
as wherein his heart takes special delight, and must think that no sin can
be so small, but it is too great to be spared, and that every sin great or
little, must be searched for, as being all traitors to Gods Majesty.

But alas, the practice of the world is far otherwise, great sins are little
sins, little sins are no sins: Nay, after a little custom, great sins
are so little or nothing, and so at last men make no bones of gross and
grievous sins: and for the most part men search so superficially, that they
scarce find any thing to be sins: such excuses are made, such distinctions
are devised, such mittigations, such qualifications, such colors are cast upon
all sins; as now up and down the world, gross sins are called into
question, whether they be sins or no: and the great trangressions of the Law
are counted small matters, necessary evils, or inconveniences, tolerated to
avoid other evils: and what is he counted, but a curious and precise fool,
which stands upon them: Ignorance after five and thirty years preaching, is
counted no sin, blind devotion in Gods service, no sin, lip labor in
praying, vain and customable swearing, mocking of religion, and the
professors thereof, no sin: profaning of the Sabbath, contemning of
preachers, abusing of parents no sin: pride in apparel, superfluity in
meats, beastly and ordinary drunkenness, fornication, no sins. Nay, deceits,
cosonages, oppressing, usury, notorious briberie, and covetousness, that
mother sin; these are counted no sins: these beams are made but moates by
profane men, and they are so minced and carved, or there is some such
necessity of them, or some such other flourish or varnish must be cast upon
them, as that they are little or none at all. Alas, alas, is not that a simple
and a silly search where such blocks as these are, lie vnespyed? what are
moul-hilles, when such mountains are not seen? Moates will be little regarded,
where such beams are not discerned: but it is clear, that therefore there is
no true trial, nor diligent search made: for a true convert will search his
heart for all, and will spare none: He deals in searching his own heart, as a
good Justice of peace in searching for Traitors or Seminary Priests. He
seeks not superficially, but most exactly, and leaves never a corner
unsought, and he thinks great sins to be infinite, and little sins great,
and judges no sin so small, but that it deserves the anger of God, and
therefore he wonders at the mercy of God, which throws us not all down to
hell in a moment: and he cries out with holy Jeremy: It is the Lords mercy
that we are not consumed. Away then with this superficial and hypocritical
search, where so many sins are spared and not found out. It is Pharisaicall,
for even so the Pharisie, when he came into the Temple to reckon with God, and
to tell what Traitors he had found, that is, what sins upon good search he
had espied, he returns his precept, all is well, he has found never a one,
but begins to thank God that he was so good, and so good, and not so ill, and
so ill, nor yet like the Publicane. The world is full of Pharisees, not only
the Popish Church, but even our Church swarms with these superficial
searches, who cannot (because they will not,) find any sin to present unto
God. Men think in the country, a Church Officer hazards his Oath, if he
present all well, and finds no fault in his parish, to present as punishable
to the Ordinary: for men think it impossible, that there should be none in a
whole parish: then how does that man hazard his own soul, who being made
ouerseer and searcher of his heart, finds nothing in it to present to the
Lord. For it is no more easy to espy outward and actual transgressions in a
whole parish, then it is to find a heap of corruptions in a man's heart, if a
man will search into the bottom of it with the light of Gods law. Therefore
when the Lord comes and keeps his visitation, what shall become of such a man,
but to undergo the strict and severe search of the Almighty, because he
would not search himself?

Our bodies and lives are free from Spanish Inquisition (which is one of the
last proppes, which Satan has lent the Pope, wherewith to uphold his
declining kingdom) and the Lord grant we may be ever free from it. But in the
mean time, that might put us in mind how to deal with our corrupt hearts,
and unmortified affections, even to erect an Inquisition over them, to lay in
wait for them, to search them narrowly, and to use them roughly: yea, to set
our hearts upon the rack of Gods Law, that so it may confess the secret
wickedness of it: for the Papists do not think us Protestants, greater
enemies to their superstition, then the inward corruptions of our hearts, are
to our salvation: therefore it may be a godly policy for every man, even to
erect an Inquisitio^ over his own heart and conscience, and not to spare his
most secret and dearest sins, and such as are nearest allied to his own
nature: for that is the true search here commanded by the Prophet, and
practiced by all godly and holy men: when a man purposes to find all that
are, and to epsy even all his sins: for a godly man is never satisfied in
his search, but still, the more he finds, he suspects the more are still
behind: and therefore he continues ing his own heart all his life long:
Therefore let every professor look to it betwixt God and his conscience, that
he dally not with himself in this case: for it he do, then when God comes
with his privy search, his hypocrisy shall be discovered, and his nakedness
shall be laid open in the view of men, and Angels: to his eternal confusion.

Thirdly, Search, says the Prophet, but not so content: he forces it again,
Even search you. In thus repeating and urging this exhortation, the holy Ghost
gives them and us to understand, that the true searching of a man's heart, and
life, is a duty of a great moment, and special necessity: therefore he leaves
it not after once naming it, but inforceth it the second time, as being no
matter of indifferency, but of great necessity: thereby showing, that it is a
principal duty in Repentance, even the beginning and foundation of all true
grace.

And further, it is a means also to prevent Gods judgments: for when men
search not themselves, then God sendes the fire of afflictions, and crosses to
try and search them: but when they search themselves, then God spares to
search them by his just judgments.

Now in that this duty of searching, is both the beginning of all true grace,
and the means to stay Gods judgments, and therefore is so pithelie, and
forcibly, urged by the holy Ghost, it must teach us all a necessary lesson:
namely, to make great conscience of searching our selves. First, because God
has so commanded, and we are to make conscience of obedience to every
commandment. Secondly, because thereby we shall reap two so great
commodities, as first, thereby we shall lay a sure foundation for the good work
of grace in us, and secondly, shall stay the hand of God, and his judgments,
from being executed upon us. Let us therefore hearken to this counsel of the
holy Ghost, let us take the fan of the Law, and there with search and
winnow our hearts and lives. Our hearts for secret and hidden corruptions. Our
lives, for committing of evil, and omitting of good. Do with your hearts as
men do with their wheat: they will not suffer their corn to lie long in the
chafe, least the chafe hurt it, but commits it to the fan, that the wind
may separate them: So the graces of God in our hearts are but corn, our sins
and corruptions are chafe: look well, and thou shall find in thy self much
chafe, and but little corn: let not then the chafe lie too long mingled with
the corn, lest it corrupt the corn. Let not thy sins lie mingled with the
grace of God in thee, if thou do, they will choke it in the end, and so
deprive thee of all grace; therefore rippe up thy heart, and look into thy
life, and when thou have sinned, enter into thy self, ask thy conscience what
thou have done, and be not quiet till thou have found out thy sin, and the
foulness of it: and never think that thou know any thing in Religion,
till thou know what is in thine own heart. And what are in thy special and
priuiest corruptions, and look into thine own faults, not with a partial
eye, but with a censorious, and a strait judgment, spare sin in no man, but
especially condemn it in thy self.

But alas, these times of ours, cry out of an other state, for even Ieremies
case is ours: We may complain as he did, No man repents him of his wickedness,
saying, what have I done? the same is the force of our people, and the
sickness of all Nations: that every man runs on in his sins, from sin to
sin carelessly: even as the barde horse into the battle. But how rare a
thing is it, to find a man, that daily searches himself, and examines how
he lives, and how the case stands betwixt God and himself: and that when
he has done amiss, enters into the closet of his heart, and strikes
himself upon the breast, and disputes the case with himself, saying; What
have I done? O what is this, that I gave done against GOD, against his Church,
and against my own soul?

The want of this, is that which the Prophet complains of in that place: not
as though it was sufficient thus to do, in a man's own conscience: but because
it is a good beginning, and a step to further grace. For if a man did seriously
thus deal with his conscience after his sin, his conscience would shape him
such an answer, and would tell him so roundly, what he had done, that he
would take heed, how he did the same again, and look more narrowely, and
warily to himself all the days of his life. Seeing therefore it is so
necessary a duty, let every one of us enduour the practice of it, namely, to
rippe and ransacke our hearts, and to search our ways unto the bottom.

Now for our better instruction, and furtherance in the performance hereof:
you must know that this Search is to be made by the Law of God, for nothing
else but Gods law can help us, and let us see that which we must search for:
for if we search by any means, we may seek and search long enough, ere we
find any thing that will be matter of Repentance. Ask the Devil, he will
tell thee all is well, and that thou art in an excellent estate: and God loves
thee, and thou art sure of heaven: this song the devil always singes for the
most part, til a man comes to die, for then he appears in his colors, but
till then, he labors to sing, and lull all men a sleep in the cradle of
securite. Ask your own flesh, and your own hearts and natures, and they
will answer and say, that all is well and safe, and that we have believed,
and loved, and feared GOD all our days. Ask the world, and men in the world:
and they will answer, all is well; and they will say further, that thou art a
right good-fellowe, and art worth twenty of these curious fools that stick
upon points, and stand upon circumstances, as swearing, and drinking, and good
fellowship, and gaming, and such other nice and circumstantiall points: thus
will worldly men answer: for thy profane course is acceptable to them,
because thereby thou approuest the same in them.

Nay, go further, and ask all human Learning in the world, and it cannot
tell thee what one sin is, nor what it is to offend God: so that there
remains only the law of God, the light whereof will disclose the darkness
of our hearts; and the justice whereof will reveal the righteousness and the
perverseness of our Natures: therefore to the Law of GOD must we fly to
help us in this search.

And yet for our better help in this duty, and that there may be nothing
wanting to that soul, that seeks God, therefore we are further to know,
that if we will search our selves by the Law profitablie, we must mark
three rules, the truth whereof unless we know, acknowledge, and feel: we
shall never see our own estate, nor profit by this search, but plod on from
sin to sin, until we plunge into hell.

The first Rule is, that every man that came from Adam, sinned in the sin of
Adam: thou must therefore know, that his sin in eating the forbidden fruit,
was thy sin: and thou sinnedst therein, as well as he (though thou wast then
unborn) and that thou art guilty of it before God, and must answer for it
to Gods justice, unless Christ do it for thee.

The reason hereof is, because we are his seed and posterity, we were then
in his loins, he was the Father of us all: and was not a private man as we
are now, but a public person, the pledge of all mankind, and bare the person
of us all at that time: therefore what he did then, he did it for himself,
and for us: what covenant God made with him, was made for himself and us: what
God promised him, and he to God, he promised for himself, and for us: what he
received for himself, and for us: and what he gained or lost by his fall* he
gained and lost for us, as for himself. He lost the favor of God, and
original purity: therefore he lost it for all his posterity: guiltiness,
and Gods anger, and corruption of nature which he gained, he got for us all,
as well as for himself. If we doubt of this point, it is proved by the
Apostle: where the holy Ghost says; Sin entered by one man, Romans 5. 14.
and death by sin: and that sin went over all, and that it went over all
them, which sinned not in the like transgression with Adam, (that is, even our
children) who as they are borne, are borne not only tainted with original
corruption: but guilty also of Adams sin. This is a most certain truth,
though it seem strange, for few men think of it, that ever they shall answer
for Adams sin: and therefore if any object, what reason is there that I
answer for another man's sin? I answer, true, if it had been Adams sin
alone: but it was his and thine also: for he was thy Father, and stood in thy
room: and thou also since thou wast borne, have confirmed what he did.

Now therefore, though not one of many thinks seriously thereof: namely, that
he should stand guilty of a sin committed five thousand years before he
was borne, yet seeing it is most true, both in Scripture and good reason: let
every man subscribe in his conscience to this Truth. And let this be thy
first Resolution in this search, that thou stand guilty of Ad^ms
transgression.

The second rule to be known is, that in every man is all sins: more
plainly, that in every man by nature are the seeds of all sins: and that
not in the worste, but in the best natured men: make choice of the best man,
and the greatest sin, and that worst sin is to be found in that best man.
If any doubt of this, let him consider what original sin is, namely, a
corruption of the powers of our souls; and that not of some, or in part, but
of all, and wholly. This corruption has two parts. First, a want, not of
some, but of all good inclination, a want of all goodness. Secondly, a
deprivation and pronenesse, not to some, but to all evil: and not a pronenes
only, but original sin infuseth into every ma^s heart the seed of all
corruption.

Many man stand much upon their good meaning, and upright heart, and brag of
a good nature: but they are foulely deceived; for take the ciuilest man upon
the earth, and the seeds of all sins in the world are in him by nature. But
to explain this point fully, observe these 2. clauses.

First, I say not, the practice of all sins, but the seeds; for all men
practice not all sin: the seeds are in their nature: but the practice is
restrained, sometime by education, sometime by good and wholesome laws: sometime
the constitution of men's bodies, deny the practice of some sins, sometime the
country a man dwelles in, or calling a man lives in, keeps him from the
practice of some sins: and always a general and limitting grace of GOD,
restrains the nature of all men, from running into many sins: which hand of
God, if God should take away, and leave every man to his nature, we should
see that every man would practice any sin in the world: yea, even the
greatest sins that ever we heard to be done in the world. All men which
know themselves, know this to be true, and the more a man knows his own
heart, the more he sees that his heart is a Sea of all wickedness: and that
it is the mercy and grace of God, that he has not fallen into the mightiest
and most monstrous sins in the world.

Secondly, I say, by nature. For I know by good education, and by grace, it is
otherwise: Grace rectifieth Nature, but that is no thanks to nature: for it is
as evil and corrupt still, being severed from grace: and therefore Nature
must be fully abolished, before man come to heaven. And yet (though all this
be true) I say not that sin breaks out in all natures alike, though all
natures be alike corrupt: for the course of nature is restrained in some more
then others, by the means aforesaid; but this is the truth, that whereas some
are not so angry, some not so wanton, some not so cruel, some not so
covetous, some not so ambitious, etc. as others; that comes not from any
goodness of nature in them, above the other originallie, but from Gods hand,
which tempereth, restrains, and moderateth every ma^s nature as he sees
good.

And if God did not thus moderate and restrain the natures of men, but suffer
them to break out to the full: there would then be no order, but all confusion
in the world; therefore, (as especially for his Churches quietness, so also
for the preservation of public peace, and the upholding of society in the
world, between man and man,) the Lord holds a hand over every man's nature,
and keeps every one in a certain compass limited by the wisdom of his
power, which restraining hand of his, if the Lord should take away, all
societies and Commonwealths, would be turned vp-side down, because every
man by the universal corruption of his Nature, would break out into every
sin: I end this point with appealing to the testimony of the consciences of
all men, and especially of the best and holiest men, of whom I would ask this
question: whether they find not in their natures an inclination, even to the
fowlest sins in the world; if shame, or fear, or else the grace of God
restrained them not? so that the best men do know well enough, what adooe they
have with their corrupt natures, to keep them within the compass of obedience.

Nay, I yet add further, the nature of men, and of all men, is so corrupt,
since Adam: that even the seed of the sin against the holy Ghost, and a
pronenesse to it, is in the nature of every man (though not one man amongst
many thousands do commit that sin,) for seeing in that sin there is a
heap or Sea of all sins gathered together, he therefore that has in his
nature the seed of all sins, has also the seed of it.

And again, seeing that all evils tendes to a perfection, as well as Grace
does; what reason therefore is there, but we may safely think, that the
Devil would hale every one to that height of sin, if it were not that the
powerful hand of God prevented him, who will neither suffer wicked men, nor
the Devil himself to be so wicked as they could, and would be.

The use of this second rule, is notable. For in this searching of our selves,
it shows us what we are, without all color or deceit, and fully discouers
unto us, the vglines of our natures: and it may teach us all how to think and
esteem of our selves, Genesis 4.
when we hear of Caines unnatural murder, Exodus 1.
Pharaohs unnatural cruelty, Genesis 8.
the Sodomites unnatural lust, 2. Sam. 15* and 16.
Achitophels devilish policy, Esaias. 38.
Senacharibs horrible blasphemy, Judas monstrous treason, Iulians fearful
Apostasy. When we hear of the fearful murders, treasons, periuries,
sins against nature, blasphemies, Apostasies, witchcrafts, crafts, and other
the horrible sins of the world: let us then return into our selves, and
look homewardes, even into our own hearts, and confess every one that
these should have been even thy sins also, if Gods grace had not prevented
thee.

This will humble thee, and make thee think vilely and basely of thy self,
and so consequently bring thee to repentance and true amendment: and the very
reason, why men repent not, nor amend their ways, is because they are
Pharisees by nature, and think highly of themselves, and of their own
natures, and their natural inclinations: this will be a harshe and a strange
doctrine to them; Oh, they have excellent narures, and they cannot endure such,
and such sins, and they thank God, they are not as ill as others: but let
all such men know, they must cease magnifying nature, and learn to magnify
Gods grace: Let them know, that nature in them, is in the root, as much
corrupt, as in the worst man in the world, and every man's heart is a
bottomless fountain of all sin; therefore praise not thy nature, but Gods
grace and mercy, in giving thee so good a nature; or rather, so well
restraining, and rectifying thy nature; and stay not there, but desire of the
Lord, that as he has given thee a better tempered nature, then to other men:
so also he would bestow on thee his espeiiall and saving grace: and as he
has kept thee from the fearful sins of others (thou being as ill
naturally as they) so he would also lead thee into the way of salvation, which
else the best nature in the world can never attain unto.

The third rule to be known and practiced of him, who will truly search
himself, is, that every man borne of Adam, is by nature the children of
wrath, and Gods enemy: this is true of all without exception; high or low,
rich or poor, Noble or simple, borne in the visible church, or without. And
further, by being enemy of God, he is therefore borne subject to hell, to
damnation, and to all other curses: so that look as a Traitor convicted,
stands thereby in his Princes high displeasure, and is sure of death without
special pardon; so stands every man when he is borne, convicted of high
treason against God, in his high disfavor; and is in danger of Hell, which is
the fulfilling of the wrath of God.

Thus David confesses of himself; I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has
my mother conceived me: If in sin, then in Gods wrath, and under the danger
of damnation. If any ask, how, or why this is so? I answer, the truth, as
also the equity of this third rule depends on the two former: for, because
every man is borne guilty of Adams great sin, and also tainted originally
with all corruption, and a pronenesse of all sin: therefore it follows in
equity and justice, that every man is borne under the wrath and curse of God.

This point is a plain and evident truth: yet men in the world think not so,
and it is the cause, why men repent not of their sins: for most men think
that by nature, they are in Gods favor; and therefore they need not so sue
for it in humiliation and repentance; but only live ciuillie, and do no open
wrong, and all is well: whereas (alas) there is no condemned traitor, more out
of his Princes favor, nor more sure of death without a pardon, then all we
are out of Gods favor, and sure of damnation, unless we procure Gods favor
again, by Faith and Repentance.

For the better opening of this third rule, and the manifesting of the Truth:
let us know further, that the curse of God, under the which we all are borne,
is threefold.

The first, is a bondage under Satan: It is a certain truth, that every man
as he is borne of his Parents, and till he repent, is a slave of Satan: man
or woman, high or low, Satan is his Lord and Master. He sits as Judge in
his heart; and in his sense Satan is the king of the nations, and god of the
world. Men will in words defy Satan, and not name him without defiance: and
spit at him; and yet (alas) he is in their hearts: they spitte him out of
their mouths, but he is lower; they should also spit him out of their
hearts, and that is true defiance indeed: for alas, he lodges in thy heart,
and there he makes his Throne, and reigns until the spirit of regeneration
dispossess him: and till then, no servant is subject to his master, no slave
to his Lord, as is the heart of man by nature unto Satan, the Prince of
darkness. Nay, our bondage, is more fearful, then the slavery of any
poor Christian, in the Spaniards, or in the Turks Galleys: for their bodies
are but in bondage, and at command, and under punishment, but our best part,
our heart, our conscience, our soul it self is captiuated unto him, and under
his command, who is the king of cruelty, and confusion, and lord of hell,
whose commandments are injustice, whose service is sin, and whose hyre is
damnation.

The second part of the curse of the first death, or the death of the body:
that is, a separation of the soul and body asunder for a time, namely, til
the last judgment. This death is duly and justly the punishment of any one,
or the least sin: therefore, how due and just a punishment, upon that
horrible heap of sinfulness, which is in every man's nature? and it is a most
terrible curse. For it is the very gate of hell, and the downfall of damnation
unto all men, but such as by faith and repentance do get their death
sanctified by the death of Christ: unto such men indeed it is no curse, but a
gracious and glorious blessing, for it is altered by Christ his death. But unto
all men by nature, and which repent not, it is the heavy curse of Gods wrath,
and the very downe-fall into the gulf of hell.

The third part of the curse under which every man is borne, is, the second
death: the death of soul and body; which is the eternal want of Gods
presence, and the accomplishment of his wrath: and an apprehension and feeling
of that wrath, seazing on body, soul, and conscience. The first curse was a
spiritual death; the death of the soul. The second, a temporal death, the
death of the body. The third, is an eternal death, a death both of soul and
body together; and for ever. This eternal death is the curse of all curses,
the misery of all miseries, and torment of all torments: and I show it thus.
Often when thy toothe acheth, and sometime when thy headacheth, or in the pain
of the stone or collicke, thou would give all that thou have in the world
to be eased of that pain: Nay, in the extreamitie of some fittes, many will
wish themselves even out of the world: Now, if the pain of one toothe, can so
far distemper mind and body, that it cannot be relieved with all the
pleasures of this life; Oh then, what a torment shall that be, when not one
kind of pain, but the whole viole of GODS wrath shall be powered, not on one
member, but on the whole soul, body, and conscience, and that not for a time,
under hope of better: but eternally without hope of release; and that not in
this world, where there are comforts, helps, and remedies: but in that ugly
and darksome place of torrments: and that not amongst living men, which might
mittigate thy pain, or else bemone thee, and bewail it with thee: but with
the devils, and damned spirits, which will now laugh at thy destruction, and
solace themselves in this thy misery, and will rejoice, as thou did serve
them in earth, so now in hell, to be thy tormenters. It may be therefore (by
the way) a good warning and wisdom to us all, when we feel the extremity
of some bodily pain, to consider with our selves, and say; Oh then, what
shall be my misery and torment, if I repent not? when not one member, but
soul, body, and conscience, shall be racked and tormented in the feeling and
apprehension of the anger of the Lord of Hosts.

In these three points stands that curse and wrath of God, under which every
man is borne. And these do answer to the three degrees of sin, which are in
us: for as the two first rules taught us, there is in every man by nature, till
he repent, a threefolde guiltiness. First, a guiltiness of Adams sin.
Secondly, the taint of original and universal corruption. Thirdly, a
pollution by many outrageous actual sins. In the first of these every man
is equally guilty. In the second, every man is equally corrupt. But in the
third, every one keeps that compass, within which the Lord will keep them
by his limiting power.

Now as in our guiltiness of Adams sin, sin has his beginning: in
original sin, his continuance: in actual sin, his perfect on: So
answerable hereunto, the wrath of God (which always stands opposite to
sin) is begun in leaving us by nature to the slavery of Satan, is
continued by death, and is accomplished in damnation.

And now these three rules, I commend to the careful and Christian
consideration of you all: certifying you from God, that as you can never be
saved, unless you repent: nor repent, unless you search your selves, (as
here the Prophet bids.) So, that you can never search your selves aright,
till you be persuaded, and resolved of these three rules, and of the truth of
them all, even in your hearts and consciences: Namely; First, that thou art
guilty of Adams sin. Secondly, that thou art prone by nature to all evil in
the world. Thirdly, that for these thou art subject to the wrath of God, and to
all the curses of his wrath: but when thou art in heart and conscience
resolved, that these are true; then thou art a fit scholar, for this Lesson of
the Prophet, Search thy self. For when thou go, thus prepared unto this
Search, and esteemest of thy self, as the three Rules have described thee:
then if thou Search into thy self, thou will find thy self, and thy estate
to be such, as will cause thee to repent, return and take a new course:
therefore what the Prophet said to those Jews, I say unto you also, My
brethren of this Realm of England, who are now here gathered together, out of
so many countries, and quarters of this Realm: yea, in the name of the same
God, I cry unto you; Search. O Search your selves: and think it not a matter
indifferent to do, or not to do it? but know it, that God commands you, as
ever you will come to salvation: Search your selves. And the rather, because by
these three Rules you see how much chafe of corruption is in your nature, and
what need therefore it has to be searched into, and fanned by Repentance. Be
well assured thou man, whatsoever thou art: there is so much chafe in thee,
that if thou search not, and fan it not out, thou will prove nothing but
Chafe at the last day, and so be blown away with the wind of Gods justice
into Hell. Take hold therefore of this exhortation, and defer it not.

Thou will not suffer thy Wheat to lie too long in the chafe, for fear of
hurting it: Is it then safe to suffer the Chafe of thy sins and corruptions
to lie cankering and rotting in thy heart? Be sure that that little portion of
grace, which thou attainest unto, by living in the Church, and under the
ministry of the word of God, will be putryfied, and clean corrupted with the
Chafe of thy sins: therefore again, and again, I exhort you to make
conscience of this duty: Search into your selves, fan out this chafe, this
presumption of ours, and high esteeming of our own nature, and conceits of
Gods favor before we have it: that so this Chafe being blown away, the Lord
may then bestow upon us soundness of grace, and the foundation of all
goodness, which is a holy and humbled heart.

Salvation is such a building, as the foundation thereof had need to be sure
and strong: Ignorance, blindness, and presumption, are not sufficient
foundations for such a building: therefore as no man will build a strong house
upon any earth, but he will first search it, least it prove sandy, and so
overthrow all: So a wise Christian will not build his salvation, upon fancies
and conceits, and natural presumptions: but will Search, and look into his
heart: and finding these to be sandy, and rotten, and therefore too weak for
the foundation of so glorious a building, will refuse them all, and labor to
furnish his heart with such sound grace, as whereupon he may trust so
weighty a work, as is the salvation of his soul. Again, if thou will stand
in the day of trial, then search thy heart betime, and discern betwixt chafe
and wheat: thou see, that chafe flies away before the wind; but good
corn indures the Fan, and the fury of the wind: so in the day of trial,
temptation, sickness, or open persecution, the chafe of natural
presumption, and outward formalitie in Religion, will fly away: and it must be
the penitent, humbled, and believing heart, which must then abide it out, and
endure the Fan of temptations and persecutions.

And to conclude, Let not the Devil deceive thee, in making thee imagine or
hope to please God, and yet to let thy corruptions lie unseen, and thy sins
unsearched out, least thereby thou mar all: for thou use not to lay up
wheat in thy garners, until it be purged from the chafe: so think not to
store up any saving knoweledge, or any other grace of God in thy heart,
until the Chafe of vanity be first blown away, that so, the holy graces
of God may be laid up in the garners of thy soul.

And therefore questionless, (to speak one word to touch our common
professors, in the very sore of their souls) all knowledge that is stored up
in these vnpure and unsearched hearts: is even as wheat laid up in the chafe,
which is, (a thousand to one) sure to be eaten up by the chafe, so that, when
the winnowing time of trial and persecution comes: I fear, that such men will
(for all their knowledge) shrink aside, and betraye the Truth: their
knowledge then proving no better then chafe, because it was laid up in an
unholy heart. If therefore thou would stand and endure, when Popery, or
persecution, or temptations come, if thou would abide the fury of the fan
of temptations: now then exercise thy heart with the fan of Gods law,
Search and ransacke it, purge out the chafe of corruption, and store up
knowledge in an holy heart, and a good conscience, and that will abide the
violence of all temptations: yea, when God suffers the Devil to do with us,
as he did with Peter, to winnowe us like wheat, to sifte and try us, as he
did Job, with the furious wind of all his malice: then knowledge will prove
Wheat, that will abide the wind, and gold that will abide the fire: thus
glorious will it be in the end, if we follow this holy Prophets counsel,
and Search our hearts.

And thus much for the first point (namely) the duty of searching here
commanded, in which we have stayed the longer, because it is the foundation of
all the rest: and this being well laid, the whole building will go up the
faster.
Now we come to the second general point here laid down: that is, whom must
we Search? the Prophet answers: your selves, not other men, but your selves.
This search so urged and enforced by the Prophet, must not be of other men's
hearts and lives, but of our own: our own are our charge, and not other men's:
and therein is the saying true, which else is most false: Every man for
himself: for as every soul must be saved by it self, so must it believe,
repent, and search it self.

The duty therefore here commanded, is for every man that would have his
soul to be saved, to search it, and reform it, and leave others to be
searched by themselves. Here the holy Ghost meets with the common corruption of
this world, (and that is) that men are Eagle eyed, to see into the lives of
other men, but to look into their own hearts, and lives, they are blinder
then Moles: they can see moates in other men's lives, but discern not beams in
their own: whereby it comes to pass, that they stumble and fall fowlie: for
the eyes of most men are set upon others, and not upon themselves: and
thereupon it is, that an evil man, seeing oother men, and not himself:
thinks best of himself, and worst of other men: but contrariwise, a good man
seeing himself, and not other men, thinks worst of himself, and better of
other men: an evil man looks outward, and judges other men: but a good man
looks homeward and judges himself: and in judging, condemns himself, far
above other men: and that because by searching into his own heart and ways,
he knows that by himself, which he knows not by any man in the world besides.

So then we must search, not other me^, but our selves: our own hearts and
our own lives are our charge, and burden: the lives of other men concern us
not, being private men, further then either to follow them being good, or take
heed of them being evil: but to search, or be inquisitiue into them, is no
duty commanded us, but rather a foul and a base vice forbidden of God.
Indeed Magistrates in their people, Pastors in their congregations, and
householders in their families are to search: but they can search only for
criminal causes, to open actual sins: but this searching must be of our
hearts, which no man can search, but our selves only. Few men have a calling
to enquire into other men's lives, but every man has a calling to search into
himself: but (alas) men do far otherwise, they suffer themselves to rotte
in their own sins, and erect an Inquisition over other men's lives, and it is
to be seen in daily experience, that those men, who are the great Searchers
and pryers into other men, are the neglecters and forgetters of themselves. And
contrariwise, they who do narrowly Search themselves and their own ways, and
look into the corners of their own hearts, do find so much work to do
with themselves, that they little busy themselves, wi^h other men.

And thus much may suffice for that point.
It follows.

O Nation not worthy to be beloved.

The third point: Who must search? the Jews, who are here termed a Nation, not
worthy to be beloved: and yet for all that, they are bid to search themselves,
that so upon their repentance, they might be beloved. Where, we may see the
unspeakable love of God, and his wonderful mercy, offering grace unto such
men, as are altogether unworthy of it. Gods children are by nature like other
men, and God finds nothing in them, why to respect them above other: but even
of his own mercy, makes them worthy, who of themselves are not: therefore how
worthy is that God, to have all the love of our hearts, who loved us, when we
were not worthy to be beloved.

But let us examine more particularly, why God does call the Jews a Nation,
not worthy to be beloved: I answer, God had blessed them above other Nations:
He gave them his covenant of grace, and thereby made them his people, and
committed to their trust, his holy word and Oracles: Romans 3. 2.
but he dealt not so with other Nations, neither had the heathen knowledge of
his laws. Besides all this, Ps. 143. 20.
they had a better land then others about them, it flowed with Milk, and
Honey, (that is, with all commodities, and delights) and though their Country
was but little, yet themselves so populous, and so powerful, that whilst they
pleased God, no enemy durst set upon then.

Thus for soul and body, they were every way a Nation, blessed of God, a
people beloved of God above all others. Now, how did this people (thus beloved
of their God,) requite this his love, which they had no more deserved, then any
other Nation? Certainly, as they deserved it not before they had it, so they
requited it not when they had it: but requited this love of God with sin,
with rebellion, and with disobedience. They tempted him, they provoked him to
wrath, they presumed of his mercy, and proved a most stubborn and stifnecked
people, a froward generation: Moses partly saw this in his own experience, and
better discerned it in the spirit of Prophecy: and therefore, wondering at
this their wickedness, he cried out; Do you thus requite the Lord: O foolish
people and unwise? thus, that is, with sin, and disobedience, which is the
only means to displease the Lord, and to provoke him to wrath: for this cause
they are worthily called a foolish and unkind people by Moses, and here, by the
Prophet. A Nation not worthy to be beloved: namely, for their unthankfulness,
and unkindness: which was such, as they not only were slack, and careless in
performance of such duties as God required: but eue^ multiplied their sins,
and committed those soul rebellions, which his soul hated.

And amongst many, the Prophet here in this Chapter, notes three of their
great sins: for which they were a Nation not worthy to be beloved.
Covetousness, Cruelty* and Deceit: all which were the more heinous and
intolerable, because they were the sins of their Princes, their rulers, and
their Priests, who should have bin lights and examples to the rest.

Now, although every sin in it self, is of that ill desert, as it is able to
cast us out of Gods favor, and deprive us of his love: yet, behold, here God
complains, not upon a little cause, but for wonderful, and exceeding
unthankfulness, and unkindness in them: who of all other should have loved the
Lord.

As a man cares not for hard usage from him, whom he esteems not: but a little
unkindness does greatly grieve a man, from him who is loved and respected: so
is it with the Lord our God, he loved not the Gentiles, as he did the Jews,
Psalm. 147.
neither was he so bountiful unto them: Acts 17. verse. 30.
and therefore, (as we may see) though they lived always in ignorance, and
continued always in disobedience; yet, the Text says, the time of that
ignorance God regarded not: but when as the Jews, his own people, whom he
chose out of all people, and bestowed his love upon them, and made his Covenant
of grace with them, when they became unkind, unthankful, forgetful,
stubborn, and rebellious, that caused the Lord even to complain of that
indignity, and to cry out by Moses, Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish
people and unwise? And hereby the Prophet, O Nation not worthy to be beloved:
and therefore there is no man, but if he be asked what he thinks of this
Nation of the Jews: he will answer, that they are a most vile and wicked
people, a froward generation, and that they are worthy to taste deeply of all
Gods plagues, who so far abused his love and mercy.

But what does this belong to them alone? and is Israel a Nation not worthy to
be beloved? Nay, I may cry out with as good cause: O England, a Nation not
worthy to be beloved: For, God has been as good a God to us, as he was to
them: and we have been as unkind a people to him, as they were to him. But
that I may be free from discrediting our nation, and from defiling my own
nest: let us prove both these points, and lay them open to the view of the
world.

1. First therefore, the same mercies, and far greater, have been powered and
heaped upon us: he has called us out of the dareknes: First, of Heathenisme,
and then of Popery: his covenant of grace and salvation, he has confirmed with
us, his treasures of his word and Sacraments, he has imparted to us, his holy
word never better preached, and the mysteries thereof never more plainly
opened, since the time of the Apostles: and as we have Religion, so we have
it under a Religious Prince, whereby it comes to pass, that these blessings of
salvation, we enjoy not in secret, or by stealth: but we have it cou^tenanced
by authority; so that religion is not barely allowed, but even as it were even
thrust upon men. Besides all this, we have a land also that flows with milk
and honey, it is plentiful in all good things: we have liberty and peace under
a peaceable Prince, and the companions of peace, prosperity, plenty, health,
wealth, corn, wool, gold, silver, abundance of all things, that may please
the heart of man: thus has God deserved the love of England.

2. But now England, how have thou requited this kindness of the Lord?
certainly even with a great measure of unkindness: that is, with more and
greater sins then ever Israel did: so that if Moses spoke true of them, then
may our Moses much more truly cry out against England, do thou thus requite
the Lord, thou foolish people? And if this prophet said thus of Israel for
three sins, then may it be said of England for three hundred sins (O
England) a Nation not worthy to be beloved: for thou have multiplied thy
transgressions, above theirs of Israel; even as though thou had resolved with
thy self, the more Gods kindness is heaped on thee, the more to multiply thy
sins against him. For thou England, as thou have requited the Lord with sins;
so not with a few sins, or small sins, or sins, which hardly could have
been prevented: for that had been a matter of some excuse, or not of so great
complaint. But thy sins are many, and grievous, and capital. And which is
worst of all, wilful and affected, even as though God had deserved evil of
us: and that therefore we ought maliciously to requite him.

If any man make doubt of this, and therefore think I speak too hardly of our
Church: I will the^ deal plainly and particularly, and rip up the sores of our
Nation, that so they may be healed to the bottom.

The common sins of England, wherewith the Lord is requited, are these.

First, ignorance of Gods will and worship, (I speak not of that compelled
ignorance in many corners of our land, which is to be pitied because they
want the means) but wilful and affected ignorance. Men are ignorant, even
because they will be ignorant. Means of knowledge were never so plentiful, and
yet never more gross ignorance: is not he wilfully blind, who will not open
his eyes in the light? and can there be any darkness at noone day, but it
must be wilful? But our Nation is dark and blind in the Sunshine of the
Gospel, and grossly ignorant, when the Gospel beats their ears, and light
shines round about them: so, as if they closed not their eyes, and stopped not
their ears, they could not but both hear and see: who would look for
ignorance after thirty five years preaching? and yet, many are as ignorant, as
if they had been borne and brought up under popery: so that our people are as
evil as those in the days of Christ, of whom the holy Ghost says; Light is
come into the world, but men love darkness more then light. So knowledge is
come into England: but many Englishmen love darkness better then knowledge.
Alas, how many thousands have we in our Church, who know no more in religion,
then they hear in common talk of all men, and which is worse, they think it
sufficient also, and which is worst of all, whereas they might have more, they
will not, but care not for it.

2. The second maine sin of England, is Contempt of Christian Religion;
Religion has bin among us these five and thyrtie years; but the more it is
published, the more it is contemned, and reproched of many; insomuch, as there
is not the simplest fellow in a Country town, who, although he knows not one
point of religion, yet he can mock and scorn such as are more religious then
himself is: this is one of the moaths of England, that eats up religion, this
is grievous in whomsoever, but most intolerable in two sorts of men. First,
in them, who are altogether ignorant, that they should mock they know not
what. A pitiful thing to here one, who himself cannot give the meaning of
one petition in the Lords prayer, to vpbraide other men, because they are too
forward: but it is the worst of all, when men of knowledge, and such as live
ciuilly, and would be counted good Christians, are indeed of the better sort,
cannot abide to see others go a little before them: but if they do, presently
they are hypocrites and dissemblers. Thus not profaneness, nor wickedness, but
even religion it self is a byword, a mocking stock, and matter of reproach;
so that in England at this day, the man or woman that begins to profess
Religion, and to serve God, must resolve with himself to sustain mockes and
injuries, even as though he lived among the enemies of religion, and not among
professors; and as religion increases and spreads it self, so does the
number of these mockers. O what a cursed sin is this? to contemn the
greatest favor that God can give us, that is, his holy religion: for the which
we should rather praise him all the days of our lives. All that God can give a
man in this world, is his Gospel, what then can God give to be regarded, when
his Gospel is contemned?

This sin was never amongst the Jews: they indeed regarded it not so as it
deserved, but who did ever make a mock and a scorn of it but England? O
England, how can thou answer this? God sendes thee the most precious jewel,
that he can send to a Nation; and thou scornest it, and them that bring it,
and them that receive it; even as though it were no blessing, but a curse: so
that as Christ says to the Jews, John. 10. 32
For which of my good works do you stone me? So may the Lord say to England,
I have given thee a fruitful land, a blessed Prince, gold and silver, peace
and liberty, plenty and prosperity: for which of these (O England) do thou
contemn my religion? The least of these deserve love; but England has a
better then all these; that is, his Gospel, the word of salvation: and yet,
that all is contemned (as being nothing worth) and those which confess it,
and those that bring it, and consequently, God himself that give it. If
England had no more sins but this: this deserves, that it should be said of
us, that we are a Nation not worthy to be beloved above all Nations: for some
Nations would have religion, that they might love it, but they cannot have it:
some have it, and love it not: but in no Nation is it made a mocking-stocke,
but in England. And where are those men, but in England, who (like the dog in
the manger) will neither entertain religion themselves, nor suffer them that
would: let us in time take heed of this sin, as a sin that cries to God,
to revenge so vile a dishonor done to his Majesty: neither is there any sin
that more certainly foreshowes, and more forcibly hastens the remoouing of the
Gospel from us. For high time is it to cease loving, where love procures
disdain: And to stay giving, where gifts are scorned.

Carry home this lesson to your great Towns and Cities where you dwell, There
were then present inhabitants of London.
for in these populous places, York, Cambridge, Oxford, Norwich, Bristow,
Ipswich, Colchester, Worcester, Hull, Lin, Manchester, Kendal, Couentry,
Nottingham, Northampton, Bath., Lincoln, Darby L^icester, Chester, Newecastle,
and of many other most populous cities and Towns of England.
are these great mockers, for where God has his professors, the Devil has
his mockers; and repent betimes of this sin, for hold on in mocking, and be
sure that God (who will not be mocked) will remove his Gospel from you; but
if you leave this sin, and entertain the Gospel (as it worthily
deserves,) then be sure of it, that God will continue the Gospel, to you, and
your posterity after you, in the face of all your enemies round about you.

3. The third common sin of England, is Blasphemy, many ways, but
especially in vain swearing, false swearing, and for-swearing, and the abuse
of all the names and titles of the Lord God. This sin is general, even over
the whole land, especially in Fayres, and Markets, where men for a little
gain, will not care to call the Lord of Hosts to be witness to a lie, and
the God of truth to testify an untruth.

And which is worst of all, Gods holy Name is used in vain oaths, and
ordinary talk; when men have no cause to swear at all: so that it is most
lamentable to see and observe, that the name of any man of honor, or worship,
is used more reverently, and less abused, then that fearful and glorious
name: the Lord our God.

4. The fourth general and great sin is, profanation of the Sabbath. A
common sin every where, and yet so great a sin, that where it reigns, in
that country, congregation, family, man or woman, there is no fear of God,
nor any true grace in them: for the keeping of the Sabbath, is the
maintaining, increasing, and publishing of religion.

5. The fifth sin of our Nation, is, evil dealing in bargaining betwixt man
and man. How hard a thing is it to find an honest, simple, plain dealing man?
and that even in such great assemblies as this is. I fear present experience
will testify: you are now many thousands gathered together, some to buy,
some to sell, some to exchange: Remember that I have told you, an honest
hearted and plain dealing man is hard to find: therefore labor to approve
your selves sincere hearted men; remember the counsel of the holy Ghost; Let
no man oppress nor defraude his brother in bargaining: for the Lord is the
auenger of all such things. These sins are general and universal as a
canker: And so are the sins of the six, seven* and eight Commandments,
(though they be not altogether so common as these be) Murders, Adulteries,
Vsuries, Briberies, Extorsions, Cosonages, they are a but then under which, our
earth groans; and they cry against us to heaven, so that upon as good or much
better cause may it be said to us, as to the Jews: O Nation not worthy to be
beloved.

Look at the outward face of our Church, at the signs of Gods love, which are
amongst us, and at Gods dealing with us; and behold, we are a beautiful
church, a glorious Nation, a Nation to be admired, and wondered at: but look at
the lives of our ordinary professors, look at our sins, and at our
requiting of Gods love: and we are a people of Sodom, as full of iniquities
as they were, whose sins were so many, so rise, and so ripe; that at the
last they will even bring down fire and brimstone, or some other strange
judgment upon us, if repentance do not prevent it, or the cries and prayers of
holy men stay not Gods hand. So then, let us all here assembled, grant and
confess, that we are a Nation so far from being worthy to be beloved, as
that we are most worthy to be hated, and to have all the wrath of God powered
upon us.

Now then, are we so? and shall we continue so still? Nay, that is the worst,
and most wretched of all: then let every one of us learn this duty, enter
into our selves, search our hearts and lives, that they may lie open to our
own sight, to the confusion of us in our selves, that in God by repentance we
may be raised up.

Our sins lie open before the face of God, and stink in his presence, and
cry for vengeance: and before the face of Gods Angels, who bewail it, and
before the face of the Devil, who rejoices in our confusions: and shall they
lie hid only to our selves? Now then, if we would have them hidden from
God, and stop the cry that they make against us, and keep them from Satan,
who accuses us for them; we must so search our selves, that they may lie open
unto our own hearts: Remember thou thy sins, and GOD will forget them: lay
them open before thine own face, and GOD will hyde them from his: write them
up for thy own self, and God will blot them out of his remembrance: but if
contrariwise thou hidest them, then assure thy self, the more thou hydest and
buriest them, the more open do they lie in the face of God: and then what will
follow, but that they will all be disclosed at the last day, to thine
eternal confusion. Therefore again, and again, I exhort you in the name of
God, Search your selves, find out your sins, confess them to God freely,
and ingeniouslie: confess their deserts to be hell and damnation, humble your
hearts to God, cry and call for pardon, as for life and death, purpose and
promise to leave them, begin a new course of life, believe steadfastly, and
doubt not but of pardon and forgiveness in the blood of Christ, continue in
that faith, and that new course of life: So may England prevent Gods
judgments, and quench that great action of unkindness which God has against
them, and become a Nation as worthy (upon their faith and repentance) in
Christ to be beloved: as for their peace and prosperity, they have been of
all Nations of the earth admired.

Hitherto of the third general point.
4. The fourth general point in this exhortation, is time limited them, when
they should Search. Before the Decree come forth, etc. As though the Prophet
should say, Israel, repent before God execute his judgments on thee. For
behold the gracious dealing of God: Man sins, his sins deserve plagues:
but God presently plagueth not, but deferres it, he puts a time betwixt the
sin and the punishment (ordinarily:) this he does to show his mercy unto
mankind, because that he would not destroy them, if they would amend.
Therefore, after the sin, he smites not presently, but puts off his
punishment, that in the mean time man may repent. Here the Prophet compares the
Lord to a mother, for as she conceiues the fruit in her womb, and bears it
a long time, ere she bring it out: so the Lord after a man's sins, or a
peoples sinn^s, conceive (that is) ordaines, and decrees a judgment for it,
but he keeps it up, and all that while he bears it: But as she, when her
time is come, then travails and bringes forth: So, when the time that God
has appointed, is come, and still sin not repented of: then his justice
travails to be delivered of that judgment, which mercy has kept up so long
a time. Thus the old world had an hundred and twenty years given them, for
time of repentance; all that while God was in conceiving, at last when their
sins were ripe, and no hope of amendment: then God traveled, and brought
forth a fearful birth, namely, the universal flood, to wash away, and take
revenge upon the universal iniquities of those times. So mame hundredth years
he gave unto the Jews, long he was in conceiving their destruction, and
oftentimes he had it at the bringing forth, as in the captivity of Babylon,
and under Antiochus; yet his mercy stayed it: and still he travailed longer:
tells them here by the Prophet, that yet the Decree is not come forth
(though it be conceived:) but at last when Israel would not Repent, but grew
worse, and worse; as in CHRIST his time) then he could contain no longer, but
traveled indeed, and though it be with grief, yet he has brought forth: and
what? a most fearful birth, even an utter desolation of that Kingdom and
Country, of their City, and Temple, and a dispersion of this nation over all
the world: but as a woman at last is delivered with danger and difficulty,
with pain and sorrow: so the Lord long conceiues, but at last brings forth
his judgments: yet is it with grief and unwillingness, and he is loath (as it
were) and much grieved to execute his most just judgments on those, who have
professed his name: he often touched the Jews a little, and as being
unwilling to smite them: he drew back his hand again: but at last when
their sins did so increase, and were so strong, that they even did wring out
by violence his plagues from him, then with much bewailing of their great
misery (as we may see in Christ weeping for them) he executes his
judgments on them. But as they are long a coming: so, when they come forth,
they were the heavier; as a child, the more fullness of time it has, is the
greater, the liuelier, and the stronger: so, Gods judgments, the longer God
deferreth them, and is in conceiving them, the heavier are they, when they
come: that is manifest in the Jews, once his own people, for he has
destroyed their land, with an irrecouerable destruction, and smitten their
posterity, with a blindness of mind till this hour, so that to this day,
when the old Testament is read, the veil is over their eyes, that they cannot
see the light of Christ Jesus, but plod on in fearful and palpable
blindness.

This doctrine has special use to this our Church, to teach us to look to
our selves betimes, and try our own woyes, and turn to the Lord, for we
cannot tell how far off his judgments are: in reason they must needs be
near, they have been so long deferred, and yet been so justly deserved of
us. Certainly, God has long been in conceyuing judgments and plagues for
the sins of England, and often has Gods hand been upon us, by War,
Famine, Pestilence, In-vndations: and yet it has been pulled back again: and
his sword has been put up into his sheathe, and God has stayed his birth,
even in the very travel, and we have escaped, even as a man, whose neck
has been upon the block, and the Axe holden up to strike: so then, yet the
day is not come, yet we have time: happy we that ever we saw this day, if
now we have grace to repent, and Search our hearts, for then we shall stay
his judgment decreed, that it shall never come forth against us: but if we
defer to repent, put off from day to day, and lie rotting still in our
sins: then know and be assured, that as the Decree is established, so it
must needs come forth, and the stroke stricken, Repentance is too late:
therefore what he said to the Jews, I say unto us, Search thy self O
England: (a Nation not worthy to be beloved) before the Decree come forth,
which is already past against thee.

Thus much for the fourth point.
5. Now follows the last point: the reason of all. Why should we search our
selves? The reason is included in the fourth point: For there is a decree come
forth against thee. And although the execution be defeated, and though God be
unwilling to take it out, yet without repentance, it is most certain, it shall
come forth, and be executed at the last. In one word, this is the reason.
Repent, or else certainly God will take vengeance: But (will man's heart say)
is this true? Or rather these be but words to fear men, and to keep them in
awe. I answer, for proof and experience hereof, never go further (...) this
place, and present example we have in hand, the Prophet bids them Search,
Search, and Repent, else, as certainly as there was a judgment conceived, so
certainly it should be executed upon them: they would not hear, nor Search,
nor repent: but what followed; let all men judge, whether God is not true of
his word to them or no: yea alas, who sees not that God has traveled
indeed, and has brought forth a fearful judgment on them, and has made
them for these thousand years, and a half, the gazing-stocke, the byword, and
the amazement of all the world.

Thus was it threatened to the Jews, and thu(...) is performed: and certainly
thus has it been threatened, and thus shall it be performed to thee, Oh
England, except thou prevent the judgments that are coming: Oh happy
England, that I may say unto thee, it is yet but coming. For as for the
miserable Jews, upon them (alas) it is come already: unto those poor souls
it can be said no more, Repent before the Decree come forth: for it is now
past: but thou art happy, for thy Day is not yet come: yet I may say unto
thee, Repent before the Decree come forth: and Oh happy England, that thou
mavest hear this word: ( Before) sounding in thine ears.

Therefore my beloved brethren, who are here assembled out (almost) of every
corner of this Kingdom, hear my words: and carry them home with you into
all Countries, God is the same God still, as just, and as jealous, as ever he
was: our sins are as ill, nay, much viler then the Jews were: how can it
be then, but that must fall to us that fell to them? therefore the zeal of
Gods glory, and my desire of your saluations, make me, that I dare not
flatter, but tell you the truth: that is, that out of all question, if we
search not our selves and Repent: there is a general judgment in preparing
for us: certainly the Decree is out, and what can stop the execution of it, but
Repentance: God has long spared, and he has been long in traveling, therefore
(though nothing can be said in way of Prophecy) I am in my conscience
persuaded to fear, and that out of infallible grounds of the word of God, that
a plague, and a judgment, and that most fearful, hangs over England: and
that it is already pronounced upon this Nation, and shall be as certainly
executed, without a visible reformation: and because I may seem to speak
somewhat large, give me leave to give you the reasons inducing me hereunto.

1. First, the Gospel has been preached these five and thirty years, and is
daily more and more, so that, the light therefore never shone more gloriously,
since the Primitive Church: yet for all this, there is a general ignorance,
general of all people, general of all points, yea, as though there were no
Preaching at all: yea, when Popery was newely bannished, there was more
knowledge in many, then is now in the body of our Nation: and the more it is
preached, the more ignorant are many, the more blind, and the more hardened
(even as a Stithie the more it is beaten upon, the harder it is) so they, the
more they hear the Gospel, the less esteem they it, and the more they
contemn it: and the more God calls, the deaffer they are: and the more they
are commanded, the more they disobey. We Preachers may cry till our Lunges
fly out, or be spent within us, and men are moved no more then stones. Oh
alas, what is this, or what can this be: but a fearful sign of destruction?
Will any man endure always to be mocked? then how long has GOD been
mocked? Will any man endure to stand knocking continually? If then God has
stood knocking at our hearts five and thirty years: it is now time to be
gone, unless we open presently?

But if we will know what this argues, to contemn the Gospel, and not to
repent, when the Word is so abundantly preached: read the Story of Elie, his
wicked sons. He spoke unto them, and gave them godly counsel, but they
hearkened not unto the voice of their father: But will some say, that is no
great matter, not to hear their Father a common thing: but mark what
follows. 1. Sam. 2. 13.
They would not hear their father, because the Lord would destroy them: a
fearful thing. Even so it is with a nation, or a people: are they taught, and
are they worse and worse? take heed: If Elyes sons obey not, it is, because
God will destroy them.

If therefore Elie, and many Elyes have spoken to England, and England hears
not, England obeys not, England repents not: take heed the the Lord in
heaven say not, England will not hear the voice of the Prophets, because I
will destroy it. Let no man say, we take upon us to prophecy: we only give
warning, and show the danger, by example of the like.

My second reason is this. One judgment executed, and not working repentance,
is always a forerunner of an other: that Rule is certain, and an evident
truth, and needs no proving. Now, we have been visited with famines,
Earthquakes, pestilences, inundations, Thunder and lightnings in winter, and
most strange and unseasonable weather: but alas, all these have taken no
effect: where is the humiliation, Repentance and reformation which they have
wrought? therefore it must needs be, there remains behind a greater
judgment. Men may be so mad to think these to be ordinary things, and to
come by course of Nature, and ordinary causes: but certainly they are the
shaking of the Rod, and forerunners of a great judgment, unless Repentance
cut off their course. For look as one cloud follows another, till the Sun
consume them: so one judgment hastens after an other, and repentance only is
the Sun, which must dispell them.

3. Thirdly, it stands with the justice of God, according as he has revealed
it in the Scripture, especially in Deuteronomy. 28. out of the whole Chapter, it must
needs be gathered as a Rule. I will curse that people that break my laws:
now we may not deny but this land of ours, is for abundance of sin, a
people of Sodom. All kind of sins, in all estates of men, rage and reign
every day more and more: therefore I conclude, that unless we repent, and so
dissolve this cloud of judgment, that hangs over our heads: it cannot be, but
a most fearful tempest is to come at the last, and when it is come, it will
be too late to wish they had done it. Therefore in the bowels of CHRIST JESUS.
Let this be to entreat and exhort you all, to search and look into your
selves, that so repenting and changing your ways, you may get the sword again
into his sheath, which is already drawn out, but yet has not stricken home,
and may quench the wrath which is already kindled, but yet burns not out as
it will do, if by repentance we quench it not: and do this every one, as you
tender the salvation of your own souls, and the continuance of the Gospel to
this glorious Nation, and the peace and prosperous state of this Church and
common wealth. For let me^ make what causes they will, it is certainly
sinfulness that ouerturnes kingdoms, and changes states, as all these
kingdoms and states have felt, who have continued finally to contemn the
Gospel.

It follows:

And you be as chafe, that passes on a day.

The Prophet proceeds, and describes more plainly, the manner and state of
that plague, which God will send upon them: the meaning was partly opened
before, to be in effect thus much; Search your selves, least God take his
fan and try you, because you would not try your selves, and finding you
upon the trial, not sound Wheat, but light Chafe: blow you to Hell with
the wind of his wrath: the Metaphor which the Prophet uses is this, he
compares the Lord to a husbandman, great and rich, the whole world is his corn
field: several Nations, (as this of ours for one) are his heaps of corn:
but the heaps of corn be full of Chafe, that is, these particular Churches,
are full of hypocrites: now a wise husbandman lets Corn and Chafe lie
together no longer, then till the wind does blow, and then he appoints his
fanning time to sever his corn from his chafe, and to blow away his chafe,
and lay up his corn: so God, the great and wise husbandman, will not let the
chafe lie for ever amongst the Wheat, he has therefore appointed his fa^ning
times, when to blow the chaff into hell, and to gather his wheat into heavenly
garners.

Now Gods winnowing times are two, the one is at the last day, after this
life, and that is Gods great winnowing day of all his corn (that of all men)
when the bad shall be severed from the good for ever, never to be mingled
again with them, but by the strong and powerful fan of his last and final
judgment to be blown into hell: the wind of whose wrath, at that day, shall be
stronger to blow them all away, then all the wind in the world to blow away
one handful of light Chafe.

2. Gods other fanning time, is in this world, and that is also double. The one
is, when the word is preached: the Preaching of the word is one of Gods fannes:
For when the Gospel is preached to a Nation or Congregation, it Fannes them,
and tries them, and purges them, and so serves them, that a man may see a
manifest difference of the chafe and the wheat, that is, of the goodly man,
and the wicked man: this preaching of the Gospel does John the Baptist
expressly call a Fan: where the holy Ghost pursues this whole Metaphor most
plainly, speaking of Christ, he says, Whose Fan is in his hand, and he will
thoroughly purge his Floor, and gather his wheat into his garner, but the
Chafe he will burn with fire unquenchable. The wind of this Fan of the
word preached, is so strong, as that it seuers the Chafe from the Wheat, that
is, good professors from hypocrites in the visible Church, and blows so
strongly upon the wicked, that it brings them to the beginning of Hell even in
this world, for it so works upon the conscience, as if it cannot convert
them, it strikes them with fear, terror and torment, either in life or at
death, which torment of conscience is the very flashes of hellfire.

But, when this first Fan of the word, will not serve to bring men to
repentance, (for the word preached, does not confound a man actually, but only
pronounce the sentence, and thereby strive strike the conscience) then God has
another fan, and that is the Fan of his judgments: and that fanning or
winnowing time is, when he executes his vengeance and his judgments on a
Nation: this is his latter fan, when the first will not prevail, this is his
powerful and strong fan driven about with the wind of his wrath, this fan
went over the old world, and swept them all away, and went over the Nation of
the Jews, and we see they are no more.

1. These three fannes of God, make a threefold separation of the Chafe from
the wheat, that is, of the wicked from the Elect: with the fan of his word
which is powerful, he seuers them in all affection, and disposition, and
makes a distinction of them, so, as generally the wheat is known to be wheat,
and Chafe discerned to be Chafe, by the Preaching of the word: but though
the tare be known to be tare, yet both grow together, so that the word only
serves them in affection, and sets several notes of distinction upon them both.

2. But then the second fan of his judgments is more violent, for thereby he
seuereth them asunder in soul, gathering the godly men, as his Wheat into the
heavens, and blowing the souls of the wicked into hell: but yet the bodies of
them both lie together, as partakers of the same judgment, so subject to the
same corruption, and are all lodged in the same grave of the earth, and death
has like dominion over them all.

3. But afterward at the last day, at Gods great harvest, and great winnowing
time, he then with the wind of his power, seuereth them asunder in soul and
body. Wheat from the chafe, Sheep from the Goats, and separateth them, never
to be mingled again for ever and ever: and then with the wind of his wrath,
he blows the chafe into fire unquenchable, and with his loving favor
gathers his wheat into the everlasting and glorious garners of heaven.

So then, the first seuereth them in affection. The second, in soul, for a
time. The third, actually in soul and body, for ever and ever.

Now of these three winnowing times, the holy Ghost speaks here properly of
the second: namely, the fan of Gods judgments: so that, the meaning of the
Metaphor is this: Search your selves and repent betimes, lest God come upon
you with some fearful Judgments: because you have so long contemned the
fan of the word, and finding you too light to abide the trial, do take you
away in the judgment, and cast you into hell: for as sure as the fan of the
word has made difference of you, which are chafe, and which are wheat, so
sure shall the fan of his judgments, blow away the chafe to hell and
damnation.

Thus much for the meaning.
Now for the use, for us in England, the case stands thus: Our Church
doubtless is Gods corn field, and we are the corn heap of God: and those
Brownists and Sectaries are blind and besotted, who cannot see that the Church
of England is a godly heap of Gods corn: but withal, we must confess, we
are full of chafe: that is, of profane and wicked hypocrites, whose hearts
and minds abound in sins and rebellions: and many of our best professors
are also too full of chafe (that is) of corruptions, and do give themselves
too much liberty in many sins: but alas, the pure wheat, how thin is it
scattered? how hard to find a man (at least a family) which dedicate themselves
to the Lord in holy and sincere obedience, and labor to make conscience of all
sins: now therefore, seeing we are Gods corn field, and we have some pure
wheat amongst much chafe, therefore God will winnow us to find out the corn,
if he have but one corn of wheat in a handful of chafe, but one good man of
many, he will stir all the heap for those few corners, he will not care to
blow all the chafe to hell, to find out those few corns of Wheat, to lay
them up in heaven: so that out of all question, England being so full of
chafe, must look to be winnowed.

Now for the first Fan of his word, it has been used in this land these
five and thirty years, and that as powerfully, and as plentifully as any
where in the world, and yet (alas) many are more godless, more ignorant, more
profane then ever they were, yea, wickedness grows, and the chafe
increases above the wheat: be sure therefore, that God will bring his second
fan upon us; because we will not suffer the first, and mild and gentle fan
of his word to try and search us: therefore we will bring the fearful fan
of his judgments, and with it, he will blow soul and body into hell, with
those our sins and corruptions, which we would not suffer the fan of Gods
word to blow from us. The first has so long blown in vain, that the second
must needs come unto us, and it has already begun to blow: three or four
blastes have blown over us; famine, pestilence, earthquakes, fire, water,
wind, these have so blown some of us, that they have taken away a great
number of us For us that remain, In the plague at London there dyed some week
almost. 2000. a week in 92. But in 1603. there died 3300. in a week.
this only remains, that we strengthen our selves by grace, to be able to
stand against the next blast, for come it will, and when it comes no wealth nor
worldly thing can enable us to endure it, only faith and repentance, and the
grace of God will stand at that day. Now therefore, in that so fearful a
fanning abides us: seeing it is so near (as appears by the blastes already
past over us, which are nothing but the forerunners of a greater tempest) what
should be our care (except we care not to be blown body and soul into hell)
but to labor to eschew this fearful fan of Gods wrath: or at least, if it
come upon us, that it may not blow us to hell, but hasten us to heaven. If thy
heart be touched to ask how this may be. I answer thee, only to follow the
Prophets advice in this place, by searching and trying our selves. The way to
escape Gods trial, is to try thy self: and to escape Gods iugdement, to be a
judge to thine own soul: and so the way to escape the fearful fan of God,
is to fan their own heart by the law of God. For whomsoever the first fan
(that is, the word of God) does work upon: these men are never blown away
with the fan of Gods judgments. O then, entertain the word of God into thy
heart, submit thy soul unto it, let it pierce and try, and ransacke thy heart,
and lay before thee thy wretched estate by thy sins, and when thou see thy
nakedness and misery, confess it, bewail it, and be humbled for it, cry and
call for mercy and forgiveness, pray against thy special sins, strive to
purge them out, as the poison of thy soul, crave grace from God for all thy
sins: if thou see any sins more welcome to thy nature, more dear unto
thee, and which more prevail against thee, then others do, pray against these
sins, and strive against them above all: and endeaour, that by the fan of
Gods word, they may be blown away from thee. When thou have done this, mark
what will come of it: when thou have fanned thy self, GOD will not fan thee:
but when the fan of his judgment comes and blows so strongly upon the
wicked, then the Lord finding thee already fanned, and cleansed by his word,
will spare thee, and his judgment shall either blow over thee, and pass by
thee untouched (as over Lot, in the destruction of Sodom) or else shall fan
out all thy corruptions, and blow thee up to heaven, to be laid up as pure
wheat in the heavenly garners, and mansions of glory, which Christ ascribed
to prepare for thee.

Now then amongst those many businesses, with which this world does cumber
every of us (all which shall perish with the world it self) let us good
brethren, spare sometime for this great business. Martha may be combred about
many things, but this is that one thing, which is necessary: therefore
whatsoever is done, let not this be undone. Once a day put thy self and thy
life under the fan of Gods law, try thy self what thou art, and thy life,
how thou live. Once a day keep a court in thy conscience, call thy thoughts,
thy words, and thy deeds to their trial: let the ten commandments pass
upon them, and thy sins and corruptions which thou find to be chafe,
blow them away by repentance, so shall thou remain pure and clean wheat, fit
for the house and Church of GOD in this world, and for his kingdom in heaven.
But, if we will not do this, then alas, what will follow? my heart greeueth
to utter it: but I must, unless I should be a false Prophet: and therefore I
will. Our long peace, plenty, and ease, have bred great sins, so great, that
they reach to heaven, and provoke Gods Majesty to his face, and so strong,
that they will violently draw down judgments from God upon us: which when
they come, they will be so powerful, and so violent, that they will blow us
away like chafe, and bring this kingdom to some miserable ruin. O therefore
how happy are we, if we can entertain this doctrine, and practice it: for in
so doing, we shall prevent Gods judgments, we shall continue the Gospel to
this land, and preserve this glorious Nation from being destroyed or
dispeopled, by some fearful judgment.

Beloved, At Stirbridg Fair.
you come hither to this place, purposely to buy and sell, and thereby to
better your estates in this world: how happy then are you, if besides the good
markets you make for your bodies and estates, you learn also how to make your
selves abide the trial of Gods judgments, and how to be made pure corn, fit
to replenish the garners of heaven, and how to continue Gods favor and the
Gospel to this Nation. If thou go away with this lesson, thou have a Jewel
more worth, then thou should go home possessed of all the huge riches of
this Fair: you call this and such like times Fair times: but if thou learn
this lesson right, then thou may say, that this was the fairest day in
deed, that ever shone upon thee, since thou wast borne. This precious Jewel
which I have spoken of all this while, I here offer unto thee. Every one bringes
hither something to be sold, this is the merchandise that I bring and set to
sale unto you: what ever commodity any of you bring, it is from some quarter
of this land, but all is from the earth: but this that I bring, it is from
heaven: and all the earth cannot yield it: and as it is from heaven, so it is
of a heavenly virtue, and will work that which all the wealth in this Fair is
not able to do: therefore cast not to buy the basest, and let pass the best
of all: and never allege that it is above thy compass, and being a Jewel, it
is too dear and costly for thee: for I offer it freely unto you, and to every
one of you, I pronounce unto you from the Lord, that here this blessed doctrine
is offered unto you all, in his name, freely, and that you may buy it without
money. Happy is that day, when thou coming so far to buy things for thy
body, and pays so dear for them, do meet with so precious a Jewel, the
virtue whereof, is to save thy soul, and payest nothing for it. Thou may
hereafter rejoice, and say: I went to buy and sell, and to help my body: but I
have also learned to save my soul. I went thither to help to mainiaine my
own estate: but I have learned to help to maintain England in prosperity:
for assuredly, if we would all of us learn this lesson, and practice it, we
might assure our selves of the glorious prosperity of England, to continue
from generation to generation: whereas alas, if we continue and go forward in
our sins, and impenitencie, it is greatly to be feared, that neither the
Gospel, nor this peace, will reach to our posterity. Therefore now to make an
end; I once again, and lastly, commend this doctrine to you all, and every one
of you (for this merchandise that I bring, is of that nature, that though some
take it, yet there is also enough for every one) and I commend it unto you,
even from the very mouth of God himself: think of it I charge thee, as ever
thou look to appear before the face of Christ Jesus the great Judge, at the
last day; and if thou would escape the rigor of that judgment, enter now
into judgment with thy self, and search thy self: if thou now wilt not
receive this doctrine, then shall it at the last day be a bill of Enditement
against thee, for if it save thee not, it shall condemn thee: think of it
therefore seriously, as a matter that concerns thy soul and body: yea, and thy
posterity, and this whole Realm, all which shall smart for it, if we repent
not. And if the body of our people, and those, whose hearts are wedded to this
world, will not entertain this doctrine; the^ I turn unto you that fear the
Lord, and to you I direct my last warning; Search, O search, and try your
hearts and lives, renew and revive your faith and repentance, that if
judgments do come and blow upon this Nation, and drive the Gospel from it,
and it to hell: that yet you may have a testimony to your consciences, that
you did not pull down this general calamity, but for your parts labored to
have prevented it, by your earnest prayers and hearty repentance: that so, the
posterity ensuing, may not curse you, but speak reverently of you, and praise
God for you, and wish that all had done as you did; for then had they enjoyed
this goodly land, and all Gods blessings with it, as we their forefathers did
before them: and so shall our names not rotte, but flourish amongst the
posterities to come, which shall be partakers of the desolation: And when we
have renewed our repentance, let us then every one of us, deal with the Lord
by earnest prayer for this Church and Nation, that the Lord would show his
mercy upon it, and continue unto it, this peace and the Gospel: it is nothing
with the Lord to do it, his powerful hand is not shortened, he can continue
our peace: when the Papists look for hurli-burlies, he can continue the
Gospel, when they hope to set up their Idolatry again: let us therefore
apply the Lord with our prayers, and with Moses set our selves in the breach,
and pray for the ignorance of the multitude, and bewail their sins, who
bewail not their own. So did Noah, Daniel, and Job, in their ages, and prayed
for the people in general calamities: let us all be Noah's, Daniels, and Jobs,
in our generations: if we do thus, then when Judgments come, we shall either
turn them away from our Nation, or at the least we shall deliver our own
souls.

Let us now turn to the Lord in prayer, and because it cannot be hoped, but
that this our general sinfulness must needs end with some heavy Judgment:
let us desire the Lord still to defet our deserved punishments, and still to
spare us, and to give us time and leisure to repent: that so, we entering into
our selves, and searching our hearts, and turning to the Lord: we may turn
away his imminent Judgments, and that when his wrath does burn out indeed,
we may then be counted worthy in Christ, to escape those things which must
needs come upon the world. Amen.

Willam Perkins.

Lament. 3. Let us Search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord.
Trin-vni Deo gloria.
FINIS.

