THE REFORMAtion of Covetousness. Written upon the 6. Chapter of Matthew, from
the 19. verse to the end of the said Chapter.

By William Perkins.

Imprinted at London, for Nicholas Ling, and John Newbery. 1603.

In memoriam Perkinsi.
Is Perkins gone, that whilome was a Lamp,
A Cantabrigian Phospher shining far?
Gone, gone indeed. And yet his deeds remain
As monuments of such a writers worth.
Hei-papist snarle, contend his works to dim,
Thou bites and blots thy wretched self, not him.
He. Clapham.

To the Christian Reader.
IT shall not greatly need (well disposed Reader) to commend to thy kind
allowance, this godly, learned and necessary Treatise, of the reformation of
that sin, which of our ancient Philosophers and Divines, has bin condemned for
the original and root of all evils; since the Author thereof (now dead) while
he lived, received a true approbatio^ of his faithful labors from the most
judicial, grave and learned censures of our time. The neuer-wearied virtues of
his inward soul, still laboring like the Sun to illuminate and enlighten the
darkness of our understandings, amongst other of his industrious studies,
have left this token to the world, that his whole care and endeavor was always
bent to the begetting of a general profit. How necessary the publishing of
such a subject is, in respect of the Idolatrous worshipping of the wicked
Mammon, I refer me to the truly* zealous and soule-labouring Ministers in the
Lords vineard; whose voices like brazen trompets continually sounding in the
obdurate and stif-necked worldlings, work little or no motion at all in them,
either for compassion of their poor distressed brethren, or salvation of their
own souls. My request therefore is, that thou would reach thy gentle hand
of acceptance to the New-yeares gift of a dead man, who by a virtuous and godly
life, has chased oblivion from his grave, and now suruiueth in the hearts and
tongues of all godly Christians.

Fare ye well.
THE REFORmation of Covetousness.
Math. 6. 19 20. 19. Lay not up treasures for your selves upon the earth, where
the moath and canker corrupt, and where thieves dig through, and steal.

20. But lay up treasures for your selves in heaven, where neither the moath
nor canker corrupts, and where thieves neither break through, nor steal.


HEre begins the fifth part of Christ's Sermon, containing a several distinct
doctrine from the rest. From this 19. verse to the 25. is contained a discourse
touching the reform of covetousness: that is, the disordered and inordinate
care of earthly things. The ground of which discourse, lies in this 19. and
20. verses. In them Christ lays down a double commandment.

1 First, what we must not do, with a reason of the same. 2 Secondly, what we
must do, with a reason thereof.
The things forbidden, are the practices of covetousness: of which that we
may speak in order, first let us see the sense and meaning of the words.

There be two things contained in them.

Lay not up,] hoord, heap: The greek word signifies more then the
translation expresses; and namely, two things: first, to gather together:
secondly, to store up things gathered together against the time to come.

That it has these two significations, see Romans. 2. verse 5.

Treasures,] abundance of worldly wealth, and excellent things of great price,
as Gold, Silver, Plate, Iewelles, Rings, precious stones, etc.

Upon the earth,] Here he notes not so much the place of treasure, as the kind
of treasure, earthly.

For your selves,] for your own private gain and commodity, all respects of
the good, either of the Church or Commonwealth set aside.

Now that we may see what is forbidden, we must first see what he forbad not.

Genesis 3. 19, In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread.

Job.

Cor. 12. 14. for the child: and for the Church. Act. 11. 29.
And Joseph is commended for hoording up corn in the seven years of plenty,
against the seven years of dearth. Genesis 41. 48. Yea in the Temple there was a
treasure by the appointment of God, made, maintained, and continued from time
to time. Therefore he does not simply condemn the gathering of riches, or the
laying up of them.

What forbids he then? Sundry practices of covetousness, employed in the 19.
verse.

The first practice is excess in seeking worldly wealth, when men know and
keep no mean, moderation, or measure. And that we may see the danger of this
vice, I will answer this question:

How far a man may seek and provide for worldely wealth.

In answer whereof, I lay this ground for a foundation; that is, men's goods
must be distinguished into three sorts: viz. necessaria, abunda^tia, superflua,
that is, necessary, abundance, and superfluous.





Now here arises a question or two by the way:

What goods, and how much is necessary for the person.

For answer whereof, the opinion and judgment of the covetous must be no rule,
because his heart is a sea insatiable, or that cannot be filled.

What then must be the rule thereof?

There is no certain rule: therefore the judgment of the wise, learned,
godly, and Christian frugall men, must be the rule to judge what is necessary:
and whatsoever is in their judgment necessary, must be so accounted.

Further, things necessary must not be judged only by the present use, but
also by the use in time to come. As for example: A Tradesman grows in
years, and has nothing to live on besides his Trade: his hands and sight
fail him, therefore he prouides something to maintain him in his old age,
and lays it up for a certain and necessary use in time to come, until his
death.

Again, a man that has children: the time will come, when he must give them
their portions, and therefore he may provide for the^ against they come to age,
and he sins not, but does well, because it serves for a certain use in
time to come. Thus far of the first sort, that is, of necessary goods. Now
of the next.

that is, plenty of worldly riches, wherewith a man is so stored, that he
has both for a necessity, and also for an holy delight and hearts-ease.



But here is a bar put in by God himself; we may go no further; we may not
seek for abundance or superfluity: The reason hereof is alleged in the 30.
Chapter of the Proverbs, the 8. and 9. verses, where it is said: Give me not
poverty nor riches: feed me with food conuement for me, least I be full,
and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? etc.

That which we must ask of God, that we may seek for, and no more: But we
have no warrant to ask at Gods hands abundance or superfluity; Therefore
we may not seek for them. Again, if we have meat and drink, we must
therewith be content. 1. Tim. 6. 8.



and use it for the good of the Church and Commo^-wealth, and for the good of
our own families.

If this be so, that we must seek for nothing but necessaries, then we must
learn contentedness therewith, which that we may do, weigh these reasons
following.





Tim. 6. 9.

hardly confess Christ, and hold out, but will be the more easily drawn from
Christ, and the confession of the truth, because their minds are glewed to the
things of this world. Hereunto may be added the examples of many Saints, who
have been contented with little, that they might serve God the better. And also
Christ's admonition, How hard it is for a rich man to enter into the kingdom
of heaven. Thus much of the first practice of covetousness, which is excessive
seeking of goods, without al measure.

First seek the kingdom of God.

This was Esaus sin, and the sin of the Gadarens, Math. 8. who preferred
worldly goods before spiritual treasure. And this may be called unreasonable
disorder, preposterousnesse, worldliness, etc.

Tim. 6. Psalm. 62.

sibi soli, this man may be called churl, niggard. etc. All these practices
of covetousness Christ condemns.

Thus much concerning that which is forbidden. Now follows the reason.

Where moth, rust, and thief, etc.] The reason stands thus: That which is
subject to vanity, to casualtie and corruption, must not be our treasure: But
earthly goods, gold, silver, riches, clothes, etc. are subject to such things;
Therefore they must not be our treasure.

The Greek word (Ses) is a moath or worm, that wastes and consumes the best
garments, and may be taken here for any worm, that does destroy and consume
any creature.

Brosis, a canker. This translation is too strict, for it signifies any thing
that wastes any creature whatsoever. Here then is set down the vanity of
the creatures, which vanity stands in two points.

First, in the corruption.

Secondly, in the abuse of the creature.

Touching the corruption, it teaches us, that gold and silver, yea that al
riches have some diseases to waste them, or some canker to rust and consume
them.

Touching the abuse of the creature, it stands in this, that it is subject to
the injury and ill usage of men, as riches are when they are hoorded up, and
serve for no use.

From whence comes this vanity?

From man's sin. Romans 8. 20. which when we consider, it puts us in mind of
our sins, how loathsome they are, that they are causes of vanity to the
creatures, both by corruption and abuse.

Christ seeing men bent and disposed to treasure up wealth in abundance, calls
them back to an other kind of treasure, better then that, as much as heaven is
better then earth; and an heavenly life better the^ a little money or mucke.
And therefore he says: Lay not up treasure in earth: That is, let not all
your heart and mind be set upon this, I can tell you a little better treasure.
Here I might take occasion to inueigh against men's ill dispositions and
affections, who will not follow this good counsel, but still prefer earth
before heaven, for all this admonition.

Every man by nature is greedy to gather goods, and desirous to be rich, but
few care to be rich in God. What profit did the rich men receive by all their
treasure. Luke 16. and 12. Had it not been a great deal better, if they had
possessed less, so they had enjoyed this? But let us come to the 20. verse.

20. But lay up treasures for your selves in heaven, etc.



How shall we lay up therefore?

Thus. Lay out here, and lock it not up, and so you shall lay up treasure in
heaven. 1. Tim. 6. Otherwise, if you lay up here, and imprison the coin, that
it cannot be current, you lay up a treasure in hell. Romans 2. For by your
hardness of heart, what do you else, but treasure up wrath against the latter
day. So that this place seems to be a special motive to charity and
liberality: but yet it is not to be restrained to that, as if it pertained
only to rich men.

Then how shall the poor lay up treasure in heaven, who want it in earth?

Very well: for they must make God their treasure, and Christ and his word, and
so all their treasure is spiritual and heavenly. And this David made more
account of then any treasure whatsoever. Ps. 119.. 72. 127. And say with him,
Psalm. 57. Thou art my portion o Lord.

Rich men use at every years end to cast up their accounts, to see how their
store and treasure increases, and it is not amiss. But it were better if they
would take a time for this account, and see how this increases.

The rich man in the Gospel had gold enough, silver and corn great store, even
by his own confession, and yet he was but a fool, and that a miserable fool,
because he sought not this. Say that a man could get all the world into his
hands, (though it be not possible,) I pray you what would it profit him, if he
loose his soul for his labor? What madness is it then to heap up treasure
in earth, and not to regard the true treasure in heaven?

But lay up treasures in heaven, etc.

In this last part of this chapter, Christ goes about to reform his hearers,
in regard of the practice of covetousness, and begins at the 19. verse,
teaching







These four abuses are here forbidden.

Now because it is man's nature to seek treasure, and men cannot be broken from
it, but they will have a treasure, Christ adds this commandment, in which he
teaches his servants in all ages, what to do in this case.

But lay up treasures in heaven, etc. These words contain a commandment,
informing us in our duty, and a reason of the same. Lay up, etc. As if he
should have said, seeing your natural disposition is such, that you will, and
must neeeds have a treasure, I will show you what you shall do, if you will be
ruled by mine advise, and follow my counsel, you shall lay up treasure in
heaven, because there neither moath nor canker can come to corrupt.

seeing it is not in the power of any creature to do this, no more then to save
himself, but the beginning, progress, and end of salvation, is from God.
Therefore why does he propound the commandment in this form and tenure?

Obadiah, Preachers are expressly called Saviors. So 1. Tim. 4. 16. Paul says:
In doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee. Yet
salvation is the proper work of God alone: but because Preachers are Gods
Instruments for the salvation of his people, therefore they are called saviors.
So here to gather and lay up treasure in heaven, it is the work of God alone,
it is not in the power of any man: nay, as much as in us lies, we treasure up
nothing but wrath. Romans 2. And yet because we are instruments of it, it
pleases God to ascribe his own work to us, who are but instruments, and that
by his grace.

Now they to whom the commandment is given, must be conceived as members of
Christ, and instruments of God. That we may the better conceive of this
commandment, and practice it, two points must be considered. First, what this
treasure is. Secondly, how every one may lay it up for himself. Of these in
order with reverence, for they are points of great weight and moment.

The very maine point of our salvation stands in the practice of these.

Consider what is erroniously counted to be this treasure, and then search the
word, to find out the truth. The Papists have long abused the world with
showing the false treasure: for they make it a common chest, in which is
gathered and stored all the overplus of Christ's merits, and of the Saints
merits of all ages. And this chest is in the Popes custody; and he only has
the ordering and disposing; opening and shutting; giving out of indulgences and
pardons, when, where, and to whom he lists; and by this treasure he
vpholdeth and maintains his kingdom: hereby comes his riches and revenues.
But this treasure is not good and current, for it has two defects.

First, they make Christ his merits to be insufficient. For if his passion must
have an addition and supply from men, it is a poor treasure.

Secondly, they make the merits of Saints deceased to be our merits, and that
is not possible: for if men could merit, yet it should but be for themselves
alone. All men are but private men in regard of salvation; and so their merits,
if they were any, should be proper and personal.

Thus you see their treasure is defective in a double respect: and therefore to
let it pass, we are to renounce it, and leave it to them.

Now let us with reverence come to consider, what is indeed the true treasure
here meant and mentioned. It is the true God, to speak in few words, one God
in three persons; Creator of all things, in whom all the treasures of
happiness are to be found. Genesis 17. 1. I am God all sufficient. And Genesis 25.
Thy exceeding great reward. And Psalm. 16. A large and beautiful portion. And
this is as much as if he had said; The Lord is my treasure: I will not stand
long upon this, for men by light of nature have seen and said this. And S.
Paul says: God is all in all to the elect, Cor.

But mark how he must be considered, that he may be our treasure.

To this end we must conceive of God as he has revealed himself to us in
Christ: for God in Christ made manifest, is our treasure, and not otherwise
without Christ. This the Gentiles never knew. Col. 2. 3. In him is the treasure
of all wisdom and knowledge. There he is made the Churches treasure. And
Coloss. 3. Our felicity and life eternal is hid with God in Christ. There
he is made the treasure, fountain and storehouse of our eternal happiness.
John. 1. John Baptist says: Of his fullness we receive grace for grace. He
makes Christ that treasure, whence we receive that grace which we have. And
2. Corinthians. 1. 31. Christ is our treasure, whence we receive our
righteousness, wisdom, sanctification, and redemption.

Therefore it remains, that GOD revealing himself in Christ, or God
incarnate, or Christ, God and man, is the treasure of the Church.

Now that he may be our treasure, we must consider him, as he is revealed
and set forth unto us in his word and Sacraments: for so is he a treasure, and
no otherwise. Therefore Christ crucified, dying, and rising again, is our
treasure. Our treasure lies all in his suffering, death and bloodshed: and
for this cause we must so conceive of him, as crucified for our sins.



He is the fountain of all true blessedness that is conveyed from God to
man, and from him does proceed all our felicity and happiness whatsoever.
Would thou have remission of sins, and life eternal? Would thou have
any temporal blessings, or comfort by them, or comfort in distress? Thou must
have it from Christ crucified. The good things that come unto us, if they come
not as from Christ, they are no blessings unto us. If he then be the fountain
of all true happiness, he is the true treasure. Besides, or without him, there
is none.

In a word then remember this, that the treasure here spoken of, is God,
revealing himself unto us in Christ, by whom he conueyeth all good things to
us. And this is that which Christ aymeth at in this place.

Now, having found what the true treasure is, let us see how every one of us
may lay it up for our selves, as we are here commanded. And that we may so
do, some particular things are to be performed, insinuated in Math. 13. 44.
you may read them there, where the kingdom of God is compared to a treasure
hid in the field, etc. Concerning which, five things are to be noted. First,
finding it. Secondly, the price or value of it. Thirdly, getting it. Fourthly,
keeping it. Fifthly, using it.

The first of these is necessary, for until it be found, we can neither
value it, get it, keep it, nor use it. Therefore this is first to be done of
us.

We must find it before we can have it and enjoy it. It is called a hidden
treasure, because the natural man cannot discern it, and the finding of it
is, when God reueales it to men, and makes them feel that themselves stand in
need of it. This is the right finding of it, when God makes a man in his
conscience to feel the want of it, then he begins to seek that which he
never saw before.

Not every revealing of the treasure is a finding of it; for God inlightens
men two ways.



But besides this, there is a second kind, when God makes a man to discern
the word in his own soul and conscence, that is, a special and distinct
kind of illumination, and it appertains unto few to be able to discern
the power of the word in our own consciences. But when this is once wrought in
us, then does a man find this treasure. The outward senses cannot discern it,
for it is hidden. And then it is found only, when men feel the want of it.

This is a great blessing of God, and not common to all, nor to many: for our
eyes are dazeled with the pompes, pleasures, and vanities of the world. Nay,
they that are learned, are blinded with humane wisdom. Not every one that can
preach, has found out this treasure. Men may have great gifts and yet want
this, and fail in finding it, till they feel themselves to stand in need of
Christ's righteousness. God has hidden this from the wise and great ones
often, and revealed it to the simple.

Before we proceed any further, let us descend into our own hearts, and try
whether we have yet found this treasure: for we may persuade our selves
amiss, as the Jews, who have a veil before their eyes these many years. If
we find that we acknowledge Christ to be the principal treasure, and that we
want him, then we find him. But if our eyes be not opened, yet let us labor
for it, for otherwise we can never get it, or have use of it, if we never find
it. And the cause why there is so little joy in the word, and so little comfort
and sweetness in the doctrine of the Gospel, is, because we never yet found
the treasure which it speaks of, and has hidden in it.

Matt. 13. 44. who valued it at more then all his goods. Nay, if a man had a
whole world of wealth, all were nothing in comparison of this; this is more
worth then all the world, or all things in the world. Philip. 3. Paul valued it
at such a price, that he counted all things loss and dung, and no better in
regard of Christ: mark what a high price he sets it at, all his good works
were nothing to it.

This second thing is necessary for all the^ that would lay up treasure in
heaven. Therefore let us have a care of this duty, and learn to value Christ
above all things whatsoever, how excellent soever they be. We have well
profited in the School of Christ, and begin to make good proceedings, when we
can prise this treasure at a due and true rate.

To proceed. The Scripture does reveal this treasure, therefore as this
treasure must be valued above all: so this word which reueales it, must be
preferred above all things, as David did, Psalm. 119. It is better to him then
much riches; yea, the finest gold of Ophyr or India, was not comparable unto
it. Can^
And Christ says: His fruits are better then fine gold. Therefore this must be
valued above all writings, for it shows more then any other can do.

It were to be wished therefore, that it had his due estimation and value
amongst us. Many make but one truth, and it is all one with them, whether it
be out of men's writings, or Gods word. But they are far deceived: for the
word of God alone is the truth, according to godliness, which does discover
the heavenly treasure, and it is to be honored above all writings, though it
be brought in earthen vessels.

If we had learned to value this treasure, and the word which reuealeth it,
we should profit more for knowledge and obedience then we do; we would
reverence it more, and rejoice in it more then we do, etc.

so it is in that parable. We must use all means to purchase it to our selves;
for so the commandment is here: Lay up treasures for your selves.

That we may get it to our selves, we must use such means as God has
appointed for this end, and they are these.







The reasons hereof are these. The Word and Sacraments are Gods hand, wherewith
he gives this treasure unto us. And our faith showing it self in our prayers,
is a hand whereby we receive it. God in his word does offer it with his hand;
and we by faith earnestly asking it, do receive it. By faith we make Christ's
right to be ours, and also his obedience and merits; therefore use all these
good means. First, of hearing the word. Secondly, of receiving the Sacraments.
Thirdly, of prayer in faith. And be constant in these duties, and thou shall
have this treasure as thine own: for faith is the only means whereby we
attain it.



How must we do this?

For this purpose read 1. Tim. 6. Charge the rich that they be not high
minded, etc. Mark there how by liberality and bounty we are exhorted to lay
a good foundation.

What? must we be saved by our almes-deedes?

No, this foundation is not laid in heaven, for that is our election which God
lays up there. But our foundation is our conscience, and that is by good
works, by which, as by fruits, me^ may assure themselves, that eternal life
appertains unto them. Works of mercy, done with simplicity and singlenes
of heart, are marks of the children of God, signs of true faith, and of the
true treasure. For this cause Paul would have rich men to lay up a foundation
in their consciences.





Luke. 12. 43. expressing these words, says: Sell all that you have, and give
to the poor: make your selves purses which shall last for ever. When men do
so, the^ they turn their temporal goods into heavenly treasure; and so men
that have this worlds goods, may by the blessing of God, make great increase of
them.



When we esteem any thing above him, or prefer ought before him, he is not
our treasure.

Thus you see five duties, all necessary to be performed, that we may keep
this commandment. And when by Gods grace we are enabled to do these, then
we shall obey and practice this commandment. Therefore let us remember
them, and be careful to perform them so long as we live.

And mark what will follow: If we can find it, and value it, etc. we will
be content to endure whatsoever Gods hand shall lay upon us in body or soul,
and never be dismayed, nor discouraged with any thing that befalles us.
Nothing can daunt or discourage a man's heart, that has this treasure, but they
shall vanish all in time.

Further, it will make that we shall never fear death nor judgment, all
pains will be nothing, great comfort, ease, and contentation, shall be to us so
long as we live, if we can do thus.

Now a word or two of the reason.

Where neither moath, etc. The reason is drawn from the certainty and
unchangeableness of the treasure. Earthly riches are subject to worms and
cankers; and if no canker can come to corrupt them, yet the thief will have
them. But there is no canker, moath, nor thief, that can hurt Christ and his
merits.



firmament, by creation all were man's. They were made for him, and he was Lord
of all. They were his palace, all saving Gods throne. And when he fell, he was
punished in all these creatures, but not in the highest heaven, because the
right unto it is not by nature, but above nature, and is ours by right of
redemption, and not by right of creation.

Secondly, by Christ's death and passion they are made ours, and not by nature:
but by grace only, and that after the fall. Therefore the heavens and the
stars, and all creatures visible are subject to vanity and corruption.

And so much of the commandment and the reason. I beseech you remember it,
and learn it, and put it in practice both in life and death.

21. verse. For where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also. In the
two verses next before going these words, Christ gave two commandments.
First, what we should not do, and the reason of it. Secondly, what we should
do, and a reason thereof. The first, a corruptione and mutabilitate. The second,
ab incorruptione and immutabilitate: Now he renders a common reason pertaining
to both, and serves to confirm both, which is thus framed: Where your treasure
is, there your hearts will be: But your heart must not be on earthly treasure,
but on heavenly: Therefore lay not up treasure in earth, but in heaven.

Now touching the words and the meaning of them.

By treasure, understand things excellent and precious in our estimation, laid
up for time to come, in which men place and put their principal joy and
comfort, where your treasure is, that is your special joy and felicity. For
so much the word treasure imports.

By heart, understand the principal powers and actions of the soul, as the
thoughts and affections, love, joy, fear, etc. yea, the labor, pains,
study, care, and endeavor, all these are to be understood by this word heart.

As if he should have said: Thus your treasure and heart are things joined
together, and inseparable: therefore where your treasure is, there is also your
care and study. For that which men judge to be their principal good and
felicity, in seeking it, they spend al their pains and time.

Now for our further edification, let us see what uses may be made of this
reason. Jeremy says, yet we may in some sort search it, and judge of it by
this sentence. For an earthly treasure, and a carnal heart go together. And
on the contrary part, a heavenly treasure, and a spiritual heart go together:
These cannot be severed. Therefore look upon what you spend your thoughts and
cares, and accordingly judge of your selves, If upon earthly things your mind
be set and fixed, then your heart is earthly and carnal, it is most certain,
Christ has given the sentence.

If you plead, that it cannot be, because you hear the word, receive the
Sacraments, and pray, etc. all this is nothing, if your mind and affection be
in this world: you deceive your selves, for where your heart is, there your
treasure is. And contrary, if our principal thoughts and affections be in
heaven, and our care be for that principally, then our heart is he auenly, and
our treasure heavenly. And thus we may judge of our selves, and search our
hearts, whether they be carnal or spiritual.

Secondly, hereby we may all try our selves without deceit plainly, whether
we have any portion in heaven, or no: for if our hearts be on the earth only
or chiefly, all our portion is here, and none in heaven. The man, whose portion
is in heaven, has his heart and affections there. Though you profess Christ,
though you hear the word, pray, receive the Sacraments, yet you may be
deceived. Therefore look to this, for if thy heart be here, thou have yet no
treasure laid up in heaven.

Thirdly, by this coupling of the heart and treasure, we learn that we must
not regard this world and te^porall life. Nay, we must despise it so far
forth, as it may be done without hatred of a good blessing, and unthankfulness
to God. For this life is a blessing of God, given us to prepare our selves for
a better. Therefore simply we are not to despise it, but in respect of heaven.

And as we must not regard this life, so our meditation must be of heaven, and
not of the earth: for heaven cannot be thy treasure, except thy heart be
there. Therefore draw thy delight from worldly things, and weane it to heaven.

So much for this verse.

22. The light of the body is the eye: if then thine eye be single, thy whole
body shall be light.

23. But if thine eye be wicked, then all thy body shall be dark. Wherefore if
the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness?

This part has diverse expositions. First, I will touch one of the principal,
though I take it not to be the rightest, and the^ I will set down that which I
take to be the best. And thirdly, I will show how this depends on those things
that go before, which will then best appear, when the sense is made manifest.

By single eye some understand a liberal mind. And by a wicked eye, an
envious and covetous mind: and so they expound these words of envy and
covetousness. And this exposition is to the purpose. And the words of good and
evil eye will bear this sense: For Solomon puts the good eye for a liberal
heart, and an evil eye for a covetous heart, Proverbs, 22. Therefore this is a
good sense, but not the proper meaning of this place, as I take it; because the
single eye, and the light of the body, are put for one and the selfsame thing:

Now the light that is in us, is the understanding and judgment. Again, it is
said here, that the eye is the light of the body. Now a liberal eye cannot be
the light of the body for all actions, but for liberal actions only. Therefore
though it be true, that the single eye is a liberal mind, and the evil eye a
covetous mind, yet it is not proper to this place. Wherefore we must search
further.

The words be similies, and there be diverse similies in the^. The comparison
is borrowed from a candle, which serves to lighten all that be in the house: so
the eye serves to light all the body, and give direction to all the actions.

If thine eye be single,] To the end of the 23. verse, there is a double
Simily, which goes thus: As a man that has a good and clear sight in his
bodily eye, can carry his body any way right, and keep it without wandering
and stumbling: But if the bodily eye have any default or defect, if it be dim
and corrupt, then a man cannot walk without falling or stumbling. Nay further,
if a man have an eye, and it be blind, he cannot find one step of his
way. In the same manner (says Christ) if you have a mind to judge rightly, all
is well; but if the judgment be corrupted, there is much darkness, many
wants and faults. This is the plain comparison here used.

To come to the words. The light of the body is the eye. These words are
plain. If thine eye be single. Here understand the mind resembled by the
bodily eye. The single eye is the mind, able to judge of things to be done, or
not to be done, good or bad.

The whole body shall be light,] That is, the whole life, For look, as the eye
is to the body: so is the mind to the life.

Bright,] That is, the whole course of our life shall be well ordered, if God
give man a mind well disposed.

But if thine eye be wicked,] That is, if the mind be corrupted, the judgment
depraved, the understanding darkened, so that a man cannot rightly discern of
things to be done, though there be some light remembrance.

All thy body shall be dark,] That is, thy life will be full of sin and
disorder. For therein stands the darkness, when the understanding is dimmed
and darkened, there the life is out of order.

If the light that is in thee be darkness,] That is, if the natural light of
reason, understanding, and judgment, which is left after the fall, and which
God has put into every man.

How great is that darkness?] That is, then there is no difference between
the life of a man and a beast, when the light of natural reason is put out: so
as there is no power of judgment or discerning, etc. This I take to be the
truest and fittest exposition.

Now having found the meaning, let us come to consider how this depends on the
words going before. I take it, they depend as an answer to an objection: for
the two former commandments are hard to flesh and blood, men cannot brook
them. Therefore Christ before he leaves it, cuts off all the cauils which might
be made against it.

If treasure must be laid up in heaven, why do all the wisest men seek
earthly treasure so much?

and heavenly. And so it comes to pass, that they omit the seeking of heavenly
treasure.

Here some things must be supplied by the readers mind.

Every ma^s eye is either a blind, corrupt, or single
eye

1. The single eye befalles not all, but those only, to whom it is given of
God. 2. The corrupt eye appertains to all. 3. And some by sin put out the
light of nature: and hence it is, that men omit heavenly treasure.

This I take to be the true and right meaning, and thus the dependence is in
good order, giving us the maine cause of covetousness, which is a blind eye:
so that they cannot see to put difference between heavenly and earthly
treasure.

Here three things are to be considered, the single eye, the wicked eye, and
the blind eye; with the fruits and effects of every one.

The single eye is the light of the body; There is expressed and noted the single
eye, with the fruits thereof, viz. to give light to all the body.

The wicked eye makes the body dark. Of these in order, and first we will
begin with the single eye. And that you may know what is meant hereby, I will
describe it plainly.

By single eye, understand the mind of a man endued with true and heavenly
wisdom, for it is the single eye, the mind that has this gift, which is
enlightened with true wisdom. Then if we shall know what true wisdom is, we
shall know what this eye is.

Therefore touching wisdom, it is a gift of God in Christ, no common gift
which every professor may have, but a special gift from God to them that are
in Christ. 1. Corinthians. 1. 31. Christ is made of GOD to us wisdom, not
only because he is the maker and author of wisdom, but also because he is
the root from whence all our wisdom springs: we must be set to him and
engraffed in him: we must be made bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. As
his righteousness is made ours by imputation, and our holiness is from his
holiness, as from the root: so our wisdom is from his wisdom, as the
branch from the stock, and the fruit from the tree.

This wisdom befalles not the devil and his angels, not all men, nor all
Christians in name, but only those that are in Christ truly: for from his
wisdom proceeds the true wisdom. So then we must conceive of it, that
this wisdom is a gift of God to them that are in Christ.

This spiritual wisdom has two actions. First, to discern things that
differ, Secondly, to discern one thing from an other spiritually.

S. Paul prays that the Philippians may be enriched with knowledge, Phil. 1.
9.
and sense, or judgment. What is this sense? that we might be able to discern
things differing, and be sincere: Mark how he joined with knowledge, sense:
that is, a gift of discerning good and badde: earthly and heavenly: what we
must do, and what we must leave undone. We ought to have our senses exercised
to discern good and evil: Heb. 5.
that is, we ought to be endued with the property of true wisdom, to have
our senses enured to put difference between things good and evil.



distinguish between the water in Baptism, and other waters: between the
bread and the wine on the Lords table, and common bread and wine. And the
discerning of these is by this gift of wisdom.



riches and heavenly treasure. He can discern the excellency of heavenly
things above earthly, and put a plain difference between them, which the
carnal man can not do. The spiritual man discernes all things truly; Virtue
from vice; Heavenly things from earthly things, and so all other things
whatsoever.

Here then, mark what is the first action and property of this wisdom, to
discern things that differ.

I add further this the Providence, Wisdom, and Justice of God in all things,
which the natural man cannot do. Hereby you see how excellent and necessary a
thing this is, serving to many excellent uses.

The second action, is to judge determine, and give sentence of things, what we
must do, and what we must not do: what is good, and what is evil: what is
heavenly and what is earthly.

Here one thing must be remembered. It is a principal point of wisdom, to
determine what is the chief happiness of man, and the scope unto which all our
life is to be directed. It is the love and favor of God in Christ: see
examples of this judgment. Psalm. 4. 6. Many say who will show us any good,
etc.? Mark there David's judgment of this matter, and how he differs from
others. He determines that it is true happiness to be in the favor of God.
So Paul cared for nothing but Christ crucified, showing what was his wisdom,
when he came amongst the wisest of the world: 1. Cor. 2. 2,
(viz) Christ crucified for the sins of the world. And indeed if a man had
all the wisdom and policy in the earth, and fail in this; if he cannot
determine where to place his happiness, and what is the scope of his life, his
wisdom is but folly. Therefore remember, this is a principal point of true
wisdom, to be able to judge of our true happiness, what it is, and the scope
of our life. Thus you see the spiritual wisdom has two actions, and what
they be: (viz) First, to discern things that differ. Secondly, to discern
onething from another spiritually.

Here, mark further, that a principal part of this wisdom is heavenly
providence. When a man discernes what is the principal good: then comes
providence, and uses all means for the compassing of that principal good.
She forecasteth all the ways and means to come unto it: without this our
wisdom is not perfect.

And thus you see what is meant by wisdom. It is a gift of Gods spirit, to
the^ that be in Christ, whereby they are enabled to discern of things that
differ, and the scope of our life, and of true happiness: and withal to
forethinke and forecast all the means to come unto it. And the single eye, that
is the single mind, which is able to discern of this wisdom.

Now in the next place, mark the fruit of it: The whole body shall be light.
That is, the whole life shall be full of righteousness, and of good success.
Prou. 8. 19. 20. My fruit is better then gold and fined silver: I make a man
walk in the ways of righteousness and the paths of judgment.

To make some use of it considering this is thus here commended, we are first
admonished to labor for this heavenly wisdom and single eye. The singular
commendation of it, should be a spur and inducement to every one to seek for
it. The commodity should move us to affect it above all.

That you may the better do it, remember two things.

First, that you get the beginning of this wisdom, that is, the fear of God,
to reverence his Word, and to tremble at his presence: which you shall have if
you lay the Word to your consciences, when you hear and read, never storm at
it. When the whole man does bow himself, the mind, conscience, and will,
without replying and repining, raging or chafing, then we are gone a good way,
and have made good beginnings and proceedings. When the word checketh us,
crosses and controlleth our faults, strive not against it, but obey it.

Secondly, we must all close our eyes, the eyes of our mind, (I mean,) and
suffer our selves to be led in all things by the written Word, to be ordered
and ruled by the Laws and Commandementes of God.

Mark this point: For if we can practice this, we shall get true wisdom and
happiness. Therefore give attendance to it in the whole course of your lives,
and let the Lord ouerrule you by his Word. Read Psalm. 119. David's example is
most excellent. By meditating in the Law, he became wiser then the ancient,
and those that were his teachers. He passed them in wisdom, that were chief
among men for wisdom, because he shut his own eyes and submitted himself to
the regiment of the word. In a word, Remember to renounce thine affections, and
to shut up thine eyes, and let the Lord perform his work in thee.

Again, in that the single eye is here thus commended, we are taught to
walk wisely, whereunto Paul in most of his Epistles exhorts. And we walk
wisely when we practice all things in wisdom, and that is done by remembering
these four things following:





selves within the limits of our calling.

Fourthly, we must do it with a single, honest and upright heart.

And that these four may concur, we must have the written word to tell us
every one of them. We must have the word to tell us, that the thing we are to
do, is just. 2. That the means we use, is just also. 3. That we do keep our
selves within the limits of our calling. And 4. that we do it with a single,
honest and upright heart. Then when our action is just, and the means just,
the heart upright, and we within the compass of our calling, according to
Gods word, the action shall be done in wisdom, so as it shall be praised and
approved by God.



God has given all men wisdom by nature, more or less. It is a gift of God
to be commended: but that it may be holy and approved, and used well, it must
be seasoned, and then natural wisdom joined with it, is good, and a blessing
of God, and tends to the honor and glory of God.

It is the sin of these days, that men of wisdom use natural wisdom
without spiritual wisdom, whereby they fall into many sins and
inconveniences, because they sever these.

let us have regard principally to this part of wisdom, which is concerning
providence; after judgment, which is best how to forecast, how we may come by
it. Consider Luke the 12. what was the rich man's fault, his riches increased,
and he was provident to lay up his store: yet Christ calls him fool, because
he wanted this heavenly wisdom. He could forecast for the enlarging of his
barnes, but not for his soul; he had no respect of it, nor regard of this
spiritual wisdom and providence.

It was the fault of the foolish virgins, therefore called foolish: they had
some Oil and blazing Lamps, but they wanted sufficiency of Oil, because
they wanted this providence.

They had not a sufficient forecast of their salvation, and the means thereof.
Though one had all the wisdom in the world, and fail in this, he were but a
mad man. Mark the end of Achytophel; his wisdom was great, but yet naught,
because he wanted the principal, viz. the fear of God, and therefore he
hanged himself.

Wherefore consider: There can be no wisdom, when we do not determine of the
end and scope of our life. Let us now in the time of our life and days of
grace and peace, forecast all the means of salvation, and never content our
selves, till all be accomplished.

If we have all the learning in the world, it is nothing without this.
Therefore above all things, let us set our hearts to seek it: for the want of
it, makes men to seek nothing but earthly treasure, because they cannot
discern things that differ. Wherefore now practice this providence, learn
this wisdom: be not like the foolish Virgins: content not your selves with
outward profession. Be not like that rich man, that had no care nor forecast
of his soul and salvation.

Consider the end of our life: let this be the first and principal thing,
for it is the principal part of heavenly wisdom.

23. But if thine eye be wicked, etc. Hitherto of the single eye: Now of the
corrupt and wicked eye. As in handling the former, so in this I will consider:
First, what is the wicked eye: Secondly, what is the fruit and effect thereof.

The wicked eye is the mind and understanding, having some light, but darkened,
dimmed, and corrupted by Adams fall. That you may yet the better conceive what
this wicked eye is, you must know that the mind is corrupted two ways, and
in two respects.

First, it has lost the gift of discerning and judging and in this respect it
is an evil eye, and mistakes one thing for an other; good for evil, and evil
for good.

And that the mind has lost the gift of discerning in many things, appears
thus: Many of us by nature know not God as we ought, nor our selves. Touching
God, it appears by diverse reasons: we know naturally that there is a God, yet
we cannot acknowledge the presence of God.

Men naturally when they sin, fear not the presence of God, and that proves
plainly, that the eye of the mind is an evil eye.

Though by nature we know that there is a God, yet we acknowledge not his
particular providence: we cannot discern it as we should, and it appears in
this: that men naturally trust men before God, the creature, above the Creator,
which shows that we do not acknowledge a particular presence a for if we
did, we would rather distrust men, and trust God.





not perceive that we are dym and dark sighted, not blind.

A man by nature cannot

We are not able by the natural

We cannot judge aright of the scope of our own lives: but

The mind is unable to judge of our own happiness: for this is all the
wisdom of man, to think that felicity does consist in outward and earthly
things, as riches, honor, etc. so that we account the rich happy, and the
poor miserable.

Therefore the first point is clear, that the mind has lost the gift of
judging and discerning.

The second way that man

It follows the example of the world. And for these causes Christ calls it
an evil eye. First, because it wants judgment. Secondly, because it obeys
that which it should rule.

Totum corpus tenebrae,) Now he shows the fruit of it; which is, to make the
whole body dark, that is, the whole life full of unrighteousness and
darkness. Though the natural understanding have some light, yet it is an
evil eye, it cannot discern in many things. And though it discern in many
things, yet it obeys not, but follows the will.

Thus much of the meaning.

Now of the instructions, which truly and naturally proceed from hence.

First always remember this, that Christ left somewhat to be supplied, namely,
that this evil eye is in all men by nature, and that is the cause why men
cannot discern: wherefore we are to labor to see and discern this
wickedness of the eye in the mind.

It is the first step to knowledge, to see that we cannot see, that we
cannot judge and discern of heavenly things as we ought: we shall never know
GOD aright nor our selves, till we see that we cannot see.

Also we must bewail this blindness, and tremble for it.

The sense and apprehension of bodily darkness is grievous unto us, much more
ought this.

And as that, etc. so we ought to labor for the good eye-salue, that makes
the blind eye to be a good eye, and this salve is nothing else but the word of
God, applied by the spirit of God.

When the holy Ghost opens the eyes of the understanding, then our eyes will
be made single.

Secondly, we are taught to amend a fault. We have here just occasion to
rebuke a damnable fault, which is common here and every where, namely, that
men content themselves with the light of nature: for by this evil eye, any man
knows thus much; namely:

1 That there is a God. 2 That God is good, and merciful. 3 That we must love
him above all, and our neighbor as our self. 4 That we must live well.
All this we know by nature.

If a man were brought up in the wilderness he might know all this without a
teacher: and yet herein stands all the knowledge that many have; but all this
is nothing: wherefore content not your selves with this. Think not your selves
good scholars in Christ's school, until you know more then this comes to.

That it is not sufficient to know these things, it is manifest, because it is
here called an evil eye, and makes the life full of darkness. For all this,
if we do no more then this, with this we may perish, live in darkness, and
dye in darkness, and go to everlasting darkness.

And though some plead, that Preachers can teach them no more then this, yet
they deceive themselves grossly. Therefore remember this, with natural
knowledge join spiritual knowledge: Put grace to nature, to help the blind
eye: Add piety and supernatural knowledge to nature.

For this cause have care to read and search the scriptures, that you may
attain to more knowledge then you have by nature, if it be for nothing else,
but to know Gods commandments and promises: for that knowledge serves for
nothing else, but to make a man without excuse, and not to save.

This fault and sin is the fall and bane of many a soul, and brings them to
hell: That men think themselves furnished sufficiently for salvation, if they
have but a natural knowledge.

Men content themselves with reformation, so far forth as nature teaches:
and look what nature teaches, the very blind eye sees.

First, that God must be worshipped, the blind eye sees and knows, but how
he is to be worshipped, he cannot tell.

Secondly, that we must love God, and live well, and deal justly, is known by
nature, and this we content our selves withal, even with evil conversation and
natural reformation.

But this is not enough, for the blind eye cannot teach us so much, and they
learn it and know it, whose lives are nothing but darkness. Wherefore never
content your selves with natural reformation, for if you have no more, all
your civil life is nothing but darkness before God, how faite soever it
seem to men: but labor for a spiritual life, that thy heart may be renewed,
and thy life reformed, according to the Gospel.

That this is necessary, it is plain, because Christ says, the whole body is
dark without it.

The blind eye is not able to free it from darkness. Civility will never
save thee, thou must perish with it.

To proceed: We learn that we must not be wise in the matter of salvation for
our selves, and by our selves.

The Lord says by Moses to the Israelites: Thou shall not do that which is
good in thine own eyes, but that which I command thee. Deuteronomy. 12.

We must not take upon us to set down how we would be saved, and by what
means, this way or that way, for we have but a blind eye. And yet this has
been, and is a common fault. The Turk with his religion: the Jew his: and the
Papist his: and there is no man, but he prescribes to himself a way of
worshipping God, and how he will be saved. And by this the devil destroys
many, because they will be wise by themselves, and to themselves. For example
sake, it is the manner of wise men, to prescribe how they will be saved: they
take it for a small matter to come to salvation, if they can but make a prayer
at the end of their life. I speak of them which are not guided by the word:
some by their works: and others by their faith: and all is one, for they
understand nothing by faith, but their good intent and well meaning.

Naturally and commonly men prescribe to themselves how they will be saved, and
how they will worship God, and in using what means they will live and dye: But
they do ill. Wherefore in a word, be not wise to thy self in this for the
matter of thy salvation. Let God be wise, be thou a fool: prescribe no
religion to thy self: content thy self to be wise, according to the word;
for by nature thou have an evil eye, and this eye cannot show thee the way of
life. Away therefore with this damnable practice.

Lastly, our duty is to seek for a better eye, that is, the eye of faith,
that which is wanting in this eye, may be supplied. And this is faith, by
which we rest on the mercy and goodness of God, on his providence and
protection in life and death. Heb. 11. 1. and 13.
This eye is able to see a far off, and to discern things that cannot
otherwise be discerned, the evidence of things not seen: And the Patriarchs
saw the promises a far off. Let us all be careful to seek this eye of
faith, without the which we cannot walk the way to everlasting life. So much
of the second kind of eye.

Now of the third eye briefly, according to the compass of the time. Wherefore
if the light that is in thee, etc. This is the blind eye, yea stark blind,
that has no power to discern or judge: that is, to see what is meant by
(light) natural knowledge of God, and justice, which is in the mind.

It is further said, that if this light be darkness, it is only buried, so
as there shall be no use of it, but it cannot be quite put out and
extinguished. Some light of nature is remaining in the most wicked men, because
conscience remains.

Now here it is said to be none but darkness, because it may be buried, hid
and covered, but not wholly put out. The veriest Atheist that lives, has this
light in him.

This must be remembered for the understanding of these words, as it is plain
in them that have a reprobate mind, they are as if they had no light of nature
remaining, because it is buried.

What is the cause that the light of nature is turned into darkness?

The cause is in the will and affections of men, the desires and lusts of the
heart: it is sin that puts out the light of nature, actual sin: the will
and affections make men to sin against the light of nature, and against
conscience, and so put out both, and bury them. This makes a man not to know
that, which by nature he might know.

Now see the fruit of it, Romans 1. in most horrible and brutish sins upon the
blind mind, and reprobate sense.

The consideration of this point, that the understanding may be quite buried by
actual sin, teaches us to enter into an examination of our selves. We have
in us (even the best of us all) wretched, devilish, and damnable desires, such
as would put out the light of nature in the understanding. This teaches us to
be vile in our own eyes, who have such vile hearts, that they can put out
that light, which Adams fall did not.

Secondly, in that the will and affection blind the mind, dazell and dim the
light of our understanding, we learn to look to these principally, that they
be mortified and brought in subjection, to the obedience of Gods
commandments, for now the case is altered. Before the fall, the mind ruled the
will, but now the will ouerrules the mind. Therefore a special regard must be
had of this: we must renounce our own wills and affections, they are those
that bring the ruin of the soul and conscience. Therefore above all things,
look to them, that they be tempered, ordered, and squared. It is best with
men, when God breaks them of their wills: for when they have their wills in
all things of this life, they carry the whole man headlong like a wild and
untamed colte.

Though thou had all the wisdom, knowledge, and learning in the world; if
thy will and affection be naught, they will cast a mist, a veil, and a cover
or scarf over it, wherefore bring these into order and subjection, then a
little understanding out of the word will give great light.

Remember this: It is not knowledge principally that should be sought for, or
the mind to be instructed, and no more: but the will and affection must
especially be regarded: for from the heart comes life and death, salvation or
damnation. There is the beginning of thy comfort or woe: for if they be out of
order, they will master and ouerrule the understanding.

Further, I gather hence, that the doctrine of salvation may be turned to
darkness. If the light of nature, which is so deeply imprinted and engraue^
in the heart, then much more this. And this is plain, by experience of all
them, which begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh, which are worldly and
wicked.

This could not be otherwise. See Heb. 3. 12. there is a most excellent place
of scripture, which does show how this light by little and little is put out,
going back from the last to the first, there be five degrees.

1 First, the deceitfulness of sin. 2 Secondly, the hardness of the heart,
when sin has deceived. 3 Thirdly, infidelity or incredulity, when the
heart being hardened, is made unbelieving, which begins to doubt of the word,
and to call the truth into question. 4 Fourthly, the evil heart, when the
Gospel begins to go to decay. 5 Fifthly, falling from God, Apostasy. And so
the light of nature, and of the Gospel, is put out.
Then furthermore, there is declared, how we having received the light of the
Gospel, may preserve it, namely, by observing and watching the lives of one an
other; and by exhorting one an other.





God gave Adam grace, but it was changeable, he did determine to permit the
fall: but now the gifts and graces of God are without repentance, and the man
that is a believer, shall never be moved. Psalm. 15.

Though the nature of grace be such, that it may be lost, yet God gives the
second grace to the first: and thereby it is made sure, that it shall not be
moved or lost. The gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church.

By reason hereof, upon this and such like promises it is, that faith is not
lost, and not by any virtue, which it has in it self, or by it own nature.

Let this be the first answer.



So much of the third eye. In which the light of nature seems to be quite put
out, because it cannot discern at al, but takes evil for good, and good for
evil: it sees not so much, as there is a God, or that God is to be
worshipped.

Now to come to the very scope of these words, mark the end of them, why
Christ used them. It was to show that men could not discern, when they seek
for earthly riches before heavenly. And the evil eye, corrupt and blind by
nature, is the cause why men cannot distinguish things that differ.

From the scope one profitable admonition must be renewed, that is, to labor
to attain the gift of discerning, to put a difference between earthly and
heavenly things: therefore let us search the scripture, that we may have our
eyes enlightened, and so see the right way to eternal life. For the want of
this discerning is the cause of all disorder, and particularly of this disorder
in preferring temporal and earthly things before eternal and heavenly. And by
this you may walk with comfort and peace of conscience, the way to life
eternal. Whereas without it, you wander in darkness all the days of your
life.

24. No man can serve two masters: for either he shall hate the one and love
the other, or else he shall lean to the one, and despise the other: ye cannot
serve God and Mammon, or riches. We have heard of two commandments of Christ:
first negative in the 19. verse: the second affirmative in the 20. verse: and
afterward an objection answered in the 22. verse. now he remoues another
impediment.

The former objection was this: If our treasure must be laid up in heaven, and
not here on earth, it is marvel that so many lay up treasure here, and not
in Heaven*

The answer hereof is: They have either a blind eye, or an evil eye, and so
want the gift of discerning.

Now in this verse he meets with an other objection, which the carnal
wisdom of man makes commonly, and has ever made against these
commandments, and it is thus.

Why may we not love and serve God, and serve Mammon too?

Some men flatter and persuade themselves, that they may serve God, and yet set
their hearts to seek riches too. And therefore they think, that they may
seek earthly riches and heavenly riches both together; and that one does not
hinder an other, but that one may have both treasure in earth, and treasure in
heaven. Here therefore Christ meets with this carnal conceit of natural men,
and proves it to be impossible that one man should practice both these. Thus
you see how this verse does depend on the former, and this will the better
appear, if we seek the true meaning of the words.

No man can serve two masters, etc. It may seem at the first to be otherwise,
for both in reason, and also by experience, one servant may serve two diverse
masters, as we see one Factor may, and does well serve diueser Merchants:
Therefore how can this be that Christ says here?

Some answer it thus: That the words must be conceived after this manner, as
if he had said: Two diverse or contrary masters. As for example, when one
shall say come, and an other shall say come not: when two masters are thus
contrary and diverse in their minds and wills, one servant cannot serve both.
And so these words carry a holy truth.

But this clause of diverse and contrary is not expressed, therefore I say
further, that this sentence was a common proverb among them. Now in a
Proverb, if it be usually or generally true, though it hold not always, if
it have effect ordinarily, it is enough. As no Prophet is honored in his own
country, that is, usually and commonly it is so: So this Proverb is true
ordinarily. And thus this sentence must be understood as a familiar proverb,
usual and common among the Jews, which Christ takes for the ground of his
speech.

Now it follows: For either he shall hate the one,] that is, as he is a
master, or in regard of his commandment: And he shall love the other,] in
respect of his commandment, in that he does embrace it and perform it. Or
else he shall lean to the one,] This is an illustration of the former words:
for it might be demanded: How shall he be known to love or hate them?

The answer is thus: Love will cleave to the one, and contemn the other. That
is, a servant is known to love his master in his commandment. First, if he
cleave unto him. Secondly, if he give himself as a servant, to the obedience
of his commandment.

And he will despise the other,] That is, he will neglect his commandments.
Thus he testifies his love or hatred by omitting and neglecting: or by
performing and practicing the commandments enjoined him.

Now the words that follow: You cannot serve God and Mammon, are the
application of the argument: you cannot serve God and riches, treasure, profit,
gain. A man cannot serve God, and give himself to get, and lay up riches.

It is not said, you cannot serve God, and have riches, for Abraham, Joseph,
and Job served God, and yet had riches: But thus, you cannot serve God, and
serve riches; that is, give your selves to seek them, and set your hearts upon
them. Thus the sense and meaning is plain, and now the scope of the words will
the better appear.

The objection is this: Why may we not do both, viz. lay up treasure in heaven
and in earth?

The answer is: No man can serve two masters.

But God and Mammon are two masters: therefore you cannot serve both these.

The proposition is confirmed by a reason which is added. And thus you see the
scope and the sense of this verse.

Now see what doctrines naturally arise hence.

First, it is to be marked, that Christ does here set down what it is to
serve God. A thing that every man speaks much of, yet a thing that few know,
and fewer do practice: therefore in a word, it is this: To serve God, is to
love him, and to cleave unto him, and he serves God, that does these two.

For the first, every man will say that he loves God, and ever did. Well then,
take heed you be not deceived: for God must be loved, not only as he is a
bountiful Lord, but as he is a Master, and does command us service, he
must be loved in his word and commandments in his authority of commanding.
The written word is his will and commandment, therein he prescribes what we
should do, though he should never bestow benefits upon us, that we should
love him because he is our Master.

For the second part of Gods service, it is to cleave unto him, whereby what is
meant, you may see in the Parable of the prodigal son; He claue to a
Farmer, that is, gave himself to his service.

So here, to cleave unto God, is the resigning up of a man's self to serve God,
and to obey him in every commandment: And to take heed that he suffer not
himself to be drawn away from obeying any commandment, and believing any
promise.

This is done when we will not suffer our selves to be separated from God, but
yield obedience to his commandments. This is the right cleaving to God.

Contrariwise, to disobey his commandments, is to hate God, and to despise
him. Though no man will say he hates God, yet he that does neglect his
commandments, and gives himself to seek the things of this life, is a hater
of God. He that is crooked in his way, despises God, let him protest what he
will, If he do not cleave unto God by obedience to his commandments, he is a
hater of God, and his utter enemy.

The consideration of this part, serves to let you understand the great
blindness of the world. For commonly if a man can but rehearse the Lords
prayer, the ten commandments, and the Creed, howsoever he live, he serves God
well enough. What gross ignorance, blindness, and superstition is this? The
service of God is in obedience to his commandments, to cleave unto him as
Abraham did, when God said: Thou shall not kill, he obeyed. Again, when God
said, Kill thy son, he obeyed.

See the^ how this age abounds with Atheism in all places: for what is he
that hates God, and despises him, but an Atheist? Now all they that seek the
things of this life so much, they are very Atheists, and no better, because
they hate him and despise him.

Atheism is a common sin of our time. The world is loved: Mammon embraced, God
hated, and the Lord despised. I know that men will abhor this to be
challenged for Atheists. But Christ has given the sentence, that whosoever he
be that does not cleave unto him in obedience, does despise and hate God, and
what is that but Atheism? This is a mother sin, and the cause of many more.

So much of the first point of the service of God.

Secondly, Christ takes it for granted, that Mammon is a Lord: That riches is
a God, and that men serve and obey him, As there is a true God and Master, by
right of creation: so there is an other by reason of corruption: and that is
riches, treasure, profit and gain. Of this he forewarnes his disciples,
because the danger is great.

How can this be, may some say?

Col 3.
Now it is made an Idol and a Master thus: Men esteem of riches as of their
principal happiness: And it is the mind of man that makes the God: look
where the heart is, there is the Lord and God.

Secondly, it is the nature of man to trust in riches, and to love the^ more
the^ God. Hence it is, that men are the servants of riches, whereof they should
be masters. I will make it plain, that it cannot be denied.





grieved and vexed, then for the loss of heaven, by breaking Gods
commandments. What argues this, but that the hearts of men do honor riches as
their God?



If any think themselves hardly dealt withal, that they should be accounted
Mammonists and Idolaters serving riches* Let them consider the lives of men,
what mean else the common oppressions, extortions, vsuries, engrossing of
necessaries? What do all these argue but this, that Mammon is a great Lord,
and has many servants and slaves, for all these are his attendants and
retainers unto him?

Further, what is the cause of a dearth in time of plenty? when God in mercy
has vouchsafed us plenty and store, what is the cause our dearth continues?
but this, that Mammon is a great Lord.

Mammon is the cause, gain and lucre. Let it be considered with reverence,
when we have a made-famine by the wicked men, who are slaves and vassals of
Mammon. There is no question, but the dearth in former years, which was caused
by Gods hand, was also increased by wicked men.

All these things being laid together and considered, it is plain, that though
all men would seem to embrace the Gospel, yet this is a common sin, men
give themselves to serve Mammon. Indeed God has his servants here and
elsewhere, yet it is but an handful: The multitude are all Mammonites.
Therefore this is a certain truth, and may well be taken for granted.

Here therefore see the vile nature of man: He was made to be Lord of Mammon,
and yet he is content to become his slave and vassal, though his state and
condition be to be a Lord, yet thus he abaseth himself.

Secondly, in that men are commonly slaves to Mammon, we learn an other lesson,
which Christ teaches us: We must learn to be faithful in the having, using,
keeping, and dispensing of the wicked Mammon. It is a vile and a miserable
thing for a man to subject himself to it, to become his slave and vassal.

He that seeks to be rich, forsakes God. Remember it, for it is the principal
point that Christ proves here. A man may have riches, and use them; and may
live and die rich: but he may not seek to be rich, because then he forsakes
God, when he sets his heart upon riches. I will make this more plain.

In riches three things are to be considered. First, the getting. Secondly, the
keeping. Thirdly, the spending.







Men have a mild and moderate opinion of covetousness: if a man be covetous,
they will say he is a good honest man, but somewhat hard and near. But mark
the sentence of Christ: Here these worldly persons are forsaken of God. So that
it is no small fault (as the world takes it) for a man to be worldly.

First, it is a renouncing of God himself, a practicing of Atheism, therefore
we must learn to think worse of these worldly persons.

Secondly, it is the manner of men to make laws to themselves for the getting
of riches: I will have an 100. or 200. or 300. or if he have a greater stock, a
200. or 2000. etc. and thus much lands, rents, and reuennewes, I must needs
have it, I cannot live else. Take heed of this; make no such law to your
selves, for then follow all the practices that tend to the compassing of this
resolution. It is a common practice among men, they will have thus much in
stock, and thus much in revenues; whereas indeed, a little with Gods
blessing, is wealth enough.



Mammon the other. Many are deceived herein, who think they may part stakes,
and give God one half, and the creature the other; nay, sin and Satan.

The use of this is, to discover hypocrites. When men live in many sins, if
they come to the Congregation, to hear and pray, and receive the Sacrament,
though they lie and live in sin, they may be the servants of God for all
that: as the drunkard, adulterer, etc. And so every man blesses himself in
his sin.

Hence it is, that so many flatter themselves while they live in sin, against
their own conscience: but they deceive themselves. If they serve the devil in
any sin, they cannot serve God.

Secondly, every servant of God is so far forth regenerate, renewed, and
sanctified, that not one sin reigns in him, for then he must serve two
masters. So many sins reigning in any man, so many Lords. This doctrine must
be received, regarded, reverenced, and remembered.

Thirdly, if the heart cannot be divided between God and the creature, let us
all in the fear of God, worship God, serve him, and profess our selves to be
his servants, with our whole souls and bodies: for we cannot serve God and
Mammon. God alone is to be served: therefore let every affection bow the knee
to God: let the body and soul do their parts in this homage, so long as thou
live.

Remember Romans 6. The servant of God has his fruit in holiness, and the end
everlasting life.

The Queen of Sheba pronounced the servants of Solomon happy, because they
served such a Lord. How much more the^ are they happy, who in body and soul
give themselves to the service of the living God?





Remember this: for every child of God may say, I serve two masters, but it
is against my will, and with grief of heart, with groaning under this bondage.
Labor and endeavor to keep a good conscience, and then if thou fail, it is
because thou art ouerruled and maistered. Walk in all the ways of God, and
the wants and defects of thy nature, are all covered in the death of Christ, if
thou do thine endeavor to obey. Search the scripture, where the will of this
master is set down; and when thou know what his will and commandments are,
endeavor to obey them, and thou shall be the servant of God. Thy service is a
kingdom, it is a true liberty. But contrariwise, serve Mammon, and thy end
will be everlasting destruction in hell.

25. Therefore I say unto you, be not careful for your life, what ye shall
eat, or what ye shall drink: nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on.
Is not the life more worth then meat? and the body then raiment? At the 19.
verse Christ began to forbid covetousness; and because men are ready to make
many excuses and objections, therefore Christ has answered two before. Now he
proceeds, and strikes at the root of covetousness, which is immoderate and
inordinate care for ye things of this life. And his intent is to remove that;
yea, the distrustful care of things necessary: and this he does to the end
of the chapter: he labors to take away the cause of all covetousness.

These words depend on the former, from the 19. verse, as I take it; and they
are a conclusion of all the doctrine delivered before from the 19. verse, and
not from the 24. only. In this manner, seeing they want a good eye, and the
gift of wisdom and discerning: therefore, I say yet further to you, be not
careful more then needs for things necessary. Thus these words depend on the
former, and withal he meets with a conceit of carnal men: for men might
say, they seek not treasure, but only things necessary. Thus might the
covetous plead, and therefore Christ comes home to them, and says: Be not
careful with any immoderate or inordinate care, for so much as meat, drink
and clothing, etc. So much shall suffice for the scope and coherence.

Now let us consider the words, the sense, and the use of them.

Therefore I say unto you,] In that Christ begins his commandment on this
manner: (Therefore I say unto you, I that am your Master, on whom you depend
for all heavenly instruction:) he does prepare them to attention, and to a
diligent marking of this commandment and instruction. And he uses this form
of speech, to declare that the commandment following, is a weighty thing,
and to be regarded and obeyed, and which if it be kept, covetousness cannot
seize on us, and this is the substance and pith of all this doctrine. And this
clause prefixed, must be a warning to us to mark the doctrine; Therefore let
us see what it is.

Be not carefull] When he says, be not careful what ye shall eat, etc.
the commandment must be considered, least it be mistaken, therefore the true
sense is to be searched out.

There be two kinds of care.

First, a godly and honest care. Secondly, a distrustful care.
The first is commended in diverse places. Prou. 6.
Wisdom sends to the Ant, to learn diligence and providence in earthly
things. And the place of Paul is well known: 1. Tim. 6.
He that is not provident for himself and his, is worse then an Infidel.
Where the holy Ghost commends unto us a provident care and circumspection, for
the things of this life. Therefore there is a lawful care, and it is this:
when men walk in their callings, and do the duties of it diligently, with
good and upright dealing to every man, minding to seek no more then is
necessary in the judgment of all men for this life.

This is one principal point of this godly care.

The second point (after we have used due diligence) is, to leave the success
and issue to GOD, we must leave the disposing of our labors to the Lord: for
it belongs to GOD, and is proper to him, to dispose of the success and event
of our labors? we must not frame the success to our selves how we will have
it, but refer it and our selves to Gods good providence.

Take Moses for an example: he was called to be a deliverer of the Israelites
out of Egypt: He obeyes Gods commandments, and comes when he is called, and
goes when he is sent, and does his endeavor to bring them from Egypt to
Canaan: and though he had many crosses, yet he goes forward, and leaves the
success to God, as we see, Exodus 14. when he was driven into such straites,
that he had the Sea before him hills on the one side, and woods on the other,
he says: Fear not, but stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord.

So Abraham being commanded to sacrifice his son Isaac, obeyes and goes
about it: And when Isaac asked him where the sacrifice was, he says: God
will provide. Therefore in a word, the godly care is, when men do the works of
their callings with diligence, leaving the success of their labors to God.
This care is of the duty only, and not of the success; and this is not here
condemned.

But the second kind is a distrustful care, which doubts of Gods
providence, when men do the works of their callings diligently: but so as
they distrust Gods providence, and dare not commend and commit the fruit and
event thereof to God.

This is a distrustful and an unlawful care. That you may the better conceive
of it, it has these fruits following.

First, it oppresses the heart with fear and grief: with fear of poverty
and want, and so filles the heart with grief.

Note secondly, when men keep not themselves to the word of God, and lawful
means, but use unlawful means to get their livings with.

Note thirdly, when men are so careful for the world, that they neglect
prayer and the service of God in hearing the word, the heart is ouerladen and
oppressed: and it argues that there is care not only for the duty, but for
the success, which belongs to God: and thus you see what a distrustful care
is.

And this is the care that is here forbidden, when men distrust God, and use
unlawful means to enrich themselves. It is a care that is joined with neglect
of Gods worship, and with grief and fear. For the Greek word does signify
such a care, as distracts the mind, deuides it, and brings it into
perplexity. So that it is as much as if he had said: Be not careful in such
sort that your minds be troubled and perplexed. His meaning is not to forbid
labor, or lawful care, for then he should speak against all callings.

So much of the sense and meaning of this heavenly commandment.

Now let us apply it to our selves. That which is here forbidden, is the common
sin of most men now: and it is not in a few, but it is a common and
ordinary thing. It lurkes in the heart, and shows it self in the life.

One kind of ground receives the seed, but when it springs up, it is choked
with worldly cares; and this is common among us, and therefore the world has
so little fruit. If we would examine our selves what profit and proceedings
we have made in Christ's school, we should see little fruit: for this
immoderate care does divide the heart, and distract the mind: worldly cares
toss it and turn it, like the waves of the Sea.

This is one argument of it, and an evident proof, that this sin is common.

Secondly, there is no trade or calling, but it has conueances of craft and
deceit: though the practices of men be not commonly known, yet the thing is
certainly true and manifest. He that has but half an eye, may see into the
abuses which are daily practiced. And it is hard to find them that seem
religious, to make conscience of this in their callings, and to avoid the
common crafts. What argues this, but that our hearts are possessed with
immoderate care? we depend not on Gods providence, we dare not trust him with
the success, we fear he will not give so good a blessing as we look for

Now Christ gives us warning of this, and does command us to take heed of it,
that we have no distrustful care, so much as for things necessary.

What must we do then?

David, Ps. 55. and Ps. 37. 5. And by Solomon, Prou. 16. And by Peter. I is a
most weighty instruction, and has this sense: Walk in thy calling, do the
duties of it diligently, truly, and justly: yet remember when thy labor is
done, to commit the success unto God, leave the blessing to his providence.
The meaning is not to forbid us to walk in our ways, and to practice the
works of our calling: but only to teach us to leave the success to God. To
make this more plain: put the case of any tradesman, he is to practice the
works of his calling: as if it be to buy or sell, he may do it with diligence
without wronging any: but the success must be referred to God, for that take
no care, but leave all to him.

The like commandment we have, Phil. 4. 6. Be not careful, etc, What then?
But in all things let your prayers be made to God, with supplication and
thanks giving. Mark there how care is opposed to prayer and thanks giving.
All care is not forbidden there, but immoderate care only. We must be
careful of our duties, but not of the success of our labors: For the
blessing be not careful, but commend it to God.

It is an excellent commandment to be remembered and practiced of all men in
all callings. It is the double care that is forbidden. Thus you see what you
are to do in the compass of your callings.

How can we do this? It is too hard a commandment, flesh and blood cannot
keep it.

Psalm. 127. 1.
But God gives sleep to his beloved: such as obey him, shall have rest and
sleep; they shall with quietness reap the fruit of their labors.

The Lions shall be starued, Psalm. 34. 10.
but they that fear God, shall lack nothing. Though the Lions use ravening,
and get their pray by violence, yet they shall want, sooner then the children
of God.

If we had no more commandments in all the Bible but this, it should be
sufficient to work this effect in us, after due labor and diligence used in
our callings, to refer the success thereof unto God. We ought to trust God,
and believe his promises, and not distrust his providence. If we will not
trust God in these outward things, how shall we trust him in the keeping of our
souls in time of temptation, and in death? Therefore commend all to God, and
for the success, live by faith.

How if all things go cross; and we find no blessing in our labors? may we
not provide for our selves?



Good Josias was puffed up with pride, and would needs fight with Pharaoh Necho,
without any warrant, and it cost him his life for it. And good Ezechias
likewise, in a pride showed the strangers his treasure, and was punished for
it. Therefore if thou want any blessing, the best way is to pray for it, and to
depend upon God, and if God see it to be good for thee, thou shall obtain thy
desire.

So much of this maine commandment, which is a commandment always to be
remembered, and written in our hearts, and to be practiced in our lives.

Now one point further is to be marked, viz. how Christ distinguishes between
the life and the body: he makes the meat and drink to appertain to the life
and soul, and apparel to the body: yet we know that the apparel is a means
to preserve the life too, as well as meat and drink, and yet Christ co^cludes
it, and that for just cause: for though in some countries the use of apparel
be to cherish the body, and to continue life, yet the general and first use
of it, is not for the life, but it respects a higher matter, it serves for the
body it self. I say, in respect of a certain shame that is set upon it, the
majesty of the body is lost, and the nakedness of it, is now a thing full of
shame and confusion, and our apparel serves to cover this shame.

So the proper and principal end of apparel is this, to cover the body in
regard of the shame which befell us after the fall: yea, the truth is, we
should be all covered, hands and face and all, if it were not for other
necessary uses: in regard of which, we keep them bare and uncovered. And if
that fall had not been, the naked body had been full of majesty.

This point being considered, we must learn never to be puffed up in regard of
our apparel: but rather to be abashed and confounded, so often as we put it on,
or look upon it; for it is nothing but a badge to cover the shame of our
bodies with: therefore it is as great a madness for any to be puffed up because
of their apparel, as it were for a prisoner to be proud of the boults on his
legs, the brand on his hand, or the hole in his care: Therefore we must learn
to think of our sin, when we look on our apparel, and to be abashed, abased
and humbled in remembrance of it.

We must express all the graces and gifts of God that be in us, so much as we
can, even in our apparel; as sobriety, temperance, frugalitie, and such like:
they are to be declared in the very garments. So much of that point.

Now it follows: Is not the life more worth, etc. After he had given a most
excellent commandment, to the end it may not go without his effect, he
enforces it with diverse arguments of weight. First, saying: Is not the life
more worth then meat? etc. The reason stands thus: The life is more excellent
the^ meat and drink, and the body is better then the apparel.

Now God gives the life and the body, and does preserve them: therefore he
will much more give food and apparel.

The reason is taken from the creation. He that is a Creator, will preserve his
work.

In this reason Christ teaches us how we should make use of our creation: by
a consideration of it, we must learn to come to a confidence of Gods
providence, and to trust in him for all the things of this life: for he will
preserve his workmanship.

Job in the beginning of his tenth Chapter, persuades himself that the Lord
will not destroy him, because he is the workmanship of his hands, he makes
that an argument, Mark what use he makes of his very creation. Commend your
selves to God, as to a faithful Creator, says S. Peter. 1. Pet. 4. Mark
that he calls God a faithful Creator, and for that cause we must commend
our selves unto him.

We see also by common experience, that no man is so tender and careful for
any thing as is the workman: therefore in this respect, we are to put our trust
in God. Has God given us life and a body, and will he not give us food and
raiment? It cannot be. Thus God teaches us his providence by the creation, and
confidence in it.

26 Behold the fowls of the heaven: for they sow not, neither reap, nor
carry into the barns: yet your heavenly father feeds them. Are ye not much
better then they? Here is a second reason of the commandment. Be not
careful for such necessaries, for if God feed the fowls, much more will he
do you.

The Proposition is confirmed thus: Because you have means, and they have
none. Again, you are better then they, for you are Gods children, and so are
not they: therefore if he feed them, much more will he do you. A very good
reason, which may induce all men to obey the commandment, for it is a very
sensible reason, and may easily be understood of all.

Before he proposes his reason, he bids us behold them, that is, to look
upon them wisely, with consideration, for so the word signifies. Here is a
general duty to be learned: namely, to consider the works of God, for this
may be said of all the creatures. Behold them. The duty therefore is to mark
them, and to view them well, that we in them may see the wisdom, goodness,
mercy, justice, and providence of God. Salomo^ gives the same lesson, Eccles.
7. 15
to consider the works of God.

God made one creature after an other severally in 6. days, and rested the 7.
and sanctified it. One cause was, that me^ might consider severally of these
works of God. Our rest must be consecrated to the consideration of the works
of God* The heaven is compared to a great book, which all may read. Ps. 19.
And so we may say of all the creatures, so many creatures as there be in ye
world, so many books, wherein we may read se^sibly and distinctly, the power,
wisdom, and goodness of God. Therefore we ought to look upon them, and even
to spell them out, till we can read them perfectly. Now what is the thing to
be looked upon in the^? They sow not, neineither reap. They have not that
care for meat and drink which we have. Me^ do this and that, sow and reap
by Gods commandment, and their labor is approved. The birds do not so much,
they take no care at all.

How then do they live?

The young ravens cry to God for food, Job. 39.
and the lions seek to him, Psalm. 104.
and the eyes of all things look up to him. Psalm. 145.


How can this be? can the unreasonable creatures do so? It cannot be.

That which the holy Ghost says, has his sense, meaning, and force: for they
do not use prayer indeed as men do, but that which men do by prayer, they do
the same in their kind by a natural instinct, imprinted in them by their
creation. They seek the food that God has ordained for them, and rest
contented with his providence, and so they call upon God and depend on him: and
therefore the holy Ghost has of purpose used these phrases, to show how they
content themselves with Gods providence.

Here mark one point: The creatures are subject to vanity and corruption by
the sin of man, and yet they come nearer the first state then man, and the
order of nature remains in them: for this is their part by order of creation,
and it is to be seen in them to this day. But man is fallen from the order set
in his creation, even in these temporal things, whether we regard the getting
or the keeping, or the dispending of them: men are grown to a distrustful
care, against the will and providence of God.

This point is to be marked, that the other creatures keep the order of nature
in this thing and man does not: which shows that man is more vile then baser
creatures, and more corrupt then they: for they keep the law of nature. This
serves to humble us, and to make us think basely of our selves, who have not
in us by nature, that good which they have. Yet your heavenly father feeds
the^.] Here be excellent points set down, which I will but touch.

There be two kinds of promises in the word.

1 First of spiritual and eternal things.

2 Secondly, of corporal, temporal, and external things.

Now how may we put our trust in God for these temporal things?

Thus: we must take hold of the maine promise of salvation, and reconciliatio^
with God in Christ: and when we are resolved of that, then we shall begin to
believe the promises of temporal things, and rest upon the goodness of God. So
that if you would know how to put your trust in GOD for these things, you must
first labor for this, to be assured by faith, that you are the children of
God, and reconciled in Christ. This is the right way and the ground of all, to
believe our adoption and reconciliation, and where this is not, there can be no
true trust in his providence, so much as for a bit of bread.

Further, mark here a special and particular providence of God. The birds
provide nothing for themselves and therefore in all reason they should perish
in winter: yet daily experience shows this, that they are both fatter and in
better liking in winter. This argues, that there is a God that does feed them,
and a particular providence which tends upon the least foul and brings it
meat in winter.

This is a sensible persuasion to all Gods servants, that God will send them
food and raiment: for can it be possible, that God should feed the fowls,
and neglect his children?

Again, this serves not to boulster up any ma^s idleness and negligence, that
will neither reap nor sow: but to teach us, that when all means fail, we
must rest upon God.

In a word; we must learn here to be like God, to be merciful as he is
merciful: he is a savior of all, specially of them that believe. This was
never more needful to be learned then now, when men make them selves rich,
even with the blood of the poor. If we be Gods children, we must be like him.

27 Which of you by taking care, is able to add one cubit unto his stature? We
have heard the commandment in the 25. verse, and two reasons of it: First, If
God give life and the body, much more food and raiment: Secondly, If he feed
the fowls, much more will he feed you. Now follows a third reason to move
us to obey the commandment. The words are propounded by way of interrogation:
And it is the manner of the holy Ghost, to affirm or deny something, and that
more effectually under the form of an Interrogation. And this is all one, as
if he had said: There is not one of you, that by taking care, can add one
cubit unto his stature.

The cubit here mentioned, is a certain kind of measure borrowed from a man's
arm, which is the length from the bowing of the arm or elbowe, to the end of
the longest finger, about which length, we are commonly when we come into the
world. So that the meaning is this: As God makes a man a cubit long at the
first, and afterward adds many cubits one after another to his stature: so
man himself cannot by all his care increase his stature one cubit: nay, all
the cunning, wit, labor, and industry of man, is not able to add any thing
to his stature, because it is the proper work of God, and of the same nature
with the work of the creation.

After a thing is created, to make it grow and increase, is a work that
proceeds from the same power, by which it was created. Therefore, as none but
God does or can create the body: so it is God alone that increases the
stature, and adds length, and makes it grow from stature to stature. And so
this is a reason from the like. As man by taking care cannot increase his
stature one cubit, no nor any thing at all, as it is in Luke: So he cannot by
taking care increase his worldly state, or better it.

This is the sum and substance of this reason, and it is very forcible and
effectual, to make us use moderate care, and to move us to put away
distrustful care, so much as for necessaries. For we can no more increase our
mainteinance by taking care, then we can increase our stature by it, which is
impossible to any creature.

And so much for the sense of this verse.

Now let us see what doctrines and instructions arise from the words: All our
labor, care, and industry, is altogether vain and unprofitable, considered a
part from the blessing of God and his providence. Ps. 127. All the pains that
men take for the things of this life, is but lost labor without Gods blessing,
the planter and waterer is nothing. 1. Cor. 3.
If such excellent men as they were, that were the founders of the Church,
labored in vain without Gods blessing, much more we.



to his full height.

This conclusion Christ would teach us, here we cannot make our worldly state
better or worse, as we will: we cannot be high or low at our pleasure; but we
must have that stature and state which God has appointed. Look what success
he has appointed shall be, and must be: we cannot alter it by carking and
caring.

This serves to teach us to depend upon God, and to rest upon him in our
lawful labors, for the success of them.

This overthrows diverse fond opinions.

First, that by art and skill a man may prolong his natural life, and make a
supply when he is come to his end. This is false: for if a man cannot make
himself higher, nor alter his stature, he cannot enlarge his life: for of the
two, that were the easier, viz. to increase his stature, rather then to
lengthen his life beyond the natural period. Therefore man cannot do this by
all his Art or wit. He cannot piece out his life, and refrain his spirit as
Ecclesiastes speaks. The soul and the body must be separated.

Indeed Art may preserve life till his natural end, but when that is come,
no Art can prolong it.

Secondly, the opinion that Witches and Sorcerers can transform themselves,
and pass through keye-holes, is false. If they cannot do this, viz. add one
cubit to their stature, much less can they do that. If they cannot add so
much to their stature, how can they change and abolish nature? If they cannot
increase nature, they cannot change it into an other kind.

Though Satan has many illusions, yet he cannot by all his skill, turn a
man's body into a beasts.

And it is a forgery, to say that Nabuchadnezzers body was changed into a
beasts; but only he had a frenzy, and became lik a beast.

Thirdly, they are deceived, and deceive, that say they can by Art turn baser
mettalles into better, as brass into gold; a creature of one kind into an
other. If this be not possible, viz. to add one cubit, etc, no more is that.

Likewise we must remember, that all these things are the work of the
Creator, and a man can no more do them, then he can increase his own
stature, which he can never do. If this be so, that we cannot add, etc. then
it is false which the Papists teach, that a man may be glorified and justified,
and increase his glory in heaven by his works. He cannot do it, for it
requires a greater power to increase glory in heaven, then to increase the
stature of the body. As it is the work of God to give stature, and to increase
it: so it is his work to give glory, and to increase it. And if men cannot do
that which is less in nature; how shall they do that, which is above nature?

28 And why care you for raiment? Learn how the Lillies of the field do
grow. They are not wearied, neither spin. The meaning is, and do not care for
raiment: the interrogation still having the force of a Negation, or
Prohibition. And here he repeates the commandment before delivered in the
25. verse. Yet not altogether, but by peece-meale, he parts it and proves it,
and urges it point by point.

What should be his meaning to take this course in handling this heavenly
doctrine?

He shows himself here to be the Doctor of the Church, and proves himself a
faithful teacher: Therefore not content only to propound his doctrine, (least
it should take no fruit or profit in the hearers,) he urges it point by
point, that by this means he may set an edge upon it, and make it take place
in the hearts of his hearers, that it may be engraven there, and be
effectual.

And this is the duty of all that are enjoined to teach. viz. to be careful
to deliver the will of God, and then be careful that it may be remembered.

The father is commanded to whet his child, as the soldier does sharpen his
sword, that it may enter into the body of the enemy.

This is the duty of every one, to whom it belongs to teach others, whether
they be ministers, masters, or fathers, every teacher has his duty enjoined
him. First, to teach the will of God. Secondly, to set it on an edge.

So here Christ gives example, and teaches by his own practice. First, he
commands, then he confirms, and urges it by peece-meale: and then he
repeates the commandment diverse times. So much for the manner and form of
teaching. Now let us come to the words, as they lie in order.

And why care you for raiment? etc. These words must have the same exposition
that the 25. verse had, where this doctrine was propounded in general.

There is a moderate care for raiment, which is not here forbidden; but the
other, that is, the inordinate and immoderate care: and it may be conceived
diversely.



and fit for his calling. But the Tradesman, his care is to be apparelled
like the Gentleman: the Gentleman like the Knight: the Knight like the Noble
man. And thus every person affects the apparel of a higher state. Yea, every
servant (so the times are now) spends the greatest part of his wages, yea, and
more then his wages comes to, in apparel.

Thirdly, when much time is spent in the curious apparelling of the body, as
though we could mend the form of our bodies, and as if the Lord had not done
his part sufficiently. The time and pains might be much better employed and
spent in matters of salvation.

Now, to come to the point: Christ forbids not here a moderate care for
raiment, but the inordinate care to provide apparel superfluous, sumptuous and
curious, which is joined with the mispending of much time, and money, beyond our
estate and ability.

Now (as I said before) this inordinate and immoderate care is the common sin
of these times in all places: this is manifest, and cannot be denied. Therefore
let us all remember and reverence this commandment, and take heed, that we be
not careful inordinately for raiment.

Now he comes to confirm the commandment by a fourth reason, set down in
this 28. verse, and in the 29. and the 30. verses: Learn how the Lillies
grow, etc. The reason is worthy and excellent, though it be borrowed from
sensible things, and thus it is framed: If God cloathe Lillies, much more will
he do you, etc.

The first part is confirmed in the 30. verse thus: The Lillies and so all the
herbs of the field, are ordained for man's use, and for the furnace: Therefore
man is more excellent then they are.

Then if he cloathe them, much more will he cloathe you; for they are made for
your use.

The second part is thus; contained in the 28. and 29. verses: They are
clouthed more gorgiously then Solomon. Nay, it is added that God does this:
for he speaks it of the herbs of the field, (not of the garden) which are
not dressed by man.

Again: They labor not: That is, they themselves are not the causes of it: it
is not man, nor the herb it self, but God alone that clothes it. And he
adds, that they are clothed more then Solomon was in all his royalty. The
conclusion therefore follows: If God so cloathe them, much more you, and that
with a check, Oligopistoi, Oyee of little faith.

Thus you see the fourth reason, which does contain many notable instructions.
Now to the words.

Learn of the Lillies,] When he says this, he makes the Lillies and every
herb to be a schoole-maister unto us, he sends us unto them to learn. And
though we be the scholars of Christ, yet we must not think scorn to learn
of them which grow without the hand of man, or any labor of their own. And
this he does for special causes.

For first, that creature in the field does more obey God in it kind then man
does; and that the holy Ghost does often testify, Esaias. 1. Hear o heavens,
and hearken, etc. And Ezechiel spoke to the mountains. And the Prophet that
was sent to reprove Jeroboam; when he came where Jeroboam was, he leaves him,
and cries to the Altar to hear him.

All this is to show that these unreasonable and insensible creatures, if they
had that reason that man has, would be more obedient and careful then man is
of his duty. Therefore to check man's rebellion, the Prophets called upon these
things, when men would not bear them; and this is the cause why Christ sends
men here to the Lillies of the field.

The second reason of this is, because we do not learn the good things which
the creature can teach us. Though we have them, see them, and use them daily,
yet we do not learn all that of God which nature teaches: wherefore for good
cause we are sent to them to learn. That which may be learned of the
wisdom, power, providence, mercy, justice, and goodness of God, is manifested
in them, and yet we mark it not. For this cause Christ knowing our want and
behavior, says thus: Learn of the Lillies, etc.

This serves to check us, who do not learn so many good things of God, as
these creatures can teach. How then shall we learn the doctrine of salvation?
So much for this point that Christ says: Learn of the Lillies, and by
learning consider.

Now what is the thing to be learned of the Lillies? How they grow. This is
the point to be learned and considered. They grow, though they labor not nor
spinne: and Solomon himself was not clothed like one of these. And it is a
thing worth the marking; for in the winter they are buried in the earth, and
appear no more then if they should never be seen: And yet in the Spring time
of the year, they grow up with stalks, leaves, flowers, and goodly colors.
Now the point to be marked, is this: How all this comes to pass.

They themselves do nothing, neither does man any thing to make them grow.
What is it then that makes them grow?

The cause is the word of creation, which was given out by the Creator in the
beginning, to the herbs: Let the earth bring forth herb and tree. By virtue
of that commandment then delivered to the earth, the earth now though it be
frozen in the winter, covered with snow, and hardened with frost, as though
there should never be any hope for the Lilly, or other herbs to grow, yet it
brings forth all in the Spring, and that with beautiful colors, and all by
virtue of Gods commandment. In the same manner (to come to the point) God has
given a word of providence over his servants, that if they trust in him, he
will provide them necessaries, all necessaries whatsoever. So as there shall be
nothing wanting that is necessary, if they trust in him.

This word is certain, set down, and as unchangeable as the word of
creation. If men believe it, they shall have meat, drink, and cloth, as
certainly as the flowers and herbs, and grass, come out of the earth.

This is the point here offered to our consideration. They grow by the virtue
of Gods word in the creation, and so they should do to the end of the world.
So in the matter of providence, trust in God, and walk in the compass of thy
calling, and doubt not the issue.

If there were no more reasons to persuade us to a moderate care for
necessaries, this one sensible reason, borrowed from the Lillies, were
sufficient.

When he says: They labor not, etc. his meaning is not by their example to
maintain idleness, or to neglect our calling, but to teach us, that when all
helps fail us, walking in our calling, and having done what we can, without
our default Gods blessing shall not be wanting, we shall have meats, drink, and
cloth, though all means fail us: And for this end these words are set down

29. Yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his royalty, was not araied
like one of these. Herein one special amplification is to be marked. They are
clothed by God, and that more gloriously then Solomon himself was: 1. Kin. 3
13.
yet Solomon had promises of great honor and glory without his seeking: for
he desired but wisdom, yet with wisdom God promised him honor. For all
this Christ says of the Lillies, that Salomo^ was not clothed like them, and
he speaks not of some one, but of every one, and of the Lillies of the field
too, not of the garden: And every one of them is clothed more gloriously the^
Solomon was, when he was in his chiefest glory.

First, this serves to check and control us for our pride in apparel, and to
teach us that we ought not to be so curious in attiring our selves: for when
we have done all we can, we cannot match one of these flowers, but they will
go beyond us. Why then should we puff up our selves in regard of our apparel,
when as the least herb in the field is more gay? What cloth in whitenes comes
near the Lilly? What purple like the Violet? And what crimson or scarlet is
like diverse other flowers? Art may do much, but it cannot match nature. Do
what we can, the herbs will go beyond us. And if it be so, why are we so
proud of our apparel? The herb which thou treadest under thy feet, and
put into the furnace, is finer then thou art.

I nunc, effer te, quod pulchro incedis amictu,
Te long superat fertile gra^um agri.
The second use is, to teach us that all our pomp is but vain: for what is
more frail then the herb, which is to day in the field, and to morrow is cut
down? So the whole nature of man is frail and brittle, as Paul says: All the
glory and pomp of this world is vain and passes away, subject to change
and alteration.

And yet when Christ speaks this of Salomons glory, and makes it inferior to
the herb, preferring this before that, he co^demnes not Salomons glory; for
it was promised him and given him by God. And the word, though it condemn
curiosity and superfluity of apparel, yet it condemns not gorgeous apparel
in Princes and great personages. The pomp in apparel is not simply condemned
in the word: Genesis 41. loseph. Act. 23.
for Joseph refused not the ring and fine garment: And whereas Luke says of
Agrippa and Bernice, that they came with much pomp, the words may be taken as
well in good part as ill.

30. Wherefore if God so cloathe the grass of the field, which is to day, to
morrow is cast into the Oven, shall he not do much more unto you? O ye of
little faith. In these words Christ abaseth the creatures in regard of man, and
the difference between man and the herbs is in these things.

First, they serve for man's use: Therefore they are inferior to him, they
serve for the making of his fire, and the heating of his furnace.

Secondly, the herb is to day, and has a being; to morrow it has no being,
but cease to be an herb? so frail and vain is the creature that excelles
man in glory. But man has a being to day, and his being continues.

The trees and herbs have a kind of life and soul, as men have; but there
is a great difference: for their souls are mortal, and arise from the matter
whereof the plant is made: but the soul of man is immortal, be it of the
righteous or the unrighteous.

The difference is plain in Genesis, where God commands the earth to bring
forth herbs and trees, with life and substance.

But when he made man, the earth brought not forth his soul, but God
breathed into him a living soul. As for the souls of beasts and plants,
whether they be quallities or substances, it is not known, but they perish and
are corruptible, and they cease to be that they were. But it is not so with
man, for when he dies, he cease not to be a man: a dead man is a man still,
though not a living man, and his soul shall be reunited to his body, yea the
body that is dead and lies in the grave, is united to Christ, as well as the
soul, and by virtue thereof it shall rise again. I speak now of the
righteous especially, and therefore dead Abraham is Abraham still. Now it is
not so with the other creatures: The herb or tree being burnt, cease to be
an herb or tree: But man when he dies (because he is in the covenant) he is
still a man, for he that is once in the covenant, is in it for ever: and the
virtue of the covenant shall be as effectual to raise the servant of God to
glory, as the word of creation is effectual to bring the creature out of the
earth. Therefore the diversity and difference is to advance man above the
creature.

Shall he not do much more unto you, O ye of little faith? These words were
spoken to all the Disciples and other hearers: wherein (for our further
edification) these two circumstances are to be considered, First, the persons
rebuked: Secondly, the causes why they are rebuked.

The persons are the Disciples, when Christ speaks thus to his Disciples,
Oligopistoi.
o ye of little faith: he does not rebuke them simply for want of faith, but
because their wicked unbelief was more, and the distrust of Gods mercy and
providence greater then their faith and belief: so that not the want of faith,
but the smallness of it is here rebuked.

Here observe, that besides the full persuasion which is the highest degree of
faith, there is a lower degree and a lesser measure, which is here called the
lesser faith.

And this little faith is not here condemned, but the unbelief that goes with
it, for this little faith in them, was a true faith: and Christ confessed
before, that God was their father. And it is a true faith that brings a man to
the little adoption, it brought them into that state, that they had God for
their father, and they were his children.





This first point of doctrine is to be remembered, because every child of God
cannot attain to Abraham's faith, and to a full persuasion: And therefore all
such as have but the beginning of faith, must not be discouraged: for thou
may be the child of God with thy little faith, if thou bewail it, and be
diligent to attain to strong faith. Endless and unspeakable is the mercy of
God in this behalf, he pardons manifold doubtings, distrust and unbelief,
to them that bewail it, and desire to increase in faith.

Secondly, the cause why Christ reproues his own disciples thus sharply, is
because they did not believe in God for raiment. As if he had said: Because you
believe not this, therefore you are to be blamed, as having little faith, and
therefore he calls them thus: because they did not believe in God for meat,
drink, and cloth.

Here a second point of doctrine is to be observed, that true saving faith does
not only apprehend Gods mercy for life eternal; but (...) for the temporal
blessings of this life. The very same faith whereby remission of sins and
life eternal is apprehended, lays hold on temporal blessings. This must not
seem strange: for (to make it plain) there be two kinds of blessings promised
in the scriptures, viz. principal, and less principal. The principal is
Christ, God and man: the redeemer of mankind, with righteousness and life
eternal in him. This is the maine and principal blessing. Now upon this there
follow blessings less principal, which are also promised as well as the
principal, and these are meat, drink, clothing, health, etc. and these are
promised us so far forth, as they are for our good: In Christ, and by Christ,
all these are promised.

To this purpose Paul says: All the premises in him, 2. Cor. 1.
are yea, and Amen. Not only remission of sins, is yea, and Amen, that is, a
thing granted and accomplished, but all other temporal blessings. This being
so, now mark what follows. When true faith lays hold on the maine and
principal blessing, then withal it apprehends all other temporal blessings
necessary. They are all apprehended in, and with the principal.

It is said of Abraham, Romans 4.
that by his very justifying faith, he did believe that God would give him a
son, when he was an hundredth years old. It was not a diverse faith.

Noah by the same faith, Heb. 11.
whereby he was saved, believed that he should be preserved and his household,
in the flood. In like manner, by one and the same faith we believe our
reconciliation with God in Christ, and remission of sins; and that God will
give us necessaries, meat, drink, cloth; one and the same faith lays hold
first on the maine and principal promise, and then on the less principal.
This point must be marked, and this point remembered; first mercy, then
providence; first the principal blessing, and then the temporal.

Every man says, he looks to be saved by faith, when he dies, and it is well.
But we must add this, we must live by faith too, we must lead our lives by
the same faith, by which we look to be saved after this life: and we must
depend on Gods providence as certainly for these necessaries, as we do upon
his mercy for our salvation: we must not live by sense or reason, but by faith.
How this is to be done, you shall see afterward. It is impossible for us to be
saved by faith when we die, if we do not live by faith. He that cannot cast
himself upon Gods providence for the necessaries of this life, can much less
cast himself on Gods mercy, for the salvation of his soul. So much for the
second point.

Thirdly, Christ gives us here a note and mark whereby we may try our faith,
whether it be a saving faith or no; true or feigned; great or little. For he
gives us to understand, that the more men are distracted with worldly cares,
the less is their faith. And the reason is plain: The more men's care is, the
less their trust is in Gods providence: And the less their trust is in Gods
providence, the less faith in his mercy for their salvation. So that where
worldly care bears rule, there is no faith in Gods providence. As long as men
be in prosperity, they think they have great faith: but in poverty and
affliction their faith is tried: for then commonly the heart is swallowed up
with grief and fear* He that cannot rest on Gods providence for the things of
this life, how shall he rest on Gods mercy in the pains of death; And thus
much of the reproof.

31. Therefore take no thought saying; What shall we eat? or what shall we
drink? or wherewith shall we be clothed? These words are a repetition of the
commandment delivered in the 25. verse, and here the commandment is the
second time repeated. Once before it was repeated. The causes of this
repetition are diverse. One I have declared before; and that was, that he might
set an edge upon the commandment, and make it take place in their hearts.
Secondly, that they might learn their duties how they ought to confirm their
faith: for as Christ urges it by a repetition, so men must by meditating upon
it the oftener increase their faith.

Faith is wrought in the heart, as the print of a seal in the wax, or as a
vision or revelation in the night, where the man does nothing: but faith is
wrought by these means ordinary, viz. the word read, heard, preached, or
meditated.

Further, that these means may be effectual, there must be a motion in us,
whereby we must strive against doubting, distrust, and unbelief, and therefore
we are often to urge the commandment to our selves, and exercise our selves
in it, and apply it: strive and struggle, wrestle and labor for this end that
we may more constantly and heartily apply the promises of mercy and
providence to our selves. This is the second cause of the repetition, that we
may master our unbelief, by striving and laboring.

You must do that which you can do by nature and grace; that is, come to the
assemblies, and endeavor to put away unbelief, and by this means you shall
increase in faith.

So much for the repetition of the commandment: Now to the words.

Therefore take no thought, etc. These words tend to this end, not to breed
idleness or carelessness in any: but as I declared in the 25. verse. Therefore
I will show you how far forth we may care for the things of this life, and
where it must end:

First, it goes thus far: Every man must have a care to do the good and
profitable duties of his calling, with diligence and painfulnesse: from that
care Christ frees no man, therefore every man must consider, what be the duties
of his calling, and the most necessary works, and these he must have a care
to perform.

Secondly, a man may have care to provide for himself and his, such things as
be necessary: that is, meat, drink, and cloth: For these a man may; nay, he
must have a care, so much as is necessary in the judgment of any: this care
is not condemned.

After this, he must give place to Gods providence, and God must have his
work. The blessing and success of all his labor must be left to God. And
then in the neck of these two cares comes faith, that God will give a
necessary blessing. Where care ends, there faith begins. We must not care
for the blessings and success of our labors, but refer that to the
providence of God. If God give more then is necessary, we must be the more
thankful: But if he withholde his blessings, we must not live by care, but
by faith.

Thus far we may care, and no further: And this has been the practice of
all Gods servants.

The distrustful care is that, which is here forbidden, when men take all care
upon themselves, and vex themselves, so as they are fit for nothing, no not
for the service of God, but only to care. And it is care that tears the
heart, and distracts it, and makes a man unmeet for any thing else, but only
to care.

This is the thought which Christ condemns, when we vex, grieve, and consume
our selves day and night with care for the world. And this is the common sin
of our time.

This care does possess and poison the hearts of many, and it appears by
experience.

For what care is that which breaks your sleep, and awakes you at all hours
of the night? And what care is that which comes first into your hearts in the
morning when you rise? And when the whole day is at an end, consider with your
selves, what is the thing you have most thought of, or altogether, whereon has
all your care been? Look back, and see if it has not been for the world, all the day long, from the morning till the evening. The care for the world takes
the first place, and filles up the whole day. Why? This can never be but a
distrustful care; and yet this is the ordinary and common care, therefore
Christ speaks this to us all: you may care for necessaries, but live by faith,
and be content with Gods good will and pleasure. Let this commandment take
place in your hearts, and let care be joined with faith, and so lead your lives.

Saying: What shall we eat, etc.

Now Christ does describe this care by the fruits and effects: for these be
the speeches of them that be possessed with worldly care, especially of them
that have great charges and mean living, or which suffer great losses; then
men make such questions: but how shall we maintain our selves? How shall we
live? And thus you see how Christ condemns not all care, but that which is
joined with distrust, when men complain and murmr, as if there were no God
nor providence. These speeches are condemned, as proceeding from distrust and
unbelief: And good reason, for they are complaints of Gods dealing towords us:
we ought to shut our mouths in this respect, and take heed how we murmur
against God.

When Aaron had both his sons burnt, Leuit. 3.
he comes to Moses, and would needs know the cause; and when he heard it was
Gods doing, he held his peace: The place is worth the marking. Likewise David
says: I held my tongue and said nothing, Psalm. 39. 9.
for it was thy doing, Esaias. 30. 15.
Lord. Our confidence is in peace and strength; that is, a man has confidence
in God, when he complaine^h not. Therefore this is our duty, never to
complain of Gods providence, be the judgment never so grievous that befalles
us. We must learn of the servants of God to hold our tongues, and with peace
and quietness to submit our selves to God, when we are distressed and
afflicted, when we loose our living or friends: Note this.
for these are sinful speeches, speeches that bewray distrust, unbelief,
discontent, and impatiencie.

32. (For after all these things seek the Gentiles) for your heavenly Father
knows that ye have need of all these things. Here is a fifth reason: For
after all these, etc. Therefore take no thought. These words are a new reason,
to move us to flee all such care. The practice of the Gentiles must be shunned;
but this is a practice of the Gentiles: Therefore it must be shunned.

The words have a further sense the^ the translation imports: for it is thus,
They seek with all their might, they set themselves or give themselves to seek
them* For the seeking of these necessaries is not a fault, but ye giving of our
selves to seek them with all our power. Then we sin, when we do so: for
they set their hearts to seek them, all their care is for them: So much the
words import: you are a peculiar people of God, and therefore you must not
conform your selves unto the Gentiles.

What is the cause the Gentiles do so?

mere device of man's brain: for the Gentiles before Christ's incarnation, knew
not the true God, but were without God: How then could they have grace, which
is a gift to be able to believe, if they would. If they failed in the knowledge
of life eternal, and Gods providence, how was it possible yt they should have
this gift? Indeed in diverse Countries that were near the Jews, some lived as
the Jews did, and got some knowledge of God: But the countries that were far
off, had no knowledge of God, therefore there was no common grace given them
all.

Secondly, Christ shows here, that they which set themselves to seek riches
and worldly blessings, they are as Gentiles, and have not learned the
principles of religion, though they come to Church, hear the Word, and receive
the Sacraments, yet they are but as Paynims. They make themselves their own
God, and they see no providence. They are Christians in show, but Gentiles in
deed, even as the Turks are, for they have not learned the foundatio^s of
religion, by faith to rest on Gods providence. This reason alone might move us
to a moderate care for the temporal things.

Now mark the ground of this reason: The Church of God is a peculiar people,
therefore they must not be like the Gentiles in evil things: and in good
things they must be better then they. Then mark and consider what a shame it
is for the people of our time: for the very maine sins of the Gentiles, are
risen amongst us: as drunkenness, oppression, usury, slaundering, engrossing
of the necessary commodities of this life: and these sins be as common
amongst us, as they are amongst the Infidels. It is a shame for us that are
separated from them in profession, and bear the name of Christians, to live in
the same sins. Nay, in regard of oppression and cruelty, there was never
more found among the Heathen. The poorer sort dye for want of relief:
Hard-hearted men get their living by Gods judgments, and fill their purses
then, and take the vantage of his judgments, when he sends them for our
sins.

Though Christ himself say in the person of the poor, I am hungry and cold,
etc. yet few or none have the bowels of compassion, to feed and cloathe him in
his members. Well, remember we are a chosen people, and therefore must not be
like the Gentiles.

For your heavenly Father knows, etc. You have a Father in heaven, and he
knows your need. This is an answer to an objection. For some might say: what
may we not care for things needful? These are things needful. Christ answers
no. Though they be necessary, yet you must have no distrustful care: your
heavenly Father knows best what and how much of these temporal blessings are
needful for you. A most excellent reason, and alone sufficient.

If this be so, we ought to content our selves in every state of life, and use
a moderate care: yea, we ought to be as well content with sickness (when God
sends it) as with health, and give thanks alike for both. We have a Father in
heaven, when he sends sickness, he knows it is better for us then health.
So when we are in poverty, we ought as well to be content, as with health:
for our Father knows this to be more for our good, then plenty and
abundance.

This ought also to make us content even when we lie a dying, and yielding up
the ghost: for our Father sees it to be for our good, when we dye, that we
should live no longer. So in any judgment of God, whatsoever it be, this ought
to content us, that we have a Father, and he knows what is good for us.

Therefore be it whatsoever it will be that God sends, it is good in the
wisdom of our Father, though not in our carnal reason. Wherefore remember
this, for it will serve to pacify us. For what is the cause we are so
impatient in adversity and sickness? but because we do not remember this.
Therefore hold this by faith, that we have a Father in heaven, and he knows
in his wisdom what is good for us, better then we our selves: and in this
faith and persuasion let us live and die, and learn to be content in every
estate.

33. But first seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be ministered unto you. Hitherto has been showed what care is to be
eschewed: Now follows the care to be used. And this verse has two parts,
viz. A commandment or an exhortation, and a promise. I will speak first of
the meaning and then of the instructions.

The commandment is two fold: First, Seek the kingdom of God: Secondly, his
righteousness, viz. the righteousness of God.

To seek the kingdom of God, is nothing else but to have a care to get it, to
labor and endeavor to obtain it: seek this first, this is above all things
whatsoever, have a care of this.

What is meant here by the kingdom of God?

It signifies a state and condition of certain men which are in the favor of
God in Christ, and have right to life eternal by Christ.

This very state is called in the scriptures the kingdom of God and of heaven;
and this kingdom is only one. There be not two distinct kingdoms of God, but
only one perfect and complete kingdom, yet it has diverse degrees, viz.
First, of grace. Secondly, of glory.

The kingdom of Grace is that in which a man is ruled by Gods word and spirit,
and that is the first step and entrance into the kingdom of glory.

The kingdom of glory is to have fellowship with the Trinity after this life.
Now both these degrees are here understood by the kingdom of God.

It is further added: And his righteousness,] The second thing that is to be
sought for above all, and before all other things whatsoever, is the
righteousness of God, whereby he makes us righteous.

Some have read it thus: And the righteousness thereof: But the words will
not bear the translation: it must be as it is, and no otherwise, viz. The
righteousness of God. And this is added for a weighty cause: for Gods
kingdom stands in righteousness.

God then reigns in the heart of men, and sets up his kingdom there, when he
enables them to serve God in righteousness, and then men are Gods subjects,
and therefore these words are an excellent exposition of the former, when God
justifies a sinner by the obedience of Christ, and enables him to obey Gods
commandments* This righteousness Paul speaks of, Romans 1. 18. 2. Cor. 5.
21. He that knew no sin, was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God. and 1. Cor. 1. 3. In all these and other places, the
righteousness of God is nothing else, but the obedience of Christ, God, and man,
which he performed in our behalf in his sufferings and fulfilling the law.

This is the righteousness of God, and is so termed in the scriptures, and is
indeed the groundwork and substance of the kingdom.

Now it is so called for diverse causes.

First, because it is given of God freely, and man cannot get it, neither by
nature nor grace.

There is a civil righteousness which men have by nature, and a religiousnesse
before men, which is of grace, but this is neither of them, it is out of the
reach of nature and grace, and therefore it is called Gods righteousness, as a
gift freely given of God.

Secondly, because at the day of judgment God will approve of it, and accept
it as a perfect satisfaction of his law, and nothing else is aunswerable to
the rigor of the law, and therefore it is also thus called, because it is a
righteousness, which may be opposed to the justice of God in the last
judgment.

Thirdly, the obedience of Christ, is called Gods righteousness, because he
is such a person as is both God and man: The son of the father is God as the
father: and though this obedience were performed in the manhood, yet it was
performed by a person that was both God and man: and in respect of that person
it is so called.

Adams righteousness was in himself, and he lost it: therefore now our
righteousness is in Christ, who is God, and therefore it is called Gods
righteousness. 1. Cor. 1. 30.

Now how is this obedience made ours? or how shall we come by it?

By imputation: for God is content to accept it for us. And here we must
further understand sanctification to be joined with it; for it must not be
separated from the fruits thereof. These go together, justification,
sanctification, and regeneration. At the same time that we are justified, the
heart is renewed, changed, and sanctified, whereby we are enabled to serve God
in righteousness and holiness. The sense then is this: let all your care be
to get this kingdom, to serve God in holiness and righteousness all the
days of your lives. This is the meaning of these words. Now follow the
instructions.

Hence it is to be gathered plainly, that we are all out of Gods kingdom by
nature, and we are in the devils kingdom: for what need we to seek it, if
we were not out of it by nature? 2. Cor. 4. 4. Satan is called the God of this
world, that is, of the greatest part of mankind. And he is called the Prince
of this world, Ioh. 12. 31. Now he is so termed, because men by nature are his
slaves, and have their hearts tied and chained, so as they can do nothing but
his will. See Ephesians. 2. 3. Children of wrath; and the devil works in the
children of disobedience. The reason is plain: when men cannot be content, but
refuse to be under God, and in his kingdom, he leaves them to the devil,
that he may reign and rule in their hearts; and the truth of this we show in
the course of our lives.

Though men wear the liuerie of Christ, yet in heart they do homage to the
devil. We hear the Word, and receive the Sacraments, but when it comes to
obedience of the commandments, when we are to put our necks under Christ's
yoke, we make light account of it. And the very performance of moral duties
is counted and called niceness, preciseness, and curiousness. What is this
in effect, but as if men should say to Christ: Depart from us, we will not
have this man to reign over us. It is a grievous and a fearful sin, and
such as argues, that although we profess our selves to be Christ's servants,
yet are we Satan's vassalles.

If a man labor to draw them from their unlawful pleasures and profits, they
will not spare to speak it with open mouth; Depart from us, we will none of
thy ways, as the wicked man is brought in speaking in Job. 21. 14. Therefore
it is not without just cause, that Christ makes this exhortation here, saying:
First seek.

Secondly, we are taught here an excellent point, never to be forgotten: for it
is the principal point, and it is this: our principal care must be to win
the kingdom of heaven; That is the point which Christ shootes at, I need not
stand to prove it, for this one commandment declares it, the words are plain:
therefore I beseech you embrace this commandment, and obey it, and let this
be our principal care now and ever till death.

You will say; How shall we do this? How shall we learn to practice it? That
you may do it, three things must be remembered. 1. Come.
First, you must come to the place, where this kingdom is to be found. 2.
Enter.
Secondly, when you are come thither, you must enter into it. 3. Wait.
Thirdly, you must wait for the possession of it. Touching the first, when men
cannot find the kingdom of God in all places, there be set and certain
places in which it is to be found. God has appointed public assemblies and a
public ministry, in which the doctrine of reconciliation and salvation is
delivered. And these be the places where this kingdom is to be found: and
these be the means whereby it is attained.

In the Gospel the kingdom of heaven is thus taken often, especially Math.
13. The very ministry of the word, and the dispensation of the doctrine of
salvation, is called the kingdom of God, because it is the only means, by
which God does give this kingdom, and offer it.

In the Canticles the Church asks Christ where his kingdom is: And he
answers by the shepherds tents. Therefore we must come to hear the word,
and labor to profit by it, because it is the sole and solemn means, by which
God gives his kingdom. And you must take heed how you neglect this duty,
because you know not when the Lord will open your hearts, and not only offer,
but give you this kingdme.

The second duty is to enter into it; for it is not enough to come where Gods
kingdom is, and to have the kingdom of God amongst us, as the Pharisees had
when Christ preached; but we must go one step further and enter into it, for
till we enter, we shall never have benefit by it.

How shall we enter? Math. 18. Except ye be changed, and become as little
babes, ye cannot enter. That a man may enter, he must become like a little
child. Now ye manner of a child is this: The child of a Prince, without any
disdain or affectatio^ of superiority, will play with a poor man's child.

That is the property of children, and so must we become children, begin to be
displeased with our selves, lay aside all self-love, and selfe-liking. We are
never capable of the kingdom of God, till we cast down our selves, and see
that we are traitors and rebels against God, we cannot come to Gods kingdom
before.

And to this purpose Christ says to Nicodemus, Except a man be borne a new of
water, Ioh 33.
and of the spirit, he cannot see the kingdom of God. This regeneration is,
when we are changed, not in the substance of body or soul, but when the
devils Image is defaced, and we are sanctified in our minds and thoughts,
wills and affections, and in all our actions.

Now then, that we may enter into Gods kingdom, we must be humbled like little
children: and when a man begins to be regenerated and converted, then he
begins to enter into the kingdom of God, and not when he dies, as many think.

Now a man must always after show himself to be entered, by holiness and
righteousness, and by duties of love and mercy, and that is the reason of
this addition (And his righteousness) and by that we declare our selves to be
of Gods kingdom, and to belong unto it, for that stands in righteousness. The
question being, Who shall dwell in Gods kingdom? The answer is; He that
works righteousness. Psalm. 15.

The third thing to be done for the obtaining of Gods kingdom, is to wayt for
the possession, and that is never given till the day of death. And this waiting
is performed, when a man converted and regenerated, has a care to keep faith
and a good conscience till death. He that does thus, waytes for the kingdom of
God: as Joseph of Arimathea is said to have done. Luke 23. 51.

Now then we see how the kingdom of GOD is to be sought for: it is by doing
these three things: First, by coming into the place where this kingdom is to
be found: Secondly, by entering into it: And thirdly, by waiting for the
possession of it. These are to be distinguished one from an other? Now let me
renew my exhortation: Let your principal care be to perform these duties, and
to practice these three things so long as you live: for in the kingdom of God
stands all your happiness, joy, peace, felicity, and blessings: out of it,
is nothing but grief, woe and horror unspeakable. All joy and comfort
whatsoever can be wished or thought of, is in the kingdom of grace and glory.
Therefore if you desire happiness, let your care be for these things: for
out of this kingdom, there is nothing but misery, and the wrath of God hangs
over every one that is not in it, every hour he is in danger of Gods heavy
judgments. Oh fearful state! oh wretched people that fear it not!

Wherefore to conclude, that we may escape the plagues and punishments of the
damned, and have the comforts of the subjects of this kingdom, let this be the
maine and principal care to be of this kingdom, and to live in it: for if you
live out it, still eternal woe will befall you.

Let this heavenly doctrine take place in all your hearts, and do not flatter
and soothe your selves, persuading your selves that if you lead a civil life,
and come to Church, all is well, and you are safe. For mark, the kingdom of
God is like a City, and it has his suburbs and sundry gates. The first gate
is the ministry of the word; when you are come so far, then you are in the
suburbs: but yet you are not in the city: All sorts of men come thus far,
both good and bad.

But there is a second gate, and that is when a man is regenerated and
converted, then he first sets his foot within the city: All before is but the
suburbs, and may be performed of hypocrites: Only the children of God pass
this gate. Therefore content not your selves to hear the Word, and receive the
Sacraments, and to be counted Christians, for all this is nothing more then the
hypocrites may do: but labor to become new creatures, that you may be
free-denisons in the kingdom of heaven, and then indeed we seek the kingdom
of God aright, when we strive to enter in at this gate. Thus much of the duty
commanded, which I will repeat, because it is a matter of weight: First seek
the kingdom of God and his righteousness. This must be the principal care of
all persons whatsoever, young or old, high or low, to come within this
kingdom.

Here is then a just rebuke for worldlings who do the contrary, and set the
cart before the horse. Now a little of the promise, which is a most worthy and
heavenly promise. And all these things shall be ministered unto you. The Greek
word is very significant, and the translation has not expressed all the sense.
It is borrowed from bargayners, but especially from sellers of wares. When men
have made a bargain, especially of any great quantity, commonly the seller
will give some overplus, and additament for amends, for the further
contentment of the buyer: so let us seek the kingdom of God, and all
temporal blessings shall be added as an overplus and amends, to the full
contentment of all our hearts.

Besides, the word signifies, that they shall be cast or flung, or added, as
an overplus and an increase besides the kingdom. Here you see a most heavenly
promise, which is to be considered of with all reverence.

Quest. How can this be true, seeing we read of many worthy servants of God,
which have been starued and pined, and destitute of garments, whereof diverse
examples might be brought; but one or two shall serve. Paul says it of
himself. 2. Cor. 11. And the holy Ghost, Hebr. 11. of all Christians.

All the promises of temporal blessings must be understood with this
exception, unless it please God to prove us, and try our faith and patience,
and exercise and chastise us by want. Thus much concerning the exposition and
meaning: Now follow the instructions.

This shows us the right way to get wealth and all temporal blessings
whatsoever, therefore mark it; for Christ the fountain of wisdom has
taught it. The right way commended by Christ, is above all things to seek the
kingdom of God, to seek to be governed by Gods spirit, and to serve him in
holiness and righteousness: This is the right way, and none other, therefore
let every one mark it.

And the reason is plain: The kingdom of God is the principal good of man:
meat, drink, and cloth, and such like, are but dependances which appertain
unto it, this is the principal. Therefore he that would obtain these, and
have good success with them, should first seek Gods kingdom: for these are
entailed together. When the Arc was in the house of Obed. Edom, his house
prospered all the while: If the presence of the Arc brought such a blessing,
much more Gods kingdom. Yea, as David says, Whatsoever he does, it shall
prosper. Psalm. 1.

To come near our selves: We have had great peace a long time, and the maine
and principal blessing of all is this, that the Kingdom of God is amongst us,
and this has brought with it peace and protection.

And because it has not had so good success amongst us as it ought, therefore
Gods hand is amongst us, and will be more, if we continue to reject the
obedience of his commandments.

This being so, mark this lesson: Art thou a poor man, and would thou have
sufficient wealth to live to thy comfort and contentment? set thy heart upon
this kingdom first, and labor for repentance and regeneration, and thou shall
find Gods blessing.

How comes it to pass then that we have so many beggars?

which live out of all order, neither obeying Gods law, nor man's, and
therefore Gods curse is upon them to death.

Art thou a rich man, and would thou continue so, and maintain thy estate?
then let thy peincipall care be to seek the kingdom of God, and to bring thy
family to it; nay, to set it up in thine house.

Art thou a student, and would thou have the blessing of God upon thy
labor? Let thy first care be to seek Gods kingdom, labor to enter into it
in this life, and the Lord will provide for thee.

The like may be said to all Merchants, Tradesmen, and Handicrafts,
Artificibus, and opificibus, who live by buying and selling, or working.

In a word, whatsoever you be, man or woman, high or low, old or young, make
conscience of this: Have thou children, and would thou make them portions,
and maintain them, to thine own and their comforts? Labor for this, and this
is the best dowry and inheritance that thou can give them. Therefore seeing
this is so, I must renew mine exhortation: Let not the devil steal away this
doctrine, nor your own corruption banish it.

Let Masters, Ministers, and Magistrates, every one in his place, labor to
set up the kingdom of God.

Lastly, let all persons, whether public or private, labor for this while
they live. Every man talks of the kingdom of God when he dies, but we must
enter while we live, or never.

To this add the particular belief of such promises, the want whereof, is the
cause that we fail in the duties commanded.

Now there are other instructions to be learned here. When Christ says: All
these things shall be ministered unto you, to wit, all these things, meat,
drink, and cloth, and all temporal blessings necessary whatsoever: he gives us
to understand, that all these things, all temporal blessings, are certain
dependances, things that depend upon the kingdom of God.

This is the second point to be remembered, that all these are annexed to that.

This appears thus: When men seek the kingdom of grace, and the kingdom of
glory, God will give them these and more too. Besides, the kingdom (which is
the only thing which he must aim at) he does cast unto them sufficient
blessings for the preservation of this temporal life. So that all temporal
blessings appertain to the kingdom of God, they depend upon it, and are
annexed unto it. And hereupon sundry other instructions may be gathered.

If this be so, that all temporal blessings depend on Gods kingdom, the^ we
for the most part live after a most preposterous order and manner: for we care
more for the body then we do for the soul: for this life, more then for the
life to come: more for meat and drink, then for the kingdom of heaven.

Generally, the care of most men is all for the world, and there is little or
no care for the life to come.

We may see our folly in the folly of children, they are better pleased with a
Nutte or an Apple, then with a promise of great revenues, or of a great
inheritance. And we have more regard of temporal blessings, then we have of
the kingdom of God, and yet these are but dependances to that.

Secondly, we are taught to seek for riches and temporal blessings with the
same mind, with which we seek the kingdom of God; that is, with an honest
heart, for they depend one upon an other. We must seek this kingdom of God
with an upright heart, and so we must seek riches with a good heart, and
honest dealing, using no unjust means. And as we are to seek them thus: so
we must use them when we have them, for this end, to further Gods kingdom
with the same: for riches are things that depend upon that, and therefore ought
to serve to this end.

Thirdly, if this be so, that riches are dependances on Gods kingdom, then
he that has no right to the kingdom of God, and is not in it, has no right
to any temporal blessings: for they are annexed one to an other.

Turks and Infidels have temporal blessings from God, and enjoy them.

An. They have them but by permission from God: they have no right nor title to
them indeed, and in conscience. I grant in civil courts, and in a civil
respect, they have a right unto them, and a propriety in them: but in
conscience and before God, they have none at all.

As many as are out of Gods kingdom, whatsoever they be, they have no right to
any temporal blessings, nor to any creature, but are very thieves, and mere
usurpers before God, though they have right to them before me^. Let this be
remembered, that they have no right to the meat that they eat, to the clothes
they put on, nor to the ground they go on.

This shows what vile and miserable wretches we are, so long as we are out of
Gods kingdom: we have no right so much as to the very breath which we draw
in at our nosthrils, nor to the bread we put into our mouths, etc. but all
the creatures are against us.

And this is without question, the state of all and every man that is out of
Gods kingdom. By which we see what miserable wretches we are; much less have
we any spiritual blessings, wherewith to comfort our selves.

Further, if this be a truth, this must be an inducement to every one to
remember the lesson taught before; namely, above all things to seek to get the
kingdom of God: for till then we are most miserable, we have no comfort in
any creature or blessing of God: nay, the creatures that be in our hands, we
have no right unto them, we have not so much right as the beasts have.

If there were no more reasons but this one taken from our miserable state, so
long as we are out of the kingdom of God, this one ought to be a spur unto
us, to make us seek it. Nay, we ought to be at no rest, till we be persuaded
out of Gods word, that we be in that kingdom: we should give our souls no
rest, day no^ night, til we be resolved of this, that we are within the
kingdom of grace, now whilst we are living upon earth. And therefore I add
this, because we are thus miserable (as you see) till we be in it.

know when you be in it, remember but thus much: when you be regenerate, then
you enter. But you will say, How shall we know when we are regenerate?

and of his blood: and have a care to put your necks under his yoke: And when
these things are in you, (whatsoever you have been before, though the vilest
sinners that ever were,) you enter into the kingdom of God.

Again, if this be so, that temporal things are but dependances; we are
taught, that when any calamity or loss befalls us, whether it be of goods,
friends, or good name, we oght then to stay our selves, and not to suffer our
selves to be overwhelmed with immoderate sorrow and grief: for when the
greatest losses come that can be of worldly things, what is it but of things
that depend on the kingdom of God? The kingdom it self is not lost. what
though thou loose the favor and countenance of men? and thy reputation and
estimation among them, or some part of thy goods? this causes not the loss of
the kingdom, the right and title of that may stand good notwithstanding al
these. Therefore we must moderate our grief with this consideration* And thus
Christ comforted his disciples in their afflictions: Fear not little flock, for
it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom.

The third point of doctrine to be gathered hence, is this: That God is a
bountiful God: and his bountifulness is here described: for if you seek the
kingdom of God, you shall have it and much more: See here the exceeding great
bountifulness of God, that gives men more then they seek, ask, or think of:
when men seek this kingdom, they shall have it, and much more, even al things
necessary for this life. A notable token of Gods great bounty. The same
goodness is excellently set forth elsewhere. Paul praises God, and
attributes this unto him (as the cause of his thanksgiving) because he can do
more, then we either ask or think.

Ob. He can do: what is that to the purpose?

Ans. Therefore he speaks of such a power as is brought forth into action, and
he will do.

This is the goodness of God; He gives them that which they seek, and more
then they seek. He can do it, and he will do it. It is a point worth the
consideration, that God gives his servant more then they seek for, or think
of when they pray. See the performance of it to David: Psalm. 21.
Thou preuentest him with liberal blessings: signifying that God gave him more
then he prayed for, and that which he never thought of.

This was also verified in Solomon: 1 King. 3.
He asked only wisdom, and God gave him that, and riches, and honor
likewise. As also in Jacob and Joseph. Thus we see the truth of this promise
performed, both by testimony and examples suitable to it.

And there is none of us all, but (if we look into our selves) we shall find
that God has given us more then ever we desired, or ever thought we should have
had. This point is not to be let pass without remembrance.

The use hereof is manifold: for we are taught all manner of good duties by it.

First, to have a continual care, that we do nothing that may offend God: for
he is a liberal and a bountiful God: when we pray, he gives us more then we
ask.

Secondly, this should move us to put our trust in God for all necessaries,
trust him with our lives and souls, and with all that we have. If he be so
bountiful as we see he is, we ought not to distrust him for any thing
belonging either to the soul or to the body.

Thirdly, this should move us in all distress to seek to him for help and
succor, because he is ready to help.

Fourthly, it should move us to love this God, in consideration of this
bountifulness.

Fifthly, to be willing to pray to him, and to be ready to make our moan to him.

Sixthly, to be thankful to him continually, who is so bountiful to us, daily
preventing us with bountiful blessings.

In a word to conclude, this ought to be a spur to prick us forward to every
good duty, and to turn our hearts from every way that is evil, and to please
God in all things. And so much of that point of the bountifulness of God, in
that he gives them the kingdom of heaven, which seek it, and withal a great
deal more then they desire. And so much of the use.

31 Care not for the morrow: for the morrow shall care for it self: the day
has enough with his own grief. Here Christ does repeat the Commandment
which he gave in the 25. verse, it was repeated twice before, and now it is
here repeated the third time. His often repeating of this Commandment, is to
teach us to be careful to learn it, to remember it, and to do it.

Now for the words themselves.

Care not, etc.] That is, take no care for the time to come. This may seem a
strange commandment, maintaining idleness and licentiousness, therefore we
must consider what is the true sense and meaning thereof: for the words are not
so to be conceived, as at the first reading they seem to be. But there are two
sorts of care; yea of care for time to come.

First, a lawful and a godly care: Secondly, a distrustful care.

That there is a godly care, even for the time to come, it is plain; for
Christ himself had a bag, and Judas kept it; therefore his meaning is not to
forbid all care of time to come.

And when Agabus foretold the famine, Act. 11.
the Church provided against it: wherefore there is no question, Pro. 10. 5.
but there is a lawful care for the time to come, which is not here
forbidden.

That you may know what care that is, mark this: Those things that be
necessary, as meat, drink, and cloth, and cannot be provided hereafter, may
be provided aforehand without sin, and without breach of this commandment. For
example: A man of Trade that is decayed in his strength and eyesight, may have
some thing provided to maintain himself when his strength and sight is gone:
He may provide aforehand things necessary for himself when he is old and
cannot work to get his living. It remains therefore, that there is a lawful
care for to morrow, and that is when to morrow is not able to help it self.
But when to morrow is able to help it self, then it is not lawful to care
for to morrow. So the^ this point is clear.

Quest. What care is it then that Christ condemns?

Ans. A distrustful care: for such a care the Greek word signifies, which
does distract the mind, etc. as before: That you may the better perceive it,
see some examples of it.

When men provide so much wealth as will keep and maintain both them and
theirs for many ages, if they can heap up goods not to be numbered, they will
do it, and there be many such gather-goods. Men forecast to provide so much as
would maintain them, if they should live as long as Methushelah. This is the
care forbidden, when men provide so much for themselves, as would suffice for
many families. The king himself, who has most need of abundance, must not
multiply too much his horses and money; much less ought any subject. If any
man had need of superaboundance and superfluity, the King much more, yet he
is forbidden it. Why then, if it be a thing to be barred the Prince, if he
must be stinted and limited, what man dares be so bold as to exceed his
bounds, and break out beyond his borders. This is one example of the
distrustful care.

An other example is, when men provide against all mischaunces and casualties,
so that they will avoid all losses and damages whatsoever. And howsoever the
judgment of God fall on others, they will be free from all; And though all the
world should die before the^ for want, yet they will live and have abundance
of meat, drink, and cloth.

They will so provide for all events and dangers whatsoever.

A third example of this is, when men do now provide things necessary, which
may sufficiently be provided in time to come: And this is the care that is
here condemned by name, when they care this day, for to day and to morrow too;
when this day may care for it self, and the morrow for it self. Thus you see
the right meaning of this commandment, how Christ forbids all extraordinary,
curious, and superfluous care. And so much for the commandment.

For the morrow shall care for it self,] Now Christ lays down a seventh
reason to persuade them and us to a moderate care for meat and drink, both
for the time present, and the time to come.

The effect of the reason is this: Every day that man lives, has sufficient
grief of it own, and therefore we ought not to care for the time to come, if
it may be cared for hereafter: for so we should bring more care upon us then
needs. That is the substance of it.





That is Christ's answer, every day must care for it self: the time present for
it self, and the time to come for it self. In which words Christ delivers a
notable rule for the framing of our lives, to be remembered and thought upon,
and it is this: Every man must know his own calling, and what be the duties
of it, and how they must live in their callings. They must do the necessary
duties and the present duties of their callings, that is the most necessary
and principal, and those things that the duty, the time, the day, and the
present occasion requires.

Quest. But what must we do then for the time to come?

Ans. That must be left unto God by faith, things present appertain to us.
When these things shall be, (says Samuel to Saul) that is, thou being now a
King, shall be confirmed in it, Do that which comes to thine hand: that is,
show thy self a King. Thou may not now plot for time to come, but as
occasion shall be offered, take them, and lay hold of them, and be not troubled
with fear of things to come. The present works of thy calling, look what
they be, and practice them. And so must we do the present duties of our
calling. As for fear and hope (which are uncertain) of things to come, refer
the^ to God. We must not feed our selves with uncertain hopes, nor vex our
selves with uncertain fears: but we must do things present. This is a most
necessary rule for the ordering and framing of our lives.

The day has enough with his own griefe] That is, every day has affliction,
trouble and grief inogh comes with it, because of our sins: Live we never so
long in this world, every day will have grief, and grief enough: And
therefore we need not, nay, we may not add more grief.

Here Christ sets forth the misery of man's life, and that very notably. Jacob
said, His days were few and miserable. Job says, Man's life is short and full
of trouble. And Christ goes beyond them both, and says: Every day has grief
enough. Whereby he declares and sets forth notably, the miserable state of
this life, which is full of grief, affliction, and sorrow.

Here we learn that we must walk in our callings so, as we entangle not our
selves in worldly cares: for every day has grief enough of it self, though
we add none to it; and the more we care, the more miserable do we make our
life.

Secondly, this being so, we are taught here further, to labor to estrange
our selves from this life, and to be out of love with it, and to seek for a
better. The Prophet Elias, upon the very miseries of this life which befell him
in particulars, says: 1. King. 19. 4.
Lord take away my soul, I am not better then my fathers. And Paul says:
Phil. 1.
I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: And, Oh wretched man that I
am, Romans 7.
who shall deliver me from this body of earth? He speaks not simply, but in
regard of the better estate, and to be with Christ, out of this vale of tears.
Therefore we ought not to addict our selves too much to the world: but to have
a love and longing after the life to come. The very consideration of this life,
and the state thereof, and of every day in it, should move us to this.

We ought every day to commend our bodies and souls, and all that we have, to
the protection and tuition of God: for wh^ the day begins, we shall have evil
enough, let us do what we can to help our selves: Therefore we ought for the
comforting and quieting of our co^science^, to commend our selves to God, as
Christ when he was a dying, we know not how soon we may die, therefore every
day ought to perform this duty: for that which Christ did at his death, David
did in his life time: for those words that Christ spoke, were David's words:
and he spoke them not at his death, but in his life, upon occasion of a
vexation.

If we learn any good thing, we learn it not without pain and grief,
travel and trouble: If we do any good thing, we are not free from trouble: If
we repent, we are molested with our corruptions: If we be the servants of
God, we have daily crosses and temptations. And so much for this seventh
reason, and of this point: In which Christ forbids the practice of
covetousness, and strikes at the very root of all, namely, distrustful care
for meat, drink, and apparel.

FINIS.

