The TRVE GAIN: more in worth then all the goods in the world.

Philip. c. 3. v. 7.

Printed by John Legate, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1601.

To the Right worshipful, Sir Edward Denny Knight.
IT is a Conclusion of our religion worthy to be considered: That Christ alone
is our Mediator, Iustifier, Propitiatour, Savior, by works and merits which
he himself wrought within himself, and not by any works or merits which he
works in us by his spirit. The scripture says thus much in express words.
Justified freely by the redemption THAT IS IN CHRIST JESUS. To. 3. 24. He has
by HIMSELF purged our sins. Hebr. 1. 3. He was made sin for us that we
should be made the righteousness of God IN HIM. 2. Cor. 5. 21. IN HIM are ye
complete. Coloss. 3. 10. By his OWN BLOOD he entered once into the holy place,
and obtained eternal redemption. Heb. 9. 12. Again Christ is said to purge
our consciences from dead works by his blood: because he offered himself by
his eternal spirit without spot to his father. v. 14. And common reason tells
us as much. For if men be mystically united to Christ, and by this union
receive the spirit of Christ, and by the spirit do good works, and
consequently merit eternal life, they are the^ become partners with Christ, and
are received into fellowship with him in the work of man's redemption: whereas
he in the Act of our reconciliation with God, admits neither deputy nor
partner.

This conclusion being thus of infallible truth, it serves greatly to exalt
the grace of God, to abase nature, and to beat down the pride of all
Iustitiarie persons and religions. And for the further explaning of it, serves
this Treatise following: which I present to your Worship. And the reason of my
doing is this. I remember, almost two years ago, in speech you entered into
commendatio^s of that golden text, Phil. 3. v. 7. and withal gave
signification of your desire, that some thing might be set down, whereby you
might be brought to a further understanding of that place of scripture.
Therefore to satisfy your desire, I have here penned a short exposition of it.
And I have further presumed to publish it in your name desiring it may be a
testimony of a thankful mind, for your love and favor toward me.

Thus wishing to your Worship continuance and increase of love to the holy
word of God, I take my leave. Anno. 1601. Ian. 20.

Your Worships in all duty to command W. Perkins.

The text, Phil. 3. 7. contains a comparison of Vnequalls. Protasis, the first
part. I count all things Dung for Christ. Here consider What things are doung.
All things. Virtues and works before his conversion. page 5. Virtues and works
after his conversion. page 12.
How they are dung, showed by a gradation. page 22. 1. I account all things
loss. 2. I deprive my self of them. 3. I account them doung.

Apodosis, the second part. Christ is my gain page 33. Here consider the
amplification by a Gradation. 1. I esteem the knowledge of Christ an exlent
thing. page 46. 2. I desire to gain Christ. page 57. 3. I desire to be found
in Christ in the day of judgment page 61.
the degrees of Gain in Christ. 1. Justice by the faith of Christ. page 67. 2.
Fellowship with Crist in the virtue of his Resurrection p. 92. Death. p. 106.
3. Attainment to the resurrection of the dead.




Philip. 3. 7. But the things which were advantage to me, the same I accounted
loss for Christ.

Yea, doubtless I count all things but loss, for the excellent knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have counted all things loss, and do judge
them to be dongue, that I might win Christ,

And be found in him --.


THE scope of these words, is this. In the second ver. Paul admonishes the
Philippians to take heed of certain counterfeit. Apostles which joined Christ
and circumcision in the cause of their salvation: and put confidence in the
flesh, that is, in the outward works of the ceremonial and moral law. And
that his Admonition might take the better place, he uses two reasons. The
first propounded in the 3. v. is this; True circumcision is to worship God in
spirit, to rejoice in Christ, and not to put any confidence in the flesh. The
second reason is framed thus. If any man might put confidence in outward
things, then I much more: but not I: therefore no man. The proposition or first
part of the reason is propounded in the 4. v. and confirmed in the fifth and
sixth. The second part, or, assumption [but I do not put confidence in outward
things] is confirmed in the 7. and eight verses, thus: All things are loss to
me in respect of Christ: therefore I put no confidence in any thing out of
Christ. And this is the very drift of the former words.

In the second place the proper sense and meaning of this portion of Scripture
is to be considered. And for this cause, we are to be advertised of sundry
things in the words themselves. And first of all, let it be observed, that
Paul in the 7. v. says, in the time past, I have counted all things loss: and
in the next verse, in the time present, I do count all things loss. The
former speech is meant of that time in which he was first called to the
knowledge of Christ: the second is spoken of the time, when he had long
continued an Apostle of Christ, and writ this epistle to the Philippians.
This distinction of times in one and the same word, makes much to the clearing
of the doctrine, that shall afterward be delivered. Secondly, whereas in our
translation, it is said in the eight verse, For whom I have counted all
things loss, the words are too skant, and do not fully express the meaning of
the holy Ghost. For the words fully translated, signify, I have made all
things loss, or, I have cast away all things, or, I have deprived my self of
all things for Christ. And whereas Paul had said before, [I count all things
loss,] his meaning is to amplify his own words, by saying, I deprive my
self of all things, and judge them dunge for Christ. Thirdly, the word
translated [Doung] signifies such things in the intralls of beasts, as being
unfit for man's use, are cast to dogs: and by it Paul signifies, that he did
not only esteem all things as losses, and deprive himself of them, but also
cast them away with loathing, in a mind never to seek the recovery of them.
Lastly, it must be known, that Paul in these verses uses a similitude
borrowed from the merchant man; and it may be framed on this manner. The
merchant in hope of a treasure, is content to esteem his commodities no
commodities but losses; yea he is further content to cast them out into the
sea, and to esteem the^ as things cast to dogs, that he may obtain his
intended treasure: so, says Paul, do I count all my former prerogatives as
loss, and am content to deprive my self of them, yea to loath them as dung,
for the obtaining of Christ.

Furthermore the sum and substance of the words, is a comparison of things
unequal, and it may be formed thus: All things are loss to me for Christ: and
Christ is my gain. The first part of the comparison is of Paul's losses, and it
is amplified two ways. First he sets down, what things be his loss: and they
are of two sorts. Privileges, virtues, and works before his conversion when
he was a Pharisie: again privileges, virtues, and works after his conversion
when he was an Apostle of Christ: the first are mentioned in the 7. v. the
latter in the eight. Secondly Paul sets down, how all things are losses to him
by a gradation, thus: I count all things loss: I deprive my self of them: I
count them dung.

The second part of the comparison is of Paul's Gain. And it is amplified by a
contrary gradation, thus: I esteem the knowledge of Christ an excellent
thing: I desire to gain Christ: and I desire to be found in him. Of these
points in order: and first of Paul's losses before his conversion, in these
words: For the things that were vantage to me, I counted loss for Christ. That
these things may be well known, let us yet more narrowly search the meaning of
these words. The things that were vantage to Paul are of three sorts. First
his privileges, that he was borne a Jew, that is, a member of the church: and
again, that he was circumcised and brought up in the straight sect of the
Pharisees: secondly his virtues, namely his justice and zeal in his religion:
thirdly his works, whereby he for outward carriage observed the Ceremonial
and Moral law without reproof. And all these things are called his advantage,
because he put his confidence in the^, and thought to merit everlasting life
thereby, when he was a Pharisie. He adds further, that he counted these his
advantages to be his loss; because so soon as he knew Christ, his confidence
ceased, his former merits were no merits, but as things lost and cast away: yet
not simply, but for Christ, that is, that he might gain Christ, and be found
in Christ, as he expounds himself in the words following.

The meaning thus laid down, sundry things may be learned. The first, that
it was an heresy of the Pharisees, to put confidence in their works, and to
think that they could merit eternal life by the^: for here Paul says, that
being a pharisie, his works were his gain and advantage in the cause of his
salvation. And hence we learn, what to judge of the popish religion, which
teaches in substance the very same doctrine of confidence in works, and of
the merit of salvation thereby. And therefore the papists of our time are the
children of the old pharisees, reviving and renewing the old heresy touching
merit, with new and fresh colors. If they allege, that they ascribe merit to
the works not of the ceremonial but of the moral law, and to works not of
nature but of grace; I answer, that the pharisees did the same, as the pharisie
acknowledges in his prayer, when he says, I thank thee, O Lord, I am not as
other men, etc.

Secondly in Paul's example being a Pharisie, we learn, that it is the pride
and arrogancy of man's nature, to be something within himself, and to erect up
something unto himself to be his righteousness and a means of his salvation,
out of Christ. The just (says Habacuk) lives by his faith, Hab. 2. 4.
but he whose soul is not right in him, puffes up himself, or builds towers
of defense to himself by vain confidence out of God. The prodigal son must
have his part alone by himself from his father. Paul says of the Jews, Ro^.
10. 3.
that they established their own righteousness, and would not be subject to
the righteousness of God. This being so, let us learn to see and detest this
pride in our selves. For where it reigns and takes place, there Christ is not
truly acknowledged: and when men begin to know Christ, this hidden and
spiritual pride gives place. And further by this, we learn not to marvel,
that Turks and Jews deny Christ, and that Papists in the cause of their
salvation, beside the passion of Christ, foiste in something of their own,
namely their own merits and satisfactions: for it is the proud nature of man
to set up himself in whole or in part, and to rely himself upon something of
his own out of Christ. No marvel then, that such as be otherwise learned and
wise, live and die in the opinion of justification by their own works.

Thirdly whereas Paul accounts things of advantage to be his loss, we learn
that no privileges out of Christ minister true comfort or true happiness. It is
a privilege to have known Christ and to have eaten and drunken with him: but
of such Christ says, Luke 13. 16.
Depart from me, I know you not. It is a privilege to be of the kindred of
our Savior Christ, but it is of no moment: Mar. 2. 35.
for Christ says, Who is my mother and brethren? he that does the will of my
father, is my brother, sister, and mother. It is a privilege that the virgin
Mary was the mother of Christ: but if she had not as well borne him in her
heart by faith as she bare him in her womb, she had not bin saved. It is a
privilege to prophecy in the name of Christ, Math. 7.
but of such Christ says, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Lastly it is
a privilege to be endued with all kind of learning, of arts, and tongues; but
alas, all is nothing: for if a man had al wit, wisdom, and learning, and could
speak in all matters with the tongue of men and angels, unless he be found in
Christ, he is no better in the sight of god then a damned wretch. This being
so, we must learn first of all, to moderate our care and our affections for
worldly profits, honors, pleasures, and our principal care must evermore be
cast on Christ. Secondly, such persons as live an honest and civil life, and
stand upon this, that they are no theiues, no murderers, no adulterers, no
blasphemers, but in outward duties show love to God and man, they must I say,
take heed, least they deceive themselves, building upon false grounds. For
though civil honesty be a thing commendable before men, yet is it not
sufficient to save us before God. And Paul, who was a strait obseruer of the
law, after he came to the knowledge of Christ counted all his moral
obedience, in which he had formerly trusted, but loss and dungue for Christ.

Fourthly it has bin the doctrine of the popish Church this many years, that
before a man can be in Christ and be justified, he must first of all prepare
and dispose himself to receive his justification: and that when he is
sufficiently disposed, he does merit of congruitie that god should infuse
righteousness, whereby of a sinner he is made no sinner and righteous before God.
But I demand of the Patrons of this doctrine; whether, when the works of
preparation are done, the doer is in Christ or out of Christ? If he be in
Christ, he is also justified before he is justified. If he be as yet out of
Christ, Paul has given the sentence that the said works are to be esteemed as
loss, and that the merit of co^gruitie is not meat for them that desire to
feed on Christ, but rather food for dogs.

Lastly hence we learn, how Christ is to be received of us. Such as would
truly come to Christ and receive him, must make losses of al things: they must
come naked and emptied of all their own righteousness. As men in a shipwreck
cast out their commodities, and when there is no remedy leave their ship and
betake themselves to the sea, and thus come swimming to the shore: even so must
all men first forsake all, and then come to Christ. Beggars, that they may
obtain their alms, come in their rag^ unfolding legs and arms, that their
sores and botches may be seen. Benadad king of Syria, that he might recover
the favor of the king of Israel, castes off his crown and royal robes: he
and his men come in sackcloath with halters about their heads: and thus he
obtaines his desire. In like manner coming to Christ, we must lay aside all
opinion of our own goodness, and in abasing of our selves follow beggars
fashions, and with Benhadad cloth our selves with signs of guiltiness and
confusion of face. We must first be annihilated and utterly in respect of
goodness be made nothing in our selves, that we may be what we are out of our
selves in Christ. There is no entering into the kingdom of heaven, except we
receive it and Christ as a little child in all meekness and humility. For
there must be nothing in us to receive Christ, but mere faith resting on mere
mercy. Let all such think on this, as desire to be in Christ, and to receive
true comfort by him.

Thus much of Paul's losses before his conversion: now come to be considered
the things which were his losses after his conversion: and they are set down
in the words following, But, [doubtlesse I do think all things losses for the
excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord.] That these losses may be the
better known, let us a little consider the meaning of the words. Whereas
before Paul had said, that herefore he counted things to be loss unto him for
Christ, that had been his advantage: some man might happily think, this is
but rash iudgem^nt in Paul; he therefore, to cut off this surmise says,
Daubtlesse I count all things loss, that is, that I may not be thought to
speak rashly, I say more, that I do now account all things loss, and I
speak it confidently, as being resolved what I say. When he says, I do
count, he speaks in the time present of himself as being not only a
Christian but also an Apostle of Christ. And when he says, ALL things, the
general speech must be observed, for he excepteth nothing pertaining to him,
but his knowledge and faith in Christ. Here therefore we must first of all
understand the privilege of an Apostle: secondly all inward and Christian
virtues, as hope, fear, love of God, good conscience, etc. for of all the
inward gifts none is excepted but faith (as I have said.) Thirdly here we must
understand works not of nature but of grace, done and effected by the spirit of
God in us. For in the verse following he does reject his own righteousness
which is of the law. Now he says of all these, that they are his losses for
Christ. But how are they losses? The speech must warily be understood, least it
be offensive. They are losses not in respect of godly conversation: for they
are the causes thereof, and they are means of showing our thankfulness to God
and love to man. Now then they are losses only in respect of justification and
salvation: when they are reputed and maintained as meritorious causes thereof
either in whole or in part. Though, when they are rightly used and applied,
they are the excellent gifts of God: yet when they are brought into the Act of
justification and salvation, they become as losses and dung. And this I take to
be the meaning of these words. To the like purpose the prophet Isai says in
the name of the whole church confessing her sins, Isa. 64. 6*
All our righteousness is as a cloth utterly to be cast away. Gal. 2. 21.
And Paul to the Galatians: If righteousness be by the law, Christ died without
cause, or, in vain: that is, if the righteousness of the law be our advantage,
Christ must be our loss: and on the contrary, if he be our advantage, the
righteousness of the law must be our loss.

This doctrine of Paul, that all virtues and works both of nature and grace
are losses in the case of our salvation, soundes not in man's reason, and there
be many things brought to the contrary. First, it is alleged, that God does
accept and crown our works: and therefore that they are not losses. I answer:
God does as it were keep a double court. One of justice, the other of mercy.
In the court of justice he gives judgment by the law, and accurseth every man
that does not continue in all things written in the law to do them. In this
court nothing can stand but the passion and righteousness of Christ, and for
the best works that we can do, we may not look for any acceptance or
reward: but use the plea of David, Enter not, O Lord, into judgment with thy
servant, for no flesh shall be justified in thy sight. Now in the court of
grace and mercy, God has to deal with his own children that stand before
him justified and reconciled by Christ. And the obedience of such he accepts
in this court, and mercifully rewards, though otherwise it be imperfect; yet
not for the merit thereof, but for the merit and worthiness of Christ. Thus
then good works in rigor of justice are worthy condemnation, and are accepted
of mercy procured by the merit of Christ. Secondly it is alleged that works
are necessary to salvation, and therefore not to be reputed losses. I answer:
works may be considered either as causes of salvation, or only as a way
directing thereto. If they be considered as causes, they are not necessary, but
in this respect they are dung. If they be respected as a way leading and
directing to eternal life, they are indeed necessary thus, and no otherwise.
Thirdly, it is objected that the law requires works, and the law must be
satisfied, and therefore that he which is justified, must be justified by
works. The answer is, that whosoever is justified and saved, is justified and
saved by works. But works must be distinguished. Some are personal works done
in and by our selves. These neither justify nor save any man, but in the case
of salvation are loss and doung. Besides these, there be works, that are out
of us, wrought in and by the person of our Savior Christ, namely the works of
obedience in satisfying and fulfilling the law. These indeed are the works,
which justify and save us, and none that proceed from us. To this effect Paul
says, Rom 3. 24.
that we are justified freely by the redemption that is in Christ. Lastly it is
alleged, that if all virtues be loss for Christ, then faith it self. I
answer: Faith must diversely be considered, first of all, as a virtue working
and bringing forth many good fruits in us. And thus it is to be reputed loss,
as all other virtues are. Secondly it must be considered not as a virtue, but
as an instrument or hand not to give or work any thing, but to apprehend and
receive Christ and his benefits. And thus it is no loss, but is a thing
excepted in this text. Now then we see that the doctrine of Paul is manifest,
that all virtues and works both of nature and grace, are mere losses in the
cause of our justification and salvation.

Hence sundry things may be learned. The first, that the most holy works of
holy men cannot justify or merit eternal life. When they are brought within
the Act of justification as causes, Paul says they are but loss, and as
offles to be cast to dogs. Let this be noted and remembered for ever against
all iustitiarie papists. Who, if they would but seriously consider this one
text, they might be far better resolved then they are.

Secondly, hence the doctrine of our our church is plainly gathered, namely,
that we are saved and justified by faith alone. For all things except our
knowledge and faith in Christ are made as doung. And that this our doctrine may
not be scandalous, sundry things must be remembered. The first is the right
meaning of the doctrine, which is, that there is nothing within us, that is any
cause either efficient, material, formal, or final of justification but
faith. The second, that faith is no principal cause, but only an instrument.
The third, that faith is no instrument to procure or work our justification
and salvation, but an instrument to receive or to apprehend our justification
given by the father, procured by the son, applied by the holy Ghost. The
last, that faith must be considered as a cause, or else, as a way of
salvation. If, as an internal cause in us, it only justifies and
consequently saves us. If as a way, it does not save alone. For other virtues
and works though they be no causes, yet are they ways to eternal life as
well as faith. Here then when papists make outcries against us, saying that we
look to be saved by faith alone: the true and plain answer to them is this.
We consider faith two ways: first as a cause within us, not meriting any way,
but instrumentally apprehending pardon in Christ and applying it to us for our
eternal happiness. Secondly, faith may be considered as a way in which we are
to walk for the attainement of everlasting life. In the first sense faith
alone justifies and saves, and nothing else within us. To this do the learned
fathers agree* Homil. de Humil.
Basil says, This is perfect rejoicing in God, when a man is not puffed up for
his own justice, but acknowledges that he wants justice, fide sola in
Christum se iustificari.
and that he is justified by faith alone in Christ. Hilarie: That is remitted
of Christ by faith, In Math. c. 9.
which the law could not loosen: for faith alone iustifies. Ambrose: in 3 cap.
ad Romans
They are justified freely which Nihil operates.
do nothing, nor repaie like for like, are justified by faith alone, through
the gift of God. Again, in his commentary upon the epist. to the Corinth. In
1. Cor. 1.
This is appointed of God, that he which believes in Christ should be saved
without work, by faith alone receiving remission of sins. Hierom: God
justifies by faith alone. in Rom* c. 10.


Nevertheless, if we speak of the way to life, then we are not saved only by
faith. For though faith be the only instrument to apprehend Christ, yet is it
not the only way to life: repentance also is the way, yea all virtues and all
works are the way. 2. Cor. 4. 17.(...)
In this sense, affliction is said to work unto us a more excellent weight of
glory: not as a cause; but as a way giving direction. And mothers are said to
be saved by bearing of children, 1. Tim. 2. 15.
not as by a cause, but as by a straight and narrow way. Iam. 2. 22.
Again Abraham's faith went not alone, but had a kind of cooperation with his
works: faith and works both being considered as a way to happiness or as
marks in a way. In this sense the fathers have ascribed salvation to many
things, Libro de gratia and lib. arbitrio. via regni non causa regnandi,
Epitom. diu. institut c. 9.
not as to causes, but as to ways. Bernard said well, that works are the way
to the kingdom of heaven and not the causes of reigning. Lacta^tius says,
Great is the help of Repentance: which, whosoever takes away, homil. 38. in.
Ioh.
cuts off to himself the way of life. Chrysostom: Some by watching, by
sleeping on the bare ground, by tewing their bodies with daily labor do blot
out their sins: but thou may obtain the same by a more easy way, that
is, by forgiving. Thus many hundred places of the fathers are to be understood,
when they ascribe remission of sins to martyrdom to fasting, prayer, works of
mercy, and such like.

Thirdly here is laid down the foundation of true humility. For if all our
virtues and works be losses in the case of our salvation, then all boasting is
excluded, and we are to take nothing to our selves but shame and confusion and
give al glory to God. Yea the more our virtues are and works, if we place any
confidence in them, the greater are our losses.

Thus we see what things are losses to Paul: in the next place let us consider
how they are losses. This Paul settes down by a gradation thus, I count them
loss, I make them my losses, I count them as doung. This gradation is nothing
else but a repetition of one and the same thing enlarged and amplified in
speech. Now repetitions in scripture are not idle and vain, as they are
oftentimes in the writings of men, but they commonly signify two things,
namely the certainty and the necessity of the thing repeated: and therefore in
this place, they signify the certainty and the necessity of Paul's losses.

Certain they are: because he that will be saved by Christ must certainly
endure these losses without recovery. The foundation of this certenty lies in
an impossibility of merit by any works of man: which I will make manifest by
five reasons. The first is this: It is a principal part of Christian inherent
righteousness to have and keep a good conscience: now Paul expressly excludes
it from justification saying, I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby
justified. 1. Cor. 4. 4. The second is this, Paul says, Ephesians. 2. 9. we are not
saved by works: now he means no other works but such as follow faith, and
are done by the spirit of God. And this appears by the reasons which he uses,
that we are created to good works, and again that they are ordained that we
should walk in them. The third: before a work can meritte, it must please
God: before the work please God, the worker must please him: before the worker
please him he must be reconciled to God and perfectly justified. Justification
therefore goes in order before good works, and for this cause works cannot be
brought within the act of justification as causes. Good works make not good
men in whole or in part; but men first of all made good by the goodness of
Christ imputed, make good works by their goodness. The fourth is this: The
humanity of Christ is the most excellent of all creatures in heaven and earth:
yet being considered by it self, it cannot possibly merit at Gods hand. In a
work properly meritorious there be three conditions. First, the doer thereof
must do it by himself, and not by another, for then the praise is his by whom
he does it, and not his own. Secondly the work to be done, must not be a debt
or duty, for then the doer deserves nothing. Thirdly there must be a
proportion between the work and the reward of life eternal. Now the manhood
of Christ considered apart by it self, cannot perform these three conditions.
For it does what it does by the spirit of God, whereby it was conceived and is
filled without measure. Again it is a creature, and therefore whatsoever it
is, has, or can do, it owes all to God. Lastly it cannot do a work
proportional to eternal glory: because it takes all of God and can give
nothing to him. If then it be demanded, how this manhood of Christ merits in
our behalf: I answer, not by it self, but by means of the personal union,
whereby it is exalted and preferred into the unity of the second person the
eternal Word of the father. Hence it is that Christ meriteth: none can merit
of God but God. Now then if Christ merit only in this regard, no mere
creature, man, or angel can possibly merit by any work. The fifth reason is
this: There be two kinds of tra^sgression of the law, one when a work is
directly against the law: the other is, when that is don which the law
requires, but not in that manner and perfection the law requires. The second
kind of transgression is in every good work which is done by men upon earth:
now where any transgression is, there must be pardon: where pardon is, there is
no merit.

That this doctrine of the certentie of our losses may yet the better be
cleared, I will set down the supposed grounds of merit, and discover their
weakness. They are two: the first is the Promise that God has made to works,
whereby he has bound himself to reward them with eternal glory. I answer,
that this very promise is made of the good pleasure, and mere good will of
God: and of the same goodness it is, that any man is a doer of any good work,
either by nature or grace. Therefore, if a man could fulfill the whole law, he
should not merit at Gods hand. Thus says the Lord, Exodus 20. 6. That he will
show mercy upon thousands of them that love him and keep his commandments.
The second ground is, That virtue of meriting is derived from Christ the head
to his members by divine influence. I answer, it is a thing impossible. For the
virtue of meriting is in Christ not simply as he is Man, but as he is in one
person God and Man. The work which meriteth is done or acted even by the
manhood; but the merit of the work is from the Godhead, or from the
excellency of the person. Now then if this virtue be in Christ, not as he is
man, but in respect he is Man-god, or God-man; it can not be derived to us that
are but men, unless every believer should be Deified, and made of a mere man
Godman, which is impossible. Therefore there is no capablenes or possibility
of merit in the work of any mere man, or creature whatsoever. For this cause
the true church of God ever detested humane merit. The merit of congruitie
before justification is a Pelagian conceit, and was never maintained of the
orthodoxe Fathers. Stapleton confesses thus much: De orig. (...). l. 1. c. 4.
The merit of congruitie (says he) in respect of the first grace was of old
hissed out: neither was it ever admitted of the better sort of schoolmen, as
of Thomas in his Sum, and his latter writings, nor of his followers. And the
(...) (...) condigno,
merit of condignitie, whereby works are said of their own dignity and that
properly, to deserve the increase of the first justification, and eternal
life, was not received of the learned in the church for more then a 1000.
years after Christ. In Dominica 18. post. Trin. in An. 10 ^0.
Radulphus Ardens a very learned man in his time says thus: Seeing by one
grace we come to an other, (...) dicuntur (...) improprie.
they are called merits and that improperly, For as Augustine witnesses, God
crowns only his own grace in us. Again, In dominica Septuagsimae.
No man may think that God is bound as it were by a bargain, to repay that
which he has promised. For as God is free to promise, so is he free in respect
of repaying, especially considering that as well merits as rewards are his
grace. For God crowns nothing else in us but his grace: because Disticte agere
if he would deal with us in extremity, none living should be justified in
his sight. And hereupon the Apostle, who labored more then all, says: I
think that the affictions of this time are not worthy the glory that shall
be revealed. Therefore this covenant or bargain is nothing else but a voluntary
promise. De mensuratione crucis an 1080.
Anselme after him says: If a man should serve God a thousand years, and that
most zealously, Non merere ur ex condigno.
he should not vvorthely deserve to be in the kingdom of heaven so much as
half a day. Bern de Annunc. Virg. sermon 1. an. 1140.
S. Bernard says, Touching eternal life, we know that the sufflerings of this
time are not worthy of the glory to come; no not if one man should suffer
all. For the merits of men are not such, that eternal life may be due for
them, or that God should do some injury if he gave it not. For to let pass,
that all merits are the gifts of God, and so man is rather debtor to God for
them, then God to man, what are all merits to so great a glory? Lastly, who is
better then the Prophet, to whom the Lord gives so worthy a testimony,
saying: I have found a man according to mine own heart: for all that he had
need to say to God, Enter not into judgment with thy servant. Again in the
process of time, when the merit of condignitie had taken place, it was not
generally received: for it was rejected of sundry schoolmen and others, as of
Gregory of Arimine, of Durand, of Waldensis, of Burgensis and Scotus.
Wherefore to conclude, it now appears to be an infallible certentie, that he
which desires to be saved by Christ, must endure the loss of all his works
and virtues whatsoever, in the cause of his own justification.

Now then if this doctrine be so certain and infallible, as it is: the^ also
must we be settled in this point without doubting, that the present church of
Rome erreth grievously, in that it magnifieth the merit of works. Yea in this
regard it reuerseth the very foundation of true religion. For if they make
advantage in the matter of salvation by their works, Christ must needs upon
infallible certentie be their loss: because Paul makes all works loss, that
Christ may be advantage. Therefore far be it from us all, to have any dealing
or contract of society with that church, least we be partakers of her
dangerous and fearful losses.

Again in that all virtues and works of grace, are but losses for Christ. We
must not only in our first conversion, but ever afterward though we be
justified and sanctified even in the pang of death by mere faith rest on the
mere mercy of God, and apprehend naked Christ, that is, Christ severed in the
case of salvation, from all respect of all virtues and works whatsoever. For
there is nothing that may be opposed to the severe judgment of God, but mere
Christ. If we do presume to oppose any of our doings to the sentence of the
law, hell, death, condemnation, we are sure to go by the losses.

Thus much of the certentie of Paul's losses: now follows the necessity of
the^. They are necessary in as much as without the^, no man can have part in
Christ. For the merit of our virtues and good works, and the grace of God in
Christ can not stand together: yea they are contrary as fire and water, and
one overthrows the other in the cause of justification and salvation. Paul to
signify this contrariety says, Romans 11. 6.
If Election be of grace, it is not of works: and if it be of works, Gal. 5.
4.
it is not of grace. And again, If ye be justified by the law, ye are
abolished from Christ. And to the same purpose Ambrose says, Grace is wholly
received, or wholly lost: and Augustine, It is no way grace, that is not freely
given every way. Hence it follows, that the present religion of the church of
Rome abolisheth Christ, in as much as it maintains and magnifies the merit of
good works. And this may be gathered by the very doctrine of that church. For
it teaches that men must be saved by their prayers, fastings, alms,
pilgrimages, buildings of churches, chapels, bridges, etc. What then shall the
passion of Christ do? whereto serves it? They answer, that it frees us from
death, and gives to our works the merit of eternal life, and makes them
meritoriously to increase our justification. Hence it follows, that Christ is
no more but the first cause of our salvation, and that we our selves are
secondarie causes under him and with him. And thus he is made of a Savior no
Savior. For either he must be a full and perfect Savior in himself, or no
Savior. Secondly by the former necessity we learn, that whosoever will be
saved by the merit of Christ, must come unto him without virtues or works of
his own, not carrying in heart so much as the least confidence in them,
esteeming himself to be a most vile, wretched, and miserable sinner, as the
Publican did, who prayed, Lord, be merciful to me a sinner.

Hitherto of Paul's losses: now follows the second part of the comparison,
touching Paul's gain, But Christ is my gain. A sentence to be remembered, and
to be written in the tables of our heart for ever. And the reason thereof is
manifest. Christ our Mediator God and man, is the only Fountain of all good
things that are or can be thought on, whether spiritual or temporal. Saint
John says, Of his fulness, Ioh. 1. 16.
we receive grace for grace. Again Paul says, Coloss. 2. 9, 10
In him all the treasures of knowledge and wisdom are hid: and, Ye are
complete in him. 1. Tim. 2. 6.
And he calls Christ our Ransom, or counterprice. And as he makes Adam the
root of all evil in mankind, so makes he Christ the root of all grace and
goodness. For the better clearing of this doctrine, two points are to be
handled: When Christ is our gain? and how? Touching the time when, I set down
three things. He is our gain in this life: he is our gain in death: and he is
our gain after death. To return to the first: He is our gain in life, if we
turn from our evil ways, and believe in him; in as much as he has gained
for us many benefits, which and infidels have and use the things of this life
at their wills, and that by Gods permission: but yet they receive and enjoy
them no otherwise, then children of traitors do the goods of their parents,
who peradventure are suffered to take benefit of some part of them for the
preserving of their lives, though title and interest to them be not restored.
The fourth is the ministry, that is, the Heb. 1. 14.
aid, and protection of the good angels. The fifth gain or benefit Romans 8. 26.
being turned to the good of them that are to be saved by Christ. The Kings,
to bear rule and dominion over the corruptions, and lusts of (...)
he took with him our pawn, namely our flesh, and left with us his own
Pawn, the presence of the Comforter, to supply his own presence, to guide,
comfort, and to assure us of our adoption and I will put my fear into their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Ier. 31. 40.
And it must be remembered, that these words are not spoken only in general
to the church, but also in singular to every true member thereof: because they
are the words of the covenant. Again David says, that the righteous man is
like a tree planted by the waters side, Psalm. ^
whose leaf never withers: who therefore has always sap of grace in the
heart to the end.

Again, as Christ is our gain in life, so is he also our gain in death, in
as much as he has taken away the sting of death, and has changed the
condition of it, by making it of the gate of hell, to be the way to eternal
life.

Thirdly he is our gain after death three ways. Our first gain is the
resurrection of our bodies to eternal life in the day of judgment. The
second, is a privilege to judge the world. 1. Cor. 6. ^.
For first of all judgment shall pass upon the godly: which done, they shall
be taken up to Christ, and there as witnesses and approouers of his sentence of
condemnation, judge together with him, the wicked world. The third is the
eternal retribution, in which God shall be all in all, first in Christ, and
then in all the members of Christ, and that for ever and ever.

The next point to be handled is, How Christ is our gain? For the answering of
this, two questions are to be opened. The first is, According to what nature is
Christ our gain? I answer, following the ancient and catholic doctrine* That
August. hom. de ovious c. 12. Humana divinitas, and divina humanitas mediatrix
est.
whole Christ is our gain according to both natures. The godhead of Christ
profits no sinner without the manhood, nor the manhood without the godhead, And
as Leo says, Leo epist. 10.
each nature works that which is proper unto it, having communication with
the other. Again, God may be considered two ways; God absolute, or God made
man. God absolute, that is, God absolutely considered without respect to
Christ, is indeed a fountain of righteousness and life, but this fountain ^s
closed, sealed up, and not to be attained unto: because our sins make a
separation between God and us, and God thus considered is a Majesty full of
terror to all sinful men. But God considered as he was made man and
manifested in our flesh, is also a fountain of goodness, yea the same fountain
opened, unsealed, and flowing forth to all mankind. Hence it is, that Christ is
called the light of the world; the bread and water of life; the way, the truth,
the life. Here again we must remember to make a difference or distinction of
the natures of Christ. For the Godhead of Christ is our gain not in respect of
essence, but in respect of virtue and operation showed in, or upon the manhood
of Christ, whereby it makes things which were done and suffered in the said
manhood apt and sufficient to appease Gods anger, and to merit eternal life
for us. As for the manhood, it is not only in effect and operation, but also
really communicated to the faith of the believing heart: and herupon it is as
it were a Treasury and storehouse of all the rich graces of God that serve to
justify, save, or any way to enrich the Elect of all ages and times through
the whole world. If any doubt of this, let them consider three things of this
most glorious manhood. The first is the grace of personal union, whereby it is
received into the Unity of the second person, and has no being or
subsisting, but only in the subsistence thereof. And hence it is truly termed
the humanity of the Son of God, or of the Word. The second is, that this
manhood has in it all fulness of grace, commonly called in schools, habitual
grace. Now this fulness of grace contains in it all the gifts of the holy
Ghost, Ioh. 3. 35.
and that, in the highest degree of perfection. It has therefore in it gifts
more for number, and greater for measure; then all men and angels have. The
third is, that it receives this excellency of gifts and graces; not for it
self, but that it may be as it were a pipe or conduit to conuaie the same
graces to all the Elect. Our salvation and life depends on the fullness of the
Godhead which is in Christi nevertheless it is not conuaied unto us but in the
flesh and by the flesh of Christ. Thus much Christ signifies, when he says:
My flesh is meat indeed. Ioh. 6. 51. 54.
And, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you. And, He which eats my flesh abides in me and I in him.
And John the Baptist says, Of his fulness we receive grace for grace. The
supper of the Lord is ordained for the increase and continuance of grace and
life: and of it Paul says, The bread which we break, is a fellowship or
communion with the very body of Christ. On this manner Christ is said to be
made unto us of God, wisdom, 1. Cor. 1. 30.
righteousness, sanctification, redemption. Wisdom, not because the essential
wisdom of the godhead is given to us: for that is infinite and incommunicable.
Neither again because he is the author of our wisdom, giving us knowledge of
our salvation as the Father and holy Ghost do. Nor because he is the matter of
our wisdom, the knowledge of whom is eternal life: but for an higher cause
then all these. Our mediator the man Jesus Christ who is also God, is an head
unto us and a Root of our wisdom. For he was anointed with the spirit of
wisdom in the assumed ma^hood not privately for himself, but that we also
which believe might be partakers of the same anointing, and that wisdom from
him by his flesh might be conveyed unto us. Therefore from his wisdom there is
wisdom derived in some measure to all that are mystically united to him, as
light in one candle is derived to an hundred, or as heat is derived from
heat. Again he is our justice, not only because he is the author and giver
of our justice, with the father and the holy Ghost: neither because the
essential justice of Christ is given to us: for then we should be all deified:
but because that justice which is in the ma^hood, consisting partly in the
purity of nature, and partly in the purity of actio^, whereby he obeyed his
fathers will and suffered all things to be suffered for us; this justice I say,
is imputed to us and accounted ours, according to the tenor of the covenant,
as if it were inherent in us. He is our Sanctification, not only because he is
the author of it, neither because the sanctity or holiness of the godhead is
communicated to us: but because he was sanctified in his ma^hood about all men
and angels. And from this holiness of his, our holiness is derived and
springs as a fruit; as the corruption in Adams posterity is derived from the
corruption of Adam. Christ says, For their sakes sanctify I my self, Ioh.
17. 19.
that they also may be sanctified through the truth. Cyril. in Ioh. l. ^1. c.
25.
Cyril says, As God, he gives himself the spirit, as man he receives it:
which he does not for himself, but for us, that the grace of sanctification
out of him and in him first received might pass to all mankind. Lib. 11. c. 22.
Again he says, that the body of our Lord being sanctified by the virtue of
the Word joined to it, is made so effectual for mystical benediction, that it
can send forth his sanctification into us. Lastly, Christ is our Redemption or
life on this manner. In the person of the Mediator being one and the same,
there is a double life: one uncreated and essential, agreeing to Christ as he
is God. And this life is not given to us at all, save in respect of the
efficacy thereof. For in god we live, move, and have our being. The other is
the created life of the manhood: and it is either natural or spiritual.
Natural is that wherewith he lived in the estate of humiliation by ordinary
means as all other men do. Spiritual is that whereby he now especially
lives in the estate of exaltation and glory. Rom 6. 8.
And this life he lives not only for himself, but also for us, that we
being partakers thereof, may live together with him. Cyril. in Iosu. l. 3. c.
37. and 4. 12. 14. and l. 10. 13.
Thus the ancient church has taught, the flesh of Christ united to the Word is
made quickening flesh; that it might further quicken them with spiritual life,
that are united to it.

The next question is, in what estate Christ is our Gain? The estate of Christ
is twofolde, the estate of humiliation from his birth to his death: and the
estate of exaltation in his resurrection, ascension, and his sitting at the
right hand of god. In the first estate he works and procures our gain. Christ
lying basely in the manger, and crucified ignominiously on the cross gained
our deliverance from hell, and a right to life everlasting. In the second
estate he communicats to us the gain before named, and by degrees puts us in
prossession of it. And for this end, he now sits at the right hand of God and
makes request for us.

The use of this doctrine, that Christ is our gain, is manifold. First it
shows that we in our selves are poor and altogether destitute of all
spiritual good things. For to this end is Christ our gain, that he may
supply our want, and fill them with graces that are otherwise empty and even
hunger starued. Secondly it teaches that men do in vain seek for so much as
the least drop of goodness out of Christ, who alone is the storehouse of all
good things. Heaven and earth, men and angels, and all things are but as
nothing to us, if by them we seek to enjoy any thing out to Christ: yea God is
no god to us without Christ. Thirdly, we learn to detest the Treasury, which
the Church of Rome maintains and magnifies. It is as it were a chest in which
is contained not only the overplus of the merits of Christ, but also of
martyrs and Saints to be dispensed in pardons at the Popes pleasure. But Christ
is alone our full and perfect gain, and therefore in himself there is an
all-sufficient Treasury of the church; and as Paul says, Coloss. 2. 10
in him we are complete. As for the merits of martyrs and Saints, they bring no
advantage to the people of God, but are indeed matter for the dounghill.
Fourthly, if Christ be our treasure and gain, our hearts must be set on him.
Our minds use to be upon our penny, and we hunger after gain: let us
therefore hunger after Christ: he is out penny and he is our gain. Nay we
must above all pleasures, honors, profits, love him, and rejoice in him: yea
we should be swallowed up with love of him. Lastly, here is matter of comfort.
In the loss of goods and friends, and all calamities of this life, we may not
be dismayed: all the losses of this life are but petty losses, so long as we
have Christ for our gain. Nothing can be wanting unto us in the midst of all
our losses and miseries, so long as we receive of his fullness, who is the
fountain of goodness never dried up.

To proceed further, the second part of the comparison [Christ is my gaine] is
amplified by a gradatio^ on this manner: I esteem the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord an excellent thing: I desire to gain Christ: I desire to be
found in Christ. Of these in order. By the knowledge of Christ, we are to
understand, the doctrine of the gospel, or the doctrine of the person and
offices of Christ conceived and known of us. To this knowledge an excellency is
ascribed, of which I will speak a little. This excellency appears partly in
the matter and contents, and partly in the effects thereof. Touching the
matter, it is full of excellent mysteries, which Paul reduces to fix heads in
his epistle to Timothy. 1. Tim. 3. 16
The first is the Incarnation of the son of God in these words, God made
manifest in the flesh. And here two wonders offer themselves to be considered:
the first, whereas Adams flesh and Adams sin are inseparably joined together
in respect of all that nature can do, yet did the son of God take unto him
man's nature and flesh without man's sin: because he was conceived of a virgin
by the operation of the holy ghost: whereas if he had been conceived by
natural generation, he had with Adams flesh taken Adams corruption. The other
wonder in the Incarnation of Christ is, that the flesh of man is united to the
person of the son of God, and thence has his subsistence, otherwise having
no subsistence of his own. The like example is not to be found in the world
again: saving that we have some resemblance thereof in the plant called
Miscelto, which has no root of his own, but grows as a branch of the oak, or
some other tree, and has his life and sap from the root thereof. justified
in the spirit: and it was on this manner. Christ made man became our Surety
and was subject to the law for us. Hereupon our sins were imputed to him, and
the punishment due thereto laid upon him, that is, the first death with the
pains of the second: yea further death in the grave had dominion over him.
After all this, by his spirit or power of the godhead he raised himself from
death, and thereby acquit himself of our sins; and this acquitall or
absolution is his justification, whereby he declares himself to be a Savior
perfectly righteous. For if he had not satisfied the wrath of God to the full,
and brought perfect righteousness, he had never risen again, considering he was
judged and condemned for our sins. The third mystery is the sight of Angels,
who desired to look into the Incarnation of Christ: in which they saw three
things, as Luke testifies. The first, that it was a means to manifest the
glory of God: Luke 2.14.
the second, that it brought peace and good success to men upon earth: the
third, that it was a means to reveal the good will of God to the world. The
fourth, is the preaching This appears to be a great mystery; because the
knowledge of Christ was kept secret from the nations, Romans 16. 2^.
for the space of more the^ 4000. years. For from the creation to Moses the
church of God was shut up in a little family: from Moses to Christ, it was
included within the precincts of Iewrie: which was not so much as the fourth
part of England. The fifth mystery was Conversion of the world to the faith of
Christ. And this is so much the greater wonder; because this conversion was
wrought by the preaching of the gospel, which is flat against the natural
reason and will of man, and therefore unfit to persuade: and the preachers
hereof were simple and silly men to see to: and some of them which were
converted, were the very Jews that crucified Christ. The last mystery was the
ascension of Christ into glory. The greatness of this mystery appears in two
things. The first, that Christ's ascension was a real and full opening of the
kingdom of heaven; which had formerly bin shut by our sins. The second, that
the ascension of Christ, was no personal or private ascension: for he ascended
in the room and stead of all the Elect: and they ascended together in and with
him, and now after a sort are together in and with him in glory. Thus we see
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ in respect of the Mysteries
contained therein: the like excellency appears in the effects thereof; which
are two, the knowledge of God, and of our selves.

For the first, by the knowledge of Christ, we know God aright. Hence Christ is
called the brightness of the glory of the Father, Heb. ^. ^.
and the engraven image of his person: Coloss. 1. 15.
and the image of the invisible God. And Paul says notably, that when God
shines in our hearts by the light of the Gospel, 2. Cor. 4. 6.
his glory is to be seen in the face of Christ. The wisdo^e, power, and
goodness of God is made manifest in Christ: and that more fully then ever it
was in the creation. In the creation Adam being but a mere man was our head;
but in the estate of grace, Christ is our head, God and man. By creation we
receive but a natural life to be continued by food: by Christ we receive a
spiritual, to be preserved eternally without food; by the operation of the
spirit. As the spouse of Adam was bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh: so
is the spouse of Christ bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; and that in
more excellent manner: because every particular man as he is borne anew, and
the whole catholic church the true spouse of Christ, springs and arises out
of the merit and efficacy of the blood that distilled out of the heart and
side of Christ. In the creation God makes life of nothing: but by Christ he
draws our life forth of death, and changes death it self into life. Again
in the law the justice of God is set down and revealed: in Christ we see more,
namely perfect justice and perfect mercy, revealed to the full; yea (which is
a wonder) justice and mercy reconciled. Lastly in Christ we see the length,
the breadth, the height, the depth of the love of God, in that God vouchsafes
to love the Elect with the very same love wherewith he loves Christ. Ioh. 17.
23.


As by Christ we know God: so also by Christ we know our selves: and that on
this manner. First we must consider, that in the Passion he took our person
upon him, and that upon the cross, he stood in our place, room, and stead.
Secondly we are to consider the greatness of his agony and passion set forth
unto us, especially by five things. The first is the testimony of the
Evangelists, who say in emphaticall words, that he was full of sorrow, Math.
26. 37.
and grievously troubled. The second, his complaint, that his soul (...) (...)
unto the death: and that he was forsaken of the father. The third his prayer
with strong cries: save me from this hour* let this (...) pass. The fourth
the coming of an Angel to comfort him. The last his sweat of water and thick
or clotted blood. Now in Christ thus considered, we see the greatness of Gods
anger against us for our sins: we see the greatness of our sins: we see the
vileness of our persons: we see the hardness of our hearts, that never so much as
sigh for our offenses, for which the son of God swette water and blood: we
see our unthankfulness that little respect or regerd this work of Christ.
Lastly we see our duty: that we are to be thoroughly touched with true
repentance, and to humble our selves as it were to the very pit of hell: for if
the son of God mourn and cry for our sins imputed, we are much more to cry
and to bleed in our hearts for them, seeing they are ours properly, Zach. 12.
10.
and by them we have pierced Christ. And thus the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ is manifest.

Hence we learn sundry things: first, if the knowledge of Christ be so
excellent, we may not marvel, that by the malice of the devil it has bin
corrupted many hundred years in the Romish church: which teaches, that the
Gospel is nothing else in effect but the law of Moses perfected. Now if this
were so, Christ doubtless died in vain, and we might place our hope in our
own righteousness; and the promise of life eternal by Christ, should be of
none effect. For the law never iustifies before God, till it be perfectly kept:
which condition of perfection if men could perform, there should be little
need of Christ or of the Gospel. Secondly, if this knowledge be of such
excellency, it must be learned of us, and that in special manner. If to other
inferior learning we lend the understanding and memory, to this we are to
apply the whole man. The mind must learn it by opening it self to conceive
it: the memory must learn it, by storing it up: the will and affections must
learn it, by resigning and conforming themselves in their kind unto it. Thus
Paul teaches, that to learn Christ, Ephesians. 4. 21, 22.
as the truth is in Christ, is to put off the old man and to put on the new
man, which after God is created in righteousness and holiness. Thirdly by
this we learn to value and prize the knowledge of Christ, above all things in
the world. The Angels of God themselves desire to profit in this knowledge:
David, who in the darkness of the old Testament desired to be a dorekeeper in
the house of God; Psalm. 84.
if he were now living on earth, would be content with an office a thousand
fold more base, that he might enjoy this clear light of the knowledge of
Christ. But alas; there is no such David's now a days. It is our fault, and the
fault of our times, that this knowledge is of little or no value and account
among men; and little fruit thereof to be seen. And therefore it is to be
feared, that God will take this Treasure of knowledge from us, 2 Thessalonians. ^. 10.
and send strong illusions to believe lies; because it is little or nothing
loved.

Paul yet further co^mends this knowledge in that he calls it, The knowledge of
Christ, HIS LORD. Now he is our Lord four ways. First, by the right of
donation (because all the Elect are given to him of the Father in the eternal
counsel of Election:) secondly by creation: thirdly by the right of
Redemption: fourthly by right of headship; in that as a living head he gives
sense and spiritual life to all that believe in him. And Paul calls Christ his
Lord, because he believed his own election, in which he was given to Christ,
his creation and redemption by him, and his mystical conjunction with him, as
with his head. And here Paul in his example teaches us two things. The first,
how we should know Christ, and the doctrine of the Gospel: For the right
knowledge whereof, there is required, beside general understand of Christ and
his benefits, with general assent, a special Application thereof. It is not
sufficient to believe the election, redemption, justification, glorification of
Gods people: but we must go further, and believe the very same things in our
selves. The reason may be taken from the contents of the Gospel. For it
contains two parts, the first is a promise in which Christ with all his
benefits is offered and propounded unto us. The second is a commandment to
apply the said promise, ^. Ioh. 3. 2^.
and the substance thereof to our selves, and that by our faith. And he that
takes away this second part, overthrows half the Gospel of Christ. Here is
the foundation of saving knowledge, Isa. 53.
which justifies and brings life eternal; Ioh. 17. 3.
and the foundation of special faith. The second thing to be learned in Paul's
example is, that we are to resign our selves, our bodies and souls, and to
render all subjection to Christ. For in that he calls him Lord, he professes
himself to be the servant of Christ. 2. Cor. 10. 5.
The end of all preaching is to bring not only our words and deeds; but also
our secret thoughts in subjection unto him. And the end why Christ sits in
glory at the right hand of the Father is, that every knee may bow unto him of
things in heaven and earth. It behooues us therefore to live and carry our
selves in our places as true and unfeigned servants of Christ.

The second degree in Paul's gradation is, That he desires to Gain Christ. Now
to gain Christ is nothing else, but to make Christ his gain, as appears by
the opposition of the words. For he says, he had deprined himself of all
things, that is, made all things his loss, that he might gain Christ. And he
is made our gain if two things be done. First, he must be made ours, that is,
thy Christ or my Christ in particular: secondly we must put our confidence in
him. For the first, that Christ may be ours, a double consent is required: Gods
consent to give Christ, and our consent to receive him. Gods consent, that
Christ shall be ours, is given in the revelation of the promise touching the
woman's seed, made to our first parents, in the continual renewing of the said
promise to our forefathers, in the incarnation and birth of Christ, in his
passion, in the preaching of the Gospel, in the administration of both the
sacraments, baptism and the Lords supper. Our consent to receive Christ, is
given when we begin to believe in him; yea when we begin to be touched in
our hearts for our sins, and to hunger and thirst after Christ. And thus by
the concurrence of these two consents is Christ really made ours. And further
yet, that he may be not only ours, but also our gain, we must set and fix
the whole confidence of our hearts upon him alone, for the forgiveness of our
sins, and the salvation of our souls. For where the gain is, there must the
heart be. When riches increase we may not set our hearts on them; because
though they be good things, yet are they not our gain or treasure: now Christ
is not only a good thing unto us, but our gain, and the very fountain of all
good things: and therefore we must bestow our hearts on him.

Hence we learn that the Popish religion teaches wickedness. For it
maintains, that we are not only to believe in God, but also Remenses in Romans
10. 14.
in the church: it maintains an hope Thomas Becket in Maria sp^^ totam ponit
post Christum. Matthew. Paris in Henrico. 11.
and confidence in Saints, specially in the virgin Marie: it maintains lastly
a Bellarm. tom. ^. de iustific. l. 5. c. 7.
confidence in our own works: so it be as they say in sobriety. This is to
make the creature our gain, and to put down Christ our Redeemer.

Again, Paul had said in the Phil. 1. 21.
former chapter, that Christ was his gain both in life and death: and yet now
he says, that he still desires to gain Christ. And by his example we learn,
that in this life our affectious must never be satisfied and filled with the
desire of Christ, till we have the full fruition of him. Naturally our desires
be insatiable in respect of riches, honors, pleasures: but we must learn to
moderate and stinte our selves in seeking earthly things; being content with
the portion that God does alot us: and the insatiablenesse of our affections
must be directed and turned upon Christ. The woman in the Gospel that had the
bloody ishew, desired but to touch the hemme of his garment; we must go
further, not only to touch him, but also by our faith to lay hold on him, as
it were with both the hands, and to hang upon him. Thomas desired for his
contentation, but to put his finger into his side: we must set before our
eyes Christ crucified: and his precious blood as it were a fresh distilling
from his hands, feet, and side: and we must not only touch this blood, but
sprinkle our selves with it, yea dip and as it were diue out selves into it,
body, soul, and all.

The third and last degree in Paul's gradation is, that he desires to be found
in Christ. And here his desire is twofold, the first, to be in Christ, the
second, to be found so of God in the day of judgment. The first, To be in
Christ, is to be taken out of the first Adam, and to be united unto Christ as
his very flesh, or as a true member of his mystical body. Now this
Incorporation and union into Christ is a mystery; and for the better
understanding of it four rules must be observed. The first, that not only our
souls are united to the soul or godhead of Christ: but also that the whole
person of him that believes is united to the whole person of Christ. For the
Redeemer and they which are redeemed are united together: and Christ God and
man redeemed us, not only in soul but also in body. We therefore believers,
have (...) our whole persons united to the whole person of Christ. And S. Paul
says, 1. Cor. 6. 15.
that our very bodies are the members of Christ. And Christ himself says,
Ioh 6. 56.
that we must eat his flesh and drink his blood, that we may be in him and he
in us. The second rule, is touching the order of this union: That we are first
joined to the flesh of Christ, and by his flesh to his godhead. For that which
brings us to have fellowship with God, ioynes us to God. Now by the flesh of
Christ we have our fellowship with God. It is as the veil of the temple,
whereby the high priest entered into the Holy of holies, Heb. 10. 20.
and into the presence of God. Again it serves as a pipe or conduit to derive
the efficacy and operation of the godhead unto us. The third rule is: that
this union stands not in imagination, but is a true and real conjunction.
Neither does the distance of place (we being on earth and the flesh of Christ
in heaven) hinder this union. The mind is united after a sort to the thing it
minds. After the contract of marriage, two distinct persons being a thousand
miles asunder, remain one flesh. If nature affoard thus much: why may not the
like be found in the coniuction that is above nature? The last rule is: That
the bond of this conjunction is one and the same spirit, being both in Christ
and us: first in Christ and then in us. This teaches S. John saying, 1. Ioh.
3. 23*
that Christ dwells in us by his spirit given unto us. Again this spirit
works in us faith, which also knits us to Christ: Ephesians. 3. 17.
who as Paul says, dwells in our hearts by faith. And by this we further see
that distance of place hinders not this union. The spirit of God being infinite
may dwell both in Christ and us: and our faith though it be seated within our
hearts, yet can it reach forth it self and apprehend Christ in heaven.

The second desire of Paul is, that he may be found of God to be in Christ,
that is, that God would respect him as a member of Christ and accept him into
his favor eternally for Christ. For the better understanding of this; the
order that God uses in showing his love must be observed. First of all, he
begins his love in Christ, whom he loves simply for himself: then from Christ
he descends to them that are united to Christ, considering them even as parts
of Christ: whom also he loves, yet not simply, but respectively, in and for
Christ. He that looks upon things of diverse kinds through a green glass,
beholdes them all to be green: even so, whom God respects in and for
Christ, they are loved of God as he is loved, and righteous as he is righteous.
And this is the thing which Paul desires, that in the day of judgment he may
be thus respected.

Hence we learn, that God will make an examination of all our hearts, lives,
and works, in the day of judgment. For this Finding which Paul mentions,
presupposes, that God sees and observes our ways, and will one day certainly
discover them, knowing eue^ now certainly whether we be in Christ or no. For
this cause we are to call our selves to an account, yea to a strait account:
for God will find out whatsoever is amiss, though we have skill to make fair
shows before men. And we are withal to amend our selves. Solomon upon this
ground disswades the young man from fornication; why should thou my son
(says he) take delight in a strange woman, Pro. 5. 11.
seeing the ways of men are before the cies of God, and he pondereth all their
paths. To this purpose the Jews have a saying worth our marking: write say
they three things in thy heart, and thou shall never sin: There is an eye
that sees thee, an ear that hears thee, and a hand that writes all thy
sayings and doings in a book. And the cause of our manifold sins is, that
men falsely think, that God neither sees nor hears them. Thus says David of
his enemies; Psalm. 59. 8.
They brag in their talk, and swords are in their lips, for say they who
hears us.

Again, here we see Paul's care, yea the pitch of all his desires and his
principal forecast, that he might be found of God in the day of judgment to
be a member of Christ. The like must be our care and forecast now in the time
of this life: yea this must be the care of all cares, that we may be knit to
Christ, and so accepted of God, when we shall rise to judgment. Luke 21. 36.
Christ bids us, watch and pray that we may stand before the son of man: and
this we cannot do, unless we be incorporate into Christ. We are bidden first
to seek the kingdom of heaven: and that is indeed to be in Christ. To be wise
and circumspect in many matters, and yet to want forecast to compass our maine
and principal good, is the greatest folly of all. What is the fault of the
foolish virgins? virgins they were as the wise: they carried the burning lamps
of Christian profession: likewise they had oil, that is, the oil of grace:
but, alas, they had not oil enough to furnish their lamps. Their fault was,
that they wanted forecast to furnish themselves with oil sufficient. And there
is never sufficiency of oil, till we be true and lively members of Christ.
And this was their damnable folly, that they contented themselves with the
name and profession of Christ, and had not a serious and special care indeed
to be members of Christ. Therefore let us now diligently endeavor to be that in
this life, which we desire to be found of God in the day of judgment. There be
three judgments which we are to undergo, the judgment of men, of our selves,
and of God. The two first we may falsify, the third we cannot. For men we may
deceive, and our selves we may deceive; but God we can not. It is the
foundation of all good things to be ingraffed into Christ: and for this cause,
all the forecast of our heads, all other cares and studies should give place
that this be might accomplished. Some man may hereupon demand, what he should
do, that he might be in Christ. I answer, two things: first he must break off
all his sins, and turn unto God: secondly, he must pray earnestly even unto
the death, that his heart may be knitte to Christ. Again it may be demanded,
how it may be known of us, that we are in Christ. 2. Ioh. 3.
S. John answers: Hereby we know that he dwells in us by the spirit which
he has given us. And we may know that we have the spirit of Christ, if the
same mind, inclination, and disposition, the like love to God and man, the like
meekness, patience and obedience be in us which was in Christ. For the same
fruits argue the same spirit.

v. 9. -- Not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that
which is of the faith of Christ, etc. The Apostle having taught in general
terms, that Christ is his gain, here begins to declare the same in more
particular sort. For he sets down a threefold gain which he desired to
obtain of Christ: the first is, the righteousness of Christ: the second is,
inward fellowship with him: the third is, the resurrection of the body to
eternal glory. Now this righteousness of Christ which Paul makes his first
gain, is handled in the 9. verse: for the better knowledge whereof, I will
first open the meaning of the words. And first of all, it must be known, that
they are an exposition of the words which went before. For whereas Paul had
desired to be found in Christ, now he shows his own meaning, that he desired
therein nothing else but that he might be accepted of God for Christ's sake, and
be esteemed righteous in his righteousness. And that this righteousness may be
the better discerned, he sets down two sorts of justice: the one he refuses,
the other he desires and chooses. The righteousness refused, he calls it his
own: because it is within him, and it is exercised by the powers of his soul,
namely his mind, will, affections. He says further, it is of the law, that
is, of the works which the Law requires: for (as Paul says) the righteousness
of the law is this, Romans 10. 5.
He that does these things shall live therein. Again of the justice desired,
he says, it is by the faith of Christ, that is, it arises of the obedience of
Christ apprehended by faith. Romans 3. 22. 25.
For in this manner to the Romans, he puts the faith of Christ, for faith in
the blood of Christ. And whereas some man might happily say, that even this
righteousness is ours as the former, Paul adds further, that it is of God,
wholly and only, and not of us either in whole or in part; being freely given
of him upon our faith, that is, when we believe.

In these few words Paul coucheth many weighty points of doctrine. I will
distinctly propound them one by one. First of all, he makes a double justice,
one of the Law, the other of the Gospel: yea he opposes them as contraries in
the case of justification: and that they may the better be conceived, he
describes them severally. Touching the justice of the law, he sets it down by
two things. First, he says, it is within us: because it is nothing else but a
conformity of heart and life to the will of God, revealed in the said law. And
the law knows not the righteousness which is without us. Secondly he notes the
matter of it, that it consists of such virtues and works as the law
prescribes. Now the justice of the Gospel it is likewise set forth by four
things. First, it is not in us, but forth of us: because Paul opposes it to
the righteousness which is ours and within us. Secondly Paul sets down the
matter of it, or the person in whom it is, namely Christ. Of whom Jeremy
says, Ierem. 23.
Iehoua is our righteousness. And Christ must be considered two ways; as God,
and as Mediator: according to which two respects he has a double
righteousness. One as God, and that is infinite, and therefore incommunicable.
The other as Mediator, is the Obedience of Christ which he performed in his
manhood, consisting of two parts, his sufferings in life and death, and his
fulfilling of the law for us. And this very obedience which is in Christ and
not in us, is the very matter of the justice of the Gospel. Thirdly Paul sets
down the means whereby this justice is made ours, and that is Faith, which
does rest on Christ and apply his obedience to us. Lastly Paul sets down the
author of this Justice, and that is God, who of his grace and mercy freely
gives Christ and his obedience unto us, when we believe. Out of these four
points a definition of the Justice of the Gospel may be framed thus: It is the
righteousness of the Mediator, namely the obedience of Christ given us freely
of God and received by our faith.

By this distinction of Legal and Evangelical justice, we learn the
difference of the Law and the Gospel. The Law promises life upon the condition
of our works, or obedience performed according to the tenor of the law. The
Gospel requires not the condition of merit, or of any work to be done on our
parts in the case of our justification, but only prescribes us to believe in
Christ and to rest on his obedience, as our justice before the Tribunal of
God. Secondly by this we learn, that the church of Rome and the learned
therein, are ignorant of the right difference between the Law and the Gospel.
For they teach, that the righteousness, which stands in our inherent virtues
and works done by us, is required for justification as well in the Gospel as
in the Law: and that the difference lies only in this, that the law is more
dark, and without grace: the Gospel more plain, having also the grace of God
annexed unto it, to enable us in our own persons to do that which both law and
Gospel require. But this is indeed to make a confusion of the law and
Gospel, and to abolish the distinction of the twofold justice before named:
which may not be.

The second point of doctrine delivered by Paul is, That a sinner stands just
before the tribunal seat of God, not by the justice of the law, but by the
justice of faith, which is the obedience of Christ, without any works of ours.
And because this point of doctrine is of great moment, and is withal oppugned
of many, I will further confirm it by some special reasons. First of all, in
the justification of a sinner, God manifests his mercy and justice to the
full. For, as Paul says, Romans 3. 24. 26.
he justifies freely by his grace: and in justifying he is not only a
iustifier but also just. Now this concurrence of mercy and justice is no where
to be found, but in the Obedience of Christ, performed by him in our room and
stead. As for all Christian virtues and works of godly men, they are by mercy
accepted of God, but they do not satisfy the justice of God according to the
tenor of the law. Secondly, Paul in the epistle to the Romans considering
Abraham not as an idolater unconverted, but as a believer, Romans 4. 1.
yea as the father of all the faithful; says, that then he was justified
without works; and that, his faith, that is, the Messiah apprehended by his
faith, was counted unto him for righteousness, long after his conversion.
Now, as he, who is a pattern for us to follow, is justified, so must we be
justified, and no otherwise. Thirdly, as by Adams disobedience we are made
sinners: Romans 5. 19.
so by Christ's obedience are we made righteous: but but by Adams disobedience
Lira upon Romans 5. and Bellar. de great. ami. 1. l. 5. c. 17.
imputed to us, are we made sinners: therefore we are made just by the obedience
of Christ imputed. Bernard used this reason. In Dominica. 1. po. (...). Epiph.
sermon. 1.
Whom (says he) another man's fault defiled, another man's water washed. Yet in
calling it another man's fault, I do not deny it to be ours: otherwise it
could not defile us. But it is another man's, because we all not knowing of it,
sinned in Adam. It is ours; because we have sinned, though in an other, and it
is imputed to us by the just judgment of God, though it be secret. Yet, that
thou may not complain, o man, against the disobedience of Adam, there is
given thee the obedience of Christ: that being sold for naught, thou may be
redeemed for naught. Again the doctrine of imputed justice he teaches
expressly, saying: Epist. 190.
Al are dead, that the satisfaction of one might be imputed to all, as he alone
bare the sins of all. Ad milites temp. c. 11.
Again, Death is put to flight by the death of Christ, and the righteousness of
Christ is imputed to us. Fourthly, 1. Cor. 1. 30.
Paul says, Christ is made unto us of God, justice, that is, justice imputed:
for in the next words he says, he is made our sanctification, 2. Cor. 5. 21.
that is, our justice not imputed, but inherent. Fifthly, as Christ was made
sin, so are we made the justice of God, but Christ was made our sin not by
any conueiance of any corruption into his most holy heart, but by imputation.
We therefore are made the justice of God by like imputation. And least any man
should yet surmise that this justice is not imputed; but infused into us, Paul
says, We are made the justice of God IN HIM, that is, in Christ. Hence it
follows manifestly, that there is no virtue or work within us which
justifies before God, and that our justice whereby we are just in the fight of
God, and accepted to life eternal, is out of us, and placed in Christ. Thus
much have the Fathers observed upon this text of Paul. Augustine says, that
Christ was made sin, Fnchir. c. 41 and de verbis Apost. Sermon. 6.
that we might be made justice, not our justice, but Gods justice, neither in
us, but in him: as he declared sin not to be his, but ours, not placed in him
but in us. Hierome says, Christ being offered for us took the name of sin
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, not ours, nor in us. In
the same manner speak Theophilact, Anselme, Sedulius presbyter, and others.
Lastly, man considered as a creature before his fall, owed unto God the
fulfilling of the law, which as a certain tribute was daily to be paid unto
him. After the fall, he doubled his debt, because he then became debtor to God
of a satisfaction due for the breach of the law. Now the not payment of this
double debt is our unrighteousness. But where may we find a sufficient payment
for this debt? We our selves by our sins daily increase the said debt. And
our own works, though proceeding of faith, are no convenient payment: because
we cannot by one debt pay an other. And if we shall search through heaven and
earth, there is nothing to be found, that may stand for payment with God, but
the obedience of the Redeemer, which he has presented and laid down before
the throne of the Almighty, as an endless treasure to make payment in our
behalf. And because the said obedience is a satisfaction for our
unrighteousness, it is also our justice in the acceptance of God. By these and
other reasons, it appears, that nothing can absolve us before God, and procure
the right of eternal life, but the only obedience of the Mediator Christ, God
and man: and that without any virtue or work of ours.

Hence it follows that the present Church of Rome corrnpts the article of
justification by mingling things together, which can no more be compounded and
mingled together, then fire and water: namely, the justice of the gospel with
the justice of the law. For it makes a double justification: the first
contains two parts, pardon of sin by the death of Christ, and the infused
habit of charity. The second is by works, which (they say) do meritoriously
increase the first justification and procure eternal life. Here we see the
sovereign medicine of the Gospel, namely remission of sins, tempered with
the poison of the law. For though virtues and works prescribed in the law,
have their place, as good gifts God, in our lives and co^uersations: yet when
they are set up higher, and brought within the circle of justification as
meritorious causes; they are put quite out of their place, and are no better
then poison: and hereupon are termed of Paul, loss and dongue. But such as
desire to be termed Catholics, allege for themselves against us, that the
obedience of Christ, that is, the righteousness of an other cannot possibly be
our righteousness. I answer, that the justice of another may be our justice,
if it be really made ours. And this is true in Christ. For when we begin to
believe in him, though our persons remain evermore distinct and unconfounded,
yet are we made one with him, and according to the tenor of the Evangelical
covenant, are we given to him, and he to us: so as we may truly say, Christ is
mine, as we can truly say, this house or this land is mine. Now if Christ be
ours, then also his obedience is not only his but ours also: his, because it
is in him: ours, because with him it is given us of God. Again, they allege,
That when Paul refuses the righteousness of the law, he means nothing else
but the works of the law, that are performed by the strength of nature, and
that he does not exclude the works of Grace. I answer, it is false: for he
speaks of himself in the time present when he was a Christian Apostle: and
therefore he excludes all righteousness of his own, which he had by the law,
even when he was an Apostle. And the objection, Romans 6. 1. what then shall we
sin that grace may abound? cannot be inferred upon justification by works of
grace: but upon a justification by the obedience of Christ imputed to us,
without all works of our own.

Again, that we are justified, not by the justice of the law, but by the
justice of faith, here is the foundation of our comfort. For hereupon, if we be
tempted in the time of this life, we may oppose against the tempter this our
justice. If Satan plead against us that we are sinners, and therefore subject
to eternal damnation: let us answer him, that the obedience of Christ has
freed us from this damnation. If he plead further, that we never fulfilled the
law; and consequently that we have no right to eternal life: we must answer
him, that Christ fulfilled the law for us. If he shall vex and vpbraid us
with the consideration of our manifold wants and corruptions; let us tell him,
that, so long as we turn unto God from all our evil ways, bewail our
corrupttions, and believe in Christ, all our wants are covered in his
obedience. Again, if in the time of death, the fear and apprehension of the
judgment and anger of God terrify us, we are to oppose this obedience of our
Mediator, to the judgment of God, and to put it between Gods anger and us:
yea we are to rest upon it, and to infold and wrap our souls in it, and thus
to present them to God. Isa. 4. 6.
Isai the prophet says, that the Messiah is a place of refuge, shelter, or
shade, against the tempest or burning heat of the wrath of God. Romans 3. 25.
And Paul says, he is our propitiatory: to signify, that as the
propitiatory covered the arc, and the law in the arc, which is the hand
writing against us, from the presence of God: so Christ covers our sins,
and puts himself between us and the indignation of his father.

The third and last point of doctrine here delivered by Paul is, That faith is
the means to receive and to obtain the obedience of Christ for our justice.
That this may the better be conceived, four points are to be handled. What
this faith is? how it is a means to obaine justice? whether alone by it
self, or by the help of other virtues? When and how long it is the only
means? For the first: Faith is a special gift of God whereby we believe
Christ and his benefits to be ours. In the first place I say, it is a gift of
God: because it comes wholly of God, and not from the mind or will of man.
Thus Paul says, Phil. 1. 29.
It is given you for Christ to believe in him: Luke 24. 25.
and Christ our Savior Says to two of his disciples, O foolish and sloe of
heart to believe. If it be objected, that when we believe first, we then
believe willingly: I answer; it is so indeed: yet is not this willingness in
us by nature but by grace: because when God gives unto us the gift of faith, he
gives us also to will to believe. None comes to Christ but he is drawn of the
father: and to be drawn is, when the unwilling will is changed, and by the
power of God made a willing will. I add further, that faith in the Messiah is
a special gift, for two causes. First, because it is a gift above not only
corrupted, but also above the first created nature. For it was never in man's
nature by creation. Adam never had it: neither did the moral law reveal it
unto us; because it never knew this faith. Nevertheless other virtues, as love
of God and man, fear of God, etc. are revealed of the law, and were in man's
nature by creation. Again, whereas all other gifts of God are given to them
that are ingrafted into Christ: faith is given to them that non insitis, sed
inserendis.
are to be ingrafted: because it is the ingrafting, and therefore can not be
given to them that are already in Christ, but to them that are to be in
Christ. Further, I say, that by faith, we believe Christ and his benefits to be
ours. For this is the property of faith, whereby it differs from all other
graces of God. When Thomas had put his finger into the side of Christ he said,
My Lord, and my God: to who^e Christ replied: Ioh. 20. 28, 29.
Because thou have seen, thou have believed. Where we see, that this is faith,
to believe Christ to be our Lord and our god. Paul says, I live by the faith
of Christ: now what he means by faith, Gal. 2. 20.
he shows in the next words: who has loved ME and given himself FOR ME.

If any man shall demand, upon what grounds, (because we are not to go by
imagination) I say, upon what grounds he is to conceive a faith, that Christ
is his Christ: I answer, the grounds are two. The first is the commandment of
God, to believe Christ and his benefits to be ours, 1. Ioh. 3. 23. This is his
commandment, that ye believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ. Now to
believe in Christ, is to put our confidence in him: and we can put no
confidence in him, unless we be first assured that he with his benefits is
ours. And whatsoever we ask in prayer, Mar. 11. 24.
we are commanded to believe that it shall be given unto us. Now above all
things we are to ask that Christ and his benefits may be given unto us of God.
This therefore must we believe. The second ground is this: We must consider the
manner that God uses in propounding the promise of grace unto us: for he does
not only set it forth unto us in a general sort, but also he uses meet and
convenient means to apply it to the persons of men. First of all, he confirms
it by oath, that we our selves might the better apply it and reap sure
consolation thereby. Hell. 6. 18.
Secondly God gives unto us the spirit of adoption; which bears witness to
our consciences of such things as God has given unto us in particular, and are
only in general manner propounded in the promise. And this testimony must be
certain in it self, and also plainly known unto us; else is it no testimony.
Thirdly both the Sacraments, are seals of the promise: in the lawful use
whereof God offers, yea exhibits Christ unto us; and does (as it were) write
our names within the promise, that we might not doubt. Now then, look as God
gives the promise, so must we by faith receive it. But God gives the promise,
and withal applies it: we therefore must receive the promise, and by faith
apply it to our selves. If any man shall say, that he can not conceive a
special faith upon these grounds by reason of his unbelief: I answer, that
he must strive against his unbelief, and endeavor to believe by desiring,
asking, seeking, knocking: and God will accept the will to believe for faith it
self, so be it there be an honest heart touched with sorrow for sins past,
and a purpose to sin no more.

That we may yet better know, what faith is; understand that there be two
kinds of false faith, like indeed to true faith, and yet no faith at all. The
first is, when a man conceiues in his heart a strong persuasion, that Christ is
his Savior, and yet carries in the same heart a purpose to sin, and makes no
change or amendment of his life. This persuasion is nothing but presumption,
and a counterfeit of true faith, whose property is to purify the heart, and
to show it self in the exercises of invocation and true repentance. The second
is, when men conceive a strong persuasion, that Christ is their Savior, and
yet for all this contemn and despise the Ministry of the word and
sacraments. This also is an other counterfeit. For true faith is conceived,
cherished, and confirmed by the use of the word and sacraments. And we must
there seek Christ, where God will give him unto us: now God gives Christ in
the word and sacraments; and in them he does as it were open his hand and reach
forth all the blessings of Christ unto us. We must not therefore imagine to
find Christ, where and how we list; but we must seek him in the word and
sacraments, and there must we receive him, if we desire to receive him aright.

The second point to be considered is, How faith is a means to justify? I
answer thus. Faith does not justify as it is an excellent work of God in us:
for then all virtues might be means of justification, as well as faith. It
does not justify as it is an excellent virtue in it self: because it is
imperfect and mingled with unbelief. It does not justify as a means to
prepare and dispose us to our justification: for so soon as we begin to
believe in Christ, we are justified Chrysostom. hom. 7. in Romans Quam primum homo
credidit, confestim simul iustificatus est.
without any disposition or preparation coming between faith and
justification. Lastly it does not justify as it contains in it all other
virtues and good works, as the kernel contains the tree with all his
branches. For then should it be a part, yea the principal part of our justice.
Whereas Saint Paul distinguishes justice and faith, saying, that our
righteousness is of God upon faith: and not for faith, but, by faith. Now then
faith iustifies, as it is an Instrument or hand to apprehend or recceiue the
benefits of Christ for ours; and this apprehension is made, when we do indeed
believe Christ and his benefits to be ours. And least any should imagine, that
the very action of faith in apprehending Christ, justifies: we are to
understand that faith does not apprehend by power from it self, but by virtue
of the covenant. If a man believe the kingdom of France to be his, it is not
therefore his: yet if he believe Christ and the kingdom of heaven by Christ to
be his: it is his indeed: not simply because he believes, but because he
believes upon commandment and promise: for in the tenor of the covenant, God
promises to impute the obedience of Christ unto us for our righteousness, if we
believe.

The third point is, whether faith alone be the means to obtain the justice
of Christ for us or no? I answer, it is the only means without the help of
any other virtue or work. For Paul here teaches, that faith apprehends
Christ for righteousness, without the law: that is, without any thing that the
law requires at our hands. And here by this exclusive particle [without the
law,] he teaches three things. The first, that nothing within us is an
efficient or meritorious cause, either principal or less principal, in whole
or in part of our justification or reconciliation with God. The second, that
nothing within us is an instrument or means to apply the obedience of Christ
unto us, but faith which is ordained of God to be an hand to receive the free
favor of God in the merit of Christ. The third, that our renouation or
sanctification is no matter, form, or part of our justification, but that it
wholly stands in the imputation of the justice of Christ. In a word, Paul
utterly excludes all things that are within us, whether by nature or by grace,
from the act of justification: that in this article, only grace, only Christ,
only faith, only mercy in pardon of sin may reign. It may be here
objected, that Abraham was justified not by faith alone, but by works, as S.
James teaches. I answer, there is a double justification, one of the person
whereby a man of a sinner is made no sinner: the second is the justification of
the faith of the person, whereby faith is declared to be true faith: and this
second is by works: and of it S. James speaks as appears v. 18. where he
says, Show me thy faith by thy works. And whereas he says, that Abraham our
father was justified by works, his meaning is that Abraham by works justified
himself to be a true believer, yea the father of all the faithful: and his
faith was made perfect by works, verse 22. that is, declared or justified to
be a true faith.

The fourth or last point is, when and how long faith alone justifies? I
answer, not only in the beginning of our conversion, but also in the
continuance, and final accomplishment thereof. For here Paul desires in the
day of judgment to stand before God only by the justice of faith, without his
own justice of the law. And Paul brings in Abraham (as I have noted before)
in the very midst of godly conversation and holy obedience to be justified
without any works by his faith in the Messiah. Romans 4.
And Paul avouches three things of faith: Romans 5. 2.
by it we have access to the grace of God: by it we stand in the same grace:
by it we rejoice under the hope of glory. Thus then, we see there is one only
way of justification, namely that we are justified and accepted of God to life
eternal through grace alone, by faith alone, for Christ alone in the
beginning, middle, and end of our conversion. And here is plainly discovered
the error of the church of Rome. It makes a double justification: one whereby
a sinner is made of an evil man a just man; and this they say is by faith
alone: the second is, whereby a man of a just man is made more just: and this
(they say) is by faith and works together: but falsely, as I have showed.

By all this which has been said, we see how righteousness comes by, and
upon the faith of Christ. And hence we learn, that it stands us in hand to
prove whether we have faith or no: because where is no faith, there is no
justice. Secondly our duty is to labor for such a faith, that can and does
justify it self to be true faith, by works of love to God and men. Thirdly
we must by this faith, rest and wholly rely our selves on the obedience of
Christ both in life and death: yea whatsoever does befall us. Though God
should reach out his hand and destroy us, we must still rest upon him.

Secondly, if our justice be forth of us, and we must by faith trust God for
it: then much more must we trust him for health, wealth, liberty, peace,
food, and raiment, and for all the things of this life. And if we cannot trust
him in the less, we shall never trust him in the principal. Therefore it is
our part to walk in the duties of our callings, and to obey God therein: and
for the success of our labors to trust him upon his word; yea when all
worldly helps and succors fail, to trust in him still. If we cannot trust
him for our temporal life, we shall never trust him for our salvation.

The second gain which Paul desires, is fellowship with Christ in the 10.
verse. Where it is set forth first generally, and then by his parts. Generally
in these words [That I may know him.] Here it must be remembered that
knowledge is twofold, knowledge of faith, and of experience. Knowldge of faith
is to be assured of Christ and his benefits, though it be against all humane
reason, hope, and experience. Of this Paul says, It is eternal life to know
thee the only God, etc. The knowledge of experience is to have a sense and
feeling of our inward fellowship with Christ, and upon often observation of his
goodness to grow more and more in experience of his love. Now this knowledge
is here meant, and not the first, which was before mentioned verse 8. And
therefore Paul's desire is, that he may grow more and more in holy experience of
the endless love of God, and fellowship with Christ.

The parts of this desired communion are two: fellowshippe with Christ in his
resurrection, and fellowshippe with him in his death. The former is expressed
in these words, [and the virtue of his resurrection.] And for the better
co^ceiuing of it, we are to consider what the resurrection of Christ is? and
what is the virtue thereof? That the resurrection of Christ may be rightly
conceived, five points are to be skanned. The first, touching the person of him
that rose: and that was Christ God and man. Indeed properly the body alone
did rise, and not the soul or godhead, yet by reason of the union of the two
natures in the unity of one person, whole Christ arose, or God himself made
man arose. This commends unto us the excellency of Christ's resurrection, and
makes it to be the foundation unto us of our resurrection. The second point is,
For whom he rose? He rose not as a private person for himself alone: but he
rose in our room and stead, and that for us: so as when he arose, all the
elect arose with him, and in him. Thus says Paul, that the Fphesians were
raised together with him. Ephesians. 2. 6.
His resurrection therefore was public: and this is the ground of our comfort.
The third point is, When he arose? He arose then, when he lay in bondage under
death, and that in the grave, which is as it were the castle and hold of death.
When Peter says, that God loosed the sorrows of death, Act. 2. 24.
he signifies that Christ was made captive for a time to the first death and
to the sorrows of the second. Now in the midst of this captivity and bondage,
he raised himself: and this argues, that his resurrection is a full victory and
conquest over death and all our spiritual enemies. The fourth point is, That
he rose by his own power, Ioh. 10. ^8.
as he says of himself, I have power to lay down my life, and to take it up
again. If this had not bin, though he had risen a thousand times by the power
of another, he had not been a perfect Redeemer. The last point is, Wherein
sta^ds the resurrection of Christ? Answer, it consistes in three actions of
Christ. The first is the reuniting of his body to his soul, both which were
severed for a time, though neither of them were severed from the godhead. The
second action is the change of his natural life, which he led in the estate of
humiliatio^, into a heavenly and spiritual life without infirmities, and not
maintained by food as before. For we find not that after his resurrection he
ever took meat for necessity, but only upon occasion, to manifest the
truth of his manhood. And this life he took unto himself, that he might
convey it to all that should believe in him. The third action is his coming
forth of the grave; whereby death it self did as it were acknowledge him to be
a conqueror; and that it had no title or interest in him. These five things
considered, the article of Christ's resurrection shall be rightly understood.

Touching the virtue of Christ's resurrection, it is nothing else but the power
of his god head, or the power of his spirit, whereby he raised himself
mightily from death to life, and that in our behalf. The excellency of it may
be known by the effects, which be in number eight. The first, that by it he
showed himself to be the true and perfect Savior of the world. For it was
foretold of the Messiah that he should die and rise again. Psalm. 16. Matthew.
12. And all this was accordingly accomplished by the virtue of Christ's
resurrection. The second effect is, that by it he showed himself to be the
true and natural son of god. Romans 1^.
Paul says, He was declared mightily to be the son of God, by the spirit of
holiness in his rising from the dead. The third effect is, that by this virtue
he declared himself to have made a full and perfect satisfaction for the
sins of the world. For if he had not satisfied to the full, 1. Cor. 15. 17.
he had not risen again. And Paul says, If Christ be not risen we are yet in
our sins. On the contrary then, seeing he is risen, such as believe in him,
are not in their sins. Romans 8. 34.
Again: Who shall condemn us? it is Christ which is dead, yea or rather which
is risen again. The fourth effect is justification, as Paul testifies: He
died for our sins, and rose again for our justification, and that was on
this manner. When he was upon the cross, he stood there in our room, having
our sins imputed unto him: and when he rose from death he acquit and
justified himself from our sins, and ceased to be any more a reputed sinner
for us: and thus, all that do or shall believe in him, are in him acquit,
absolved, and justified from all their sins. If any demand, how they which
lived in the time of the old Testament, before the resurrection of Christ,
could be justified thereby; considering the effect must follow the cause: I
answer, that they were justified by the future resurrection of Christ: which
though it followed in time, yet did the value and virtue thereof, reach eue^
even to the beginning of the world. The fifth effect, is the conferring and
bestowing of all such gifts and graces as he had merited and procured for us by
his death and passion. Thus Christ testifies that the giving of the spirit in
large and plentiful manner, was reserved to the glorification of Christ, Ioh
7. 39.
which began in his resurrection. Luke 24. 47.
And the preaching of Repentance and remission of sins is reserved till after
his resurrection. And S. Peter says, 1. Pet. ^. 3.
that the Elect are regenerate to a lively hope by the resurrection of Christ.
By reason of this bestowing of graces and gifts, the resurrection of Christ is
the beginning of a new and spiritual world, which the holy Ghost calls the
world to come, Heb. 2. 5.
in which shall be a new heaven and a new earth, Isa. 65. 27.
as Isai speaks, and a peculiar people of God, zealous of good works, keeping
an eternal sabbath unto God. This one effect alone sufficiently declares the
excellency of this virtue of Christ. The sixth effect is vivification, which
is a raising of us from the death of sin to newnes of life. And the reason
hereof is plain. For Christ in his resurrection put away his natural life,
which with our nature he received from Adam, and took unto him a spiritual
life, that he might communicate the said life to all that believe in him.
Again as the first Adam makes us like himself in sin and death: so Christ
the second Adam renewes us and makes us like to himself in righteousness and
life. And the head quickened with spiritual life will not suffer the members to
remain in the death of sin. The seventh effect is to preserve safe and
sound the gifts and graces, which he has procured by his death; and bestowed
on them that believe: and this he does by the virtue of his resurrection. For
to this end, has he conquered all our spiritual enemies, and does by his
power conquer them still in us; so as none shall be able to take his sheep out
of his hands. The last effect is, to raise the body from the grave in the day
of judgment to eternal glory. If it be objected, that the wicked are also
raised then by the power of Christ: Romans 8. 1^.
I answer, that the power of Christ is twofold. One is the power of judgment,
the other a power of a Savior. By the first, Christ as a judge raises the
ungodly, that he may exequute on them the curse denounced from the beginning of
the world [at what time thou shall eat the forbidden fruit, (...) 2. 7.
thou shall die the death.] The second power is here termed the power of
Christ's resurrection; and it belongs to him as he is our Savior: and by it
will he raise to life eternal all those that by the bond of the spirit, are
mystically united to him. For by means of this union, this raising power shall
flow from the head to the dead bodies of them that are in Christ. Thus we see,
what the virtue here mentioned is, and what Paul desires, namely that he may
have experience of these effects in himself.

The use of the doctrine follows. First of all, in that Christ rose for us,
and in that his resurrection is of endless efficacy, here is the foundation
of all our spiritual comfort. For by this virtue of Christ's resurrection from
death to life, all our spiritual enemies are conquered and subdued, and by the
said virtue does he daily more and more subdue them in us. Upon this ground
said Christ: Ye shall have affliction in the world: Ioh. 16. 33.
but be of good comfort, I have overcome the world. And this victory is for
us, and it is made ours by our faith, as John says, This is the victory which
over comes the world, 1. Ioh. 5. 4.
even your faith. Art thou then terrified and afraied with the conscience of
thy sins, with the cruelty of tyrants, the rage of the world, the pains of
hell, the pangs of death, the temptations of the devil; be not dismayed, but
by thy faith rest on Christ that rose again from death to life for thee, and
thereby showed himself to be a rock for thee to rest on, and to be the lion of
the Tribe of Judah: and thus shall thou find certain remedy against all the
troubles and miseries of life and death.

Again here we are taught to rise with Christ from our sins, and to live
unto God in newnes of life: and for this end to pray that we may feel the
virtue of Christ's resurrection to change and renew us. Great are the benefits
which we reap by this virtue, and we are to show ourselves thankful to God
for them: which we can do no way, but by newnes of life. Again the end why
Christ rose for us, was that we might rise from our sins and corruptions, Rom
6. 4.
in which we lie buried as in a grave, to a new spiritual life. And the reward
is great to them that make this happy change. For he that is partaker of the
first resurrection shall never see the second death: (...). 20. 6.
as on the contrary he which never rises from his own sins and evil
ways, shall certainly feel and endure the second death. And further it must be
known, that the virtue of Christ's resurrection and the merit of his death, are
inseparably joined together: and therefore he that finds not the virtue of
Christ to raise him to an holy and spiritual life acceptable to God, falsely
persuades himself of the merit of his death in the remission of his sins.
Christ by rising put under his feet all our enemies, and led captivity
captive even sin it self. It is therefore a shame for us to walk in the
ways of sinue, and to make our selves slaves and captives to it. Christ by
rising from death made himself a principal leader and guide to eternal life.
Act. 3. 25.
What wickedness then is it to walk in the ways of our own heart, and not to
'follow this heavenly guide. The care and purpose to keep a good conscience is
a certain fruit and effect of Christ's resurrection. 2. Pet. 3. 21.
Thus S. Peter says, that the effect of our baptism is the stipulation of a
good conscience by the resurrection of Christ. Where the word which I
translate, Stipulation, (...)
signifies an interrogation upon an interrogation. For the Minister in the name
of God demandes, whether we renounce the world, the flesh and the devil, and
take the true God for our God. And we upon this demand, do further in our
hearts demand of God, whether he will vouchsafe to accept us being wretched
sinners for his servants; and thus we make profession of our mind and desire.
When Christ rose, by the virtue of his resurrection, the earth trembled, and
thereby this bruit creature in his kind professed his subjection and homage to
Christ that rose again. If then we believe, that Christ rose from death for
us, much more should our hearts tremble and we yield our selves in subjection
to him in all spiritual obedience. Some man may say, you bid us rise from our
sins, as Christ rose to the glory of his Father, whereas this is wholly Gods
work in us, and not ours: I answer, it is so indeed: yet can we use the
outward means of hearing and reading; and if we have any spark of grace, we
can ask and desire the spirit of God, that works this in us. Again,
exhortations, admonitions, and such like, are means appointed of God, whereby
he works in us the thing which he requires and commands. Wherefore let us
listen to the voice of Christ, Awake thou that sleep, stand up from the
dead, Ephesians. 5. 14.
and Christ shall give thee life. And worldly cares must not hinder us in this
work: for as Paul says, Coloss. 3. 1.
they which are risen with Christ, must seek the things that are above.

Again here we are taught, that we may not content our selves, if we know
Christ in the brain, and can speak well of him with a glibbe tongue, we must
go yet further, and by all means labor, that we taste and feel by
experience how good and sweet a Savior Christ is unto us; that our hearts may
be rooted and grounded in his love. This is the thing which Paul aimed at:
which also we must seek by all possible means to attain unto.

To proceed; that we may have right knowledge of our communion with Christ in
his death, two points are to be handled. The first is, what are the sufferings
of Christ? I answer, not only the sufferings which he endured in his own
person, but also those which are endured of his members. Act. 9. 4.
Thus Saul persequuting the church, is said to persequute Christ himself. And
Paul says, that he fulfilled the rest of the afflictions of Christ in HIS OWN
FLESH. Coloss. 1. 24.
And whereas the Lord said of the people of Israel, Hos. 11. 1.
I have brought my son out of Egypt: it is applied by Saint Matthew to Christ
himself. Yet here it must be remembered, that if the members of Christ suffer
either civil or ecclesiastical punishments for evil doing; they are not the
sufferings of Christ. For when Saint Peter had said, 2. Pet. ^. 13. 15.
Rejoice in that you are partakers of the sufferings of Christ: he adds
further, Let no man suffer as an evil doe^, opposing the one kind of
sufferings to the other. Therefore our sufferings are then to be accounted the
sufferings of Christ, when they are for good cause, and for the name of Christ.

For the second point, fellowship with Christ in his death is either within us
or without us. That within us is called the mortification of the flesh or the
crucifying of the affections and the lusts thereof. The other without us, is
the mortification of the outward man by manifold afflictions: and of this Paul
speaks in this place: and it may be thus described out of this text.
Fellowship with Christ in his death: is nothing but a conformity in us to his
sufferings and death. And it is a thing worthy our consideration to search
wherein stands this conformity. For in two respects there is no conformity
between our sufferings and the sufferings of Christ. For first of all, God
powered forth on Christ the whole malediction of the law due to our sins: and
by this means showed upon him justice without mercy. Contrariwise in our
afflictions God moderates his anger, 1. Cor. 10.
and in justice remembers mercy: because he lays no more upon us, then we are
able to bear. Secondly Christ's sufferings are a redemption and satisfaction to
Gods justice for our sins: so are not ours: because before God we stand but as
private persons, and for this cause the sufferings of one man cannot satisfy
for an other: and there is no proportion between our sufferings and the glory
which shall be revealed. And Christ says of himself, Isa. 6 3. 3.
I have tread the wine press alone.

Now this conformity stands (as I take it) properly in the manner of
suffering; and that in four things. First of al, Christ suffered for a just
and righteous cause: for he suffered as our redeemer, Mat. 5. 10.
the righteous for the unrighteous. And so must we likewise suffer for
righteousness sake. 1. Pet. 2. 21.
Secondly Christ in suffering was a myrrour of all patience and meekness. And
we in our sufferings must show the like patience. And that we be not deceived
herein, our patience must have three properties. It must be voluntary, that
is, we must willingly and quietly renounce our own wills, and subject our
selves in our sufferings to the will of God. Patience perforce is no patience.
Again it must not be mercenarie, that is, we must suffer not for bie respects,
as for praise, or profit, but for the glory of God, and that we may show our
obedience to him. Hence it appears that the patience of the papist, that
suffers in way of satisfaction, is no right patience. Lastly our patience must
be constant. If we endure afflictions for a brunt, and afterward begin to
grudge and repine casting off the yoke of Christ, we fail in our patience.
Further, if it be demanded, whether the affections of grief and sorrow may
stand with patience: I answer yea: for Christian religion does not abolish
these affections, but only moderate them, and bring them in subjection to the
will of God, when we lie under the cross. The third point wherein stands our
conformity with the sufferings of Christ is this: Heb. 5. 8.
Christ learned obedience by the things which he suffered, not because he was a
sinner, but because being righteous he had experience of obedience. And we
likewise in our sufferings must be more careful to take the fruit thereof,
then to have them taken away. And the fruit of them is to learn obedience
thereby, specially to the commandments of faith and repentance. When Job was
afflicted of God, not for his sins, but that he might make a trial of his
faith and patience, Job. 42. 6.
he nevertheless in the end took an occasion thereby to renew his old
repentance. And Paul says, that he received in his own flesh the sentence of
death, 2. Cor. 1.
that he might learn by faith to trust in god alone. Lastly Christ's sufferings
were even to death it self: Heb. 12. 4.
even so must we resist sin, fighting against it to the shedding of our
blood. Faith and good conscience are things more precious then the very blood
of our hearts: and therefore if need be, we must conform our selves to
Christ, even in the pains of death.

This is that conformity of which Paul here speaks of, which also he magnifies
as a special gain. And there be many reasons thereof. For first of all this
conformity is a mark of Gods child. Heb. 12. 7.
For if we obediently endure afflictions, God in them, and by them, offers
himself as a father unto us. Secondly, it is a sign that the spirit of God
dwells in us: 1. Pet. 4. 14.
as Peter says, If ye be railed upon for the name of Christ, the spirit of
glory and of God rests upon you. Thirdly, the grace of God is most of all
manifested in afflictions, in which God seems most of all in man's reason to
withdraw his grace. Gods power is made manifest in weakness. 1. Cor. 12. 9.
Afflictions bring forth patience: not of themselves, but because then the
love of God is shed abroad in our hearts. Romans 5. 5.
Hope of eternal life shows it self most in the patient bearing of
afflictions. 15. 4.
In peace and ease natural life reigns. Contrariwise in our sufferings
natural life decaies, and the spiritual life of Christ apparently shows it
self. Lastly, this conformity with Christ, 2. Cor. 4. 1^.
is the right and beaten way to eternal life. By many tribulations we must
enter into the kingdom of heaven. Act. 14. 2. Tim. 2. ^^.
That we may reign and live with Christ, we must first die with him. The
estate of humiliation is the way to the estate of exaltation and glory, first
in him and then in us.

The use of this doctrine follows. Here we see what for this life is the
condition of all true believers: namely, that after they are made partakers of
Christ and his benefits, by the virtue of his resurrection, they must also be
made conformable to his death. The commandment of our Savior Christ to the^
that will be his disciples is, Luke 9. 23.
To deny themselves and to take up their own crosses every day. And there be
three weighty causes, why God will have it so. 2. Cor. 12. 1. Cor. 1^.
The one, that he may correct sins past: the other, that he may prevent sins
to come: the third, that he may prove what is in our hearts. Secondly we learn
by this which has bin said, to comfort our selves in our sufferings. For in
them Christ and we are partners, and he vouchsafes to make us his fellows.
Hence it follows that all our afflictions are well known to Christ, and that
they are laid on us with his consent: and for this cause we should frame our
selves to bear them with all meekenes. And hence again we learn, that he
being our partner, will help us to bear them, either by moderating the
weight of them, or by ending them for our good. Lastly, here we learn that our
afflictions are either blessings or benefits: and such may we discern them to
be, though not by the light of reason, yet by the eye of faith: because they
are means to make us conformable to our head Christ Jesus. Benefits of God are
of two sorts, positive and privative. Positive, whereby God bestows something
on us. Priuat^ whereby God takes away a blessing, and covertly gives another.
Benefits of this kind be afflictions. Of the twain, these are the rifer for
the time of this life: and the other for the life to come. And therefore while
we live in this world, our duty is with Paul to labor to attain to this
conformity with the sufferings of Christ, when upon any occasion we shall be
afflicted: for then shall we be fashioned like unto him, and reap much comfort
thereby.

Thus much of the second gain: now follows the third in these words, [If by
any means, I may attain to the resurrection of the dead.] The word
resurrection here signifies the reward of eternal life; the antecedent being
put for the consequent. For to rise again of it self is no gain, considering
it is common both to good and badde, but eternal life that follows, is the
reward. And the form of speech, [if by any meanes] does not signify or imply
any doubting in Paul of his own resurrection to life: Rom 8. 2. ^im. 1. 12.
for he was persuaded that nothing should separate him from Christ: and it is
an article of our and Paul's faith, to believe the resurrection of the body to
eternal life. Wherefore it signifies properly a difficulty to obtain the
gain desired: and an earnest affection in Paul to obtain the same. And when
he says, [By any means,] we must know that there be three ways or means to
come to eternal life. One is by peaceable life and death: the other is by a
life lade^ with many afflictions, the third is by a violent, cruel, and bloody
end. And Paul's mind and desire is, to obtain the crown of eternal glory by
any of these ways: and if not by the first or second, yet by the third.

In these words four things are to be considered. The first is the gain it
self, and that is, the Reward of eternal glory. And that we may the more
with Paul be stirred up to a desire thereof, I will stand a while to declare
the excellency and the conditions of it. It is nothing else but a certain
estate of life, in which all the promises of God are in and by Christ
accomplished unto us in heaven. And it will the better be conceived by the
answering of three questions: What shall ceafe in this estate? What we shall
have? What we shall do?

For the first, seven things shall cease. The first is the Exequution of the
Mediatorship of Christ, or of the offices of a king, priest, prophet. Thus much
teaches Paul, 2 Cor. 15. 24.
when he says, that Christ in the last day must give up his kingdom to his
father. And though the exequution shall then cease: yet nothing shall be
wanting to them that believe: because then shall be the full and eternal
fruition of all the benefits of our redemption. Secondly, then shall cease all
callings in family, church, and common wealth: because Christ shall then put
down all power, Ibid. v. 24.
rule, and authority. In this blessed estate, there shall not be magistrate
and people, master and servant, husband and wife, parents and children, pastor
and people: but all such outward distinctions of persons shall cease, and we
shall be as the angels of God. Thirdly all virtues, that pertain to us, as we
are pilgrims here upon earth, shall have an end, as faith, hope, patience:
because the things believed and hoped for shall the^ be obtained. Withal that
part of invocation called Petition, shall cease, as also the preaching and
hearing of the word and the use of sacraments. 1. Cor. 13. 13*
The fourth thing that shall cease is original sin with the fruits thereof:
because no unclean thing may enter into the heavenly Jerusalem. Rev. 21. 4.
Fifthly, then shall cease all miseries, and sorrows, all infirmities of body
and mind: for then all defects of eyes, arms, and legs, shall be restored.
The fixed thing that shall cease is natural life with the means thereof, as
meat, drink, clothing, physic, recreation. For then our bodies shall be
spiritual, that is, immediately and eternally preserved by the operation of
the spirit of God, as now the body of Christ is in heaven. The last thing to
be abolished is the vanity of the creatures, specially of heaven and earth:
which i^ the last judgment shall again be restored to their former excellency.
Act. 3. 21.


The second question is, what we shall have and inioye in this estate? I answer,
three things. The first is, immediate and eternal fellowship with God the
father, 1. Cor. 15* 28.
son, and holy ghost. For in this happy estate the tabernacle of God shall
be with men, Rev. 21. 3.
as Saint John says: and God shall be all things that heart can wish to all
the elect. Sermon. de Temp. 148.
Augustine says notably: There shall be exceeding peace in us, and among us,
and with God himself. Because we shall see him and enjoy him always and every
where. Therefore blessed shall that life be, for the thing which we shall
enjoy: for we shall enjoy God himself. For the manner of inioying him: for we
shall enjoy him by himself, all other means ceasing. For the measure of our
inioying him: for we shall fully enjoy him. For the time: for we shall
eternally enjoy him. For the certenty, whereby we shall know that it shall be
so. For the place: for we shall enjoy him in heaven. Lastly for the companions
joined with us: for they shall be the elect. From this fruition of God shall
arise endless and unspeakable joy. Psalm. 16. 11. In thy presence is fullness
of joy, at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. In the Transfiguration of
Christ, which was but a shadow of the eternal glory, Peter was ravished with
joy and delight: the joy therefore which shall be in heaven must needs be
unspeakable. Mat. 17.
The second thing which shall be inioyed is Glory both in mind and body. In
mind, because we shall the^ be partakers of the Divine not essence (for then we
should be deified) but nature, that is, divine virtues and qualities, more
excellent then those which God bestowed on Adam, 2. Pet. 1. 4.
though of the same kind. The glory of the body is to be changed and made like
the glorious body of Christ. The third thing is, Dominion and Lordship over
heaven and earth; which Lordship once lost by Adam, shall then fully be
restored. He that overcomes shall possess all things. Phil. ^. 21.
Reu. 21. 7.

The third question is, what we shall do? I answer briefly, keep an eternal
sabbath in praising of God, and giving thanks unto him. And thus by the
consideration of these things, we may take a taste of the excellency of this
third and last gain.

The second point here to be considered, is the difficulty of obtaining this
desired gain of eternal life. And the reason is plain. For the way to
eternal life is full of impediments, which I reduce to four heads. First of
all in this way we are to fight, not with flesh and blood, Ephesians. 6. 13.
but with principalities and powers in spiritual things, seeking the
destruction of our souls. Secondly there be within us innumerable lusts that
compass us round about, press us down, and draw us away to the broad way of
destruction. Heb. 12. 1. ^am. 1. 14.
Thirdly this way lies full of offenses, partly in doctrines, partly in evil
examples; all tending to this end, either to make us fall, or to go out of
the way. Ro^. 1. 8. 35.
Lastly it is beset with manifold tribulations, from the beginning to the end.
Hence we learn, that we must give all diligence that we may attain to the
reward of glory: and therefore we must struggle, Mat. 7. 13.
strive, and wrestle to enter in at the straight gate. The principal gain,
and the hardness to obtain it, requires our principal study and labor.
Therefore they deal wickedly, that use no means, but (as they say) leave all
to God, thinking it the easiest matter in the world, to win the kingdom of
heaven. The like is their fault, that profess religion in a slack and
negligent manner, being neither whot nor cold.

The third point, is Paul's mind and desire of eternal life. If it be said,
that wicked men have the like desire, as for example Balaam: I answer, in Paul
there was an endeavor answerable to his desire, as appears act. 24. 16. where
he says, That he waited for the resurrection of the just and unjust: and that
in the mean season he labored to keep a good conscience before God and men:
now this desire in the ungodly is barren, and yeeldes not his fruit. Again
Paul being justified, still desires to attain to full fellowship with Christ,
and to conformity with him in glory. The like desire, with the like
endeavor, should be in us.

The last point, is Paul's courage and fortitude. He is content to endure any
kind of death, yea cruel death, so he may obtain this third and last gain.
And thus it is verified, which he says, that God had given him the spirit not
of fearefulnes but of courage. ^. Tim. 1. 7.
Like was the courage of Moses, who was content to endure afflictions with the
people of God, that he might win the recompense of reward. Heb. 11. 26.
Like was the courage of the martyrs, that were racked and would not be
delivered, (...)
that they might obtain a better resurrection. We likewise walking in the way
to eternal life, must take the like courage unto us in all dangers. For this
cause we must pray unto God, to give us the spirit of courage: and we must
always attend upon the calling and commandment of God, making it the stay
and foundation of our courage: and we must yet further stay our selves on the
promise of Gods presence and protection, so long as we obey him. If it be
alleged, that we are by nature fearful in dangers, and therefore incapable
of courage: I answer, there is a threefold fear. The first is fear of nature;
when man's nature fears, flies, and eschewes that which is hurtful unto it.
This fear was in Christ, whose soul was heavy unto death, Heb. ^. ^.
who also feared the cursed death which he endured. And therefore this fear of
it self is no sin, and it may stand with true fortitude. The second fear is
that which rises of the corruption of nature, when a man fears without cause,
or without measure. Without cause, as when the Disciples feared Christ walking
upon the sea: or when they feared drowning, Christ lying asleep in the ship.
Without measure, as when men distrusting God, neglect their callings in time of
danger, and the duty of invocation, flying to unlawful means of
deliverance. Now this second fear is an enemy unto all true courage. The third
fear is, when perils and death are indeed feared: but yet fear is ordered by
faith in the mercy and providence of God, by hope, by invocation; and it is
joined with obedience to God in the time of danger. This is a proceeding of
grace, and it may well stand with courage, and it serves to order the two
former fears, the one of nature, the other of distrust.

Trin-vni Deo gloria.
Amend the faults thus.
Page 18. l. 18. offals.

P. 61. l. 21. put out, have.

P. 74. l. 3. put out, but.

P. 78. l. 2. gifts of God.

P. 112. l. 20. for private, read, privative.


