A DISCOVRSE OF THE DAMNED ART OF WITCHCRAFT; SO FAR FORTH as it is revealed
in the Scriptures, and manifest by true experience. FRAMED AND DELIVERED by M.
WILLIAM PERKINS, in his ordinary course of Preaching, and now published by
THO. PICKERING Batchelour of Divinity, and Minister of Finchingfield in Essex.
WHEREUNTO IS ADJOINED a twofold Table; one of the order and Heads of the
Treatise; another of the texts of Scripture explaned, or vindicated from the
corrupt interpretation of the Adversary.

PRINTED BY CANTREL LEG, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1610.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR EDWARD COOK Knight, Lord chief Justice of his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas; Grace and peace.
RIght Honorable: The word of God that only Oracle of truth, has pointed out
the Enemy of mankind, by his proper Characters, in sundry places. Our Savior
terms him, the Prince of this World; Ioh. 12. 11.
and a Ioh. 8. 44
murderer from the beginning* Peter compares him to 1. Pet 5. 8.
a roaring Lion, that rangeth abroad in the earth, seeking who^ he may devour.
His attempts in regard of their quality, are called 2. Cor. 2. 11.
(...)* subtle and deep devises; yea Ephesians. 6. 11.
(...) plots exquisitely contrived, and orderly framed, as it were in Method.
The meaning of the holy Ghost in these and such like attributes, is, to
express that measure of policy and power, which Satan has reserved unto
himself even in the state of his Apostasy, improoued by long experience, and
instantly practiced upon the son, of men, that he might set up in the world,
a spiritual regiment of time, as a mean to encounter the kingdom of grace,
and (...) it were possible, to bring the same to ruin. To forbear instances
of open force made against God and his Church by other courses, for the
compassing of his de^^c, how skilfully he work, his own advantage, by secret
opposition in the exercise of that cursed Art, which is the Subject of the
present Discourse, is a point not unworthy your Honorable consideration.

The Power of this Prince of darkness, being above the might of all sensible
Creatures, and every way seconded by the greatness of his knowledge and
experience, manifes^eth it self herein, for the most part, by works of
wonder, transcendent in regard of ordinary capacity, and diversely disp^^sed
by his chosen instruments of both tex^t* sometime in matter of Divination,
sometime by Enchantment, sometime by rare (...) and delusions; otherwhiles by
hurting, by cu^ing, by raising of Tempests, by speedy conuayance and
transportation from place to place, etc. and all to purchase unto himself
admiration, fear, and faith, of the credu^ous world, which is usually carried
away, with affectation and applause of signs and wonders. His policy,
appears in a wise and exqui^ite manner of framing and conceiving both his
practices and grounds; the one to procure credit and intertainment, the other,
that he may not fail of his purpose, but proceed upon certenties.

Touching the manner of his practice. He stands resolved, that the world has
taken notice of him to be Ioh. 8. 4^.
a liar, and the father thereof: and therefore if he should offer to speak in
his o^ne language, or inform an Art by Rules of his own devising; he might
happily incur suspicion of falsehood. Hereupon he composeth his courses (...),
by way of counterfeit and imitation, not of the actions and dealings of men,
but of the order of Gods own proceeding with his Church; holding it a sure
principle in policy, That actions will be much more effectual, when they be
framed unto the best presidents, then when they are suited to the direction of
meaner examples. To this purpose, as God has made a Covenant with his Church,
binding himself by promise to be their God, and requiring of them the
condition of faith and obedience; so does Satan indent with his Subjects by
mutual confederacy, either solemnly or secretly; whereby they bind themselves
on the one part to observe his Rules, and he on the other to accomplish their
desires. Again, God gives his Word, the Interpreter of his will, and his
Sacraments, the ^eales of his promises, to which being rightly administered and
received, he has tied his own presence, and the work of his grace in them
that believe. Answerably to this, the Devil gives a word of direction to his
Instruments, and adds unto it, Charms, Figures, Characters, and other
outward Ceremonies, at the use whereof he has bound himself to be present,
and to manifest his power in effecting the thing desired. Furthermore, God has
revealed his will to the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, by familiar Genesis
18. 17.
conference, by Number. 1^6.
dreams, by Amos 3. 7.
inspiration, by Act. 10. 10.
Trances: In the same manner, Satan has his Diuinors, and Soothsayers, his
Pythonisses, his Cassandra^s, his Sibylles, to whom he makes known things to
come, by familiar presence, by dreams, etc. To conclude, God had in the Old
Testament his Temple at Jerusalem, yea his Exodus 25. 22. N^mb. 7. 89.
Oracle, from whence he spoke, and gave the answer unto Moses: So of ancient
times, the devil erected his Temple at Herodot. Euterpe.
Dodona, and Delphos, whence he gave his answers, for the satisfaction of the
superstitions Heathen. Yea, and at this day, as the Ministers of God do give
resolution to the conscience in matters doubtful and difficult: so the
ministers of Satan, under the name of Wisemen, and Wise-women, are at hand, by
his appointment, to resolve, direct, and help ignorant and unsettled persons,
in cases of distraction, loss, or other outward calamities.

Now the Grounds whereupon he builds his proceedings for certentie, are
cunningly gathered from the disposition of man's heart, by natural all
corruption, and that in three special instances. First, he knows that Man
naturally out of the light of grace, has but 1. Cor. 2. 14. (...).
a mere Saul, endued only with some general and confused notions; and as
for matters of deeper apprehension touching God and heavenly things, there is a
veil of ignorance and blindness drawn over the eyes of his mind. Whereupon,
though he be apt to know and worship a God, and learn his will, yet for want
of information by the word, he is prone to err in the practice of his notion.
Here Satan applies himself to man's measure, and at his own will, draws the
mind into error, by his delusions, and impostures. This made the 2. king. 17.
29. I^h 4. 21.
Samaritants in the Old Testament, and the superstitious Act. 17. ^3.
Athenians in the New, to worship an unknown God, that is the 1. Cor. 10. 20.
Devil. Hence it was, that the greatest Clerks of Greece, Diog. Laert. lib. 1
in Thal^tis epist. ad Pherecid. and l. 3. Strabo Geogr. l. 17.
Thales, Plato, and the rest, for want of a better light, sought unto the
Wizzards of Egypt, whom they called Prophets, men instructed by Satan in the
grounds of Divination. And of this sort were Iannes and lambres mentioned in
the 2. Tim. 3. 8.
Scriptures. Hence it was also that the ancient Heathen, having b^a 8. 19, 20.
no Law and Testimony from God, inquired at Soothsayers, and murmuring
Inchanters; others betook themselves, in matters of doubt and difficulty, to
the old Oracles of Diod. Sic. l. 17. Plin. l. 5. c. 5.
Jupiter Ammon in Libya, of Herodot. Euterpe. Strabo Geogr. l. 16. ex Hom.
Odyss. (...).
Jupiter Dodonaeus at Dodona in Epirus; of Pa^san. in Phocicis. Herodot.
Euterpe Str Geogr. lib. 9. and l. 16.
Apollo at Delphos, of Pa^san. in Hoeoticis. Strabo Geogr. lib. 9.
Jupiter Trophonius in Boeotia, and the rest; where the Devil gave the answer,
sometimes one way, and sometimes another. Secondly, Satan by observation
perceives, that man upon a Omn^^ superstiti^ i^becilli animi atque a nilis
est. Cic. de Divin.
weak and ignorant mind, is prone superstitiously to dote upon the creatures,
attributing some divine operation or virtue to them, without any ground of Gods
word, or common understanding; and consequently disposed to worship God in some
work of man, or to join to the some worship the inventions of man, which he
has not commanded. Upon which ground he made the Heathen to dote upon their
wisemen, to regard Levit. 19. 31.
Soothsayers, and them that wrought with Spirits; The Chaldean Cle^^ Al. (...).
lib. 6. Strabo Geogr. l. 15.
Philosophers renowned for their superstitions and Magical courses, to make
the Heavens, fatalium Legum Tabulam, ascribing that to the virtue of the
Stars, which was known and done by Satanicall operation; The Magicians of
Persia, to admit of corruptions in their ancient good learning, and to give
themselves, upon reading the fabulous writings of the Chaldean Sorcerers, Dan ^
2. Matthew. 2. 1.
to the sludie of unlawful Arts invented by himself, both before and after
the times of Daniel the Prophet: Lastly, the ^ncient Romans upon a
superstitious do^age, never to undertake any business of weight, ^isi
auspicato, unless they had luckie consent and warrant from the Colleges of
their Augurors erected by Romul^u. Thirdly, there is a natural Distemper in
the mind of man, showing it self in these particulars, That he cannot endure
to stand in fear of imminent danger; That he swells in an high conceit of his
own deserts, specially when he is in lower estate, then he would be; That he
will not bear a wrong done, without revenge; That he rests not satisfied, with
the measure of knowledge received, but affects the searching of things
secret, and not revealed. When the mind is possessed with these troubled
passions, with care to help it self; then comes the Devil, and ministers
occasion to use vnlawf^ll means in the general, and forces the mind by
continual suggestion, to determine it self in particular upon his own
crafts. It was the case of 1. Sam 28.
Saul, and of Dan. 2. 1, 2.
Nebuchadnetsar. It caused many of the Heathen Philosophers, to go from Athens
to Memphis, from Grecia to Syria, from men on earth to wicked Spirits in hell,
to get more illumination at the hands of the Prince of darkness. It moved
sundry ^^al-contented Priests of Rome, Platina in Sylv. 2. etc. Fascie.
temporum.
to aspire unto the chair of Supremacy, by Diabolical assistance; yea Benno
Cardinal. de Sylvest ^ and Gregor. 6. Act. 8 9.
to exercise Magical arts, when they were Popes: and thereby to manifest
indeed, that they were not the true Successors of Simon Peter, but heirs of
the virtues of Simon that Magus, who bewitched the people of Samaria, and
professed to do that by the great power of God, which he wrought by the aid
and assistance of the Devil.

If any do think it strange, that Satan should in this sort oppose himself
to the kingdom of God, and maintain his own principality, by such ungodly
arts and exercises; August. Enchirid. cap. 95. and 96.
They must know, that this and all other evils come to pass even by the will
of God, who has justly permitted the same; To punish the wicked for their
horrible sin^es; 1. Sam. 28.
as Saul for his wickedness: To avenge himself upon Man for his ingratitude;
2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12.
who having the truth revealed unto him, will not believe or obey it; To waken
and rowze up the godly, who are sleeping in any great sins or infirmities;
Lastly, to try and prove his people, whether they will cleave to him and his
word, Deuteronomy. 13. 3.
or seek unto Satan and wicked Spirits.

Now from the consideration of the premises, we conclude it a necessary thing
for the Church and people of God, to be acquainted with the dealing of Satan in
this kind, that knowing his subtle devises, they may learn to avoid them.
For which purpose this Treatise was first framed, and now exhibited to your
Lordship. The just commendation whereof, above others formerly divulged
touching this Argument, appears herein, that it serves to the full opening
and declaration of Satan's Method in the ground and practices of Witchcraft.
Wherein among many other remarkable points, it may please you to take special
notice of these particulars. I. That they do grossly err, who either in
express terms deny that there be Witches, or in effect, and by consequent;
auouching that there is no league between them and the Devil; or affirming
they can do no such miraculous works, as are ascribed to them. The former
issues plainly our of the body of the Discourse. And for the latter; That
there is a Covenant between them, either explicit in manner and form, or
implicit by degrees of superstitious proceeding in the use of means
insufficient in themselves; is plainly taught and confirmed in the same. That
Witches may and do work wonders, is evidently proved; howbeit not by an
omnipotent power, ^ Reignald Scot, epist. (...).
(as the (...) has unlearnedly and improperly tea^^ (...)) but by the
assistance of Satan their Princ^^^ ^ho is a powerful Spirit, but yet a
Creatu^^^ well as they. And the Wonders wrough^ (...) them are not properly and
simply miracles, Miravel mirand^, non Miracula.
but works of wonder, because they exceed the ordinary power and capacity
of men, especially such as are ignorant of Satan's ability, and the hidden
causes in nature, whereby things are brought to pass. II. That the Witch
truly convicted, is to be punished with death, the highest degree of
punishment; and that by the Law of Moses, the equity whereof is perpetual.
Yea even the better Witch of the two in common reputation, because both are
equally enemies to God, and all true religion; and it is well known by true
experience, that all professed Sorc^rers, are guilty of many most monstrous
impieties. III. That the Miracles of the Popish Church at this day, are indeed
either no Miracles, or false and deceitful works. Touching corporal presence
in the Sacrament, which they affirm to be by miracle; If it were true, then
miracles were not yet ceased, but should still be as ordinary in the Church,
as are the Sacraments. A point not only confuted in the latter part of this
Treatise, Lib. de civ. Dei. 22. c. 8.
but also by the testimony of purer Antiquity. Augustine says, That miracles
were once necessary to make the world believe the Gospel; but he that now
seeks a sign that he may believe, is a wonder, yea ^ monster in nature.
Chrysostom conclude^ (...) on the same grounds, Homil. 19. open. imperfect.
that there is now in the Church, no necessity of working Miracles; and calls
him a false Prophet that now takes in hand to work them. Again, if there be a
miracle in the Sacrament, it is contrary to the nature of all those that were
wrought, either by Moses and the Prophets, or by Christ, and his Apostles. For
they were apparent to the eye, but this is insensible; and therefore neither of
^orce to move admiration, nor to convince the mind of man, and make him to
believe. As for those, which are pretended to be wrought by Saints in that
church; if we make recourse to the Primitive times, wherein God gave the gift,
to breed faith in the Gentiles; we shall find that the power of producing
such works, was never actually inherent in the Apostles, Act. 3. 12. 16.
but dispensed by their* in the Name of Christ: Neither was it in their
liberty, to work miracles, when they would, but when it pleased God, upon
special cause* to ca^l them thereunto. And i^ neither the power nor the will
was in them, much less is it likely to be sound in any of the Saints. And for
their Relics, of what name soever, so greatly magnified and resorted unto; we
deny there is any such virtue in them. For they may not be thought to be more
effectual then the hem of Christ's garment, from which the power of healing the
woman did not proceed, but from himself: Luke 8. 46.
Or, then the Napkin of Paul, which did not cure the sick, but the power of
God only, dispensed by the hands of Paul. Act. 19. 1^. 11.
Miracles therefore, avouched by them, to be wrought at the Tombs and Statues
of Saints, and by their relics and monuments, are but mere Satanicall
wonders, serving to maintain Idolatry and superstition; and are in truth, no
better then ^the wonders of the Donatists in S. Augustines time, Aug. lib de
vnital. eccl. cap. 16.
aut figmenta mond^^cium hominum, aut port^nta fallacium spirituum. 2. Cor. 4.
4.
IV. That the light of the Gospel purely preached, is a sovereign mean, to
discoue^ and con^ound the power and policy of Sa^^n in Witchcraft and
Sorcerie. The wo^d of God preached, is the weap^n of the Christians warfare,
and is mighty through God to cast down strong bolds. 2. Cor. 10. 4.
At the dispensation of i^ by the disciples of Christ, Satan fall from heaven
a^ lightning. Luke 10. 18.
After the ascension of Christ into Heaven, in the times of Claudius Caesar
Just. Mart. Apol. ad Anton.
, the Devil stirred up sundry persons, who in regard of the admirable works
which they did, by the help of Magic and Sorcerie, were accounted as Gods,
and their Statues erected and worshipped with great reverence. Amongst the
rest, one Simon, called by a kind of eminency; Magus, practicing his trade
with success, to the admiration of the multitude, Act. ^. 10.
was holden to be the great power of God. Whose dealing was first discovered by
the light of the word, shining in the Ministry of the Apostles, and himself
convicted with such evidence of truth, to be an Instrument of Satan, that he
was forced at length to fly ou^ of Sama^i^ into the Western parts, Eusebius.
Eccl. hist. lib. 2. cap. 12.
as Eusebius records in his Ecclesiastical History. By this, Christ the
true angel of the Covenant, lo^ked and bound up Satan for a 1000. Rev. 20. 2.
years after his ascension, that he might not be so generally powerful in
seducing the Gentiles, as he had been before his incarnation. But toward the
expiration of those years, when corruption began to creep into the Papacy;
when the Bishops affected that Sea, and aspired unto it by Diabolical arts;
when the Canons, Decrees, Sentences, Synod^lls, De^r^ialls, Clemen^ines,
Extrauagants, with other Laws and Constitutions, prevailed above the
Scriptures; then began Satan again to erect his kingdom, and these works of
iniquity to be set abroach.

Th^se points together with the whole work ensueing* I humb^y commend to your
Honorable patronage, that under your protection they may freely passes the
common view of the world. Wherein if I seem ouer-bold, thus to press upon your
Lordship unknown; my answer in at hand; That all by-respects (...) part, I
have been hereunto induced many ways. First, upon a reverent opinion of those
rare gifts of knowledge and piety; wherewith God has beautified your person,
and thereby advanced you to high place, and estimation in this Commonwealth;
Whereof those your grave and indicious speeches, even in the weightiest matters
touching God and Caesar, as also those many learned writings, have given large
testimony. From which has issued the greatness of your Name, both in the
present judgment of the world, and in future expectation. Next out of a
resolved persuasion of your Honorable disposition, as in general to the whole
house of Leui, so particularly to those, whose labors have fruitfully flowed
out of the Schools of the Prophets, amongst whom the Author of this book, in
his time, was none of the meanest. Lastly, by the consideration of the Argument
arising out of a Law Judicial, agreeable to the calling and quality of a
Judge. A Law penal in regard of the offense, and therefore suitable to his
proceedings, whose office is to hear with favor, to determine with equity,
to execute justice with moderation. A law of the highest, and greatest weight,
immediately concerning God and his Honor, and therefore appertaining to him,
De^t. 1. 16. 2. Chron. 19. 6.
that sits in the place of God, to maintane his right, that he may be with him,
in the cause and judgment.

By such Motives, I have encouraged my (...), under assurance of your Lordships
pardon, to present you with that, wherein you are most deservedly interessed;
further entreating your favorable interpretation and acceptance, both of the
quality of the Work, and of the pains of the Publisher. And thus heartily
wishing to your Lordship increase of grace and honor, with a daily influence
of blessing and direction from heaven, upon your grave consultations and
employments, I humbly take my leave, and commend you to the grace of God, by
whom do rule all the Judges of the earth. Prove. 8. 16.
Finchingfield. October. 26. 1608.

Your L. in all Christian duty to be commanded, THOMAS PICKERING.

A Table of the Contents.
The entrance into the Discourse. Page 1.

CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Witchcraft in general.
That VVitchcraft is an Art. 4 That VVitchcraft is a wicked Art. 7 The end of
VVitchraft: To work wonders. 8 The grounds of working wonders, coffeehouse
and Curiosity. 9 That wonders are wrought by Satan's assistance. 12 The sorts
of wonders. True wonders wrought only by God. 13, 14 Ly^^g wonders wrought by
Satan and his instruments. 18 That Satan is able to do extraordinary works by
the help of Nature. 19 The sorts of Lying wonders. 22 1. Illusions, of the
Senses. 22 Mind. 22
2. Real works. 27 That Satan cannot change one creature into another. 33
Gods Permission of the practices of Witchcraft. Why he permits them? 38
Satan cannot go beyond his permission. 39

CHAP. II. Of the Ground of all the practices of Witchcraft.
That there is a league between Satan and the Witch. 42 This League is
twofold. Express or open. 47 Secret; and the degree, thereof. 51

CHAP. III. Of the Parts of Witchcraft, and first of Divination.
How Satan being a creature, reuealeth things to come. 56 Divination by
means, which are the true creatures of God* As, By the flying and noise of
Birds. 66 By the Intralls of Beasts. 67 By the stars called Iudiciarie
Astrology. 73
That Predictions by the Stars are unlawful. 75. 86 Of the Observation of
the Sign. 88 Of the choice and observation of days. 91 By Dreams; Divine. 93
Natural. 95 Diabolical. 97
Notes of Difference to know them each from other. 100 By Lots.
Divination by counterfeit means; N^cromancie. 107 Whether that which was
raised by the Witch of Endor, was true Samuel, or no? 109 Divination without
means; by immediate assistance of a familiar Spirit. 121 Practiced two ways.
1. When the spirit is within the Witch. 122 2. When he is out of the Witch. 123
The Difference between Traunces divine and diabolical. 124

CHAP. IV. Of working Witchcraft.
The parts of it. Enchantment; What it is. 127 What a Charm is. 130 Whether
the Charm be in it self effectual to work wonders. 133 Particular practices
referred to Enchantment. 148
Iugling: consisting in delusion and slight. 157 That the wonders done by the
Sorcerers of Egypt before Pharaoh, were lrgling sleights, and not true and
real works. 160


CHAP. V. Of Witches.
What a Witch is. 167 How many Sorts of Witches. 173 The bad Witch. 173 The
good Witch the worser of the two. 174 That the word: (...) used by the 70.
signifies a Witch. 178.

CHAP. VI. Of the punishment of Witches.
Why Witches are and ought to be punished with Death. 182
CHAP. VII. The Application of the Doctrine of Witchcraft to the present times.
Here four Points are handled. I. Whether the Witches of our times^ be the
same with those, which are condemned by this Law of M^ses. 186 Reasons proouing
that they are. 186 Allegations to the contrary answered. 188. 194. etc.
II. How we may be able in these days to discern and discover a Witch. 199
The Means of Discovery two: 200 1. Examination, upon Presumptions. ^00 2.
Conviction upon proofs less sufficient: 205 more sufficient. 211


The causes moving Satan to further their discovery. 215 Why all Witches are
not speedily detected by Satan's means. 216, 217
III. What Remedy may be used to prevent or cure the hurts of Witchcraft. 219
Remedies of two Sorts. Lawful, either preservative or restoratiue. 219
Preservative concerning Persons. 219 Whether the child of God may be bewitched
or no? 222 Concerning places of abode. 224

Restoratiue. How whole countries may be cured. 227 How particular persons may
be cured. 229

False and unlawful Remedies prescribed by the Church of Rome. General. The
gift of casting out of Devils. 232 That there is no such gift in the church,
since the days of the Apostles. 232 Partic^^r, sieve. The name Jesus. 239 The
use of Saints Relics. 241 The Sign of the Gross. 243 Hallowing of
Creatures. 244 Exorcismes. 245

IV. Whether the witches of our times are to be punished with death, and that
by virtue of this Law of Moses? 246 Reasons proouing that they ought. 247
Objections answered. 251

The Table of the Texts of Scripture.
Chap. verse. Page Genesis. 3 20. 226 12 8 226 30 37 141 37 7 94 9 94 41 25 94
44 5 69 Exodus. 7 21 166 11 163 12 165 8 14 166 19 40. 164 8 165 14 21 13 22 18
1 20 182 32 28 254 9 11 164 Leuiticus. 16 8 106 19 31 121 20 27 121 29 19 182
Numbers. 12 6 93 22 6 129 23 23 130 25 8 254 35 31 180. 183 Deuteronom. 1 17 93
13 1 38 2 103 3 93 5 182 6 250 17 3 249 18 9 220 10 67. 73. 92 11 43. 108 121.
127 18 228 20 5 225 Iosh^a. 7 15 106 10 13 14 14 2 106 I. Samuel. 10 21 106 15
23 8 28 8 126 9 122 19 62.108 I. Kings. 17 21 116 22 22 40 II. Kings. 2 21 245
4 34 116 13 21 242 20 11 14 II. Chron. 30 18 226 Job. 1 16 28 21 157 33 15 94
Psalms. 58 5 42. 143 92 10 221 106 30 235 136 4 15 Proverbes. 16 33 106 18 18
106 Ecclesiastes. 1 9 64 9 2 223 10 11 128 Isaiah. 8 19 108 20 ibid. 47 13 74
Jeremy. 23 25 93 Ezekiel. 21 21 67 Daniel. 2 1 102 2 74 3 25 14 4 30 34 6 22
14 8 16 102 11 3 58 Matthew. 1 20 94 2 13 ibid. 4 9 43 7 22 23. 35 12 27 234 14
20 14 20 34 17 Mark. 5 12 41 16 17 234. 237 16 18 232 19 ibid. Luke. 10 17 36
18 227 12 54 71 13 16 222 John. 11 43 17 Acts. 3 6 151 12 16 16 151 5 15 242 7
22 82 8 9 173 10 11 126 13 6 173 8 ibid. 16 16 122. 151 19 12 242 13 2^5. 240
Romans. 8 1 199 I. Corinth. 6 5 230 12 vlt. 36 14 22 233 II. Corinth. 4 4 5 11
14 147 12 2 124 Galatians. 3 1 23. 158 5 20 179 Ephesians. 6 12 5 Philippians.
2 10 241 Colossians. 2 15 198 II. Thessal. 2 9 28. 238 10 39 11 ibid. I.
Timoth. 1 20 230 4 4 245 II. Timoth. 3 8 160. 163 Hebrews. 10 28 182 Reuelat.
14 13 110. 115 21 8 179 22 15 ibid. "Ecclesiasticus." 46 20 112 Tobit. 6 7 226

FINIS.
A Discourse of Witchcraft.
Exodus 22. 18. Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live.
THis text contains one of the Judicial Laws of Moses touching the
punishment of Witchcraft: which argument I have chosen to entreat of, for these
causes:

First, because Witchcraft is arife and common sin in these our days, and
very many are entangled with it, being either practitioners thereof in their
own persons, or at the least, yiedling to seek for help and counsel of such
as practice it.

Again, there be sundry men who receive it for a truth, that Witchcraft is
nothing else but a mere illusion, and Witches nothing but persons deluded by
the Devil: and this opinion takes place not only with the ignorant, but is
holden and maintained by such as are learned, who do avouch it by word and
writing, that there be no witches, but as I said before.

Upon these and such like considerations, I have been moved to undertake the
Interpretation of this Judicial law, as a sufficient ground of the doctrine
which shall be delivered. In handling whereof, two things are distinctly to be
considered. The first, what is a Witch. The second, what is her due and
deserved punishment. And both these being opened and handled, the whole
meaning of the law will the better appear.

For the first. To give the true description of a Witch, is a matter of great
difficulty, because there be many differences and diversities of opinions
touching this point; and therefore that we may properly and truly define a
Witch, we must first pause a while in opening the nature of Witchcraft, so
far forth as it is delivered in the books of the Old and New Testament, and
may be gathered out of the true experience of learned and godly men.

Touching Witchcraft therefore I will consider three points: I. What witchcraft
is. II. What is the ground of the whole practice thereof. III. How many kinds
and differences there be of it.


CHAP. I.
Of the Nature of Witchcraft.
TO begin with the first: According to the true meaning of all the places of
holy Scripture which treat of this point, it may be thus described:

Witchcraft is a wicked Art, serving for the working of wonders, by the
assistance of the Devil, so far forth as God shall in justice permit.

Sect. I.
I say it is an Art, because it is commonly so called and esteemed amongst
men, and there is reason why it should be thus termed. For as in all good and
lawful arts, the whole practice thereof is performed by certain rules and
precepts, and without them nothing can be done: so Witchcraft has certain
superstitious grounds and principles whereupon it stands, and by which alone
the seats and practices thereof are commonly performed.

If it be demanded, what these rules be, and whence they had their beginning,
considering that every Art has reference to some author, by whom it was
originally taught and delivered? I answer, that they wear devised first by
Satan, and by him revealed to wicked and ungodly persons of ancient times, as
occasion served: who receiving them from him, became afterward, in the just
judgment of God, his instruments to report and convey them to others from hand
to hand.

For manifestation whereof, it is to be considered, that God is not only in
general a Sovereign Lord and King over all his creatures, whether in heaven
or earth, none excepted, no not the devils themselves; but that he exercises
also a special kingdom, partly of grace in the Church militant upon earth,
and partly of glory over the Saints and Angels, members of the Church
triumphant in heaven. Now in like manner the Devil has a kingdom, called in
Scripture the kingdom of darkness, whereof himself is the head and governor,
for which cause he is termed (...). 12.
the Prince of darkness, 2. Cor. (...).
the God of this world, ruling and effectually working in the hearts of the
children of disobedience.

Again, as God has enacted Laws, whereby his kingdom is governed, so has
the devil his ordinances, whereby he keeps his subjects in awe and
obedience, which generally and for substance, are nothing else but
transgressions of the very law of God. And amongst the^ all, the precepts of
Witchcraft are the very chief and most notorious. For by them especially he
holds up his kingdom, and therefore more esteems the obedience of them, then
of other. Neither does he deliver them indifferently to every man, but to his
own subjects, the wicked; and not to them all, but to some special and tried
ones, whom he most betrusteth with his secrets, as being the fittest to serve
his turn, both in respect of their willingness to learn and practice, as
also for their ability to become instruments of the mischief, which he
intends to others.

If it be here asked, whence the devil did fetch and conceive his rules? I
answer, out of the corruption and deprauation of that great measure of
knowledge he once had of God, and of all the duties of his service. For that
being quite depraved by his fall, he turns the same to the inuenting and
devising of what he is possibly able, against God and his honor. Hereupon,
well perceiving that God has expressly commanded to renounce, and abhor all
practices of Whitchcraft, he has set abroach this art in the world, as a maine
pillar of his kingdom, which notwithstanding is flatly and directly opposed to
one of the maine principal laws of the kingdom of God, touching the service
of himself in spirit and truth. Ioh. 4. ^4.


Again, the reason why he conueies these ungodly principles and practices from
man to man is, because he finds in experience, that things are far more
welcome and agreeable to the common nature of mankind, which are taught by man
like unto themselves, then if the devil should personally deliver the same to
each man in special. Hereupon, he takes the course at first to instruct some
few only, who being taught by him, are apt to convey that which they know to
others. And hence in probability this deuillish trade, had his first original
and continuance.

Sect. II.
In the second place, I call it a wicked art, ^o distinguish it from all^good
and lawful a^^s, taught in schools of learnin^ which (...) they are
war^antable by the word of God* so are they no less profitable and necessary
in the Church. Again, to show the nature and quali^ie of (...), that it is a
most ungracious and wicked art, as appear^th by the Scriptures. (...)
For when Saul had broken the express commandment of God* in sparing Agag,
and the best things, Samuel tells him, that rebellion and disobedience is as
the sin of Witchcraft, that is, a most horrible and (...), like unto that
wicked, capital, and (...) sin, 1. Sam. 15. 23.

Sect. III.
Thirdly, I ^dde* te^^ing to the working or producing of wonders, wherein is
noted the pro^er end of this art, whereby I put a further difference between
it, and others that are godly and lawful.

Now if question be moved, why man should desire (...) Witchcraft to work
wonders (...) the true and proper cause is (...) first temptation, whereby the
devil prevailed against our first parents, had enclosed within it many sins:
for the eating of the forbidden fruit, was no small or single offense, but as
some have taught, contained in it the breach of every commandment of the
Moral law. Amongst the rest, Satan labored to bring them to the sin of
coffeehouse, whereby they sought to become as Gods; that is, better then God
had made them, not resting content with the condition of men. (...) his sin
was then learned* and could never since b^ forgotten, but continually is
derived from them to al their poster^ie, and now is become so common a
corruption in the whole nature of flesh and blood, that there is scarce a man
to be found; who is not originally tainted therevvith as he is a man.

This corruption shows it self principally in two things, both which are
the maine causes of the practices of Witchcraft.

First, in man's outwardest^^e; for* lie being naturally possessed with a love
of himself, and an high conceit of his own deserving, when he lives in base
and low estate, whether in regard of poverty, or want of honor and
reputation, which he thinks by right is due unto him: he then grows to some
measure of grief and sorrow within himself. Hereupon, he is moved to yield
himself to the devil, to be his vassal and scholar in this wicked art,
supposing that by the working of some wonders, he may be able in time to
relieve his poverty, and to purchase to himself credit and countenance amongst
men.

It were easy to show the truth of this, by examples of some persons, who by
these means have risen from nothing, to great places and preferments in the
world. In stead of all, it appears in certain Popes of Rome, Pla^^^a de vit.
Po^t* in vita Sil^* 2. ^aleus in Act. Romans Pont lib. 5. and lib. 6.
as Syluester the second, Benedict the eight, Alexander the sixth, John the ^0.
and twenty one, etc. who for the attayning of the Popedom (as histories
record) gave themselves to the devil in the practice of witchcraft, that by the
working of wonders, they might rise from one step of honor to another, until
they had seated themselves in the chair of the Papacy. So great was their
desire of eminency in the Church, that it caused them to dislike meaner
conditions of life, and never to cease aspiring, though they incurred thereby
the hazard of good conscience, and the loss of their souls.

The scond degree of coffeehouse, August. confess. l. 10. c. 35
is in the mind and inward man; and that is curiosity, when a man rests not
satisfied with the measure of inward gifts received, as of knowledge, wit,
understanding, memory, and such like, but aspires to search out such things as
God would have kept secret: and hence he is moved to attempt the cursed art of
Magic and witchcraft, as a way to get further knowledge in matters secret and
not reueiled, that by working of wonders, he may purchase fame in the world,
and consequently reap more benefit by such unlawful courses, then in
likelihood he could have done, by ordinary and lawful means.

Sect. IV.
Fourthly, it is affirmed in the description, that Witchcraft is practiced by
the assistance of the Devil, yet the more fully to distinguish it from all
good, lawful, and commendable arts. For in them experience teaches, that the
Arts-master is able by himself to practice his art, and to do things
belonging thereunto, without the help of another. But in this it is otherwise;
for here the work is done by the help of another, namely, the Devil, who is
confederate with the Witch. The power of effecting such strange works, is not
in the art, neither does it flow from the skill of the sorcerer, man-or-woman,
but is derived wholly* from Satan, and is brought into execution by virtue of
mutual consederacie* between him and the Magician.

Now that this part of the description may be more clearly manifested, (...)
proceed to a further point, (...) kind of wonders they be which are ordinarily
wrought by the ministry and power of the devil.

1. Wonders therefore be of two sorts; either true and plain, or lying and
deceitful.

A true wonder is a rare work, done by the power of God simply, either above,
or against the power of nature, and it is properly called a miracle. The
Scripture is plentiful in examples of this kind. Of this sort, was the
dividing of the red sea, and making it dry land by a mighty east wind, that
the children of Israel might pass through it, Exodus 14. 21. For though the
East wind be natural of great force to move the waters, and to dry the
earth; yet to part the sea asunder, and to make the waters to stand as walls on
each side, and the bottom of the sea as a pauement, this is a work simply
above the natural power of any wind, and therefore is a miracle. Again, such
were the wonders done by Moses and Aaron before Pharaoh in Egypt, one whereof,
in stead of many, was the turning of Aarons rod into a serpent, a work
truly miraculous. For it is above the power of natural generation, that the
substance of on creature should be really turned into the substance of another,
as the substance of a roode into the substance of a serpent. Of the like kind,
were the standing of the Sun in the firmament without moving in his course,
for a whole day, losh. 10. 13. the going back of the Sun in the firmament
ten degrees, 2. King. 20. 11. the preservation of the three men, Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego in the midst of the hot fiery furnace, Dan. 3. 25. and
of Daniel in the lions den, Dan. 6. 22. the feeding of five thousand men,
beside women and children, with five loaves and two fishes, Matthew. 14. 20. 21.
the curing of the eyes of the bling man, with spittle and clay tempered
together, Ioh. 9. 6. 7. etc.

Now the effecting of a miracle in this kind, is a work proper to God only;
and no creature, man, or Angel, can do any thing either above or contrary to
nature, but he alone which is the Creator. For as God in the beginning made all
things of nothing, so he has reserved to himself, as a peculiar work of his
almighty power, to change or abolish the substance, property, motion and use
of any creature. The reason is, because he is the author and creator of nature,
and therefore at his pleasure, is perfectly able to command, restrain,
enlarge, or extend the power and strength thereof, without the help or
assistance of the creature.

Again, the working of a miracle is a kind of creation, for therein a thing is
made to be, which was not before. And this must needs be proper to God alon, by
whose power, things that are, were once produced out of things that did not
appear. The conclusion therefore must needs be this, which David confesses in
the Psalm: God only does wondrous things, Psalm 136. 4. that is, works
simply wonderful.

But it is alleged to the contrary, that the Prophets in the old Testament,
and the Apostles in the new, did work miracles. I answer, they did so, but
how? not by their own power, but by the power of God, being only his
instruments, whom he used for some special purpose in those works: and such as
did not themselves cause the miracle, but God in and by them. The same does
Peter and John acknowledge, when they had restored the lame man to the perfect
use of his limbs, that by their power and godliness, they had not made the
man to go, Act. 3. 13.

Again, it is objected, that our Savior Christ in his manhood wrought many
miracles, as those before mentioned, and many more. Ans. Christ as he was man
did something in the working of miracles, but not all. For in every miraculous
work there be two things, the work it self, and the acting or dispensing of
the work: the work it self, being for nature and substance miraculous,
considering it was above or against the order of natural causes, did not
proceed from Christ as man, but from him as God; but the dispensation of the
same, in this or that visible manner^ to the view of men, was done and
performed by his manhood. For example; The raising up of Lazarus out of the
grave, having been dead four days, was a miracle^ to the effecting whereof,
both the Godhead and the manhood of Christ ^o^curred, by their several and
distinct actions. The manhood only uttered the voice, and bad Lazarus come
forth, but it was the godhead of Christ that fetched his soul from heaven, and
put it again into his body, yea, which gave life and power to Lazarus, to
hear the voice uttered, to rise and come forth. Ioh. 11. 43. In like manner,
when he gave sight to the blind, Matthew. 20. 34. he touched their eyes with the
hands of his manhood, but the power of opening them, and making them to see,
came from his Godhead, whereby he was able to do all things. And in all other
miraculous works which he did, the miracle was always wrought by his divine
power only; the outward actions and circumstances that accompanied the same,
proceeded from him as he was man.

Now, if Christ as he is man, cannot work a true miracle, then no mere
creature can do it, no not the Angels themselves, and consequently not Satan,
it being a mere supernatural work, performed only by the omnipotent power
of God.

2. The second sort of wonders, are lying and deceitful, which also are
extraordinary works in regard of man, because they proceed not from the
usual and ordinary course of nature: and yet they be no miracles, because
they are done by the virtue of nature, and not above or against nature simply,
but above and against the ordinary course thereof: and these are properly such
wonders, as are done by Satan and his instruments; examples whereof we shall
see afterward.

If any man in reason think it not likely, that a creature should be able to
work extraordinarily by natural means, he must remember, that though God has
reserved to himself alone the power of abolishing and changing nature, the
order whereof he set and established in the creation, yet the alteration of the
ordinary course of nature, he has put in the power of his strongest
creatures, Angels and devils. That the Angels have received this power, and
do execute the same upon his command or permission, it is manifest by
Scripture, and the proof of it is not so necessary in this place. But that
Satan is able to do extraordinary works by the help of nature (which is the
question in hand) it shall appear, if we consider in him these things.

First, the Devil is by nature a spirit, and therefore of great understanding,
knowledge, and capacity in all natural things, of what sort, quality, and
condition soever, whether they be causes or effects, whether of a simple or
mixed nature. By reason whereof he can search more deeply and narrowly into the
grounds of things, then all corporal creatures that are clothed with flesh and
blood.

Secondly, he is an ancient spirit, whose skill has been confirmed by
experience of the course of nature, for the space almost of six thousand
years. Hence he has attainted to the knowledge of many secrets, and by long
observation of the effects, is able to discern and judge of hidden causes in
nature, which man in likelihood cannot come unto by ordinary means, for want
of that opportunity both of understanding and experience. Hereupon it is, that
whereas in nature there be some properties, causes, and effects, which man
never imagined to be; others, that men did once know, but are now forgot; some,
which men knew not, but might know; and thousands which can hardly, or not at
all be known: all these are most familiar unto him, because in themselus they
be no wonders, but only mysteries and secrets, the virtue and effect whereof he
has sometime observed since his creation.

Thirdly, he is a spirit of wonderful power and might, able to shake the
earth, and to confound the creatures inferior to him in nature and condition,
if he were not restrained by the omnipotent power of God. And this power, as it
was great by his creation, so it is not impaired by his fall, but rather
increased and made more forcible by his irreconciliable malice he bears to
mankind, specially the seed of the woman.

Fourthly, there is in the devil an admirable quicknes and agilitie, proceeding
from his spiritual nature, whereby he can very speedily and in a short spoce
of time, convey himself and other creatures into places far distant one from
another. By these ^ower helps, Satan is enabled to do strange works. Strange
I say to man, whose knowledge since the fall is mingled with much ignorance,
even in natural things; whose experience is of short continuance, and much
hindered by forgetfulness; whose agilitie by reason of his gross nature, is
nothing, if he had not the help of other creatures; whose power is but weakness
and infirmity in comparison of Satan's.

(...) if their be any further doubt, how Satan can by these helps work
wonders, we may be resolved of the truth thereof by considering three other
things. First, that by reason of his great knowledge and skill in nature he is
able to apply creature to creature, and the causes efficient to the matter, and
thereby bring things to pass, that are in common conceit impossible.

Secondly, he has power to move them, not only according to the ordinary
course, but with much more speed and celeritie.

Thirdly, as he can apply and move, so by his spiritual nature he is able, if
God permit, to convey himself into the substance of the creature, without any
penetration of dimensions: and being in the creature, although it be never so
solid, he can work therein, not only according to the principles of the
nature thereof, but as far as the strength and ability of those principles
will possibly reach and extend themselves. Thus it appears, that the devil
can in general work wonders.

3. Now more particularly, the devils wonders are of two sorts. Illusions, or
real actions.

An illusion is a work of Satan, whereby he deludeth or deceives man. And it
is twofold; either of the outward senses, or of the mind. An illusion of the
outward senses, August de (...). c. 18.
is a work of the devil, whereby he makes a man to think that he hears,
sees, feels or touches such things as indeed he does not. This the devil
can easily do diverse ways, even by the strength of nature. For example, by
corrupting the instruments of sense, as the humor of the eye, etc. or by
altering and changing the air, which is the means whereby we see, and such
like.

Experience teaches us, that the devil is a skillful practitioner in this
kind, though the means whereby he works such feats, be unknown unto us. In
this manner Paul affirms that the Galatians were deluded, when he says, O
foolish G^latians who has bewitched you? Gal. 3. 1. Where he uses a word (...)
borrowed from the practice of witches and sorcerers, who use to cast a miste
(as it were) before the eyes to dazzle them, and make things to appear unto
them which indeed they do not see: and the ground of Paul's comparison is that
which he takes for a granted truth, that there be such delusions whereby men's
senses are and may be corrupted by Satanicall operation.

Thus again the devil by the Witch of Endor deceived Saul in the appearance
of Samuel, ^. Sam. 28. making him believe that it had been Samuel indeed,
whereas it was but a mere coun^erfeit of him, as shall appear hereafter.
Again, the devil knowing the constitutions of men, and the particular
diseases whereunto they are inclined, taks the vantage of some, and secondeth
the nature of the disease by the co^currence of his own delusion, thereby
corrupting the imagination, and working in the mind a strong persuasion, that
they are become, that which in truth they are not. This is apparent in that
disease* which is termed Lycanthropia, where some, having their brains
possessed and distempered with melancholy, have verily thought themselves to
be wolves, and so behaved themselves. And the Histories of men in former ages,
have recorded strange testimonies of some, that have been thus turned into
wolves, lions, dogs birds, and other creatures, which could not be really in
substance, but only in appearance, and fantasy corrupted, and so these
records are true. For God in his just judgment, may suffer some men so to be
bewitched by the devil, that to their conceit they may seem to be like these
bruit beast, though indeed they remain true (...) still. For it i^ a work
surmounting the devils power, to change the substance of any one creature,
into the substance of another. By this kind of delusion the Church of Rome, in
the times of blindness and ignorance, has taken great advantage, and much
increased her riches and honor. For there be three points of the religion of
that Church, to wi^^e, Rurgatorie, Invocation of (...) Saints, and honoring of
Relics, whereby she has notably enriched her self, all which had their
first foundation from these and such like Satanicall impostures. For the only
way, whereby they have brought the common sort to yield unto them, both for
belief and practice, has been by deluding their outward sense^, with false
apparitions of ghosts and souls of men, walking and ranging abroad after their
departure, and such like^ whereby simple persons, ignorant of their fetches and
delusions, have been much affrighted, and caused thorough extremity of fear
and dread, to purchase their own peace and security, by many and great
expenses. And indeed these were the strongest arguments that ever they had,
and which most prevailed with the common people, as is manifest in stories of
all nations and ages, where such deceits have taken place, though oftentimes by
the just judgment of God, they were taken in their craft, and their feat^
revealed.

The second kind of illusion, is of the mind, whereby the devil deceiues the
mind, and makes a man think that of himself which is not true. Thus
experience teaches, that he has deluded men both in former and latter times,
who have avouched and professed themselves to be kings, or the sons of Kings.
Yea, some have holden themselves to be Christ, some to be Elias, some to be
John the Baptist, and some extraordinary Prophets. And the like concei^s have
entered into the minds of sundry Witches, by the suggestion and persuasion of
the devil. To whom, when they have wholly resigned their souls and bodies,
they have been moved to believe things impossible touching themselves, as
that they have indeed been changed into other creatures, as catts, birds,
mise, etc. The inquisitions of Spain and other countries, wherein these and
such like things are recorded touching Witches really metamorphosed into such
creatures, cannot be true; considering that it is not in the power of the
devil, thus to change substa^ces into other substa^ces. And those conuersions
recorded by them, were only Satan's illusions, wherewith the minds of Witches
were possessed, and nothing else; which though they were extraordinary, (as
the rest of this kind are) yet they went not beyond the power of nature.

The second sort of the devils wonders, are real works, that is, such as are
indeed that which they seem and appear to be. These, howsoever to men that
know not the natures of things, nor the secret and hidden causes thereof, they
may seem very strange and admirable, yet they are no true miracles, because
they are not above and beyond the power of nature.

If it be here alleged, that the devils works are not real and true
actions, because the holy Ghost calls them Lying wonders, 2. These. 2. 9. I
answer, that they are called Lying wonders, not in respect of the works
themselves, for they were works truly done and effected; but in regard of the
devils end and purpose in working the^, which is to lie unto men, and by them
to deceive. The truth of which point will appear in the view of some
particular examples.

First* we read in the history of Job, Job. 1. 16.
that Satan brought down fire from heaven, which burnt up Jobs sheep and
servants; and caused a mighty wind to blow down the house upon his
children, ^er. 19.
as they were feasting, to destroy them. Again, he smot the body of Job with
botches and boyles. All these were true and real works, very strange and
admirable, and yet no miracles, because they exceeded not the compass of
nature. For first, when he cast down the fire from heaven, he did not create
the fire of nothing, for that is a work proper to God alone, but applied
creature to creature, and therefore produced such a matter as was fit to make
fire of. If it be demanded, how he is able to do this? we must remember, that
his knowledge in natural causes is great, and therefore he was not ignorant of
the material cause of fire, which being thoroughly known and found out,
Satan brought fire unto it, and so putting fire to the matter of fire, he
brought it down by his power and agilitie from heaven, upon the cattle and
servants of Job. Again, the wind which blewe down the house, where his
sons and daughters were eating and drinking, was not created by the devil,
but he knowing well the matter whereof winds are generated naturally, added
matter to matter, and thence came the wind; whereunto he ioynes himself,
being a spirit of a swift and speedy nature, and so makes it, for his own
purpose, the more violent and forcible. Thirdly, he smote Jobs body with sore
boyles, from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot. Now this may
seem strange, that he should have such power over man's body, as to cause such
diseases to breed in it. Therefore we are further to understand, that his
knowledge extends it self to the whole frame and disposition of man's body,
whereby it comes to pass, that the causes of all diseases are well known unto
him, and he is not ignorant ho^e the humors in the body may be putrified, and
what corrupt humors will breed such and such diseases, and by what means the
air it self may be infected: hereupon preparing his matter, and applying
cause to cause, he practiced upon the body of Job, and filled him with
grievous sores.

Another example of Satan's real works is this. By reason of his great power
and skill, he is able to appear in the form and shape of a man, and resemble
any person or creature, and that not by deluding the senses, but by assuming to
himself a true body. His power is not so large, as to create a body, or bring
again a ^oule into a body, yet by his dexterity and skill in natural causes
he can work wonderfully. For he is able, having gathered together fit matter,
to join member to member, and to make a true body, either after the likeness
of man, or some other creature; and having so done, to enter into it, to move
and stir it up and down, and therein visibly and sensibly to appear unto
man; which though it be a strange work, and besides the ordinary course of
nature, yet it is not simply above the power thereof.

For a third instance. The devil is able to utter a voice in plain words and
speech, answerable to man's understanding in any language. Not that he can take
unto himself being a spirit, an immeadiate power to speak or frame a voice
of nothing without means, but knowing the natural and proper causes and
means by which men do speak, by them he frames in himself the voice of a
man, and plainly vtters the same in a known language. In this manner he
abused the tongue and mouth of the serpent, when in plain words he tempted Eve
to eat the forbidden fruit. Now it is to be remembered here, that when the
devil speaks in a creature, it must be such a creature, as has the
instruments of speech, or such whereby speech may be framed and uttered, not
otherwise: for it was never heard that he spoke in a stock or a stone, or any
created entity, that had not the means and power of uttering a voice, at least
in some sort; it being a work peculiar to the Creator, to give power of
utterance where it is not by creation. Again, when he frames a voice in a
creature, he does it not by giving immediate power to speak, for that he
cannot do, and the creature abused by him, remains in that regard, as it was
before. But it being naturally fitted and disposed to utter a voice, though
not perfectly to speak as a man, he furthereth and helps nature in it, and
adds to the faculty thereof a present use of words, by ordering and ruling
the instruments to his intended purposes. And to conclude this point, look
what strange works and wonders may be truly effected by the power of nature,
(though they be not ordinarily brought to pass in the course of nature) those
the devil can do, and so far forth as the power of nature will permit, he is
able to work true wonders, though for a false and evil end.

Here a question is moved by some, whether the devil can change one creature
into another, as a man or woman into a beast? for some, notwithstanding the
doctrine already taught, are of opinion, that he can turn the bodies of
Witches into other creatures, as hares, cattes, and such like. Ans. The
transmuta^ion of the substance of one creature into another, as of a man into a
beast of what kind soever, is a work simply above the power of nature, and
therefore cannot be done by the devil, or any creature. For it is the proper
work of God alone, as I have said, to create, to change or abolish nature.

It is objected, that such cha^ges have been made. For Lots wi^e was turned
into a pillar of salt, Genesis 19. 26. Ans. It is true, but that was done by the
mighty power of God, neither can it be proved that any creature, Angel, or
other, was ever able to do the like.

But it is further said, that king Nabuchadnezzar was turned in^o a beast, and
did eat grass with the beasts of the field, Dan. 4. 30. Ans. There is no such
matter: his substance was not changed, so as his body became the body of a
beast indeed, but his conditions only were altered by the judgment of God
upon his mind, whereby he was so far forth bereaved of humane sense and
understanding. Again, for his behavior and kind of life, he became
altogether brutish for the time, and excepting only his outward form and
shape, no part of humanity could appear in him: but that he retained his
humane body still, it is evident by his own words, verse. 31. when he says,
And mine understanding was restored to me: which argues plainly, that the hand
of God was upon him in some kind of madness and fury, and therefore that
there was not a change of his body and substance, but a strange and fearful
alteration in his mind and outward behavior. And though such a transmutation
should be granted, yet it makes nothing for the purpose, considering it was the
work of God only, and not of the deull. And thus we see what kind of wonders
the devil can bring to pass. The meditation of which point may teach us two
things.

First that the working of wonders is not a thing that will commend man unto
God, for the devil himself, a wicked spirit, can work them: And many shall
allege this in the day of judgment, that they have by the name of God cast
out devils, and done many great works, to whom notwithstanding the Lord will
say, I never knew you; depart from me ye workers of in^quitie, Matthew. 7. 22.
23. It behooves us rather to get unto our selves the precious gifts of faith,
repentance, and the fear of God, yea to go before others in a godly life and
upright conuers^tion, then to excel in effecting of strange works. When the
seauentie Disciples came to our Savior Christ with joy, and told him, that
even the devils were subdued unto them through his name, Luke 10. 17. he
counsels them, not to rejoice in this, that wicked spirits were s^bdued unto
them, but rather, because their names were written in heaven, verse. 20.

Indeed to be able to work a wonder, is an excellent gift of God, and may
minister matter of rejoicing, when it proceeds from God: but seeing the
devil received this power by the gift of creation, our special joy must not
be therein, but rather in this, that we are the adopted sons of God, in which
privilege the devil has no part with us. And therefore the Apostle, 1. Cor.
13. making a comparison of the gifts of the spirit, as of speaking diverse
tongues, of prophesying, and working miracles with love; in the end, wishes
men to labor for the best gifts, which are faith, hope, and love, because by
these we are made partakers of Christ, on whom we ought to set our hearts, and
in whom we are commanded ^lwaies to rejoice, Phil. 4. 4.

Secondly, we learn from hence, not to believe or receive a doctrine now or at
any time, because it is confirmed by wonders. For the devil himself is able
to confirm his errors and Idolatrous services by strange and extraordinary
signs, by which usually he labors to avouch and verisie the grossest points
of falsehood in matter of religion. On the contrary, we must not reject or
contemn a doctrine, because it is not thus confirmed. This was a maine fault
in the Jews, who would not receive the word preached by Christ, unless he
showed them a sign from heaven. Indeed in the primitive Church it pleased God
to confirm that doctrine which the Apostles taught, by great signs and
miracles, but now that gift is ceased, and the Church has no warrant to expect
any further evidence of the religion it professes and enjoys by arguments of
that kind; yea rather it has cause to suspect a doctrine taught for the
wonders sake, whereby men labor to avouch it.

Sect. V.
The last clause in the description, August. de Trin l. 3. c. 7.
is this; so far forth as God in justice suffers: which I add, for two
causes. First, ^o show that God, for just causes, permi^te^h the Arts of
Magic and Witchcraft, and the practices thereof. Now this he does in his
providence, either for the trial of his children, or for the punishment of the
wicked.

First therefore God permits these wicked Arts in the Church, to prove whether
his children will steadfastly believe in him, and seek unto his word, or cleave
unto the devil, by seeking to his wicked instruments. This Moses plainly
forewarned the Church of God of, in his time, Deuter. 13. v. 1. If there arise
among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and give thee a sign or wonder,
v. 2. and the sign and wonder which he has told thee, come to pass, saying,
Let us go after other gods, which thou have not known, and serve them, v. 3.
thou shall not hearken to the words of that Prophet, etc.

Again, God suffers them for the punishment of unbelievers and wicked men:
for oftentimes God punishes one sin by an other, as the antecedent sins by
the consequent. This Paul plainly shows (speaking of the days of
Antichrist) that because men received not the love of the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
10, 11.
therefore God would send upon them strong illusions, that they should believe
lies. And we may resolve our selves, that for this very cause, God suffers
the practices of Witchcraft, to be so rise in these our days, to punish the
ingratitude of men, who have the truth revealed unto them, and yet will not
believe and obey the same, but tread it under their feet, ^ 12.
that all they might be condemned which believed not the truth, but took
pleasure in unrighteousness.

Secondly, this last clause is added, to show that in the practices of
sorcerie and witchcraft, the Devil can do so much only as God permitts him,
and no more. Doubtless, his malice reaches further, and consequently his will
and desire; but God has restrained his power, in the execution of his
malicious poses, whereupon he cannot go a whit further, then God gives him
leave and liberty to go. The Magicians of Egypt did some wonders in show like
unto the miracles wrought by Moses and Aaron, and that for a time, by changing
a rod into a serpent, and water into blood, and by bringing froggs through he
slight and power of the devil; but when it pleased God, to determine their
practices, and give them no further liber^ie, they could not do that, which in
likelihood was the meanest of all the rest, the turning of the dust of the land
into lice, and themselves gave the true reason thereof, ^aving, That this was
the finger of God, Exodus 8. 19. When the deuil^ went out and became a false
spirit in the mouth of all Ahabs Prophets, to intise him to go to fall at
Ramoth G^le^d, he went not of his own will; but by the authority of God, who
commanded him to go ^^^entise Ahab, and suffered him to prevail, 1. King. 22.
20. and the act was not the act of Satan, but of God, whose instrument he was;
and therefore the holy Ghost says by Mi^aiah, The Lord-hath put a lying spirit
in the mouth of all these thy Prophets, and the Lord has appointed evil
against thee, v. 23. Hence also it was, that the devils, being cast out of
the man that had an unclean spirit, asked leave of Christ to enter into the
heard of swine, and could not enter in till he had permited them; Mark. 5. 12,
13. And we read oftentimes in the Gospel, that our Savior cast out many
devils by his word only, thereby showing that he was absolute Lord over them,
and that without his permission; they could do nothing.

And thus much touching the general (...) of this Art.

CHAP. II.
The Ground of Witchcraft, and of all the practices thereof.
THe Ground of all the practices of Witchcraft, is a league or covenant made
between the Witch and the Devil: wherein they do mutually bind themselves
each to other. If any shall think it strange, that man or woman should enter
league with Satan, their utter enemy; they are to know it for a most evident
and certain truth, that may not be called into question. And yet to clear the
judgment of any one in this point, I will set down some reasons in way of
proof.

First, the holy Scripture does intimate so much unto us in the 58. Psalm. v. 5.
where, howsoever the common translation runs in other terms, yet the words
are properly to be read thus; which hears not the voice of the mutterer
joining societies cunningly. And in them the Psalmist lays down two points.
First, the effect or work of a charm, muttered by the Inchanter; namely, that
it is able to stay the Adder from s^inging those which shall lay hold on him,
or touch him. Secondly, the maine foundation of the charm; societies or
confederacies cunningly made, not between man and man, but (as the words
import) between the Inchanter and the devil. The like we read, Deuter. 18.
11. where the Lord charge his people when they come into the land of Canaan,
that amongst other abominations of the heathen, they should beware least any
were found amongst them, that joined society, that is, entered into league and
compact with wicked spirits.

A second reason may be this: it is the practice of the devil to offer to make
a bargain and covenant with man. Thus he dealt with our Savior Christ, Math.
4. 9.
in the third temptation wherewith he assaulted him, promising to give unto him
all the kingdoms of the earth, and the glory of them, (which he showed him in
a vision) if Christ for his part would fall down and worship him. The offer
was passed on the behalf of Satan, and now to make a perfect compact between
them, there was nothing wanting but the free consent of our Savior unto the
condition propounded. Whereby it is manifest, that the Devil makes many
covenants in the world, because he finds men and women in the most places,
fitted for his turn in this kind, who will not let to worship him for a far
less matter then a kingdom. And it is not to be doubted, that thousands in
the world, had they been offered so fair as Christ was, would have been as
willing to have yielded upon such conditions, as the Devil to have offered.

Thirdly, the common confession of all Witches and So^cerers, both before and
since the coming of Christ, does yet more fully confirm the same. For they
have confessed with one consent, that the very groundwork of all their
practices in this wicked art, is their league with the devil. And hence it
appears, how and whereupon it is, that Sorcerers and Witches can bring to
pass strange things by the help of Satan; which other men ordinarily can not
do; namely, because they have entered a league with him, whereby he has bound
himself to them, for the effecting of rare and extraordinary works, which
others, not joined with him in the like confederacy, are not able either by
his help, or any power or policy of their own to bring to pass. Hereupon it
was, that the Witch of Endor showed unto Saul the appearance of Samuel, which
neither Saul himself, nor any in all his court could do. There was no great
virtue in the matter or frame of her words, for she was ignorant and had no
learning. By power she could not effect it, being a weak woman; neither was
it like that she had more cunning and policy then any of the learned Jews in
those times had for such purposes. The main reason was, her league made with
Satan, by virtue whereof she commanded him to appear in the likeness of
Samuel, which neither Saul nor any of his company could do, by virtue of such
covenant, which they had not made.

The end why the Devil seeks to make a league with men, may be this; It is
a point of his policy, not to be ready at every man's command to do for him
what he would, except he be sure of his reward; and no other means will serve
his turn for taking assurance hereof, but this covenant. And why so? that
hereby he may testify both his hatred of God, and his malice against man. For
since the time that he was cast down from heaven, he has hated God and his
kingdom, and greatly maligned the happy estate of man, especially since the
covenant of grace made with ou^ first parents in Paradise. For he thought to
hau^ brought upon them by their fall, eternal and final confusion, but
perceiving the contrary by virtue of the covenant of grace; then manifested,
and seeing m^n by it to be in a better and surer estate then before, he much
more maligned his estate, and bears the ranker hatred unto God for that his
mercy bestowed upon him.

Now that he might show forth this hatred and malice, he takes upon him to
imitate God, and to counterfeit his dealings with his Church. As God therefore
has made a covenant with his people, so Satan ioynes in league with the world,
laboring to bind some men unto him, that so if it were possible, he might
draw them from the covenant of God, and disgrace the same. Again, as God has
his word and Sacraments, the seals of his covenant unto believers; so the
devil has his words and certain outward signs to ratify the same to his
instruments, as namely, his figures, characters, gestures, and other Satanicall
ceremonies, for the confirmation of the truth of his league unto them. Yea
further, as God in his covenant, requires says of us to the believing of his
promises: so the devil in his compact, requires faith of his vassalls, to put
their affiance in him, and rely on him for the doing of whatsoever he binds
himself to do. Lastly, as God hears them that call upon him according to his
will: so is Satan ready at hand upon the premises, endeavoring to the utmost
of his power, (when God permits him) to bring to pass whatsoever he has
promised. And so much of the league in general.

More particularly, the league between the Devil and a Witch, is twofold:
either expressed and open, or secret and close.

The express and manifest compact is so termed, because it is made by solemn
words on both parties. And it is not so expressly set down in Scriptures, as
in the writings of learned men, which have recorded the confessions of Witches,
and they express it in this manner. First, the Witch for his part, as a slave
of the devil, binds himself unto him by solemn vow and promise to renounce
the true God, his holy word, the covenant he made in Baptism, and his
redemption by Christ; and withal to believe in the devil, to expect and
receive aid and help from him, and at the end of his life, to give him either
body, or soul, or both: and for the ratifying hereof, he gives to the devil
for the present, either his own handwriting, or some part of his blood, as a
pledge and earnest penny to bind the bargain. The devil on the other side,
for his part promises to be ready at his vassalls command, to appear at any
time in the likeness of any creature, to consult with him, to aid and help
him in any thing he shall take in hand, for the procuring of pleasures, honor,
wealth, or preferment, to go for him, to carry him wheth^r he will, in a
word, to do for him, whatsoever he shall command. Many sufficient testimonies
might he alleged for the proof hereof, but it is so manifest in daily
experience, that it cannot well be called into question.

But yet if it seem strange unto any, that there should be such persons in the
world, that make such fearful couena^ts with the devil, let them consider
but this one thing, and it will put them out of doubt.

The nature of man is exceeding impatient in crosses, and outward afflictions
are so tedious unto mortal minds, and press them with such a measure of
grief, that some could be contented with all their hearts to be out of the
world, if thereby they may be released of such extremity, and hereupon they
care not what means they use, what conditions they undertake to ease and help
themselves. The devil finding men in these perplexities, is ready to take his
advantage, and therefore perceiving them now fitted for his purpose to work
upon; he insinuates and offers himself, to procure them ease and deliverance,
if they will use such means, as he shall prescribe for that purpose: and to a
natural man there is no greater mean then this to make him join society
with the devil. He therefore, without any further doubting or deliberation,
condescendes to Satan, so as he may be based and relieved in these miseries.

Again, we are to consider, that in these cases, the devil gets the greater
hold of man, and mooues him to yield unto his suggestions the rather, because
that which he promises to do for him is present and at his command, and
therefore certain; whereas the thing to be performed on the behalf of the
party himself, as the giving of body and soul, etc. is to come sundry
years after, and therefore in regard of the particular time, uncertain. Now
the natural man not regarding his future and final estate, preferres the
present commodity before the loss and punishment that is to come a far off,
and thereby is persuaded to yield himself unto Satan. And by these and such
like antecedents are many brought to make open league with the devil.

The secret and close league between the Witch and Satan is that, w^erein they
mutually give consent each to other, but yet without a sworn covenant
conceived in express words and conference. Of this there be two degrees.
First, when a man uses superstitions (...) of prayer, wherein he expressly
requires the help of the devil, without any mention of sol^mine words or
covenant going before. That this is a kind of compact it is plain, because
herein there is a mutual underhand consent between the party and the devil,
though it be not manifest. For when a (...) to use supersti^ous forms of
invocation, for help in time of need; by the very using of them, His heart
consents to Satan, and he would gladly have the thing effected. When
therefore the devil has notice of them, and endeauo^^^ to effect the thing
prayed for, therein also he gives consent; so as though there be no express
words of compact outwardly framed on both parts, yet the concurrence of a
mutual consent for the bringing to pass of the same things, makes the
covenant authentical. For according to the received rules of equity and
reason; mutual consent of party with party, is sufficient to make a
bargain, though there be no solemn course or form of words to manifest the
same to others.

The second degree is, when a man uses superstitious means to bring any thing
to pass, which in his own knowledge, have no such virtue in themselves to
effect it, without the especial operation of the Devil.

Superstitious means I call all those, which neither by order of creation, nor
by the special appointment and blessing of God since, have any virtue in them,
to bring to pass that thing for which they are used. For example; A charm,
consisting of set words and syllables, both rude, barbarous, and unknown, used
for the curing of some disease or pain, is a superstitious means; because it
has no virtue in it self to cure, either by the gift of God in the creation,
or by any special appointment afterward in his word, or otherwise. And
therefore when this mean is used by man, which he knows has no such virtue
in it, for the effecting of that work for which it was used, there is a secret
league made with the Devil.

Yet here I add this clause, in his own knowledge, to put a difference
between men, which use superstitious means to bring some things to pass: For
some there be, which when they use them, know they be merely superstitious,
yea weak and impotent, having no virtue in themselves for the purpose whereto
they are used; as the repeating of certain forms of words; the using of signs,
characters, and figures, which in effect are mere charms, no whit effectual
in themselves, but so far forth as they serve for watchwords unto Satan,
without whose aid nothing is done by them. A plain argument that the vser
hereof has in his heart secretly indented with Satan, for the accomplishment
of his intended works. A second sort there is, which uses them for some
special end, being persuaded that there is virtue in the means themselves to
bring the thing to pass, and yet not knowing that either they be
superstitious, or have their efficacy by the power and work of the devil.
Such persons have made as yet no league with Satan, but they are in the high
way thereunto. And this course is a fit preparation to cause them to join
with him in covenant. I show it by an example. A man is fallen into some
extemitie, and finds himself bewitched; his pain is great, and he desires
with all his heart to be cured and delivered. Hereupon he sends for the
suspected Witch; being come, he offers to scratch him or her, thinking by this
means to be cured of the witchcraft. His reason is no other, then a strong
persvvasion, that there is simply virtue in his scratching to cure him, and
discover the Witch, not once suspecting that the help comes by the power of
the Devil, but from the action it self. This doing, he may be healed: but the
truth is, he sins and breaks Gods commandment. For the using of these
means is plain Witchcraft, as afterward we shall see. And yet for all this,
the party cannot be said in present to have made a league with Satan,
because he thought, that though he yielded to the use of superstitious means
for his curing, yet there had been in the said means a virtue of h^ling,
without any help or work of the Devil.

CHAP. III.
Of the kinds of Witchcraft, and first of Divination.
WItchcraft is of two sorts; Divining, or Working. For the whole nature of
this art, consists either in matter of Divination and conjecture, or in
matter of practice. And in both these it is to be remembered, that nothing can
be effected, unless the party have made a league with the Devil, express or
secret, or at the least, a prepa^ation thereunto, by a false and erroneous
opinion of the means.

Sect. I.
Divination is a part of Witchcraft, whereby men reveal strange things, either
past, prese^^, or to come, by the assistance of the devil.

If it be here demanded, how the devil being a creature, should be able to
manifest and bring to light things past, or to foretell things to come; I
answer, first generally, that Satan in this particular work, transformes
himself into ^n Angel of light, and takes upon him the exercise of these
things in an ambitious (though false) imitation of divine revelations and
predictions, made and used by God in the times of the Prophets and Apostles.
And this he does (as much is in him lies) to obscure the glory of God, and to
make himself great in the opinion of ignorant and unbelieving persons. Again,
though Satan be but a creature, yet there be sundry ways whereby he is able
to divine.

First, by the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, wherein are set down
sundry prophecies concerning things to come. In the Old Testament are recorded
many prophecies concerning the state of Gods Church, from the first age of the
world, till the coming of Christ. In the New Testament likewise are recorded
others, touching the self same thing, from the coming of Christ in the latter
days, to the end of the world. Now the devil being acquainted with the
history of the Bible, and having attained unto a greater light of knowledge in
the prophecies therein contained, then any man has; by stealing diuinations
out of them, he is able to tell of many strange things, that may in time fall
out in the world, and answerably may show them ere they come to pass.

For example: Alexander the great before he made war with Darius king of
Persia, consulted with the Oracle, that is, with the devil, touching the event
and issue of his enterprise. The Oracle answered him thus; Alexander shall be a
Conqueror; upon the prediction of the Oracle, P^^tarch. in vita Alex.
Alexander wages war with Darius, and inuades Asia, and having conquered him,
translated the Empire from Persia to Greece, according as the Oracle had said.
Now if question be made, how the devil knew the event of this war, and
consequently made it known to Alexander? The answer is, by the help of a
prophecy in the Old testament; for this thing was particularly set down
before hand by the Prophet Daniel, Dan. 11. 3. where he says; That a mighty
King shall stand up, and shall rule with great dominion, and do according to
his pleasure, and this was Alexander the great. Satan therefore knowing the
secret meaning of the Angels words unto Daniel, framed out of them a true and
direct answer, whereas he was not able of himself to de^ine certainly of the
event of things to come in particular.

The second means, whereby the devil is furnished for his purpose, is his
own exquisite knowledge of all natural things; as of the influences of the
stars, the constitutions of men and other creatures, the kinds, virtues, and
operations of plants, roots, herbs, stones, etc. which knowledge of his,
goes many degrees beyond the skill of all men, yea even of those that are most
excellent in this kind, as Philosophers, and Physicians. No marvel therefore,
though out of his experience in these and such like, he is able aforehand to
give a likely guess at the issues and events of things, which are to him so
manifestly apparent in their causes.

A third help and furtherance in this point, is his presence in the most
places: for some devils are present at all assemblies and meetings, and
thereby are acquainted with the consultations and conferences both of Princes
and people; whereby knowing the drift and purpose of men's minds, when the same
is manifested in their speeches and deliberations, they are the fitter to
foretell many things, which men ordinarily cannot do. And hence it is
apparent, how Witches may know what is done in other countries, and whether one
nation intends war against an other, namely, by Satan's suggestion, who was
present at the consultation, and so knew it, and revealed it unto them. But how
then comes it to pass, that the consultations and actions of Gods Church and
children, are not disclosed to their enemies? even by the unspeakable mercy
and goodness of God, who though for special causes sometimes, he suffers
Satan by this means to bring things to light, yet he has restrained this his
liberty, and subjected it unto his own will, so as he keeps him out of such
meetings, or compels him to conceal; whereas otherwise his malice is so great,
tha^ not a word could be spoken, but it should be carried abroad to the hurt
and disturbance both of Churches and commonwealths.

The fourth way, is by putting into men's minds wicked purposes and couns^ls;
for after the league once made he labors with them by suggestions and where
God gives him (...), he never cease persuading, till he has brought his
enterprise to pass. Having therefore: first brought into the mind of man, a
resolution to do some evil, he goes and reueales it to the Witch, and by
force of persuasion upon the party tempted, he frames the action intended to
the time foretold, and so finally deludes the Witch his own instrument,
foretelling nothing, but what himself has compassed and set about.

The fifth help, is the agilitie of Satan's nature, whereby he is able speedily
to convey himself from place to place, yea to pass through the whole world in
a short ^ime. For God has made him by nature a spirit, who by the gift of his
creation, has attained the benefit of swiftnes, not only in dispatching his
affairs, but also in the carriage of his person with great expedition for the
present accomplishment of his own desires.

Lastly, God does often use Satan as his instrument, for the effecting of his
intended works, and the executing of his judgments upon men; and in those
cases manifests unto him, the place where, the time when, and the manner how
such a thing should be done. Now all such things as God will have effected by
the devil, he may fortell before they come to pass, because he knows them
before hand by revelation and assignment from God. Thus by the Witch of Endor
he foretold to Saul the time of his death and of his sons, and the ruin of
his kingdom, 1. Sam. 28. 19.
saying, To morrow shall thou and thy sons be with me, and the Lord shall give
the host of Israel into the hands of the Philisti^s; which particular event,
and circumstances appertaining, he did truly define; not of himself, but
because God has drawn away his good spirit from Saul, and had delivered him to
be guided by the devil, whom he also appointed as a means; and used as an
instrument to work his overthrow. The Scripture indeed makes not particular
mention of the time of Saul's death, it only records the manner thereof, and
that which followed upon his death; the translating of the kingdom to his
neighbor David after him; and yet because God used Satan as an instrument to
bring this to pass, hereupon he was able to foretell the particular time, when
the will of God should be wrought upon him. And these be the ordinary means
and helps whereby the devil may know and declare strange things, whether
past, present, or to come.

Neither may this seem strange, that Satan by such means should attain unto
such knowledge, for even men by their own observations may give probable
conjectures of the state and condition of sundry things to come. Thus we read,
that some by observation have found out probably, and foretold the periods of
famille^ and kingdoms. For example, that the time and continuance of kingdoms
is ordinarily determined at 500. years, or not much above; and that great
families have not gone beyond the sixth and seventh generation. And as for
special and private things, the world so runs (as it were) in a circle,
that if a man should but ordinarily observe the course of things, either in the
vveather, or in the bodies of men, or otherwise, he might easily foretell
before hand what would come after. And by these and such like instances of
experiences, men have gessed at the alterations and changes of estates, and
things in particular. Now if men which be but of short continuance, and of a
shallovv reach in comparison, are able to do such things, how much more
easily may the Devil, having so great a measure of knowledge and experience,
and being of so long continuance, having also marked the course of all
estates, be able to foretell many things which are to come to pass? specially
considering what the wise man has set down to this purpose, that that which
has been, shall be; and that which has been done, shall be done; and there
is no new thing under the Sun, Eccl. 1. 9.

If it be here alleged, that Divination is a prerogative of God himself, and
a part of his glory inco^municable to any creature, Isa. 41. 23. I answer,
Things to come must be considered two ways; either in themselves, or in their
causes and signs, which either go with them, or before them. To foretell
things to come, as they are in themselves, without respect unto their signs or
causes, is a property belonging to God only; and the devil does it not by
any direct and immediate knowledge of things simply considered in themselves,
but only as they are present in their signs or causes. Again, God foretells
things to come certainly, without the help of any creature, or other means
out of himself; but the predictions of Satan are only probable and
coniecturall: and when he foretells any thing certainly, it is by some
revelation from God, as the death of Saul; or by the Scripture, as Alexanders
victory: or by some special charge committed unto him, for the execution of
Gods will upon some particular places or persons, as before has been showed.

Thus much for the causes of Divination. Now follow the parts and branches
thereof. Divination is of two sorts; either in and by means, or without
means. Divination by means, is likewise of two sorts; either by such as are
the true creatures of God; or those which are merely counterfeit and forged.

Sect. II.
Divination by the true creatures of God, is distinguished according to the
number of the creatures, into five distinct kinds, whereof four are mentioned
in the Scriptures.

1. The first, is by the flying and noise of birds. Sorcerers among the
heathen, used to observe fowls in their flight; for example, whether they did
fly on the right hand, or on the left; above them, or below by them; whether
cross and overthwart, or directly against them. In like manner they observed
the noise and sound of the foul. And both these ways, sometimes by the noise,
and sometimes by the flight, they diuined of things to come, both public and
private, of good and bad success in man's affairs; of the state of kingdoms,
towns, families and particular persons. Now this kind of divination is
condemned by Moses, Deuteronomy. 18. 10. Let none be found among you that i^ a --
diuiner of diuinations: that is, (as some intepret it) a marker of the flying
of fowls: or a charmer, or a consulter with spirits, or a soothsayer; that is,
such a one as by observing the flying and noise of fowls, takes upon him to
foretell good or bad success.

2. The second kind of creatures used for diuinatio^, are the intralls of
beasts, of which mention is made Ezekiel. 21. 21. where Nabuchadnezzar being to
make war both with the Jews and the Ammonites, and doubting in the way which
enterprise to undertake first, he offers a sacrifice to the Idol gods, and
opening the belly of the sacrifice, looks upon the liver, and by the signs
therein found, he judges what should be the issue of the war. Which thing
Nabuchadnezzar did according to the usual practice of the Heathen, who when
they were to make war, or to attempt any business of importance, were wont
to offer sacrifice to their gods, and to pry into the intralls of the beast
sacrificed: for example, the heart, stomach, spleen, kidneies, but specially
the liver, and by certain signs appearing in those parts, the devil was wont
to reveal vnthem what should be the success of their affairs they had in
hand. It were easy to exemplify both these sorts of Divination by sundry
particulars out of Heathen writers, but seeing the Scripture has manifested
that there are such, and experience shows the same, I will forbear that
labor, and proceed.

But here it is demanded, why both these kinds of Divination should be
condemned in Scripture, considering they had so great applause among the
Heathen?

I answer, because the flying of birds, and the disposition of the inward parts
of creatures, are no true signs either of good or bad success. For that which
is a true sign of a future event, must have the virtue and power whereby it
signifies, from God himself, either by creation in the beginning, or by his
special ordinance and appointment afterward. Now it cannot be showed, that God
in the creation infused any such virtue into the natures and motions of these
creatures, whereby they might signify such things; neither is there any
apparent testimony in the whole book of the Scriptures, whereby it may be
proved, that since the creation, they were appointed by God, to serve such uses
and ends. And therefore howsoever they were esteemed of the Heathen, yet the
word of God has justly censured them, as no true and proper causes of
Divination sanctified by God, but merely diabolical.

It is alleged, that Joseph diuined by his cup, as may appear both by his
stewards speech, as also by his own, Genesis 44. 5. and 15. and yet that cup
received no power from God, either the one way or the other, to be a cause or
mean of Divination.

The answer anciently and commonly made is this, that Joseph's steward spoke not
as the thing was indeed, but as the common received opinion was among the
Egyptians, who esteemed Joseph to be a man of great skill and wisdom, able by
sundry means to divine and prophecy. To this I add a second answer, that
the steward spoke not as he thought, but his purpose was in those words, to
co^ceale the knowledge of Joseph his master from his brethren, that thereby
they might not discern who he was, but take him to be an Egyptian. Thirdly,
the words may not unfitly admit this interpretation, as if the steward had
said, Know ye not that this cup which I find in the sackes mouth of your
youngest brother, is that whereby my master will easily prove what manner of
men you are? this answer is also ancient, and may well be received.

It is further objected, that our Savior Christ by his speech unto the
Pharisees, seems to approve of Divining by creatures, as by winds, and by
clouds; When you see a cloud (says he) rising out of the West, straight way
you say, a shower comes, and so it is: and when you see the South wind blow,
ye say, that it will be hoate, and it comes to pass, Luke 12. 54, 55.

Ans. There be some kinds of predictions that are and may be lawfully used,
because they are natural, of which sort are those that are made by Physicians,
Mariners, and husbandmen, touching the particular alterations and dispositions
of the weather; and these being agreeable to that order which God has set in
nature from the beginning; by them a man may probably gather the state of the
weather, whether it will be fair or foul; and of these natural signs our
Savior Christ speaks, not of diabolical, which have no warrant, either from
the common course of nature created, or by any special appointment from God.
So that whatsoever can be said in their defense, this yet remains certain,
that the slying and noise of birds, and the state of the intralls of beasts,
are no true signs ordained by God, but invented by the devil and his
instruments, and therefore all divination by them is justly condemned, as
wicked and deuillish.

Whence it appears, what judgment may be given of those common signs of
Divination, which are observed in the world, specially of the more ignorant
sort. For example: A man finds a piece of iron, he presently conceiueth a
prediction of some good luck unto himself that day. If he light on a piece of
silver, then he stands contrarily affected, imagining some evil will befall
him. Again, when a man is taking his journey, if a hare cross him in the way,
all is not well, his journey shall not be prosperous, it presageth some
mischief toward him. Let his cares tingle or burn, he is persuaded he has
enemies abroad, and that some man either then does, or presently will speak
ill of him. If the salt fall toward a man at the table, it portendeth (in
common conceit) some ill news. When a raven stands upon some high place, look
what way he turns himself and cries, thence, as some think, shall shortly
come a dead corpse; albeit this sometime may be true by reason of the sharp
sense of smelling in the raven. These and sundry other of the like sort, are
merely superstitious. For the truth is, they have no virtue in themselves to
foreshewe any thing that is to come, either in nature, or by Gods ordinance.
Therefore whatsoever divination is made by them, must needs be fetched from
Satanicall illusion. And though we cannot say they be soothsayings, or term
the users and favorers of them soothsayers, yet we may safely refer them to
this kind of divining, being such as no Christian may warrantably use, though
some of them be not so gross and palpable, as those that are condemned in the
Scriptures.

3. The third kind of creatures used to divine by, are the stars. Divination
by stars, ^s commonly called Iudiical Astrology; of which we may read, Deu.
18. 10. 11. where the holy Ghost does of purpose reckon up all those kinds of
deuillish arts, whereby men have dealings and society with Satan, either in
divining or practicing* among which, this is the second.

The word there used (...).
may carry a double sense. For it signifies either him that observes times,
under which acception Astrology is comprehended, or him that observes the
clouds. And howsoever the best learned Interpreters do dissent about the
notation of it, yet all agree in this, that this profession of Divining by the
stars, is there condemned: and that it is to be numbered among the rest
expressed in the prohibition, may further appear by other places of Scripture,
as in Isa. 47. 13. 14. where the Lord threatens the same judgments against
Diuiners by the starre^, that he does against Soothsaiers and Magicians.
Again, in Dan. 2. 2. Inchaunters, Astrologians, and Sorcerers are joined
together, as being all sent for about the same business, v^z. to expound the
Kings dream. Now if the Lord himself have allotted the same punishment to
the Astrologer, which he has to the Soothsaier and Magician, and account them
all one; it is manifest, that Divining by the stars ought to be held as a
superstitious kind of Divination.

Here if it be thought strange, that predictions by so excellent creatures as
the stars be, should carry both the name and nature of diabolical
practices, which can be done by none but such as are in league with Satan:

I answer, The reasons hereof are these:

First, it must be considered, that the drift and scope of this art, is to
foretell the particular events of things contingent, as the alteration of the
states of kingdoms, the deaths of Princes, good or badde success of men's
particular affairs, from the hour of their birth, to the day of their death.
And from this all men may judge, what the art it self is. For the foretelling
of things to come, which in their own nature are contingent, and in regard of
us casual (I say not in regard of God, to whom all things are certainly
known) is a property peculiar to God alone, and not within the power of any
creature, man, or Angel. A point that is plainly taught by the Prophet Esai,
from the 4. chap. of his prophecy, to the 48. The scope whereof is to prove,
that it is a prerogative appointed to the Deity, and not communicable to the
creature, to foreshew the eue^t of things to come, which in our understanding
and reach, may either be, or* not be; and which when they are, may be thus or
otherways. It remains therefore, that Diuinations of this kind, taking from
God his right, and robbing him of his honor, are justly censured of impiety,
and are in themselves wicked and abominable.

It is alleged, that stars in the heavens, are the causes of many things
happening in the world, and therefore to practice by them in this manner,
deserves no such imputation.

Ans* It cannot be denied that they are causes of some things, but I demand,
what causes? not particular of particular euents^ but general and common, that
work alike upon all things: and no man can divine of a particular event, by a
general cause, unless he also know the particular causes subordinate to the
general, and the particular dispositions and operations of them. For example,
let twenty or thirty eggs of sundry kinds of birds be taken, and set under
one and the same hen to be hatched; it is not possible for any man, only
upon the bare consideration of the heat of the hen, which is the general
cause of hatching the eggs, to set down certainly what kind of bird each
egg will bring forth, unless he know what the eggs were particularly. For a
general and common cause, does not immediately produce a particular effect,
but only moves and helps the particular, immediate, and subordinate
causes. Therefore the heat of the hen does not make one egg to send forth a
henne-chicken, another egg a ducke, a third a swanne, etc. but only helps
it forward by sitting and crouching upon them. In like manner the stars are
general causes of natural things, as the heat of the hen is of the hatching
of the eggs, and by them no man can rightly define of particular events, and
therefore Divination by the slarres, whereby are foretold particular
contingent events, in kingdoms, families, or particular persons, is but a
forged skill, that has no ground in nature from the virtue of the stars, for
any such purpose.

A second reason may be this; All the rules and precepts of Astrology, set
down by the most learned among the Chaldeans, Egyptians, and other
Astrologers, are nothing else but mere dotages and fictions of the brain of
man: for the rules and conclusions of all good and lawful arts, have their
ground in experience, and are framed by observation, whereupon they are called
Axioms, or positions of art, so generally and undoubtedly true, that they can
not deceive: But these rules are of a contrary nature, having no foundation in
experience at all; for if they had, this must needs follow, that the position
of the heavens, and the course of all the stars, must needs continue one and
the same; for the principles of art ought to be immutable: but neither the
position of the heavens, nor the course of all the stars, is always one and the
same. Again, he that would make sound rules of art by observation, must know
the particular estate of all things he observes: But no man knows the
particular estate of all the stars, and consequently none can gather sound
rules of art by them. Thirdly, no man knows or sees all the stars, and
though they might be all discerned, yet the particular virtues of those which
are seen, can not be known, because their influences in the air, and upon
the earth, are confused; and therefore by observation of them, no rules can be
made, whereby to judge of particular events to come that be contingent.

But experience teaches (may some say) that if a man addicted to this course
shall practice the rules of Astrology, it will fall out that the most things
he foretells shall be true, and come to pass accordingly: which being
verified in experience, it should seem, that these principles are not
uncertain: for how is it possible that upon false grounds, should proceed true
predictions? To this objection, learned Divines have framed answer thus. That
in this there is a secret Magic at the least, if not an open league with
Satan. For look what is wanting to the effect of the stars, the Devil makes
supply of it by his own knowledge in things that are to come to pass. And
this is the judgment of them that have known this art, which was also
received for true in the days of the Apostles.

The third reason. The man that repaireth to the Astrologian upon the
particular case for his help and counsel, must believe that he can and will
do for him; otherwise, if he come doubting of his ability, or in way of
tempting him, he can not help him. Now in common understanding, if the Diuiner
brings the thing to pass, here must needs be more then Art. For he that is
master of a lawful art, can work by his rules, whether a man believe that he
can or no; yea though all the men in the world should doubt, his rules would be
effectual. The art therefore it self is the old superstitious art of the
Chaldeans, which they being Idolaters, first ferched from the devil, and his
Oracles: yea, the practice thereof is nothing but superstitious sorcerie, and
the undertakers no better then Sorcerers. If any man doubt hereof, their
writings are sufficient testimonies, and they themselves avouch it. For it is a
rule and maxim among them in all kind o^ Sorcerie, that the learner must come
credulous, and not doubting, or to tempt; otherwise no answer can be given.

But notwithstanding all these reasons alleged for the proof of this point,
sundry things are opposed to the contrary.

For first, it is said that the Sun, Moon, and Stars were created for
signs, Genesis 1. 14. and therefore that it is lawful to divine by them, seeing
that in so doing, we do but use them to the end for which God made them.

Ans. The reason is of no force. The stars indeed by this ordinance do
serve for signs, but of what? not of all things, but (as the text plainly
shows) of days, weeks, months, and yeare^; yea, of the seasons of the
year; as of Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter; yea further, of the
alterations of the weather in general; but all this makes nothing to ratify
Divination of particular events in things co^tingent, which are to fall out in
the state of kingdoms, families, and persons: for they are not causes, but
Signs, and that of some general things only, not of particular.

Again, it is said, that Moses and Daniel, two famous Prophets, are commended
for their skill in this art: for of Moses it is said, Act. 7. 22. that he was
learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians: and Daniel, in all the wisdom of
the Chaldeans, Dan. 1. 17. 20. and we know, that the Egyptians and Chaldeans
were the masters of Divination, and eminent above all others in matter of
Astrology.

Ans. 1. It cannot be proved out of those places, that Moses or Daniel were
trained up in this art: and though it should be granted they were, yet it
follows not, that they were practisers of it. at least continually. For albeit,
being children and of tender years in the courts of Pharaoh and
Nebuchadnetsar, they had been trained up by their governors in this
knowledge, it may not thence be concluded, that they finally submitted
themselves to the practice thereof; considering that a man may learn that when
he is young, which afterward upon better judgment and consideration, he may
utterly disclame. And so we are to think of them, that after God had called
them, they did for ever lay aside all such wicked and deuillish practices,
forbidden by God, and yet in use among the Egyptians and Chaldeans.

Thirdly, it is objected; the stars are admirable creatures of God, and the
causes of many strange effects in the air, in the waters, and upon the earth
also, in bodies of men and beasts: it may seem therefore not unlawful to
divine by them.

Ans. We grant that the S^arres, and especially the Sun and Moon, have
great virtue and force upon the creatures that are below; partly by their
light, and partly by their heat; but hence it will not follow, that they are,
or may be lawfully used for Divination: for whereas it has been showed, that
the grounds of all good arts are gathered by observation and experience, it is
not possible for any man, truly and certainly, to observe all particular events
brought forth by the stars, whereupon he might ground his rules. And for
proof hereof; Suppose there were a heap of all kinds of herbs growing upon
the earth gathered together, which should be all strained into one vessel, and
the liquour brought to the most skillful Physician that is, or ever was; can we
think him able by tasting or smelling thereof, to distinguish the virtues of
the herbs, and to say which is which? To do this when all were severed each
from other, is a hard matter, yet possible, considering they have their
several natures and operations: but in this confused mixture to discern the
seueralls, is a thing passing the skill of man.

The like may be said of the particular virtue of every star; for they all have
their operation in the bodies of men, and other creatures; but their virtues
being all mixed together in the subject whereon they work, can no more be
known distinctly, then the virtues of a mass of herbs of infinite sorts
beaten together. For this is an undoubted truth in nature: that the virtues of
Celestial bodies in their operations, are mingled with the qualities of the
elements in the inferior bodies, and the virtues of them all do so concur,
that neither the heat or light of the stars, nor the virtue of ^he elements,
can be severed one from another. And therefore though there be notable virtue
in the stars, vet in regard of the mixture thereof in their operation, no man
is able to say by observation, that this is the virtue of this star, and this
of that. The seven Planets being more notable, then the other lights of the
heaven, specially the Sun and the Moon, have their operations and effects
plainly and perfectly known: as for the other, there was never any man that
could either feel their heat, or certainly determine of any thing by them.

There being the some stars, whose virtues are unknown, how can their
operations and effects be discerned in particular? Therefore no rules can be
made by observation of the virtues of the stars in their operations,
whereupon we may foretell particular events of things contingent, either
concerning men's persons, families, or kingdoms.

A fourth reason. All stars have their work in the qualities of heat,
light, cold, moisture, and dryness, as for the secret influences which men
dream of, coming from them besides the said qualities, they are but forged
fancies. The Scripture never mentions any such, neither can it be proved,
that the Sun has any efficacy upon inferior bodies, but by light and
heat; which because they are mixed with other qualiti^s, they affo^rd no matter
of prediction touching particular events. For that though the celestial bodies
do ^^use in the terrestrial, heat and cold, drought and moisture? does it
therefore follow, that these effects do declare before hand the constitution of
man's body? the disposition of men's minds? the affections of men's hearts? or
finally* what success they shall have in their affairs, touching wealth,
honor, and religion? Hence I conclude, that divining by them in this sort, is
mere superstition, and a kind of sorcerie: for which cause in Scripture
Astrologians are justly numbered among Sorcerers.

Now that which has been said touching this point, may serve for special
use.

And first, it gives a caveat to all Students, that they have care to spend
their time and wits better, then in the study of Judicial Astrology; and
rather employ themselves in the searching out of such things, as may most serve
for the glory of God, and the good of his Church. It is the subtlety of Satan
to draw men into such meditations, and to make this study so pleasant, that it
can hardely be left, when it is once begun* but let them take heed betime. For
assuredly these vain and superstitious practices, are not the builders and
furtherers, but the hinderers and destroyers of religion, and the fear of God.

Again, this must admonish them which suffer any losses, not to seek for
help or remedy at the hands of Astrologers, commonly called Figure casters,
for their directions in the recovery of things lost or stolen, comes not by
the help of any lawful art, but from the work of the devil, revealing the
same unto them. And be^ter it were to loose a thing finally, and by faith to
expect till God make supply another way, then in this manner to recover it
again: yea, the curse of God hangs over the head of him, that to help
himself uses diabolical means. For put the case (...) thing lost of great
value, be again restored by the help of Satan: yet God in his justice, for
the use of these unlawful means, man take from the consulter twice as much; or
at least his grace, and so give him unto a reprobate sense, to believe the
devil to his vetter perdition.

Thirdly, it serves to admonish us of some other vanities that accompany
Astrology* specially of two.

The first, is the observation of the sign in man's body; wherein not only
the ignorant sort, but men of knowledge do far^e ouershoot themselves,
superstitiously holding, that the sign is specially to be marked. An opinion
in it self fantastical and vain, not grounded in nature, but borrowed from
Astrology. For the Astrologians for better expressing and establishing
thereof, have devised new spheres in the heavens, more then indeed there be,
to wit, the ninth and the tenth; and in the tenth, commonly called the first
mooueable, have placed an imaginary sphere, which they term the Zodiac,
and in the Zodiac twelve signs, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, and the rest, which
they imagine to have power over the twelve parts of man's body: as Aries, the
head and face, Taurus neck and throat, etc. But these are only twelve
imaginary signs: for in the heavens there is no such matter as a ram, a
bull, etc. And how can it stand with reason, that in a firmament fained by
Poets and Philosophers, a forged sign, which indeed is nothing, should have
any power or operation in the bodies of men?

Again, the very order of the government of these signs in man's body, is fond
and without show of reason. For according to this platform, when the Moon
comes into the first sign, Aries, she rules in the head; and when she
comes into the second sign, Taurus, in the neck; and so descends down from
part to part, in some part ruling two, in some three days, etc. Where observe,
that the Moon is made then to rule in the cold and moist parts, when she is
in hoate and dry signs: when as in reason, a more consonant order were this;
that when the Moon were in hoate and dry signs, as Aries, Leo, and
Sagittarius, she should rule in hot and dry parts of the body; and when
she is in cold and moist signs, she should rule in the cold and moist
parts of the bodies; and so still govern those parts, which in temperature
come nearest to the nature of the signs wherein the Moon is.

Besides this, some learned Physicians have upon experience confessed, that the
observation of the sign, is nothing material, and that there is no danger in
it, for gelding of cattle, or letting of blood. Indeed it preuailes
oftentimes by an old conceit and strong imagination, of some unlettered
persons, who think it to be of force and efficacy for restoring and curing:
and yet the vanity of this conceit, appears in the common practice of men,
who commonly upon S. Stevens day use to let blood, be the sign where it will;
though it be in the place where the vein is opened. But the truth is, the
sign in it own nature, is neither way available, being but a fancy,
grounded upon supposed premises, and therefore ought to be rejected, as a
mere vanity.

The second thing belonging to Astrology, which ought to be eschewed, is the
choice and observation of days. Curious diuiners do set apart certain days,
whereof some are (as they say) luckie, some unlucky. And these they appoint to
be observed for the beginning of ordinary works and businesses; as to take a
journey; to begin to lay the foundation of a building, to plant a garden, to
weane a child, to put on new apparel, to flit into a new house, to traffic
into other countries, to go about a suite to a Prince, or some great man, to
hunt and use exercises, to pare the nails, to cut the hair; in a word, to
attempt any thing in purpose or action, which is not done every day. The effect
and force of these days, is not grounded either in art or in nature, but
only in superstitious conceit and diabolical confidence, upon a wicked
custom, borrowed from the practice of diuiners: and the danger of such
confident conceits is this; that the Devil by them takes the vantage of
fantastical persons, and brings them further into league and acquaintance with
himself, unless they leave them. And all such persons as make difference of
days for this or that purpose, are in express words plainly condemned, Deuteronomy.
18. 10, 11.

4. The fourth kind of Divination by true means, is the prediction of things
to come by dreams.

In the old Testament we read tha^ Sorcerers and false Prophets used to
foretell strange events, by revelations which they had in their dreams. Such
diuiners were among the Jews: and for that cause the people of God were
expressly forbidden to harken unto Dreamers of dreams, Deuteronomy. 13. 3. And the
Lord himself by the Prophet Jeremy, taxes the false Prophets, who broached
false doctrine in his name by this deuillish means, saying, I have dreamed, I
have dreamed, Ier. 23. 25.

Yet here it is to be remembered, that foretelling of future things by dreams,
is not simply to be condemned, but only in part. For of dreams there be three
sorts, Divine, Natural, and Diabolical. Divine, are* those which come from
God: Natural, which proceed from a man's own nature, and arise from the
quality and constitution of the body: Diabolical, which are caused by the
suggestion of the devil.

Touching Divine dreams: that there are, or at least have been such, it is
evident. For these be the words of God, Numb. 12. 6. If there be a Prophet of
the Lord among you, I will be known unto him by a vision, and will speak unto
him by a dream. And Job says, that God speaks in dreams and visions of the
night, when sleep falls upon men, and they sleep upon their beds, Job. 33.
15. Now these divine dreams were caused in men, either immediately by God
himself, as the former places show; or by means of some good Angel. In this
latter kind was Joseph often admonished in dreams what to do, by the
ministry of an Angel; as Matthew. 1. 20. and chap. 2. 13. 19. and divining by
such dreams, is not condemned* for by them the most worthy Prophets of God
have reueiled Gods will in many things to his Church. Thus Joseph by dream had
notice given him of his own advancement, Genesis 37. 7. 9. and by Pharaohs
dreams which were sent from God, he also foretold the state of the kingdom of
Egypt, touching provision for seven years dearth, Genesis 41. 25. By the same
means the Prophet Daniel prophesied of the flourishing and fading of the
chief Monarchies of the world, from his time to the coming of Christ, Dan. 9.
etc. these therefore being one of the extraordinary means, whereby God has
manifested his will unto man in times past, more or less; divination by them
is not to be censured as unlawful, but rather to be honored and esteemed, as
the ordinance of God.

For the second sort which be Natural, arising either from the thoughts of the
mind, or the affections of the heart, or the constitution of the body: as they
are ordinary in all me^, in some more, in some less: so they vary according
to the diversity of men's thoughts, affections, and constitutions: and by them
a man may probably conjecture of sundry things concerning the state and
disposition, partly of his body, and partly of his mind.

As first he may guess in likelihood, what is his constitution, as the learned
in all ages, do constantly avouch. For when his mind in dreaming runs upon
wars, and contentions, fire, and such like, it argues his complexion is
choleric. When he dreams of waters and (...), it betokens abundance of
phlegm. When his fantasy conceiueth heavy and doleful things, full of
grief, fear, and horror, it bewraieth a melancholic constitution. When his
dreams be joyful and pleasant, as of mirth, pastimes, and delightful news,
his complexion is judged to be sang^i^^.

^ Again, by natural dreams a man may gess^ar the corruption of his own
heart^* and know to what sins he is most naturally inclined. For look what
mon do ordinarily in the day time conceive and imagine in their corrupt
hearts, of the same, for the most part, they d^e corruptly dream in the night.
And this is the rather to be observed, because though the wicked man shut his
eyes, and stop his ears, and harden his heart, and will not take notice of
his enormities by the light of the Law; yet even by his own dreams in the
night, his wickedness shall be in part discovered, and his conscience thereby
convinced, and he himself left in the end inexcusable before God. Now albeit a
man may give a probable conjecture of the premises by natural drems; yet no
divination of things to come, whether public or private, good or bad, can be
made by them, either concerning persons, families, or kingdoms. Therefore the
common observations of dreams in the world, whereby men imagine things to come
to pass, and accordingly foretell them by those means, are vain and
superstitious, and justly so condemned in the places before named, Deuteronomy. 13.
Ier. 23.

Concerning the third kind of dreams, which are caused by the devil; It has
been granted in all ages for a truth, that Satan can frame dreams in the
brain of man, and by them reveal his diui^ations. And it is plainly
manifested by the continual observation of the Gentiles, before the coming of
Christ. For when Oracles, (that is, answers from the devil) were in force, men
that used to consult with them, and desired to be resolved in matters of doubt,
were to lay them down and sleep beside the altar of Apollo, where they had
offered their gift, and sleeping they received in a dream, the answer for which
they came; and this dream was framed in the brain of him that slept, by the
devil, and in it the answer was delivered by him speaking at or in the Oracle.
So likewise in the Primitive Church, since the coming of Christ, though
Oracles then ceased, which were the greatest and strongest delusions that ever
Satan had: yet he has by dreams and visions wrought in the heads of many men
most strange and curious concei^s for the raising up of heresies, to the great
disturbance of the peace of the Church. For we read in Ecclesiastical stori^s,
that the Maniches had their damnable opinions first inspired into them, and
then confirmed by dreams. And in this age the first authors of the sect of the
Anabaptists, had their curious conceits of revelation, partly in dreams,
partly in visions. Likewise the Family of love have their revelations in
dreams. For he that desires to become one of that sect, must ascend thereunto
by degrees, before he can come to perfection to be an elder illuminate, or a
man deified; to which estate when he is once come, he has for his confirmation
strong Illusions, both waking and sleeping in visions and dreams. Histories of
latter times, and woeful experience shows this to be true, the devil
prevailing so strongly, that many have fallen away by this means, being
corrupted by a doctrine merely carnal, howsoever maintained with pretense of
great holiness. Again, as the good Angels may cause divine dreams from God,
and therei^ revile unto men his will and pleasure concerning things to come: so
no doubt the evil spirits may cause in men diabolical dreams, and therein
reueile unto them many strange things, which they by means unknown to men,
may foresee and know. By all which it is evident, that there are and may be as
well diabolical, as divine dreams.

The conclusion then is this: That as divining by the second sort is
superstitious, having no ground from Gods word: so fortelling by this third
sort is flat Witchcraft, directly condemned in the places aforenamed, where men
are forbidden to prophecy by them, or to regard them.

Yet forasmuch as dreams be of sundry kinds, as has been said, it shall not
be amiss to set down some notes of difference between them, whereby they may
be known and distinguished each from other. Which point indeed has long
agone been handled in the Primitive Church, but hardly determined. For the
learned of that age have avouched it a very hard matter, considering that the
devil in these, as well as in other things, can transform himself into an
Angel of light. But howsoever the case be hard, and the devil politic, yet by
light of direction from the word of God, there may some true differences be set
down between them; as namely these.

First of all; divine dreams have always had their preeminence above others,
that generally they have concerned the weightiest matters in the world; as the
coming and exhibiting of the Messiah, the changes and alterations of
Kingdoms, the reueiling of Antichrist, and the state of the Church of God. And
this may plainly appear by those which Joseph expounded unto Pharaoh, and
Daniel unto the Kings of Babel and Persia. But in the other sort it is
otherwise. For if there be any thing represented more then ordinary in those
that be natural, it proceeds merely from fancy and imagination. And as for
diabolical, they are not of so weighty matters, nor so hard to foretell. For
though the devil have great power and skill, yet it is above his reach to
determine of such things as these are, or to foretell them without help from
God.

Secondly, divine dreams be always either plain and manifest, or if they be
obscure, yet they have a most evident interpretation annexed unto them. Of the
plainer sort, were the dreams of Joseph the husband of Marie. Matthew. 1. Of the
other sort were Pharaohs, very dark and hidden, but God raised up Joseph to
give them an casie interpretation upon the instant. Genesis 41. Nebuchadne^sars
dreams were full of obscurity, and many matters were contained in the^, so as
his spirit was troubled, and he forgot them; but God stirred up Daniel and
revealed to him the secret, so as he remembered it to the King, and declared the
true meaning thereof, Dan. 2. 1. 28. 36. Lastly, Daniels dreams of the four
beasts, etc. were of like difficulty, but the Angel Gabriel was presently sent
to make him understand them, Dan. 8. 16. Now those that are caused by the
Devil, as they be obscure and intricate, so the interpretation of them is
ambiguous and uncertain, because he himself cannot infallably determine how
things shall come to pass, and thereupon is constrained to give doubtful
answers by dreams. And such were not only the ancient Oracles among the
heathen, where he gave the resolution, but the modern Prophecies given by him
to some of his instruments in later time.

Thirdly, the dream that comes from God, is always agreeable to his revealed
will, and represents nothing contrary to the same, in whole or in part:
whereas those that proceed from nature, do savor of nature, and be agreeable
to man's corruption, which is repugnant unto Gods will. And those that are
suggested by Satan, are of the same nature; the general scope whereof is to
cross the will of God, and to withdraw the heart from obedience thereunto.

Fourthly, divine dreams (...) a^ this end, to further religion and ple^^e,
and to maintain true doctrine: but the devil, an enemy to God, works in
his dreams the subversion of true religion, and the worship of God, that in
the room thereof he may set up Idolatry and superstition. For so much we
learn, Deuteronomy. 13. where the false Prophet brings his dream, and vtters it, yea
and confirms it by a wonder; but mark his end: It was to draw men to
Apostacy: Let us (says he) go after other Gods; which thou have not known,
and let us serve them, verse. 2. Answerable to which, was the practice of the
false Prophets afterward, who caused the people to err ^y their lies and
flatteries. Ierem. 23. 32.

To conclude this point, it must be here remembered, that howsoever there ^re
and have been distinct sorts of dreams, yet those which are from God, were
only in ordinary use in the old Testament, and in the Church of the New, are
ceased, and take not place ordinarily. Whereas therefore men in their sleeps
have dreams, they must take them commonly to be natural, and withal know
that they may be diabolical, or mixed partly of the one kind, partly of the
other. And howsoever there may be some use of the natural, as has been said,
yet commonly they are not to be regarded. And for the other which are from
Satan, or mixed, they are not to be received, believed, or made means whereby
to foretell things to come, least by this use of them, we grow into
familiarity with the devil, and before God be guilty of the sin of Witchcraft.

5. The fifth and last kind of Divination by true means, is by Lots, when men
take upon them to search out fortune (as they use to speak) that is, good or
bad success in any business, by casting of Lots, whether it be by casting a
die, or opening of book, or any such casual means. I mention this the
rather, because among the ignorant and superstitious sort, such practices are
common and in great account: the Lot is an ordinance of God, appointed for
special ends and purposes, but when it is thus applied, it cease to be
lawful, because it is abused to other ends then God by his word and ordinance
has allowed.

That we may the better know the abuse of a Lot in this kind, we must remember
there be three sorts of Lots; the Civil, the Sporting, and the Divining Lot.

The civil use of Lots, is, when they be used for the ending of controversies:
the dividing of lands and heritages: the disposition of offices amongst many
that are equally fit, the trying of the right in doubtful things, or lastly
the discovery of a malefactor hid amongst many suspected. By this use of the
Lot, was Saul chosen to be king over Israel, 1. Sam. 10. 21. the skape-goate
separated from that which was to be sacrificed, Leuit. 16. 8. the land of
Canaan divided among the children of Israel, Josh. 14. 2. etc. the trespass of
Achan found out, Josh. 7. 15. and Matthias chosen to be one of the twelve, Act.
1. 26. and of this Lot Solomon says, Pro. 18. 18. The Lot causes contentions
to cease, and makes partitions among the mighty. Hereupon the civil use of
Lots has his warrant in Gods word, so it be lawfully used in case of
necessity, with i^uocation of the name of God, and with expectation of the
event from God, by whose hand and immeadiate providence it is disposed. For the
Lot (says Solomon) is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is
from the Lord, Pro. 16. 33.

The Sporting Lot is that which is commonly used for some vain and unnecessary
end; as to set up banck-rupts, or such like. This has no warrant in the word
of God whereupon men should use it, and therefore is no better then an abuse of
Gods ordinance, to speak no more of it.

Now the divining Lot performed by the opening of a book, or the casting of a
die, or such like, thereby to declare good or bad success, cannot be done
without confederacy with Satan either explicit, or implicit. For the plain
cast of a die, or the opening of a book without believing, can do nothing for
discovering of future contingents. And what is there in the nature of these
actions to produce such effects? or where, or when did God give this virtue to
them, certainly to determine of things hidden from man, and known only to
himself? Divination therefore by them is to be holden as a practice, not only
sauouring of superstition, but proceeding from the art of Witchraft and
Sorcetie.

And thus much of Divination by means of the creatures; and the several kinds
thereof.

Sect. III.
The second kind of Divination, is by counterfeit, and forged means, which are
none of the creatures of God: whereof one kind only is mentioned in Scripture,
viz. when Satan is consulted with in the shape of a dead man. This is commonly
called Neeromaneie, or the black art, because the Devil being sought unto by
Witches, appears unto them in the likeness of a dead body. And it is
expressly forbidden, Deuter. 18. 11. yea condemned by the Prophet Esai, 8. 19,
20. who says in plain terms, that Gods people ought not to go from the
living to the dead, but to the Law and to the testimony. A memorable example
hereof is recorded in 1. Sam. 28. the observation whereof, will discover unto
us the chief: points of Necromancie. There Saul about to encounter the
Philisti^s, being forsaken of God, who refused to answer him, either by
dreams, or by Vrim; or by the Prophets, inquired for one that had a familiar
spirit: and hearing of the Pythonesse at Endor, went unto her by night, and
caused her to raise up Samuel, to tell him of the issue of the war. Now the
Witch at his request raised up the Devil, with whom she was confederate, in
Samuels likeness; who gave him answer concerning his own overthrow, and the
death of his sons. Which example declares plainly, that there is a kind of
divination, whereby Witches and Sorcerers reveal strange things, by means of
the devil appearing unto the^ in the shapes or shadows of the dead.

Touching the truth of this example, two Questions may be moved.

The first is, Whether that which appeared, was true Samuel or not? Some say it
was Samuel indeed: others (who hold that there are no Witches) deny that it
was either Samuel, or the devil; and affirm it to be some other counterfeit
coming in Samuels attire to deceive Saul: both which opinious are false and
here to be confuted.

And first, that their opinion which say that true Samuel appeared unto Saul,
is a flat untruth, I prove by these reasons.

I. Before this time, God had withdrawn his spirit from Saul, as himself
confesses, and denied to answer him any more by ordinary means, in such sort
as before he had done. Hereupon I gather, that it is was not probable, that God
would now vouchsafe him the favor to suffer Samuel to come unto him
extraordinarily, and tell him what should be the end of his war with the
Philistines: and to this purpose it is affirmed twice in that chapter, that God
had taken his good spirit from Saul.

II. The souls of the faithful departed, are in the hands of God, and do
rest in glory with himself, and their bodies are in the earth, and there rest
in peace. So says the voice from heaven, Revel. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead
that die in the Lord: for they rest from their labors, and their works, that
is the reward of their works, follow them immediately, or at the heels, as the
word signifies. Now suppose the devil had power over Samuels body, yet to
make true Samuel, he must have his soul also. But it is not in the power of
the devil, to bring again the souls that are in heaven unto their bodies,
and so to cause them to appear unto men upon earth, and to speak unto them.
The Devils kingdom is in hell, and in the hearts of wicked men on earth; yea
whiles the children of God are in this world, he usurps some authority over
them, by means of their own corruption: But heaven is the kingdom of God and
his Saints, where Satan has nothing to do, considering that there is no flesh
or corruption, to make him entrance or yield him intertainement. Neither can it
be proved by Scripture, that the devil can disturb either the bodies or
souls of them that die in the Lord: and therefore the Witch with all her power
and skill, could not bring Samuels rotten body (for so no doubt it was now)
and soul together.

III. This shape which appeared suffered Saul to adore and worship it, where
is the true Samuel would never have received adoration from Saul the king,
though it had been in civil manner only. Whom then did Saul adore? Answ.
The Devil himself, who being an enemy to the glory of God, was content to
take to himself that honor, which a King in duty is to perform to God
himself.

IV. If it had been true Samuel, he would certainly have reproved Saul for
seeking help at Witches, contrary to Gods commandment, and that doctrine
which he had taught him from God in his life time. But this counterfeit
reproved him not, and therefore it is not like to be the true Prophet of God,
but Satan himself, framing by his art and skill the person and shape of Samuel.

But it is alleged to the contrary, that Samuel after his sleep, prophesied
of the death of Saul, Ecclesiastic. 46. v. 20. After his sleep also he told of
the Kings death, etc. Answ. That book penned by Jesus the son of Sirach is a
very worthy description of Christian Ethics, contaming more excellent
precepts for manners, then all the writings of heathen Philosophers, or other
men. But yet it is not Scripture, neither did the Church ever hold and receive
it as C^^onicall: yea, the author himself ^^sinuateth so much in the beginning
thereof: for in the preface he disableth himself to interpret hard things, and
after a sort craves pardon for his weakness, which is not the manner of the
men of God, that were penmen of Scripture. For they were so guided by gods
spirit in their proceedings, that nothing could be hard unto them. This
privilege no ordinary man has assurance of: and therefore this author
writing upon his own private motion, was subject to error, and no doubt this
speech of his, being contrary to that which is recorded in the Canonical
Scriptures, is a flat untruth.

Secondly, it is objected, that the Scripture calls him Samuel, that appeared
unto Saul. Ans. The scripture does often speak of things, not as they are in
themselves, but as they seem to us. So it is affirmed, Genesis 1. 16. that God
made two great lights, the Sun and Moon: whereas the moon is lesser then
many stars, yet because in regard of her nearenesse to the earth, she
seems to us greater then the rest, therefore she is called a great light. In
like manner Idols in the Scripture are called Gods, not that they are so
indeed, (for an Idol is nothing, 1. Cor. 8. 4.) but because some men do so
conceive of them in their minds. In a word; the Scripture oftentimes does
abase it self to our conceit, speaking of things not according as they are,
but after the manner of men; and so in this place calls counterfeit Samuel,
by the name of the true Samuel, because it seemed so unto Saul.

The third objection: That body which appeared, prophesied of things that came
to pass the day after, as the death of Saul, and of his sons; which indeed
so fell out, and at the same time, therefore was like to be Samuel. Answ. There
is nothing there said or done, which the devil might not do. For when the
Lord uses the devil as his instrument to bring some things to pass, he does
before hand reueile the same unto him: and look what particulars the devil
learneth from God, those he can foretell. Now the truth is, Satan was appointed
by God to work Saul's overthrow, and it was made known unto him when the
thing should be done; by which means, and by none other, the devil was
enabled to Foretell the death of Saul. Where (by the way) observe, that in this
case the devil can reveal things to come certainly, to wit, if he be appointed
Gods immediate instrument for the execution of them, or knows them by light of
former prophecies in Scripture.

Fourthly, dead men do often appear and walk after they are buried. Ans. It
is indeed the opinion of the Church of Rome, and of many ignorant persons
among us, but the truth is otherwise. Dead men do neither walk, nor appear
in body or soul after death: for all that die, are either Righteous, or
wicked: The souls of the Righteous go straight to heaven, and the souls of
the wicked to hell, and their remain till the last judgment: and therefore of
the just it is said, that they are blessed when they die, because they rest
from their labors, Apoc. 14. 13. But how do they rest, if after they be dead
they wander up and down in the earth?

If it be said, that Moses and Elias appeared when Christ was transsigured in
the mount; and that Lazarus rose again, and at Christ's resurrection many dead
bodies rose again and appeared.

I answer; there were two times when God suffered the dead to be raised up
again; either at the planting of his Church, or at the restoring and
establishing of it, when it was rased to the foundation. Thus at the restoring
of religion in Elias and Elishaes times, the son of the Shunamitish woman, 2.
King. 4. 34. and the widows son at Sarephta, 1. King. 17. 21. were raised.
Again, when God would restore his Church, which was fallen to Idolatry about
the death of Elisha, he caused the like miracle to be wrought in the reviving
of a dead man by the touching of Elishaes dead carkeise in the grave, thereby
to assure the people of their deliverance, and to cause them to embrace the
doctrine of the Prophet after his death, which in his life they had contemned.
In like manner at the establishing of the Gospel in the new Testament, it
pleased Christ to raise up Moses and Elias, and to make them known to his
Disciples by extraordinary revelation, that they might believe that the
doctrine which he preached was not new, but the same in substance with that
which was recorded in the Law and the Prophets, both which were represented by
Moses and Elias. So also he wrought the miracle upon Lazarus, the widows
son, and lairus daughter, thereby to sliewe the power of his Godhead, the
truth of his calling, the testimony of his Doctrine: lastly, to make known
the power of his resurrection, he caused some to rise and appear to others,
when he himself rose again. But out of these two times we have neither
warrant nor example, that God suffered the dead to be raised up. Wherefore
those instances will not any way confirm Samuels appearing, which indeed was
not true, but counterfeite and forged by the Devil himself.

Now for the second Opinion, of those which deny that there be any Witches,
and thereupon hold that this was a mere cosenage of the Witch, suborning some
man or woman to cou^terfeit the form, attire, and voice of Samuel, thereby to
delude Saul, that also is untrue. For he that spoke foretold the ruin of
Saul, of his sons, and of his army, yea the time also wherein this was to
come to pass: whereas in likelihood no man or woman in all Israel, could have
foretold such things before hand of themselves. It was not then any cosenage,
as is affirmed, but a thing effected by the devil, framing to himself a body
in the likeness of Samuel, wherein he spoke.

If therefore it be manifest, that by counterfeit apparitions of the dead
Witches and Sorcerers can foretell things to come: hence sundry points of
Witchcraft may be observed.

First, that there is a league between the Witch and the devil. For this was
the cause which moved Saul to seek to Witches, because neither he himself,
nor any of his servants could raise up Satan in Samuels likeness, as the Witch
of Endor did. But Saul being a King, might have commanded help from all the
wise and learned men in Israel, for the effecting of such a matter: why then
would he rather seek to a silly woman, then to them? The reason was, because
she had made a compact with the devil, for the using of his help at her de
^aund, by virtue whereof he was as ready to answer, as she to call him;
whereas Saul and the learned Jews, having made no such league, neither he by
his power, nor they by their skill, could have performed such a work.

Secondly, the devil will be ready at the call and command of Witches and
Sorcerers, when they are intending any mischief. For here the Witch of Endor
no sooner spoke, but he appeared, and therefore the text gives her a name that
signifies one having rule and command over Pytho, that is, the familiar
spirit: yet when he is commanded, he yields not upon constraint, but
voluntarily, because he builds upon his own greater advantage, the gaining of
the soul of the Witch. Where by the way, let it be observed, what a precious
thing the soul of man is; the purchasing whereof, can make the proud spirit of
Satan so far to abase it self, as to be at the command of a silly woman.
Again, what an inueterate malice Satan bears to man, which for the gaining
of a soul, will do that which is so contrary to his nature. It may teach
man, what to esteem of his soul, and not to sell it for so base a price.

Thirdly, by this, the great power of the Devil in the behalf of the
Sorcerer, is made manifest. For he was presently at hand to counterfeit Samuel,
and did it so lively and cunningly, as well in form of body, as in attire and
voice, that Saul thought verily it was the Prophet: which may be a caveat unto
us, not easily to give credit to any such apparitions. For though they seem
never so true and evident, yet such is the power and skill of the devil, that
he can quite deceive us, as he did Saul in this place.

Sect. IV.
Hitherto I have showed the first kind of Divination by means, both true and
forged. Now follows the second; practiced without means.

Divination without means, is the foretelling and revealing of things to come,
by the alone and immediate assistance of a familiar spirit. This kind is
mentioned and expressly forbidden, Leuit. 19. 31. Ye shall not regard them
that work with spirits. Again, Leuit. 20. 6. If any turn after such as work
with spirits, to go a whoring after them, I will set my face against that
person, and will cut him off from among his people. So, Deuteronomy. 18. 11. Let none
be found among you that consulteth with spirits. In which places the holy Ghost
uses the word Ob, which more properly signifies a spirit, or devil, in which
sense it is taken in Leuit. 20. 27. and in 1. Sam 28. 8. And by reason of the
league which is between the Witch and the devil, the same is also given to
the Witch, that works by the devil: and therefore the Pythonesse at Endor,
is both called Ob, 1. Sam. 28. 9. and she that rules Ob. v. 7, 8.

Now this kind of Divination is practiced two ways: either inwardly, when the
spirit is within the Witch: or outwardly, when being forth of the Witch he does
only inspire him or her.

An example of the former way, the Scripture affords, Act. 16. 16. of a
woman at Philippi, that had a spirit of Pytho; which gather master much vantage
with divining. And this spirit whereby she diuined was within her. For Paul
being molested, said to the spirit, I command thee in the name of Jesus
Christ, that thou come out of her, and he came out the same hour, v. 18. And
because the devil is wont in this kind to speak out of the throat and breast,
or belly of the Witch p^ssessed, hereunto learned men have thought that this
name (Ob) is given to the devil, because he speaks out of the witch, as out
of a bottell or hollow vessel: for so the word Ob, properly signifies.

Secondly, this may be practiced when the devil is forth of the Witch, and
then he either inspireth her, or else casts her into a trance, and therein
reueileth unto her such things as she would know.

Of this kind, though we have no example in Scripture, yet the histories of the
heathen do affoard unto us many instances of experience therein. One of the
principal is the history of the ten Sibylles of Greece, who were most famous
Witches, and did prophecy of many things to come, whereof some were true
concerning Christ and his kingdom, which the devil stole out of the Bible,
and some other were false: and all of them they received by revelation from the
devil in traunces.

But it will be said, If the devil reueileth unto his instruments strange
things in traunces, then how shall a man discern between diabolical
revelations, and the true gift of prophecy, which God in traunces reueileth
unto his Prophets.

Answ. In this point Satan is, (as it were) Gods ape. For as he in old time
raised up holy Prophets to speak unto the fathers for the building up of his
Church: so has Satan inspired his ministers, and furnished his instruments
with prophetical inspirations from time to time, for the building up of his
own kingdom: and hereupon he has notably counterfeited the true gift of
prophecy received first from God himself. And yet, though in many things they
be like, there is great difference between them.

First, divine trances may come upon Gods children, either when the soul
remains united with the body, or else when it is severed for a time. So much
Paul insinuates, when he faith of himself, 2. Cor. 12. ^. that he was rapt up
(as it were in a heavenly trance) into the third heaven, but whether in the
body, or out of the body, he knew not. But in all diabolical ecstasies,
though the body and senses of the Witch be (as it were) bound or benumbed for
the time; yet their souls still ren^aine united to their bodies, and not
severed from them. For though the devil by Gods permission may kill the body,
and so take the soul out of it for ever; yet to take it from the body for a
time, and to reunite them again, is miraculous, and therefore beyond the
compass of his power.

Secondly, in divine trances the servants of God have all their senses, yea all
the powers of soul and body remaining sound and perfect, only for a time the
actions and operations are suspended and cease to do their duty: but in
ecstasies that be from Satan, his instruments are cast into frenzies and
madness: so as reason in them is darkened, understanding obscured, memory
weakened, the brain distempered; yea, all the faculties are so blemished, that
many of them never recover their former estate again: and they that escape
best, do carry their blemishes, as the devils skars, even unto their grave.
So kind is Saran to his friends, that he will leave his tokens behind him,
where ever he comes in this sort. The servants of God receive no such
blemishes, but rather a further good, and a greater measure of illumination of
all the powers of the soul.

Thirdly, divine ecstasies tend always to the confirming of the truth of the
Gospel, and the furtherance of true religion and piety. Such was Peter's, Act.
10. 11. which served to assure him of his calling to preach the Gospel to the
Gentiles, and to inform his judgment in this truth, that there was no
acception of persons with God, and that to them of the new Testament, all
things were clean, and nothing polluted. But the scope of them that are from
Satan, is principally the suppressing and hinderance of religion, the drawing
of the weak into errors, the ratifying and confirming of the^ that are fallen
thereinto, and the general upholding of the practices of ungodliness. And by
these and such like particular differences, has God pulled off the Devils
vizar, and made him better known and discerned of true Christians. And thus
much concerning Divination, the first part of Witchcraft.

CHAP. IIII.
Of Operative or working Witchcraft.
THe second part is that which consists in Operation, and is therefore called
Operative or working Witchcraft.

Witchcraft in Operation, is that which is employed in the practice and real
working of strange things or wonders, and it has two parts, Enchantment, and
Iugling.

Sect. I.
Enchantment is the working of wonders by a Charm. (...)
This the Lord expressly forbids, Deuter. 18. 11. Let none be found among
you, that is a Charmer. In this description, two points are to be considered:
1. what things may be done by enchantment, namely wonders, for I say it is the
practice of wonders: 2. by what means these wonders are wrought, that is, by a
Charm.

For the first: The wonders done by Inchanters are, 1. The raising of storms
and tempests; winds and weather, by sea and by land: 2. The poisoning of the
air: 3. Blasting of corn: 4. Killing of cattle, and annoying of men, women,
and children: 5. The procuring of strange passions and torments in men's bodies
and other creatures, with the curing of the same: 6. Casting out of devils.
These and such like things Inchanters can do by their charms. And for proof
hereof, we have the uniform consent of all ages, with the records of Witches
confessions to manifest the same; besides the testimony of experience in this
age: so as the man that calls it into question, may as well doubt of the Sun
shining at noone day.

Yet for the further declaration thereof, we will allege what the Scripture
says in this point. Solomon says, If the Serpent bite when he is not charmed,
no better is a babbler, Eccles. 10. 11. thus the words are in our English
translation: but they may better be thus read according to the original: If
the serpent bite before he be charmed, what profit has the master of the
tongue thereby; that is, the Charmer. And so they beard this sense: If the
Inchanter be bitten, before the serpent be charmed, then he has no benefit by
his charm. For Solomon in that place gives us to understand, what power
In^hanters have, and what they may do by their charms, if they come in time,
namely, stay the poison of the serpent, so as he cannot hint, either by biting
or stinging. When Balae intended evil against Israel, he hired Balaam to curse
them, Number. (...). 6. Now this Balaam was an enchanting Witch; for though he be
called a Prophet, yet this was only in the reputation of the world; for his
practice was to inehant by charms of words: and to that purpose he was hired
to curse Gods people, that is, to-bring mischief upon them by charming; which
thing (...) he had often and inany (...) to do, (...) but that it pleased God
contrary to his endea^ours (...) out into these words: There is no sorcerie
against Jacob, nor soothsaying against Israel, Number. 23. 23. As if he should
have said, I know well that sorcerie is powerful in many things, and of force
to bring much mischief upon men, yet it can take no place against the people
of God, because he has blessed them; and whom he blesses, them no man can
hurt by cursing. Inchanters therefore may upon Gods permission work strange
things, as appears by these places, to name no more.

The second point to be observed, is the means whereby these wonders are
practiced; these are counterfeit and supposed means, not ordained and
sanctified by God, which are commonly called Charms.

A Charm is a Spell or verse, consisting of strange words, used as a sign or
watchword to the devil, to cause him to work wonders.

First, I say it is a Spell consisting of strange words, because in these
enchantments, certain words or verses are secretly uttered, which in regard of
the common forms of words are strange, and wherein there is thought to be a
miraculous efficacy to bring some extraordinary and unexpected thing to
pass. A point of it self evident and needing no further proof, considering
it is not unknown to the more ignorant sort, who are better acquainted with
these, then with the word of God. And these words are not all of one and the
same kind; but some are rude and barbarous, neither known nor conceived or
understood; of which the auncienter sort of charms were wont to be made
especially, and some later. Some again are plain and known terms, which
may be understood; as the names of the Trinity, some words and sentences of
Scripture, as In principto er at verbum, etc. Again, charms that consist of
words, are not all of one sort, but some be imprecations, wishing some evil:
others in show have the form of praises and blessings, whereby the Witch
either flatteringly commends, or favorably wishes some good: others again
are made in form of prayer and petition: and they all are sometimes plainly
conceived, sometimes in ruder and more unknown words, as those well know, who
have heard them, or read them where they are to be sound.

Secondly, I add, that the charm is used for a sign: and watchword to the
devil, to cause him to work wonders, wherein stands the nature and proper
end of a charm. The nature, in that it is a diabolical sign: the end, to
cause the devil to work a wonder: whereby it is distinguished from all other
speeches of men. For all they commonly carry the nature of the thing, whereof
and whereabout they be made, but the Charm does not always follow the nature
of the words, but has another nature in regard of the immediate relation it
has to the devil, to whom it is a sign. Again, the charm pronounced does
not the wonder, but the devil admonished by it as by the watchword to do the
feate.

Now because some are of opinion, in regard of the ordinary production of
strange effects by these means, that the Spell has in self some vertuit and
power to such and such purposes whereinto it is used; I will stand a little in
the proof of the contrary. That a charm is only a diabolical watchword;
and has in it self no such effectual power or possibility to work a
wonder. My reasons are these.

First, this must be taken for a maine ground; That as there is nothing in the
world, that has being but from God, so nothing has in it any efficacy, but
by his ordinance. Now whatsoever efficacy is in any creature from God, it
received the same into it self, either by creation, or since the creation by
some new and special institution, appointment, and gift of God. For example.
The bread in the Saerament, by a natural power given unto it in the creation,
serves to nourish the body, and the same bread, by Gods special appointment
in his word, feeds the soul, in that by his ordinance it is made to us a
sign and seal of the body of Christ broken for us: And so it is in every
creature; if the effect be ordinary and natural, it has it by creation; if
extraordinary and supernatural, it has that by divine ordination: So that
whatsoever comes to pass by any other means, is by Satanicall operation. Now
charms and spells, standing of set words and sillables, have no power in them
to work wonders, either by the gift of nature in the creation, or by Gods
appointment since the creation: and therefore they have in them no power at all
for any such purpose. This latter part of the reason, being the assumption or
application of the ground to the present instance, consists of two parts,
which I will prove in order. First then I affirm, that by the gift of nature,
no words of charms have power in the^ to work wonders; and I prove it in
this manner.

I. All words made and uttered by men, are in their own nature but sounds
framed by the tongue, of the breath that comes from the lungs. And that which
is only a bare sound, in all reason can have no virtue in it to cause a real
work, much less to produce a wonder. The sounds of bells and of many musical
instruments, and the voices of many bruit creatures, are fartr more strong and
powerful, then the voice of a man: yet who knows not, that none of all these
is available to such purposes. Indeed they have power to affect the mind, by
their sweetness or otherwise, but they are not able to bring to pass a real
work, either by the inflicting of hurts and harms, or by the procuring of
good. I conclude therefore, that the voice of man by nature, has no power to
work any wonders.

II. Again, every thing which hurts or affects another, must necessarily
touch the thing which it hurts or affects. For it is a granted rule in
nature, that every agent works upon the patient by touching: Omneagen^ per
con^aet^^^:
But words uttered in Charms are commonly made of things absent, and therefore
though it should be granted, that they had the power of touching a substance
(which they cannot have) yet of themselves they are not available to bring
upon things absent either good or evil.

III. Moreover, if words conceived in charms and spells have any such power as
is pretended, why should not every word that any man speaks have the same
power, inasmuch as all words are of the same nature, being only sounds framed
in the breast, and uttered by the tongue in letters and syllables? But
experience teaches, that the same word spoken by another, has not the same
virtue; For the charm uttered by the Charmer himself, will take effect; but
being spoken in the same manner by another man, that is no Inchanter, makes
to no purpose, for nothing is effected by it.

IV. That which is in nature nothing but a ba^e signification, cannot serve to
work a wonder, and this is the nature of all words^ for as they be framed of
man's breath, they are natural, but yet in regard of form and articulation
they are artificial and significant, and the use of them in every language is,
to signify that which the author thereof intended; for the first
significations of words, depe^^^d upon the will and pleasure of man that framed
and invented them. Being therefore invented only to show or signify some
thing, it remains that neither in nature nor proper use, they can be applied
to the producing of wounderfull and strange effects. Thus the former part of
the assumption is cleared.

In the second place I affirm, that the words of charmers have not this power
in them, by any special gift, blessing, or appointment of God, since the
creation; which is the other part of the assumption. And I show it thus:
whatsoever is powerful and effectual to any end or purpose, by Gods gift,
blessing, or appointment, the same is commanded in his word to be used, and
has also a promise of blessing annexed to the right use thereof. To use the
instance before made for explanation sake. The bread in the Lords supper, has
this power and property given it by Christ, to seal and signify unto every
believing receiver the body of Christ; and by this property given it, it is
a^eileable to this purpose; though it be a thing above the common and natural
use of bread; and thereupon we have warrant from Christ's own commandment,
ordinance, and example so to use it. But in the whole body of the Scripture,
there is not the like commandment to use the words of Charms for the
effecting of wonders, much less the like promise of blessing upon the same so
used: therefore the conclusion is, that God has given no such power unto them
in special.

If it be asked then, what they are, and whereto they serve? I answer, they
are no better then the devils sacraments and vvatchvvords, to cause him to do
some strange work. For the Inchanter has relation in his mind to the devil,
whose help he has at hand by covenant either open or secret; or at least
some superstitious opinion of the force of the words, which is a preparation
to a covenant.

The truth of this doctrine, howsoever it be thus made manifest, yet it finds
not general intertainement at all men's hands. For there are and have been
some learned men, in all ages, who maintained the contrary, both by word and
writing; and namely, that there is great virtue and power in words pronounced
in time and place, to effect strange things. For proof whereof they allege
these reasons.

First, that the bare conceit and imagination of man, is of great force to do
strange things; and therefore words expressed much more. Ans. The ground of the
reason is naught. Imagination is nothing else but a strong conceit of the mind
touching any thing, whatsoever it be, and by reason of the communion that is
between the body and soul being together, it is of great force to work
within the man that imagines diuersely, and to cause alteration in himself,
which may tend either to the hurt or to the good of his own body: but yet
imagination has no force out of a man to affect or hurt an other. A man
(conceiving desperately of his own estate) by the strength of imagination may
kill himself; but the same conceit, be it never to strong, can not hurt his
neighbor. For it is no more then Cesars image upon his coin, which serves
only to represent Caesar: so imagination is nothing but the representation of
some thing in the mind by conceit, and therefore as the person of Caesar is
nothing hurt though his image be defaced; so when we conceive of men in our
minds, though never so badly and maliciously, yet all is of no force to hurt
or annoy them, either in person or state.

Secondly, they allege that Witches by malicious and wrie looks in anger and
displeasure; may and do hurt those upon whom they look, whether they be men or
other creatures. And it is an old received opinion, that in malicious and ill
disposed persons, there proceed out of the eye with the beams, noisome and
malignant spirits, which infect the air, and do poison or kill, not only
them with whom they are daily conversant, but others also whose company they
frequent, of what age, strength, and complexion so ever they be. Ans. But the
opinion is as fond, as it is old: for it is as much against nature that such
virtue should proceed out of the eye, or such spirits break out of the nerves
to the party hated, as it is for the blood of the body, of it self, to gush
out of the veins.

Yet for the ratifying of this opinion they allege that which is written in
Genesis 30. 37. where Jacob laid spe^kled ^oddes before the sheep in their
watering troughes, and that by Gods appointment, for this end, that they might
bring forth party colored lambs. I answer, that was not a work of sight, but
a special and ex^raordinarie work of Gods providence upon Jacob in his
necessity, as we may plainly see in the chapter next following v. 9. and. 11.
yea it was taught Jacob by God himself: and ^f it had been an ordinary work,
doubtless the ga^^es thereof being so good, Jacob would have done it again
afterward: but we never read that he did it again. And be it granted it were a
natural work, yet it cannot prove witching by sight, because the sheep
received into their eyes the species and resemblance of the rodds, which is
according to nature: whereas in fas^ination or bewitching by sight, malignant
spirits should not be received in, but sent forth of the eye, which is against
nature.

Yea, but the Basiliske or Cockatrice does kill man and beast with his breath
and sight, yea, the wolf takes away the voice of such as he suddenly meets
withal and beholds, and why may not wicked men or women do the like? An.
Indeed it is a thing received by common error, and held of some for a truth;
but no experience of any man has yet been brought for the proof thereof, and
therefore it is to be reputed as fabulous. Thus much in probability may be
thought (if the allegatio^ should be true) that the Basilis^e being possessed
of a thick poison, may by his breath send forth some gross venemo^s vapors,
and thereby infect the air, and poison the thing that is near unto him. And
that the soddaine and unexpected beholding of the venomous Cock^trice, or the
ravenous wolf, (being creatures in their kind fearful, especi^ll^ to those
that are not acquainted with them) may cause present astonishment, and
consequently peril of death. But that this should be done by the ei^s of these
creatures only, in manner aforesaid, it is not credible; and therefore A^thors
have upon good ground denied i^ as being confirmed neither by reason, nor
experience.

Thirdly, they reason thus; ^nchanters by whispering of words in charms can
stay the stinging and poisoning of serpents: for so David in effect speaks;
that the voice of the Charmer charmeth the serpent, Psalm. 58. 5. It may seem
therefore that there is no small force in words for the effecting of strange
works. Ans. It must be granted that the charmer may inchant the serpent: but
how? not by virtue of the words in the Charm, but by the power of the devil,
who then is stirred up, when the charm is repeated, to do the thing intended.
The truth of this answer appears by the words of the text, as they are read in
the original, that the Inchanter joins societies very cunningly, namely,
with the devil. Now these s^ci^ties between Satan and the Charmer, are the
very ground of the work upon the serpent: which work, upon confederacy
formerly made, is done by the devil; and the words of the Charm are no more
but the Inchanters Item or watchword, to occasion him thereunto. And let any
other man reapeat the same words a thousand times, that either is not thus
confederate with Satan, or has not a superstitious opinion of Charms, and al
his labor will be in vain.

Fourthly, the word of God is of great force in the hearts of men to con^ert
and change them, as it is uttered by the mouth of mortal man: and this force
is not in the man by whom^ it is spoken: where then should it be, but in the
(...)? and if in the words, why may not other words be of like (...) being
uttered by man? Ans. 1. The power of Gods word comme^^ not from this, that it
is a word, and barely uttered out of the mouth of a man: for so it is a d^ad
letter: but it proceeds from the powerful operation of the spirit, annexed
by Gods promise thereunto, when it is uttered, read, and conceived which
operation if it were taken away, the word might be preached a thousand years
together, without any fruit or effect, either to salvation or condemnation.

2. The word of God is powerful by the concurrence of the work of the spirit,
not in all things: as for example, in raising winds and tempests, in infecting
the air, in killing and annoying men or other creatures; but in the conversion
of sinners, in gathering the Elect, and in confirming those that be called: and
this power it has also by his special blessing and appointment.

3. Furthermore, the same word is not of power, when it is barely read, heard,
or spoken, unless it be also conceived in the understanding, received with
reverence, treasured up in the memory, and mingled with faith in the heart:
whereas the bare reading and muttering over the words of a Charm by an
Inchanter, though in an unknown tongue, in ^ude and barbarous words, is
sufficient to procure the working of wonders.

Now, though the word of God be in it self pure, and serve to excellent
purpose, as has been said, yet by the way we may remember; That as it is
with all things that are most precious, nothing is so excellent in it kind,
which may not be abused; so it is with this heavenly word: for it is and may be
made a Charm two ways. First, when some part of it, is indeed used for a
charm. Thus many Texts of Scripture, both in Latin and other languages, have
been abused by Inchanters, as might easily be showed. Secondly, when it is
heard, read, recited, or made a matter of prayer without understanding. And
thus the ignorant man, as much as in him lies, makes it a Charm. For in his
ordinary use thereof, he neither conceiueth, nor takes care to understand it,
as lamentable experience teaches. Yet in neither of these is the very bare
repeating of the word effectual. For as when a man hears or reads it,
unless the Spirit of God inlighteneth his heart, it is to no purpose; so when
it is made the matter of a Spell, nothing will be effected, unless the devil
either by conf^deracie, or superstitious conceit be drawn to confer his
help in the point, for his own advantage.

Howbeit, of all Enchantments these are the most dishonorable to God, most
acceptable to Satan, and most hurtful to the charmer, which are made of the
Scriptures. For beside the sin of Witchcraft in the Charming, this
inconvenience (...), that Satan procures more credit to one of th^se, then to
twenty other, because the words are Scripture; hereby clo^ing his mischie^ous
practices under the color of holiness, and so confirming the truth of that
which the holy Ghost says, that when he works most deceitfully, he
transformes himself into an Angel of l^hgt,^ Cor. 11. 14. He knows well,
that ordinary words seem nothing to some men, therefore he teaches and
suggesteth phrases and sentences out of the word, for such ungodly ends, that
even the grace of them fet^hed from the Scriptures, may make them s^^mefull.
Wherefore let every one that is endued with grace and knowledge, d^ely consider
this with himself. Cannot Gods word be effectual, when it is used to
edification, unless the work of his own Spirit accompany the same? then
surely it is impossible, that the same which is holy, being used to an evil
end, should be powerful, except the devil affords his help for the
effecting thereof. To conclude therefore, let men say what they will, the truth
is this, that words of Enchantment, be they never so holy or profane, either
by way of cursing or blessing, have no power of themselves to the producing of
strange works: but are (as has been said) only diabolical signs,
admonishing the Devil of some wickedness intended and desired, which he through
his power must cause to be done.

And thus much of Enchantment standing upon the practice of wonders by a Charm.

To this head of Enchantment, sundry other practices of Witches are to be
referred, the chief whereof are these.

First, the using and making of Characters, Images, or Figures, specially the
framing of Circles, for this end to work wonders by them. As, to draw the
picture of a child, or man, or other creature in clay, or wax, and to bury
the same in the ground, or to hide it in some secret place, or to burn it in
the fire, thereby intending to hurt or kill the party resembled. Again, to
make an impression into the said picture, by pricking or gashing the heart or
any other place, with intent to procure dangerous or deadly pains to the same
parts. This is a mere practice of Enchantment, and the making of the image,
and using of it to this end, is in virtue a Charm, though no words be used.
For the bare picture has no more power of it self to hurt the body
represented, then bare words. All that is done comes by the work of the
devil, who alone by the using of the picture in that sort, is occasioned so or
so, to work the parties destruction.

Secondly, hither we may refer the using of Amulets, that is, remedies and
preservatives against enchantments, ^orceries, and bewitchings, made of herbs
or some such things, and hanged about the neck for that end.

Thirdly, the using of Exorcismes, that is, certain set forms of words used
in way of ad^uration, for some extraordinary end. A practice usual in the
Church of Rome, whereby the priest co^iures the salt, holy water, cream,
^pittle, oil, pal^es, etc. all which are in truth mere inchantements. For
howsoever the Council of Trent has ratified the^ by their decrees, (...)*
and so commended them to general use within the compass of the Popish Church;
yet they have in them no power or abili^ie of blessing or cursing, either by
nature, or Gods appointment.

Fourthly, In this number we reckon the using of the name Jesus, to d^iue away
the devil, or to p^euent Witchcraft; a common practice among the ignorant.
Wherein the wonderful malice of Satan bew^aies it self, in making the
ignorant people think that Christ is a coniurer, and that there is virtue in
the naming o^ his name, to do some strange thing. Whereas the truth is, he
cares neither for this name, nor for all the names of God, if a man goes no
further the^ the bare repeating of them; but rather delights to see them so
abused and disgraced. And hereupon it is, that in all coniurations, when he is
raised by the Sorcerer, he is willing to be adi^red by all the holy names of
God that are in the Scripture, to the end, that he may the more deeply seduce
his own instruments, and make them to think that these holy names will bind
him, and force him to yield unto their desires in the particular, when indeed
there is no such matter. Which point thoroughly considered, may admonish us to
take special heed of these cunning glozes and deuillish insinuations, whereby
he intends to delude us; always remembering, that the Apostles themselves, to
whom the power of working miracles was given, did never acknowledge the work
to be done by the name of Jesus, but as S. Peter affirms, through faith in
his name, Act. 3. 6. 16.

Fifthly, The crossing of the body, to this end, that we may be blessed from
the devil. A thing usual even of latter times, specially in Popery; wherein
the cross carries the very nature of a Charm, and the use of it in this
manner, a practice of Enchantment. For God has given no such virtue to a
cross, either by creation, or special privilege and appointment.

Six^ly, the Scratching ^f a Witch to discover the Witch. For it is a means
which has no warrant or power thereunto, either by the word of God, or from
nature, but only from the devil; who if he yields either at crossing, or
scrat^hing, he does it willingly, and not by compulsion, that he may feed his
instrument with a false faith and a superstitious conceit, to the dishonor of
God, and their own overthrow. In a word, look whatsoever actions, gestures,
signs, rites, and ceremonies are used by men or women to work wonders, having
no power to effect the same, either by creation and nature, or by special
appointment from God, they must all be referred to this head, and reckoned for
Charms.

The use. Now considering that all kinds of Charms are the devils watchwords
to cause him to work the wonder, and have no virtue in them, be the words
wherein they are conceived never so good: hereby we must be admo^^shed, to take
heed of the use of them, and all other unlawful ceremonies, both in respect of
their forms, be they praises or prayers, or imprecations; as also in regard of
their ends, be they never so good in outward appearance. But alas! the more
lamentable is the case, Charming is in as great request as Physic, and
Charmers more sought unto then Physicians in time of need. There be charms
for all conditions and ages of men, for diverse kinds of creatures, yea for
every disease; as for headache, toothache, stitches, and such like.
Nevertheless, howsoever some have subjected themselves to such base and
ungodly means, yet the use hereof by the mercy of God, has not been
universal. And those that have sought for help, are to be advised in the
fear of God, to repent of this their sin, and to take a better course. Let
them rightly consider, that they have hither to depended upon Satan for help,
and consequently have dishonored God, and renounced lawful means sanctified
by him, which should not have been done in case of the greatest worldly gain.
For no man may do evil, that good may come of it.

But they that use the help of Charmers, and consult with Wisemen, are wont to
allege something in defense or excuse of their practice.

First, that they for their part, mean no hurt, they know no evil by the man
whom they seek to, they only send to him, and he does them good, how, and in
what manner they regard not. Ans. 1. Indeed many be ignorant of the Inchanters
courses. But in cases of loss and hindrance, men ought not only to inquire
the means, but to weigh and consider the warrantablenes thereof, otherwise
they do not that they do of faith, and so are guilty of sin before God,
Romans 14. last verse. 2. Put the case they themselves mean no hurt, yet in this
action they do hurt to themselves, by reposing trust in things, which upon
better consideration they shall find to be dishonorable, and therefore
hateful to God.

Secondly, they allege; we go to the Physician for counsel, we take his
Recipe, but we know not what it means; yet we use it, and find benefit; if
this be lawful, why may we not as well take benefit by the Wiseman, whose
courses we be ignorant of? Ans. 1. Physic used in time and place, is a worthy
ordinance of God, and therefore being rightly used, God gives his blessing to
it. But for enchantment it was never sanctified by God, and therefore cannot be
used in any assurance of his blessing. 2. The Physicians receipt being a
composition and mixture of natural things, though a man knows it not, yet he
takes it into his stomach, or applies it to his body, and sensibly perceiues
the virtue and eff^cacie thereof in the working: whereas the Charmers course
consists of words, which neither are known in themselves, nor are manifest
in their use to sense or understanding. And hereby it is plain, there is not
the same reason of Physic and charms: the one having a sensible operation by
virtue given it of God; the other insensible, and wrought above ordinaric
means by the work of Satan.

Thirdly, they allege, God is merciful, and he has provided a salve for
every sore, they have used other means, but they have not succeeded, and what
should they do more, may they not in extremity repair to the Inchaunter, and
see what he can do for them, rather then their goods and cattle should be
lost and spoiled? Ans. 1. It were better for you to bide by the loss, yea to
live and die in any sickness, then to tempt God by seeking help at charmers
hands: for their help is dangerous, and comes from the devil, whereupon if
ye rest your selves, ye join league with him, and so hazard eternally the
safety both of bodies and souls. 2. Use good means allowed of God, and when
they have been used often without success, proceed not to other courses, but
refer your selves to God, and say with Job, The Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken away: blassed be the name of the Lord, Job 1. 21. And thus much of
Enchanting, the first part of Operative Witchcraft.

Sect. II.
The second part is Iugling. Iugling, Iugling
is the deluding of the eye with some strange slight done above the or linar^e
course of nature. In this description there are two points necessarily required
in the point of Iugling, Delusion of the eye, and extraordinary Slight.

Delusion is then performed, when a man is made to think he sees that, which
indeed he sees not. And this is done by the operation of the devil diversely,
but especially three ways. First, by corrupting the humor of the eye, which
is the next instrument of sight. Secondly, by altering the air, which is the
mean by which the object or species is carried to the eye. Thirdly, by
altering and changing the object, that is, the thing seen, or whereon a man
looks.

This deluding of the sense, is noted by Paul, Gal. 3. 1. O foolish Gal^tians,
who has (...).
bewitched you? where the spirit of God ^eth a word borrowed from this kind of
sorcerers, which in full meaning signifies thus much: who has deluded your
eyes, and caused you to think you see that, which you see not. As if he should
have said, Look as the Iugler, by his deuillish art, deludeth the outward eye,
and makes men think they see that, which indeed they do not: Even so the
false Apostles, by their erroneous doctrine, have deluded the eyes of your
minds, and have caused you, Galatians, to judge that to be the word of God,
which is not, and that to be truth, which is error and falsehood. Paul gives us
to understand by the very phrase used, that there is such a kind of Iugling, as
is able to deceive the eye: For otherwise his comparison would not hold.

The second thing required in Iugling, is a Slight done above the order and
course of nature. This is the point which makes those conueiances to be
Witchcraft. For if they were within the compass of nature, they could not be
rightly ^earmed and reputed Sorceries; considering that diverse men, by reason
of the agilitie of their bodies, and sleight of their hands, are able to work
diverse feats, which seem strange to the beholders, and yet not meddle with
Witchcraft. Again, some by the lawful art of the Optiks, may show strange and
admirable things, by means of light and darknesso, and yet may be free from
impution of Magical worke^; because they keep themselves wholly within the
power and practice of nature. But sleights done (...) over and above delusio^,
must pass the ordinary bounds and precincts of nature, and so are made points
of Witchcraft. One memorable example, for the clearer manifestation of this
point, we have in the Scripture, by name in the 7, 8, and 9, Chapters of
Exodus, where Moses and Aaron wrought wonders before Pharaoh, turning the rod
into a serpent, and water into blood, with many other such like. Now Iannes and
Iambres (for so Paul calls them, 2. Tim* 3. 8.) the Magicians of Egypt, did
work the same miracles which Moses and Aaron had done: But here was the
difference^ Moses made true creatures, and wrought true miracles, whereas they
did all in appearance and outward show. For theirs were not true real actions,
but only Magical illusions, wrought by the slight and subtilty of the devil,
in the practice of lugling.

And because some think, that the serpents and froggs caused by the Magitians,
were true creatures, and all their other works as really and truly done, as
those which Moses and Aaron did, I will here stand a little to show and prove
the contrary, that they were only in show and appearance, and not in deed
and truth.

First then, if the frogs and serpents caused by Iannes and Iambres were true
creatures indeed, and their other sleights true and real works; then they
were made and caused either by the devil, or by God himself: (for no man of
himself can make a rod to become a true serpent.) But this was done neither by
the devil, nor by God, as shall appea^e in the sequel^.

They were not done by the Devil; because the devil cannot make a true
creature, either serpent or frogge.

How does that appear? Ans. To make a true creature of any sort, by producing
the same out of the causes, is a work serving to continue the creation, and is
indeed a kind of creation. Now the devil as he cannot create a thing at the
first, so he is not able to continue the same by a new creation: that being a
property belonging to God only. For better conceiving hereof, we must know,
that God crea^eth two ways: either primarily in the beginning, when he made
all things of nothing, Genesis 1. 1. or seco^darily, in the government of the
world, when he produces a true creature in a true miracle: yet not making it
of nothing (as he did in the beginning) but producing it by ministering and in
forming the matter immediately by himself, without the aid of ordinary
means and instruments appointed after the creation. The former is creation
properly called; the latter a continuance thereof. Both these God has reserved
to himself, as incommunicable to any creature. As for the succession and
propagation of creatures in their kinds, as of men, beasts, birds, fishes, etc.
it is only a continuation of the creatures in their kinds, and is wrought by
ordinary means of generation; but is no continuance of the work of creation.
And the devil by his power may make counterfeits of the true creatures of God,
but neither by creating them, nor by continuing their creation; these two
being works peculiar and proper to the Deity alone.

Again, if the devil could turn a rod into a true serpent, and water into
blood indeed, then his power should be equal to the power of the son of God
himself. For the first miracle that he wrought, was the turning of water into
wine, loh. 2. And that was no greater a work, then the turning of water into
blood, or a rod into a serpent. But this were most horrible blasphemic, to
match the devil with the Son of God, and his finite power, with the power of
the Godhead, by which miracles are wrought. And the truth is, Satan can work
no true miracles; neither does the text import, that the Magicians did that
which they did by miracle, but by Enchantment and Sorcerie, Exodus 7. 11. 22.
and 8. 7.

In the second place, I affirm that God did not create these creatures, or
cause the works of the Magicians: to be effected. And this is proved by the
words of Paul, 2. Tim. 3. 8. who says, that Iannes and Iambres (which did
these works) withstood Moses and Aaron, whom God had sent, and by whom he
wrought. If then God had wrought with the Magicians also, he should have been
against himself, yea, he should have wrought both ways, for himself, and
against himself, and consequently should have impeached his own glory, for
the manifestation whereof he wrought miracles by Moses and Aaron; which we
may not once think of God. Seeing therefore that these serpents, if they were
true creatures, were not created either by Satan, because he could not, or by
God himself, because he would not; it must needs remain, that they, and all
other the Magicians works, were mere illusions, and not otherwise.

Yet for the further clearing of the matter in hand: the text it self yields
sundry reasons, to prove that these acts of the Sorcerers, were but
appearances, and not things really produced.

First, they that ca^ not do a lesser thing, can not possibly do a greater. Now
Moses shows that the Egyptian Incha^ters could not do a lesser thing then the
turning of rodds into true serpents, or waters into blood. For they could not
by all their power and skill, preserve themselves from the plagues of Egypt, as
the botch and other judgments, Exodus 9. 11. which was a more easy thing, then
to make or change a creature. Nay, they were not able to bring forth lice by
their enchantment, which seemed to be the least miracle, but acknowledged that
to be the ^inger of God, Ex. 8. 18, 19.

Secondly, the text says, that Aarons serpent devoured their serpents, Exodus
7. v. 12. hence it follows, that theirs could not be true creatures. For in
all likelihood they were all of the same kind, and of like quantity, at least
in show. And it was never seen, that one creature should receive into it self
an other creature of equal bigness, with preservation of it self. Neither
has it been observed ordinarily, that one creature should devour another of
the same kind. It was therefore a work of Gods secret power in the true
serpent, whereby he would show that the other were not true and real, but
formal and imaginary.

Thirdly, if the Magicians had been able to have made true frogs and
serpents, then by the same power they might have removed those which Moses
brought: for the like ability is required in both: yet this they could not
do, but were feign to entreat Moses, to pray for their remooueall. So says
the text, Then pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Pray, etc. Exodus
8. 8.

Lastly, the frogs which Moses caused, when they were removed, being
gathered on ^eapes, caused great corruption, and the whole land stanke of them,
Exodus 8. 14. Again, the water turned into blood, made the fish in the river to
die, and the water to stinko, so that the Egyptians could not drink of the
water of the river, Exodus 7. 21. But we read of no such effect of the frogs
and waters of the Inchanters, which doubtless would have followed as well as
the other, if both had been true and real creatures. It remains therefore,
that these were but mere appearances and Iugling tricks, and the Sorcerers
themselves Iuglers, yea all their works but sleights, caused by the power and
subtlety of Satan, and no true works, as has been said. Thus I have declared
the whole nature, grounds, and kinds of this damnable Art.

CHAP. V.
What Witches be, and of how many sorts.
Having in the former part of this Treatise opened the nature of Witchcraft,
and thereby made way for the better understanding of this Judicial Law of
Moses, I come now to show who is the practiser hereof, whom the Text
principally aims at, namely, the Witch, whether man or woman.

A witch is a Magician, who either by open or secret league, wittingly and
willingly, consents to use the aid and assistance of the Devil, in the
working of wonders.

First, I call the Witch [a Magician] to show what kind of person this is: to
wit, such a one as does profess and practice Witchcraft. For a Magician is a
professor and practiser of this art, as may appear, Act. 8. 9. where Simon a
Witch of Samaria is called Magus, or Simon the Magician.

Again, in this general term, I comprehend both sexes or kinds of persons,
men and women, excluding neither from being Witches. A point the rather to be
remembered, because Moses in this place setting down a Judicial ^awe against
Witches, uses a word of the feminine gender [^^ecasbephah] which in English
properly signisieth, a woman Wicth: whereupon some might gather, that women
only were Witches. Howbeit Moses in this word exempteth not the male, but
only uses a notion referring to the female, for good causes; principally for
these two.

First, to give us to understand, that the woman being the weaker sex, is
sooner entangled by the devils illusions with this damnable art, then the man.
And in all ages it is found true by experience, that the devil has more
easily and oftener prevailed with women, then with men. Hence it was, that the
Hebrews of ancient times, used it for a proverb, The more women, the more
witches: His first temptation in the beginning, was with Eve a woman, and since
he pursues his practice accordingly, as making most for his advantage. For
where he finds easiest entrance, and best entertainment, thither will he
oftnest resert.

Secondly, to take away all exception of punishment from any party that shall
practice this trade, and to show that weakness cannot exempt the Witch from
death. For in all reason, if any might allege insirmitie, and plead for
favor, it were the woman, who is weaker then the man. But the Lord says, if
any person of either sex among his people, be found to have entered covenant
with Satan, and become a practiser of Sorcerie, though it be a woman and the
weaker vessel, she shall not escape, she shall not be suffered to live, she
must die the death. And though weakness in other cases, may lessen both the
crime and the punishment, yet in this it shall take no place.

The second point in the description, is consenting to use the help of the
devil, either by open or secret league, wittingly and willingly: wherein
stands the very thing, that makes a Witch to be a Witch: The yielding of
consent upon couenaut. By which clause, two sorts of people are expressly
excluded from being Witches. First, such as be tainted with phrenzy or madness,
or are through weakness of the brain deluded by the devil. For these,
though they may be said after a sort to have society with Satan, or rather he
with them, yet they cannot give their consent to use his aid truly, but only
in imagination; with the true Witch it is far otherwise. Secondly, all such
superstitious persons, men or women, as use Charms and Enchantment for the
effecting of any thing upon a superstitious and erroneous persuasion, that the
Charms have virtue in them to do such things, not knowing that it is the
action of the devil by those means; but thinking that God has put virtue
into them, as he has done into herbs for Physic. Of such persons we ^gue
(no doubt) abundance in this our Land, who though they deal wickedly and sin
grievously in using Charms, yet because they intend not to join league with
the devil, either secretly, or formally, they are not to be counted Witches.
Nevertheless, they are to be aduertis^d in the mean time, that their estate is
fearful. For their present ungodly practices have prepared them already to
this cursed trade, and may bring them in time to be the ranckest Witches that
can be. Wherefore I advise all ignorant persons, that know not God nor the
Scriptures, to take heed and beware of this dangerous evil, the use of
Charms. For if they be once convinced in their consciences, and know that God
has given no power to such means, and yet shall use them, assuredly they do
in effect consent to the devil to be helped by him, and thereupon are joined
in confederacy with him in the confidence of their own hearts, and so are
become Witches.

The third and last thing in the description, is the end of Witchcraft; The
w^rking of wonders. Wonders are wrought three ways (as has been showed,)
either by Divination, or by Incha^tment, or by lugling: and to one of these
three heads, (...) ^eates and practices of Witchcraft (...) to be referred.

Now if any man doubt, whether there b^such Witches indeed as have been
^escribed, let him remember, that beside experience in all ages and countries,
we have also sundry examples of them even in the Scriptures.

In the old Testament we read of Balaam, Numb. 23. who though he be called a
Prophet, because he was so reputed of men, yet indeed he was a notorious
Witch, both by profession and practice, and would have showed his cunning in
that kind upon the Israelits, if God had not ^undered him against his will. Of
the same kind were the Inchanters of Egypt Exodus 7. the Witches of Persia,
Dan. 2. and the Pythonisse of Endor, known for a renowned Sorcerer over all
Israel, and therefore Saul's servants being asked, could presently tell of her,
as we read, 1. Sam. 28.

In the new Testament, mention is made of Simon, whose name declared his
profession^ his name was Magus, and the text says, that he used Witchcraft,
and bewitched the people of (...), calling himself a great man, Act. 8. 9.
Whence it was that after his death, Just. Mart. Apolog. ad Anton. Pium.
there was a statue set up in Rome in honor of him in the days of Claudius
Caesar, with this inscription; Simoni Deo sancto. And it is not unlike, but
Bar-jesus the false prophet at Paphus, was a man addicted to the practices of
Witchcraft, and for that cause was called by a kind of excellency, Elymas the
(...)
Magician, Act. 13. 6. 8. that is, the great or famous Sorcerer. Lastly, the
Pythonisse at Philippi, that gat her master much advantage by divining, Act.
16. 16. And all these used the help of the devil, for the working of wonders.

Of Witches there be two sorts: The bad Witch, and the good Witch: for so they
are commonly called.

The bad Witch, is he or she that has consented in league with the Devil, to
use his help, for the doing of hurt only, as to strike and annoy the bodies
of men, women, children, and cattle with diseases, and with death it self: so
likewise to raise tempests, by sea and by land, etc. This is commonly called
the binding-Witch.

The good Witch, is he or she that by consent in a league with the devil,
does use his help, for the doing of good only. This cannot hurt, torment,
curse, or kill, but only heal and cure the hurts inflicted upon men or
cattle, by badde Witches. For as they can do no good, but only hurt; so this
can do no hurt, but good only. And this is that order which the Devil has
set in his kingdom, appointing to several persons their several offices and
charges. And the good Witch is commonly termed the unbinding Witch.

Now howsoever both these be evil, yet of the two, the more horrible and
de^^stable Monster is the good Witch: for look in what place soever there be
any bad Witches that hurt only, there also the Devil has his good ones, who
are better known then the bad, being commonly called Wisemen, or Wise-women.
This will appear by experience in most places in these countries. For let a
man's child, friend, or cattle be taken with some sore sickness, or strangely
tormented with some rare and unknown disease, the first thing he does, is to
bethink himself and inquire after some Wiseman or wise-woman, and thither he
sends and goes for help. When he comes, he first tells him the state of the
sick man: the Witch then being certified of the disease, prescribes either
Charms of words to be used over him, or other such counterfeit means, wherein
there is no virtue; being nothing else but the devils Sacraments, to cause him
to do the cure, if it come by Witchraft. Well, the means are received,
applied, and used, the sick party accordingly recouereth, and the conclusion
of all is, the usual acclamation; Oh happy is the day, that ever I met with
such a man or woman to help me!

Here observe, that both have a stroke in this action: the bad Witch hurt him,
the good heals him; but the truth is, the latter has done him a thousand
fold more harm then the former. For the one did only hurt the body, but the
devil by means of the other, though he have left the body in good plight,
yet he has laid fast hold on the soul, and by curing the body, has killed
that. And the party thus cured, cannot say with David: The Lord is my helper;
but the Devil is my helper; for by him he is cured. Of both these kinds of
witches the present Law of Moses must be understood.

This point well considered, yields matter both of instruction and practice.

Of instruction, in that it shows the cunning and crafty dealing of Satan,
who afficteth and tormenteth the body for the gain of the soul. And for that
purpose has so ordered his instruments, that the bad Witch gives the occasion,
by annoying the body or goods; and the good immediately accomplisheth his
desire, by intangling the soul in the bands of error, ignorance, and false
faith. Again, this shows the blindness of natural corruption, specially in
^gnorant and superstitious people. It is their nature to abhorte hurtful
persos, such as bad Witches be, and to count them execrable; but those that
do, them good, they honor and reverence as wise men and woman, yea secke and
(...) unto the^ in times of extremity, though of all persons in the world they
be most odious: and Satan in them (...) the greatest friend, when he is most
like himself, and intends greatest mischief. Let all ignorant persons be
advised hereof in time, to take heed to themselves, and learn to know, God
and his word, that by light from thence they may better discern of the subtle
practices of Satan and his instruments.

For matter of practice; Hence we learn our duty, to abhor the wizzard,
as the most pernicious enemy of our salvation, the most effectual instrument
of destroying our souls, and of building up the devils kingdom; yea, as the
greatest enemy to Gods name, worship, and glory, that is in the world, next
to Satan himself. Of this sort was Simon Magus, who by doing strange cures and
works, made the people of Samaria to take him for some great man, who wrought
by the mighty power of God, whereas he did all by the devil. He therefore
being a good Witch, did more hurt in seducing the people of God, then Balaam a
bad one could with all his curses. And we must remember that the Lord has set
a law upon the witches head, he must not live, and if death be due to any,
then a thousand deaths of right belong to the good Witch.

But the patrones of Witches endeavor to delude the true interpretation of
that law. For by a Witch (say they) we must understand a poisoner, and they
allege for that purpose the 70. Interpreters, who translate the original word
[Mecashephah] by (...), which signifies a poisoner.

I answer: First; the word used by the 70. Interpreters signifies indeed so
much, yet not that only, but also a VVitch in general, as may appear in
sundry places of Scripture. The Apostle, reckoning up Witchcraft among the
works of the flesh, Gal. 5. 10.
uses the Greek word (...), not for poisoning, but for all Magical arts, as
Hierome testifies upon the place. And that it must necessarily be so
translated, it is evident, because in the next verse murder is termed another
work of the flesh, under which, poisoning and all other kinds of killing are
comprehended. And the same word is used in the like sense, Reu. 21. 8. and 22.
15.

Again, the word [Mecashephah] which Moses uses, is ascribed to the
Inchanters of Egypt, in the 7. 8. and 9. chapters of Exodus; and to the wisemen
of Babel, Dan. 2. who are also called (...) in the translation of the
Seauentie: and both sorts of them were witches and sorcerers. The kings of
Egypt and Babylon used these [Mecashephim] for sundry purposes, and made them
of their counsel; and if they had been according to this allegation,
poisoners, it is not like they would have so fitted the humors of those two
Princes, Pharaoh and Nebuchadne^sar, much less that they would have so
ordinarily required their presence and assistance, in the business there
mentioned.

Thirdly, there is a peremptory Law against the wilful murderer, Number. 35.
31. that he should be put to death, and that no recompense should be taken for
his life. In which place all poisoners are condemned, because they are wilful
murderers. Now if here in Exodus, by [Mecashephah] we should understand a
poisoner, then there should be one and the same law twice propounded for the
same thing, which is not like: and therefore the word used by Moses in this
text, signifies not a poisoner properly, but a Witch.

CHAP. VI.
Of the punishment of Witches.
HItherto I have treated of the nature of witchcraft, both in general, and
particular, and have also showed what witches are, both good and badde. And now
I proceed to the second point considered in this Text, the Punishment of a
Witch, and that is Death.

In the Judicial laws of Moses (whereof this is one) the Lord appointed sundry
penalties, which in quality and degree differed one from another, so as
according to the nature of the offense, was the proportion and measure of the
punishment ordained. And of all sins, as those were the most heinous in
account, which tended directly to the dishonor of God, so to them was assigned
death, the greatest and highest degree of punishment. He that despised the Law
of Moses, died without mercy under two or three witnesses, Hebr. 10. 28. the
punishment of the thief, was restitution fourfold, Exodus 22. 1. but the
murderer must be put to death, Numb. 35. 31. the Idolater and Seducer were
commanded to be slain, Exodus 22. 20. Deuteronomy. 13. 5. the Blasphemer must be
stoned, Leuit. 29. 19. And the VVitch is numbered amongst these grievous of
fend^rs: therefore his punishment is as great as any other. For the text says,
he might not be suffered to live, Exodus 22. 18.

But why should the VVitch be so sharply censured? And what should move the
Lord to allot so high a degree of punishment to that sort of offenders? Ans.
The cause was not the hurt, which they brought upon men in body, goods, or
outward estate. For there be sundry that never did harm, but good only. We
read not of any great hurt that was done by the Inchanters of Egypt, or by the
Pythonisse of Endor, or by Simon Magus in Samaria. And those divining Witches,
which have taken upon them to foretell things to come, hurt not any, but
themselves, yet they must die the death. This therefore is not the cause. But
what if these do hurt, or kill, must they not then die? yes verily, but by
another law, the law of Murder, and not by the law of VVitchcraft. For in this
case, he dies as a murderer, and not as VVitch, and so he should die, though
he were no VVitch.

The cause then of this sharp punishment, is the very making of a league with
the devil, either secret or open, whereby they covenant to use his help for
the working of wonders. For by virtue of this alone it comes to pass, that
Witches can do strange things, in Divining, Enchanting, and Iugling. Now let
it be observed, of what horrible impiety they stand guilty before God, who
join in confederacy with Satan. Hereby they renounce the Lord that made them,
they make no more account of his favor and protection, they do quite cut
themselves off from the covenant made with him in Baptism, from the communion
of the Saints, from the true worship and service of God. And on the contrary
they give themselves unto Satan, as their god, whom they continually fear and
serve. Thus are they become the most detestable enemies to God, and his people,
that can be. For this cause Samuel told Saul, that rebellion was as the sin
of Witchcraft: that is, a most heinous and detestable sin in the sight of
God. The traitor, that does no hurt to his neighbor, but is willing and
ready to do him the best services that can be desired, is notwithstanding by
the law of Nations, no be^ter then a dead man, because he betraies his
Sovereign, and consequently cannot be a friend unto the Commonwealth. In like
manner, though the Witch were in many respects profitable, and did no hurt, but
procured much good; yet because he has renounced God his king and governor,
and has bound himself by other laws to the service of the enemy of God, and
his Church, death is his portion justly assigned him by God; he may not live.

CHAP. VII.
The application of the doctrine of Witchcraft to our times.
THus having delivered the true sense and interpretation of this Judicial Law,
both concerning the sin of Witchcraft, and the persons by whom this sin is
practiced; it remains now that I should make some use thereof, by way of
application to the Witches of our times.

In doing whereof, four particular Questions of moment, are to be handled.

I. Whether the Witches of our times, be the same with those, that are here
condemned by the law of Moses? for some there be, and those men of learning,
and members of Gods Church, that hold they are not. II. If they be the same (as
it shall appear they are) then how we may in these days be able to discern,
and discover a Witch? III. What remedy may be used against the hurt of
Witchcraft? IV. Whether our Witches are to be punished with death, and that by
virtue of this Law of Moses?
Sect. I.
I. Question. Whether the Witches of our times, be the same with those that are
here condemned by Moses Law?
Ans. If we do well consider the quality, and condition of the Witches of our
days, we shall easily see that they be the same. For experience shows, that
whether they be men or women, but especially aged women, they be such persons,
as do renounce God, and their Baptism, and make a league with the devil,
either secretly or openly; in which the devil binds himself to teach them
certain rites and ceremonies, whereby they may be able to work wonders, as to
stir up tempests, to reveal secrets, to kill or hurt men, and cattle, or to
cure and do good, according to the tenor of their covenant.

The Joan. Fr. Pie. M^^and. de praenot. l 1. c. 2.
confessions of Witches recorded in the Chronicles of countries through all
Europe, Nicol. Remigius, Daemonola^^. c. 1. c. 5.
do with common consent declare and manifest this point. So that howsoever our
Witches may differ in some circumstances from those in the time of Moses, as
either in the instruments, and means used, or in the manner and form, or in
some particular ends of their practices; yet in the substance and foundation of
Witchcraft, they agree with them. For both of them have made a covenant with
the Devil one way or other, and by virtue thereof have wrought wonders above
the order of nature. Agreeing therefore in the very foundation and form of
Witchcraft, which is the league, and in the proper end, the working of wonders:
they must needs be in substance and effect the same with the Witches mentioned
by Moses. And yet this point is denied by some, and the Witches of these days
have their patrons, who use reasons to prove, that now we have none such as we
speak of. Their reasons are specially three.

First, they labor to take away the form of Witchcraft, affirming, that there
can be no confederacy made between the Witch and the Devil, and that for
four causes.

I. In every league and contract the parties must be mur^ally bound each to
other: now between man or woman, and the devil, there can be no bond made,
and though there could, yet man is bound in conscience to God, to renounce the
bond of obedience to Satan, and to break the covenant. Ans. There be two sorts
of leagues; lawful, and unlawful: in all lawful leagues it is true, that
there must be a mutual bond of both parties, each to other, which may not be
dissolved; but in unlawful compacts it is otherwise. And no man can say that
this league between a Witch and the Devil is lawful, but wicked, and
damnable, yet being once made, howsoever unlawfully, it is a league and
compact. This therefore proves not, that there can be no covenant at all, but
that there can be no lawful covenant betwixt them, which no man will deny.

II. Satan and the Witch are of diverse natures: he is spiritual, they are
corporal substances: therefore there can be no league made between them. Ans.
The reason is not good. For even God himself, who is of nature most simple and
spiritual, made a covenant with Adam, renewed the same unto Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob: and continues it with his Church on earth, from age to age. Hence it
appears, that diversity of nature in the parties, can not hinder the making
of a covenant. And therefore if man may make covenant with God himself, who is
most spiritual; then may he likewise come in league with the devil, whose
substance is not so pure and sp^rituall. Again, we must remember, that in
making of a covenant, it is sufficient, that the parties consent and agree in
will and understanding, though other circumstances and rites, which are but
signs of confirmation, be wanting. Be it then, that Satan has not a bodily
substance, as man has, yet considering that man is endued with understanding,
to coceiue of things, as the devil does, and has also will to yield consent,
and approbation thereunto, though in a corrupt and wicked manner, there may
pass a confederacy, and a covenant may be made, and stand in force between
them.

III. Whatsoever the devil does in this compact, he does it in fraud and
deceit, never meaning in his promises, as man does, and when both parties mean
not one and the same thing, how can they grow to agreement in any kind? Ans.
Suppose this be true, yet it only proves, that the covenant made between
them, was deceitful and unlawful. But what of that? still it remains a
bargain howsoever: for it fails only in the circumstance, the substance,
which is the consent of the parties, was not wanting.

IV. Witches of our times (say they) are aged persons, of weak brains, and
troubled with abundance of melancholy, and the devil takes advantage of the
humor, and so deludes them, persuading that they have made a league with him,
when they have not, and consequently moving them to imagine, that they do,
and may do strange things, which indeed are done by himself, and not by them.

Ans. This reason is a mere melancholic conceit, without ground. And the
contrary is a manifest truth, that they are not so, as is affirmed, parties
deceived by reason of their humors. For first, our Witches are as wise and
politic, yea as crafty and cunning in all other matters, as other men be;
whereas brainsicke persons troubled with melancholy, if their understanding be
distempered in one action, it will be faulty likewise in others, more or
less. Again, our Witches know that they sin in their practices of
VVitchcraft, and therefore they use subtle means to cover them, and he that
would convict them, must have great dexterity to go beyond them. Now if they
were persons deluded, through corruption of any humors; look what humor
caused them to do a thing, the same would urge them to disclose it. Thirdly,
they are also of the same stamp, they take the same courses in all their
practices, their consent in word and action is universal. Men of learning have
observed, that all Witches through Europe, are of like carriage and behavior in
their examinations, and conuictions: they use the same answers, refuges,
defenses, protestations. In a word, look what be the practices and courses of
the Witches in England, in any of these particulars, the same be the practices
of the Witches in Spain, France, Italy, Germany, etc. Wherefore the case is
clear, they are not deluded by Satan, through the force of humor* ^s is
avouched: for such persons, according as they are diversely ^ake^, would show
themsel^es diversely affected, and vary in their speeches, actions, and
conceits, both public and private. Fourthly, our Witches are wont to
communicate their skill to others by tradition, to teach and instruct their
children and posterity, and to initiate them in the grounds and practices of
their own ^rade, while they live, as may appear by the confessions recorded
in the Courts of all countries. But if they were persons troubled with
melancholy, their conceits would die with them. For conceits, and imaginary
^ancies, which rise of any humor, cannot be conuayed from party to party, no
more then the humor it self. Lastly, if this slight might serve to defend
Witches under pretense of delusion through corrupted humors, then here were a
cover for all manner of sins. For example: a fellon is apprehended for
robbery or murder, and is brought before the Judge: Upon examination he
confesses the fact, being convicted the law proceeds to condemnation. The
same man's friends come in, and allege before the Judge in this manner: This
man has a crazie brain, and is troubled with melancholy, and though he has
confessed the fact, yet the truth is, it was not he, but the devil, who
himself committed the murder, and made him think he did it, when he did it
not, and hereupon he has confessed. Would any man think, that this were a
reasonable allegation, and a sufficient mean to move the Judge to acquit
him? Assuredly if it were, upon the same ground might any sin be laid upon
the devils back, and all good laws and judicial proceedings be made void.

Therefore howsoever the patrons of Witches be learned men, yet they are
greatly deceived in fathering the practices of Sorcerie upon a melancholic
humor.

But for the further ratifying of their assertion, they proceed, and use this
argument: They which confess of themselves things false, and impossible, must
needs be parties deluded, but our Witches do this, when they be examined or
consulted with, as that they can raise tempests, that they are carried through
the air in a moment, from place to place, that they pass through keyholes,
and clifts of doors, that they be sometimes turned into catts, hares, and
other creatures; lastly, that they are brought into far countries, to meet
with Herodias, Diana, and the Devil, and such like; all which are mere fables,
and things impossible.

Ans. We must make a difference of Witches in regard of time. There is a time,
when they first begin to make a league with Satan, and a time also after the
league is made and confirmed.

When they first begin to grow in confederacy with the devil, they are
sober, and their understanding sound, they make their match waking, and as they
think wisely enough, knowing both what they promise the devil, and upon what
conditions, and therefore all this while it is no delusion. But after they be
once in the league, and have been entangled in compact with the devil
(considerately as they think, for their own good and advantage) the case may
be otherwise. For then reason and understanding may be depraved, memory
weakened, and all the powers of their soul blemished. Thus becoming his
vassalls, they are deluded, and so intoxicated by him, that they will run into
thousands of fantastical imaginations, holding themselves to be transformed
into the shapes of other creatures, to be transported in the air into other
countries, yea to do many strange things, which in truth they do not.

I come now to their second reason. The Witches of our age (say they) were not
known in the days of Moses, nor of Christ, therefore that law concerns them
not.

To this I answer two ways:

First, that their argument is naught: for by the same reason the Papists might
avouch the lawfulnes of the images of Saints, as of Peter, Paul, and others,
yea of Christ himself, because they were not known in the days of Moses, and
therefore could not be condemned in the second Commandment. Whereas
contrarily, the spirit of God, has so framed and penned the laws Moral, and
Judicial, which concern man, as that they fetch within their compass all
sins of all ages, and condemn them. And therefore whatsoever is against the
Law of God written by Moses, though it were not known, nor heard of, either
when the Law was made, or afterward, is yet condemned by the same Law.

Again, I answer, that our Witches are the same that were in Moses time: and
therefore by their own reason must needs be condemned by this Judicial law.
For by the records of ancient writers it is proved, that about a 1200. years
before Christ's birth, shortly after the Trojan war, which was 100. year and
upward before the building of the Temple by Solomon, there were the same
Witches that are now, as the Circes, and Syrenes, and such like, mentioned in
the Homer (...). lib 10. and 12.
narration of that war, as is manifest to them that know the story.

Again, 500. years before Christ when the Romans made their Sub tit. de
intur. al^^sque; deli^t c. 9. Sense lib Not (...). est 4. (...). etc.
twelve Tables, which comprised all the laws whereby that famons Commonwealth
was governed, they made one expressly against Witches, even the same with
these of our time, for practicing the same things, as blasting of corn,
hurting of cattle, mer, women, and children, etc. And for the time of Christ,
though there be no particular mention made of any such Witches; yet thence it
follows not, that there were none: for all things that then happened, were
not recorded: and I would feign know of the chief patrons of them, whether
those parties possessed with the devil, and troubled with strange diseases,
whom Christ healed, and out of whom he cast devils, were not bewitched with
some such people, as our Witches are? if they say no, let them if they can
prove the contrary.

The third and last reason is this: Christ at his coming abolished all sin,
and therefore miracles and witchcraft the^ ceased also. The Apostle says, that
he spoiled principalities and powers, and triumphed over them upon the cross,
Coloss. 2. 15.

Ans. This argument is frivolous, serving as well to justify the traitor, the
thief, and the murderer, as the witch. For whereas it is alleged, that
Christ abolished all sin; we must understand how: not simply, so as sin
should be no more, but only in part, in this life, reserving the final
destruction thereof to the last judgment. Again, sin is not abolished, no
not in part unto all, but only to the members of Christ. Whereupon the Apostle
sa^h, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, Romans 8. 1. because
no sin is imputed unto them. But unto Witches, and all the enemies of Christ,
sin is imputed, and not abolished.

To conclude, howsoever much is said in their defense, yet the first part is
clear affirmatively, that the Witches of our time are the same with the
Witches that were in Moses time, in truth and substance. And so much for the
first Question.

Sect. II.
II. Quest. How we may be able in these our days to discern and discover a
Witch?
Ans. The discovery of a Witch is a matter Judicial, as is also the
discovery of a thief and a murderer, and belongs not to every man, but is
to be done Iudicially by the Magistrate according to the form and order of
Law; who therefore is set apart for such ends, and has authority both to
discover, and to punish the enemies of God and his Church. Now for the
Magistrates direction in this business, we are to know, that in the discovery
of a VVitch, two things are required, Examination, and Conviction.

1. Examination is an action of the Magistrate, making special inquiry of the
crime of Witchcraft. This action must have the beginning from occasions, and
presumptions. For the Magistrate though he be a public person, and stand in
the room of God, for the execution of justice, yet he may not take upon him to
examine whom, and how himself wills, of any crime; neither ought he to
proceed upon slight causes, as to show his authority over others, or upon
sinister respects, as to renenge his malice, or to bring parties into danger or
suspicion; but he must proceed upon special presumptions.

Those I call presumptions, which do at least probably, and coniectutally note
one to be a VVitch; and these are certain signs, whereby the party may be
discovered: I will touch some few of them.

The first in order is this: If any person, man, or woman, be notoriously
defamed for such a party. Notorious desamation, is a common report of the
greater sort of people, with whom the party suspected dwells, that he or she
is a Witch. This yields a strong suspicion. Yet the Magistrate must be wary
in receiving such a report. For it falls our oftentimes, that the innocent may
be suspected, and some of the better sort notoriously desamed. Therefore the
wise and prudent Judge ought carefully to look, that the report be made by men
of honesty and credit: which if it be, he may then proceed to make further
inquiry or the fact.

The second is, if a fellow-witch or Magician give testimony of any person to
be a Witch, either voluntarily, or at his or her examination, or at his or her
death. This is not sufficient for conviction, or condemnation, but only a fit
presumption to (...)-strait examination of the party to be made.

Thirdly, if after cursing there follows death, or at least some mischief.
For Witches are wont to practice their mischievous facts by cursing and
banning. This also is a sufficient matter of Examination, not of Conviction.

Fourthly, if after enmity, quarelling, or threatening, a present mischief
does follow. For parties deuillishly disposed, after corsings do use
threatenings; and that also is a great presumption.

Fifthly, if the party suspected be the son or daughter, the manseruant or
maidseruant, the familiar friend, ^eere neighbor, or old companion of a known
and convicted witch. This may be likewise a presumption. For witchcraft is an
art that may be learned, and conveyed from man to man, and often it falls
out, that a VVitch dying leaves some of the forenamed, heirs of her
witchcraft.

Sixthly, some do add this for a presumption, If the party suspected be found
to have the devils mark: for it is commonly thought, when the Devil makes
his covenant with then, he always leaves his mark behind him, whereby he
knows them for his own. Now if by some casual means, such a mark be
descried on the body of the party suspected, whereof no evident reason in
nature can be given, the Magistrate in this case may cause such to be examined,
or take the matter into his own hand, that the truth may appear.

Lastly, if the party examined be unconstant, or contrary to himself in his
deliberate answers, it argues a guilty mind and conscience, which stops
the freedom of speech and utterance, and may give just occasion to the
Magistrate to make further inquiry. I say nor if he or she be timorous and
fearful: for a good man may be fearful in a good cause, sometimes by
nature, sometimes in regard of the presence of the Judge, and the greatness of
the andience. Again, some may be suddenly taken, and others naturally want the
liberty of speech, which other men have. And these are the causes of fear and
astonishment, which may befall the good, as well as the bad.

Touching the manner of Examination, there be two kinds of proceeding; either
by a single Question, or by some Torture. A single question is, when the
Magistrate himself only makes inquiry, what was done or not done, by bare
and naked interrogations. A torture is, when besides the inquiry in words, he
uses also the rack, or some other violent means to urge confession. This
course has been taken in some countries, and may no doubt lawfully and with
good conscience be used, howbeit not in every case, but only upon strong and
great presumptions going before, and when the party is obstinate. And thus
much for Examination: now follows Conviction.

2. Conviction, is an action of the Magistrate, after just examination,
discovering the Witch. This action must proceed from just and sufficient
proofs, and not from bare presumptions. For though presumptions give occasion
to examine, yet they are no sufficient causes of conviction. Now in general
the prooses used for conviction are of two sorts, some be less sufficient,
some be more sufficient.

The less sufficient proofs are these. First, in former ages, the party
suspected

Again, our own times have afforded is imagined to be a forcible means to
cause the Witch to discover her self. Thirdly, the burning of the thatch of
the suspected parties house, which is thought to be able to cure the party
bewitched, and to make the Witch to bewray her self.



All these proofs are so far from being sufficient, that some of them, if
not all, are after a sort practices of witchcraft, having in them no power or
virtue to detect a Sorcerer, either by Gods ordinance in the creation, or by
any special appointment since. For what virtue can the Scratching of a Witch
have to cure a hurt? where do we find it in any part of the word of God, that
scratching should be used? or what promise of recovery upon the use thereof.

But how then comes it to pass, that help is often procured by these and such
like means? Ans. It is the slight and subtlety of the Devil upon scratching
the Witch, to remove such hurts, as himself has inflicted, that thereby he
may invre men to the practice of wicked and superstitious means. And what I
say of scratching, the same may be enlarged to all other proofs of this kind
before named. God has imprinted no such virtue in their natures to these
purposes, or added the same unto them by special and extraordinary
assignment. That therefore which is brought to pass by them when they are
used, comes from the Devil.

And yet to justify the casting of a Witch into the water, it is alleged,
that having made a covenant with the Devil, she has renounced her Baptism,
and hereupon there grows an Antipathie between her, and water. Ans. This
allegation serves to no purpose: for all water is not the water of Baptism,
but that only which is used in the very act of Baptism, and not before nor
after. The element out of the use of the Sacrament, is no Sacrament, but
returns again to his common use.

To go yet further, an other insufficient proof, is the testimony of some
wizzard. It has been the ordinary custom of some men, when they have had
any thing ill at ease, presently to go or send to some wise man, or wise woman,
by whom they have been informed, that the thing is bewitched; and to win
credit to their answer, some of them have offered to show the Witches face in a
glass: whereof the party having taken notice, returns home, and detecteth
the man of woman of witchcraft. This I grant may be a good presumption to
cause strait examination: but a sufficient proof of conviction it can not be.
For put the case the grand-Iurie at the Assizes goes on a party suspected,
and in their consultation the Devil, comes in the likeness of some known
man, and tells them the person in question is indeed a Witch, and offers
withal to confirm the same by oath: should the Inquest receive: his oath or
accusation to condemn the man? Assuredly no: and yet that is as much as the
testimony of another wizzard, who only by the Devils help reuealeth the
Witch. If this should be taken for a sufficient proof; the Devil would not
leave one good man alive in the world.

Again, all other presumptions commonly used, are insufficient, though they
may minister occasion of trial: for example; If a man in open court should
affirm before the Judge; Such a one fell out with me, and cursed me, giving me
threatening words, that I should smart for it, and some mischief should light
upon my person or goods, ere it were long. Upon these curses and threats,
presently such and such evils befell me, and I suffered these and these
losses. The Magistrate thus informed may safely proceed to inquire into the
matter, but he has not from hence any sure ground of conviction. For it
pleases God many times to lay his hand upon men's persons and goods, without
the procurement of Witches. And yet experience shows, that ignorant people,
who carry a rage against them, will make strong proofs of such presumptions,
whereupon sometime. Iurers do give their Verdict against parties innocent.

Lastly, if a man being dangerously sick, and like to die, upon suspicion
will take it on his death, that such a one has bewitched him, it is an
allegation of the same nature, which may move the Judge to examine the party,
but it is of no moment for conviction. The reason is, because it was but the
suspicion of one man, and a man's own word for himself, though in time of
extremity, when it is likely he will speak nothing but the truth, is of no
more force then another man's word against him.

And these are the proofs, which men in place and time have ordinarily used,
for the detecting of such ungodly persons: but the best that may be said of
them, is, that they be all either false or uncertain signs, and unavailable
for the condemnation of any man whatsoever.

Now follow the true proofs, and sufficient means of conviction, all which
may be reduced to two heads.

The first, is the free and voluntary confession of the crime, made by the
party suspected and accused after examination. This has been thought
generally of all men both Divines, and Lawyers, a proof sufficient. For what
needs more witness, or further inquiry, when a man from the touch of his own
conscience acknowledges the fault.

And yet the patrons and advocates of Witches, except against it, and object in
this manner: That a man or woman may confess against themselves an untruth,
being urged thereto either by fear or threatening, or by a desire, upon some
grief conceived, to be out of the world; or at least, being in trouble, and
persuaded it is the best course to save their lives, and obtain liberty, they
may upon simplicity be induced to confess that, which they never did, even
against themselves. Ans. I say not, that a bare confession is sufficient, but a
confession after due examination taken upon pregnant presumptions. For if a man
examined, without any ground or presumptions, should openly acknowledge the
crime, his act may be justly suspected, as grounded upon by-respects; but when
proceeding is made against him at the first, upon good probabilities, and
hereupon he be drawn to a free confession, that which he has manifested
thereby, cannot but be a truth. Other points of exception urged by them, are of
small moment, and may easily be answered out of the grounds before delivered,
and therefore I omit them.

Now if the party held in suspicion, be examined, and will not confesso, but
obstinately persist in denial, as commonly it falls out; then there is
another course to be taken by a second sufficient means of conviction: which
is the testimony of two witnesses, of good and honest report, auouching before
the Magistrate upon their own knowledge, these two things: Either that the
party accused, has made a league with the devil; or has done some known
practices of Witchcraft. And all arguments that do necessarily prove either
of these, being brought by two sufficient witnesses, are of force fully to
convince the party suspected. For example.

First, if they can prove that the party suspected, has inuocated and called
upon the devil, or desired his help. For this is a branch of that worship,
which Satan binds his instruments to give unto him. And it is a pregnant
proof of a league formerly made between them.

Secondly, if they can give evidence, that the party has entertained a
familiar spirit, and had conference with it, in form or likeness of a mouse,
catte, or some other visible creature.

Thirdly, if they affirm upon oath, that the suspected person has done any
action or work, which necessarily infers a covenant made; as that he has
showed the face of a man suspected, being absent, in a glass; or used
Enchantment, or such like feats. In a word, if they both can avouch upon their
own proper knowledge, that such a man or woman suspected, have put in practice
any other actions of Witchcraft, as to have diuined of things before they came
to pass, and that peremptorily; to have raised tempests, to have caused the
form of a dead man to appear, or the like, standing either in divination or
operation, it proves sufficiently that he or she is a Witch.

But some may say, if these be the only strong proofs for the conviction of a
Sorcerer, it will be then impossible to put any one to death, because the
league with Satan is closely made, and the practices of Sor^erie are also very
secret, and hardly can a man be brought, which upon his own knowledge, can
auerre such things.

I answer, howsoever both the ground and practice be secret, and to many
unknown, yet there is a way to come to the knowledge thereof. For it is usual
with Satan to promise any thing, till the league be ratified: but when it is
once made, and the party entangled in society with him, then he indeauoureth
nothing more, then his or her dise^uefie, and uses all means possible to
diclose them. So that what end soever the Witch propounds to her self in
the league, he intende^^ nothing else, but her utter confusion. Therefore in
the just judgment of God, it often fills out, that these which are true
witches indeed; shall either by confession discover themselves, or by true
testimony be convinced. The causes which move the devil not only to affect,
but to hasten this discover it, are two principally.

The first is, his malice toward all men, in so high a degree, that he cannot
endure they should enjoy the world, or the benefits of this life (if it were
possible) so much as one hour. Though therefore by virtue of the precontract,
he be cock-sure of his instrument, yet his malice is not herewith satisfied,
till the party be brought to light, and condemned to death? Which may be a
caveat so all ill disposed persons, that they beware of yielding themselves
unto him.

The second, is his infatiable desire of the present and full possession of
them, whom he has got within the bonds of the covenant. For though he have
good hope of them, yet is he not certain of their continuance, The reason is,
because some united with him in confederacy, have through the great mercy of
God, by careful usage of holy means, and faith in Christ* been reclaimed and
delivered out of his bondage, and so at length freed from his covenant, so as
he has eternally left them. Hence it is, that he labors by might and maine,
to keep them in ignorance, and to prevent the usage of means effectual to
there conversion, by laying a plot for their discovery. B^t how then comes it
to pass, that all such persons are not speedily detected, but some live long,
and others die without any man's priuitie? Ans. The reasons hereof may be diverse.

First, because some one or more of them may belong to Gods election; and
therefore albeit for causes-best known to himself, he may suffer them for a
time to be holden in the snares of Satan, yet at length in mercy he reclaimes
them, and in the me^ne time suffers not the devil to exercise the depth of
his malice in discovering them to their confusion. Again, for others, the Lord
may in justice and anger suffer them not to be disclosed, that living under the
means, where they might be reclaimed, and wilfully contemning the same; they
may live to fill up the measure of their iniquities, and thereby be made
finally inexcusable, that they may receive their iuster condemnation.

Secondly, tho devil suffers some to live long vndisclosed, that they may
exercise the greater measure of his malice in the world; specially if they be
parties maliciously bent to do hurt to men, and other creatures.

Thirdly, some Witches do warily agree with the devil, for a certain term
of years, d^ring which time he binds himself not to hurt them, but to be at
their command. And Satan is careful, specially in case of his own advantage,
to keep touch with them, that they may the more strongly clea^e unto him on
their parts. But if the case so stand, that neither the party suspected
confesses, nor yet sufficient vvitnesses can be produced, which are able to
convict him or her, either of these two ways: we have no warrant out of the
word either in general, or in special, to put such a one to death. For though
presumptions be never so strong* yet they are not proofs sufficient for
conviction, but only for examination.

I would therefore with and advise all Iurers, who give their Verdict upon life
and death in courts of Assizes, to take good he^de, that as they he diligent in
zeal of Gods glory; and the good of his Church, in derecting of Witches, by
all sufficient and lawful means; so likewise they would be careful what they
do, and not to condemn any party suspected, upon bare presumptions, without
sound and sufficient proofs, hat they be not guilty through their own (...)
of shedding innocent blood.

Sect. III.
Quest. III. Whether a man may prevent the danger of Witchcraft, and if he may,
than what Remedies he may lawfully and effectually use against it?
To this Question we answer affirmatively, that a man may. And for the
manifestation of this point, the Remedies of Witch craft are to be considered.
In the ha^dling whereof, I will proceed in this order. First, to set down the
true, lawful, and (...) allowed and prescribed in the word. Secondly, the
unlawful and superstitions means prescribed and practiced in the Romish
Church.

Lawful Remedies of Witchcraft, be of two sorts; Preservative, and
Restoratiue. Preservative are those, which keep a man from the hurt of
Witchcraft. And these be of two sorts; either such as keep safe the persons of
men, or such as preserve the places of men's abode.

For the persons of men, there is one sovereign preservative; And that is, to
be within the covenant of grace, made and confirmed in the Gospel by the blood
of Christ, and that not outwardly in profession onely^, as all those be which
are within the compass of the Church, but truly and indeed as all the elect
are. And a man is then in the covenant, when God of his grace in the use of the
means, gives him a true knowledge of the nature of it, and of conditions
required in the same on both parts: and withal gives him a true and lively
faith, to apprehend and apply to himself the promise of God in Christ,
touching remission of sins, and life everlasting; yet further to show forth
his faith by the fruits of true repentance, and new obedience. When a man in
this manner comes to be brought within the covenant, and is in Christ, he then
receives assurance of Gods ^auour, and to him belong the promises depending
thereupon, to wit, not only of the comfortable presence of Gods spirit, but of
the presence and special protection of his holy Angels, to pitch their tents
about him, to keep him safe in soul and body, from the power and malicious
practices of Satan, and his members. The ground of this assistance is laid
down in the word, Psalm. 92. 10. He shall give his Angels charge over thee,
etc. And the speech of Balaam confirms the same, who when he was hired of
Balac to curse Gods people, and had oftentimes assayed to do it, but could
not, at last he brake out into this confession, There is no witchcraft against
Jacob, nor sorcerie against Israel* (for so the words are to be read, according
to the true meaning, and circumstances of the text.) As if he should have said,
I was of thine opinion (O Balac) that Israel might be cursed, but after trial
made, I found by good experience, that I could do that people of God no hurt
by mine Enchantments.

Howbeit we must here remember, that the promise of protection made unto Gods
children, is not absolute, but admits exception, as all other promises of
temporal blessing do, and that in this manner: Thou shall be partaker of this
or that blessing, and this or that curse shall be removed, if it be expedient
for thee: but if for special causes to t^^e thy faith, and to exercise thy
patience, I make denial, thou must rest thy self (...) in my good will and
pleasure.

By warrant of this doctrine, a question commonly moved, may be resolved:
Whether the servant and child of God, may be bewitched or nor?

Out of that which has been said, I answer, he may; and that is plain by the
word. For by Gods permission, the holy body of Christ himself, was by Satan
transported from place to place, Matthew. 4. Righteous Job was miserably
afflicted in his body by the power of the devil, and his children, who no
doubt were Gods servants, and brought up in his fear, as their father was,
were slain by the same power. Yea, Christ himself testifies, Luke 13. 16.
That a daughter of Abraham, that is, of the faith of Abraham, had been
troubled eighteen years with a spirit of infirmity, which the devil caused
by bowing her body together, so as she could not lift her self up. v. 11. And
therefore whereas some men are of this mind, that their faith is so strong,
that all the Witches in the world, and all the devils in hell cannot hurt
them; they are much deceived. This their faith is but a fond presumption, and
no true faith. For no man in the earth can absolutely assure himself of
safety and protection from the Deuill^ and if any could, it were the child of
God; but Solomon says, that all outward things may come alike both to the good
and to the bad, Eccle. 9. 2.

Howbeit in this case there is great difference between the servant of God, and
an unrepentant sinner. Though the godly man be not exempted from Witchcraft,
yet he is a thousand fold more free from the power thereof, then other men
are. For there is only one case, and no more, wherein the Devil has any way
power to hurt him, and that is, when it pleases God by that kind of cross, to
make trial of his faith and patience, and out of this case, he is always free
from the annoyance of the vilest Witches in the world.

If then this be the only sovereign preservative to keep a man safe and sure
from the power of Witches, and of the Devil, to have part in the covenant of
grace, to be made partaker of Christ, by a true faith, testified by dying unto
all sin, and living unto God in ^ewnes of life: we must not content our
selves with a formal confession, as many in the visible Church do, which
wanting the life of faith, do not live in Christ; but strive to go further,
and to adorn our profession, by framing our lives according to the word, that
we may have our portion in this excellent privilege of preservation, from the
power and malice of the enemies of God, and all ungodly persons.

Preservatives of the second sort, are such as concern the places of men's
abode. For Satan contenteth not himself, to have manifested his malice in
afflicting men's persons, but he also enlarges the same to the molestation of
the places where they dwell, by insecting the air, and such like. The only
effectual means to remedy this evil, is the Sanctification of the places of
our habitation. Look as we are wont to sanctify our meat and drink, by Gods
word, and by prayer, and thereby procure his blessing upon his own ordinance
for our refreshing: so in like manner may we sanctify the places of our abode,
and thereby both procure the blessing which we want, and also avoid many curses
and dangers, which otherwise would fall upon us.

If any shall think the Consecration of houses and places in this sort, to be
a mere devise of man's brain; let them remember, that in the Old Testament,
besides the dedication of the Temple, allowed by all, there was a Law
prescribed to the Jews, for the special dedication of every man's house: If
any has built a new house (says Moses) and has not dedicated it, let him
return again etc. D^ut. 20. 5. As who should say, he has omitted a
necessary duty. Now this dedication was nothing else, but the sanctification
of them by word and prayer, wherein they made acknowledgement, that they became
theirs by the free gift and blessing of God, and further desired a free and
lawful use of the same to his glory, and their mutual good. A duty which
has been performed by the servants of God in ancient times.

The first thing that Abraham did, when he came from Vr of the Chaldeans, to
the land of Canaan, which God gave him to possess, was the building of an
Altar for the worship of God, his sacrificing thereon; and calling upon the
name of the Lord, Genesis 12. 8. The same did Noah before him at his first coming
out of the Arc after the flood, Genesis 8. 20. and Jacob after him in Bethel. And
they were al moved hereunto, because they knew their comfortable abode in
those places, came not by their own endeavor, but from the blessing of God.
When the good king Hezekiah kept the passover in Jerusalem, his principal
care was, that the Priests and all the people might first be sanctified, and
therefore he prayed unto God to be merciful to them that were not sanctified,
2. Chron. 30. 18. And as he behaved himself in his kingdom, so should every
master of a family behave himself in his house where he dwells, laboring
to sanctify the same, that it may be comfortable to him and his; least for
neglect thereof, he pull upon himself, and those that belong unto him, the
heavy hand of God in plagues and punishments.

The second kind of Remedies are Restoratiue, which serve to deliver men from
Witchcraft, by curing the hurts of Witches in the bodies of men, or other
creatures. In the handling whereof, first we will consider, how whole
countries, and then how every private man may be cured and delivered. Whole
Countries and Kingdoms are freed and cured specially by one means; The
publishing and embracing of the Gospel. When our Savior Christ had sent the
seauentie Disciples to preach in Jury, at their return he gave this
testimony of the effect of their ministry, That he saw Satan fall down from
heaven like lightening, Luke 10. 18. his meaning was this; As lightning is
suddenly and violently sent out of the cloud, and (as it were) cast down to
the earth by the crack of the thunders; even so Satan the prince of the world,
that rules in the hearts of the disobedient, was cast down, and his kingdom
ruinated by the power of the Gospel preached. In the times of ignorance the
devil triumphs freely without controlment, but the mist and darkness of his
delusions cannot possibly abide the bright beams of Gods glorious will
revealed by preaching. The Lord of ancient times commanded his people not to
do according to those nations, among whom they dwelt in Canaan, by practicing
Witchcraft, or following after Sorcerie, Deuteronomy. 18. 9. etc. And that they might
be able to obey this commandment, Moses prescribes unto them this
Restoratiue, the reverent and obedient hearing of the Lords Prophets, v. 18. In
this our Church, if we would be healed of our wounds, and banish Satan from
among us, who greatly annoieth a great number of our people by his delusions
and damnable practices of Sorcerie: the only way to bring it to pass, is the
maintaining of a learned Ministry, the adua^cing of Prophets, by whose labors
the Gospel may flourish. For the faithful dispensation thereof, is the Lords
own arm and scepter, whereby he beats down the kingdom of darkness, and
confounds the works and enterprises of the devil.

The second sort of Restoratiues, serve for the cure of particular persons: for
howsoever the gift and power of casting out Devils, and curing Witchcraft be
ordinarily ceased, since the Apostles times, it being a gift pecu^liar to the
Primitive Church, and given to it only during the infancy of the Gospel; yet
there may be means used, and that effectual, for the easing of any person
that is bewitched by Satan's instruments. Those therefore that are in these
days ^ormented in this kind, must do three things.

First, they must enter into a serious examination of themselves, and consider
the cause for which it pleases God to suffer Satan to exercise them with that
kind of cross. And here upon diligent inquiry, they shall find that their
own sins are the true and proper causes of these evils. When Saul was
disobedient to the commandment of God, the Lord sent upon him an evil spirit
to vex him, 1. Sam. 15. Hymeneus and Alexander for their pestilent errors were
both cast out of the Church, and given up also to Satan, that they might learn
not to blaspheme, 1. Tim. 1. 20. in the same manner was the incestuous person
dealt withal, 1. Cor. 5. 5.

Secondly, after this Examination, the same parties must show forth their
faith, whereby they depend on the free favor and mercy of God for their
deliverance. How may this be done? by hearty prayer unto God, joined with
fasting that the same may be more earnest. In which prayer the maine desire of
the heart must be absolutely for the pardon of their sins, and then for
deliverance from the hurts and torments of diabolical persons: yet not
absolutely, as for the other, but with this condition, so far forth as it
stands with Gods glory, and their own good. For these are the bounds and
limits of all temporal good things; of them the Lord makes no absolute
promise, but with these conditions and qualifications.

Thirdly, the parties bewitched must patiently bear the present annoyance,
comforting themselves with this, that it is the Lords own hand, by whose
special providence it comes to pass, and who turns all things to the good
of his chosen. Again, they are to remember, that he being a most wise God,
and loving father in Christ, will not suffer them to be tried above that they
are able to bear, but in his good time will grant a joyful issue. Now when
the bewitched shall thus submit themselves unto God, in the cross, be it that
he (upon some causes) defer their deliverance, yet they shall not finally be
deceived of their hope. For either in this life, at the appointed time, or in
the end of this life, by death they shall be eternally delivered, and put in
present possession of everlasting case and happiness. Thus much of the true
remedies against Witchcraft.

In the next place we are a little to examine the false and superstitious
Remedies, prescribed and used by them of the popish Church.

The most learned Papists of this age do teach and avouch, that there is in
Gods Church an ordinary gift and power, whereby some men may cast out devils,
and help annoyances that come by Witches. The Protestant is of a contrary
judgment, and holds according to truth, that there is now no such ordinary
gift left to the Church of God, since the days of the Apostles.

Reasons of this opinion may be these.

First, casting out of devils, and curing such annoyances, are extraordinary
and miraculous works. For Christ accounts handling of serpents without hurt,
speaking with new tongues, curing of diseases by imposition of hands, (all
which are things of less moment) to be miracles, Mark. 16. 18, 19. but all
these lesser works, yea the ordinary power of working them is ceased: for it
was only given to the Apostles in the Primitive Church, as a means to
confirm the doctrine of the Gospel to unbelievers, that never heard of Christ
before. So Paul says; Strange tongues (that is, the gift of speaking strange
languages, without ordinary teaching) are for asigne, not to them that
believe, but to them that believe not, 1. Cor. 14. ^2. And for the same end
were all extraordinary gifts then given. Seeing therefore the doctrine of the
Gospel has been already established, and the truth thereof sufficiently
confirmed by miracles in the Primitive Church, the same gift must needs cease
unto us. For if it should still continue, it would call into question the
effect of the Apostolical preaching, and implie thus much, that the Gospel was
not well established, nor sufficiently confirmed by their extraordinary
Ministry, and miracles accompanying the same. Again, if the gift of working
miracles should remain, then the promise of God for his special and
extraordinary assistance therein should yet continue: for the gift and promise
go together, so long as the promise is in force, so long is the gift also: but
the promise made by Christ, In my name shall they cast out devils, and speak
with new tongues, Mark. 16. was in force only in the persons and Ministry of
the Apostles, and those that had extraordinary and immediate calling from God,
and it ceased when they and their calling ceased. Therefore if Ministers now
should lay their hands on the sick, they should not recover them: if they
should anoint them with Oil, it should do them no good, because they have no
promise.

Howbeit the Papists stand stiffely in defending the continuance of these gifts.

First, they say, the Church of the New Testament is nothing inferior to that
of the Old. The Jewish Church before the coming of Christ, was the Church of
the Old Testament, and had the power and gift of casting our Devils. So says
our Savior himself, Matthew. 12. 27. If I through Beelzebub cast out Devils,
then by whom do your children cast them out? In which words he ascribes this
gift unto the Jews, therefore it should seem, the same remains still in the
Church.

Ans. That place of Scripture is diversely expounded. Some by children there
mentioned, understand the Apostles, who were Jews borne, and had received from
Christ this gift and power to cast out devils. Which if it be so, it makes
not for them, because they had it extraordinarily. But I rather think, that by
children, are meant the Exorcising Jews, before Christ's time, who did cast out
devils among them, pretending an ability to do this work in the name of
God; whereas in truth, they were all flat Sorcerers, and did it by virtue of a
league and compact made with the Devil. Which practice has been of long
continuance, and is at this day common and usual among the Popish sort. And
that there were such Exorcists among the Jews, it is evident. For such were
those Vagabonds which came to Ephesus, and took upon them to cast out devils
by the name of Jesus, and Paul, Act. 19. 13. but the man in whom the evil
spirit was, (so soon as they (...) adjuced the spirit) ran upon them, and
mightily prevailed against them, v. 16. Now if they had done this great work
by the power of God (as they pretended) the holy Ghost would not have called
them E^orcists and Vagabonds ^ neither could the evil spirit possibly have
overcome them, as he did. Again, in the histories of the Jews are recorded
many practices of stich as exercised this power among them. Raphael the angel
tells Tobias, that a perfume made of the heart and liver of a fish, will
help a man vexed with an evil spirit, Tob. 6. 7. which counsel is fla^
Magic, for there is no such virtue in the liver of a fish. And in other
histories we read^ that one Bliaz^r a Jew, by the smell of a certain root put
to the nose of a man possessed with a devil, Joseph. (...). 1. 8. c. 2.
caused the devil to come out of his n^strills; and forsake him; which thing
was done in public place before V^spasian and others. This also was effected
by mere conjuration. For what virtue can there be in any root or herb in the
world, a ^aileable to command and enforce Satan to depart from a man possessed^
And yet such fea^es were played by sundry Magici^ns among the Iewes^ Whereupon
I conclude, that the meaning of our Sauionr in the place alleged* is in
effect thus much; If (...) the power of Beelzebub, etc. that is, you have among
you sundry Magicians and Exorcists, who pretend and exercise the gift of
casting out devils, and you think they do it by the power of God, why then
do you not carry the same opinion of me also?

Their second reason is grounded on the promise of Christ, Mark. 16. 17. These
tokens shall follow them that believe, In my Name they shall cast out D^uills,
etc. whence they gather, that there shall be always some in the Church, who
shall have power to cast forth Devils, if they believe.

Answ. That promise was made by Christ unto his Church, to be fulfilled
immediately after his ascension. It did not extend to all times, and persons,
so long as the world endures, but only to the times of the primitive Church,
and to such as then lived. For to them only the doctrine of the Gospel was to
be confirmed by signs and miracles. And this lasted about 200. years next
after Christ his ascension. During which time, not only the Apostles and
Ministers, but even private men, and soldiers wrought many miracles.

The third reason is taken from experience, which (as they say) in all ages
from the Apostles times to this day shows, that there have been always some
in the Church, which have had this gift of casting out devils, and curing the
hurts of Witchcraft.

Ans. This gift continued not much above the space of 200. years after Christ.
From which time many heresies began to spread themselves; and then shortly
after Popery that mystery of iniquity beginning to spring up, and to dilate
it self in the Churches of Europe, the true gift of working miracles then
ceased, and in stead thereof came in delusions, and lying wonders, by the
effectual working of Satan, as it was foretold by the Apostles, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
9. Of which sort were and are all those miracles of the Romish Church, whereby
simple people have been notoriously deluded. These indeed have there
continued from that time to this day. But this gift of the holy Ghost, whereof
the Question is made, ceased long before.

To proceed yet further, we are here to consider the particular Remedies,
which they of the Popish Church have prescribed against the hurts that have
come by Witchcraft. And they are principally five.

I. The name Jesus. II. The use of the Relics of Saints. III. The sign of
the Cross. IV. Hallowed creatures. V. Exorcismes.
I. First, for the name Jesus: Thus much we grant, that any Christian may
lawfully call upon the name of Jesus in prayer, for the help and deliverance
of those that are possessed and bewitched, but yet with the caveat and
conditi^n before specified, If it be the will of God, and if their recovery may
make for his glory, the benefit of the Church, and the good of the parties
diseased.

But the Papist by the use of this name, intends a further m^^ter, to wit,
that the very name uttered in so many letters and sillables, is powerful to
cast out Devils, and to help those that are bewitched. For when it is
uttered, then (say they) the authority of Christ is present, that the work
may be done. A flat untruth, and a practice full of danger. For let this be
well considered, whatsoever any man does in this case, he must do it by virtue
of his calling, and have also his warrant for the doing th^reof out of the
word; which if he want, and yet will undertake such a work, he may justly
fear the like event that befell the vagabond Jews that were Exorcists, Act.
19. 13. Now the Church of Christ has no warrant in the word, to use this name
of Christ for any such purpose; neither has any ordinary Christian a special
calling from God so to do. Therefore he may not do it.

And whereas they would bear men in hand, that the said name, of all the
names of Christ, and above all other things, is of most special virtue, though
it be used even by a man that wants faith, because the Apostle says, At the
name of Jesus every knee shall ^ow, both of things in heaven, in earth, and
under the earth, Phil. 2. 10. and by things under the earth are meant the
devil: we must know that their allegation is weak, and that they greatly
abuse the place. For there the name Jesus, is not only a title of Christ, but
withal signifies the power, majesty, and authority of Christ, sitting at
the right hand of the father, to which all creatures in heaven, earth, and hell
are made subjects; and by that power indeed (if they had it at command) they
might be able to cure the hurts of Witchcraft.

II. The second special Remedy, is the use of Saints Relics; as the books,
bones, apparel, staves, or such like, which being but touched of the parties
vexed, are excellent means to recover them.

Ans. The use of these things, to the purposes aforesaid, is a mere
superstitious practice. For first, they have not the true Relics of the
Saints, as would plainly appear, if a true Inventory were taken of all such
as they say are to befound in their Monasteries and Churches. Secondly, though
they had the^, yet they have no (...) or calling to use the^ to this end: for
in all the word of god, there is neither commandment to warrant the use, nor
promise to assure any man of a blessing upon the use of them. Albeit they would
seem to have some warrant, and therefore they allege that which is written,
2. king. 13. 21. of a dead man, who being for have thrown into the sepulcher
of Elisha, so soon as he touched the bones of Elisha, revived and stood upon
his feet. To this also they add the examples of cures done by Peter's shadow,
Act. 5. 15. and of sundry diseases healed by Paul's handkerchiefs, Act. 19. 12.
Ans. These thingsin deed are true, but they serve nothing to their purpose.
For first, the quickening of the dead soldier, came not from any virtue in the
corpse of Elisha; but it was a miracle, which it pleases God then to work, by
means of the corpse, that the Jews at that time might be confirmed in the
truth of that doctrine, which Elisha had taught them from God, and which before
his death they had, neglected, as I have before showed* And it was a thing
only then done, and never since. It cannot therefore be a ground for the
ordinary use of Relics. Again, touching the other examples: I answer, that
both Peter and Paul had the gift of working Miracles, and having the gift, they
might use such means for the present to cure disease^. But the Papists are not
able to show, that God has given them the like gift whereby they might be
warranted for the use of the like means: neither can they assuredly hope for
success, although they should undertake to use them.

III. The third Remedy, is the sign of the Cross, made upon the body of the
party tormented. Behold to what an height of impiety they are grown,
ascribing that to the creature, which is proper to the Creartor, For the power
of working miracles, is proper only to the Godhead. The Prophets and Apostles
in their times did not work them of themselves, but were only Gods passive
instruments, in this manner: When the Lord ^^^ended by them to work any
miracle, they received from him at the same time an extraordinary and special
instinct, whereby they were moved to attempt the work. They therefore yielded
themselves to the present motion of Gods spirit, to be his instruments only in
the dispensation of the work* but the sole author and producer of the miracle,
was God himself. And in this case the very manhood of our Savior Christ,
considered apart from his Godhead, had no power of it self, but was only the
instrument of his Godhead, whenever it pleased him in that kind to manifest
the same. Wherefore to ascribe this virtue to the Cross, being a creature, or
the work of a creature, is to communicate the incommunicable power of the
Creator to it, which is plain blasphemy.

IV. The fourth Remedy, is the using of hallowed things; as hallowed grains,
salt, water, bread, images; specially the image of Agnus dei.

Ans. Hallowed creatures are in truth unhallowed superstitions. For every
creature is sanctified by the word and prayer, 1. Tim. 4. 4. by the word, when
God in his word commands us to use it for some end; and by prayer, when we
give thanks for giving the creature, and withal desire his blessing in the use
thereof. Now let any Papists show me one letter or syllable in all the Book of
God, commanding the use of a creature for any such end.

They affirm indeed, that Elisha wrought miracles by hallowed salt, for by it
he cured the bitter waters, 2. king. 2. 21. But the Prophet used not hallowed,
but common salt, and that not ordinarily, but only then, as a means whereby to
work a miracle. It was therefore powerful in his hands, because for the doing
thereof, he had power and warrant from God extraordinarily: and it cannot be so
in any other, which have not the same gift.

V. The fifth and last Remedy, is Exorcisine, which is an adiuring and
commanding the Devil in the name of God to depart from the party possessed,
and cease to molest him any more. This means was used by our Savior Christ
himself, and after him by his Apostles, and other believers in the time of the
Primitive Church, when the gift of working Miracles was in force: but in these
days (a^ I said before) that gift is ceased, and also the promise of power
annexed to the use of adjuration: and therefore the means thereof must needs
cease. And for an ordinary man now to command the Devil in such sort, is
mere presumption, and a practice of Sorcerie.

Sect. IV.
IV. Quest. Whether the Witches of our age are to be punished with death, and
that by virtue of this law of Moses?
I doubt not, but in this last age of the world, and among us also, this sin
of Witchcraft ought as sharply to be punished as in former times; and all
Witches being thoroughly convicted by the Magistrate, ought according to the
Law of Moses to be put to death. For proof hereof, consider these reasons.

First, this Law of Moses flatly enioyneth all men, in all ages, without
limitation of circumstances, not to suffer the Witch to live, and hereupon I
gather, that it must stand the same, both now and for ever to the worlds end.

Patrons of Witches except against this, holding that it was a Judicial law,
which continued but for a time, and concerned only the Nation of the Jews,
and is now ceased. But I take the contrary to be the truth, and that upon
these grounds.

I. Those Judicial Laws, whose penalty is death, because they have in the^ a
perpetual equity, and do serve to maintain some moral precept, are
perpetual. The Jews indeed had some Laws of this kind, whose punishments
were temporal, and they lasted only for a certain time: but the penalty of
Witchcraft, being Death by Gods appointment, and the in^licting of that
punishment, serving to maintain the equity of the three first moral precepts
of the first Table, which cannot be kept, unless this Law be put in
execution: it must necessarily follow, that it is in that regard moral, and
binds us, and shall in like sort bind all men in all ages, as well as the Jews
themselves, to whom it was at that time personally directed.

II. Every Judicial law, that has in it the equity of the law of nature, is
perpetual; but the Law of punishing the Witch by death, is such. For it is a
principle of the law of nature, holden for a grounded truth in all countries
and kingdoms, among all people in every age; that the traitor, who is an
enemy to the State, and rebelleth against his lawful Prince, should be put to
death: now the most notorious traitor and rebel that can be, is the Witch.
For she renounceth God himself, the King of kings, she leaves the society
of his Church and people, she binds her self in league with the Devil: and
therefore if any offender among men, ought to suffer death for his fact, much
more ought she, and that of due desert.

The second reason for the proof of the point in hand, is this; According to
Moses law every Idolater was to be stoned to death: Deuteronomy. 17. 3, 4, 5. If
there be found any among you, that has gone and served other gods, as the
Sun, the Moon, or any of the host of heaven: if the thing upon inquiry be
found to be true and certain, thou shall bring them forth unto thy gates,
whether it be man or woman, and shall stone them with stones till they die. Now
this is the very case of a Witch, she renounceth the true God, and makes
choice to serve the Devil, she is therefore a gross Idolater, and her
punishment must be suitable. It is alleged by the favorers of the contrary
part, that Peter denied Christ, and yet was not put to death: I answer, there
is great difference between Peter's denial of Christ, and Witches denying of
God. Peter's denial was upon infirmity, and in have: the Witch denies God
upon knowledge, and deliberation, wittingly and willingly. Again, Peter did
not upon the denial betake himself to the Devil, but turned unto Christ
again, which he testified by his hearty and speedy repentance: but Witches
deny God, and betake themselves to the Devil, of their own accord, as is
manifest even by their own confessions at their arraignments.

The third reason. Every seducer in the Church, whose practice was to draw men
from the true God, to the worship of Idols, though it were a man's own son or
daughter, wife or friend, by the peremptory degree and commandment of God,
was at no hand to be spared or pitied, but the hand of the witness first, and
then the hands of all the people must be upon him, to kill him, Deuteronomy. 13. 6. 9.
If this be so, no Witches connicted ought to escape the sword of the
Magistrate: for they are the most notorious seducers of all other. When they be
once entangled in the Devils league, they labor to invre their dearest
f^iends and posterity, in their cursed and abominable practi^es; that they may
be the more easily drawn into the same consederacy, wherewith they themselves
are united to Satan. I might here allege that they deserve death, because
many of them be murderers, but I stand not upon that instance, because I hold
in the general that Witches are not to be suffered to live, though they do no
hurt either to man or other creatures, and that by virtue of Moses Law, only
for their leagues sake, whereby they become rebels to God, Idolaters, and
seducers, as now has been showed. Notwithstanding all that has been said,
many things are brought in defense of them, by such as be their friends and
wel^illers.

First, it is said, that the hurt that is done, comes not from the Witch, but
from the devil: he deserves the blame, because it is his work, and she is not
to die for his sin. Ans. Let it be granted, that the Witch is not the author
of the evil that is done, yet she is a confederate and partner with the
Devil in the fact, and so the law takes hold on her. See it in a familiar
comparison. A company of men conspire together in a robbery, by common
consent some stand in open place to epsy out the booty, and to give the
watchword, others are set about the passage, privily to rush upon the man, and
to spoil him of his goods. In this case what says the Law? The parties that
gave the watchword, though they did nothing to the man, yet being accessories
and abettors to the robbery by consent, they are thieves, and liable to
condemnation and exequution, as well as the principalls. Even so stands the
case with the Witch. In the working of wonders, and in all mischieous
practices, he or she is partaker with the devil by consent of covenant: the
Witch only uses the watchword, in some charm or otherwise, and does no more;
the devil upon notice given by the charm, takes his opportunity, and works
the mischeife. He is the principal agent, but the other yields help, and is
rightly liable to punishment. The reason is, because if the devil were not
stirred up, and provoked by the Witch, he would never do so much hurt as he
does. He had never appeared in Samuels likeness, had he not been solicited by
the Witch of Endor. He would not have caused counterfeit serpents and frogs
to appear in Egypt, but for Ian^es and Iambres, and other Inchanters. And in
this age there would not in likelihood be so much hurt and hinderance procured
unto men, and other creatures by his means, but for the instigation of ill
disposed persons, that have fellowship and society with him.

Again, they object, that Witches convicted, either repent, or repent not: If
they repent, then God pardons their sin, and why should not the Magistrate
as well save their bodies and let them live, as God does their souls. If they
do not repent, then it is a dangerous thing for the Magistrate to put them to
death: for by this means he kills the body, and casts the soul to hell.

Ans. All Witches iudicially and lawfully convicted, ought to have space of
repentance granted unto them, wherein they may be instructed and exhorted, and
then afterward executed. For it is possible for the^ to be saved by Gods
mercy, though they have denied him. Secondly, the Magistrate must execute
justice upon malefactors lawfully convicted, whether they repent or not. For
God approoueth the just execution of judgment upon men, without respect to
their repentance: neither must their impenitencie hinder the execution of
justice. When the people of Israel had committed Idolatry in worshipping the
golden calfe, Moses did not expect their repentance, and in the mean while
forbear the punishment, but he and the Levites presently took their swords
and slew them, and the Lord approved their course of proceeding, Exodus 32. 28.
When Zimri an Israelite had committed fornication with Cozbi a Midianitish
woman, Phineas in zeal of Gods glory executed judgment upon them both without
any respect unto their repentance, Numb. 25. 8. and is therefore commended,
Psalm. 106. 30. Wars are a worthy ordinance of God, and yet no Prince could
ever attempt the same lawfully, if every soldier in the field should stay the
killing of his enemy, upon expectation of his repentance. And whereas they
say, that by executing an impenitent Witch, the Magistrate casts away the
soul; we must know, that the ^nde of execution by the Magistrate, is not the
damnation of the malefactors soul, but that sin might be punished: that
others may beware of the like crimes and offenses, and that the wicked may be
taken away from among Gods people.

But some Witches there be that can not be convicted of killing any: what shall
become of them? Ans. As the killing Witch must die by another Law, though he
were no Witch: so the healing and harmless Witch must die by this Law, though
he kill not, only for covenant made with Satan. For this must always be
remembered, as a conclusion, that by Witches we understand not those only which
kill and torment: but all Diuiners, Charmers, Iuglers, all VVizzards, commonly
called wise men and wise women; yea, whosoever do any thing (knowing what they
do) which cannot be effected by nature or art; and in the same number we
reckon all good Witches, which do no hurt, but good, which do not spoil and
destroy, but save and deliver. All these come under this sentence of Moses,
because they deny God, and are consederates with Satan. By the laws of
England, the thief is executed for stealing, and we think it just and
profitable: but it were a thousand times better for the land, if all VVi^ches,
but specially the blessing Witch might suffer death. For the theife by his
stealing, and the hurtful Inchanter by charming, bring hinderance and hurt to
the bodies and goods of meni but these are the right hand of the devil, by
which he takes and destroys the souls of men. Men do commonly hate and
spit at the damnifying Sorcerer, as unworthy to live among them; whereas the
other is so dear unto them, that they hold themselves and their country
blessed that have him among them, they fly unto him in necessity, they depend
upon him as their God, and by this means, thousands are carried away to their
final confusion. Death therefore is the just and deserved portion of the good
Witch

FINIS.

