AVLVS PERSIVS FLACCVS HIS SATIRES TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH, BY BARTEN HOLYDAY
Mr of Arts, and Student of Christ-Church in Oxford.

Hinc trahe que dicas, mensamque relinque Mycenis
Cum capite and pedibus --
The second Impression.

printer's or publisher's device

AT OXFORD, Printed By Joseph Barnes, Printer to the University, 1616.

TO THE READER.
IVdicious Reader (for to Thee as to a Just Patron, I make my Dedication) with
the true stingenuity I submit these my endeavors, the not unprofitable
recreations only of severer studies. To exsite thy attention, I may without
ambition say it ^s a New thing, Persius Understood. When first entertained the
attempt, I was opposed by see^ing-insuperable difficulties: The laboring to
^pprehend, to Express the sense of my Author: ^he reconciling of contrary
exposition^: the fin^ng out the order of his passages, grounded on a ^aturall,
but much concealed dependancy of his ^ecedent and subsequent matter: the
endeavo^ng to render him with brevity, perspicuity and ^s Own Strength: Lastly
the amputation of ^necessarie Criticismes of some Interpreters, ^om whom on
just reason I sometimes depart.

And that in this point I may stand clear from ^^e private surmise of some
tacit censurer: I will show unto thee, among many, two only of their
curiosities, and those in the front of the work.

The first is about the word Prolui, which some would have to be here used, to
signify that the Poet had modestly wet his lips in Hippocrene, but never
endrench'd them, or drank deep thereof. I grant that the word in the original
Can bear that sense; but that it does in This place, I confidently deny. And
stand confirmed by this reason: because the Poet satirically Derideth those,
that attributed the faculty of poetric to so insufficient and vain a cause, as
the drinking of that Well was. (He himself afterward confessing, ironically,
his Own skill to be Constrained: howsoever, not proceeding from so Fond a
cause;) and therefore in the like sort presently after, he says (if the
Critiques had observed it) tha^ he never slept on Parnassus: which was also
held as another cause of the poetique faculty. Where with reason, as good as
theirs, one might say, H^ never slept Soundly or Snorted on that hill, bu^ had
lightly taken a gentle nap. The parts of the similitude hold an equal
proportion: and then refer the ridiculous curiosity to the secret smile of
the Judicious.

The second is about the next word Caballino with which, according to Their
exposition, the epithet which in my translation I give to Pegasus, may seem
somewhat to strain courtesy: inasmuch as it implies the swiftness (and so by
co^sequent the praise) of the horse, to which it is (justly) applied: when as
They would have it to be used in the disgrace of the vain Poets, which are
here derided. Deriving so the ignominy of the word Caballus from the Well to
the persons: implying Them to be base packe-horse poets. A pretty, but imposed
meaning, if farther enquired into. For if the poet use this word especially for
that reason, it might seem (me thinks) that he did forget what horse he
himself meant: there being as great difference between Pegasus a winged
horse, and Caballus a packe-horse, as well-nigh could be between two
creatures of one kind. But if they once come to Conjectures, I may assume the
like liberty to interpose Mine also; And then I Could think (which, I wonder,
the Critiques did not see) that the Poet used this word before others, for a
most natural and strong reason drawn from the Etymology of the word
Caballus; which, as Isidore in his Originals has it, Lib. 12. cap. 1. is
derived, a cavando: propter quod gradiens vngula impressa terram concavet, quod
reliqua animalia non habent; And then who sees not how excellently the history
of Pegasus is intimated in this word? This Etymology is much strengthened by
the letter v changed into b. For in the Modern languages which have drawn
their original from the Latin, we see the v still retained, as in the Italian
and Spanish Cavallo, and in the French Cheval; and which may be observed, These
words in none of these Modern languages imply any disgrace, but are generally
attributed to all horses; Nay, from these words are drawn Titles of dignity,
as Cavaliero, in the Italian, Chevalier in the French, and Cavallero in the
Spanish.

But (that I may follow the^ no farther in these their wandering speculations)
to speak freely: I think the Poet neither thought as They think, nor as I
show how I Could think, and think as well as They. I am persuaded that more
is picked out of these Poets, then they themselves ever meant. For indeed when
a Satirist, through the heat of his love to virtue, is set on fire to see the
desperate security of profaneness: the fury of his passion does so transport
him: that there is no time left for the placing or displacing, choosing or
rejecting of some particular word: but as most commonly their passions are
uneven, rough, and furious: so is that also which they write being in this
poetical perturbation.

The difficulties which I have here set down, were by my peculiar affection
to This Author, at last all overcome. I have not herein bound my self with a
ferulary superstition to the letter: but with the ancient liberty of a
Translator, have used a moderate paraphrase, where the obscurity did more
require it: yet so, that with all convenient possibility, I stick unto his
Words. To have added Large annotations, had been but to transcribe a
Commentary or a Dictionary. Such brief ones notwithstanding, as without
which, the sense could not be sufficiently explicate, yet could not be well
inserted into the text; with all compendious perspicuitie I have adiected in
the margin: prefixing Arguments to every Satire.

From the affected obscurity, wherewith this Author has hitherto labored, I
cannot altogether quitte him, yet doubtless, it in part, proceeded from the
want of Liberty, which in his desperate times, was altogether lost; though, I
confess, He durst say Somewhat.

As for My labors: I much abhor so sickly an impotencie, as to ouerweane my
self with a conceit of mine own work; though, if my best friends tell me
truth, It may bear a Judge. But howsoever; If the truly Judicious (who are
always attended with Perspicacitie, and a mild ce^sure that true exciter of
promising ingenuities) shall courteously accept it: I am Crowned: and having
thus finished this work of an Others invention, I may be excited to a second
and more liberal attempt of mine own.

But if any Left Handed Pythagorians (who enforce Writers now adays as the
Ancients did their Comoedians, to use instead of Prologues expressing their
arguments, Apologies against the malicious) shall sinisterly accept, what is
courteously offered: I only wish them the other good quality of the
Pythagorians, Silence. For the oversights which I may be perchance convinced
of (as the purest eye sees not its own blemishes, but by reflection) I will,
being showed them, with free ingenuity confess: and doubt not of pardon;
having two so good solliciters in the eye of any, but moderately courteous;
Mine Own Infancy (in respect of any Maturity of judgment) and the
unacquainted Difficulty of my attempt. To have committed No faults in my
Translation, had bin to Translate My Self, and put off Man.

What other faults Detracters would Make (by their Own Reading, or
Interpretation) let them know, they are committed not out of Ignorance, but
Election, after a just consultation with more then a Cornutus. Author veterum
Glossaru^. Murmellius. Vinetus. Pithoeus. Marcilius. Foquelinus. Tornorupaeus.
Lubinus. Casaubonus. Frischlinus. Bondus. Farnabius.
Dozen Expositers. But why do I in the Indiscretion of Too-much humility
prostrate my endeavors to the Tyranny of the Ignorant: who stand Herein so Many
degrees below the faculty of Judging ce^surers? If any in the procacity of
baser malice (raised commonly from a despair of Imitation) shall proceed
farther unto contumelies: I shall not need, as some do (though I approve Their
course also) to arm my self with a confidence of Religion; I will not put it
to the stresse: nor against the stroke of so leaden a sword, use the
protection of so golden a shield. A little assumed Stoicisme shall serve the
turn; and with a Secure Contempt, I Will let them Scoule alowd Unheard. Farewell.

Thine BARTEN HOLYDAY,

A LETTER OF A JVDICIOVS FRIEND requested by the Author to deliver his censure
on his Translation.
Mr. B.H. I have read your smooth translation of rough Persius, and send it
home to you with my Censure (such as you wish) ingenuously free. I will deal
Justly with you Now, Friendly at Other times. In My judgment, when you
conversed in this familiar and friendly manner with Persius his Satires, your
wit stooped far below the elevation of its own worth. But as Scaliger said
of Claudian and his works, Solo argumento ignobiliore oppressus addit de
ingenio, quantum deest materiae: (Lib. 6. cap. 5. Poetic:) So I of You and Your
Poem; Whatsoever is mean in your Author, is (me thinks) so choicely adorned
by Your Genius: that if it stand out of the presence of Ignorance or Desperate
Emulation, it may be Graceful. Which I do more heartily affirm, because you
have Chastised your Poet with modest, yet significant terms: where some
ranke-breathed Interpretet would have rendered him with a strong savor of
lasciviousness. I know not now, what should stay You from sending it abroad,
or Others from giving it welcome entertainment. If Old Persius were ever worth
the having: Yours, I doubt not, will be thought Well worth the reading; yet
look for Other censures and Neglect them. Farewell.

Your loving friend, JOHN LEY.

Dark Persius, Ambrose threw thy book on ground
With indignation, 'cause 'twas so profound:
But now in fathers room a child is sprung,
That reader thy Satires in a vulgar tongue.
No Ambrose, yet with ambrose to be fed,
That could so wisely tracke, where thou could tred,
He takes away thy veil, and makes that line
Transalpine, which the Romans would confine:
Now let thy wandering shadow freely roaue,
And seek great place in the Elisian groaue,
Where since there is store of bay, for him one knit,
That makes the looser Brytaines fear thy wit.
Needs must his own inventions radiant be,
That casts such beams through thy opacitie.
Hence forth (bright Holyday) to change refuse
Thine Own Terpsichore, with translated Muse.
In Latio latuit Saturnum filius: Aulum
Sic poterat soboles ista latere suum,
Ante tuas (Holydaie) faces; hac luce refulget
Pluribus, and caeco, tector ante, patri.
Gymnasiarcha, puer, festivus ludat vterque:
Per Festum vobis otia quanta diem?
Nunquam Pegaseas libavit Persius vndas, Nee font, etc. Nec in bic: etc.

Aut clausit docto lumina pigra jugo.
Nempe tibi, fontem laticesque and culmina Phoebus
Servarat: pleno dum satur ore mades.
Quidve Aulus traheret? cum fic Helicona refundas,
Vt natet Angligenis Jtala Musa labris.
(...)
(...).
JOHN WALL.

UPON THE HAPPY TRANSLATIon of the most difficult Satirist, performed by his
dear friend Mr. B. H.
I Sing the Conquest, which an English rhyme,
With all its force never won before This Time.
Who thought that there would extant be the Man
That such stiff, sullen, hardy Romans can
Subdue, and with an hand, learnedly fierce,
Bind in the fetters of a Britane verse?
Yet here is one that does: But not as those
That Ovid: Met. Virg: Aeneid.
changed shapes, and wandering Trojans chose
For to translate, with lines a mile in length,
Or Paraphrase that tires. Such is His strength
And strictness, he his Author without wrong
Lodges in prisons but of five foot long.
Some I have known, that did Attempt the same
Which that they Durst, it was their Greatest fame,
But it was He, that could disdain to stay
At this praise Margent, only to Assay:
He with impetuous and all-conquering wit
That only had the power to finish it.
For had They don't, J know they must have left
Their graver studies, and have filcht with theft
Guilty of too much sacrilege, more hours,
Then time would loose; or else those sister powers
Jnvoke to lend them Others lives, to pluck
A vessel with such Remora's bestucke
To wished shore. But as for Him, with strange
And easy have, he did his Roman change
Without complaint of time: No serious part
Of learning murmured, that he did impart
Hours to the work. For all this was begot
(I speak my conscience) when it was his lot
To be at Truce with study. Then judge you
That shall upon his happy pains, a view
Bestow, that nere the Muses Holydaies
Or times of leisure, were with greater Praise,
Or Thrift, or Business spent: and likewise since
He conquered has so fierce a Latin Prince
Unto the Rimes and Phrases of Our tongue:
Decree that bays unto his brow belong.
A. WHITE.

TO HIS KIND FRIEND Mr. B. H. upon his Persius.
AS if in travailes far engaged, at last
Returned, I gratulate thy labors past.
But when unto thy ways I turn mine eye
Dangers obscured with dangers J epsy.
J think it a task too great for humane sleights,
Vngraueld or vndasht to pass those streights.
Admiring thy chaste notes, in which vnharmd
The Sirens lustful language thou have charmed.
That Art I love, when as against faith of sense
By sense of faith I see things flow from thence.
Nor do I (like to his ore'wheeling brain)
Persius still a cloud, embrace in vain;
This's the substance gives vice the fatal blow
The others thunder few to fear do know.
On envy, summon all the vices spite:
Better they should be conquered then not Fight.
R. WELDON.

UNTO HIS LOVING FRIEND Mr. B. H. upon Persius translated.
THis work me thinks makes my conjecture bold
TO affirm the Athenians paradox is true, Annus Platonicus.

When by years revolution J behold
Men dead reviue, things long since old, grow new.
For should dead Rome awake, and those loose times
Which feared and felt this scourging Satirist,
She might again in us review her crimes;
As fertile is Our age. Nor has it mist
The worst of all Her ills. Vainly we thought
Thy ashes (Persius) Slept within thine vrne:
Feared not thy lash: hoped negligence had wrought
Thy lines worse Funeral: and at length would turn
All to obscurity; For how few did strive
TO enlighten thy dark phrase, unless some vice
Made an acute bad comment: So to thrive
And purchase perspicuitie, is a price
Thou would have grieved to give. Yet since in ill
We have ore'tune past times: I must rejoice
That Constant industry should get such skill
As to tell us our bad in Persius voice:
Whom now All understand: all may endure
To read, but Such as would their crimes obscure.
T. GOFFE.

TO THE AVTHOR HIS most loved friend.
What None have Dared, Thou have; and might again
With praise, were it vndar'd. Did thou abstain
Yet longer, none would dare Thee to Prevent;
If any, what could breed thy more Content
Then, when by victory, thy glory should
Be doubled? yea, although recall some could,
From fields of rest, thy Persius to consult:
Yet would no less praise from thy lines result,
Then that vnparalel'd, which now is due
From those that read thee. Who when they shall view
How Truly with thine Author thou do pace
How hand in hand ye go, what equal grace
Thou do with him observe in every term:
They cannot, but, if just, justly affirm:
That did your Times as do your Lines agree,
He might be thought to have translated Thee;
But that he is Darker, not so Strong; Wherein
Thy Greater art more clearly may be seen;
Which do thy Persius clowdie storms display
With lightning and with thunder; Both which lay
Couched perchance in him, but wanted force
To break, or light from darkness to divorce;
Till Thine Exhaled skill compressed it so,
That forced the clouds to break, the light to show,
The thunder to be heard. That now each child
Can prattle what was meant: whilst Thou art styled
Of all, with titles of true dignity,
For Lofty Phrase, and perspicuitie.
I. KNIGHT.

TO THE AVTHOR HIS very good friend.
RE-liuing Persius, Daies-Birth, Heir of Fame:
I wrong not Persius, giving Thee His name;
If any, I wrong thee for what He did
Had Thou him not Illustred, had been hid.
This being but thy Pedestall of praise,
Oh what a Pyramid will thy Next work raise?
True Laureat, with blessed Omens go thou on;
All-imitable, imitating none.
I speak not this (nor need'st thou it) of Favor.
But as one conscious of thy Great works labor.
My tongue was never oil'd in the base claw-art.
Jn Others read thou Wit, in Me my Heart.
W. W.

TO HIS LEARNED FRIEND Mr B. H. upon his judicious translation of Persius.
What lay imprisoned, and confined alone
Only to deeper apprehension;
Thy more benign, sublimed, transcendent wit
Has reached, and conquered, and imparted it.
And giu'n't to all, which makes it more thine own
Since all are heirs of that invention.
Nor does one jot, so sweet congruitie,
Adulterate the Latin chastity,
All things conseru'd, so terse, so nothing lost
As if thou did consult with the Authors Ghost,
^uch height, such sacred indignation
As seems a Persius, no Translation.
On, learned Quill; thus vindicate thy name
From times proud Injury, Traitor to fame:
Nor suffer yet, that Italy so long
Should make her Vice speak English, not her Tongue.
W^ip back her basiards, send them home to Rome,
Let her that was their parent, be their tomb.
Mean while J dare Congratulate our Crimes
Made Happy that they could produce These Rimes.
T. G.

AVLVS PERSIVS FLACCVS. THE PROLOGVE.
Argument.
Need and not Inspired skill
Makes our Author try his quill.
MY lips did never touch the spring
Of the winged horse: nor can I bring
To mind, that e're I dreamed upon
Two-topt Parnassus, that thereon
I might be' Inspired and So Vp-start
A Poet by Infused art.
And all the Muses that do dwell
'Bout pale Pirene, and the well
Of Helicon, to Those I leave,
Unto whose statue's brows does cleave
The Jvy-greene incircling Crown.
In humbleness I half a Clown
Do only bring this my rude line,
Unto Apollo's sacred shrine.
Yet blame me not for my bold deed:
Alas! I write enforced by A satirical Ironie Persius was a Knight of Rome of
sufficient wealth.
need.
Who taught the Parrot his kind Hail?
Who taught the Pie so to prevail
To frame Our words? 'Twas but to fill
Their belly, master of their skill;
Which skillful is to make them reach
Voices, which Nature cannot teach.
Nay; if there chance to shine but some
Hope, of deceitful Gain to come:
Crow-poets and poetique Pies
You Would think did chaunt sweet ayries;
And make (when as they harshly Cry)
A Pegaseian Melody.
SATIRE. 1. THE FIRST SATIRE IN form of a Dialogue. The Speakers. PERSIVS.
MONITOR.
Argument.
Inspired poets Art and Pride
Our Satirist does here deride.
P. O Cares of men! O empty Vanity

P. Out of the too abundant variety of the interpunctions of these three
verses following, I could find none more accurate, then this I have extracted,
and here used.
Why?
Of things!

M. who will read these Wondering Satires?
Do Thou say so my Friend?

M. Faith I think none.

P. How say thou? None?

M. Perchance some two, or --

P. None?

M. It Is hard.

P. Yet why? Least Rome's Ironically here the Poet calls Nero Polydamas who is
much famoused by Homer in diverse places for his virtue, yea and compared with
Hector. Iliad. m.
Polydamas
And doutie Trojans should prefer the ass
A ridiculous Poet, that translated five books of Homers Iliads into verse,
word for word, with extreme obscurity, and no less absurdity.
Labeo before Me? Tush; their false doom
Is but a trifle. If disturbed Rome
Prowdly slight any thing, scorn to descend
To Their Vain censure: neither strive to mend
The tongue of thy false balance in Their scale
Which is as wrong: but if thou would never fail
Know This: To try thy secret innocence,
The surest witness is thy conscience.
For Who is Not at Rome? O that I might
But freely speak, yet speak no more then Right.
And So I May. Then, when I cast mine eye
On those whose Faces promise Gravitie:
On our sad Stoickes: on the things we do
Since we left off to play with nuts: and view
Our actions, when we labor much to be
Stern Uncles. Then! then! But, oh, pardon me,
I will not touch. Yet can I hold my peace
Urged Thus? and from revenge so lust, Thus cease?
I Am of a Scoffing spleen. I Love to Flout
At Hypocrites: therefore it now Must out.
Then Thus.
Being immured from each man's sight
In some obscure retired place, we write
Some, ev'n-pac'd numbers, Some freefooted prose,
Some weighty thing, which the Author strongly blows
From his large-winded lungs. For he rehearses
Unto the people straight his well-pen'd verses;
His hair being first kemb'd smooth, and then he dight,
In a fair comely garment fresh and white,
Wearing some precious jewel, which some friend
On's birthday to him for a gift did send,
With moist'ning syrrope having cleared his throat
Apt Now to sound it in a various note.
Then is he reading in a seat on high,
Dissolved unto a lustful Acting eye.
Where thou may see even those that bear the name
Of Rome's brave Titi (but unto their shame)
To shake with trembling lust, and to rejoice
Obscenely, with a broken skreaking voice
When a lewd line their inward loins does pierce,
And touch them with a lust-provoking verse.
But thou Old Dotard, do Thou strive to feed
Other men's ears? nay, Theirs who without heed
Or moderate discretion praise thee so,
That (skinne-peel'd Ass!) thy self do first cry, Hoe?
Here the Poet faineth a reply of this old ambitious Poet defending himself.
Why did I learn unless this leaven here
Inbred, this strong wild-figtree should appear?
And from its seat the liver breaking forth
Show to the world its own, though unknown worth?

P. O see ambitious palenesse! see Old Age!
At such corrupted times Who could not rage?
Think thou, thou nothing know, if it be so,
That others know not, that thou this do know?
A second reply.
O but it is brave to hear men cry, See, see?
And pointing with their fingers, say, That Is he.
Say you 'had a poem which so smoothly runs,
That 'twere for lectures read to great men's sons,
Brave lads with curled locks, like gold so yellow:
Would not you think your self a pretty fellow?

P. O that is not all! See, our Romulidans
Profane our sacred poems with foul hands!
Reading, amidst their bowls, poems divine,
Being full up to the throat with flesh and wine.
Where if forsooth one clad in purple clothes,
Snaffle some mustie stuff through's muffling nose
Melting forth fair Hypsipyle's sad song
Or Phyllis fortune with a moist'ned tongue
Or some such tales which poetry affordes
His dainty palate tripping forth his words,
The Men assent! And are not the ashes then
Of this Rare poet blessed? This man of men
Has he not now a The Ancient Ethniques did use to pray that the tombe-stones
of their dead friends might be light unto them; because they believed that
their Manes or souls remained in their sepulchers, and were sensible of such
accidents. They held likewise the springing of flowers from the grave of a
deceased friend, an argument of his happiness.
lighter mole of earth
Gently pressing his bones? A general mirth
Ensues: the guest with hands and voices ring
His due applause; And shall there not now spring
Even from his Manes, from the hollow womb
Of his thrise-happy vrne-inclosing tomb
Sweet Violets? But, Oh, says one, you touch
Too scoffingly, wrinkling your nose Too much.
For does there breath a man that can reject
A general praise? and his own lines neglect?
Lines worth immortal Cedars recompense,
Nere fearing new-sold Fish or Frankincense?
Well; whosoever thou art whom I did make
But now, the Adverse part to undertake;
When I my self do write, if from my brain
Do flow by greatest chance some happy strain
(For it is by chance) My heart is not so hard
So hornie, as to fear the due reward,
Of deserved fame. Only I do deny
The scope of virtuous actions to lie
In thy O brave! O fine! for search but this
Thy O fine! and within it What not is?
No; in These papers know thou shall not find
Labeo's helleborated lines confined
Too superstitiously to Words: nor weak
Loue-elegies, such as Rome's Nobles speak:
Whose judgment like their overcharged maw,
Wants strong concoctions heat, and is Yet raw.
Briefly whatse're on The Romans had their lecti lucubratorii on which they
studied, and tricliniares, on which they eat the latter are rather understood
in this place, for he principally speaks against the verses they writ amongst
their cupps.
Citrean beds is writ,
We hence exclude as the excrement of wit.
Thou do some dish of good hot meat provide
For some poor wretch (whose bellie's his tongues guide)
Or to thy quaking foll'wer thou do cast
Thy threadbare cloak (which could no longer last)
Then thus thou speak. You know even from my youth
I hated lies, now therefore tell me truth.
Of me (P. Can He tell truth? Wilt let Me speak?
Thou triflest (bald-pate ass!) and thy skill's weak.
Seeing a fat-hogge-trough-panch before thee struts
Full Eighteen inches with a load of guts.
O blessed Ianus! happy is Thy luck!
Behind Three manner of flouts were used by the Ancients. The first was with
their hand to make a Storkes bill, their fingers being all collected together,
and then let out with a flurt. The second was to put their thumbes to the
temples of their heads, and then wagge their fingers like asses ears, which
within are somewhat white. The third was to lill out their tongues, like dogs
in the heat of summer, especially in hot countries, such as is Apulia a region
in Italy.
thy back, whom never Storkes bill struck:
At whom no nimble fingered hand being framed
Like asses white ears, ever Yet was aimed:
Nor so much tongue thrust forth in a base flout
As an Apulian bitch for thirst lils out.
You O Patrician blood whose heads are blind
In The hinder part, prevent a scorn behind.)
What do men say? The answer of the flatteres
That now your verses flow
In a soft numbered pace both sweet and slow,
Whose well-smooth'd parts are so exactly joined
That the severest nail can never find
The least vnev'nesse. O says one, he makes
A verse, as he that his true level takes,
Shutting one eye, for to direct his line,
Which drawing, with red oaker he does sign.
Whether he scourge with his deepe-wounding rimes
The delicate soft manners of the times,
Or th'impious banquets of revenging Kings:
Our Poets Muse can well express great things.
P. I, You shall see a fellow dare assay
To write Heroicke acts, who the other day
But trifel'd out some Fables of small worth
In scarce true Greek: whose skill cannot paint forth
A pleasant selfe-describing Groue's delights;
Nor praise the full-stor'd Country, that even writes
The story of its Own abundant store;
Where fruits and firewood and the fat'ned Boar
Are never wanting; where the shepherds feast
Sacred to Pales is, to expel the beast
That hates the lamb: where shepherds on that day
Are purged in a fire of smoking hay.
Whence Remus sprung: where ( Q. Cincinnatus.
Quintius) thou wast borne,
And where thy plow-share was in furrows worn;
When as thy wife trembling with joy and fear,
Made thee the great Dictators roabes to wear
Before thine Oxen, and to leave them Now,
Making the Lictor carry home thy plow.
Behold then this brave Poet.
Some there are
To whom Furius Accius Labeo. Briseus, is the surname of Bacchus, fitly here
attributed to Labeo, because of his mad verses.
Brisean Labeo's book seems rare:
Whose lines swell like full Veins. Others desire
Pacuvius, whom much they do admire,
And love often to read, and even to stay
Upon his knottie harsh Antiopa;
Whose woeful heart was nourished with grief,
The Depth of sorrow yielding Some relief.
When thou shall see the blear-eied father teach
His son these things; can thou not quickly reach
To know the cause how this our vile disgrace,
This hissing drying pan of Speech took place
First, in our tongues? And yet wherein our smooth
The Knights of Rome were anciently so called, because they surprised a town
in Hetruria called Trossulum, without the help of the footmen.
Trossulians vainly themselves do sooth,
And even leap in their seats, when as they hear
Old words, which please their thick false-judging ear.
When thou art accused, art not ashamed to be
Not able thy now-Aged head to free
From fear o'th 'law, but love the lukewarm cry
Of all thy hearers crying, Decently?
Pedius says one, unto thy charge I lay
The guilt of theft. What now does Pedius say?
In smooth Antitheta's his fault he weighes,
And for his learned Figures, winnes much praise.
O neat! O neat? In judging thou do fail,
Base fawning Roman, do thou wagge thy tail?
For think thou, if some ship-wrack'd wretch should Sing.
He e're from me one Halfe-peny should wring?
Do Sing, when at thy shoulder thou do wear
Thy self and ship, which the sharp rocks did tear?
His tears shall be expressed through's Misery,
Not-Studi'd for by Night, that would move Me
To pity. M. Yet in Numbers, O, there shines
Beauteous composure added to those lines
Which were before but raw. P. I, so it seems;
For one, this as the only skill esteems
To end his verse (But, O ridiculous!)
With Berecinthian Atys; or else, thus;
The Dolphin which did cut Cerulean Nereus.
Ex'lent! and this our Romans count most serious!
So thus another draws his numbered line,
We drew a ribbe from the long Apennine.

M. Virgils Aeneads, which begin so, Arma virumque cano.
Arms, and the man I sing, perchance you will dare
To term This frothy, fat-bark'd.

P. O no; spare
Your Too-quicke censure, and dissolve your brow.
This Poem as an aged well-growne bough
Seasoned with time, is with the warm Suns heat
Well boild in its own bark; grown strong and great.

M. What then do you term soft, and to be read
With a loose-bending neck, and bow'd-downe head?

P. Their writhed horns the Mimallones did fill
With sounds, and Bassaris about to kill
The scornful calfe, snatching from him his head,
And Moenas as the spotted Lynx she lead
With Joy-bridles, often did Evion sound:
The reparable Echo did rebound.
These, these are brave I But, Oh, should Such lines be
If any vein of Old Nobility
Did live in us? These Weak lines in the Brimme
Of every mouth, in the utmost spittle swim.
Moenas and Atys or some foolish Songs
Are always in the moisture of their tongues.
They never Buffeted a Deske for These,
Or Bitte their Nails: such lines are writ with ease.

M. Grant this be true: yet Sir You have no need
With biting truth to make their soft ears bleed.
Well, look you to it; I fear; be not too bold,
Lest great men's thresholds toward you grow cold.
Me thinks, the are touched already, and I hear,
The doggish letter R sound in mine ear.

P. Nay, Sir, rather then so, all is white and free:
All, all is admirable well for Me.
I will not hinder't. Now you are pleased I think.
You Will say, Let no man make My verses stink,
Making a place for This place is thus against the common interpretation more
manerly and truly expounded by Mr. Bond.
urine, in a scorn,
Among My papers.

P. See then you adorn
Your book, and paint two These represented the Genius of the place, and were
painted there to deter any from violating the place by any pollution.
Serpents on it; Boys, None
Must urine in This Sacred place: be gone:
And I Will go first.
Yet did Lucilius cut
Lewd Rome, and thee, O Lupus, that did glut
Thy appetite, and thee (Mutius) grown weak
With lust, and did on us his Iaw-tooth break.
So subtle Horace laughing with his friend
Would cunningly his vices reprehend,
And lying in his bosom, in his heart,
Would bitterly deride him with great art.
Skillful he was basely t'esteeme the rout,
Yet near wrinkled his nose, or Seemed to flout.
And may not I then Mutter? not to the An allusion to the fable of Midas.
Dust?
Not, though Alone? No where? I will; I must
Dig here, even here. (My book) I speak to Thee;
I Have seen, I say, I Have seen; (my tong's born free)
Who has not Asses ears? Thou shall not buy
This my obscure concealed mystery,
This my dear scoff, my Nothing, for whole miliads
Of any base Poets long-winded Iliads.
Thou whoso'ere thou art, that art inspired
With bold Cratinus; or with zeal art fired
Like angry Eupolis; and art grown pale
With that Aristophanes.
old man, whose style with a full sail
Bears strong against foul vice: vouchsafe a glance
On these My Satires also; where by chance
If any thing more perfect thou shall hear,
Among my lines; grow hot with a purged ear.
But him with deepest scorn I do detest
That basely loves to break a bitter jest
At a Philosophers poor Shoe: and winkes
At him, whose sight is bad, calling him Blinkes:
Counting himself no mean man, bearing some
Jtalian honor at Aretium;
'Cause, being Market-Clarke (such was his pleasure)
He brake their earthen vessels less then measure.
Nor love I him that counts the counting-table
Of deep Arithmeticians but a fable.
Nor him that scoffs at Figures made in An allusion to the story of
Archimedes; see Plutarch's Marcellus.
dust
By sound Geometry. Such are unjust,
And Enemies to th'Arts. They much delight
To see the bold-fac'd queen Nonaria fight
With a good honest Cynicke; and will grinne
If that she pull his beard off from his chinne.
These, in the morning next their hearts I Will send
To study the Edicts lest they offend:
Yet after dinner (for they 'le turn no more
From vice) unto Callirhoe their Whore.

SATIRE. 2. THE SECOND SATIRE UNTO his friend Plotius Macrinus.
Argument.
Profane desires: true sacrifice:
Bold sins: our Poet here descries.
Sign This day (Macrine) with a Purer stone,
Which does present to thee times long since gone.
Power wine unto thy Genius; for Thy care
Is not to win Jove with a Bribing prayer.
Nor crau'st Thou, what thou sham'st to name for fear
Except Ioue's drawn aside that none may hear.
Though no small part of Rome's chief Nobles can
Sacrifice with a low-voic'd incense-pan.
It Is not an easy thing to take away
The murmured whisperings of those that pray
From the Gods Temples. It Is no easy thing
To live with Known desires. This was but the manner of some hypocrites; for
it was the Custom of the Romans to pray softly to themselves, as Ios.
Scaliger well observes in his Castigations on the 2. li. of Tibullus. p. 137.
and Wowerius in his Animadversions on Petronius. p. 428.
They use to sing
Alowd, that strangers and the standers-by
May hear 'hem, when they pray for honesty
Or a good mind, good fame. But for the rest
Of their desires, inwardly the are suppressed
Under their murmuring tongues; such as are these
Profane requests; O that some strong disease
Would make my Vnckl's brave rich funeral
To bubble up. O that my rake would fall,
As I were working, on some sounding pot
Of silver; Antiquity made Hercules the propitious God for the finding out of
hidden Treasure.
Hercules blessing my lot.
Or would I might expu^ge this young, rich Ward
By whom from great possessions I am barred
Being the next heir; for he is with scabs perplexed,
And is with swelling choler sharply vexed.
There Is Nereus to, has buried ye three wives,
And I scarce --! O Such men lead Happy lives!
That these things thou religiously may crave
Of Jove, in swelling Tybers silver wave
Early thou washest twice or thrice thy 'head
Purging the Of this, see Casaubon on Theophrastus; p. 292. where he shows
their twofold manner of expiation. And Brissonius at large, lib. 1. de
Formulis, p. 8.
night pollutions of thy bed.
Do hear? answer me this: and but disclose
Thy thought in one small question I Will propose.
What think of Joue? think he may be preferred
Before Some? Whom? be it even A wicked fellow, that poysned his brother and
brothers wife.
Staius; art afeard?
And doubtst thou Whether is the fittest Guard
And iuster judge for a young guidlesse Ward?
This then, wherewith thou dare to press Iou's ear,
Tell but to Staius: would he not even fear
To hear thee Speak? and casting up his eye
Cry, O good Joue! and shall not Joue then cry
Unto himself for vengeance? What? do think
Thou art Forgiven, because he is pleased to Wink
At thy black deeds, and sooner strikes a Tree,
With horrid Sulphur, then Thy house and Thee,
When with his roaring thunders he does chide
The proud high-mounting air? Dare thou deride
The power of Heaven, and lay with Joues Fond beard,
As if thou had Leave, because thou never was feared.
With some strange judgment? or never yet did lie
A woeful spectacle to each man's eye,
Unholy, to be shunned in some sad grove,
Then ceasing to be sacred unto Joue,
Or the other Gods, until with sacrifice
Th'Aruspex great Ergenna purifies
The same, by offering th'entrals of two sheep?
Or else, what is it? with what reward do keep
The bribed ears of the corrupted Gods
That they should only give indulgent nods
At thy vast crimes? is it thy fat offering
Which to their sacred altars thou do bring?
Now you shall see some grandames, or fond Aunts,
Whom women's Fury Superstition haunts,
Take up a tender infant in their arms,
And being skillful to depell the harms.
Of an Of Fascination, see Del Rio: Mag: disquis: l. 3. q. 4. Sect. 1. and
Ramirez, in his learned Pentecontarchus, cap. 31. at large.
effascinating eye, they will spet
Upon their middle finger, and then wet
With this their purging spettle, the child's brow
And pretty lips. Then with a humble vow
Dancing him in their arms, they will vainly spend*
Their poor lean hope, in praying Jove to send
This babe in time to come such happiness
As once wealthy Licinius did possess
In fruitful lands: or such as Crassus held,
Who for brave houses, Rome's chief Lords excelled.
They wish that Kings and Queens may be at strife
To make even their best daughter His blessed wife.
And as for Maids (say they) Ye Gods above!
O let'hem strongly, strangely fall in love
With his rare beauty: and that whereso'er
He treades, a crimson rose may spring up there.
Brave! brave! But yet I will not bid My nurse
Pray so: or if she do; then Good Jove Curse
Her Prayers; Though cloth'd-White she strongly Cry,
Yet for thine Own sake, Strongly still Deny.
Thou wishest for firm nerves, and for a sure
Sound body, that would healthfully endure
Until Old age; why be it, that thy wish
Is Granted by the Gods; yet thy Large dish
And full fat sasage make the Gods Delay
To bless thee, and do Force good Jove to stay.
Thou'd'st feign grow rich: yet do thou sacrifice
An Ox, (is that the way in wealth to rise?)
Then upon Mercury the God of gain
With this thy offering, thus thou cri'st amain,
Let my domesticke Gods (great Mercury)
Make all things happy in my family!
Bless thou my herds of beasts, bless thou my lambs,
And make my tender yewes the happy damm's
Of many yong-ones. Madman! will thou see?
This is impossible! It cannot be!
When as so many heyfers fats do fry
In flames of sacrifice? Yet does he cry,
And with his Entrals and his dainetie Cake
Strives to overcome, and forcingly will Make
The Gods to hear; nor yet will hold his peace.
Now does my field, now does my fold increase:
Now twill be given: now, now, until at last
Deceau'd, his great hope prooving but a blast:
His Money in his chest may make its moan
For want of company; yet sigh alone.
If for a gift to Thee some friend presents
A silver goblet, or rich ornaments
Curiously graven in a massy bowl
Of purest gold: straightway thy very soul
Is touched with a strong passion: and thou shak'st
Even Drops from thy left breast (Vain heart that qual^'st
Thus with a trembling joy?) Now because gold
Thus pleases Thee; hence it is that Thou do hold,
The Gods are pleased so too, and over lai'st
Their statues faces (that thereby thou may
Procure their favor) with gold purchased
From the enemy, which was in triumph led.
For those The brazen Statues of the sons of Aegyptus, all, except one,
slain by their new wives the daughters of Danaus. Which brothers the Romans
adored as Gods: and were vainly persuaded that they sent dreams unto men.
brasse-brother-gods that send a dream
Most true, and purged from thick, corrupted fleame,
Whereby in sleep men are disturbed, or feared,
Let those be chief, and wear a golden beard.
Gold has the pots of earth, and brass disdaign'd,
Though used when Numa, and good Saturn reigned.
Gold likewise has expeld the Vestall Vrne:
Gold does the Thuscan Earth to Gold now turn.
Base stooping souls, that groovle on the Earth,
In whom there is Nothing testifies their birth
To be from Heaven!
Yet, does not this suffice?
But we must bring these our iniquities,
To the Gods Temples, where their powers divine
Do dwell; and even profane their holy Shrine?
As if there could be any thing in these
Infected Carcases, the Gods to please?
This Flesh of ours makes us in vain to spoil
Sweet Casia, by mixing it with oil
To make us ointments. This does make us stain
The soft Calabrian fleece in Purple grain,
This makes us with much art to polish well
Mother of Pearl, drawn from the fishes shell.
This from th'vnpurged earth made us desire
To strain out veins of gold by purging fire.
This sins; and sins; yet persevers in sin.
But you great Priests, tell; what does gold within
The holy Temples? sure, no greater thing
Then It was acustome among the Ancients, for Virgins about to marry to offer
their Babies as an ensign of their Virginities to Venus, hoping that by her
benefit, shortly after, they should have true Babes of their own.
puppets, which to Venus Virgins bring.
No; let us strive to bring to th'Gods, that which
Messala's bleare-eyed offspring, from his rich
Large incense-bason nere could give; A mind
By Law and by Religion well confined;
A retired soul; a heart not stained by
Foul lust, concoct in Noble honesty.
This let me bring to th'Gods, and I Will obtain
Offering but a Small Cake of some Course grain.
SATIRE 3. THE THIRD SATIRE.
Argument.
Young Gallants Sloth, and their Neglect
Of Arts, this Satire does detect.
What Every day thus long? fie, fie, arise:
See how the clear light shamefully descries
Thy sloth and through thy windows shining bright
Stretches the narow chinks with his broadlight.
We snort till the An hypall: for, till the shadow touch the fifth line; which
is about our Eleven of the clock. He understands this of Sun-Dials. You may
see the form of an ancient Roman Sun-Diall, in Ramirez his Pentecont. cap. 23.
Fifth shadow touch the line,
Enough even to digest strong Falerne wine.
Now what do do? The furious dog-stars heat
Upon the parched corn has long since beat
With its fierce scalding influence, and made
The beasts to seek the spreading Elmes cool shade
Thus the companion of some slothful youth
Does freely chide him. Then says he, in truth
And is it so late? indeed? some body then
Come presently and reach my cloths: why when?
If then no body come, Oh how he swells,
And breaks with Because it is as soon raised as glass is, by those that make
it.
glasse-like choler; and the^ yels
With such a foul loud noise, that you would say
Surely some great Arcadian ass did bray.
At last, with much ado he does begin
To take his book in hand and some fair skin
Of smooth Yellow on the side the hair grew, and white on the other side.
two-colourd parchme^t: he takes the^
Some paper and his knottie reed-like pen.
Then he complains how that his ink does stick
In clots at his pens nose, it is so thick.
Power water then to his black Sepia is a seafish called a Cuttell, whose
blood the Romans used in stead of ink.
Sepian juice,
He cries, now it is too white. Has a device
For every thing. So Sometimes he does plead
His pen writes double, or his ink does spread.
Wretched, unhappy man! yet growing still
More wretched! Think wee're borne to take our fill
Of sloth? Why do not then like the soft Dove
Or great men's little children, rather love
In delicatest wantonness to lap
Some soft sweet spoone-meat, as, a little pappe?
Or angry with the tear, why do not cry,
Refusing to be stilld with Lullabie.
This verse is an interiected reply of the slothful youth: the next is spoken
in the person of his companion which reprehendeth him.
Why can I study, sir, with such a quill?
This verse is an interiected reply of the slothful youth: the next is spoken
in the person of his companion which reprehendeth him.
Alas! whom do thou mock? why pleadst thou still
Such vain ambages? wretched man to flout
Thy self! Thou Art broken! lo, thou leakest out!
And know thou Shall be Scornd! strike but a pot
Of some raw earth halfe-boild, and will it not
Tell its own fault, yielding a dull crazd sound?
Well; Yet thou art soft moist clay, and may be wound
To any form: Now therefore, Now make have
To virtue: Present time must be embraced.
Now like the potters clay, now thou must feel
Sharp disciplines effigiating wheel.
His companions ironicall defense of the others carelessenesse.
But, oh, thy father left Thee Land enough,
And a clean Salt-seller, with household stuff
Sufficient, needst Thou then fear any thing?
So the have a secure pan wherein to bring
Incense to thy protecting Lares. Well;
But think thou this enough? wilt therefore swell,
And break thy lungs with an ambitious wind,
Because that thou thy thousanth off, do find
Thy branch to be perchance drawn from a tree
Of some high Thuscan true nobility?
Or that because clad in the purple grain
Meeting Romes Censour with his pompous train
Thou can salute him, by the name of Cuzze,
And arrogantly ask him how he does?
Away: go pranse before the multitude
In these thy trappings; seek not to delude
My judgment: for I know thy soul within,
And see thy faults writ in thy outmost skin.
Art not ashamd to live like dissolute
Loose Natta? but (alas!) he is destitute
Of Sense! He stands Amasd in vice! the deep
Fat brawne of sin makes his heart soundly sleep!
That now he does not sin! No, he is so gross,
So stupid, that he is senseless of his loss!
And sunk down to the depth of vice he will swim
No more again up to the waters brim!
Great father of the Gods! when cruel lust
Touched with inflaming venom, moves th'vniust
Corrupted disposition of fierce kings,
To act unworthy and unkingly things:
Punish them only thus; Let them but see
Fair virtue, and their lost felicity.
Then shall their bowels yearne, and they shall cry
In secret, and wax pale, and pine, and die.
Did ever the Sicilian brazen bull
Roar out his torments with a throat more full?
Or did the sword hung by a slender thread
Up in the golden roof over the head
Of the Damocles.
crowned flatterer, more terrify
His soul, then when a man shall truly cry
Unto himself, I fall, Oh, I do fall
Down headlong; and shall Know he is past recall?
And Inwardly grow pale (O wretched life!)
Which he is afeard to tell his near dear wife?
Indeed, when I was Young, I like a fool
Would 'noint my eyes with oil to stay from school:
When I Would not learn, through sloth, the stately part
Of dying Cato, though 'twere penned with art.
And my too-carefull Master praised it much:
And my glad father being moved with such
His praises, brought his friends to here his boy
Bravely act Cato, and would sweat for joy.
For then I cared not to know any thing:
Except how much the luckie Sice would bring:
Or what the loosing Ace would scrape away
Or that my fellow might not put false play
Upon me, neatly cogging forth a die
Out of the small-neck'd They used to cast their dice out of boxes, (as now
adays some do out of small saucers) to prevent the sleight of the hand, which
notwithstanding some more cunning gamesters did often practice.
casting-box. This I
Did learn: and for the scourge-stick I did strive,
That none his top with greater art might drive.
But now, Thou art not at This age to learn
Between good and bad manners to discern.
Noe; thou Have learned the precepts that are taught
In the wise porch, where curiously are wrought
By Polygnotus skill, the conquered Medes
In their short sloppes: whose story overspreads
The Walls: and where in searching hidden truths
The little-sleeping close-shorne Stoic Youths,
That feed on husks and a course barley cake,
Early and late industriously do wake.
And unto Thee the The letter of Pythagoras, who by birth was a Samian.
Samian letter Y
Whose spreading branches teach Philosophy,
Has marked out even as it were with chaulke,
The high-rear'd right hand path, wherein to walk.
And snort'st thou Yet? What? is thy head grown slack?
Art jaw-falne? Does their frame begin to crack?
Lie yawning, to evaporate the excess
Of yesterdaies oppressing drunkenness?
Have thou proposed thy self a certain end?
And with thy best endeavor do thou bend
Thy bow at that? Or, careless of thy hurt,
Do throw at crows, with stones and clots of dirt
Neglecting where thou runn'st? Have thou no drift,
But only for the Present how to shift?
Well, yet be provident; when our sick skin
Does with the puffing dropsy once begin
To swell, it is then, thou know, but vain to cry
For Hellebore; when a disease draws nigh,
And yet but threatens thee; Then, then prevent
And meet a danger that is imminent.
But if thou do delay, till't be too late,
And that thy sickness once grow desperate:
Then would thou give Craterus half thy wealth
Yet can he not restore thee to thy health.
Learn then, O wretched youths the mystery
Of Nature in profound Philosophy.
Learn who we are: why we were borne: the estate
Wherein wee're set; And know that not by fate
But wisdom, we may turn our ship with ease
About high-vertues An allusion to the Romans Naumachia.
mark placed in the seas
Of this our life. Temperately desire
Silver: learn what it is lawful to require
In prayer: and the perfect use, aright,
Of Money: for which, men so sharply fight:
What likewise to thy Country thou do owe,
And what to thy dear kinsmen; Learn to know
Whom Me thinks, these lines of mine Author, and especially this word Deus,
seem to be of that high strain of Divinity (in a Heathen) which Plato
reached unto, when he did profess that he writ but in jest, when he said,
Gods.
God has made thee, and in what degree
And state of life, he here has placed thee.
Learn: neither envy thou at the full store
Of the greased Lawyer, though he have much more
Provision, then his family can spend
Whilst it is sweet: which the fat Vmbrians send,
As gifts to bribe his tongue. Nor grutch to see
His Marsian Client bring him for a fee,
Pepper, gammons of bacon, or such kind
Remembrances. Nor let it vex thy mind,
Because he has fresh Pilchars to him sent,
Before the former barrel be quite spent.
But here, me thinks, I hear some boistrous rough
Centurion say; Tush, I have wit enough
To serve mine own turn; And I Will never care
To be Arcesilas, or to impair
My health, like Solon: who do lean awry
Their heads, pearcing the earth with a fixed eye:
When by themselves they gnaw their murmuring
And furious silence, as 'twere ballancing
Each word upon their out-stretchd lip: And when
They meditate the dreams of old sick men,
As, Out of nothing, nothing can be brought:
And that which is, can never be turned to naught.
Is it for This they are pale? and that they miss
Their dinner oftentimes, is it for This?
Why yet they are but scorned even by the Route,
The People: and our Lusty Lads but flout
Them, and with crisped noses aloof off,
Strongly ingeminate a trembling scoff.
Perfius his answer to the objection, which he makes the Centurion here use.
Yet, scorn not learning: lest thy falling state
Prove such, as this which here I will relate.
One said to his Physician, Pray Sir see;
Me thinks I am not as I use to be.
My heart does quake as if it boaded death:
And my sick jaws send forth a loathsome breath;
Pray good Sir feel my Pulse: and play your part.
Well, the Physician used his chiefest art,
And bid him rest Four days. But when each vain
Began composedly to flow again,
On the Third night: he bid his servant take
A A small flaggon.
little thirsting-flaggon, and straight make
All speed, to the great house of such a friend,
And tell him, he desired him for to send
Some of his mild Surrentine wine: and so
Having drank that, unto the Baths he would go.
When being there, thither did come by chance
His own Physician: who straight cast a glance
On this his patient, and to him said,
Why You are Pale, and are you not afraid?
Tush man, says he, that's Nothing. Yet beware,
Said his Physician, and pray have a care,
What ere this Nothing is. For I do see,
Your yellow sickly skin swells secretly.
Well, prithee now, said he, do not thou rail
At Me: for thou thy self do look more pale
And worse: be not a Tutour unto Me.
One I have had, and buried: now for Thee,
Thou yet remainst. On then, and do not cease,
Said his Physician, and I Will hold my peace.
This gallant then swelling with dainty cheer
Bathes his pale belly, and without all fear:
His throat half stopped with gross corrupted fleame,
Leasurely breathing a sulphurous steame.
But midst his wines a sudden trembling seaz'd
Upon each joint of him* that his diseased
Weak hand could not his lukewarm bowl retain:
And his vncover'd teeth even gnasht again:
And then through his loose lips, his fine-oild meat
He vomits, which he greedily had eat.
Then were prepared for his funeral
The At the Funerals of Great Men, they used Trumpets: as pipes at the Burials
of the meaner sort.
Trumpet, and the Lights: And last of all,
This seeming-happy man, that would not doubt,
His health, being composedly laid out
On his high bed, his biere; and now daubed over
And even bedurted with th'abundant store
Of ointments; stretches towr'd the Citie-gate
His cold dead heels; and those whose best estate
But yesterday, was but to be his slave,
It was the custom of the Romans before their deaths to Manumitte their
servants: which was by shauing their heads, and putting a cappe on.
Now wear their cappes, and bear him to his grave.
The scornful reply of the Centurion.
What? then belike y' apply this same to Me?
But (wretched fool!) the art out. For know, I Am free.
Touch but my veins: feel how my heart does beat:
There Is but a wonted moderated heat.
Or feel the bottoms of my feet: or hold
My hands: thou shall perceive they are not cold.
The answer of Persius.
It Is true. But know seduced man; there stick
Diseases in thy Soul; it is That is sick.
For if thou see by chance much gold: or spy
Thy neighbors smooth-cheek'd wench to cast an eye
Upon thee, smiling with a wanton glance:
Speak true: does Then thy heart Orderly dance?
There Is set before thee on thy board, to eat,
In a cold dish hard herbs, somewhat rough meat;
And course bread sifted in the people's searce:
Lets try your chappes. Oh are ye now averse?
In thy soft mouth there is hid a putrid soar,
Which touched with Common herbs, would make thee roar.
So thy heart's cold, when pale fear does affright
Thy hair like ears of corn standing upright.
Again, fierce anger makes thy blood grow hot,
Even as a firebrand does a seething pot;
And then thy flaring eyes sparkling forth fire
Thou sai'st and do So in thy furious ire:
That mad Orestes dares swear, Such a fact
None but a man stark mad, ere durst to act.
THE FOVRTH SATIRE.
Argument.
Young Rulers: The complaint of Lust
On Avarice, unfit though just.
ARt thou a Commonwealths chief Governer?
(Suppose the bearded grave Socrates.
Philosopher,
Whom the cold draught of Hemlocke forced to die,
Thus to demand) On what do thou rely?
What are thy grounds? speak Alcibiades,
Pupil unto the famous Pericles.
Oh, wit and grave discretion, I have heard
Indeed, do many times Prevent a Beard!
And so Thou know no doubt, though thou art but young,
Both when to Speak, and when to hold thy tongue.
When therefore the vexed multitude grow hot
With choler, and their duty have forgot:
Thou do but lift up thy maiesticke hand,
And straight a general silence do command
Ore the tumultuous rout. Then what do say?
These three lines are spoken in the person of this young Governer.
O ye Quiritians (if prevail I may)
I think This is not just that is done by you:
Nor This: twere better if you Thus did do.
For thou can weigh truth in the double scale
Of the most doubtful balance. If it fail,
Straightwaies Thou know it: yea, though hid it lie
Between a double crooked falsitie:
Or if a Rule (so perfect is Thy sight)
Measure not every thing exactly right.
And the black The Judges being about to give sentence of death against a man,
were wont to write his name in a table, and prefixe before it, the letter ^ as
being the first of (...), signifying he was to be delivered over to Death.
Theta sign of deadly shame
Thou can prefixe before an offenders name.
Thou Can do this. Oh, twere a crime to Doubt.
Come, come: Thou being fair only without
And in the skin, in vain: leave off to shake
Thy tail, before the flattring rout, or make
Suit for great offices, till age and cares
Have made thee Fit to manage such affairs.
Thou being fitter yet to drink good store
Of pure unmixed braine-purging Hellebore.
Wherein consists thy last, thy greatest wish?
The answer of this vain fellow: and the reply of Persius.
In having every day a full fat dish:
Then with sweet oil to'noint my skin, and lie
In the Suns pleasant warmth till it be dry.
The answer of this vain fellow: and the reply of Persius.
Why had thou with the self same question tried
This poor old woman; she had so replied.
Go now and boast how thy Nobility
Comes from the Illustrious Dinomache.
Puff out thy vaunts, and say, I Am comely, fair,
To grant thee such Vain praises I Will not care.
When ragged gran'ame Baucis, that does cry
Unto the looser servants, Will ye buie
Any sweet herbs, has as much wit as Thee,
That thus do boast of thy vain pedigree.
That no man will descend to his Own heart,
And search the secrets of that hidden part!
No man! But have their eyes fixed evermore
Upon His back and bag that goes Before!
For do but ask a man, by Chance; D' ye know
Vectidius farms? He Will say, Vectidius? Who?
The Chuffe of Cures, he whose grounds they say
A kite can scarce fly over in a whole day?
Him even the Gods oppose and the sure fate
Of an unlucky Genius. Who (the date
Of time, bringing again the Plow-mens These feasts were called Compitalia,
and were celebrated in honor of their Lares.
feast,
When from their paineful labors they have ceased,
And now hung up their weary Oxens yoke
By the worn path upon some aged oak)
When he should freely laugh, and make good cheer
For other plow-men (it is but Once a year)
Most basely fearing to pull off the clay
From his small wine-vessel; he will sigh, and say,
Pray Jove, that this my Prodigality
Bring me not in the end, to beggerie!
A coated oignion then with salt he eats;
(His servants much applauding such brave meats:
Nay, and rejoicing for their happy lot
And for the barly-pudding in the pot)
Then sparingly he suppes in steed of beer,
The cloathy dregs of dying Vinegar.
But straight replies the other, If Thou 'noint'st
With supple oil thy foul lubberly ioints
And lie in the hot Sun letting it beat
Upon thy skin, with its strong parching heat:
There Is one whom Thou scarce know, stands here hard by,
Even at thine elbow, that could likewise cry
Against Thy manners, and thy lewder art,
The depilation of thy modest part,
And of thy lunges, to prostitute thereby
Unto a barren lust thy pathicke thigh.
Thy Cheeks bearing a kemb'd, oil'd beard: Elsewhere
Reader, in This line, I intendedly depart from the Letter of mine Author, yet
without thy loss.
Why do thou too-vniustly-smooth appear?
Scrape on: but though five lusty wrastlers would
Root up these springing plants: yea though they should
With crooked pinsers, by their tugging often,
Weaken thy parts of shame, though first made soft
With Barbers soapie water, so to yield
The better, to the plowers of this field:
Yet this o're-spreading fearne will never bow
Unto the deepest furrow-making plow.
Thus we wound Others: and do yield again
Our thighs unto the darts of other men.
And thus we know man's life pursued to be
By this too-much-assumed Liberty.
The passage here, was too-obscure: wherefore J was forced to be a little
diffuse in the opening of the connection; and so inserted these four verses.
Yet some men's faults, because they hidden lie
From the inquiry of their Enemy,
Are not objected to them; yet are known
To him, to whom they cry, We are thine Own.
Thou have a secret wound under thy side:
But thy broad gold-boss'd girdle does it hide:
So though thou make Men say, Thou Art well (in Vain):
Will thy Side say so too, that feels the pain?
Thou Wilt here perchance reply, What? when as all
My neighbors Me an ex'lent fellow, call;
And say, I am not as your Common men.
Shall I, ah, Can I not believe 'hem then?
The reply of Persius to his own objection.
Alas, blind wretch! if at the sight of gold
With avaricious love thou waxest cold
And pale: if every thing thou likewise do,
Which griefe-procuring Lust provokes thee to:
If on the table of thy Usury,
By most oppressing heavy cruelty,
As by a strong deepe-wounding scourge, thou make
Many a sure-imprinted grievous struck:
To the false-praising People thou may lend
Thy spungie, sucking ears; but to no end.
Seem not more then thou art: neither believe
The ignorant applause base Cobblers give.
Live with thy Self, and quickly thou shall see,
The curtal'd store of thy bare poverty.
THE FIFTH SATIRE IN FORM of a Dialogue. The Speakers. Persius, Cornutus.
Argument.
Cornutus praise: Philosophy:
Opposed desires: true Liberty.
P. Our Poets use to wish they had large lunges,
And a whole hundred voices, mouths, and tongues:
When they would write a buskined Tragedy,
To be yawn'd out with the sad Majesty
Of a Tragedian: or describe the high
Braue-minded Parthian pulling from his thigh
A hooke-like bearded dart.

C. Why speak Thou thus?
And heapest up such vast robustious
And swelling lines, that Thou Thy Self do need
A hundred throats, if thou would attain indeed
The end which such endeavors tend to? Rather
Let Them, who will write some Lofty matter, gather
Clouds off of Helicon, to whom the pot
Of Progne, or Thyestes shall grow hot;
Of which, the fond Tragedian Glyco must
Often make his supper. But Thou neither dust
Puff from thy mouths full bellows much vain wind
The whilst the matters boiling in thy mind,
Thy fordge: nor with an inward murmuring
Hoarsly crow-like caw'st out some idle thing,
^ know not what: nor do Thou strive to stuff
Thy swelling cheeks, to break 'hem with a puff.
Thy words are words of peace, and accurate
Thy style; thy mouth not swollen, but moderate
Smooths out thy numbers; Thou can touch to th'quicke,
Pale manners: and with an ingenuous trick
Strike a crime Through; And Hence indeed from Crimes
Do Thou draw still the subject of Thy rimes;
And leave the feast made with the feet and head
Of Plysthenes woefully murdered,
At sad Mycenae: and do Thou descrie
The Peoples banquets, full of Luxury.

^. Surely, I strive not that My leaf may rise
Wi^h swelling bubbles of vain fopperies,
^it to give weight to smoke. We speak retired:
And inwardly I by my Muse inspired
Here offer even my secret heart to be
By Thee tried fully. For I Would have thee see
Cornutus, dearest friend, how great a part
Of my dear, yet divided soul Thou art.
Knock on my breast: for Thou have skill to know
What sounds solid, and the covered show
Of a gilt tongue. And oh here I could crave
A hundred voices: that how much I have
^ixt thee within my many-seated breast,
^ a pure fluent style might be expressed:
and that which now ineffable does dwell
Within my heart, in words I here could tell.
When first I did begin to leave to fear
under a Master: and left off to wear
^y purple-Coate, that still preserved free
From violation my weak infancy:
And when my Golden Bosse I newly had
Hung up to my To signify their readiness and expedition in defense of the
house which was committed to their tutelary charge.
succinct House-Gods: when bad,
And st^ttering companions guarded me:
When now my White Shield granted Liberty
Unto mine eyes, freely to roue throughout
The lewd Suburra: when I was in doubt
Which way to take: and when my trembling mind
Was by pernicious error almost blind,
Misled into divided paths: I then
Offered my self to thy Instruction. When
Thou straightway did embrace my tender youth
In thy Socratique bosom: and the truth
Of Thy rule well-appli'd, skillful to draw
Feeble inclining minds to reasons law,
Showed me intorted manners: and my mind
Was pressed by reason, thoroughly confined
To learned precepts, strove to be overcome;
And took a Fair form from Thy skillful thombe.
For I remember often I with delight
Have spent long days with Thee: and of the Night
Have borrowed the first hours, feasting with Thee
On the choice dainties of Philosophy.
One work we wrought: we rested both one rest:
Mixing severenesse, with a Modest jest.
For doubt not, both our birth-daies ioin'd in one
Sure league, drawn from one constellation:
Or the unchanged Parca weighed our time
With an even balance: or that first, that prime
Birth-howre of us true friends did blessedly
Place our embracing fates in Gemini:
And heavy Saturnes stern malignitie
Was broke by our good Jove's benignity.
I know not What, but sure Some Star I see,
Which inwardly disposes me towrds Thee.
Yet there is a thousand sorts of men: and strange
Variety does humane actions change.
Each has his several will: nor do All live
With One desire, For, One his mind does give
To Merchandising, and with care does run
Out to the East under the rising Sun,
To get rough pepper, and pale Cummin seed
For Roman wares Another loves to feed
His panch, and then swell with destilling sleep;
A third does Mars-field wrastlings duly keep;
A fourth turns banke-rupt by the desperate die;
A fifth grows rotten by damned Venerie.
But when the knottie hand-gout has once broke
Their joints, as th'boughes of some decayed oak:
Anger and grief do then begin a strife
Within them, for their base and durtie life
Now spent: when now, but now too late, they look
Upon the life they wretchedly forsook.
But Thou in learned writings do by night
Grow pale. Thou make it thy chief delight
To sow young purged ears with fruitful truths,
With good Cleanthes fruit. Draw Hence ye youths,
Ye old men, for your selves, some Certain end:
^ome helps from cares your old age to defend.
To Morrow we will do this. He brings them in answering for themselves and then
be replies a^ine unto them.
Alas! you will do
The same, tomorrow. 'Why ask we of you
^o much, to wit, only One Day? Another answer of theirs, with his own reply.
But when
The Third day comes, we have consumed then
Tomorrow Yesterday: and thus to borrow
Of time, though yet to come, still one To-morrow^
Will secretly drive out our Years at last,
When Every day a New day will be past,
Never to be recovered. For Thou Wheel
Which do about the Second Axle reele
Hindermost, may in vain strive to overtake
The First still turning forward, which does make
Like have, with equal swiftnes: though thou be
Hard by it placed under the selfsame tree.
Whos'ever then True Liberty would gain,
Let him embrace Philosophy: for vain
Is Other freedom; Such, to wit, whereby
Any new Publius may familiarly
In his (the Veline) tribe course corn demand
By bringing but his Token in his hand.
O men barraine of truth, that think they can
Make, with a Turning, a Quiritian!
Here Is Dama a base horse-keeper not worth
Three halfe-pence, a mere sot, that cannot look forth
From out the mist of Jgnorance, and one
Who Will lie even for the least occasion,
For horse-bread; whom if 's Master turn about,
IN the moment of the Whirling he goes out
Straight, Marcus Dama. The Gods! Dare deny
To trust one, Marcus being surety?
Or, Marcus being judge, art pale with fear
Of Wrong? Marcus said it: then thou may swear
It Is true. Now Marcus seal the Bond. Oh, here is
Brave Liberty and true, which our Cap wears
As well as We! The answer of Dama now Manumiss'd.
Why is there any free,
But he, the which does live at Liberty?
I live at liberty, and am not I
More free then Brutus then? The reply of Persius.
Oh here stands by
A well-taught Stoic, whose more purged ear
Is washed, as 'twere, with Truths sharp vinegar,
That says, I grant the First; but where you say,
J live at Liberty, take That away.
Another answer of Dama.
Why? since I came from the Praetors rod Mine Own
Free man, I Will Now be subject unto none;
And why may n't I do with full liberty
Whats'e're A famous Lawyer, and afterward a Knight of Rome.
Masurius does not deny?
Another reply of Persius.
Oh, learn: but this thine anger first depose,
And let fall from thy too-much-wrinkled nose,
Thy rugged scoff? whilst from thy lunges I pull
These old wives tales, of which thy breast's Yet full.
It was not in the Praetors power to give
Pure Wisdom unto Fools, or make Them live
By Reasons rule. No; thou shall sooner fit
Unto the harp, a rough rude soldiers wit.
Against which Reason does stand, and secretly
Whispers him in the ear, and says, Fie, Fie:
Never attempt what thou can nere reach to,
And only spoil, whilst thou do strive to do.
The law of man and nature both deny
Weak Ignorance the privilege to try
Forbidden things. Do Thou mix Hellebore
For a sick patient, who never tri'd'st before
To weigh 't exactly to a Dram? The art
Of Physic bids thee not-dare act This part.
If a rude high-shooed clown offer to steer
A ship, not knowing his guide Lucifer:
The Sea-God Melicerta may exclame.
The brow of modesty has lost all shame?
Has virtues art taught thee to walk upright?
And can thou with a perspicacious sight
Discern the Show of Truth from truth? Do know
Counterfaite gold by th'Sound? and can thou show
What things to follow, what things to decline,
The first with Chaulke, the last with Coal to sign?
Art of confined desires? have thou a small
And pretty well-trimm'd house? art kind to all
Thy friends? can wisely sometimes Shut thy store,
Sometimes Open thy garners to the poor,
And with a pure affection unhurt
Can thou pass over money An allusion to the sport that children used: who
tying a piece of money to the end of a string, would cover the string with dirt
and let the money be seen, which, when any greedy fellow passing by, would
stoop to take up, they would plucke-in the string; and so delude him.
fixed in the dirt?
Nor, as a greedy glutton, love to lick
Mercuriall spittle, which does use to stick
Upon the lips of Niggards? When as all
These things thou may thine own most truly call;
Then, Oh be wise, enjoy true Liberty,
The Praetors, yea, and great Joue blessing thee.
But Thou but the other day of Our degree,
Retaining still thy Old skin, being free
Only in a smooth brow, that outward part,
Deep subtilty lurking in thy foul heart:
The Liberty I gave thee, I again
Recall, and do tie Shorter Now thy chain.
For Reason unto Thee does Nothing lend:
Lift but thy Ramirez (in his Commentary on Martial: lib. 1. Epig. 1.) would
persuade us that this place is meant de Medio digito, but his exposition is
somewhat rank, and J will justly oppose him with that discreet admonition of
Turnebus (Advers. lib. 23. cap. 23.) Non sunt tam ex alto ducendi sensus, de
quibus poeta nihil cogitarit.
Finger up, thou do offend;
And what is so small? But, thou shall nere obtain
By any francke-incense, that the Least Grain
Of wisdom shall ere rest within a fool:
To mix These Two, is against Natures rule.
Nor shall thou, thou remaining a Clown still,
Ere dance three measures with Bathyllus skill.
^^'me Free. An other reply of Dama, and the answer of Persius.
How can thou say so, thy affection
Being in vassal'd to the worst subjection?
Know thou no other Master, but he whom
The Manumitting rod did free thee from?
Indeed if Now, one say imperiously
To 's slave; Go, Sir, carry presently
This linen to Crispinus Bathes; do stand
Still, Lazy knave? This his severe command
Does move thee nothing: because now no whip
May scourge Thy Lazy sides, to make Thee skip.
But if within, in thy sick lungs do spring
Headstrong desires, art Thou in any thing
Less servile then, then is such a poor knave,
Whom the whip and fear of's Master made a slave?
Thou lying long in bed, avarice cries,
Up, up, Not yet, say thou: For shame arise,
Cries she; I cannot, thou do reply: Why so,
Says she again? Rise, Rise; do thou not know
What thou should do? Why go to the Sea, bring thence
Fish, Beaver-oile, flax, Eben, franckincense,
And loosning wines of Co; and be the first
To fetch from the Camel, whilst he yet does thirst,
Fresh pepper: exchange somewhat, and forswear
For Gain. O but (alas!) then Jove will hear
Why, fool, if thou will dwell with Joue, thou shall
Striving but to get out one taste of salt,
Boar a hoale through thy oft-lick'd salt-seller.
Well; being got up, thou do (not to defer
To execute her will) provide thy men
Bags for to lay their clothes in, and then
Lai'st-in wine, with such other things thou know
Are fit for Navigation: then straight go
To ship; where nothing hinders thee to sail
Over the Aegaean Sea with a full gaile,
But Luxury. That does seduce thy weak
Vnstayednesse, and thus with art does speak.
Whether, Oh whether madman, do thou run?
Whether? What lackst thou? What would thou have done?
( These two lines, the Poet interiects in his own person.
And now thy hot breast with strong ire does swell,
Which a whole pot of Hemlock can scarce quell.)
Will Thou pass ore the Seas? Will Thou ere eat
Thy Supper, making a Stretched Rope thy seat?
Shall a broad-bottom'd tankard that does st^^ke
Of pitch, fume out the wine, that Thou must drink?
Nay, vile ruddie Veientane wine? striv'st thou
To make thy laboring money sweat forth now
Eleav'n in twelve, the which did Here obtain
Never above Five in Twelve, a modest gain?
Come, come: cherish thy Genius: let us be free
TO enjoy a full delight: for without Me
Life is Not: and remember that ere long.
Thou shall be but a Ghost, dust, and the song
OF the People. Think how thou by death shall pass
Away, like Time. This which I Have Spoke, It was.
What do thou now? Two hooks a double way
Now draw thee; Will thou this, or I his obey?
Thou must be slave to both alternately:
Now serving Avarice, now Luxury.
Nor may thou, if thou do for Once withstand
Their instant and importunate command,
Say straight, I Have broake their bands; For, lo,
A dog by tugging breaks his knot, just so,
Who, though he run away and bite and strain,
Yet at his neck does traile much of his chain.
Chaerestratus in serious meditation
Biting his nail to the quick through deep vexation
Says to his man; Davus, I now intend
All my fore-passed greefes and Love to end;
Believe me. For shall I be still a shame,
Unto my sober careful friends good name?
Shall I spend all my stock with infamy
At the lewd threshold of a Stews? Shall I
Drunk before Chrysis 'nointed moist doors stand
Singing, my torch extinguished in my hand?
O Davus his rejoicing at his Masters promised reformation.
rare young Master! Be hence-forward wise:
And offer up a lamb in sacrifice,
To thy protecting Gods. The interrogation of Chaerestratus to his servant
Davus.
But do believe
Davus, if I forsake her, that she will grieve?
Davus his indignation, at his Masters weak inconstancy.
Do trifle, Idle boy? Then she shall break
Thy pate with her red pantofle, and wreake
Her spite upon thee, that thou shall not dare
To quake, nor bite her fast-entangling snare.
Thou Art Now averse and violent; but when
She shall perchance but call thee: thou wilt say then,
I come straightwaies; for, why? what should I do?
Sha'n't I go to my Love, when She does Woo,
And Sends for me? But if thou can Now, Now
Redeem thy self All and Entire; Thou, Thou
Art that thrise-happy man, that only He
Whom Only, We judge to be Truly free.
Not he, over whom the foolish Lictor wagges
His rod, and of him, as His Freeman bragges.
For, Oh, can he be truly called his own
Whom Candidate Chaulkie Ambition
Draws gaping to Her lure? To whom she cries,
The words of Ambition.
Unto thy Clients salutations rise
By time, and give a lib'rall doale of pease
Unto the scrambling multitude: that these
Our large Floralia may be made the talk
Of Aged men hereafter as they walk
In the warm Sun; For what can be More brave?
These words are spoken in the person of Persius.
And art not Superstitious to have
On Herod's birthday, many candles placed
In order in the oild window, much defaced
By the fat clowd the which they vomit out,
Though with sweet violets they are decked about;
And to have a Tunies tail, as 'twe^e to swim
In a red dish, thy white bowl full to the brimme
With wine, yet do nor fast till night, and pray
All the Jews circumcised Saboth-day?
Then with Hobgoblins, and the feigned fear
Of danger from a cracked egg, and the austere
Grave Priests of Cybell, and the one-eied maid
Of Isis with her timbrell, thou art dismayed.
And think the Gods will puff with some disease
Thy swelling skin: if thou shall them displease:
Refusing by their grave rules to be led,
To taste each morn three times a Garlicke-head.
And say thou yet, thou live at liberty,
Being subject to the extremest vanity?
Yet speak this, which the Gods do know, is true,
Amongst full-veind Soldiers: what would straight ensue?
Some vast Volpenius with a full deep throat
Would bellow out a laugh, in a base note:
And ten times ten Philosophers of Greece
Would scarcely prize at a clipped Ten-groates piece.

THE SIXTH AND LAST SATIRE TO his friend Caesius Bassus a Lyrique Poet.
Argument.
The pining Niggards fruitless care,
To feed the lust of his lewd heir.
NOw, Bassus has the cold made thee retire
Thy self, this winter, to the Sabine fire?
Do thy old harp and strings live to thee still,
Sounding loud music with a stiffer quill?
Great workman! whose blessed Muse sweet lines affordes,
Full of the Native beauty of Old words:
And on the Roman harp with happiness
Of skill, a masculine, strong sound t^ express:
Now playing young men's sports, now playing some
Brave Old men's actions, with an honest thombe.
The warm Ligurian shore grows hot to Me:
And I Am now winterd at my Native Sea;
Where the rocks yield a shore to them that sail
And where the haven into a large vale
Retires it self. It Is fairly worth the sight,
The port of Luna, full of much delight.
Thus said wise Ennius Aft'r h' had dreamd he was
Homer, the fifth formed by Pythagoras
His Peacockes soul. Here I retired live free
From caring what the People think of me:
And what the unlucky South Wind does prepare
For cattle; Nor do I take grief or care
If that my neighbors field's more fat then mine.
Let all poore-borne grow rich, I Will never pine
With stooping age, for That: or want good cheer:
Or touch the sign of dreggy sealed beer
In a hoar'd flaggon. Yet another may
Dissent from this. For often the same birthday
Has an Ascendent strongly influent
Producing even in twins a different
Yea an opposed Genius. For the one
Warily with great circumspection,
And on his Birthday only, dips his dry
Course herbs in brinish sauce, which he does buy
In a small cup, His Own self Sprinkeling
His dish with Pepper as a Holy thing.
The other a brave boy courageously
Spends his large portion in luxury
On his consuming tooth. But as for Mine,
I Will Use it: yet nere let my Freedmen dine
With Turbets: nor be curious-mouth'd to know
But by the taste if 't be a Thrush or not.
Proportion thy expenses by thy gain:
And grind out freely (for thou may) thy grain
Laid up within thy barnes. What should thou fear?
But harrow, and behold straight will appear
Another harvest. The covetous man's pretended reason in defense of himself.
Why, I Would thus spend,
But Duty hinders me. For my poor friend,
His ship being split, held by the Brutian
Sharp rocks; and buried in the Jonian
Rough waves all his estate, and his deaf cries
Neglected by the Gods: and himself lies
Upon the shore with his great Gods, which he
Caught from his broken ship, whose ribs now be
Exposed unto the Cormorant. Persius his reply.
Nay, Now
Give him some of thy Land: and do not thou
Think thou can be Too free; Let him not lack,
Wandering with a Green The table of his shipwreck
Table at his back.
But if thou' impair thy wealth, thy angered heir
Of thy last funerall-feast will take small care:
And with neglect into thy vrne will throw
Thy bones without perfumes, careless to know
Whether he buy dull-smelling Cinnamum,
Or Casia corrupt with Cherry-gumme.
He Will say. What do thou idly spend thy wealth.
My portion, being in thy perfect Health?
But more; I Am sure there is thriftie Bestius
Does press your learned Grecian Doctors, thus;
Thus it is, since your Fond Liberality,
Rather Thus with the most accurate Interpreters, J render Maris Expers, taking
Maris for the genitive case of Mas, not of Mare; For then there were a manifest
contradiction in the sense; because presently after, he says, it came from
Greece, and so by consequent, over the Sea.
emasculate soft Luxury,
With pepper, dates, and other ware has come
From your lewd Greece unto our City Rome,
Our very Mowers do with too much oil
Their ancient wholesome meat Sawcily spoil.
Persius here answers to the objection, which he himself brought for the
covetous man.
But fearst these things beyond thy Graue-Draw near,
Thou whosoere shall be My heir, and hear:
And that into our talk none may intrude,
Let us retire from the thick multitude.
My friend, know not the news? Caesar has sent
A Laurel for a sign and ornament
Of his great conquest over Germany:
And the cold ashes which before did lie
Upon the Altars, are now swept away:
And with great care and joy The Emperor Caligula's wife makes all things
ready for the triumph.
Caesonia
Fixes the conquered Kings armor of proof
And all their weapons to the temples roof:
Clads all the captives in a durt-browne freise:
Places the Rheni of a huge vast size:
And orders all their coaches: Wherefore I
Will bring for this so happy victory
The Romans counted their Fencers-shewes and Plays a part of their Religion;
as Turnebus well observes, in his Advers. lib. 39. cap. 7. p. 1093.
To the Gods and our great Captains Genius
A hundred pair of fencers. I being thus
Freely disposed, who does forbid? Dare Thou?
Woe, if thou yeeld'st not. Say, that I Am pleased now
Upon the people to bestow a doale
Of oil and flesh-pies: do thou dare control?
Speak out, and plainly. Why, your land, thou wilt say,
Is not so fat, so bonelesse, but I may,
For any cause I see, not greatly care,
Whether or not, you do make Me your Heir.
Well then, scorn Thou my Love; yet thus much know:
Enough will be my heir, and thank me too.
For were none of my fathers sisters left:
No cousen-germane: or were I bereft
Of all my vnkle's neece's daughters: say,
My mothers sister had di'd barraine: nay,
That none sprung from my grandame did surviue:
Briefly, that not one kinsman were alive:
I Will go but to These were places not far from Rome, where beggars used to
ask alms of passengers.
Bovillae, or the These were places not far from Rome, where beggars used to
ask alms of passengers.
hill
Of Virbius, where stands ready still,
Poor Mannius: He shall be my heir. The interrogation of his covetous heir,
and the reply of Persius.
What He?
A son of the Earth? Obscure? The interrogation of his covetous heir, and
the reply of Persius.
Why ask of Me,
Who was my fourth Forefather, I cannot Well
And Readily declare; though I Can tell.
But if you 'de know His father, and again
That fathers father: sure you must remain
Satisfied thus; That He did draw His birth
Immediately from his mother earth;
And so at last, you will find Mannius to be
By right of kin, great uncle unto Me.
Yet why at all should Thou indeed desire
To be my Heir, when thou might be my Sire
For Age? and why should thou demand of Me
My torch, when I in An allusion to the race celebrated in honor of
Prometheus, where the first running with a torch in his hand, when he was
weary, gave it to the next after him.
course run After Thee?
Yet if thou be my heir, me thinks, thou oughtst
To be content, with what thou never bought'st*
I Am Mercury, and come, to Thee, a God,
As he is With a purse of money in his hand.
Painted. With a churlish nod
Scorn'st my free offer? Wilt not thou be glad
For what is left? The murmuring objection of his covetous heir, and the reply
of Persius.
Why, heeres not all You had
Left to You by Your father. The murmuring objection of his covetous heir, and
the reply of Persius.
True indeed.
Much I did spend on mine own proper need.
But, briefly, this is all is left: which All
I Will Give to thee; And do not thou now brawle
Unkindly with me: neither ask me where
Is that which Tadius left me: and never
Give me hard words, as fathers drawing nigh
Their end, do give their sons before they die;
Saying, See thou put out the Principal:
And spend but of the Use: let That be all.
One murmuring interrogation more, of his greedy heir; and the reply of
Persius full of indignation.
But yet, What Is Left? One murmuring interrogation more, of his greedy heir;
and the reply of Persius full of indignation.
What Is left? Now lib'rally
Pow're boy, pow're oil upon my herbs. Shall I
Upon a high festival day, be fed
With a sod nettle, and a lean swines head
Hung up i'th'smoake by the ear; unto the end
This lewd knave may My goods hereafter spend?
And filled with dainty jiblets, without shame
Lewdly embrace a soft Patrician Dame;
When as his wayward, full-swolne, chiding vein;
With an uncertain lust does sob again?
Shall I be like the warpe of bare cloth, that
To him a strutting panch may quagge with fat?
A satiricall Irony in the person of some Third Speaker.
Oh, sell thy Soul for Gain, to leave thy heir
Wealthy: and so thou gettest by thy ware,
Never care how honestly. Sift every coast
Of the whole world, that thou may truly boast,
No man feeds fatter Cappadocian knaves
In a rough cage, then are Thy lusty slaves.
Double thy wealth. The answer of Persius.
It Is done; nay't has increased
Three, four, ten-fold as much. Yet scarce is ceased
And now, where likewise I may rest, design,
Chrysippus, thou that did Thy Sorites, of which kind of Argumentation,
Chrysippus was the Author.
heap confine.
THE END OF PERSIVS.
AN APOSTROPHE OF THE TRANslatour to his Author Persius.
THou art Redeemed; Nor has the Fate of Time
And Vice seized on thy glory. The Worst crime
Which does o'recloud the Guilty, adds to Thee
A Luster, which out shines obscurity.
Who thought not, that the Great-borne Spirit of Rome
Had lien overwhelmed in her Last Brutus tomb?
Yet did it Not: but did at last bring forth
Thee, the Example of her Ancient worth.
Jn whom, had Vesta's fire by which Rome Stood
Been out, there might have yet been found as good.
Mount then, thou purer fire, and let thy heat
Strongly exhale from their infectious seat
The envenomed fogges of vice; And then inflame
Them, that they may be lights to their Own shame;
Which, as a Comet, may affright the earth
With horror, at its own prodigious birth;
And, with its darting tail threatening dread
Vengeance, point-out to wrath each guilty head.
Be thou the Vestall fire, thy Priest I Will be,
And consecrate my vigilance to Thee.
Be thou the enlifening Sun, I Will be the Earth,
And offer up to Thee this grateful birth
Of thanks: which thus now given, though straight it Die,
It has lived Ages in its Infancy.
Action, not Time, does number age. Who gives
A just praise to great Virtues Patron, lives
Himself by his just Gratitude. Let Spite
Then do its worst, and with eternal night
Labor to clowd my name. Obscure to lie
With Virtue, is an immortality.
THis lash has but Six knots: but see thou mend;
Or peradventure Else I shall intend.
(Although my Angry Muse says She will be
No more thus Wit-bound, thus Tongue-tied, not She)
To come in Fury; and thee Naked strippe;
And Scourge thee with a Sixteene-knotted whippe.
FINIS.

