A GODLY AND LEARned Exposition or Commentary upon the three first Chapters of
the Revelation. PREACHED IN CAMBRIDGE BY that reverend and judicious Divine,
master WILLIAM PERKINS, Ann. Dom. 1595. First published for the benefit of
Gods Church, by ROBERT HILL, Bachelor of Divinity. The second Edition reuised
and enlarged after a more perfect copy, at the request of M. PERKINS
executors, by THOMAS PIERSON, Preacher of Gods word. Hereunto is prefixed an
Analysis of the Vision in these three Chapters: And a twofold Table added; one
of places of Scripture: the other of special points to be observed.

PROVE. 13.9. and PROVE. 4.18. The light of the righteous rejoices by increase,
shining more and more unto the perfect day: But the candle of the wicked shall
be put out.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Jslip for Cuthbert Burbie, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Swan. 1606.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL AND VIRTUOUS Lady, the Lady ELIZABETH MONTAGV of
Hemington in Northamptonshire; Grace and Peace.
JUST cause there was (Right worshipful) as well in respect of the reverend
Author, whose rest is now in glory; as also of the godly Reader, whose good
herein claims special stroke; that some refining hand should recommend unto
the Church of God, a more perfect coppie of this godly Exposition, than the
first edition hereof did afford: and yet no cause I find, why your worthy
children, who no doubt for the Authors sake, did more gratefully accept the
former dedication, should by me be deprived of their right: Nay rather, as they
in heart (I am persuaded) did highly honor the Author, for his double labor in
Christ's vineyard; so do I rejoice, this recompense is returned for their love,
That with this work, their memory with posterity shall long endure. And since
my pains herein yields me this right, to make choice of some, to whom I also
may commend the patronage hereof; I presume to present the same unto your
Ladyship. If this be any kindness on my behalf, I confess it is far short
of your desert, and of my desire: some others (I know) may challenge me herein,
as unmindful of their love; yet because God may offer me opportunity
hereafter, to give them good content this way, I will entreat their patience
for this time, that I may join the mother with the children, in this work of
love, to afford tuition to these godly labors of the dead. It fits you best
(good Madam) in many respects, for neither will your children complain of your
admission into the society of their right, nor you esteem the lesser hereof,
because of their claim hereto by former possession. They are your own, and
you theirs; this comes unto you all, as unto one, accounting your united love
for greater safety: and look what grace it finds by your protection, like
grace it yields by many a good instruction. Solomon says, Prou. 13.15.
Good understanding makes acceptable, (meaning to such as fear God, for Prou.
1.22.
fools hate knowledge) how welcome then will this be unto you, who Prou. 7.4.
have said unto Wisdom, thou art my sister, and do esteem the words of her
mouth, Ier. 15.16.
The joy and rejoicing of your heart; since herein you shall find on every
leaf, some pleasant fruit of the tree of life: a taste whereof I will here set
before you, that you may judge the better of the store. When the Disciples
hearts were full of grief for Christ's departure then at hand, Philip said unto
him in the name of all, Ioh. 14.8.
Show us the father and it suffices. Lo Chap. 1. ver. 4*
here, behold and you shall see, not the father alone, but with the father, the
spirit of grace; and with them both the Verse. ^.
Son of God, so lively described to your view, that you may truly say of this
knowledge (God sanctifying the same unto your soul) Ioh. 17.^.
It is eternal life* When Christ would harten his Disciples for the great
work of their ministry, he does it by the promise of his presence, saying,
Mat. 28 20.
Be hold I am with you always. The evidence and fruit whereof, you shall Verse.
1^.
hereby so well perceive, that hereupon I trust, both you and many more, will
learn to say with David in temptation, Psalm. 16.8.
I have set the Lord before me always; for he is at my right hand, therefore I
shall not slide: And with Jeremy in affliction, Ier. 20.11.
The Lord is with me like a mighty Giant, therefore my persecutors shall be
overthrown, and shall not prevail. What shall I say more? It would be too
long to speak of the dignity of Christ's Church and ministry here handled at
large: and to instance in particulars through the seven Epistles to these seven
Churches of Asia: only this, in the Preface of each Epistle learn what Christ
is in himself, and to his Church; In the Matter, behold the state of every
Church, and see what Christ approves, and what his soul detesteth; In the
Conclusion, see his bounty toward his children, and the duty of all to him
again. The handling of these things will much delight your Christian heart:
for beside the 1. Cor. 2.4.
Plain evidence of the spirit, in opening the text, which is best pleasing
unto God, and most profitable to his Church (wherein this godly Author had a
special grace) the application is so fit and pertinent to our times, that I
had welnigh said, He did foresee what we now behold; and has foretold, what we
for our lukewarmenesse, and decay in love, may justly fear: 2. Tim. 1.7.
Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things. Hold
fast that which you have, be faithful unto death, and the Lord will give you
the crown of life, Heb. 6.10.
For God is not unrighteous, that he should forget your works and labor of
love, which you have showed toward his name, in that you have ministered unto
the saints, and yet do minister. Now the God of hope, Rom 15.13.
fill you with all joy and peace in believing, and increase your joy by the
constant 2. Ioh. 4.
walking of your children in the truth: Yea the same Lord, 2. Co^ 9.^.
make all grace so to abound toward you all, that always having all
sufficiency in all things, you may abound in every good work, Philip. 1.11.
which is by Jesus Christ unto the praise and glory of God; unto whose
gracious protection both now and ever, I humbly commend your Ladyship, with
your godly family.

London, December 10. 1606. Your Ladyships to command, Thomas Pierson.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir Edward Montagu, Sir Walter Montagu, Sir Henry
Montagu, and Sir Charles Montagu, Knights, M. James Montagu, Doctor of
Divinity, Deane of his Majesty's Chapel, and M. Sidney Montagu Esquire, the
Lady Susan Sandys, and the Lady Theodosia Capel, children of that right
worthy and religious Sir Edward Montagu of Bowghton in the County of
North-hampton Knight, and of the Lady Elizabeth his worthy wife, sister to
the right Honorable Sir John Harington, Baron of Exton, and father to the
virtuous Lady the Countess of Bedford, Grace and Peace.
RIght Worshipful, as the Patriarch Jacob had Genesis 42.1 ^.
twelve sons, so Christ the Messiah had Mat. 10.1.
twelve disciples: but as Joseph was beloved above Genesis 37.3.
all those sons; so John was beloved above Ioh. 21.
all the disciples. Joseph was apparrelled better than the rest, and John was
inspired far better than the rest. Genesis 41.38.
Had it not been for Joseph Egypt had wanted her food temporal, and had it not
been for John, the Church had wanted her food eternal. Genesis 41.25.
The future state of Egypt was revealed to Joseph, and the future state of the
Church was revealed to John. The one was Genesis 37.4.
exiled, because his father loved him; and the other exiled, because his
master loved him. The place of his exile was into the Revel. 1.9.
Island of Pathmos, being before by Traian put into a vessel of Fasticulus
temperum*
scalding oil. But that God who showed his visions to Genesis 22.12.
Abraham in the mount, Genesis 28.
to Jacob in the field, Genesis 40.
to Joseph in the stocks, Exodus 3.
to Moses in Midian, Ier. 38.14.
to Jeremy in the prison, Dan. 2.
to Daniel in Babylon, Act. 10.
and to the Apostle Peter in the house of a Tanner, even he shows his visions
to John in his exile.

He is not bound to persons, he can advance whom he list, he is not bounden to
place, he can reveal where he list. For persons, he can prefer Gen 4.
Abel before Cain, Mal. 1.
Jacob before Esau, 1. Sam. 16.
David before Eliab, Act. 1.
Matthias before Judas. He can make Exodus ^.10.
Moses a Courtier, Job. 1.1.
Job a Potentate, Act. 7.
Samuel a Judge, 2. Sam. 2.1.
David a King, Prou. 1.1.
Solomon a Sovereign, 1. Kin. 19.19.
Elysha a plowman, Amos 1.1.
Amos a Neat heard, Ierem 1.1.
Jeremy a Priest, Dan. ^.6.
Daniel a Prince, Isay 1.1.
Isaiah of the blood Royal, Math. 9 9.
Matthew a Publicane, Matthew 4.1^.
Peter a Fisher, Acts 1^ 2. Nullum tempus occ^^ri^ Regi.
and Paul a Tent-maker, to be penners and preachers of the word of God. For
place, as no time can prescribe against the King of a nation, so no place can
prescribe against this King of all nations. John 5.
The wind blows where it lists, and the Spirit works where it lists.

It pleased Christ, who is called in this Revelation, 1. Reu. cap. 15.
that faithful witness, that first begotten of the dead, V^rs. 8.
that Prince of the kings of the earth, Verse. 18.
Alpha and Omega, the first and last, Ve^s. 16.
he that has the keys of hell and of death, Verse. 14.
which has that sharp sword, Verse. 15.
his eyes like fire, Chap 2.1.
his feet like brass, Chap. 3.1.
the seven Spirits of God, the seven Stars in his hand, Ve^s. 7.
the key of David, who is called here Verse. 14.
Amen, the beginning of the creatures of God; and in Daniel, he that Dan. ^.22.
reuealeth secrets, it pleased this Christ to reveal secrets to John. Not by
dream as to Genesis 28.
Jacob, or apparition, as to Exodus 3.
Moses, or by voice as Genesis 3
to Adam; but partly by vision, and partly by voice, as he did when he turned
Acts 9.
Saul into Paul. This John was Legatus a Latere, that ambassador who leaned
on his Lords breast. He writes Christ's history, there he shows his love to
Christ: he writes the Churches history, (...) Gospel. (...) Revelation
there Christ shows his love to him: especially in this, that he will do
nothing, which he does not reveal to his Amos 3 7.
servant this Prophet. For the Church in his time, we may see how it stood, in
the three first Chapters: and what condition it should have for the time to
come, it is plainly set down in the rest of this book. The co^te^ts of the
whole Revelation.
If we respect the general estate of the Church, after John had described the
authors of this Revelation, which are God the Father, chap. 4. and Christ his
Son, chap. 5. he comes to the works of God, which are predictions, chap.
6. obsignations, chap. 7. indignations, chap. 8, 9. Predictions of things to
come, obsignations of such as must be saved, and indignation on things to be
destroyed. And for the more particular estate of the Church, having (chap. 10.)
showed his warrant to write, he comes to her actions: first, in her Prophets:
secondly, in her body. In her Prophets, their fighting, falling, rising, chap.
11. In her body, comparing her to a woman clothed with the Sun, chap. 12.
and describing her by her combats, conquests, triumphs: her combats defensive,
chap. 13. and offensive in Christ, by words, chap. 14. threatenings, chap. 15.
and judgments, chap. 16. her victories gotten against that The Church of Rome.
whore, chap. 17. and 18. the The Roman Emp^re.
Beast, chap. 19. and the The d^^^ll.
Dragon, chap. 20. And all that glory which she shall have in the kingdom of
God, is under the type of Jerusalem most comfortably set down, chap. 21.22.

The things in this book were (I grant) very dark to them that lived in the
days of John, as the Prophecy of Daniel was to them who lived in the time of
Daniel. But as that Prophecy being fulfilled, we can now tell what was
foretold in it: so many things being fulfilled which were foretold in this
book, we may easily see what is meant by it: and the posterity to come shall
better understand this book than we do, because it may be all things are
not yet fulfilled. Neither is this book like the cities of the Number. 13.
Anakims, or the Genesis 3.
tree of knowledge which may not be reached to: for Revel. 1.3.
blessed is he that reads the words of this book. But to come to these
three Chapters written by John surnamed the Divine, and expounded by one a most
worthy Divine. The first Chapter is a Proeme or Preface to the book: the two
latter are Epistles dedicating this book. The dedication is made to Revel. 2.3.
seven several Churches, and by name to the Ministers which are called Angels.
In the word of God Ministers have many excellent titles given them, (though now
they are scarcely graced with titles) they are called Genesis 20.
Prophets, 1. Sam. 9.^.
Seers, 2 Pet. 1.13.
Remembrancers, Isa. 58.1.
Trumpets, Ex. 3.1.
Watchmen, Cor. 3.
Husbandmen, Luke 12.14.
Stewards, Prou. 9.4.
Maidens, Ezec. 47.
Fishers, Ma^h. 23.24.
Leaders, 1. Pet 5.1.
Elders, Mar. 9.50.
Salt, Dan. 12.2.
Stars, 1. Cor. 11.10.
Angels, and Ezec 14.2.
Shepherds. Prophets to teach, Seers to foretell, Remembrancers to put in
mind, Trumpets to sound, Watchmen to admonish, Husbandmen to plow up, Stewards
to distribute, Maidens to keep pure the doctrine of truth, Fishers to catch
men, Leaders to go before, Elders to govern, Salt to season, Stars to give
light, Angels to declare, and Shepherds to feed: to feed (I say) soundly by
doctrine, liberally by charity, and religiously by life. By doctrine: for
Sacerdos sine doctrina, est nauis sine velis, a Priest without knowledge, is a
ship without sails. By liberality: for Naz. in ora. de pauper.
Nihil habet homo adeo diuinum quam benefacere, Man is in nothing more like
God, than in doing good. By life: for cuius vita despicitur, eius oration
contemnitur: his words are not esteemed, whose life is not approved. And that
it may be said of them as it was of Origin: Quale habuit verbum, talem habuit
vitam: as his words were, so were his works. They must not be barren like
mount 2. Sam. 1.21.
Gilboah, but 1. Sa. 1.24.
weaned as Samuel was, before they be offered unto the Lord They must be pure
water if they will cleanse others, and more than whetstones, if they will
sharpen others. They must be in Genesis 19.
integrity Abraham's, Number. 12.3.
in meekness Moses, Exodus 4.14.
in knowledge Arons, 2. Cor. 11.23.
in pains Paul's, 1. Sam. 12.
and in praying Samuels: and remember, that as Augustine said, Manus pauperum
sunt gazophylacium Christi, The hands of the poor are the treasury of Christ.
I need not speak much of the duty of a Minister: for every one will teach him
his duty, that will not be ranged within any duty himself.

These Churches were then like 1. Chr. 12.14.
David's Worthies, excellent above all the Churches of the world: but because
they lost their first Revel. 2.4.
love, Verse. 10.
were not faithful to the death, Verse. 14.
maintained the doctrine of Balaam, Verse. 20.
suffered women to teach, Cap. 3.1.
bare a name only to live, Verse. 8.
had but a little strength, Verse. 16.
were neither hot nor cold, and Cap. 2.21.
repented not as they should have done, of all their sins, they are
reprehended by John, threatened by Christ, and the Candlestick of the Gospel
is now taken away from them. Iam seges est vbi Troia fuit: Now Mahomet rages,
where Messiah did reign. Are they reprehended? let us hearken: are they
threatened? let us fear: are they fallen? let us labor to continue. From
John's reprehension we see, that (as one said) hereof our Elders have
complained, hereof do we complain, Seneca.
and hereof they which live after us will complain, that men wax worse, and
live not according to the doctrine of Gods word. From Christ's threatening we
see, that God is merciful, Deuteronomy. 20 10.
who first offers peace before he fight against us, that we being forewarned,
might be forearmed. And by the woeful downfall of these seven Churches, let 1.
Cor. 10.12.
us that stand take heed that we fall not: for if God spared not the 2. Pet. 2.
old world who despised Noah, the Sodomites who vexed Lot, Mat. 23.3^.
Jerusalem which abused the Prophets, Orosius says that these cities for (...)
cause, fell by an earthquake.
Colossa, Hierapolis, and Laodicea, who rejected Paul, and these Asian
Churches who did not grow in righteousness as they did in riches, how shall
we escape Heb. 2.3.
if we neglect so great salvation? and for this cause these Sermons are most
worthy to be considered of in this present age. O then let us now Romans 13.
consider this season: Romans 12.11.
redeem the opportunity, Heb. 3. and Psalm. 95.
not harden our hearts, but regard the time of our present visitation. As the
day opens and shuts with the Sun, so salvation opens and shuts with
the Gospel. Heb. 3.13.
Whilst it is called to day let us hear his voice: Prou 10 5.
He that labors in Summer is the son of wisdom, but he that sleeps in
harvest is the son of confusion.

All things in the world do take their time, the bird to build her neast, the
husbandman to sow his seed, the mariner to go to sea, the gardener to set his
trees, the sick patient to take physic, the cook to season meats, and the
dresser of the vineyard to gather his fruit. It will be too late to build in
Summer, to sow in harvest, to go to sea when the ship is launched, to
transplant trees when they are old, to take physic when we are dying, to
season meats when they are unsavory, and when winter is come to gather fruit.
The Mat. 25.10.
five foolish virgins came too late, Dives Luke 16.
in hell repents too late, the time present is only ours. Solum tempus
presens est nostrum, Seneca.
Is the fig tree fruitless? it shall hear that sentence, Luke 13.
Never fruit grow on thee any more. Eccl. 18.18.
Get thee then righteousness before thou come to judgment: use Physic
before thou be sick, and whilst thou may yet sin, show thy conversion,
as the wise man exhorts every man. But alas, whereunto shall I liken this
generation? We are like the Ephesians, we have Apoc. 2.
lost our first love; or the Laodiceans, we are Apoc. 3.
neither hot nor cold: or the twilight, neither day nor night: or the Autumn,
neither fair nor foul: or one sick of an ague, one day well, another ill: or
a man in a Lethargy, neither alive nor dead: or Hermaphroditus, neither male
nor female: or to those creatures called (...), which live in water or on land:
or the Lioness, which the oftener she breeds, the fewer cubs she bears:
or the Mariner, who is only good in a storm: or the Marigold, that shuts
and opens with the Sun: or the Mermaids, which are half flesh, half fish.
I would to God we were either hot or cold: that as the hotest regions bring
forth sweetest spices, so most zealous people might be most fruitful in good
works: that as the Sun in the heaven is swiftest at her setting, so the
sons of God might be best at their ending. But is it so? no: the more we
are taught, the more ignorant are many; and the older we are, the colder in
religion. We have indeed many of us, as it was said of Aristogiton, Martem, or
rather religionem in lingua, religion in tongue: but when trial is made of us,
every Plutarch in Ph^cion.
Phoc^on can epsy our halting: and then with Theatrum Philos. lib. 5. cap. 30.
Archilochus we think it better clypeum abiicere quam interire, even to cast
off all religion, than to undergo the least disgrace for religion.

Treatise of Apostacy, cap. 2.
The Moon desiring to be apparelled as the rest of the Planets, answer was made
her, That her diverse chaunges could admit no kind of habit: and we desiring
to be attired with the robes of Christians, it is to be feared, that since we
tread Apoc. 12.1. That is, all earthly vanities.
not the Moon under our feet, we shall never be clothed as the Church was, with
the Apoc. 12.1. That is, Christ the Son of righteousness.
Sun. Ho^. 14.10.
Who is wise, and he shall understand these things; and prudent, and he shall
know them. Let us therefore labor to 1. Pet. 3.19.
grow in grace, to abound in knowledge, to be full of good works, and to
overcome all the underminers of our future salvation. Then shall we See Reu c.
2.23
eat of the tree of life, not be hurt of the second death, taste of the hidden
Manna, have power over nations, be clothed in white, made pillars in Gods
temple, and sit with Christ Jesus in the throne of his father. And though the
1. Sam. 22.7.
son of Ishai cannot make us Captains of thousands, yet that Son of David
will Gal. 3.27.
make us the sons of God. That we may do so, we must believe the Gospel,
put on Christ Jesus, and be renewed by repentance; The first is necessary,
the second comely, the third profitable. To come to the first; it is necessary
we should believe: for he that Ioh. 3.18.
believes not, is condemned already, he is condemned in the counsel of God,
in the ministry of the word, and in his own conscience, and he shall be
condemned in the day of judgment; for Ioh. 3.38.
the wrath of God abides upon him. The more I consider the fruits of faith,
the more I see the necessity of faith. Ephesians. 2.^.
Through it we are saved: Romans 5.1.
by it we are justified: Heb. 1.4.
in it we live. We are saved from Satan, justified before God, and live in the
Church. In the Church? nay, by it we live in heaven: for Ioh. 3.16.
he that believes in the Son of God, has everlasting life. Faith is that
which Act. 15.9.
purifieth the heart, makes the whole man to Psalm. 119.32.
run the ways of Gods commandments, Romans 5.2.
gives entrance to grace, Heb. 10.3.
access to God in prayer, Heb. 11.
made the Elders well reported of, and each Christian to 2. Cor. 1.24.
stand to the profession of Christ. It is that Ephesians. 3.17.
hand by which we must apprehend Christ: that Ephesians. 6.16.
shield by which we resist all the fiery darts of the devil: and that Mat.
^.13.
means by which we do good to others. Gal. 3.7.
By faith we receive the spirit: Romans 8.1.
are members of Christ: Col. 3.12.
we are risen with him: Ephesians. 3.17.
he dwells in our hearts: Ioh. 6.35.
we feed on him continually: 1. Pet. 5.8.
resist Satan: Ioh. 1.13.
are the children of God: Heb. 4.2.
and the word which we hear becomes profitable. And what shall I say? faith
is of such a quality, that it Colos. 2.7.
unites us to Christ, 2. Cor. 13.5. Romans 8.
makes us certain of our salvation, 1. Tim. 3.13.
bold in our profession, ministers Phil. 3.28.
true joy, Mat. 15.28.
gives temporal blessings, Luke 17.19.
sanctifies our gifts, and makes us refuse the Heb. 11 24.
pleasures of this present world. In a word, no sin can condemn him who has
this true faith, and no virtue can save him who wants it.

To come to the second, which is Christ, the object of faith. The most comely
garment that ever we can wear, it is to be covered with the Romans 13.13.
robes of Christ's righteousness. Genesis 27.15.
Jacob was blessed by Esaus garments; and we are blessed by Christ's garments.
What we see through a green glass, seems all to be green: and what God
sees through Christ it is all amiable. We must put on this apparel, not as
the Church in the Canticles: Cant. 5.3. How Christ is to be put on.
I have put off my clothes, how shall I put them on again? or as a gown, that
we cast off when we come to our home: but we must so put him on, that we never
put him off again. We must put him on by imputation, imitation, infusion, and
profession: by imputation of his righteousness, imitation of his virtues,
infusion of his spirit, and profession of his name. Thus we must labor to get
Christ: for what though a man could command the earth with Alexander, the Exodus
14.
sea with Moses, the 2. King. 1.
fire with Eliah, and the Ios. 10.
Sun with Iosuah? What though he were as rich as 1. King. 4.
Solomon, as wise as 2. Sam. 16.23.
Achitophel, as strong as Iud. 16.
Sampson, as swift as 2. Sam. 18.19.
Ahimaaz, as beautiful as 2. Sam. 18.
Absolon, as fortunate as Theatrum Philos. lib. 2. cap. 33.
Metellus, and descended as Phi^. 3.8.
Paul was of the blood royal of Princes, yet having not Christ he has
nothing. Yea say a man had the abstinence of Aristydes, the innocence of
Phocion, the holiness of Socrates, the alms deeds of Cimon, the moderation
of Camillus, the honesty, justice, and faithfulness of both Catoes, all these
out of Christ, were but Augustine.
splendida peccata, and to be esteemed as Phil. 3.10.
dung, in regard of Christ. For have him and have all things, want him and want
all things: he is in, at, and after death advantage. I come to the last, it is
profitable to repent: for if we Ier. 4.1. Reasons of repentance.
turn to the Lord, he will turn to us: and that we may turn, consider his
Rom 2.
mercies in forgiving, his Genesis 30.9.
benefits in giving, his Romans 2.5.
patience in forbearing, and his Isa. 26.9.
judgments in punishing. Act. 17.30.
The word preached, 1. Pet. 4.3.
sins committed, and that Luke 13.24.
few shall be saved: Eccl. 12.1.
the shortness of life, Psalm. 90.12.
the uncertainty of life, Heb. 9.26.
and the certainty of death: 1. Cor. 2.9.
the joys of heaven, Mat. 25.46.
the torments of hell, the Luke 15.10.
comfort of the elect, and that else we can have no Eccles. 41.1.
comfort in death: Ier. 7.
pray we cannot unless we repent, and Luke 13 2. Act. 2.40.
perish we shall unless we repent: but blessed shall we be if we do repent.
But manum de tabula Magister adest: this discourse following will teach us
these things: and it am I bold to present to your worships. John sent his
Revelation to many Churches; and I present his Epistles to many worthy
personages: and to whom may I better present them then to you. John was a
Disciple full of love, and you are brethren full of love. The Preacher of these
Lectures was well known to many, but to none better than to many of you,
especially to those who were in my time worthy members of that most worthy
Christ's college.
College with him. And the rather I do it, that times to come may rejoice in
the Lord, that from one honorable root have issued so many profitable
branches to the Church. You are six brethren as pillars of your house, there
were three sisters as fruitful vines of the same: one is not, but is with the
Lord, and her I knew a Lady of admirable virtues: (...) Ale^a^der. The Lady
Wray.
the other two are, and long may they be so. You are all brethren by nature of
one venture, nation of one country, grace of one spirit, affection of one heart,
fortune in great favor, and of one hope by your holy behavior. And 1. These.
4.9.
concerning brotherly love, I need not to write unto you: for you are taught of
God to love one another. Your Which had (...) sonne^. Plutarke.
Scilurus at his death need not to teach you concord, by giving to each of you
a sheafe of arrows, which cannot well be broken whilst they are conjoined:
for you by your amity make your selves invincible. If The^trum (...). page 294.
Chilo the Lacedemonian died for joy to see one son crowned at Olympus, and
^ul. Gel. lib. ^ (...).
Diagoras Rhodius did the like, when his three children got the garland at a
wrestling: and Genesis 45.28.
Jacob so rejoiced to hear of his son Joseph, to be advanced greatly in the
kingdom of Egypt: how might that happy father of yours rejoice, to see at
one time, one son sitting as high Sheriff of the shire, another preaching
before the Judges of Assize, and the third pleading as Councellor at the bar,
and all the rest of great expectation in the kingdom? Thus Pro. 10.1.
wise sons are a joy to their parents, and all may Psalm. 133.1.
behold how good and comely a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity. Aristotle could say, that parents were not blessed, unless they were
after their death blessed in their children. Lib. 10 (...).
And surely it is no small part of a fathers blessedness, to see his children
like to flourish when he is gone. Nay of all monuments that parents can leave
behind them, there is none (as one says) like to a virtuous son. But all
parents are not to be blessed. Genes. 4.
Adams two sons could not agree in one field, Genesis 21.9.
Abraham's in one house, Genesis 25. ^^atrum gratia rar^^.
Isaaks in one womb, 2. Kin. 1.
David's in one palace, nor Luke 12.13.
two brethren in the division of an inheritance. And though concord amongst
brethren (especially such as divide the inheritance) be very rare, yet do you,
even in this, most comfortably agree. You are not as Simeon and Leui, Romulus
and Remus, Eteocles and Polynices, Atreus and Thyestes, Aeta and Perseus: but
as Castor and Pollux, David and Jonathan, Joseph and Benjamin; and (as a true
friend is described to be) (...).
one soul in two bodies: It seems that as Agrippa the brother of Augustus
was beholding to Salust for that one sentence, Small things increase by
concord, but perish through discord: so you have all learned the same lesson,
as being persuaded, that as the members of a body being once dismembered, they
cannot possibly be joined again: so if natural brethren be once unnaturally
disioyned, no glue will conioyne them fast again. It were infinite to show
examples of brotherly love and hatred, See French Academ page 542, etc.
and othe^s have eased me of this pains. Now that good God, who has brought
you from one root, placed you in one country, advanced you to like credit,
and given you one heart, give you also one inheritance in the kingdom of
heaven. Thus right worshipful, I am bold to speak unto you, and the world
knows I speak the truth, and the Lord knows I desire not to flatter. Go on
therefore I beseech you, continue in love, be settled in the truth, and labor
to honor him who thus honoreth you. Be not carried away with the Lud^mur he
(...) bla^d a fallentis imag^^e mundi.
show of this world, but think religion the best nobility, and that as
Prudentius (...).
Prudentius said: Generosa Christi secta nobilitat viros,
Cui quisquis seruit, ille vere est nobilis.
He noble is that comes of Christ his race:
Who serves this Lord, he surely is not base.
And this made Theodosius more to thank God, H^st Eccles.
that he was a Christian than a king; considering that he must lose the one,
he could not lose the other. Now as to one of you I am bounden in parcicular,
and by him, being a Minister, the despised ministry is not a little graced:
^o for him I pray, M. Doctor Montagu.
that he may be an Genesis 20.
Abraham to our Abimelech, a 2 Samuel 12.
Nathan to our David, a 2. Kin. 11.
Iehoida to our Ioash, Ier. 38.
an Ebedmelech to Jeremiah, an 2. King. 4.1.
Elisha to the widow of this Prophet deceased, a light in the Court, a trumpet
in the Church, and that ^sther. 5.2.
Ahashuerosh may long hold out his golden Scepter unto him: that by his means
(...) regis, deest regibus qu^ verum dicat.
great men may not want such as will tell them the truth: no Plu. in vit^ Alex.
reports, that Jupiters Priests called Alexander by the name of Jupiters son.
earthly Alexander accounted a son of Jupiter, and that no man may be more
respected than a good (...). page 42.
Pastor: and that he may ever remember that saying of wise Solomon: Prou. 22.11.
He that loves pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips the King shall be
his friend. His Cyrus will not be spoken to verbis bissinis in silken words, to
his Alexander he needs not speak (...), either sweet words or no words. For
if one Antiochus might be surnamed holy, and another good Prince called the
Good King: much more may he, whose religious knowledge surpasses all the
Princes that have been of this nation: and whose humility is such, that he
will have his son to remember, (...). page 95. O dictum ver^ regium.
that he differs not in stuff, but in use from the rest of his people, and
that by Gods ordinance. I am the bolder for that one to make choice of all in
the dedication of this book: no man knew, loved, conuersed with, and respected
this Author more than he. He resorted to him in his health, visited him in
sickness, and preached a learned Sermon for him at his death. Concerning this
author, as he said of Carthage, I had rather be silent then say little, and
his worthy labors do speak enough for him, by name that his Problem^
Theologicum.
Posthume, dedicated to his excellent Majesty, by Master Samuel Ward, Fellow
of Immanuel College.
an excellent Divine. In a word therefore, whatsoever this man did, he desired
to profit others by it: he thought (as it is written Author vit^ B^r. l^^. 2.
cap. 4. and 7.
of Bernard in his life) that he was not his own man, but deputed to the
service of others. He was never idle, but as Hieron ad Marcellam.
Hierome reports of Ambrose, and Bernard of himself, he did either read, or
meditate, or pray, or confer, or counsel, or comfort, or write, or preach.
And thus (as the Aliis in^er^i^^s, meipsam consum^.
Emblem is of a faithful Teacher) he, like a wax candle, in giving light to
others, in a short time extinguished himself. Yet in this short time of his,
what art was he not master of? what virtue was he not endued with? He was a
complet Divine, and has his blessings in the Church, that no man's writings are
read of all sorts, and in all countries with greater grace and profit than his.
He was peaceable in the Church, patient of wrongs, and free from ambition. For
as Jerome said of Nepotian, Aurum calcans, schedul^s consectabatur: he
regarded not his purse, but followed his book, and as Bernard said, he lived
in terra auri sine auro, in a kingdom of gold without gold. An excellent gift
he had to define properly, divide exactly, dispute subtly, answer directly,
speak pithily, and write iudicially: and how he preached, if these Sermons
do give a testimony, what witness had they who often heard him themselves? I
have published of his now two Discourses, and I only did it, that these his
labors might not perish: I have no benefit by them, but exceeding great
pains. And since I understand that his other labors are in the hands of his
friends, to make benefit for his children, I will ease my self of the like
labor, and be a means that they may have the benefit of the future
impressions of this book: the which, how faithfully I have published, I
appeal to the godly and indifferent Reader, and I hope no honest minded man
will be hired to calumniate it. Thus as one desirous to be serviceable in my
calling, profitable to the Church, not forgetful of my friend, and to testify
the happiness of your house, which was in your fathers time, and is now (as it
is said of Aurelian the Emperors,) Refertapi^s and Ecclesia Dei, replenished
with the godly, and a Church of God, and withal to leave a monument of my duty
to you all, I have as you see, published this exposition of seven Epistles
under your eight names, nothing doubting but it will be as welcome to you, as
by your countenance it may be profitable to the Church. The God of heaven give
you all that blessing of blessings, Epist. ad Iulianum.
which (if Jerome say true) few men have, that you may transire a deliciis ad
dilicias, go on from grace to grace, and be a long time happy in this life,
and ever for happy in the life to come. London: Saint Martins in the fields,
from my worshipful friend Master Oldisworths house, 2. Tim. 1 16.
by which family (as Paul was by the house of Onesiphorus) in the time of this
late (and I wish I may say) the last visitation, I have received no small
refreshing.

March. 12. 1604. Your Worships to command, Robert Hill: Fellow of S. John's
College in Cambridge.

To the Godly and Christian Reader Grace and Peace.
I Am not ignorant (good Reader) how ungrateful a thing it is, to deal by way
of Censure or reformation, in those things wherein others have gone before; and
many times for the smart that follows, do men beshrow their own fingers. Yet
the warrant of a good calling will breed peace in his conscience, that herein
shall endeavor the observance of these rules of Love, to wit, 1. Cor. 13.5.
Love thinks not evil.
Judge the best of that which is done* and It seeks not her own things.
refer his own pains to the glory of God in the good of others: Hereto I
aim in this second edition of this book. For my calling to this work, when
mine accusers stand forth, the executors of the dead shall answer for my
discharge. And for mine endeavor to do good; the small gain of this reuised
work, was truly returned to the right owners thereof: If thou therefore
return glory to God, for good received to thy soul, in this behalf I have
my desire. Here only rests the doubt, how this second edition should not be
prejudicial to his good estimation that published the former: I answer, well
enough: For I hope he intended See his preface toward the end.
the glory of God in the good of his Church, and the credit of the reverend
Author of this work: Now if any addition be brought hereunto, his intent is
furthered, and wherein then can he be grieved? If one man should help poor
Orphans to some lands or living, he would not think himself wronged by
another, that should enlarge their just claims, or settle their possession in
a better tenure: so I trust it fares in this work; where thou shall find
upon thy diligent view, in some doubtful As touching the Images of the
Trinity, Page 53. Col. 1.
things the Authors meaning truly cleared, his method rectified, many
repetitions omitted, and the matter (specially toward the latter end) somewhat
enlarged. If any thing be dissonant to the Authors judgment in his liue-works
(which I hope thou shall not perceive) rather charge the fault on me through
ignorance, or misunderstanding, than entertain in thy heart the least conceit
of wavering leuitie in so godly, learned, and judicious a Divine, who has so
well deserved of thy love, if thou love the truth. Thus craving thy favorable
acceptance of my helping hand, to do thee good, I end with him, That is the
beginning, and the end: Let him that has an ear hear what the spirit says
unto the Churches.

Thine in him, who is Lord of all, T.P.

A GENERAL ANALYSIS OF the Vision showed to John.
The three first Chapters consist of a Preface, containing the Title of the
book, viz. Apocalypse, or Revelation, described by seven Arguments, verse. 1,
2, 3. Inscription of the vision, wherein is John's Dedication, To the seven
Churches. Verse 4. Salutation, including the Blessings wished for Grace. Verse 4.
Peace. Verse 4.
Authors of them viz. 1. The Father. Verse 4. 2. The Holy ghost. Verse 4. 3. The
Son* who Is described by His offices. Prophetical. Verse. 5. Priestly. Verse. 5.
Kingly. Verse. 5.
The execution of his offices in four works. 1. Loving us. Verse. 5. 2. Washing
away our sins. Verse. 5. 3. Making us kings and priests. Verse. 6. 4. coming
to ^^dgement* Verse. 7.

does confirm the former description* Verse. 8.




A Vision, containing Circumstances four. Person to whom, John. Verse. 9. Place
where, Isle Pathm^^. Verse. 9. Manner how, In a Trance. Verse. 10. Time when, On
the Lords day. Verse. 10.
Parts The entrance into it: containing The means of John's preparation, viz. a
voice set out by The place whence it came. Verse. 10. The greatness of it.
Verse. 10. The matter of it. Verse. 11.
Parts of his preparation. Hearing, noted in the means, Verse. 10. Turning
himself, Verse. 12.

Matter, viz. a representation of Christ in majesty* set out by The place
where John saw him, Verse. 13. His form or figure, in His attire, Verse. 13. The
parts of his body, Verse. 14.15. The properties thereof, Verse. 16.
His actions. 1. A confirmation of John being sore afraid* Verse. 17, 18. 2. A
commandment to write, Verse. 19. 3. The interpretation of the Vision, Verse.
20. 4. Seven several commandments, to write seven Epistles to the seven
Churches. Chap. 2. and 3.






A GODLY AND LEARNED Exposition of the three first Chapters of the Revelation.
REVEL. 1.1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto (...) his
servants things which must shortly be done: which he sent, and showed by his
Angel unto his servant John.

BEfore we come to the words, where in is contained singular matter fit for the
time and age* this question must be handled: Whether this book of the
Revelation be canonical Scripture: for some have heretofore, as also in our
time called the authority of it in question. But we are without all doubt, to
resolve our selves that it is canonical Scripture, of equal authority with the
rest of Gods book. Our reasons be these: first, the doctrine contained in this
book is Apostolical, as any shall perceive which seriously reads the same.
Secondly, the style of this book is Apostolical, that is, plain, simple and
easy, if we consider that the matter thereof is Prophetical. Thirdly, this
book has been approved and received for Canonical by the common consent of
Gods Church in all ages since the days of John, and was never refused of any
whole Church, but only of some private men. Fourthly, the things foretold in
this book, came to pass as they were foretold: as among the rest (in one for
all) may appear by the prophecy of the two beasts; whereof one came out of
the sea, the other out of the earth, Chap. 13. the one prefigured the Roman
Empire, the other the Heretical Apostaticall Church of Rome: both which in all
things are come to pass in these latter ages answerable to the Prophecy.

The contrary reasons brought to improve the authority of this book, are of
no moment. 1. Reason. John names himself sundry times in this book; whereas
in penning the Gospel he did not once mention his own name, though he had just
occasion so to do: therefore, it was not penned by John but by some other, and
published afterward in John's name.

Answ. The reason is not good: for there is great difference between an
history and a Prophecy. The Gospel of John is an history of Christ: now
there is no necessary reason why one man penning the history of another should
name himself. But this book of the Revelation is a Prophecy, in penning
whereof it is more requisite the prophet should put to his own name; so did
the former prophets: Jeremy mentions his name in his book at least an
hundred times, so does Isay and Daniell almost in every chapter. Then seeing
they do it so often* it is no marvel if S. John repeat his name five sundry
times in this whole book.

2. They object, that his style in this book is not the same with that he used
in the penning of the Gospel. Ans. The difference of the style arises from
the difference of the matter, seeing there he writes an history, here he pens
a Prophecy. Again, he writes not his own words, but those which he received
from Christ by particular revelation.

3. They say, this book has been rejected in diverse ages, as not Canonical.
Ans. It cannot be proved that it was ever refused of any whole Church, but of
some particular men. Now the disallowing of any private man, cannot make a whole
book to be rejected: for then the Epistles to the Hebrews of James, and of
John, should not be Canonical; which yet be received of all Churches for the
pure word of God.

Now come to the words, The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto
him, etc. These three first Chapters consist of two parts: A Preface, and a
Vision. The Preface is an entrance to the Vision, contained in the beginning of
the first Chapter, from the first verse to the ninth. The Vision it self is
set down in the rest of these three Chapters. The Preface has two parts:
First, the title of the book: Secondly, the inscription thereof. The title in
the three first verses. The inscription, from the fourth to the ninth verse.
The title in these words, The Revelation of Jesus Christ, etc. A Revelation is
nothing else but a manifestation, or discovery of things secret in respect of
men, for the common good of the Church: and so this word is taken in this place.

Revelations from God in Scripture, were showed three ways: First, by dreams:
Secondly, by vision: Thirdly, by created voice of God face to face: as we may
see, Number. 12.6, 8. Now this was not by dream, nor by vision, or voice alone;
but it is a mixed Revelation, received partly by vision, and partly by voice
uttered in the vision from the Lord.

In the three first verses, this Revelation is described by seven arguments:
First by the author: Secondly, the end: Thirdly, the persons to whom it was
directed: Fourthly, the matter: Fifthly, the instruments: Sixthly, the manner of
delivering it: Seventhly, the fruit of the Revelation. First, the Author is
Jesus Christ: It comes from him, and it is called his Revelation in these
respects: First, not to exclude the father, and the holy Ghost, but to show the
special office of Christ, the second person in Trinity; which is, to reveal,
to publish, and to manifest the will of God the father to his Church: and for
this cause he is called the Mal. 3.1.
Angel of the Covenant, the Man. 23.^.
doctor of the Churh, the 1. Cor. 1.^4
wisdom of the father, and the Ioh. 1.
word of God.

Secondly, it is called the Revelation of Jesus Christ, to teach us to put
difference between this, and all Satanicall Revelations: for as God has his
true Revelations, so Satan (who herein may be called Gods ape) has his
counterfeit visions, and delivers them in show like to gods, but they differ
much: First, the Devils Revelations be for the most part ambiguous, doubtful,
and uncertain in speech and phrase, so as a man cannot tell which way to take
them: But the Revelations which come from Christ, the author of truth who
knows all things, and the reasons of them are certain and in plain terms
delivered. Secondly, the Devil shows his visions to none but to the wicked,
and bad men that be his instruments: But the Lord chooses the godly, which
fear his name, and to them he reuealeth his secrets, as to John in this place.
Thirdly, the Devils Revelations evermore tend to set up, and uphold heresy,
wickedness, Apostacy, and idolatry, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2. but these that come from
God serve to erect, and maintain truth, according to godliness; even pure
Apostolical doctrine, and the sincere worship of God.

Thirdly, it is called the Revelation of Christ, to show unto us his special
kingly office in heaven: for being ascended, and exalted to the throne of
Majesty, he sits at the right hand of his father, far above all
principality and power, might and domination; and there does direct, rule, and
govern his Church upon earth according to the good pleasure of his will: for
all these visions serve to direct his Church in their obedience to his command.

Whereas Christ Jesus is author of this Revelation; The Use.
and after his ascension, and exaltation, gives the same unto his Church: We
may observe his constant care over his Church in this last age of the world.
Before his Incarnation even from the beginning, he gave unto his people such
doctrine of faith and manners, as was needful for their salvation, and still
some time to time revealed such prophesies of things to come as were meet for
them to know.

And now behold the continuance, or rather the increase of this his care, in
the new Testament: for beside the perfection of the former prophesies, and the
full manifestation of his blessed will by his Evangelists and Apostles, for all
things needful to be believed, and done, unto eternal life; Lo here is added
the Revelation of this worthy Prophecy, concerning things to come, for the
great good, and comfort of his children to the end of the world.

Which God gave unto him. These words be added to show how this became the
Revelation of Christ: namely by the gift of God, that is, of God the father the
first person in Trinity: for this is a rule to be observed, That where the
title, God, in any sentence of Scripture, is opposed to Christ, there it
imports the first person the father: though this be also true, That sundry
times in Scripture, the father alone is termed God, without any addition of
the other persons; because he is the first in regard of order, and the
fountain of the deity: for the son receives the Godhead by communication
from the father, and the holy ghost receives it from them both: but the father
has his godhead of himself, and receives it not by communication from any
other.

Here some will say, this seems strange, that any thing should be given to
Christ, seeing he is God, and has all things of himself. Answ. We must
conceive of Christ two ways: first, as God, secondly, as Mediator, and head of
the Church. As Christ is God, the father gives him nothing: for so he is of
himself the same with the father, and has all things belonging unto him that
the father has (excepting personal properties) and is no way inferior to the
father, neither receives any thing from him, but gives all things as well as
the father does. But yet as Christ is Mediator, he is not God simply, but God
incarnate, or God made man: and so is said to receive of his father, in respect
of his manhood, as himself confesses, All power is given to me, Matthew. 28.18.
And Paul says, God gave him a name, above all names, Philip. 2.9. he
received of his father the promise of the holy Ghost, says Peter, Act. 2.33.
And God made him both Lord and Christ, ver. 36. and so God gave him this
Revelation in this place.

If it be said, this makes Christ inferior to his father, for the receiver is
usually inferior to the giver. Answer. As Christ is God, he is equal with the
father, but as he is Mediator, God incarnate, and made man, he is inferior,
and receives of him. So much himself confesses, My father which gave them
me, is greater than all. John. 10.29. And in the same respect, Paul calls
God the father, The head of Christ. 1. Cor. 11.6. And as Christ now sits at
the right hand of his father, being Mediator, and ruler of his Church, he is
inferior to his father, and receives his kingdom from his father, which he
must give up at the last day. 1. Cor. 15.24.

And here we must consider in what manner God gives his Revelation to his
son. First therefore Christ Jesus, as he is Mediator, is made Lord of this
Revelation: so as he may say, it is his own right, and royalty being a part
of that law, whereby his Church is now governed, whereof he is Lord and King.
Again, this Revelation was revealed unto Christ as he is man, before it was
ever known to any creature, man, or Angel, by reason of the union of his
manhood, with the godhead.

In this which has been said, we may observe, that this book of the
Revelation is Christ his right, and belongs unto him as his own royalty and
privilege. For as the laws in any kingdom belong to the prince thereof, and
are called his laws alone, and no man's else: So this book, being a part of
that law whereby Christ governs his Church, is his royalty alone, for God
gave it him, and he has by his Angel sent it to his Church. And that which is
here said of this book, must be understood proportionally of all other books
of holy scripture, Christ is made Lord of all, and they are all of them his
royalties and possessions. And from hence will follow necessarily; First, That
no man in the world has authority above this book, or any other part of
Canonical Scripture: indeed Monarchs and princes have great authority and
pre-eminence in their dominions over all persons, and over all causes of men:
but in the Church they with all others owe homage unto Christ: there he has
the Canonical Scriptures to be his laws, whereto every one must subject
himself The dispensation of the word, and the adminis^ration of the
Sacraments, be his royal ordinances, over which none may dare to claim rule
or authority; for so should the Scriptures have been given unto them for
their prerogatives, as they were to Christ; but God gave them to him alone, and
he disposes thereof, as pleases him. And therefore the Pope in taking upon
him to dispense with the word, and to mangle the Sacraments, does herein step
into the room of Christ, and so declare himself to be that man of sin, by
seeking to rob him of that princely royalty which belongs to him alone.

Secondly, that the sovereign power and authority of expounding Scripture
belongs to Christ alone, and to none other with him. True it is, that man
has a ministry committed unto him, by virtue whereof he may expound
Scripture by scripture: but men have no power of themselves to determine of the
proper sense of Scripture. And therefore the Popish practice in giving to the
Church absolute authority to determine of the sense of Scripture, of themselves
without Scripture, is flat robbery against Christ: for therein they give unto
men that sovereign power which is proper to Christ.

Thirdly, herein we observe the excellency of this book, and of the whole
Scripture of God: for all of it is the gift of the father to the son, and of
the son unto his Church. The like cannot be said of any writings of men
whatsoever, be they never so excellent: herein the Scriptures surpass them
all. Whereby we are taught to esteem more reverently of the Scriptures of God,
than of all the writings of men in the world. Here then behold the sin of
this age, which more delights to speak and hear the sayings of men in the
public ministry, than the glorious word of the everliving God. Whereas the
writings of men be full of darkness, of error, and deceit: but the word of
God is most holy and pure, and every way perfect, proceeding wholly from the
father of lights unto his beloved son, who has faithfully dispersed the
same, for the good of his Church.

To show to his servants things that must shortly be done. These words contain
the second, third, and fourth Arguments, whereby this Revelation is described,
viz. the end of it, the persons to whom it must be showed, and the matter which
it contains.

Arg. II. The end of this Revelation is, To show, that is, to make known, and
manifest things to come, for the good of the whole Church. Whence we may
observe, that the Papists err exceedingly in debarring lay people (as they
call them) from the reading of the Scripture; for the end of this book is, To
make manifest to Gods servants things to come. And who are Gods servants? Are
the Clergy only, and not lay people also? God forbid: the lay man is Christ
his servant, as well as one of the Clergy. And therefore, it is Gods will,
that he should learn to know and understand this book, like one of his
servants. And here consider, that if this book of Scripture, which is hard and
difficult, must be learned of the lay man, then much more must he search into
all other books of God, which be more plain and easy, as the histories of
Gospel, Epistles, etc.

Arg. III. The persons to whom it must be showed, viz. The servants of Christ.
This Revelation was not given of God for all men indefinitely, but for all his
servants, that is, such alone as repent of their sins, and truly believe in
Christ for the pardon of them, and show forth the same by new obedience. So he
teaches elsewhere: The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and his
covenant to give them understanding, Psalm. 25.14. The Lord will reveal his
secret to his servants the Prophets, Amos 3.7. And, God will not keep back
from Abraham the thing he was to do unto Sodom and Gomorrah, because he
knew Abraham would do his will, and teach his family after him. Genes. 18.
verse. 17.19. The consideration whereof should admonish us not to content our
selves with the bare hearing of the word and outward participation of the
sacraments: but to labor principally to become Gods servants, and to show the
same by the practice of that which we hear. Hereby shall we receive
instruction from the Lord, and grow in knowledge daily more and more: our
understandings shall more easily conceive the will of God, for they that will
do the will of his father, shall know his doctrine. John 7.17. Here then is
the cause why most hearers after long teaching profit little, but remain as
blind and ignorant as ever they were, even their own impiety; they live in
their sins, and labor not to become Gods servants.

Secondly, in this argument we may observe, that Christ Jesus is true God: for
here he is made the head of the Church; every true believer is his servant, and
he his Lord: the angels of the Churches be his angels, as after we shall see:
which prerogative none can have, but he that is true, and very God.

Thirdly, in this Argument are those confuted, which hold, that God would have
all to be saved, and calls all men without exception. For if he called all
effectually, then he would offer the means to all: to wit, his holy word,
that so they might be called to the state of grace. This he does not: for as
we see, this book is given not to all, but to his servants: and that which is
said of this book, is true of the whole Scripture. The Lord showed his word
(says David) not to all the world, but to Jacob, that is, his people with
whom he made a covenant, Psalm. 147.19, 20.

The fourth Argument whereby this Revelation is described, is the matter
thereof, viz. Things which must shortly be done; that is, things to come.
Whereby in general we may observe a difference of this book from the rest of
holy Scripture, which treats of things present or past: this being a prophecy
of things to come.

The matter of this book is described by two Arguments: first, by the
necessity of these things to come, They must be done: secondly, by the
circumstance of time when, shortly, or quickly.

For the necessity of these things, they be such as must needs be done. So
speaks the holy Ghost elsewhere of sundry things to come: of offenses, It
must needs be that offenses should come, Mat. 18.7. Of heresies: There must be
heresies in the Church. 1. Cor. 11.19. And of afflictions: Through manifold
afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of heaven, Act. 14.22. And, They
that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecutions. 2. Timo^h.
3.12. From whence I gather, That things which come to pass concerning Gods
church, and the enemies thereof, do come to pass necessarily. This doctrine
must be well observed: for though it be the truth of God, yet the reason of man
will not agree unto it: for some will say, If all things come to pass
necessarily, then in their actions and proceedings men have no free will: for
necessity and liberty of will cannot stand together. Answ. They may: indeed
constraint and man's free will cannot stand together, but man's will and
unchangeable necessity may well accord: As I show thus; In God there is most
absolute freedom of will, yet he does many things of necessity: as he wills
that which is good necessarily (for he cannot possibly will that which is
evil) and yet he wills the same most freely. So Christ died necessarily, he
could not but die, if we consider the counsel of God, and yet he died most
freely; For he laid down his life of himself, and no man took it from him.
John. 10.18.

It will be said again, if things come to pass by necessity, then it is in
vain to use any means for the effecting of them, for Gods will must be done,
do we what we will. Answ. This is man's corrupt reason: these men must consider,
that as God has appointed what things must come to pass; so he has appointed
the means how they shall be effected: and seeing the Lord has appointed as
well the means as the end, we should by this necessity rather be induced to
use the means, than any way moved to neglect the same. To make this more
plain, we must know there is a double necessity: one is absolute; another in
part. I call that absolute necessity, which cannot be otherwise possibly: as
that God lives, and cannot die, is omnipotent, infinite, etc. Necessity in
part is, when any thing done is necessary only, because it depends on
necessary causes: as fire to burn is necessary, in regard of that order
which God has set in nature by creation: yet this necessity is not absolute;
for fire would not burn, if God should please to change that order set in
nature, as he did when the three children were cast into the hot fiery oven,
Dan. 3.27. Now, whereas we say, Things to come must necessarily be done, it
must be understood of necessity in part, and not of absolute: for in
themselves they be changeable and contingent, and necessary only in regard of
Gods decree, appointing them which is unchangeable: in regard whereof all
things to come be necessary. And yet we may not think, that the
unchangeableness of Gods decree does take away freedom from man's will, it
only inclines the same to one part, and so disposes, that man should freely
will that to be, which God eternally has decreed.

The second thing whereby the matter of this book is set out unto us, is the
circumstance of time when these things must be done; Shortly* must be well
observed: and howsoever some things foretold were not to be done till many
hundred years after, which space of time might seem very long, yet in two
respects it is but short. First, in regard of God, to whom a thousand years
are but as one day, 2. Pet. 3.8. Secondly, in regard of men, to whom a
hundred, or two hundred years seem but a short time when once they be
expired, though before they seemed long.

This circumstance of time is set down for two causes. First, to terrify all
carnal and careless men: for this book foretells judgments, plagues, and
destructions for the enemies of Gods church, which m^st shortly come upon
them: which is a thing worthy our careful consideration in this secure age of
the world, wherein men bless themselves in their sins, without fear of Gods
judgments, and say they shall have peace, though they walk after the
stubbornenesse of their own hearts, putting far from them the evil day;
saying, spare thy self, this shall not come unto thee. But shall the lion
rore, and the beasts not tremble? Yet the Lord threateneth his judgments, but
men will not repent. Well, let us consider this, whether we be young or old,
high or low, that Gods judgments are shortly to come: and let this be a
motive to raise us out of the sleep of sin, and of security. That which
Peter said of false teachers, is also true of all impenitent sinners, unless
they prevent the same by speedy and unfeigned repentance, Their judgment long
ago is not far off, and their damnation sleeps not. 2. Pet. 2.3.

Secondly, this circumstance of time serves greatly to comfort the servants of
Christ, and to furnish them with all patience, and long suffering under any
adversity, or distress that may befall them in body or mind, or both. Indeed
many are brought to impatience and distrust by afflictions and crosses: But the
child of God in such a case must call to mind what the holy ghost has here set
down concerning the prophecies of this book, which foretell deliverance for
Gods Church, and for every member thereof: namely, That they must shortly be
brought to pass: yet a very little while, and he that comes for their
deliverance, will come, and will not tarry, Hebr. 10. verse. 37.

Thus much for the matter of this revelation: now follow the instruments
whereby the Lord does convey the same unto his Church, which is the first
argument whereby it is described, in these words. Which he sent, and showed
by his Angel unto his servant John. Where two points must be observed, first
the action of Christ, which is the ground of their imploiment: secondly the
persons employed therein as his instruments. For the first: Christ sent and
showed this revelation. This action of Christ is noted by the holy ghost for
two special causes; first to show, That S. John did not pen and publish this
book rashly, but by calling and warrant from God. This teaches us what must
be our behavior in all our actions whatsoever we take in hand: we must look
we have warrant from God for the doing of the same, by virtue of our calling,
and with out this we should not dare to enterprise any thing.

If this duty were practiced, there would be more conscience of the service
and worship of God, and more care of just dealing with men then there is in the
affairs of this life.

Secondly, this action of Christ is noted to get more reverent acceptance, and
greater authority to this book: for which cause also it was sent by an holy
Angel. If an earthly prince should write his letter to his subject, and
withal send it by one of his guard, we doubt the subject would receive it most
reverently. Behold this book is the Epistle and letter of Jesus Christ, sent
by his Angel for the benefit of his Church. What reverence therefore, and
acceptance ought this to find? surely a thousand fold more with every one,
then the writing of any earthly prince whatsoever.

The second point to be observed, is the persons whom Christ imployeth about
this Revelation, and they be two. An holy Angel, and Saint John. For the
first* It has pleased God in all ages to use the ministry of Angels, as a
means whereby he would convey the knowledge of his will unto his Church. The
law in mount Synai was given to Moses by the ministry of an Angel, Act.
7.38. Gal. 3.19. and Daniell received the exposition of sundry dreams and
visions by an Angel, Dan. 8.19, and 9.21. and 10.14. And the seven visions
which contain the substance of this book were showed to John by an holy
Angel. But here we must take heed that we do not like the papists ground
hereupo^ the invocation of Angels, because they be about us, and bring unto us
particular messages from the Lord: for before we may pray unto them, we must
have from God a particular commandment so to do, and also a promise to be
heard in that we ask, or else our prayer is not of faith: but the whole
Scripture affoords no word of command, or promise for any such action, and
therefore we cannot do it without sin.

The second instrument here employed by Christ, is John. This John was son to
Zebedeus, and so kinsman unto Christ; a blessed Apostle, and Evangelist which
penned one of the Gospels, and the three Epistles which bear his name. This
was that Disciple whom Jesus loved. And to procure the more credit and
reverence to this book, he describes himself by two arguments: First, by a
property, calling himself Christ his servant: Secondly, by an effect, or
action, in bearing record to Gods word, verse. 2.

For the first, note that John does not call himself that Disciple whom Jesus
loved, nor the kinsman of Christ, which he might have done, being allied unto
him (for John's mother was sister to Joseph Christ's supposed father, and cousin
german to the virgin Mary) John had learned of Christ himself, that the
^earers, and doers of the will of his father were esteemed more dear and near
unto him than any bond of outward alliance could possibly make them, Math.
12.50. Luke 11.28. But he calls himself Christ's servant, having yielded up
himself to do his will: for herein stands the dignity of a Christian to do
service unto Christ. The blessed Virgin had never found such favor with God
to have been Christ's mother, if she had not withal become Christ's servant:
She bare him in her heart by faith, as well as in her womb by conception, or
else she had never been saved by him. Hence we learn that outward dignities,
as blood royal, noble parentage, and such like, will nothing further a man's
salvation: he that would be acceptable unto Christ must become his servant by
believing his word, and doing his will, having cast off the old man, which is
corrupt, and put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness
and true holiness. So Paul says, Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision
is nothing, but keeping the commandments of God, 1. Cor. 7.19. and henceforth
know I no man after the flesh, but if any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature, 2. Cor. ^.16, 17.

Again, consider in what regard John is here called the servant of Christ: not
only for that he believed in Christ, and obeyed his will as all true
christians do; but more specially because he was an Apostle, and did service
unto Christ in the work of his ministry, which was his particular calling.
So Paul writing to the Romans, calls himself an appostle, and servant of
Christ: Cap. 1.1. And he renders a reason thereof verse. 9. Because he did
service unto him in preaching the Gospel. Hence we are taught that we must not
only show our selves Christ's servants in our general calling of
christianity: but especially in our particular callings and offices, after the
example of Christ's blessed Apostles. It is a good thing to profess service
unto Christ, by hearing his word, receiving his sacraments, and keeping his
Saboathes: but unless therewithal we show the power of godliness in our
particular callings, our outward profession is flat hypocrisy. This,
magistrates, ministers, husband, wife, parents, children, masters, servants,
buyer, seller, and every one in his lawful calling should carefully observe:
for unless in the particular duties of their special callings (as the
magistrate in the duties of a magistrate, etc.) they do service unto Christ,
their public service in the outward duties of religion shall never commend
them unto God, be it never so glorious, Micha, 6.6, 7, 8.

Verse. 2. Which bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus
Christ, and of the things that he saw. Here is the second argument whereby John
describes himself; namely, by this action, or effect, in bearing record to
the word of God, for partly by writing the gospel, and partly by preaching,
he bare witness, and testified that the word of God was true. And because the
word of God has diverse parts, the Law and the Gospel; he shows in the next
words, that he means especially the Gospel, adding, and of the testimony of
Jesus Christ, that is, of those things which Jesus said and did. And that no
man might call into question the truth of his testimony, he professes
himself to have been an eye witness of all those things whereof he bare
record, saying, and of all those things which he saw. And here he alleges his
testimony to the Gospel, to prove himself a faithful penman of this book,
that so it might have more reverence: for he which was faithful in penning
the Gospel of Christ, the same also is faithful in penning this Prophecy of
the Church.

In this testimony we may observe, that the doctrine of Gods word is an
infallible mark whereby to know the true Prophet of God, and also to
distinguish him from all false prophets. God foretold his people, that false
Prophets should come among them for their trial, Deuteronomy. 13. But how shall they
discern them? surely by their doctrine: for though they show wonders, yet if
their doctrine tend to draw men from the true God to idolatry, they are false
prophets and should die. When our Savior Christ was asked, By what authority
he did those things. Luke 20.2, 3. He approved his authority by the
testimony of John, (who bare witness of him, John. 1.15.) and confirmed the
calling of John by the truth of his doctrine, which (themselves being
witnesses) was from heaven, Luke 20. ver. 4, 5.

Hereby then we see the error of the Papists, who teach, That the only note of
a true Prophet, is to confirm his doctrine by a miracle, and that he which
cannot do so, is a false Prophet. But this note of difference is not true: for
false Prophets may confirm their lying vanities by signs and wonders, as we
may see Deuteronomy. 13. And so does Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.

The sixth argument by which this Revelation is described, is the order and
man^r of propounding it to the Church, and it stands in four degrees. First,
God the father gives it to Christ the mediator, and head of the Church.
Secondly, Christ gives it to an Angel. Thirdly* the Angel conueyes it to
John the Apostle. Fourthly, John di^ected and assisted by the holy Ghost,
delivers it to the Churches.

Now as this particular book was, so no doubt all other holy Scriptures were
conveyed to the Church: from whence we may observe. First, the constant love of
God to his children, by this his special care, in propounding and delivering
his will and word to his Church.

Secondly, that this book, and so all other parts of holy Scripture, are in
their kind most perfect and excellent.

Thirdly, that the Church of Rome blasphemeth in calling the written word of
God, a dead letter, and dumb Judge; matching general councels with it for
authority, and teaching, that the universal consent of the Church is about
Scripture, f^r ^^terpretation, and gives life and sense thereto: which
otherwise of it self were but an inckie letter, and dumb word.

Verse. 3. Blessed are they which read, and they that hear the words of this
prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein: for the time is at
hand. Here is the seventh and last argument whereby this Revelation is
described, to wit, the fruit, effect, and the profit which comes of it, even
true happrnesse. This prophecy concerns the present and future state of the
Church: the reading and hearing whereof joined with careful keeping, brings
with it true blessedness, that is, fellowship with God, and life everlasting.

In this argument we may observe, First, the end of this book, and so of all
other books of Scripture, viz. ^o bring men to happiness, to fellowship with
God, and life everlasting. These things were written (says S. John) that ye
might believe that Jesus is the Christ, and so believing, might have eternal
life. John 20.31. Again, he declared to them the word of Christ, that by it
they might have fellowship with God the father, and with his son Jesus
Christ. 1. John. 1.3. In which fellowship is true happiness: Christ himself
says: Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal life.
John. 5.39. And in this they differ from all other books and writings of men,
for men's writings be penned either by the light of nature, and so be
erroneous, and miss the end of true happiness: or else they be penned by them
which have direction from the word, and so all the truth they have, leading to
true happiness, is borrowed hence; when as the Scriptures of themselves do
directly guide men thither.

From the consideration of this blessed end of holy Scripture, we may observe,
first, That the opinion and practice of the church of Rome is damnable, who
bar the people of God from reading and hearing the Scriptures in their vulgar
tongue. For in depriving them of this means (as much as in them lies) they
bar them of their salvation, and they do directly cross the purpose of S.
John, who does therefore pronounce him blessed, that shall hear and read this
book, with conscience to keep and obey it, that he might allure and draw al
men to do it with delight.

Secondly, we are hereby admonished with all care and diligence to read and
meditate in Gods word: That place before named is most excellent: Search the
Scripture, John 5.39. Even as we would search for gold or some precious thing
which we would fain find. (So the word imports.) And he adds the reason: For
in them you think to have eternal life. The same is wisdoms counsel, Prou.
2.4.

But some will say, I cannot read, I was never brought up in learning, and
therefore I cannot search. S. John cuts off his excuse in the next words,
saying, Blessed he is also which bears the words of this prophecy. As if he
should say: though he cannot read, yet if he hear and keep it he is
blessed. Here then i^ the duty of those which cannot read the Scriptures, they
must procu^e others to read unto them, and by hearing and keeping they shall
be blessed.

Thirdly, by this scope and end of Scriptures, we must learn to carry in
mind this plain difference between the books of God, and writings of men:
Gods word brings a man which keep^ it, to happiness; but man's writings of,
themselves cannot do so, unless they have light from the word of God. If this
distinction were imprinted in our hearts, we should not be so delighted as many
are, to hear or speak the words of God mixed with the words of sinful men,
specially in the public ministry. In former times the Lord forbad his own
people to sow their field with mingled seed, (...) to make them garments of
diverse things, as of linen and woollen, Leuit. 19.19. And no doubt the same
God does mislike, that the pure seed of his word should be mingled with the
sayings of erroneous and sinful men, when the same is sown upon the furrows
of men's hea^ts.

Secondly, in this seventh Argument we may observe the right manner and way of
hearing and reading the Scriptures: a point worthy all serious consideration.
I^ stands in two things: First, we must set down with ourselves a certain
end, why we read, and hear the Scriptures, which is, that we may attain to
true happiness, standing in fellowship with God, and life everlasting. This
end must be the motive to induce us to hear, and read the word of God, and
when this ta^es place in our hearts, it will be of force to make us read, and
hear with care and conscience which beseems Gods word. Secondly, we must
keep in mind the things we read or hear; so faith the text: And keeps the
things which are written: which word imports, that by diligent observation, we
should lay them up in our hearts. This is a weighty duty, and seriously
commended unto us of God. Bind up the testimony, seal up the law among my
disciples, Isay. 8.16. And Marie is therefore commended, because she kept in
her heart the words of Jesus, Luke 2.19.^1. It was David's practice: I have ^id
thy saying in my heart. Psalm. 119.^^. And hereto ^endeth Christ's encouragement,
pronouncing them rather blessed, which hear the word and keep it, than those
which bare Christ, and gave him suck. Luke 1^. 27.28. And James calls it the
ingraffed word, James 1.21. because it should abide in our hearts like a syence
in a stock, and never be removed, but there grow, and fructify unto life
eternal.

Now because this is a point of great difficulty, and the want hereof the
cause of so little profiting after much hearing and reading: I will therefore
show how (by Gods grace) in hearing and reading the word of God, a man may
keep the same in memory.

First, a man must learn the grounds or elements of religion, commonly called
the Catechism, for they are the foundation of all knowledge: without which a
man shall never understand the Scripture to his comfort, nor keep the same in
memory. The Apostle says the Hebrews were dull of hearing (the deep things
of God in Christ) because they had not well learned the first principles of the
word, Hebr. 5.11.12. This all ignorant persons should well observe, specially
the aged, that they may find in themselves the cause of their ignorance and
dullness, even want of knowledge in the Catechism. They think it a disgrace
to be brought unto it now they are old: but if they would not be ever
learning, and never come to the knowledge of the truth, they must lay in
themselves this good beginning, and learn the principles of religion.

Secondly, we must not rush upon Gods holy ordinance, but before we either
come to hear, or read, with reverence prepare our selves thereto. Most men at
this day use to prepare themselves before they come to the Lords table; and so
they ought to do before they come to hear the word: for God ordained both for
this end, to be means to bring men to true happiness: they differ only in
this, that the Sacraments are the visible, and the Scriptures the audible word
of God. At the giving of the law, The people that must ^eare it, were
sanctified three days before. Exodus 19. And when they did offer sacrifice, or
eat the Passover, both priests and people must be sanctified: and the same
thing for substance must we perform before we come to hear the word of God.
This preparation stands in two things: First, we must put out of our hearts al
by thoghts, all delights, and cares of wordly affairs, and set our hearts (as
Ezra did) to seek the law of the Lord, Ezra 7.10. Secondly, we must make our
earnest prayers to God, that he would open our eyes, that we may see his will;
soften our hearts, and make our ears attentive, as L^diaes were; and also give
us grace to embrace his word, and keep it: for Christ is the only doctor of
the heart by his spirit, without whose inward teaching we can never learn
unto salvation.

Thirdly, when we are about the holy exercise of Gods word, the frame of our
heart should be thus disposed.

I. It must be an humble heart: for the Lord resists the proud, and gives
grace to the humble, Iam. 4.6. Them that be meek, will he guide in judgment,
and teach the humble his way, Psalm. 25.9. A proud heart is so stuffed with
self love, that there is no room for the word of God to lodge in. But the
heart that is lowly in it self, through the conscience of sin, that is the
heart in which the Lord by his graces will take up his abode, Isay 57.15.

II. It must be an honest heart; such as has no manner of purpose to live in
any one sin whatsoever, but (though it feel corruption in it self) is
resolved to please God in all the ways of his commandments, and that
continually: such an heart have the good hearers, resembled by the good ground,
Luke 8.15. As on the contrary, that is a wicked heart, which resolves to
cherish, though it be but any one sin whatsoever.

III. It must be a believing heart. The old Jews heard the word, but it
profited them not, because they mingled it not with faith (...) their hearts.
Hebrew* 4.2. where he compares the heart to a vessel, in which there must be
both the word, and faith: these two must be mingled together, and then it will
be a word of power, of life, and salvation. Therefore when we hear the
threatenings of the law, or the promises of the Gospel, we must labor to
resolve our hearts of the truth thereof. But incredulity whereby men except
against the word, as not pertaining unto them, is the mother of forge^fulnesse.
The old world knew nothing of the flood, because they did not believe, Matthew.
24.39.

IV. It must be an hearing heart* such as is pliable to the word: Sacrifice
and burnt offerings (says David) thou would not, but mine ears have thou
prepared, Psalm. 40.6. As if he should say, beside those bodily cares which
thou have given me by creation, thou have bored new cares in my heart, so as I
can by thy grace attend and listen to thy word. And when God says Seek ye my
face, this hearing heart will answer, I seek thy face O Lord, Psalm. 27. verse.
8.9.

Fourthly, after we have heard or read the word, we must become doers of the
same, even in the duties of our vocation. We see every man more skillful in the
works of his own trade, by reason of his daily exercise therein: even so the
constant practice of Gods word will make us expert in it, and cause us to keep
it in perfect memory. And these are the right means to become good hearers
and readers of the word of God.

Thirdly, this benediction pronounced upon them that hear, read, and keep the
prophecies of this book, serves to induce every child of God (as much as in
him lies) to keep in memory the whole word of God, but specially these
prophecies of things to come that concern the state of the Church; for
therefore did God reveal them, that they might be remembered. When the Angel
had told Daniel the state of the church, from his time to the coming of
Christ; he bids him, Shut up the words, and seal the book, till the end of
the time, Dan. 12.4. meaning, that he for his own comfort should hide them in
his heart. And Christ says to his disciples, When ye see the abomination of
desolation, spoken of by Daniell the Prophet: let him that reads, consider
it, Matthew. 24.15. Behold I have told you before, meaning things to come verse
25. showing, That he would have his children to mark, and remember those
weighty things that are foretold, concerning the state of the church.

For the time is at hand. Here is a reason of the former benediction, for
seeing the time of the accomplishing of this prophecy, is at hand, and must
shortly be fulfilled: therefore those be blessed which read and keep the same
in memory. And it is an answer to a secret objection; for they might have
said, we need not to read or remember this prophecy, seeing it shall not be
fulfilled in our days; but he adds: The time is at hand, wherein they must
be fulfilled, and therefore it must be marked. These words for substance were
in the first verse; where it is said, The Revelation was of things that must
shortly be done. And here they be repeated again. Whereby he would teach us,
That these prophecies contain weighty matter, to be deeply considered, and
earnestly thought on. And S. John repeates the same for two causes: first to
awake the members of the church out of the sleep of security, and make them
stand upon their watch continually: for though they cannot fall into the dead
sleep of sin, yet the slumber of security may overtake the^: the wise
virgins slumber, as well as the foolish, Matthew. 25.5. And the spouse of
Christ, the true Church, confesses, That she sleeps, though her heart
waketh, Cant. 5.2.

Secondly, to confirm and hearten the church, and all true members of Christ,
against the afflictions to come: for herein is the common saying true, He that
is forewarned, is fore-armed.

Now in these words ( The time is at hand) Christ would teach us to observe,
That whatsoever thing may befall the members of Christ in this life, whether
afflictions, temptations, death, or the last judgment it self, all will come
shortly. This consideration ought to take place in our hearts, being of great
use in our lives: as to stay us from many sins, so to move us to do all
things with good conscience. And the want hereof is the cause of much evil:
The bad servant beats his fellows, because he thinks his master does
defer his coming. Matthew. 24.48.49. The old world went on in sin, never
regarding Noah's prophecy, and so knew nothing till the flood came and swept
them all away, Matthew. 24.39. We should lay these to our hearts, and always
think with Paul Phil 4.5.
the Lord is at ^and. The rather, because we have had the Gospel, and peace
with all temporal blessings these eight and thirty years: now the state of
the church is interchangeable, one while peace, and then trouble: so as it is
like, this peaceable state will not long continue, but we must be tried. And
the time of ou^ trial is at hand, for whatsoever must befall the Church, will
come shortly. We must therefore prepare for trouble, and so we shall find it
the less grievous.

Verse. 4. John to the seven Churches which are in Asia, Grace be with you, and
Peace from him, which is, and which was, and which is to come, and from the
seven spirits which are before his throne. Here begins the second part of
the Preface, to wit, the inscription of this vision, and it has two branches:
First, a dedication, in these words: John to the seven Churches which are in
Asia. Secondly, a salutation, in the next words: Grace be with you and peace,
etc. to the ninth verse. In the dedication observe first the penman, that
dedicates this book: secondly, the parties to whom it is sent. For the first,
the penman is John, who here again repeats his name, to show and certify
every reader of this book, that he was without al doubt the true penman of the
holy ghost, in writing this Revelation. But though he repeat his name, yet he
does not add any titles of honor, or commendation, as he did in the first
verse. Wherein he gives us a true pattern of modesty and humility, which is
never to speak in our own cause to our own praise, but only in cases of
necessity, when Gods glory may be advanced, and the credit of our particular
callings maintained. This Paul practiced, who often humbles himself, and calls
himself the 1. Cor. 15.
least of all the Apostles; yea the 1. Tim. ^.15
chief of all sinners: yet when the credit of his Apostleship came into
question, then he sets out himself, showing he was a true Apostle, one of the
chief, and above those which did falsely call themselves so, as we may find
in both of his 1. Cor. 9.1, 2. 2. Cor. 11.5.
Epistles to the Corinthians.

Secondly, the persons to whom he wrote, were, the seven Churches in Asia*
concerning them note two things: first, he writes to churches, secondly to the
churches in Asia. For the first: why writes he to the churches, rather tha^ to
the church, seeing there is but one only Catholic church? Ans. The church may
be considered diverse ways; first, as it is the whole company of the elect,
and so it is but one: secondly, as the same is parted into several branches
and companies, one part being in one country, and another part in some other.
Wherein also, every several congregation, professing the gospel, is a
particular Church. And so there may be many Churches, all of them being
members of one Catholic Church: As the sea is only one, yet it consists of
many parts, which taking their names of the countries whereto they adioyne,
are called so many particular Seas; as the English Sea, the Spanish sea,
French, Italian, Scottish Seas, etc. And of particular Churches must John be
understood in this place.

Now John chooses rather to write to Churches, than to particular men. First,
because the matter of this book concerns the Church, being a Prophetical
history, touching the state of the Church to the end. Secondly, because
particular Churches, which be true members of the Catholic Church, are the
pillars and ground of truth. 1. Timoth. 3.15. And the Church is so called, not
that her authority is above the word* but first, because it is the treasure
house wherein the Scriptures are preserved, from age to age, against the rage
of Gods enemies. Secondly, because the Church gives testimony to the truth of
Gods word. And thirdly, because it publishes the truth of God; word by virtue
of that ordinary ministry which God has ordained therein.

Secondly, in the dedication of this book, among all particular Churches God
directs him to make choice of those seven in Asia: no doubt for special cause.
First, because they were then most famous Churches, as the chapters following,
and the histories of the Church do plainly show: Secondly, that the calling
of the Gentiles to the light of the Gospel, which long before had been
foretold, might be more evident: for here the Jews are passed by, and the
Gentiles sent unto.

Lastly, we may here observe, That S. John knew no prerogative of the church of
Rome above other churches: for if it were the mother church, whereon al^ other
churches should depend, as the Papists would have it* I would know of them why
John passed by it in the dedication of this book, which contains matter
needful for all churches to know.

Grace be with you, and Peace from him which is, and which was, and which is to
come: and from the seven spirits which are before his throne. Here begins John's
salutation of the seven churches. Salutations be of two sorts, Civil, and
Religious. Civil, is that which men use ordinarily one to another, wishing
health welfare, and such like. Religious, is that, which is peculiar and proper
unto the church, comprehending in it a benediction also. And such is this here
used by S. John. It may also be called Apostolical: because it is so usual
with them in their Epistles. And they used it the rather, because it is so
correspondent to their ministry: which stood in two things; first, in
preaching, which is the ministry of grace and reconciliation, the things here
desired: secondly, in prayer, whereto belonged the duty of benediction, to
pronounce a blessing upon the people; as did the priests in their ministration
under the law, Number. 6.23. and our savior Christ with his Apostles, when they
preached the gospel; and as every minister should do to his whole
congregation, before they depart. And this is also included in this salutation:
for hereby they blessed those churches to whom they did write.

But to come to the words, which be most excellent, and contain in them the
sum of the gospel. Grace, in scripture signifies two things: first, Gods
favor; secondly, some gift of God freely bestowed. Now here by Grace is meant
not any particular gift of God, but the gracious favor and good will of God,
whereby he accepts of some in Christ for his own: for it is here opposed to
peace, a gift of grace, and therefore cannot signify the same thing.

Now mark, S. John in thi^ salutation begins with grace, because it is the
foundation of all happiness, and of all Gods blessings: whatsoever we are,
and all that we have, is of grace; our election, redemption, vocation,
justification, and sanctification: our faith and repentance, and our
perseverance in the^ both proceed from this fountain of Gods free grace. It is
the beginning, and the end of all; yea it is all in all in the matter of our
salvation: first we must have this, and then we may look for all other
blessings.

And Peace. Peace is taken sundry ways in the scripture: first, for welfare
and good success in things of this world by Gods blessing, Exodus 18.7. Moses
and Iethroe saluting, ask each other of their peace, that is, of his welfare;
and so it is partly taken in this place. Secondly, for that unity and blessed
concord which is in the kingdom of God, among Gods children: and so it is
especially taken here. And in this sense it has six parts, every one whereof is
a most worthy blessing.

The first is peace with God: which is, when we stand in the favor of God,
reconciled to him in Christ Jesus, Romans 5.1. Secondly, peace with Gods Angels,
for they guard such as be in Gods favor, and carry them as a nurse does her
child in her arms, That they hurt not their feet at any stone, Psalm. 91.11.
and they rejoice at our good estate. The third, is peace with a man's self,
when his conscience will not accuse him, but excuse and clear him, being
washed in the blood of Christ: This is that peace of God, which passes all
understanding, Philip. 4.7. The fourth is, Peace with Gods Church, notably
prefigured by the peaceable habitation of wild beasts, and tame together, as
the Lion and the Calfe, the Wolf and the Lamb, the child and the Cockatrice,
etc. Isay, 11, 6. And plainly to be seen among the believers* Acts. 4.32. Who
were all of one mind and heart. The fifth is, Peace with the enemies of Gods
Church, so far as it is for the good of the Church, and the glory of God. So
Joseph had peace in Pharaohs court: so Daniell had peace in the court of
Nabuchadnezzar: for when the three children were cast into the oven, we must
not think, that he did revolt unto idolatry, or hide himself: but being in
favor in the Court, obtained privilege to be excused. The sixth is, Peace
with all the creatures of God: with the beasts of the field, fowls of the
air, and fishes of the sea. This the Lord promises in the covenant that he
will make for them with all his creatures, Hosea, 2. verse. 18. yea, The child
of God shall tread upon the Lion and the Serpent, and they shall not hurt him,
Psalm. 91. Verse. 13. And this his peace stands herein, That by Gods blessed
providence he shall find help, and comfort from all Gods creatures.

In this place, whether we take peace for outward welfare, or for the concord
of Gods church, yet it is placed after grace, because it follows as a fruit
thereof: First, a man must be in Gods favor, and then come all the blessings
of peace unto him. This then is the meaning, Grace be with you and peace. That
is, I wish you the favor of God in Christ with peace, the blessed fruit
thereof, even all outward welfare, and especially the concord of Gods church,
having peace with God, with his holy Angels, with his church, with your own
hearts, with your enemies (as far as may be for Gods glory) and with all
his creatures.

The Use.
Whereas S. John wishes grace unto the churches in the first place* he would
teach us, That the favor of God is to be sought for above all things; for the
Apostles practice must be our precept. So did David: Many say, who will show
us any good: But Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me, Psalm.
4.6. As if he should say, Let the most of the world seek what they will, as
riches, pleasure, etc. yet my desire is of thy love and favor above all. And
oftentimes he calls God his portion, his rock, and castle of defense, the
thing that be longs for; to show, that all his joy was in Gods favor. And
so it should be with us: but we little practice this, because we bring from
our cradles natural presumption, which persuades us, that we be in the favor
and love of God. But we must cast off this false persuasion, and take a new
course; and labor first to see, that we be out of Gods favor, lost sheep,
prodigal children in our selves, yea, the very firebrands of hell: and this,
to see our own want of grace, is the first step to grace. Secondly, feeling
this want and misery in our selves, we must earnestly desire, and in our
souls hunger and thirst after the love and favor of God in Christ above all
earthly things. Thirdly, we must by the hand of true faith lay hold upon the
grace and mercy of God in Christ, propounded in the promises of the Gospel,
and apply them to our selves particularly.

Secondly, after grace he wishes unto them Peace: where note, the true order
of seeking for the blessings of this life, we must not begin with welfare and
prosperity, but our first and chiefest care must be, to obtain the grace and
favor of God. So Christ bids us, first, to seek the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness: for when we are in Gods kingdom of grace reconciled to him in
Christ, then all things needful shall be ministered to us, Matthew. 6.33.

This discouers the bad practice of most men every where, The Use.
who in seeking the blessings of God, begin at the wrong end. They will toil
themselves in their callings to get wealth, honor, pleasures, and preferments;
but the favor of God in Christ is not regarded: which notwithstanding is the
true and right foundation of all outward welfare.

Here some will say, if God give me wealth, honor, and reputation, then he
loves me: for these be signs thereof. I answer, These be no sure tokens of
his favor in Christ, for those that be his enemies, may enjoy them all, as
Job. 21.7. to the 14. This David perceived, how the wicked might flourish in
their outward prosperity, having more than heart could wish, Psalm. 73.3.7.
And yet they stood but in slipperie places. And therefore, let no man herewith
deceive himself: he that wants Gods favor in Christ, is but a cursed
wretch, and a firebrand of hell, though he had all the world for outward
things, at his command. For all earthly things severed from Gods special
grace, are but an heap of miseries. The wicked man's peace is no peace, says
the Lord, Isay, 48.22. And the man that has Gods grace in Christ, though he
want all wordly benefits, yet he has more than all the world without it: for
hereby alone he is truly blessed and happy.

From him which is, and which was, and which is to come: and from the seven
spirits which are before his throne. Here is set down the first cause and
author of these two, Grace and Peace, to wit, God himself, distinguished into
three persons, the father, son, and holy ghost. The Father is noted in these
words: Which is, and which was, and which is to come. The holy ghost in these:
And from the seven spirits which are before his throne. The Son in the fifth
verse: And from Jesus Christ, which is a faithful witness: and first begotten
of the dead, and Lord over the kings of the earth, unto him that loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his own blood, etc.

S. John in the first place describes the father, by a distribution, which
expresses the true nature of God in these words: Which is, was, and is to
come. In which he alludes to that, Exodus 3.14, 15. where Moses demands of
God, If the people should ask who sent him, what he should answer? The Lord
bids him say, Ehich, Jehovah has sent me: which two names serve to one end,
namely, to express the nature of God. They are translated, I am, and the Lord:
but these English words do not fully express their signification. Yet S. John
expounds the^ here, making Ehich to signify him which is, which was, and is to
come. Which words of John also in the original be more full in sense than our
English tongue can well express. And yet they may be thus explaned: Grace and
Peace be from him, which is in himself, and of himself a most perfect and
absolute substance: which was a most perfect substance, and which is to come, a
most absolute, perfect, simple substance, and essence. In these words are
touched sundry weighty points.

First, touching the nature of God, namely, That God is a most absolute perfect
substance, and essence, which has his being in himself, of himself, and from
none other. Paul says, An idol is nothing. 1. Cor. 8.4. that is, nothing
subsisting in nature, but a mere fond device of man's brain: But the true God
is an essence subsisting, and that of himself alone perfectly; and herein
differs from all Idols and false Gods.

Secondly, hereby we see a difference between God and all his creatures. Every
creature is a substance, as Angels and Men: likewise man's body and soul are
substances: yet none of these have being of themselves, but from God, and of
God. And yet we must not conceive, that the creatures are parts of God, though
they have their substances and being of him; for then each creature should be
God: for the communication of the divine substance cannot be without the divine
nature. But Gods substance is indivisible, and incommunicable to the creature.
My meaning then is that God made the creatures out of himself of that matter
which he created by his word; and preserves them being made. Which by the way
should teach us to return our bodies and souls by obedience unto God, in lieu
of thankfulness, endeavoring his glory all the days of our life.

Thirdly, hence we learn, that the Lord is Eternal every way, without
beginning or ending: for it is he which is, which was, and which is to come.
Angels and the souls of men they be eternal; but not every way: though they
be eternal in that they shall never die, yet had they a beginning. Secondly,
they are eternal, not absolutely, but by participation; for God made them
eternal: but the Lord is most absolutely of himself eternal.

Fourthly note, he says not from him which shall be, but from him which is to
come, that is, to judgment: to give us to understand, That this eternal God
is also a judge of all his creatures, especially men and Angels. A point of
special use, to move us to well before God with all good conscience. If any
shall flatter himself, thinking he shall be dead before that day come* I
answer, i^ may be so. What then think thou thereby to escape his judgment?
No verily: for this God comes to judge thee particularly by death, and
thereby to reserve thee to the judgment of the great day. O^, that we could
seriously think on this; it would be a means to move us to repentance, by
breaking of the course of sin, and endeavoring ^o keep a good conscience in
all things, Acts 24.16. And so shall we be ready to meet him at his coming,
whether by death or judgment.

And from the seven spirits which (...) before his throne. These words commonly
are expounded of seven Angels of God* which stand before the thron^, and
minister unto him. But it cannot be meant of them, for two cause a first
because (...) and Peace is here said to proceed from these seven spirits; but
it cannot come from the holy Angels, which attend to minister before the Lord.
Secondly, in this verse, which is a benediction or a salutation of (...) to the
Church, the seven spirits, are set before Jesus Christ, the second person of
the Trinity* but there is no reason nor respect, for which the Angels should
be placed before Christ. The words are rather thus to be expounded. And from
the seven spirits, etc. that is, from the holy ghost. This exposition is most
agreeable to all the circumstances of the text; and the holy ghost may be
called by the name of the seven spirits for two causes: First, because though
he be only one in substance, yet he is seven, that is, manifold in regard of
gifts and operations which proceed from him. Secondly, saint John here speaks
of the Father, Son, and Holy ghost, as he saw them in vision: (for here he
sets down one vision which he saw) now he beheld the holy ghost in form of
seven lights in a vision, Revel. 4.5.

Which are before his throne. This he speaks by comparison taken from earthly
kings: which sitting in their thrones, do there show their glory and
majesty. So S. John saw in vision God the father sitting in his throne, and
Christ at his right hand; and before the throne the holy ghost. Which manner of
appearance proves not, that the holy ghost is inferior to the father and to
the son: but hereby is expressed the office of the holy ghost: which i^, to
be sent from the father, and from the son to the church, to enlighten the
members thereof.

This the^ is the meaning of the words, And from the seven spirits which are
before his throne; that is, Grace and Peace be with you from the Holy ghost,
the spirit of the father, and of the son, who from them both is sent unto the
Church, to enlighten, to sanctify, and to govern the members thereof.

First, hence we learn, that the holy ghost is God: The Use.
for look from whom comes grace and peace, that same is very God: but here
grace and peace proceed from the holy ghost, and therefore he is very God.

Secondly, we learn, that we may and ought to direct our prayers to the holy
ghost: for by whom grace and peace is given, to him we may direct our prayers:
but grace and peace are given by the holy ghost; therefore we may pray to him
for them. This is the rather to be observed, because there be some which
doubt, whether we may pray to the holy ghost: b^t they may as well doubt
whether he be God. They say, we have no example hereof in scripture. Ans. It is
not true: for in this benediction John prays to the holy ghost, saying, Grace
be wi^h you, and Peace from God the father, etc. For in substance it is as much
^s if he had said thus: Thy grace and peace, O father; and thy grace and peace,
O holy ghost; and thine O son, be with thy Church.

Thirdly, in this description of the holy ghost, by standing before the throne
of the father, we may observe, That the holy ghost is a person subsisting, and
not a quality. Some heretics that acknowledged the godhead of the father,
denied the godhead of the son and of the holy ghost: and concerning the holy
ghost, have held, That he is nothing, but the virtue and quality of the
father. But this is most false: for a^ the father is a substance fitting upon
the throne: so here we see the holy ghost is a substance standing before the
throne.

Fourthly, here we learn, that the holy ghost is a distinct person from the
father, and from the son: for he sits not in the throne, as does the
father, nor sits at the fathers right hand, as does the son: but stands
before the throne apart from them both.

Verse 5. And from Jesus Christ, which is a faithful witness, and first
begotten of the dead, and Lord over the kings of the earth, unto him that loved
us, and washed us from our sons in his own blood. That is, grace and peace
from Jesus Christ. Where Christ Jesus is joined with the father, and the holy
ghost in bestowing grace and peace on his Church. Here some may ask, Why is
Christ the second person of the Trinity placed after the holy ghost, the third
person^ Answer. For (...) causes. First, in regard of his office, for Christ is
to be considered two ways: first, as he is the son of the father: secondly,
as he is the mediator of the Church. As he is the son of the father, he is
the second person in Trinity, and so before the holy ghost in order. But as he
is mediator, so he is after the holy ghost, Isay 61.1. The spirit of the Lord
is upon me, he has sent me to preach. Where Christ confesses himself to be
sen^ by the holy ghost, as he is mediator, and in that respect he is set after
him. Secondly, he is placed after the holy ghost, for the fitter progress of
the history: for the manner of them which pen the scriptures, is, to set them
in the last place of who^ they mean to speak most, as Matthew. 1. the Evangelist
setting down the genealogy of Christ from Abraham (though among them all was
none so excellent as Christ) yet places him the last, because he intended to
go on with the history of his life and death. So John places Christ the
last, because he purposed to make a large description of the person, and
office of Christ, which he could not so fitly have brought in, if he had
placed him before the holy ghost.

From this fifth verse, till the ninth, he describes Christ at large: First, by
his offices: secondly, by the execution thereof. His offices are three: First,
his prophetical office in these words: which is that faithful witness.
Secondly, his priestly office: The first begotten of the dead. Thirdly, his
kingly office: And that prince of the kings of the earth.

The execution of all his offices is particularly set down in the words
following, To him that loved us, and washed us from our sins, and so forth to
the ninth verse.

Touching his offices. In his Prophetical office we may note three things:
First, he is a witness. Secondly, A faithful witness. Thirdly, that
faithful witness. First he is a witness, Isay. 55.4. I gave him to be a
witness to the nations. By his witness ^earing is signified two duties of his
Prophetical office: First, to reveal the will of his father to his Church:
secondly, to certify the Church of the certainty of the same: and in these
two stand his whole office prophetical.

For the first, to reveal his fathers will to the Church immediately, is his
office as he is a Prophet: for none has seen God, but he which came from the
bosom of the father, and he has declared him, John 1.18. Now Christ declares
the father, by making known his will: and that he has done not only in his
own person, while he lived on earth, but from the beginning by all the
Prophets, and so will do to the end by all true preachers: for in the Church
the father does all things by the son. When the Lord rained fire on Sodom,
Genesis 19.24. there Jehovah the father rained down by Jehovah the son. So when
the covenant was made to our first parents, it was made in Christ the promised
seed. It was renewed to Noah, Abraham, and the patriarchs, from the father by
the son: for that Jehovah, which appeared to Moses in the bush, Exodus 3. is
by S. Paul called Christ. 1. Cor. 10. The Prophets and the Apostles wrote as
they were inspired by Christ; they were but his instruments to speak and write
that he put into them by the holy ghost. The matter, and the style, and phrase
of the Scripture, all came from Christ. Nay, when any particular man comes to
understand the Scriptures, this is by the working of Christ, he opens his eyes.
He gave the disciples understanding, Luke 24.
as they went unto Emaus to understand the Scriptures.

The second duty of Christ's prophetical office is, to certify men in
conscience of the truth of his fathers will. This certificate is two fold,
general, or particular: general, when he certifieth men in conscience, That
the word written or spoken by man, is the word of God: neither nature, nor
learning can do this, but it is proper to Christ's prophetical office. And for
this he says to his disciples, Ioh. 16.13
He will send them the comforter, which shall lead them into all truth: that
is, reveal Gods will unto them, and assure their heart that the same is true.
Unto this assurance two things are required. The outward means, which is the
word it self: and an inward cause, which is the principal, to wit, the
operation of the holy spirit.

By this doctrine three points are resolved: First, The Use.
this demand of the Papists, How a man can come to know, that the Scriptures
read and taught, be the word of God? Answ. We must here have recourse to this
faithful witness, and desire of him his spirit, whereby the mind must be
enlightened, and made able to discern the things of God: for natural man can
do it of himself. Secondly, we must have Christ his testimony of Scripture,
in the Scriptures themselves: for in them he sets down his testimony of
the Scriptures.

But some will say, if Christ's testimony of scripture be set down in the
scriptures, why do not al^ men know this testimony, and receive it? I
answer, The shining of the sun before a man's face, is not sufficient to
cause him to see, unless he have in his eyes the gift and sense of seeing:
Even so, it is not enough for a man to have in Gods word, the testimony of
Christ, that scripture is scripture; but withal, he must have in himself the
light of the spirit, revealing that testimony to his conscience: and then in
reading or hearing the scripture, in marking the manner, and style, the
majesty, and power thereof, he shall be able to see in every sentence the
testimony of Christ, assuring his conscience, that the same is undoubtedly the
word of God.

A second doubt resolved by this doctrine, is this, How can a man know the true
religion, seeing the Turk, Papist, Jew, and Protestant, have their several
religions, and die in them? I answer, We must have recourse to Christ, this
faithful witness: and look whereto he gives his testimony, that we must
hold for true religion. Now the scriptures be as a letter sent from heaven to
the Church, wherein Christ has set down his own testimony of the true
religion: which in trial shall be found to be the religion of the Protestant,
and not the religion of Jew, Turk, or Papist.

A third doubt to be resolved by this doctrine, is, How to know the particular
truth in matters of religion, when as sundry men professing the same religion,
be of diverse opinions. Answ. Still we must have recourse to this faithful
witness and Prophet of the Church, he is the Judge of all controversies in
religion; and in the scriptures, if we mark them, we shall see his judgment.
Quest. But if there be diverse opinions about scripture it self, and every one
give a several sense unto it, who must then be Judge? Answ. In this diversity
of opinions, yea, of the scriptures themselves, we must still have recourse to
Christ, and that in the scriptures alone: for though there were a thousand
diverse expositions of one place, yet by the scope and circumstances thereof,
conferring it with other like places of scripture, a man shall be able to find
out the true sense; for Christ in the scripture expounds himself.

The particular certificate of Christ belongs also to his prophetical
office: and that is, to assure men in their consciences, that the promises of
the Gospel, with all the benefits therein contained, as Justification,
Sanctification, and life eternal, which in the word be generally expounded,
do belong unto them particularly; as to Peter, to John, etc. And this
assurance (as the former) is principally wrought by the word, not barely read,
but preached: for therein by the inward work of the spirit, the general
promises be particularly applied. This Paul imports, saying, Ye have the
spirit of adoption, which testifies with our spirit, we be the sons of God,
Romans 8.15, 16.

Hence we learn, that the doctrine of the Church of Rome, The Use.
and of all others which hold, That men cannot be assured of their salvation
by faith, is wicked and damnable: for hereby they cut off a part of Christ's
prophetical office, wherein the dignity thereof does consist, that is, to
assure a man particularly of the truth of Gods promises unto himself. And in
this he differs from all other Prophets and Apostles, which be witnesses: for
they can witness only outwardly to the ear; but he can speak and testify
to the conscience: Neither can any of them certify any man particularly,
though their ministry tend to that end.

Secondly observe, Christ is not only a witness, but a faithful witness; and
so he is for these causes: First, because he testifies not his own will, but
his which sent him; namely, his fathers, John 8.26. Secondly, he testifies all
his fathers will, neither adding thereto, nor detracting from it, John 17.4.
Thirdly, because he teaches his fathers will sincerely, in the same manner
which he received it, not altering, changing, or deprauing any part thereof: As
my father taught me, so I speak these things, John 8.28.

Thirdly, Christ is called that faithful witness, to distinguish him from all
other witnesses. The Lord has sundry faithful witnesses; as the Prophets,
Apostles, the Church, nay the Sun and Moon, Psalm. 89.37. but Christ alone is
that faithful witness; First, because his witness is (...). 8.14.
authentical, sufficient of it self, and needs no other confirmation. The
testimony of the Apostles and Prophets is not of it self authentical and
certain, but as it consents with Christ's witness, and proceeds from his
spirit. Secondly, he is that witness, because he is the Lord of that house,
whereto he gives witness, namely, the Church; but the Apostles and Prophets
are but servants there, Hebr. 5.5, 6. Thirdly, Christ his witness is inward:
it speaks directly to the conscience, and there gives undoubted assurance: but
the witness of men, as of the Prophets and Apostles, is outward only; it comes
to the ears, it never binds and assures the conscience of it self. And thus
we see why he is called here that faithful witness.

The Use.
First, whereas Christ the Doctor and Prophet of the church is called that
faithful witness, we learn, That all ministers of the Gospel ought to be
faithful witnesses: for every minister of the Gospel, when he preaches Gods
word is in the room of Christ, and speaks that unto the church which Christ
would speak. That they may be faithful witnesses, sundry things are required
at their hands. First, they must deliver the testimony of Christ above all
other things, and before all testimonies of man in the office of their
ministry, This was meat and drink to Christ, to Ioh. 4.34.
teach his fathers will. Eleazar, Abraham's eldest servant, showed his
fidelity, in that he would not eat or drink till he had done his masters
message. Genesis 24.33. Much more ought the ministers of Christ have special care
of that weighty message committed unto them. Secondly, they must testify all
the will of God concerning matters of salvation, as faith, obedience, and a
godly life: among men, we count him a faithful witness, which testifies all
the truth, and no more but the truth: so should it be with all ministers, that
be Gods witnesses to his church. Herein Paul cleared himself, Acts. 20.26, 27.
That he was free from al men's blood, seeing he delivered the whole will of God
in matters necessary for salvation, and kept nothing back. Thirdly, he must
neither add unto, or take away, much less in any case deprave the word of God.
And this is the true mark of a faithful witness: For false prophets teach
some truth, but withal they add something of their own, or detract from Gods
truth something that they ought not. In the church of Rome a man may hear
things concerning moral virtues handled soundly: but come to Justification,
and thereto they add the merit of men's works, and so they deal with Faith,
and Repentance, matters of salvation: they take away one part, and add another
to the scriptures: they hold the Creed in word, yet in deed they deny the
same, as by their doctrine may appear, and so show themselves false witnesses.
Fourthly, a faithful witness must deliver the testimony of Christ in that
spiritual manner which best beseems the majesty of God, and which he best
approoueth, that is, in a plain, easy, and familiar kind of speech, that the
conscience of the sinner may be touched, and the understanding of the simple
may be edified. When the word is otherwise delivered, as in the entising words
of man's wisdom, or for oste^tation of wit, or much reading, though nothing be
said but the truth, yet he that so dispenses it, is an unfaithful witness,
because he corrupts the word by his vain delivery. And this is the sin of
this age in many ministers, who teach the truth indeed, but yet in such sort,
as it may appear, they seek themselves, and not Gods glory, respecting little
the edification of the simple, so themselves may be famous for wit, eloquence,
and learning. But these men make merchandise of the word, like to huxters, that
by starching, blowing and spicing, set a gloss upon their ware, to make it
seem that which it is not: which is a grievous sin, and such as will banish
the Gospel out of our land, unless it be reformed.

Secondly, this title of Christ, That faithful witness, does discover unto us
the damnable practice of men in the sin of unbelief: for Christ this
faithful witness has given testimony to his word which is preached, that
the same is true. And therefore Ioh 5.10.
they that believe it not, do make Christ a false witness, and a liar, than
which, what can be more horrible? and yet this is the common sin of this age.
For when the law is applied, who is afraid? and when the gospel is preached,
yet who believes our report? Gods ministers may say with the little children,
We have piped unto you, but you have not daunced, we have mourned unto you,
but you have not wept. This deadness of heart, whereby men are not moved with
the word preached unto them, is an evident argument of this fearful unbelief,
whereby they make Christ a false witness. This therefore should move us to
consider in our selves, the heinousness of this sin, that so we may strive
against it, and labor to give free passage to the word into our hearts,
trembling at the law, and rejoicing in the Gospel, that so each part thereof
may have his perfect work in us: for which end also we may consider, That
amongst those which shall have their portion in the burning lake, unbelievers
are set in the first rank, Revel. 21. verse. 8.

Thirdly, seeing Christ Jesus is that faithful witness, which gives
testimony to men's consciences in particular of their salvation; we learn,
That every one which professes himself to repent, is bound in conscience to
believe that the promises of the Gospel, and the benefits thereof, as
Election, Redemption, Justification, Sanctification, and Salvation, belong to
him particularly. And though this be against all humane sense and reason, yet
seeing we have a faithful witness, auouching the same, we must submit our
selves unto his testimony: for by unbelief we greatly dishonor our witness
bearer, by denying truth unto his record. Here then we see, it it no
presumption (as the Papists say) to believe our election and salvation in
particular: nay, it is an horrible sin in every one that repents, not to
believe it; seeing Christ, a most faithful witness, testifies the same to our
consciences by his holy spirit. Hereto also serve the sacraments instituted by
God, to seal up unto every worthy receiver, Christ and all his benefits. The
ministers giving of the bread and wine to them that truly repent, is as much as
if Christ should say, Believe thou, and life eternal belongs to thee.

And the first begotten of the dead. In these words is contained the second
office of Christ; namely, his Priesthood: the principal actions whereof stand
in dying, in rising again from the dead, and making intercession for us. And
here S. John alludeth to the estate of the families among the Jews, comparing
Christ to the first borne: for as among them, he which was first borne, and
eldest of the family, had many privileges and preheminences above his
brethren; as Lordship, right of the Priesthood, and double portion, etc. so
Christ he has his privileges, yea even Christ crucified, he has his
prerogatives among the dead, above all that are dead. So Paul expounding this
title, calls him, The first borne, and beginning of the dead, that he might
in all things have the pre-eminence. Coloss. 1. verse. 18.

The privileges of Christ dead, and buried among all the dead, are two: first,
That he was the first that ever rose from death to life, and so to glory. Some
indeed have risen before Christ from natural death to natural life, as
Lazarus, but it was to die again. And Moses and Elias assumed their bodies in
the Mount with Christ in his transfiguration: but yet they laid them down
again to the former misery of corruption, for a time. But Christ Jesus ros^
from death, to life eternal, never to die again: And his resurrection was the
first step into his glory. Secondly, that by his own power he raised up
himself, and by the virtue of his godhead quickened his manhood. The most
godly man that is, or ever was, cannot do so: but all the saints of God are
raised from death by virtue of Christ's resurrection, through that mystical
union which is between Christ the head, and all his members; by mean whereof,
the power of Christ his godhead, which raised up his manhood, is conveyed to
all his members in their resurrection from death to life. And therefore is
Christ called 1. Cor. 15.
The first fruits of them that sleep, because as the first fruits of corn
which was offered unto God, did sanctify the whole crop: so Christ his
resurrection, did make acceptable unto God the resurrection of all his members.

In this title is comprised a notable comfort for all Gods children, against
the immoderate fear of death. If John had said, Christ is the first borne
among the living, it had been a great comfort: for then had he showed, that
the living saint^ on earth were children in Gods family, having Christ for
their eldest brother: but calling him the first begotten of the dead, here is a
further comfort: the Lord shows hereby, what special regard he has to the
faithful that be dead: for even then, when they be dead, they continue members
of his family, and have Christ Jesus dead and buried, reckoned among them for
their eldest brother. In regard whereof, Christ has a double right among the
dead: first, of a King; secondly, of a Priest. The right of a king he has, to
command his members to rise again, and to enter into glory after him. The
right of a priest, whereby he offered up himself in death, a sacrifice
acceptable to God for the sanctifying of the death of all his members: for by
his death he took away the sting of death, and has made it unto them a sweet
sleep in the grave, as in a bed of down, out of which they shall one day rise
to eternal life and glory.

And Prince of the kings of the earth. Here is the third title, given to
Christ, wherein his kingly office is expressed. He is called a Prince of the
kings of the earth, in two respects: First, as he is God, the son of God,
equal with the father, and so is king, together with the father and the holy
ghost, governing all things with them by the same divine power, in heaven, in
earth, and in hell. Secondly, as he is Mediator and Redeemer, God and Man, in
two natures. In this respect he says of himself; All power is given to me in
heaven, and in earth, Matthew. 28.18. And Paul says, God gave him a Philip.
2.9, 10.
name above every name, at which every knee should bow, even as he is
Mediator. And in this second respect he is called, A Prince of the kings of
the earth in this place. Now Christ being a king, must needs have a kingdom,
which is not of this world, standing in the might and policy of man, as
earthly kingdoms do; but it is spiritual, directly concerning the hearts and
consciences of men, where he rules by his laws. And this is his privilege,
which cannot be given to any creature, man, or Angel, to rule and reign
spiritually in the heart and conscience. This spiritual kingdom of Christ is
exercised not by dint of sword, or force of arms, but by his holy word,
through the work of the spirit: for he is as a king, which carries his
scepter in his mouth, even his word, Isay. 11.4. That is the r^d of his power,
by which he rules the heart, and conscience, even in the midst of his
enemies, Psalm. 110. verse. 2.

Now Christ is here entitled, Prince of the kings of the earth in two
respects: First, because he (and he alone) as Mediator, can give laws to bind
the consciences of men; yea of the greatest Monarch in the world. Secondly,
because he has sovereign power over all kings and potentates, as well as over
others, to save, and to destroy: for not only has he power to make a law to
bind their consciences; but also if they keep it, to save them: if they break
his law, he has power to destroy them, be they what they may be. He has
the keys of heaven, and of hell, to open, and to shut at his pleasure. Revel.
3.7. He can, if he will, lead them to life, and save them; or else leave them to
their own mind, and so destroy them. Hence arise sundry instructions.

First, seeing our Savior Christ is a prince of the greatest Monarchs of the
world, and is far above them: we must then with all fear and trembling
reverence his high majesty. Great is that reverence which men yield to earthly
princes: Oh then what reverence should we perform to him which is prince and
Lord of all the kings of the earth? We cannot conceive, what honor we owe
unto him, which is advanced in the throne of all majesty. And this our
reverence we must show, by hearing his word, with trembling and believing
hearts, as Isay says, cap. 66.2. We must not dare to think, or speak of
Christ, without great reverence: At his name every knee must bow; that is, at
the consideration of the great majesty whereto he is now exalted, every
heart, even of the greatest Monarchs, should be touched with submission, awe,
and reverence. If this took place in men's hearts, the name of Christ would not
be so profaned and blasphemed as it is; in ^easting sports, in cursing, and
swearing, whereby men toss it like a ball, without all reverence to so great a
prince as is the king of kings.

Secondly, seeing he is king of kings, we must give him absolute obedience.
Princes on earth must be obeyed, so far as they command in Christ, but he must
be obeyed without exception, not only absolutely, and perpetually in all his
commandments, but most willingly and freely (as it is said) his people come
freely in the day of assembling, Psalm. 110.3. Men will say, they believe in
Christ, as he is their Savior, but that is not enough, they must obey him also,
as he is the king of princes. Many persuade themselves, they have a good faith
in Christ their savior, which little regard obedience to him, as their King
and Lord. But they deceive themselves: for none can have Christ for their
Savior, which have him not for their Lord and master: neither does that man
believe in Christ, which will not strive to do his will. And this our
obedience must be showed in performing those duties which we hear, and learn
out of his holy word.

Thirdly, seeing Christ is king of kings, all princes must do him service: for
they be all inferior and subject to him, Psalm. 72.11. This is the counsel of
the holy ghost: Psalm. 2*10, 11, 12.
Be wise now, O ye kings, be learned, ye Judges of the earth: kiss the
Son, etc. that is, inwardly reverence, and outwardly obey him. This their
homage must be showed, in all the affairs of their kingdoms; They must frame
their laws after the laws of Christ Jesus; they must show mercy, exercise
judgment, keep courts, assizes, begin, end, and continue war according to
his commandments. And so in every thing, the direction of Christ should be
their guide, as it was to David, Thy laws, O Lord, have been my counselors,
Psalm. 119.24.

Fourthly, if Christ be sovereign king, then all earthly princes are bound to
plant, and establish in their kingdoms the religion of Christ, else how can
they show themselves his loyal subjects? Many imagine, That earthly princes
may admit unto their subjects any religion for the peace of the civil state:
but this is against the equity of Gods word in this place, for wherein can
earthly princes do homage unto Christ, if they maintain not his religion? And
their duty in this behalf is signified plainly in the parable of the
marriage. For when they that were bidden, did not come, the king sent forth his
Luk 14.2^*
servants (which may be understood of Christian magistrates) to compel men to
come to the marriage: for that is the magistrates duty, in respect of the
outward profession of true religion.

Fifthly, seeing Christ alone is prince of the kings of the earth: hence we
learn, that kings on earth in their dominions are sovereign governors over
all persons, and in all causes next under Christ, he is king of kings
absolutely, and they are under him alone, and have no other head but him.
Whereby we see the presumption and arrogancy of the Pope, and Sea of Rome, in
claiming supremacy above all kings and princes in the whole church upon earth.
This is a device of the devil, and high treason against Christ: for hereby he
is robbed of this royal prerogative, to be the only prince of the kings of the
earth.

Lastly, seeing Christ is king of all kings, we must not be discouraged, when
we be called to suffer any affliction for his truth: let the tyrants of the
earth rage and bend their force to hurt us, yet we have a king above them al,
for whom we suffer: he is their king, he can stay, and bridle them, and if he
please, confound and bruise them in pieces. They cannot do any thing, but that
which he permits; for he rules in the midst of all his enemies, Psalm. 110.2.
he can break them in pieces like a potters vessel. Thus much of the offices
of Christ.

The second part of Christ's description is by the execution of his offices,
which consists in four works. The first contained in these words, Unto him
which loved us: the second, in these, Which washed us in his blood: the other
two, in the two verses which follow, viz. 6 and 7. For the first, which loved
us, that is, John and the churches of Asia, and by proportion, all other
churches, being parts of the true church. The love of Christ has three
degrees: the first is a general love, whereby he loves all his creatures,
approving the same to be good as they be his by creation. The second, is the
love of mankind, in that he was content to become a redeemer for mankind, after
their fall, and not ^or any other creature; no not for the Angels, which fell
as well as man: who therefore remain without all hope of salvation. The third
and principal, is that whereby he loves his elect and chosen children; which is
that special savor, whereby he accepts of them to life everlasting. This
third degree has two parts: First, it is taken for his purpose to love: as
when he says, I have loved Jacob and hated Esau, Romans 9.13. Secondly, for the
act of loving; which is the declaration of his purpose by spiritual benefits,
1. John 3.1. Behold, what singular love God has showed unto us, that we
should be called the sons of God: noting the declaration of his love in the
gift of adoption. So in this verse, by the love of Christ unto his church, is
meant the actual declaration of his special favor, in accepting them for his
children, and bestowing many singular blessings upon them.

Whereas S. John places this in the first place of all the benefits of
Christ, That he loved us; he would teach us* That this special love is the
very ground of man's redemption; which excludes all foreseen faith and works
from being motives of man's election in Gods eternal council, and so
proportionally, all foreseen sins from being motives in God of man's
reprobation.

It may be objected, The love of God as also of man, respects a thing as it is
good: First, the thing must be good, and then it is loved: and so in man's
redemption God first foresees their goodness, and therefore chooses them. Ans.
There is great difference between the love of the creature, and of the
creator. The love of the creature follows the goodness of a thing; because he
sees it is good, therefore he loves it. But God the creator first loves the
creature before it be good, and hence it comes, that it is good, because he
loves it.

Secondly, whereas Saint John and all the churches of Asia, as other true
churches do believe, and are assured that Christ loves them (for that Saint
John takes for granted) this should move all men to have this care, to labor
above all things to be rooted and grounded in the love of God, seeing he
places that in the first place. This is the principal thing, wherein the
Apostle would have the Ephesians rooted and grounded: and therefore prays,
That with all Saints they may be able to comprehend, what is the breadth and
length, deapth, and height th^^of. Ephesians. 2. verse. 17, 18, 19. This we do when
we are assured in heart and conscience, by the working of Gods spirit, that he
loves us in Christ. So that he which denies unto us the assurance of Gods love
in Christ, takes away the very ground of our salvation.

Now that we may have this assurance of Gods love; we must in all good duties
to God and man draw near to God with our hearts, keeping a good conscience in
all things, and then will God draw near to us. If any man love me (says
Christ) he will keep my word, and then my father will love him, and we will
come in unto him, and dwell with him. John 14.23. meaning by the holy ghost;
which shall shed this love into our hearts, Romans 5. verse. 5. causing us to
increase in the feeling thereof, as we grow in faith and obedience toward him.

And has washed us from our sins in his blood. Here is the second benefit
and action of Christ to his church. Where first of all the very phrase, has
washed us, does import, that the sins of men are as filthy spots in their
souls: and that himself and this church of God were touched with a serious
consideration of their vileness, by reason of their sins: for washing
presupposes former filthiness and pollution. Thus did David most sensibly
feel his own filthiness, and see his miserable estate, when he desired the
Lord to Psalm. 51 ^.
wash him thoroughly: confessing thereby, that his soul and body were so
foulely stained, and polluted with sin, that once washing was not enough: but
says he, Wash me again and again, rince, bathe, and swill me in the blood
of Christ, till I be purged and cleansed from all my sins. And this same
affection should be in every one of us: we should labor, that our hearts may
be touched with a lively sense of our vile estate, by reason of our sins,
which make both body and soul most ugly and filthy in Gods sight* and that
the stain hereof is so deeply set in our souls, that we can never be
cleansed, but by the washing of Christ his own hand, and that in his own
hearts blood: yea, that one washing will not serve, but we must be rinced and
bathed therein. For till such time as this consideration do in some measure
take place in our hearts, it is not possible that we should loath sin as we
ought: or come to this comfortable assurance of Gods love, that he has washed
away our sins in his blood: for this humility in our souls by reason of our
sins, is the beginning of all true grace and comfort. Now this work of Christ
in washing us from our sins, does comprehend a double benefit.

First, the remission of our sins, whereby the guilt and punishment due to
them is taken away. Secondly, the mortification of sin, whereby the
corruption of sin is removed and abolished. And we must observe, that S.
John propounds this benefit generally without limitation, saying, Which washed
us from our sins. That is, from all our sins: to give us to understand,
that if any believe truly in Christ, he has pardon of all his sins without
any restraint or limitation, either of number, or quality, be they never so
many, or never so great.

By his blood. How can blood wash away filthiness? nay, it rather defiles a
man. Answ. This washing stands not in the substance of Christ's blood, but in
the merit thereof: for that substance of blood which was shed is lost, and we
know not what is become of it, whatsoever the Papists say: but the merit thereof
remains still. And Christ's blood deserves to purge away sin, rather than
any other man's blood, as of Peter, John, etc. because his blood was the blood
of God (not of the godhead) but of him who was both God and man. For the
manhood of Christ was received into the union of the second person. And so it
may be called the blood of God, as Paul says, Act. 20.28
God redeemed his Church by his blood, that is Christ, God incarnate. And so it
being the blood of him, that is God, is more meritorious than the blood of any
creature whatsoever. Besides Christ was appointed by God to be a public
person in the work of redemption, and in his death and passion he stood in the
room and stead of all his elect, so as when his blood was shed, their blood
was sh^^, because it was shed for them. But the blood of other private men
cannot answer for any besides themselves, because it is shed only for
themselves. Then dam^^ble is the doctrine of the Papists, who hold the blood of
Martyrs, can merit for others, being applied unto them: for seeing they be but
private men, and suffered in their own persons only, they cannot profit any
other thereby.

By blood we must understand the passion of Christ, a part for the whole, and
with all his fulfilling of the law upon the cross; for in his suffering he
fulfilled the law, and in fulfilling the law he suffered. These two cannot be
severed, save only in thought. And so this word contains the whole obedience
of Christ, whereby he procured the remission and mortification of our sins.
Here then we see two notable benefits of Christ unto his church; his love,
and the washing away of sins: which S. John sets down to move the churches
with reverence and diligence to read, and delight in this book. All of us
will say, we are sure God loves us, and has pardoned our sins in Christ:
why then do we not show our love again to him by hearing and reading his
word, set down in this, or any other book of Scripture, and by yielding
answerable obedience thereto* Why then do we not offer up ourselves, souls and
bodies, to serve him, as the Apostle requires, Romans 1^.1. by way of recompense
for his mercies and love shed out unto us? But alas, that is more common, which
is most shameful, to turn Gods grace into wantonness: for when men say God
loves them, and has washed away their sins, yet they rebel against him:
when as these two benefits are here recorded to be in^ucements of continual
love, and obedience to his holy word.

Verse 6. And made us kings and (...) to God, even his father, to him be glory
and dominion for (...), Amen. In these words is set down the third work, and
benefit of Christ, bestowed on his church, and on every true member thereof.
For the better understanding whereof we must consider in them four points*
First, the dignity and excellency of all true believers and member^ of
Christ* They are kings and priests. Secondly, when they be made kings and
priests in this life, noted by the phrase of speech, has ma^^. Wherein (...)
speaks of the church on earth, and uses a word that signifies the time
past. Thirdly, the manner how they become kings and priests, they are not so
borne, but Christ has made them such. Fourthly, to whom they be made such, to
God even the father.

For the first. The dignity of all true believers has two heads; first, They
be kings, secondly, Priests. They are called kings, not in regard of an
earthly kingdom, for usually the condition of most believers on earth is base
and contemptible: but in regard of a spiritual kingdom, the kingdom of
heaven, whereto the Lord gives them right, title, and interest, in, and by
Jesus Christ. So our Savior Christ speaks to his disciples: Luke ^2*31
Fear not, little flock, it is your fathers will to give you the kingdom.
And again, Behold I give unto you a kingdom. Now the faithful are kings in
these respects; first, because by Christ they be lords and conquerours of all
these enemies, sin, Satan, the world, death, hell, and their own flesh.
Secondly, because in, and by Christ, they are partakers of the glory of
Christ's kingdom and salvation: for they receive of Christ grace for grace, and
so answereably, glory for glory, and felicity for felicity. Thirdly, because
they be made lords of all things in heaven and earth (except good Angels, and
the church) All things are yours, whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas,
or the world, or life, or death, whether things present, or to come, even all
are yours, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22.
and ye Christ's. Quest. But if Christ be king, and all his members kings, how
do they differ? Answ. In two points: First, Christ is the son of God by
nature, and so a king by nature, having the right of the kingdom of heaven by
inheritance: but the members of Christ are the sons of God by adoption in his
son, so that our right to that kingdom is not by nature, but by grace.
Secondly, Christ is an universal king over the Angels in heaven, the church on
earth, and all other creatures wheresoever; his regiment is absolute in the
hearts and consciences of men, and he can by his word bind all things: but
true believers be not universal kings, for they have no superiority above
good Angels, and the church. Neither are they absolute kings as he is, nor of
themselves; but by Christ Jesus, and as they participate with Christ in his
kingdom.

The second part of the dignity of true believers stands in this, That they
be priests consecrate and set apart by Christ, to the worship and service of
God here in this life in spirit and truth, and in the life to come, to serve
and praise him eternally. Christ he is a priest, so are all his members; but
yet there is difference. First, Christ he is an external and real priest of
the new Testament, which offers up a true, real, and external pr^pitiatorie
sacrifice to God the father for the sins of mankind. As for believers, they
are not real and external priests, but spiritual, offering up spiritual
sacrifice unto God. As when any member of Christ gives an alms, he offers a
sacrifice to God, not a corporal sacrifice, though the thing given be a bodily
substance; but it is every way spiritual: for to offer a real outward
sacrifice in the new Testament is proper to Christ. Again, our Savior Christ
he is a perfect priest, and offers up a perfect sacrifice, but we being
imperfect, do offer up imperfect sacrifices, tainted, and blemished with
sin; yet accepted as perfect, for the worthiness of Christ's sacrifice.

The second point to be considered, is the time when believers be made kings
and priests; namely, in this life. For as in the entrance into an earthly
kingdom there be degrees: first, to have good right and title to it:
secondly, to get possession of it, which is more than title only; and yet if a
man's title be good, though he want possession, he may be called a king. So it
is with Gods. children, they have the right given them of the kingdom of
heaven in this life, and in that respect are kings. Further, in the possessing
of a kingdom there be two degrees: first, the entrance upon some part*
secondly, the full and perfect enjoying of all. Now every true believer begins
to enter possession of the kingdom of heaven in this life: for it stands Romans
14.17
(...) rig^^eousnesse, joy, and peace: and they which (...) these things in
their hearts, have the kingdom of God begun in them in this life. But the full
fruition and perfect posses^^on of this kingdom is reserved to be given at the
end of this life, and at the d^y of judgment. And as true believers be kings
in this world: so likewise be they priests, in offering spiritual sacrifice
to God, and dedicating and consecrating themselves to his service all the days
of their life.

The third point is, the manner how true believers become kings and priests:
they are not such by nature, neither does this dignity come by descent in
blood or birthright, or by any other privilege they have from man, but only
from Christ Jesus, who by divine calling makes them spiritual kings and
priests, like as under the law, by solemn election and ordination, some were
made earthly kings and priests. Now in this calling of Christ, two things
concur: First, Christ gives his members right to his own kingdom and
priesthood: yet not so, that they can execute the regiment sustained by Christ,
or perform the office of his priesthood; but because they have right in part to
these offices, and the benefit of them both redoundeth to them wholly. And this
right they have, is brought to pass in the covenant of the Gospel: wherein
they are bound to believe in God through Christ; and God is bound again to
give unto them Christ with all his benefits: among which, these two must be
accounted: for indeed, every thing which belongs to Christ, as he is mediator,
is conveyed in some sort to every true believer. Secondly, in this divine
calling, Christ endues all his members with gifts and graces, whereby they are
enabled for the duties of spiritual kings and priests unto God. For as Christ
is anointed, so are all his members. So the Psalmist speaking of Christ says,
He is anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45. verse.
7. Therefore his fellows (that is believers) are anointed with the same oil,
though in less measure. And Saint John says; Ye have received the
anointing, 1. John 2.27. yea, God himself charge wicked men, not to touch
his anointed, Psalm. 105.15. meaning not only Patriarchs, Kings, and Prophets,
but all true believers, who are then anointed when they are endued with the
gifts of the same spirit, in some measure, wherewith Christ in his manhood was
filled above measure.

The fourth point: To whom has he made them kings and priests* Answ. To God,
even the father. This is added for special cause, to prevent that carnal
liberty which man's nature might claim from this spiritual royalty: for men
might say, if all believers be kings, then may they live as they list: but
these words (unto God) do show that the right of their kingdom, with the
offices of their priesthood, must all be referred to the honor and praise of
God, unto whom they are made kings and priests.

Lastly, he adds, Even his father, by way of exposition, to show more
particularly to which of the persons they are first of all made kings and
priests: for the title, God must not here be taken absolutely for the divine
nature, but with restraint to the first person, the father: unto whom all true
believers are made kings and priests in the first place, and from the father to
the son; and from them both, to the holy ghost. And the first person in
Trinity is here named above the rest, not as being above them in degree or
honor, for so they be equal: but because he is the first in order, and the
fountain of the Godhead, which is conveyed from him to the Son, and from
them both to the Holy ghost.

Thus much for the meaning of the words: Now follow sundry uses, from the
consideration of these two dignities of believers. And first their kingly
dignity affoordeth matter both of instruction and consolation.

Instruct. I. Whereas all true believers are made true kings in this life;
hereby every one that professes Christian religion is taught, to carry
himself as an enemy to all those that are of the kingdom of darkness: as
namely to sin, and Satan, to the flesh, and the world, even through the
whole course of his life: for by calling, every Christian has title to the
kingdom of heaven. What affinity then can we have with those that be both
enemies of this kingdom, and of Christ himself, that made us kings. Now, that
we may so carry our selves, as enemies, we must do these three things: First,
have care to keep, guard; and defend our selves, as kings against all our
enemies, sin, Satan, our own flesh, and the enticements of the world. As king^
protect their kingdoms, so must we labor to keep our souls and bodies, and
every faculty and part of them, our wills, affections, thoughts, and
inclinations, from the power of sin. He which is borne of God, keeps
himself (as with watch and ward) that the evil one, that i^, Satan, touch
him not by the assaults of sin. 1. John. 5.18. Secondly, we must make war
continually against Satan, sin, our own flesh, against all our spiritual
enemies, and all the enticements of the world: we must make no truce with the^,
because they will never be reconciled to us, so long as we have interest unto
the kingdom of heaven: and if we yield to them, we loose our kingly dignity,
and become their vassales, and bondslaues. Thirdly, we must labor to kill and
destroy these our enemies as much as possibly we can, by that power we have
from Christ our head, and like valiant kings seek to have the blood of these
enemies, and from day to day strive to vanquish Satan, his power and might, to
overcome the world, and to weaken our own corruption.

Instruct. II. If in this life we be kings, then must we become lords over our
selves, and keep in subjection unto God our wills and affections, and the
secret thoughts and inclinations of our souls. We must not look for rule over
earthly kingdoms: but herein stands our kingdom in this world, That we can
subdue our corrupt affections, and keep our bodies and souls in obedience unto
God. If a man were prince over the whole earth, and yet could not rule
himself, he were but a poor prince, nay he were no prince indeed. But though
a man have not so much as a foot of ground in this world, and yet can rule and
master himself, his thoughts and affections, this man is a valiant prince, and
one whom Christ has consecrate to be king in heaven.

Instruct. III. Seeing we be kings, we must do the duty of Judges: for to him
that is a king belongs sovereign judgment. In the day of judgment the 1.
Cor. 6.2, 3.
saints shall judge the world, and Angels also: but we must be Judges in this
world. And yet here we can neither judge men nor Angels, but we must be our
own Judges. Wherefore as Judges summon, arr^igne, condemn, etc. so must we
examine our selves, call our selves to account, and as guilty persons accuse
and condemn our selves for our sins; acknowledging we be worthy to be cast
into eternal damnation with the devil and his angels: And withal plead for
pardon, and approach to the throne of grace, and forgiveness in Christ: and in
this we show our selves upright spiritual judges, and by this means we
shall be fr^e from the judgment to come.

Instruct. IIII. If we be kings by Christ, we must carry our selves as kings
courageously, and constantly in the afflictions and miseries which we shall
suffer for Christ's sake. For herein among the rest stands the royalty of a
king, that he bears with valor and courage all the troubles which befall him.
Hence it is, that Saint Paul exhorts us to rejoice in afflictions, because we
are partakers of Christ's sufferings, 1. Pet. 4.13. and so are made conformable
unto him that was consecrate the prince of our salvation through afflictions,
Heb. 2.10.

Instruct. V. Seeing we be spiritual kings, we must above all things labor
and seek to have our part in the kingdom of Christ, and in his righteousness.
A Christian must not have his heart glued and fast tied unto the things of this
world, it is against his calling: but he must so use this world, as though he
used it not. If a king should lay down his crown, and go and become a
shepherd or of some manual trade, all men would marvel at it. So it fares
with them that profess themselves to be Christians, and yet bend their wits
and endeavors wholly for these worldly things, they do as it were cast aside
their kingly crown, and abase themselves to slavish bondage. But we must ever
after have our hearts fixed in heaven, striving to come to our inheritance
there.

Instruct. VI. Seeing all the true members of Christ be kings and princes: this
should be an inducement to al backward persons to love and embrace true
religion. In these careless days Religion is counted preciseness, and the
profession thereof made a matter of reproach. But this ought not to be so,
seeing that by it we come to have right and interest unto the kingdom of
heaven, and to be lords of all creatures. And why should we not esteem the
gospel preached as a most precious jewel, seeing that we which are vassales
of Satan, and firebrands of hell (as all men are by nature) become thereby the
members of Christ, yea kings and princes to God? Yea verily, the consideration
of this should make the ministers of the Gospel to joy in their callings, and
to take all pains to preach the word, ^ seeing by it men become of vassals of
Satan, the true members of Christ, and heirs of the kingdom of heaven. In
this world it is counted great honor to consecrate and establish one in an
earthly kingdom: What a blessed and honorable thing then is this, to
consecrate spiritual kings for the kingdom of heaven? And this is done, when
by the word preached men are converted and brought to unfeigned repentance for
their sins, and to true faith in Christ Jesus.

Thus much for the duties. Now follow the consolations to every true believer
only. It is an heavy cross, which breeds much anguish to the soul, to be
in poverty and contempt among men; yet herein may the child of God stay his
heart, and lessen his grief, by considering that even in this state of
misery, he is a king unto God; though he seem base to the world, yet it
appears not what he shall be, for he is heir to the kingdom of heaven. If
a man be in sickness, he must consider it is but Gods messenger, to call him
out of this world to the full possession of the joys of his kingdom. If he be
in trouble of mind, having his own conscience tormented fearfully by Satan
with his sins; yet he must not despair, the Lord will give him an happy
issue: he must remember he is a king, and therefore shall one day have full
conquest over sin, Satan, and his own corruption, yea, over all his enemies
whatsoever. Romans 16.^0.
If he be in the heat of persecution turmoiled and tossed from post to pillar,
which flesh and blood cannot brook: yet then he must consider his holy
calling to be a spiritual king, whose property it is in the most violent
afflictions, even unto death it self (as Paul says) to be more than
conqueror, Roman. 8.37. Lastly, in the very pang of death, when nature must
needs be dissolved, and soul and body separated, then must the child of God
remember, that he is a king in Christ, and this will stay his heart against the
fear of death; for herein shall he see, that by death, as through a straight
passage, he shall enter into the full possession of his kingdom. And thus much
in that we are kings.

From the second dignity of believers, which is to be priests unto God, we are
likewise taught sundry duties.

First, to teach and instruct one another. It was the office of the priest
under the law to teach the people the will of God. The priests lips should
preserve knowledge, Malach. 2. verse. 7. And now under the Gospel not only the
minister, but every true believer is a spiritual priest, and therefore ought
to teach, and admonish one another. Coloss. 3.16. When the Lord says, Touch
no^ mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm, Psa. 105.15. He calls all
his faithful by the name of Prophets, because they ought to have the knowledge
of his will, and be able also in due time and upon just occasion to teach the
same to others, that so the Gospel of Christ may flourish. And as this duty
belongs to all men; so especially to governors, as parents and masters, they
must show themselves priests to their charges. Abraham did it, Genes. 18. David
did it, Prou. 4. And Bathshebath did it, Prou. 31. And all must do it, that
desire an holy generation to succeed after them. We teach them other things,
why not religion?

Secondly, seeing we be priests, we must pray unfeignedly, not only for our
selves, But ^* Tim. ^ ^
for all men, especially the members of Christ. The priest in the old Testament
must pray and make request, not only for himself, but for the people also.
And herein stands the praise of a Christian, to pray for his brethren. Hence it
is that Paul says: Pray for all the Saints, and for me, Ephesians. 6.18. Moses
is highly commended for this duty, especially when he prayed for the
Israelites, and stood before the Lord in the gap, to turn away his wrath,
Exodus 32. Elias for his power in prayer and prophecy, is called the chariot
and horsem^n of Israel. 2. King. ^.12. And this is recorded for the praise of
Hezechi^, That when the people were unprepared at the eating of the Passover,
He prayed to the Lord for mercy, and was h^ard, 2. Chron. 30.18. And so when we
find any commended in scripture for his gift in prayer, it is not so much for
that he prayed diligently for himself, as for the whole church of God.

Thirdly, being priests we must offer spiritual sacrifice unto God, that is,
dedicate our selves, our souls, and bodies, and all that is in us, our wit,
learning, knowledge, and every gift of body or mind to Gods service. That we
may do all this to his glory, we must look, that every thing we take in hand
have his beginning from a pure heart* a good conscience and faith unfeigned, and
be directed to a good end, to Gods glory principally, and the good of others,
whom it may concern.

Fourthly, we must be full of blessings. The priests in the old Testament,
Numbers 6^ used to bless the people: so must we, if we be Christians, because
we are spiritual priests. We must take heed of all cursed speaking, of
slaundering and backbiting, of swearing and forswearing: and give our selves to
blessed and gracious speeches to all men, and of all men, friends, or foes,
Romans 12.14.

Fifthly, we must seek to have God for our portion: The Leuits had no portion
in the land of Canaan, but the tenth^ only, Deuteronomy. 10.9. Psalm. 119.57
The Lord was their portion. So we being priests to God, must be content with
any estate in this world, for God is our portion. We must not seek too much
after any inheri^^nce on earth, for then we carry not our selves like priests
unto God. The favor of God in Christ must be the thing we long for, and therein
must we rejoice.

To him be glory and dominion, for evermore, Amen. These words are a
thanksgiving to God for the former benefits of Christ bestowed on his church:
Which S. John puts in before he have ended his record of the gracious
works of Christ for his church, as it were interrupting himself, for the
great desire he had to the glory of God. Whereby we are taught, that the
consideration of Gods benefits toward us, specially such as concern the
kingdom of heaven, should stir up our hearts to give continual praise and
glory to God. This was David's affection, when he felt in his soul the pardon
of his sins, and therefore he breaks out into this thanksgiving* My soul
praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits, Psalm 103.^. And so did
Paul, after the blessed memory of Gods mercy in his vocation. 1. Tim. 1.17.

Secondly, in this example of John we may learn, what is the true form of
giving thanks to God, namely, to ascribe unto him all power, glory, and
absolute dominion for evermore. But alas, it is too too manifest, that our
corrupt nature will not do this, but taking from God his due, bestows it on
creatures, yea, on our own selves. It is a matter of grace to know what is due
to God, and to ascribe the same unto him, and therefore we are charged to give
unto the Lord glory and power, which in the next words he calls the glory of his
name, Psalm. 96.7, 8. So Christ, he teaches us to ascribe all power, glory,
might, and dominion to God, when we say in the Lords prayer: For thine is the
kingdom, the power and glory* that is, The kingdom of heaven is thine; all
power in heaven and earth is thine, and therefore all glory is thine: and from
our hearts we do ascribe the same unto thee.

Lastly, S. John adds, Amen, that is, So be it. Let all glory and dominion
be given to Christ: which is the same he said before. Whereby he does testify
his fervent affection, and strength of desire, after the glory of Christ, else
he would not have doubled his thanksgiving. And so should it be with us, we
should not freese in our thanksgiving for Gods benefits, but labor to have
our hearts and tongues to double the same, that thereby we may testify our
fervent and earnest desire after his praise and glory.

Verse 7. Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him: yea,
even they which pierced him through: and all kinreds of the earth shall wayle
before him, Even so, Amen. These words are a declaration of the fourth action
of our Savior Christ toward his church: and that is, his second coming to
judgment, to judge both quick and dead. Wherein we are to consider sundry
points: first, this note of attention, Behold: secondly, the action of Christ's
coming it self, He comes: Thirdly, the manner how; with clouds, amplified
by the manifestation thereof, Every eye shall see him, even they that pierced
him: fourthly, the effect of his coming: All tribes of the earth shall wail.
Fifthly, the conclusion of this narration, with two notes of asseueration, Even
so, Amen, to confirm the second coming of Christ unto all people.

I. point: Behold. First, Saint John begins this narration with a note of
attention. The spirit of God is accustomed, when any thing is of special weight
and worth our careful marking, to prefixe before it this note of attention:
Behold, or such like. Hence then we are taught this special duty, namely,
often and every day earnestly and seriously to bethink our selves of the
second coming of Christ to judgment. This consideration is a matter of great
use, for it is a notable means to begin and continue the conversion of a
sinner unto God. When the Scribes and Pharisees, obstinat enemies, came to the
baptism of S. John, he used this as a means to make them to turn, and
believe in Christ, saying: Ob generation of vipers, who has forewarned you,
that you should fly from the vengeance to come? Matthew. 3.7. So Peter uses
this same Argument, to bring the Jews to repentance: exhorting them to turn,
that their sins might be put away, when the day of refreshing (that is) the
day of judgment should come, Acts 3.19. Paul persuades the Athenians to
repentance, Because there is a day appointed in which the Lord will judge the
world by Jesus Christ, Act. 17.30, 31.

Secondly, this note of attention serves to strike our hearts with a fear and
reverence of Christ Jesus: for it gives us warning that he shall come to be
our Judge. We are touched with awe and reverence toward earthly magistrates when
we consider, that they have authority to attach, apprehend, and to bring us to
their courts and assizes. How much more should this work in us a reverend awe
toward Christ, when we consider, That one day we must all be brought before
his Tribunal seat, and there be judged of him.

II. point: The coming of Christ himself, He comes* that is, Christ locally
descends from the highest heaven, in his manhood, to that part of the world,
where the clouds be, there to give judgment upon all mankind quick and dead.
Here mark in what manner John propounds his coming: he says nor, he shall
come, but in the present time, he comes. Whereby he would teach us: First,
that this second coming of Christ is as certain, as if it were now present.
Secondly, that it is not long to, or far off, but will be quickly. Thirdly,
that our duty is, to consider of the coming of Christ, as of a thing present.
This Saint John learned, and so should we by his example, for it is a matter
of great use. For hence we^ are taught, to desire and do that every day, which
we would desire and do in the day of judgment, and blessed is he that
attaineth hereunto.

Now that we may come to the practice of this duty, we must daily consider of
the coming of Christ, not as a thing to be delayed or far off, but as a
thing present. We must every day call our selves to a reckoning and account,
and persuade our selves this may be the last day; and so shall we carry our
selves every day, as we would in the last day. Now we would wish at the day of
judgment, that we did repent and believe in Christ: and therefore every day of
our life, before the last judgment come, we ought to repent and believe in
Christ. If this duty were practiced, we should find less corruption, and more
grace in our hearts, and less sin, ^^d more obedience in our lives every day
than other: but grace is wanting, and sin abounds, because this meditation
takes no place in our hearts. Again, in that he says, He comes, meaning
in respect of his manhood; hence we gather, he is absent from us, in regard
of bodily presence; and the heavens must contain him until the day of
judgment: But if Christ were always bodily present in the Sacrament, he
could not be said to come, but only to manifest himself, being before
present. And therefore the opinion of those, which hold the body of Christ to
be really the bread, to be in or about the bread of the Sacrament, is most
false and frivolous, flat against that article of our Faith, whereby we hold,
That he comes from heaven only at the last day, in regard of his manhood.

III. point: The manner of Christ's Christ's coming, in two things* First, that
he comes with clouds: Secondly, that his coming is open, and visible to every
eye.

First, with clouds, here S. John speaks after the manner of the prophets,
who to set out God in his majesty and glory, say: he comes with clouds, Psa.
18. and 97.
rides on the wings of the wind; as though he had said, he comes in exceeding
majesty and glory. These words are added to make a distinction between the
first and second coming of Christ. His first coming was in humility, borne
of a poor virgin, entertained in a stable of an Inn: but his second coming
is with glory, majesty, and dominion in the clouds. And the reason is because
he came first to be a redeemer, and a savior by his suffering; and therefore
came in the state of a servant. But his second coming is to be a Judge of all
men, yea of his enemies, and therefore he comes with all might, majesty and
glory, to show himself king and lord of all.

The uses of this his second coming are set down in the 97 Psalm, to make
the very mountains to tremble, to confound the wicked, and ungodly, and to
comfort the godly in that day.

Secondly, for his open appearance; Every eye shall see him, he shall come in
majesty and glory: not secretly, but in visible show to all the world. All
men shall see him with their own eyes: All I say, which were since the world
began to his coming.

In these words he touches three points: First, he takes it here for
granted, that every man shall rise from death to life, though their death were
never so strange, or never so long before. Secondly, that all men being raised
again, shall have life, and motion, and their senses restored to them, as
before they died. Thirdly, that all men, none excepted, shall come and stand
before the tribunal seat of Christ, and there be judged of him in the clouds.

The consideration whereof is, First, an exceeding comfort to Gods children, in
that they being dead, and rotten in their* graves, shall rise, and receive
their life, and motion, and see Christ their savior, and judge of all men. If
a man when he lays him down to sleep, should be told that when he rose
he should see his dead father and mother, or his dearest friends, whom he saw
not of long before; this would be a notable comfort to him, that now he should
enjoy them again* (...) how far greater comfort shall this yield to all the
godly, who have been dead and rotten in the grave, That they shall be raised
up, and not only to meet with godly friends, but enjoy Christ Jesus the son
of God, which is the friend of friends; who shall give them not only life and
motion, but eternal life with his own majesty. This was Jobs comfort, that
though he died, yet he believed he should see his redeemer with his eyes. And
this should be our comfort against the fear of death, and last judgment.

Secondly, this is a terror to the wicked, and to all impenitent sinners, that
they shall (will they, nill they) be brought to the bar of Christ's judgment
seat, and there look on him who is their judge whom they have in their life
contemned, and despised. And this consideration may serve to move them to
repentance which have no^ begun to repent, and to labor to become the
members of Christ; a^ also to increase and further repentance in them, who have
by Gods grace begun the same. It may be some do think when they die* all is
done, and there is no further account to follow: but though we lie rotten in
our graves a thousand, or two thousand years; yet we shall rise and look upon
our judge with our own eyes. And if we have not in our life time repented, we
shall hear him with our own ears, giving the dreadful sentence against us,
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire. And therefore it is best for us in this day
of grace to prevent this danger, and now repent, and believe in Christ: that
then we may rise with joy, and stand with hol^nesse before Christ Jesus. No
doubt if we were persuaded that we should thus appear, it would move us to
repent.

Thirdly, Every eye shall see him* that is, all men with their own eyes shall
look on him. Hence it may be gathered, that those who wanted their fight in
this life, shall have it then restored. It is granted of all Divines, that the
elect shall have all their senses, and other defects restored, wherein they
were wanting in this life: And it may also be added that the wicked shall then
have some of their senses restored* if they wanted the same in this life; as
hearing, and seeing at the least: for the deaf shall hear, the blind shall
see this Judge. And this can be no glory to them, seeing it is to increase
their misery: for the more senses they have, the more punishment they shall
feel, because by sense we apprehend misery.

Even th^se which peirced him. Here is added a further evidence of Christ's
manifestation of his coming, and that for three causes. First, to show that
no power, or wisdom in the world, can free any one from his appearance. For
if any could escape, in all likelihod it would be those Jews and Gentiles who
prevailed most against Christ, and put him to death. But none of those can
escape his judgment: for even they which peirced him, they shall see this
Judge, and be summoned before his majesty: For though they had power to kill
him, yet none of them shall have power to absent themselves from before his bar
of judgment at the last day.

Secondly, to show the case of all wicked men: namely, that such woe and
misery shall befall them as they never once thought of. The Jews and Gentiles
which crucified Christ, never dreamed of this; that he whom they then put to a
temporal death, should one day be their Judge, and condemn them to eternal
death, unless they had repented.

Thirdly, to show the rufull and woeful estate of all impenitent sinners; they
shall rise to judgment, and have the greatest enemy their Judge, who will
show rigor upon them, and justice without all mercy: for this peircing of
Christ is meant not only of the Jew, which put him to death, but of all
ungodly person^; because all such do by their sins, as with swords and
spears wound him at the heart as the soldiers did. Impenitent sinners be as
the Jews which crucified Christ, as Judas which betrayed him, and as the
soldiers which goar^^ his side: and unless they now repent, they shall one day
be judged as his enemies.

Even they which peirced him. Out of these words some gather that the body of
Christ has still the wounds and scarres which were given him at his death, the
print of the nails in his hands and his feet, and that these shall be seen
in him at the last day: adding withal, that it is no blemish to Christ to have
these, but rather an increase of his glory. But this cannot be gathered hence,
for though it be said, They shall see him whom they peirced; yet it follows
not, that they shall see him as he was peirced: what though they see the person
whom they wounded, shall they therefore see his wounds? Many shall see kings
and queens whom they crowned in this world, but it follows not, that
therefore they shall wear their crowns. So we shall see our fathers and
mothers, but not as fathers and mothers.

IV. point. The fruit and effect of his coming, especially in the wicked in
these words: And all tribes of the earth, shall wail before him. Where S. John
speaks of the whole world according to the condition of the land of Canaan:
for only that part of the world was divided into tribes. As in like case our
Savior Christ sets out the judgment of the whole world, according to the
state and manner of judging the visible Church, Math. 25. So that his meaning
is, that they which repented not, of what nation soever, of what state, or
condition soever they have been, shall wayle, and mourn at that day. And he
adds a reason of this their mourning, in these words, (...).
for him, before him, or over him. That is, they shall wayle, and lament with
exceeding lamentation, because they believed not his word, but contemned him,
and his doctrine, and therefore now they want all help to free them from the
punishment of their unbelief* and contempt of the gospel: for this life is
the only time of grace and mercy: afterward there is no work, nor invention
that can alter man's estate.

Hence then we are admonished, first, that in this world we labor above all
things to be reconciled to God in Christ, to get our sins pardoned, to
believe and embrace his holy word, and unless we attain hereunto in this
life, we shall wayle eternally; for when the last day is come, there is no
hope of help, no way to escape, no time of grace to repe^^. Remember the
foolish virgins that sought for oil, when it was too late, and knocked when
the doors were shut, Math. 25. But if by Gods mercy we can in this life get
his love and favor in Christ, then shall we enjoy the same eternally: yea, at
this dreadful day to all the wicked, we shall lift up our heads, and our
hearts, when we shall see Christ coming to our full redemption, all tears
shall be wiped from our eyes, when the wicked shall cry and houle, woe and
alas for evermore. The devil knowing the worth of this admonition, will labor
by all means to keep it from our hearts. But this shall be our wisdom,
betime to sue for grace, and so shall we defeat Satan, and prevent eternal
wailing.

Secondly, here see what an evil conscience is: It lies asleep here while a
man lives, and never troubles him, and so it may do in death also: but in the
last day when he shall see his Judge with his eyes, then it will stir, it
will torment him, it will attach, accuse, and condemn him, it will lay to his
charge all his sins, his contempt of Christ and his word, his unbelief in
the time of grace; and then it will break his heart, being as good as a
thousand witnesses to condemn him.

This should cause all men to labor to get a good conscience, washed and
purged in the blood of Christ, which will not suffer us to lie in any one
sin; and upon our repentance will assure us we be in the favor of God: Which
if it do in this life, then will it never make us to wail at the last day, but
it will excuse us, and make us look up to our redeemer, and to rejoice in him.
But take heed when thy conscience lies asleep, and accuses not for thy
sins, no not at death; that is an evil conscience which will awake at the
day of judgment to torment and condemn thee.

V. point. The means whereby he confirms the certainty of the second
coming of Christ; that is, by a double note of asseueration: Even so, Amen.
One of these is taken from the Greeks, Even so, the second from the Hebrews,
Amen: being both as much as Amen, Amen, or verily, verily. In which phrase
Saint John teaches us, how to confirm the things we avouch. There be three
ways whereby a thing may be avouched: First, by a simple and bare affirmation,
or negation: Secondly, by an earnest asseueration: Thirdly, by an oath. Now S.
John uses these two notes of assuring in this weighty matter of Christ's
second coming, saying, He comes, even so, Amen; that is, certainly and
without all doubt it is so. Hereby teaching us, first, that an asseueration
must not be used, but only when the matter in hand is of great weight and
moment. Here then we see that wretched is their practice, who use to bind
every word with an oath; which is a degree above this asseueration. Yea, they
also are here justly reproved, who in their ordinary communication have ever
in their mouth some weighty asseueration. Our savior often uses these words
of asseueration, yet only in matters of weight and moment, and when the
hearers were to be moved to greater attention, and their hearts were to be
more fully settled in some truth of great importance.

Secondly, by these asseuerations John would teach us to hold against the
practice of Atheists, that the coming of Christ is most certain and
undoubted. Which thing we should more seriously observe; because in our corrupt
nature there is bred this false persuasion, That either we shall not be
summoned to judgment; or else, that Christ's coming is far off: like to the
evil servant, who says, My master deferres his coming: which evil servant
by nature is every one of us.

Thirdly, hereby John gives us to understand one special note and mark of the
child of God: namely, to desire and long after unfeignedly the second coming of
Christ to judgment: for as these words be an asseueration, so withal they
contain a most earnest desire: Even so, Amen, as if he should say by way of
answer to the proclaiming of his coming, Lord grant it be so, yea Lord, let it
be so. Hence it is that Saint Paul describes all those, who must receive the
crown of righteousness, by this property, that they love his appearing, 2.
Tim. 4.8. As for the ungodly it is not so with them, they (being not justified
nor sanctified, and so not reconciled to God in Christ) cannot love this
appearing. Nay they could wish with all their heart there were no hell, nor
last judgment. And by this one note we may well judge of our estates; for if
from our hearts we desire and long for this second coming to judgment, and
wish he would come Revel 22.^0.
quickly, then it is a certain token and sign we be reconciled to God in
Christ, and shall receive the crown of righteousness. But if as yet we feel
not this longing and hungering desire in us, then we must suspect our selves,
and labor every day to feel it: for it is the desire of the saints to say,
Reave. 6.10*
How long Lord. And with John, Even so, Amen.

Verse 8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end (says the Lord)
which i^ which was, and which is to come, even the Almighty. After Saint John
had described Christ at large in the former verses: he brings him in speaking
of himself by a figure, as may appear by this clause ( says the Lord.)

The end and scope of these words in this verse is to confirm that which was
before spoken of Christ, being a proof and reason thereof, after this manner
to be conceived. He which is the beginning and the end of all, etc. he is
sufficient to be a king, priest, and prophet to the Church, and is both able
and willing to bestow on them all blessings which serve for their good. The
first part of this argument is omitted, the second part is contained in this
eight verse: But I am the beginning, and the end; and therefore I am
sufficient, etc.

In this eight verse are three points concerning Christ. First, he is the
beginning and the end. Secondly, he is, was, and is to come. Thirdly, he is
Almighty. For the first: that Christ is the beginning, and the end, Saint John
expresses by a comparison taken from the Greek alphabet: and it stands
thus. As in the A, B, C, of the Grecians, Alpha is the first letter, and
therefore the beginning of all the letters; and Omega is the last, and
therefore the end of all the letters. So (says Christ) am I the beginning of
all things that are; and the end of all things. The first part of this
similitude is in these words, I am Alpha and Omega; that is, I am as Alpha and
Omega. The second part in these words, The beginning and the end.

From this and such like manner of speaking, the Papists gather that it is
lawful to worship God in a strange language. And that the Scriptures are to
be read and delivered to the people in an unknown tongue. But their collection
is frivolous: For though the unlearned English man know not what Alpha and
Omega is: yet the Churches to whom this book was written, being Grecians knew
generally what was meant hereby.

Again, though the spirit of God uses here and there a strange word or
phrase; yet we may not follow that practice in the whole service and worship of
God, whereby neither the word, nor prayer should be understood of the people,
as the Papists do.

I am the beginning, Christ is said to be the beginning for two causes. First,
because he was the very first of all things: there was nothing before him; he
had ^ being when all creatures were not; then was he the same that he is now:
and for this says Saint John Chap. 1. verse. 1. In the beginning was the word,
that is, the son of God, he had his being, and subsisting when all other
creatures wanted it, and began to be.

This proves the eternity of Christ, because he had his being before any
creature; he was a substance and essence begotten of the father before all
worlds, not created as other creatures are, or made of any other.

Secondly, he is called the beginning; because he gives a beginning to al
creatures: For all things which were created and had a being, were created by
him, and had their being from him. So says the Apostle, All things are from
him, and for him, Colos. 1.16. And hence we learn, that when we go about any
business in word or deed, we must begin it with invocation on the name of
Christ: for Christ he gives the beginning, and proceeding to all things. And
without his help we cannot have in any thing good success.

Secondly, the same Christ is the end of all things, and that for two causes:
First, because he is the last of all things, and after him is nothing in
subsisting, and being: for all creatures if they were left to themselves would
come to nothing. And whereas some creatures be eternal, it is not of
themselves, but by him, and from him which is the end. But though they all
should come to nothing, yet Christ would remain the same he was for ever,
namely, the eternal son, and word of the father. This then should make us
with full purpose of heart to cleave unto Christ in all things, if we would
enjoy eternal happiness: for without him is nothing but changing; and unless
we have our stablenesse from him, we cannot but come to an end.

Secondly, he is the end; because all things in heaven and earth were made to
serve him: For him were all things created, Coloss. 1.16. that is, to serve for
his glory and praise.

The second thing here said of Christ is this, Which is, was, and is to come.
These words were expounded in the fourth verse, where the very same are
affirmed of the father. The meaning is, that Christ is in presence a perfect
substance, and essence or being; subsisting in, by, and from himself, and such
a substance he was in time past, from all eternity: and such as shall
continue in time to come for evermore.

Hence we learn three things. First, That the second person in the Trinity is
consubstantiall with the father, that is, of one and the same substance and
nature with him. The reason is, because there can be but one only substance or
essence, which has being in and by it self, and from it self alone: neither
can we conceive how there should be two, or more, but only one; as there
cannot be two eternals, or two infinits, two omnipotents and absolute lords,
which have nothing one of another. Now in the fourth verse it is said of the
father, That he is a substance of himself, in himself, and from himself
alone. And here the selfsame thing is said of the second person, the son.
And, therefore he is of the very same substance with the father: for though
they be distinct persons in the godhead, yet they have but one and the same
substance, one and the same divine nature, and Godhead.

Secondly, hence we may gather. That Christ is God of himself* because as the
^^ther is, (...).
was, and shall be; so the son i^, was, and shall be; and that in the same
respects: So that as the father is God of himself, and from none other, so the
son is God of himself, and from none other. Indeed as he is the son, the
second person, so he is of the father, and has his being from him by eternal
generation: but as he is God, he is consubstantiall with the father, and
coequall with him, and has his essence of, and in himself alone. And the same
is to be affirmed of the holy ghost; as he is the third person, he proceeds
from the father and the son, but as he is God, he is of himself, and from
none other.

Thirdly, hence we learn, That Christ is coeternall with the father, being
everlasting as the father is, and every way coequall, having the same
attributes of the godhead that the father has.

The third point touching Christ is, That he is the Almighty. There is in God,
and so in Christ, a double power: First, a Potentiall; secondly, an Actual
power. Potentiall is that, whereby he can do many things, more than ever he
did, or will do: as he could raise children to Abraham of the stones, but he
would not: he could* have delivered Christ from death* but he would not. Now
Christ's omnipotency is not to be understood of his potentiall power here
principally, but rather of his actual power, whereby he brings to pass
without let and impediment whatsoever he decrees, wills or promises.

From this omnipotency of Christ arises a double comfort to his church:
First, That whatsoever he has promised in his Gospel, is yea, and Amen: that
is, shall be brought to pass effectually without stop and let, as assuredly
as he promised it. Now Christ has promised in the Gospel to all penitent
sinners remission of sins, mortification, justification, and life
everlasting; every one whereof, shall in due time be done to every true
believer, which is a singular comfort to them; for all men and Angels cannot
give one of these to any one man: but Christ he is omnipotent, and he both can
and will effect them all to his elect.

The second comfort: that Christ both can and will give his church sufficient
security and protection through all the miseries of this life: he can defend
and guard her against all the fury and malice of Satan, and all her enemies:
he is above them, and can bridle their might when and how he pleases.

Hence also, that Christ is Almighty, we are taught two duties. First, under
the cross, and in tribulation to humble our selves under his mighty hand* for
it is he which corrects us, who is almighty, able to do what he list, and
more than he will, resistance or repining will do us no good. Secondly, this
should move us to perform hearty obedience unto Christ in all things, both
in our general and particular callings to walk uprightly before him: for he
is Almighty, and sees whether we walk sincerely before him, or not, if we
do not, he is able to punish us. By this Argument God persuadeth Abraham to
walk uprightly before him, because he is Almighty, able to correct and
destroy those which refuse to obey him, Genes. 17.1.

Verse. 9. I John, even your brother, and compa^^on in tribulation, and in the
kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the ^sle called (...) for the
word of God, and for the witnessing of Jesus Christ. Hitherto we have
entreated of the Preface of this book, containing the title and inscription
thereof. Now from this ninth verse, to the end of the third chapter, is
contained one of those seven visions which were showed unto John, and are set
down in this book. In this first vision two things are to be noted: first,
the circumstances; secondly, the parts thereof. The circumstances in the ninth
and tenth verses: the parts from thence to the end of the third chapter.

The circumstances of this vision are four: first, the person to whom this
vision was showed, namely, John: The second, the place where, at Pa^mos: The
third, the manner how it is propounded, It was delivered to him being (...) the
spirit: The fourth, the time when, on the Lords day.

For the first: John is the person to whom this vision befell; who does
therefore name himself, to show, that it was given him of the Lord: for as the
Lord has his visions and re^elations (as has been said) so the devil has
his: Verse. 1.
but they may be distinguished by the persons to whom they be given. God
gives his visions not to all men, but unto those which are most ^it for them;
such as be most holy men for life, endued with exceeding gifts of God,
a^knowledge, wisdom, constancy, zeal, piety, and religion. So in the old
testament he delivered not them to all, (...) his servants the Prophets, men
of singular gifts and graces, and of exceeding holiness and piety. Indeed the
Lord revealed some particular things by wicked men, as by Balaam and Caypha^,
but they never knew what those things meant which were showed unto them. It is
a property belonging to the servants of God, to receive a vision, and to know
the same to their comfort. And for both these was John thoroughly qualified, he
was a man of exceeding holiness of life (for Christ loved him) and of singular
and rare gifts, full of zeal, love, and piety, and also had the knowledge of
this vision made known unto him. But the devil makes no such choice, his
visions befall men which are Heretics, wicked notorious sinners, who have no
such rare and special gifts as the other have: so that we must esteem of
this, as a singular gift of God to his own Apostle S. John.

Now John having named himself to be the receiver of this vision: for the
greater credit hereof, he describes himself by two modest terms: First, A
brother: secondly, A companion: First, he calls himself, their brother; that
is, of them who by faith were all members of the mystical body of Christ. For
the Church of God is a family, whereof God the father is head and
house-holder, Jesus Christ is the ^lder brother, and all believers are fellow
brethren in and by Christ, being by faith the adopted sons of God, members of
that family, and brethren (...) to other.

By this title (your brother) first he sets out his humility, and great
modesty. For he was a man at that time above all men which liue^, in reg^rd of
his gifts and holiness of life* he was the last Apostle, and had Apostolical
authority, b^ing a most ze^lous and constant professor, yet he calls
himself a brother to (...) himself but equal with them, though they were
far inferior to him. And so should we esteem better of our brethren than of
our selves, and make our selves inferior to them.

Secondly, by this title we see he had his heart full of brotherly love to all
the members of the church of Christ, he loved them as brethren. So we are bound
to love all men, even our enemies, as they be of the same flesh with us, but
those that be of the same faith and religion with us, to these especially
should we show our love and affection. So Paul says to the christian Romans,
He affectioned to love one another with brotherly love, Romans 12.10. And great
reason: for believers are linked each to other with the nearest bond, they have
the same father, which is God, the same redeemer, the same faith, hope,
baptism, and the same benefit by Jesus Christ, his death and obedience.

But this duty is not practiced; there be that call themselves brethren, who
(as Isay says) hate them that tremble at the word; Isay 66.5.
and mock them even for the profession of the same religion, whereby they
think to be saved. If any seem to make more conscience of their ways than
others, they are reviled and hated for the name of Christ; which ought not to
be, for among all true Christians should be brotherly love.

The second title, Companion, or copartner in three things* in tribulations, in
the kingdom, and in the patience of Christ. He calls himself Copartner with
(...) in tribulations for two causus. First, because at that time when he
wrote this vision* the whole church was in persecution and tribulation under
that cruel tyrant Dom^^ian, about fourscore or an hundred years after Christ^
who banished him into (...): where he was not unmindful of the afflictions of
the church whereof he was a member: and therefore calls himself a partner with
them in affliction.

By which he shows what is that state of Gods church in this world, namely, to
be under the cross: and the members thereof must not be companions of peace
and ease, but copartners in affliction and tribulation. And therefore Christ
teaches those which will be his Disciples these lessons. First, to deny
themselves, to take up his cross daily and to follow him. And because of this
estate, the church in this world is called The Militant Church, being in
continual fight against the devil and his instruments. The consideration
whereof is of special use: For we in this land have had peace and quietness for
many years without persecution, which we must acknowledge for a special
blessing vouchsafed to us for this end, that now in the time of peace we might
prepare our selves against the day of trial. For seeing the estate of the
church is to be under afflictions; we are all in duty bound to wait
continually when God will call us out to suffer for his sake. No man can define
the time, or the manner of our trial* but yet that it will come we must
resolve; because of the usual estate of the church. God has for a long time
sent forth laborers into his harvest, whereby no doubt many sheaues are
gathered into the Lords barn. Now after this long gathering there will come a
day of ^^^^ing* The Lord will take into his hand the (...) of affliction, and
put it into his corn, and thereby try the chafe from the wheat. It stands us
therefore in hand to prepare our selves in this time of peac^, that we may be
found good corn in the Lords sieue, and not chafe, which must be cast into
unquenchable fire.

Secondly, he calls himself their copartner in afflictions: because his
pitiful heart was moved with the bowels of compassion, toward all his fellow
members, when he remembered their persecution, and affliction under the cruel
tyrant Domitian. And the same affection should be in every one of us toward
the poor afflicted servants of Christ: seeing they be our fellow members, we
should have a fellow-feeling with them, weeping with them that weep, and show
our compassion in pitying them. If the foot be pricked, the head stoopes, the
eye beholds and looks on it, the finger pulls it out, the hand applies the
plaster, the other foot is ready to run for help, the tongue to ask for
counsel, and all the members are ready to afford their mutual help in
pi^tie and fellow-feeling: so when any members of the church suffer affliction,
be pricked with persecution for Christ's cause; then should we as members of the
same body, be ready to do all the help we can to them, especially in showing
our fellow-feeling with them.

The second thing wherein he is this copartner is, in the kingdom of Christ,
that is, the kingdom of heaven. Where observe that he places fellowship in
affliction, before companion in the kingdom: to give us to understand, that
through afflictions and crosses for Christ's sake, is the ready way to the
kingdom. It is that way which is beaten and trodden by the Prophets, Apostles,
and the Saints of God: as the Apostle says, Act. 14.12.
through manifold tribulations we must enter into heaven. And, this 2. Cor. 4.^7
momentarie affliction causes to us an inf^^it weight of glory; not by
deserving it, but by showing the plain way thither. Whereby we are taught not to
think it hard, when trials do befall us, but rather to count it a good thing,
yea exceeding great gladness, when any affliction does befall us for Christ's
sake: for herby we are brought like wandering sheep into that beaten path which
leads to heaven. Iam. 1.2.
Nay, we must rather marvel when we profess the Gospel, and have no
affliction; then we may Heb. 12.8.
fear we be out of the way, seeing the Lord afflicts every child which is
his.

Thirdly, he is Copartner in patience: which he adds, because it is a most
worthy virtue, whereby we are made able to persevere in affliction till we
come to heaven. Afflictions are the beaten way, heaven is our joyful end,
patience is the means to make us go on till we come thither. Whatsoever
things are written, are written for our learning, that we through patience, and
comfort in the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.4. Where true hope to come
to heaven is obtained by patience, which makes a believer to go on in
suffering till he come to life eternal. There is much fruit in the good
ground, Math. 1^.
but not brought forth without patience, and the true believer is saved by hope
in this world, yet cannot come to heaven without patience, Ia. 5. for thereby he
must possess his s^ule.

Now because men will say, patience is an hard matter, and so are discouraged
from seeking for it; therefore to set an edge on there desire, he adds, It is
the patience of Christ: and it is so called, either because he commands it, or
because it is his gift, and comes from the spirit of Christ; or chiefly
because he himself suffers in his members, and as their misery and
suffering is his, so is their patience. The consideration whereof is a singular
motive to enduce every child of God to patience, in bearing the cross for
Christ his sake: for they have Christ their fellow sufferer, he takes part with
them, and puts under his shoulder: Who would not then be content to suffer with
patience? And thus much of the branches of his fellowship severally.

Now consider them jointly, and they contain a notable description of the
communion of saints, which is a special article of our faith, standing in
three things: In tribulation, In the kingdom of heaven, And in patience. And
mark well, that this communion begins in tribulation, therein we must be
partners, and that with patience, before we come to have fellowship in the
kingdom of heaven. That man therefore that has afflictions laid on him, must
bear them patiently; and when the members of Christ are under the cross, he
must in tender compassion be touched with their miseries: and when he does
truly feel in his heart this Christian patience and compassion, then may he
assure himself he is entered into this communion, and shall undoubtedly with
all saints be partaker of the joys of heaven. But if patience and compassion
be wanting, we persuade our selves in vain of this communion: and therefore
let us strive against impatience, and against the deadness and hardness of
our hearts* that we may neither murmur against God in our own afflictions, nor
ye^ want compassion toward our brethren that any where suffer affliction for
the name of Christ. Thus much for the circumstance of the person.

Was in the Isle called Patmos. In these words is the second circumstance,
namely, the place where this vision (...) given to John. This Patmos is one of
those Islands, which the Geographer^ call Sporades, lying in the West part of
(...) the less, near to the churches to whom John writ, and by the sea
commonly called the Eg^^n sea. This Island was a small, base, and poor Island,
little or never a whit inhabited.

Saint John had his vision not at Jerusalem, at Antioch, or Rome, but in
Patmos, a base, poor, and little inhabited Island. By this we see, that in the
new Testament there is no respect of one place above another, in regard of Gods
presence, and our fellowship with him, he does as well manifest himself to
John by this vision in Patmos, as to other his Prophets and Apostles in
Jerusalem the holy city. In the old Testament there was difference of places,
in regard of Gods solemn worship and presence; as the Lord showed his
presence, and tied his worship especially to his Tabernacle and Temple at
Jerusalem. This Daniell shows by his gesture in prayer: Dan. 6.
for being in captivity, when he prayed in his chamber, He opened the window
which was toward the Temple at Jerusalem, and turned his face thitherward. But
now in the new Testament, that difference of place is abolished in respect of
Gods worship. And therefore Paul wills, That men pray every where, 1. Tim.
2.8.
lifting up pure hands unto God: and so for all the duties of religion we must
think the like.

I. Then away with Popish pilgrimage to churches and chapels of Saints, The
Use.
or to their relics. This is mere superstition: for God is present every
where, and a man that will worship God in spirit and truth, may have fellowship
with him in one place as well as another.

II. Also this may serve to correct a false conceit which many have of our
churches and chapels: for when they come to a dwelling house, they think it
not their duty, there to humble themselves, to kneel down, and call upon
God: but if they come into a church or chapel never so often, upon ordinary
affairs they fall down to prayer. The reason is, because they think these
places be more holy, and God more present there, and they shall sooner be
heard in them than in their common houses: which is untrue: for in the new
Testament all such diversity of place is abolished in regard of Gods service
and presence: the dwelling house is as holy as the church. Indeed churches must
be maintained, because in them the people may more orderly and conveniently
meet together to serve God publicly in the word and prayer: for which time all
due reverence must be observed in them: but we must not think that they are
more holy than other places.

More particularly, in this circumstance of place note two things: First, by
what means Saint John came thither: Secondly, to what end, and for what cause.
The means was banishment by the emperor Domitian: the cause was, for the word
of God.

For the first, he came and abode in Patmos, being banished thither for the
Gospels sake. In this his banishment consider many excellent things: First,
Saint John was a most worthy Apostle, endued with rare gifts, a singular
maintainer of the Gospel, and a famous founder of the church of God, and
chief pillar thereof in those days when he wrote this book: and for this
cause most hated of the cruel persecutor Domitian, and of the Romans. And yet
observe, That whereas many other true Christians were put to the sword, S. John
is not, but escapes by banishment. The cause of this was Gods special
providence, by which he reserved him for the benefit of the church, that he
might receive this Revelation, and commit it to writing, for the perpetual
good of all his children. And so though Domitian was a cruel tyrant, and
wanted no malice toward John, yet he could not kill him. God ouerruled him,
that he did but banish him, and that into such an Island, wherein he might
quietly receive these visions, and pen the same for the good of the church. By
this we see the great care and providence of God over his church, that he
does bridle and ouerrule the cruel minds and might of bloody persecutors,
that they cannot for their hearts do any thing, but that which serves for Gods
glory, and the good of his church, though they intend the contrary. For
Domitian intended only the hurt of John, yet see, by his banishment into that
Isle, he had fit place to receive these visions for the good of the church. So
in the death of Christ, the Jews and Gentiles, and all the people banded
themselves together, to put Christ to death, and the devil he labored to
stir them on to practice their intended malice. Yet the ouerruling power of
God, who brings light out of darkness, directs and orders this their
malice and wicked practice to the most excellent work that ever was, even the
redemption of mankind. So Joseph's brethren intended no such deliverance as God
wrought by him, in selling their brother. This consideration should comfort all
Gods children in the time of any outward distress, even the remembrance of
Gods ouerruling hand.

Secondly, in that John went into banishment, when it was so appointed, we
learn, That when we are oppressed and persecuted by tyrants for Christ's sake,
we must not make resistance, or offer violence, but suffer all injuries with
patience: Pr^ce^ and lachrima, (...) Christianorum
for as one says truly, The Christians weapons in persecution, are only
prayers and tears. And Saint John often in this book adds this conclusion,
after the foretelling of persecution, Here is the patience of Saints; showing
that patience must be the complete armor against all our bloody enemies.

Thirdly, here also observe, That John came into this Island, not of his own
accord, as choosing a solitary life to be the most happy state of perfection;
but by violence and constraint. For if he had come into it voluntarily, being
little or not inhabited, he could not have done the duty of his Apostleship in
preaching the Gospel, and laying the foundations of the church. This then
confuteth the Monkish life, which is no life of holy perfection (as Papists
call it) but of glorious superstition and slat impiety before God: for hereby
they forsake their callings, and utterly disable themselves to do those duties
which God requires of them in church, commonwealth, or family.

Fourthly, whereas John being banished, received his visions in a barren and
base desolate place: we see, that those which honor God shall be honored of
God, even then when men seek most to disgrace them: for what greater disgrace
could they have put upon John, than to banish him into so base an Island? Yet
because it was for Gods glory, even there does the Lord appear unto him, and
honor him much in revealing unto him these visions. So when Joseph was sold of
his brethren, and most dishonored of them; then did God exhalt him most of
all. The same may be said of Daniell in Babylon, whom God did most advance,
when his enemies sought his greatest ruin: and the same is true of all Gods
children, Them which honor God will he honor.

II. point. The cause for which he came into this Isle, is expressly set down,
for the word of God: that is, because he was a publisher and preacher of the
word of God: for the performance of which duty he was banished. By which we
may note, That all natural men (as Domitian and his court, and all the
Gentiles, without Gods special calling) do bear a deadly hatred toward Gods
word. For S. John was a most worthy Apostle, a famous man for gifts, a singular
preacher of the word of God; yet is hated, nay banished, not for his own
cause, but for the word of God. This hatred has appeared in the heathen
emperors, by their bloody persecutions against the preachers and professors
of this word: and yet though men hate it naturally, the same word wins them,
and takes place in their hearts for their conversion, and causes them to love
it: so as successively it has been spread over all the world. Which shows
against the Atheist, That the word taught by the Prophets and Apostles, is
indeed the true word of God, not the invention of man: for man's word being
hated, cannot win unto it him which hates it: but the word of God prevails
by grace in the hearts of those who hate it by nature, which it could not do,
unless there were in it some divine power.

Again, seeing John was banished for Gods word, all ministers are to cast
their accounts, and make this reckoning, that they may and must suffer trouble
and persecution, yea, sometime banishment it self, for the Gospels sake, if
they will be faithful. For that which befell the principal founders and
chief builders of the church, cannot be avoided of them which are ordinary
ministers, if they will be faithful. Christ acquainteth his disciples with
this, telling them, Luke 6.26.
That they are even accursed, when all men speak well of them. Let none
therefore think it strange at this day, if for well doing, they hear and
receive evil: nay, let them fear the curse, when all men praise them.

And for the witnessing of Jesus Christ. Here John does note more specially the
cause of his banishment, to wit, for testifying the history and doctrine of
the gospel, the sum whereof is this, That Jesus Christ, the son of Marie,
is the son of God, and redeemer of all that believe in him to the
justification of life. This testimony S. John puts down, to give us to
understand, what part of Gods word that is, which is most hated of the world:
and for the preaching whereof Gods ministers are persecuted and banished, to
wit, the gospel of Jesus Christ especially: for the law is in part natural,
but the gospel is supernatural, and to man's reason absurd; for the preaching
whereof, men in all ages have been persecuted. The reason hereof is this, God
in the beginning made a covenant with man, promising, That the seed of the
woman should break the serpents head. Genesis 3.
Now the gospel is that glad tidings, wherein is declared, that this promised
seed is come; who has indeed bruised the head of the serpent. Hereupon the
devil maligneth the gospel above all parts of Gods word, and accordingly has
labored by all means to suppress the same; partly by persecution, as he did
in the first three hundred years after Christ; and partly by bringing into the
church damnable heresies, which did destroy the gospel by deprauing the
natures and offices of Christ, when by outward violence he could not prevail.

Now seeing the devil and his instruments do thus hate the gospel, and
labor to extinguish it: we on the contrary must labor to know, and to
believe to love and embrace the gospel, that so we may uphold and maintain
the same.

Verse. 10. And I was ravished in the spirit on the Lords day, and heard behind
me a great voice, as it had been of a Trumpet. In this tenth verse are set
down the third and fourth circumstances of this vision. The third is the
manner of receiving and giving this revelation to John, namely, in a trance.
The fourth is the time when it was given, on the Lords day.

Touching the manner, it is noted in these words: I was in the spirit. That is,
I was by the mighty and extraordinary work of the spirit of God cast into a
trance. That this (...) be so expounded, appears by comparing this phrase
with the like in the whole prophecy of Ezechiell, who uses to say, I was in
the spirit, when he expresses and signifies that he was cast into a
trance, and therein received some vision by the spirit.

To understand this the better, consider two things: first, what a trance is:
secondly, the end of it. First, a trance is an extraordinary work or action
of Gods spirit. We must not think, that traunces come from the virtue of the
stars, nor from the constitution of man's body, or by the strength of
imagination, as some have fondly thought: but they are wrought by the holy
ghost. Secondly, it is not every work of the holy ghost, but an extraordinary
work, above the order of nature. It is also powerful and mighty, wherein the
whole man, both in body and mind is altered: which Saint John here expresses,
saying, I was in the spirit. This extraordinary work of the spirit consists
in two actions; one upon the body, the other upon the mind. First, in
procuring a trance, the spirit of God casts the body of man into a dead
sleep; whereby all the senses, both inward and outward, are benumbed: so
Genes. 15.12. when God renewed his covenant with Abraham, he casts him into
an heau^e sleep: that is, into a trance, wherein all his senses were
benumbed; only his mind was waking. The action of the Holy ghost on the mind
is, to draw it from fellowship with the body, and all the senses, to have a
nearer fellowship with God, that so the spirit of God may enlighten it with
divine light, that it may understand the things which are revealed to it: as
we may see in other ecstasies and traunces of the Prophets and Apostles. As in
that of Act. 10 1^
Pe^er, when he saw the vision of beasts clean and unclean. And thus we see
what a Trance is, namely, What a trance (...).
an extraordinary powerful work^ of the spirit upon the whole man, ca^ting
the body into a dead sleep, and making the mind fit to receive the things
which are revealed unto it of the Lord.

II. point. The end of traunces. God for two causes reuealeth his will in
traunces unto his servants, as to John in this place. First, that (...) might
know, that the things revealed were not invented of themselves, but given of
God. John herein had no use of his bodily senses, he neither heard, saw, nor
felt, but they were asleep. And therefore the vision must needs be from God,
and the glory thereof wholly his.

Secondly and chiefly, that the things revealed might take the deeper
impression in the understanding: for the mind being freed from fellowship with
the body, and not hindered by any fantasies of the senses (they being all
asleep, and quiet) does then most lively and sensibly apprehend and retain
the impression of things revealed. Here then we see the great care of God, that
his servants might thoroughly understand, certainly believe, and constantly
keep in memory the things he delivered unto them. The like care he showed in
revealing his will to all his former Prophets, he would not have their minds
troubled with the fellowship of the body; nor hindered of the senses inward or
outward, but wholly taken up for the service of his spirit. And there is good
reason of this: for if they must faithfully teach Gods will to others, to make
them know and understand, to believe and remember the same: is it not
necessary that they themselves should thoroughly understand, soundly believe,
and firmly keep in memory whatsoever God reuealeth?

This dealing of the Lord for this end with his holy Prophets, teaches us that
the ordinary ministers of the Gospel at this day ought to employ themselves
with all care and diligence, that they may thoroughly understand the will of God
in his word, and withal believe it soundly, and remember it carefully. We must
not now look for traunces and visions, as they had, but we must use continual
study in the word, which is the ordinary means to come unto this knowledge.
This duty concerns all students in divinity, and all others which desire a
good understanding in the word of God. And for their furtherance herein they
must have principal care to search into the text of Scripture thoroughly:
thereby shall they best conceive the proper meaning of the holy ghost, and with
greater facility keep the same in memory. For one says truly, That every
good minister should be a good text man. Whereby is descried a common fault of
many students: who rather employ themselves in the ancient writings of men,
than in the word of God: nay, many spend their best time in the base writings
of wicked and heretical monks and friars. It cannot be denied, but many of the
fathers were worthy members of Gods church: but if the fountain be left, the
ministry will soon be tainted with the filthy puddles of men's inventions.

Again, in this dealing of God with John, we may observe the truth of Christ's
saying, to him that has, it shall be given. Mark. 4.^5*
For though John was endued with rare knowledge and singular gifts, yet the
Lord adds more knowledge to his former. The Lord found him faithful in the
duties of an Apostle; and therefore reuealeth the knowledge of many secrets
unto him in most full manner: even so it is in Gods church at this day: all
that have care to know the will of God, and do it, though their knowledge be
small at the first, yet the Lord will help them, and add daily to their
knowledge. And the cause why many hear the word of God and profit not; but wax
worse, or stand at a stay, is, because they labor not to have their knowledge
increased, by putting in practice that which they know: for if they did, then
to him which has, should more be added, and he should have abundance. As on
the contrary, when we be negligent to hear or know and to obey the will of
God: we have a spirit indeed sent upon us, yet not Gods spirit, but the spirit
of slumber, of blindness and ignorance, so that we see, and see not; hear,
and understand not, Isay. 6.9. Isay. 6.9.


On the Lords day. In these words is the fourth circumstance, namely, the time
when this vision was showed to S. John. This day which here is called the Lords
day, among the Jews was the first day of the week called by us Sunday. It is
called the Lords day for two causes: First, because on this day Christ rose
from death to life: for Christ was buried the even of the Jews Sabboath, which
is our Friday; and he rested in the grave their whole Saboath, which is our
saturday, and rose the first day of the week early in the morning, which is
our Sunday.

Secondly, this first day of the week (according to the Jews account) came in
stead of the Jews Saboath, and was ordained a day of rest for the New
testament; and sanctified for the solemn worship of the Lord. And for this
cause especially it is called the Lords day, the manifestation whereof (as some
think) John chiefly intended in this title. And touching this time: for our
better understanding, let us consider three points: First, who changed the
Jews Saboath: secondly, for what cause; thirdly, whether the Church has now
in the New testament power to change the Saboath day we now celebrate, to any
other day of the week.

For the first: it is commonly thought that the Jews Saboath was changed into
this Lords day by christian emperors, long after the ascension of Christ. But
it is more consonant to the tenor of the New testament to hold, that Christ
himself was the author of this change. My reasons are these: First, that which
the Apostles delivered and enjoined the Church, that they received from Christ,
either by voice or instinct, for they delivered nothing of their own head. But
the Apostles delivered, and enjoined this Saboath to the Church, as to be kept
a day of holy rest to the Lord as appears, 1. Cor. 16.1. Where Paul ordained
in the churches of Galatia and Corinth, that the collection for the poor
should be on the first day in the week: This he left not to the choice of the
church, but appointed it by authority Apostolical from Christ.

Now the day of collecting for the poor (as appears in the histories of the
church) was the Saboath day; when the people were assembled for Gods service.
For this was the custom of the church for many years after Christ, First to
have the word preached, and the Sacraments administered, then to gather for the
poor: and for this cause in the writings of the church, the Lords supper is
called a sacrifice, an oblation, and the mass; not a real sacrifice as the
papists use it; but spiritual, because therewith was joined collection for the
poor, which was a spiritual oblation, not to the Lord, but to the church for
the relief of the poor; and it was called the mass, because the collected
relief thereat was sent to the poor saints abroad. A second reason is this:
The Apostles themselves kept this day for the Saboath of the New testament,
Act. 20.7. And it cannot be proved that they observed any other day for an
holy rest to the Lord after Christ's assention, save only in one case, when
they came into the assemblies of the Jews, who would keep none other but the
old Saboath of the law. A third reason is John 20.19.26. The same day where^n
Christ rose from death being the first day of the week, ^e appeared to his
disciples, being gathered together, and taught them many things, which
concerned the government of his Church. And eight days after being the first
day of the week, he appeared unto them for the same end. Now it is more than
likely that Christ in his own person gave them an example to celebrate and
keep that day wherein he rose again for a Saboath of the New testamen^.

II. point. The Saboath of the Jews was changed for two causes. First, to
maintain the liberty of the church, of the New testament whereof this was a
great part, tha^ they were freed from the ceremonies of the Jews: For when
this day was changed, the church was no more tied to the Jews Saboath, neither
had any such regard of days and times.

Secondly, that there might be a more fit time for the memory of the work of
man's redemption: For as God in the Old testament appointed the seventh day to
be a day of rest to remember the first creation: So in the New testament it
stands with reason there should be a day to celebrate this work of redemption,
which is a wonderful creation; wherein (as Isay says) are made a new heaven,
and a new earth, Chap. 66. And whereby men become new creatures, 2. Cor. 5.17.
Nay this redemption is a more glorious work than the creation; for in that
creation Adam was the head, but in this redemption Christ Jesus is our head. By
the first creation we received a temporal life; but by redemption we receive
life eternal. In the creation Adam was espoused to Eve, but in the work of
redemption every christian is espoused to Christ Jesus. By creation Adam had an
earthly Paradise: In this redemption we have an heavenly kingdom. In the
creation Gods power, and wisdom did principally appear. In this redemption
with power and wisdom he showed mercy and justice: Justice in Christ's
passion, and mercy in our forgiveness. By creation he made man of nothing,
but by redemption he made him of worse then nothing, and better then he was.
Therefore seeing this work of our redemption is far passing the creation: it
was meet a day should be set a apart for the memory thereof: Now no day could
be more fit then the first day of the week, in which Christ rose again;
whereby he confirmed the work of our redemption: for he died for o^r sins,
and rose again for our justification, Romans 4.25.

III. point. Whether may the church of the New testament change this Saboath
day to any other day of the week, as to tewsday, wednesday, etc. Ans. The
church has no such power, for time is the Lords, and the disposing thereof is
in his hands. Therefore Christ says to his Disciples, It is not for you to
know the times and seasons, which the father has kept in his own hands, Act.
1.6. As if he should say, The father has kept times and seasons in hi^ own
power; and therefore it is not for you to know them: Now if that were a good
reason, as no doubt it was; then is this also sound and good. If God have the
disposing of times in his hands, then it belongs not to the church to dispose
of them: but God has the disposing of all times in his hands, ergo. And it may
be otherwise hen^e gathered thus; If that which is less belong not to the
church, then that which is more does not: But the knowledge of time and seasons
which God has in his power belongs not to the church, which is less than
the disposing of times and seasons. And therefore the church has not power to
dispose of them; and so by consequent may not alter the Saboath day. Object. In
the Old testament the Jews appointed festival days: as the feast of
Dedication which Christ kept holy, Ioh. 10.22. instituted by the Machabees, 1.
Match 4.
in token of thankfulness for their deliverance: and for restoring of religion
and the temple which Antiochus had pulled down. And also Mordichay instituted
the feast Purim: Esth. 9 17.
which was celebrated of the Jews afterward.

Now if they had power to make holidayes, then they might alter the Saboath
day; and so may the church in the New testament. Ans. These feasts of the Jews
were no Saboaths set wholly apart for the solemn worship of God: but were
only days of the solemnity appointed by the church in token of joy and
thankfulness for the repairing of the temple, and deliverance of Gods people:
And were only celebrated as they served to put the people in mind of these
outward benefits. So that whereas some hold that the church has power to alter
the Saboath day: or to make two more Saboath days in a week if it were
convenient; it has no ground in Gods word* For that authority which does
alter this day must not be less than Apostolical. And thus we see why this
day was called the Lords day.

Now if the first day of the week be the Lords day, The Use.
set apart for his honor in the memory of so great redemption, then here are
three sorts of men reproved. First, those that make the Lords day a day of
vain pleasure and delight. This is the manner of all sorts of men, but
especially of the younger sort and servants, who spend this day in carnal
rejoicing, in riot, gaming, and wantonness; never thinking of the worship of
God, which is then to be performed. But these sin greatly against the Lord:
for hereby they pervert the end of the Lords day: It should be kept holy and
glorious to the Lord, but they turn it to the worship and service of the
devil.

The second sort here reproved are those which live more ciuilltie than the
former; but yet they think they may do what they will on the Lords day: as to
take their iourneys thereon, and employ themselves in their ordinary affairs:
persuading themselves they may serve God with as good an heart when they are
alone about their business, as they do who go to the church. But these men sin
grievously against the fourth commandment: for hereby they make that their
own day which is the Lords.

A third sort here reproved, though not so bad as the former, are those who
think it needful to serve God at those ordinary times of the Saboath which
the laws of the land inioyne unto men; and therefore they will come duly to
morning and evening prayer: thinking that they are not bound besides to hear
the word of God preached, and that all the rest of the day they may do what
they will pertaining either to their profit or pleasure. Of this sort are our
ignorant people, and a great number every where. But they sin grievously
against God, for the Saboath day is called the Lords day, because it is wholly
consecrated to his worship: but they part stakes with the Lord, and give him
but a part of his own day, and that the lesser: taking the rest unto
themselves, which thee mispend upon their lusts. Now as these vices must be
abhorred so on the contrary, we must with all conscience keep the Lords
Saboath holy according to the fourth commandment. And therefore we must
thereon cease from all works of sin, and from the works of our callings;
and sanctify this day wholly by applying it all to the honor and worship of
God. And here we must remember that there is a double sanctification of the
Saboath: public, and private. Public when men assemble themselves together
publicly to hear Gods word for the increase of faith and knowledge: and to
call on Gods name for further graces; as also to give him thanks for his
mercies, and to receive his Sacramens. Private, when men in their private places
employ themselves in holy duties of prayer, reading, and meditation upon Gods
word and works: whereby God is honored, and their souls edified: and both
these must be performed to the Lord every Saboath day of every man: For we
may not abridge God of that tim^ wherein glory should be given to his name. If
the officers should take our servants in the week day from our private
business, and employ them in public affairs, we would think much at it,
though it were for the common good. And shall we not think that God will take
himself dishonored of us when we shall take either whole or part of his
holiday, and employ it in our business. A maine cause why many profit little
by the public mininisterie, is want of private sanctification of this day.
Therefore we must learn to sanctify the Saboath of the Lord, for else we shall
never increase in faith, knowledge, or obedience as we should: for the
begetting and increase whereof this day has been set apart and sanctified
from the beginning.

Object. 2. Why did the Lord show this vision unto John rather on this day then
any other? Answ. Though John were absent from the church in regard of bodily
presence: yet he was present in spirit withal the faithful, and therefore no
doubt on this day he gave himself to prayer, and other duties which he could
perform for the glory of God in that solitary place. Now it is the Lords
manner when his servants are thus humbled, then to come and reveal himself
unto them in special manner. So he did unto Daniel, Dan. 9. and to Cornelius,
Act. 10. and to Peter praying alone on the house top, Act. 10.11. And so
doubtless finding John thus employed this Lords day, he revealed his will unto
him touching the state of the church to the end of the world.

Hence we learn sundry instructions: First, whereas John being in a sollitarie
Island kept the Saboath: we may observe that all persons who are severed from
the assemblies of the church: as the prisoners and those which are sick of a
dead paluesie, or other great diseases: As mariners though they be in the
midst of the sea should keep holy the Lords Saboath by performing such
duties as God requires: as prayer, confession of sins, and thanksgiving;
whereby God may be glorified, though they cannot come to the public
ministry of the word.

Secondly, in that John received his vision on the Lords day, when he gave
himself to prayer and holy duties; Hence arises a consolation to Gods
church, that God draws near unto them, that draw near to him, as James 4.8.
And so let us humble our selves and draw near to the Lord by prayer, and
thanksgiving; and the Lord in mercy will show himself sundry ways, and draw
near unto us.

The cause why men have so little taste of Gods mercy and love toward them, is
because they do not draw near unto him, by doing those duties which he
requires at their hands. For when men draw back from God, is it not good
reason he should draw back from them?

This therefore must stir up our hearts, and move us to come often to God by
prayer and thanksgiving: for by use in these duties shall we get acquaintance
with the Lord. Thus much of the circumstances of this vision.

And I heard behind me a great voice, as it had been a trumpet. First, here
follows the parts of this vision, which are two: The beginning or entrance
into it in this verse, and part of the twelft. Secondly, the matter and
substance thereof from the twelft verse to the end of the third chapter.

The entrance into the vision is a preparation, whereby the Lord makes John
more fit to apprehend and receive the things revealed. In which preparation we
must observe first the means: secondly, the parts thereof. The means whereby
God prepares him, is a voice: And I heard a voice. The like manner of
preparation has God used in former times when he intended to make with Adam
the covenant of reconciliation in the seed of the woman: First, he prepared him
by a voice speaking unto him before he appeared, and by this voice caused him
to sly for fear. Then having rebuked him for his sins, he made with him
this covenant of grace, Genes. 3.

And in mount Synai before the Lord gave the law, Exodus 19 and 20.
he first came down in thundering and lightning, and with the sound of a
trumpet to terrify the people: and then he uttered his law to Moses, and to
his people. So when the Lord would instruct Samuel touching the house of Elie,
1. Sam. 3.
he awoke him by a voice, again, and again: and then spoke plainly unto him.
And in all visions usually, and generally the Lord uses to prepare his
servants by voices, by signs, and words, that they might be more fit to
receive such things as he revealed.

This dealing of God with John, in preparing him to the worthy receiving of
this vision, teaches us that we much more should be prepared to hear and
receive the will of God; for we come far short of those excellent gifts of
God, which were in John, who yet must be prepared.

Our coming to hear Gods word is to learn the same, for the increase of
knowledge, faith, and obedience. Now the word of God is hard, and we dull to
learn; we must therefore by all good means prepare our selves, that our
minds and hearts may be fit to receive the same with profit. The cause of so
little profit after long hearing is want of preparation: but hereof we have
entreated already upon the third verse.

This voice is here set out unto us three ways: First, by the place whence it
came: Secondly by the quality of it: Thirdly, by the matter and substance
which it contained. For the place: it was uttered from behind him: which the
Lord observed to stir up ^^re attention in John; for usually men do more
carefully mark those things which come on a sudden behind them, than those
which are spoken or done directly before their face.

Secondly, for the quality of it, this voice was great; as is expressed
further by a similitude, Like the sound of a trumpet; that is, full of power
and majesty. Which also God added unto it, to further attention in John. For
if it had been an ordinary voice, or small, he would not so much have
regarded it: but being so sudden, so great, and full of majesty, it could not
but make him very attentive.

Now seeing Christ is so careful to prepare John's mind with attention and
diligence to receive the things which should be told him: This teaches us,
that when we come to hear Gods word, we must use all means of attention: for
if it were needful to John, then is it far more necessary for us, who are
far inferior to him in all gifts of understanding and memory. And here also
is another cause of small profit and little liking of Gods word, namely, want
of attention in the heart. We must therefore like godly Lydia, Act. 16. stir
up our dull and heavy spirits, and with all diligence mark the things we
hear. And here we must take heed of two enemies to attention: the first are
by-thoughts: as when the body indeed is present, but the mind wandereth from
the word, and is wholly possessed with thoughts of pleasure, or other worldly
affairs: For these be thorns in the ground of our hearts, which choke the
good seed of the word. Many will complain they cannot mark and remember that
which is taught; now the cause is in themselves their wandering thoughts, which
hinder both understanding and memory: for the mind conceiving other matters,
cannot observe how one point depends on another, much less remember them
afterward.

The second enemy to attention, is dullness and heaviness in body and soul;
a common fault in many hearers, which shows it self by drowsinesse and
sleepiness in the time of preaching, when they ought to stir up their bodies
and hearts to all attention. If a man should be dull and heavy when his
prince is speaking unto him of some weighty matter that is for his good, it
would be taken for a part of contempt and disloyalty toward his majesty.
What disloyalty then is this unto the king of kings, that we should be dull
and heavy, when himself vouchsafes to speak unto us out of his word, the
mysteries of our salvation? And surely, among other things this drowsinesse is
one cause of small profit, by the ministry of the word. And therefore if we
would increase in knowledge, and in the gifts of grace unto salvation, we must
prepare our selves before we come, and in hearing cast off all dullness of
flesh and spirit, and with all might stir up our selves to attentive hearing:
so shall the word be blessed unto us; otherwise our hearing shall turn to our
deeper condemnation.

Verse 11. Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: and that which
thou see write in a book, and send it unto the seven Churches, which are in
Asia, unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamus, and unto Thyatira, and
unto Sardai, and unto Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea. These words contain the
third description of this voice, whereby John's heart was prepared, touching the
substance and matter which was uttered: which consists in two things. The
first is a testimony in these words: I am Alpha, and Omega, the first and the
last. The second a commandment in the words following: That which thou see
write, and send etc.

I. Touching the testimony, the substance thereof is set down in the eight
verse, where the words were handled, and the meaning showed. They do serve
directly to prove the Godhead, and eternity of Christ, which Christ himself
does here avouch, to give unto John, and unto the Church full assurance, that
the things now uttered and delivered, were from God: for saying, I am Alpha and
Omega, the first and the last, it is as much as if he had said: I which speak
unto thee am God, and therefore the things I deliver, are from God.

In this testimony note Gods special care in regard of his truth, he does
not content himself with revealing his will unto his Church; but more
specially his care is, to certify the Church of the truth thereof, that it is
indeed from God. This has been Gods care from the beginning: When Peter
received a vision from God, withal Act. ^0 19
Gods spirit assured him, that the things revealed therein were certain and
sure. And so when Christ preached the will of his father among men, he did
withal work strange miracles, to confirm and seal up the truth of his
doctrine, that it was from God.

This special care of God over his Church does first confute the Papists
opinion touching Scripture. The Use.
They hold the Scripture to be certain in it self, but not unto men, till the
Church give testimony thereunto. But this is false: for God ever had this care
over his Church, not only to reveal his will unto them, but also to use
means for the assurance of their consciences, that that which was revealed was
his undoubted and perfect will. And therefore the word of God is certain, and
ever was, not only in it self, b^t to the consciences of believers, and that
without the testimony of the church: and so should be, through the testimony
of the church should never come thereunto.

Secondly, hereby are confuted many carnal men, who will be of no religion;
because (say they) there is no certainetie in the matters of religion: men's
opinions therein are so diverse, that so many men, so many minds almost, and no
man can tell who speaks the truth. Answ. It may be that men in sundry matters
hold sundry private opinions: yet in the church of God, all the true members of
Christ hold the same opinions touching the foundation of religion. But let it
be granted, That all men on earth were of diverse opinions touching matters of
religion, should religion therefore be uncertain? God forbid. For religion is
certain unto men, by the means that God has appointed to certify the
conscience of the truth thereof, and thereby might men come to the truth and
certaineti^ of religion taught by the Prophets and Apostles, though all men in
the world were of diverse opinions touching the same: Thus much of the
Testimony.

II. point. The commandment given to John is in these words: That which thou
see write in a book, and send it to the seven Churches which are in Asia.
This commandment has two parts: First, To write the things seen in a book:
secondly, to send the book to the seven churches here named. And both these
must John do, being now disabled by his exile to preach these things unto them
personally, for these causes. First, that these churches might be edified in
the faith, and strengthened in these most grievous times of persecution.
Secondly, that they might become keepers of this book for the good of others:
for the church of God is the pillar of truth: not only, for that it publishes
Gods truth: but also because it keeps it, and gives testimony thereunto.

In this commandment note sundry things. First, that the word of God, written
and penned by the hand of man, is a notable help to the church of God, and a
worthy means to edify the same, else Christ would never have commanded John
to have written these visions, and sent them to the Churches. Which serves to
confute the blind Papists, which say the word written is but an inkie letter,
and a nose of wax; because the sense thereof may be turned every way as man
will. This also confuteth the Anabaptists, which so much magnify their
Revelations, and make no account of the word written. If the Lord had thought
it best, he would have taught these churches by revelations: but they must
learn by the word written.

Secondly, that the reading of Gods word either publicly or privately, is an
ordinance of God: for the Lord commanding John to write this book, and send
it to the churches, hereby implies, that they must read the same as they did
other books of Scripture. The preaching of the word is indeed the most worthy
instrument for the founding and confirming of Gods Church, whereby ordinarily
justifying faith is wrought in the heart: and yet reading must have his due
reverence, as a means to confirm, and increase true knowledge, faith, and
repentance, where it is begun.

Thirdly, here note, that a man may be under the cross, and in persecution,
and yet remain in the special favor of God: for this banishment into such a
desert place, was unto John a grievous cross: and yet the Lord vouchsafed
there to reveal himself unto him, and to make him the penman of this book.
Which honor he vouchsafes not to all, but to them that are most dear unto
him. Which thing each one should carefully observe: for our nature is so
corrupt, that when we are under the cross, it would persuade us, we are cast
out of the love and favor of God.

In the end of the verse, the seven Churches, Ephesus, Smyrna, and the rest
are named. Which seven places, were seven famous cities in Asia, wherein were
planted the most famous churches that were in those parts, and for their
excellency are they named. And thus much for the means of John's preparation:
Now follow the parts thereof, which are two: first is hearing, folded up with
the former means: And I heard a voice. Second is Turning of himself, to see
the party that spoke unto him in these words.

Verse. 12. Then I turned back to see the voice which spoke with me: and when
I was turned, I saw seven golden candlestickes. That is, so soon as I heard
this sudden and mighty voice, I turned my self to see who it was that uttered
the same. In this behavior of John we are to learn our duty: so to dispose
our hearts toward God in the receiving of his word, as John disposes himself
toward Christ in the receiving of this vision. So soon as the voice spoke,
John hearkened, and because the sound thereof came behind him, he turned
himself to look on him that uttered it. Even so must we do, we are by nature
strangers with God, slow to hear when he speaks, and ready to turn our
hearts from God, when we hear. Therefore when God speaks unto us in the
ministry of his word, we must hearken: And though we be going another way,
yet we must turn our selves from our evil ways, and incline our hearts to
his voice, that we may have fellowship with him. Saint John had not seen this
marvelous vision, unless he had turned himself to behold him that spoke. No
more shall we at any time feel true fellowship with the Lord, unless we
turn our hearts unto his word, and that betimes, while he speaks unto us in
the ministry thereof.

Thus much for the first part of the vision, viz. the entrance thereunto. The
second part it the matter and substance of the vision; containing a most
worthy representation of Christ in his majesty, as he is the Prophet, King,
and Priest of his church: set down at large by a description of Christ,
continuing from this twelfth verse unto the end of the third chapter; wherein
John shows what he received of Christ, partly by hearing, and partly by
seeing. And first he begins his description of Christ, as he saw him
represented in vision: and so describes him by two arguments. First by the
place where he saw him: Secondly, by his form and figure wherein he appeared.

I. For the place, John saw him in the midst of the seven golden
candlesticks. These seven candlestickes here seen, are the seven Churches of
Asia: the particular churches of God, being compared to candlesticks, as Christ
expounds himself, verse. 20. Now the particular congregations of Gods church
be called candlestickes, for that resemblance which is between them. For as
the candlesticks serve to bear up and hold forth the light that is set therein:
so the particular churches of God on earth, they bear up and show forth the
light of the gospel unto the whole world, partly in the ministry of the
world, and partly in the profession of the faith of Christ.

From hence sundry things are to be learned: first observe, that the churches
are rather called candlestickes than candles; To give us to understand, that
they have no light of themselves, or from themselves, but only are Gods
instruments to bear up and hold forth the light in the ministry of the word,
and profession of the faith: for Christ Jesus is the only true lamp and
candle that gives light to the heart and conscience by his holy spirit in the
word.

Secondly, hence every one that professes himself to be a true member of Gods
church, must learn his duty, which is earnestly to labor to become a shining
and burning candle. Indeed this principally concerns the ministers of the
church: and therefore John Baptist is called a burning and shining light, John
5. verse. 35. but yet it must also be verefied of every member thereof, as
Saint Paul commands: Philip. 2.15, 16.
Shine (says he) as lights in the world, in the midst of a naughty and
c^^oked nation: holding forth the doctrine of life, that is, the gospel.
Quest. How shall every member of the church become a burning light? Answ.
First, he must have his mind enlightened in the knowledge of Gods will and
word: and then as a candlestick hold out and send forth the bea^es thereof to
others; partly by teaching within the compass of his calling, and partly by
example of an honest and blameless life and conversation. Thus we should do,
if we would be answerable to our profession. And to induce us hereunto, let us
observe the reasons following.

First, it is Gods commandment, Shine as lights (says S. Paul) in the world,
Philip. 2.15. And, walk as children of the light, Ephesians. 5.8. Secondly,
consider the fruit hereof, which is wonderful great. For by godly instruction
in our places, and by answerable obedience in our lives we win many to the
Lord: showing forth such lights, whereby others may walk in this dark world
to the kingdom of heaven, which is a most blessed light. In the Winter season,
men think they do others great pleasure, if in the night they hang forth a
light to guide passengers a little way in an earthly walk. What a blessed
thing then is this, that a man should always hold forth that light which shall
guide a sinful wicked wretch to leave the ways of death, and to walk in the
paths of righteousness to eternal life? But on the contrary, when men live
in Gods church like candles put out by reason of the blindness of their minds,
and the badnesse of their lives; hence comes great hurt and danger to others
with whom they live: for they lead others that depend upon them to the pit of
destruction, especially they who know the will of God and yet make not
conscience to show forth the same by good example of a godly life. For as in an
haven town, if any man in the night time do remove the sea-marke which
guides the ships in the right channel, he does as much as in him lies cast
away all the ships that are coming near the shore, by causing them to run on
rocks and sands: even so they that should give light in the church, if they
give either no light, or false light to such as depend upon them who are
sailing in the sea of this sinful world, hereby they lead and direct them to a
wrong haven, and instead of heaven bring their souls to eternal perdition:
which must terrify us from ignorance and evil works, and make us labor to
shine as lights in this world by good instruction and godly conversation. Third
reason. Consider the fearful judgments of God against such as live in his
church as members thereof, and yet give no light: they do incur the
fearful wrath of Christ. In the Temple, the keeping of the lamps and lights
belonged to the priest, and therefore he had his snuffers, and other
instruments to trim the same: which notably figured the duty of Christ in the
Church of the new Testament: for he is our high priest, who looks to every
light in the Sanctuary, that is, to every member of his church, who ought to
shine as a lamp; and when they burn but dimly and dark, he has his snuffers
to trim them, and make them give a better light, both by godly life and good
instruction. But when he has snuffed them again and again, if still they
burn dark and dim, and give either no light, or else a false light, then
surely he will either cast them out of the Temple, or else tread them under his
feet. We grant this liberty to every governor, when he has light up
candles for his family, if any of them will not burn clearly, he may snuff
it; if that will not serve, he may cast it into the fire, and set another in
it place. And shall we deny to Christ Jesus the like authority in his
Church, which is his house, over men and women, who ought to shine as lights?
God forbid. The Minister therefore in his place, and every other Christian in
the compass of his calling must labor to be a shining candle, both for
knowledge and godly life before all the world, that so he may escape Gods
fearful judgments. In common reason we ought to carry our selves as shining
lights before othe^s. It is an usual thing in the Winter time to hang forth
lights for the guiding of men's bodies safe from place to place. Now if we have
such care over their bodies, we ought to have much more over body and soul
both; that by the light of grace in us, sinners and wicked men may be guided
in the dark and dangerous way of this world to the kingdom of heaven.

Here then, all ignoran^ persons and loose lu^ers, who abound in every place,
must be admonished to reform themselves, and labou^ to become lights in Gods
church. They stand as candles, but they are extinct* and give no light to
others, Ignorant persons therefore must cast off their ignorance, and labor
for knowledge: and wicked livers must reform their looseness of life, and
become obedient to the word^: truth, that so they may shine unto others. If a
man have a candle set up in his family and shall assay to light it and snuff
it once or twice, and cannot get it burn, then in displeasure he will trample
it under his feet, or cast it into the fire. Even so Christ Jesus seeking to
enlighten the minds of these ignorant persons, and to reform the lives of
these loose livers by the ministry of the word: when he shall perceive that
they refuse the light, and will not be reformed, undoubtedly in fury of his
wrath, he will at length Psa. 52.^.
pluck them from their places, and stamp them to powder, and cast them to
hell. Many be ignorant in every place, and more be profane, and small is the
number of good shining lights: but we must remember our duty, and walk
worthy our calling. If we hold forth the light of knowledge and obedience, we
shall shine as the firmament in the world to come, Dan. 12.3.

Golden candlestickes. The churches of God are not base candlestickes, but
candlestickes made of gold. There be two causes of this resemblance: First,
because gold is the most excellent of all metals: so Gods churches here on
earth are the most excellent of all societies. The companies and societies of
men in families, towns and kingdoms, and in other common affairs of this
life, be the ordinance of God, and good in their kind; but yet the society of
saints in the church of God, does far surmount them all, and that in these
respects: First, because in Gods church salvation may be obtained, but in other
societies, as they are societies; though sundry benefits arise from them, yet
salvation is not to be had in them, unless they be either particular
churches as members thereof. Secondly, the church of God is the end of all
other societies; and they are all ordained to preserve and cherish the church,
which is the society of the saints. Thirdly, the church beautifieth all other
societies: the principal praise and dignity of any town, household, or
kingdom is this; that they are either churches of God, or true members thereof.

From this pre-eminence of the church we are taught: above al things to labor
to become true members of this society. Men have great care to become members
of incorporations and towns of greatest privileges; but few there be that seek
for the privileges of Gods church: And commonly those that seek most for
privileges in chief towns, have the least care to become the true members of
Gods church; which is a wretched practice and ought not to be among us, seeing
the church has privileges far above all other societies.

Secondly, hence we are taught above all things to have care to preserve the
society of the church of God. True it is, the minister and magistrate must have
chief care thereof: and yet every man in his place must do his best endeavor
hereunto, because it is the most principal society.

Thirdly, in that Gods church is the most excellent society, giving honor to
all others; we are taught within the compass of our callings, as much as we
can to bring all other societies unto this. Those that are members of a
family, must labor to bring every one in their family to be good members
of the church: And so in civil societies, men of government must labor that
the members of the civil body, become also members of Christ's body. Thus
governors of kingdoms should labor that the parts of their dominions may be
particular churches of God. And there is good reason of this duty; because all
other societies without this are companions of men in the dark, sitting in the
shadow of death, being spiritually blind, and without all sound comfort in
their souls. Secondly, the church is compared to a candlestick of gold,
because of all societies among men it is most precious and dear unto God: and
therefore it is resembled to a seal Cant. 8.6.
on Christ's heart, and a signit on his arm: yea, it is a dear unto him as the
apple of his eye, Zachar. 2.8. The Church is the Queen that stands on Christ's
right hand in a vesture of gold, Psa. 4.5.9. Yea that which surpasses all,
Christ redeemed Act. 20.1^
the Church unto himself by his own blood. Oh then how dear and precious is
she in his sight: And hereby also we are taught the same instructions that did
arise from the former pre-eminence; namely to have special care of Gods church
to preserve the same, and to labor to become our selves, and to bring others
to be members thereof. And thus much of the title of the church.

Now it is added that Christ the Messiah is in the midst of the seven golden
candlestickes: whereby is signified: First, that Christ is present with his
church at all times: And secondly, that being present he has care to gather
his church; and being gathered to preserve the same against the gates of hell,
and all other enemies.

From hence we learn sundry things: First, that the supremacy of the church
of Rome, wherein one is made head of all the militant church, is needless: For
Christ is present always with his church, having special care to gather,
guide, and preserve the same, and he needs no vickar general to supply his
room, for in the presence of the prince all commissions of vicegerencie do
cease: though Christ had granted this supremacy to any, yet so long as Christ
is present, their commission must cease; and it is as great pride, and greater,
for any to presume to be head of all churches in Christ's presence, than for a
man to sit vicegerent in the presence of the prince.

Secondly, seeing Christ is always present with his church, we are taught to
walk with God, and before God, as Enoch did, Genes. 5.22. Which duty stands in
these points. First, whatsoever we say, or take in hand, we must do it as in
the presence of Christ. Secondly, we must continually depend upon Christ's
providence, who is ever present with his church, providing all things for the
good of his church, and of every member thereof. Thirdly, we must do all our
actions as looking for approbation at the hands of Christ: for which end we
must take direction for the same out of his word. The practice of this duty is
most excellent: for by walking with God we shall be enabled to many good
duties; as namely, live unblameably in this wicked world, making conscience of
all sin, and approving our selves both to God and man, in heart and life. And
thus much for the place where John saw Christ.

The second argument whereby John describes Christ, is his figure, or form, in
these words, One like the son of man. Some think that these words are a
description of some Angel, not of Christ, because he is said to be like the
son of man, not the son of man himself, but they are deceived! For he
which is here described, is before called the first, and the last, it is he
which was dead, and is alive, which cannot agree to any but to Christ. Now the
words may more significantly be translated thus, One like to a son of man:
for if it be translated that son of man, then Christ must needs be the
resemblance: for so he is called Act. 7.56. But here Christ is said to be like
to a son of man, by the usual phrase of the Old testament: whereby is meant
that he is like unto a man. And Christ is not here called a man, but is said to
be like unto a man, because he appeared unto John not in his true manhood,
which was then in heaven, but in the likeness of his manhood. And note this,
that as Christ here appeared to John in this vision, so did he always appear
after his ascension. Steven indeed saw his true manhood, Act. 7. but it was in
heaven: and Paul heard his voice when he was converted, Acts. 9.5. and saw the
Lord, 1. Cor. 9.1. But no man can prove that Chrst appeared unto him in his
true manhood, unless it were in heaven. And in all these visions John saw not
his true manhood, but a resemblance thereof. Now Christ appeared thus for
special consideration, For man is too much addicted to his bodily presence:
this was the fault of his own friends and Disciples. Therefore Christ would
hereby teach us, not to seek for his bodily presence, but rather to lift up
our hearts to heaven, and therefore seek to have fellowship with him by faith.
For this cause he said to Marie after his resurrection, Touch me not, I am not
yet ascended to my father, John. 20.17. This Paul had learned, Though we had
known Christ (says he) after the flesh, yet henceforth know we him no more,
2. Cor. 5.15. Now if Christ after his ascension never appeared in his true
manhood, i^ teaches us, that the defense of Christ's real presence in the
Sacrament is needless. For if Gods church have spiritual fellowship with
Christ by faith, it is sufficient. Again, whereas Christ appears in the
shape and form of man after his ascension, the Papists gather, that we may
make images of Christ, and so answerably of the father, and of the holy ghost,
in those forms wherein they appeared: as of the holy Ghost in the form of a
Math. 2.
dove; and Dan. 9.
of the father in the likeness of an old man. Ans. It is not unlawful to
make, or to have an image of Christ's manhood, so that it be out of religious
use (though it be doubtful whether any now have a true picture thereof:) but
if it be to represent whole Christ, God and man, or be used to remember
Christ thereby, or to worship Christ therein, it is an idol. As for the forms
of an old man, or of a dove, they may be made for the manifestation of the
hystori^ of the Bible, when it is painted or pictured: but then we must
conceive, that these forms are no images of the father, son, or holy ghost,
but only representations of such visible appearances, as sometimes were signs
and pledges of the presence of those persons. But now to abstract those forms
apart from the history, and to make them images of any person in Trinity, is
flat against the second commandment; which does generally forbid all images
of God, not excepting those very shapes in which himself took liberty to
testify his presence for some time. And there being no exception against Gods
commandment, it is in vain to seek shifts and excuses for a thing
forbidden, De Deo ^il sin^ Deo.
specially considering we may not meddle with God beyond our commission from
God.

Clothed with a garment down to his feet. Here Christ is further described by
his attire. The first part whereof is, A long garment reaching to his feet.
The causes why he so appeared, may be these. First, to signify that he is the
high priest of the new Testament, and so continues, doing the offices of the
high priest for his Church after his ascension, in presenting the merit of his
one only sacrifice, and making intercession to God the father for them. For
the long garment was one of those wherewith the high priest was clothed in his
ministration, under the law.

Secondly, to signify that he is The Prince of peace: for the long garment
not only in the Church of God, but among the Heathen, has been always a
note of peace: and so Christ is called, Isa. 9.6.

Thirdly, to show that he had in his breast the Coloss. 2.3
treasures of the wisdom of the father, and the Isay 11.2.
spirit of counsel. For this long robe always pertained to them that excelled
in counsel and wisdom: and so Christ is described, Isay 11.2. Now in this
example of Christ we may learn a duty touching our attire: namely, that the
outward garment of the body should be suitable to the good things that ought to
be in the heart: as to our wisdom, knowledge, fear of Gods name, to our
sobriety, modesty, temperance, humility, and all other virtues whatsoever.
We must not only in speech and action, as in hearing Gods word, and receiving
the Sacraments, show our selves to be burning lights; but even by the gesture
and attire of our body, both for matter and form, show forth the grace of our
hearts. But miserable are these times, wherein men's attire is suitable, not to
the graces of God, that should be in their hearts, but to the common
corruptions of the times. For such it is generally, whereby a far off (though
he never had acquaintance with the party) a man may see the vanity and
lightness of his mind, the pride, and folly of his heart, that wears it.

The second part of Christ's attire is this: Girded about the pappes with a
golden girdle. It hanged not loose about him, but was girded close to his body:
whereby is signified, that he is a mediator, every way ready prepared to do
the office of a mediator for his Church: for in all ages the Luk 12.35 36.
girding of the attire to the body has been a sign of care and diligence in
the business they have in hand; and the contrary, not girding, a sign of
carelessness, and negligence therein. When Christ was here on earth, he was
most pitiful to all penitent sinners, he rejected none such that came unto him
but regarded them far more than the Scribes and Pharisees, that were the
learned men among the Jews. And since his assention he has not left off his
care and diligence, but is always ready, doing a^ such duties which may
pertain to their salvation.

The consideration whereof, is a matter of excellent comfort unto all such as
have any spark of grace. First hereby we learn, that when we truly humble
our selves, Christ is ready to receive ou^ prayers, and in all our troubles and
temptations ready to relieve, to comfort, and deliver us: and in our death
ready to receive our souls, yea at all times prepared to do whatsoever may
further our salvation. He is not like unto Pharoahs butler, who promised to
remember Joseph while he was in prison with him, (...) 40.23
but forgate him quite when he was advanced to honor again. But he is
always mindful of us, and ever ready to do all the works of a mediator
for us. Whence we are taught answereably, to have our loins girded, as Christ
commands, Luke 12. verse 35. being ever ready to do all duties that
concern Christianity: as to call on Gods name, and to praise God, to practice
faith, repentance, and obedience; fit to die, and fit to live: never suffering
our selves to be unfit for any thing that concerns our salvation, but at all
times so stand upon our watch, that whenever God shall call, we may be
ready to enter into the kingdom of heaven. But alas the case with most men
goes far otherwise: they fit themselves for the world at all times: but few
seek to prepare themselves for the kingdom of heaven till death do come.

This ought not to be* It is a treacherous part in any subject to be
unprepared for the service of his prince, and yet ever ready to receive a
common enemy. And it is no less treason against God, to forslow our
preparation for the Lord, by fitting our selves for the world.

Further he is said to be girded, not about the loins, but about the pappes
and breast. Whereby some say (and not unfitly) is signified, that there is no
defect, or aberration in any motion or affection of our Savior Christ, but
every thought and inclination of his heart is kept in order by the fullness of
the spirit which dwells in him bodily.

Verse 14. His head and hairs were white as white wool and as snow: and his
eyes were as a flame of fire. In the third place: John here describes Christ
by the parts of his body. The whiteness of his head and hairs, signifies the
eternity of Christ. For howsoever as he is man; he had a beginning* yet in
regard of his godhead he is eternal, and therefore is called, The ancient of
days, Dan. 9. and is said to have been in the beginning, John. ^.1. that is,
to have had a being before all other things had their beginning.

In this resemblance of his eternity, by head and hairs as white as wool and
snow, he gives us to understand an honor and prerogative in the aged man,
whereby he excels the younger sort: to wit, the horenesse and whiteness of
his hair, for which cause in the word of God it is set forth by most worthy
comparisons: as by the white Almond tree, Eccles. 12.5. And by a glorious
silver crown, not made by man, but by the hand of God set upon his head. And
herein does this excellency of the aged consist; that they bear the image of
Gods eternity before all that are of younger years. From whence all younger men
are taught to reverence the aged by ^ev. 19.23.
rising up before them: acknowledging thereby the pre-eminence of the hoare
head.

Again, hereby the aged are taught to carry themselves answerable to their
estate and condition, they ought to excel all their yongers in knowledge,
wisdom, and experience of good things, 1. John. 2.13. I write unto you fathers
(that is aged men, who by reason of years are fathers) because you have known
him who is everlasting.

Also they must be holy, as he that is eternal is holy, whose eternity they
show forth: And therefore Solomon says The white head is a crown of glory
when it is found in the way of righteousness: that is, in one that walks in
the way of righteousness, Prover. 16.31. for his white hair signifies, that
he has spent much time and care about good duties. But it is no ornament
unless it be joined with holiness of heart and life. Which I say because many
younger men, excel the aged in the knowledge of God, and other virtues: which
is a shame to the gray headed, for as they go before others in years, so they
ought to excel in piety, knowledge, and all virtues: Ignorance and looseness
of life is a foul vice in any; but in him that bares the silver crown it is
intolerable. For how can they look for reverence from the younger, when as
they be far inferior to them in gifts of grace? It is no excuse for old men
to say, Their wits are not so ripe* as young men's are; and their memory fails
them. Their aged ignorance argues that they spent the time of their youth
loosly and profanely: For they that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall
bring forth fruit in their age, Psalm. 92.13, 14. A plant is young, and
therefore he that would wear the crown of glory in his age, must receive the
sap of grace in the house of God while he is young.

And his eyes were as a flame of fire, here John proceeds in describing the
parts of Christ's body. In the handling whereof it is hard for any to set down
certainly, what the holy Ghost intends in every particular. It shall be
sufficient for us to follow that interpretation which is most probable and best
agreeing with the tenor of Gods word.

In this description of Christ's eyes, are signified to us two things: first,
that Christ the mediator and redeemer of his church, is of most quick, sharp,
and piercing sight, so as he beholds all things that are done upon the
earth: yea, he sees into the very secret thoughts of men's hearts, thither can
the eyes of his godhead more easily pierce, than fire can do into the
substance of bodily things. And there is great necessity it should be so, for
being head and governor of his church, he must know all the parts and members
thereof: he must behold their several estates, and see the malice and
practices of Satan, and other enemies against them.

Now in that Christ our Savior has this piercing sight, we are taught to have
care, not only of our words and actions, but also of the very secret thoughts,
purposes, and desires of our hearts: for the piercing eye of Christ sees them
all, therefore we must be sure they be well ordered. In the courts of men,
thoughts and inward motions bear no action, but with God it is otherwise.
Christ Jesus has a fiery eye, that sees into all our thoughts, and there he
holds a court of judgment. Therefore we must keep a godly watch over all the
imaginations of our hearts, that they may be approved of Christ, least for them
we be judged and condemned.

Secondly, this teaches us in matters of religion to be that indeed which we
seem to be in profession. For though we may deceive men, which know not our
hearts, yet we cannot deceive Christ: for by his fiery eyes he sees
whatsoever is in us. And yet the common practice of the world is here to be
reproved, who terms them hypocrites that take upon them any profession for
the name and religion of Christ. But herein men go beyond their calling: it
belongs only unto the piercing eye of Christ, to judge and look at men's
hypocrisy of heart.

Secondly, by these fiery eyes is signified, That Christ is full of anger,
wrath and judgment against all sinners, ready to take vengeance on all those
that will not yield subjection unto him by turning from their sins, and
believing in him: for Christ as he is a Savior, so is he a Judge; and
therefore in the parable he says: Those mine enemies that would not that I
should rule over them, Luke 19.27.
bring them hither, and stay them before me. The consideration hereof serves
to awake many an one out of the sleep of sin. This age is miserable, if we
regard the practice of faith and repentance which God requires; for men live
in ignorance without knowledge, they go on in looseness of life without
reformation; which is both scandalous unto men, and odious unto God: not one of
an hundred turns to God at the preaching of his word, renewing his ways by
daily repentance. But unto many it is meat and drink to go on in those sins
wherein their hearts delight. But let these men consider, that Christ is a
righteous Judge, beholding his enemies with fierce and fiery eyes, always
ready (...) take vengeance on them that do no^ repent: and therefore they
must in time consider their estate, for if they persevere in their evil ways
as they have begun, the truth is, he still beholds them with his fiery
eyes, and though in his great patience he spare them for a time, yet at length
he will put in practice the execution of his judgment, and slay them for
enemies: as it is in the parable, Luke 19 27. Let them remember what a
fearful thing it is to fall into the hands of God, if his wrath be kindled
never so little, Psalm. ^.12.

Verse. 15. And his ^eele like unto fine brass burning as in a furnace: and his
voice as the sound of many waters. The word in the original signifies Brass
that shines, which for substance is pure and durable, a very choice and
excellent kind of brass. And hereunto Christ's feet are compared, to signify
unto us his invincible power, whereby he is able not only to encounter with
sin, Satan, and death; but also that he has already entered combat with
them, and has bruised the heads of these his enemies. Yea hereby is signified,
that he has not only done these things in his own person, but also will do
the same in all his members, by his invincible power, unto the end of the
world. Which is a matter of exceeding great comfort to Gods church and people,
never to be forgotten. If any man be exercised in any grievous temptation of
Satan, he must not be astonished and confounded therewith: but remember, that
Christ our Savior has the brazen feet, wherewith he has bruised the head of
the serpent, and will (if he seek unto him unfeignedly) bruise in him the
serpents head: so by experience shall we find the benefit of his brazen feet.

If any be oppressed with the corruption of his nature, whether it be in
thoughts or affections: let him come unto Christ Jesus, lay open his wants
before him, show his sins, and make known the strength thereof unto him, and
withal cry unto him for help: and he shall find by joyful experience,
though they were never so many, or mighty, That the power of Christ in him,
will vanquish, and subdue them all.

Again, does any fear the terrors of death (as all men do by nature) let
him consider, that Christ has the feet of brass, wherewith he did encounter
with death upon the cross: and not content with that, went down with him into
his own den, and there did bruise his head, and subdue his power. Indeed if
death were to encounter with us in his full strength* it were a matter of
fear: but considering that Christ has bruised his head, this must stay our
heart^ against overmuch dread. And as it serves to minister comfort to the
godly, so it is a matter of all terror and woe unto those that live
impenitent: for Christ has feet of brass to bruise the head of all his
enemies, and such are all those that go on in sin; unless they turn,
destruction will be their end. Let every one therefore look unto his soul,
that has led a course in any sin. Let him forsake his old master Satan, and
the works of darkness, and turn unfeignedly to Jesus Christ in the practice
of faith and true repentance, and by all obedience in the duties of his
callings. For howsoever the patience of God may stay for a time the execution
of his justice and wrath, yet in the end they shall feel by woeful experience
the destroying power of these his brazen feet.

Burning as in a furnace. Feet ascribed to God and men in Scripture, do often
time betoken their ways: So here by Christ's feet we may understand his
works and ways. And whereas they are said to burn as in a furnace; thereby
is signified the perfection thereof. All the counsels of God, with the
execution thereof in the creation and government of the world, with all his
works therein, are all most holy and pure, like fine brass purged in the
furnace, Psa. 18.30. Psalm. 111 7.
The ways of God are vncorrupt, yea he is holy in all his ways.

The consideration whereof, must teach us to conceive and speak reverently of
all the works of God, even of those most secret and strange judgments,
whereof we cannot comprehend a reason. Yet because they proceed from God we
must acknowledge them pure and just. In sundry points of religion there is a
learned ignorance, whereof this is not the least, to hold our selves content,
and to reverence the works of Christ, though we see no reason thereof; nay,
though to us they seem against all reason: for all the ways of God are
vncorrupt. Though the blind eye of men cannot discern the light of the Sun,
yet the Sun is full of light: so though our blind eyes cannot ^e ^old the
purity of Gods works, yet they are all done in justice and equity, yea they
are justice it self: for his will is the rule of justice. And we must not
think that God does a thing because it is good and right: but therefore is the
thing good and right, because God wills and works it. Examples hereof we
have in. Gods word: Genesis 20.
God commanded Abimele^ to deliver Sarah to Abraham, or else he will destroy
him and all his household. In man's reason this might seem unjust: for why
should Abimelechs servants be punished for their masters fault. So (...) 7.
Achan sins, and all the host of Israel is punished. David committed
adultery, (...). 12.18
and the child which he begat ^^eth. David numbreth the people: but the people
are smitten with the plague, 2. Sa. 24. All this to man's reason may seem
unequal: yet being the works of God, we are withal reverence to judge them
most just and holy. Again, the Romans 9.
Scripture shows plainly, that God in his eternal counsel has decreed to
save some, and to reject others: and his reason moving him thereto, is not any
thing foreseen in them, but his will and pleasure alone. This in man's reason
seems to be cruelty toward some: and therefore sundry men disclaim this
doctrine as charging God with injustice and tyranny. But herein they greatly
offend: for it is the manifest truth of God in his word: and therefore ought
with reverence to be acknowledged, though we can see no reason thereof, For who
art thou oh man, that pleadest against God, Romans 9.20.

And his voice as the sound of many waters. The voice of Christ is resembled to
the sound of many waters for two causes. First, to signify the loudness and
greatness of it: the sound whereof has been heard through all the world in
the ministry of the Gospel. Secondly, to show the power and efficacy
thereof in the ears of his creatures: for such power it is of, that when the
creatures were not, He but spoke the word and they were made, He. 11.3. This
powerful voice of Christ, brought John 11.43, 44.
Lazarus out of the grave after he had been dead four days bound hand and
fo^^e. And by this voice of Christ shall they that have been dead six thousand
years before, be raised up to life, The hour shall come, in the which all
that are in the graves shall hear his voice: and shall come forth to
judgment, John. 5.28, 29.

Hereby then we may see the great security and the deadness of men's hearts in
this age. For though the powerful word of Christ be daily sounded into the
ears of many; yet it enters not into their hearts. They live securely in
their sins though they be daily exhorted to repentance. But shall dead
Lazarus start out of his grave when Christ says, Lazarus come forth? Nay,
shall they that were consumed to dust many thousand years before, at the
hearing of Christ's voice rise out of their graves? And shall we which live in
body be no whit affected with it in our souls. Oh fearful death in sin.
And yet this is the state of all those that will not be moved to leave their
sins by the ministry of the word. It may be the outward ear receives the
sound, but the dead heart receives no instruction. We must therefore apply our
hearts to this powerful voice of Christ; and leave the sins wherein we have
lien dead, that so the quickening power hereof unto salvation may appear in us.

Verse 16. And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his mouth
went a sharp two edged sword: And his face shone as the sun shines in his
strength. Here John proceeds further, to set out the parts of Christ's body
and the properties thereof. By seven stars we are to understand seven
Angels: that is (as Christ expounds them verse. 20.) the seven ministers of
the seven churches of Asia. And they are called stars for these causes.
First, stars give light to men on earth: And so the ministers ought to give
spiritual light to them that live in the church, both by doctrine, and by an
unblameable conversation. Secondly, stars have their continual abode in
heaven and descend not unto the earth: So ministers above all others ought to
have their conversation in heaven. This indeed is the duty of every christian;
but especially of the minister, in regard of his calling. And this heavenly
conversation he must express: first, by seeking the conversion of his own
soul: and then the conversion of others, that they may have an eternal
mansion in heaven. Thirdly, they are called stars because (if they be
faithful) they shall be honored of God, and made to shine a^ the stars for
ever and ever, Dan. 12.3.

It is added that they are in Christ's right hand. Whereby is signified that to
him belongs the regiment, and government, and the whole disposition of the
ministry for matters that concern the church. From whence arise sundry
instructions.

I. That it is Christ who gives to his church ministers which preach the
Gosspell. For he (...) 4.11.12.
ascends up on high, and gave gifts unto men, some to be Apostles, some
Prophets, and Evangelists, some Pastors and teachers for the gathering together
of the saints, and for the work of the ministry, and for the edification of
the body of Christ. And for this cause we ought to pray daily unto Christ, Mat.
9.38.
that he would thrust forth laborers into his harvest: that the remnant of Gods
elect may be gathered, and so we see an end of these miserable days wherein
we live.

Secondly, in that Christ holds them in his right hand, we may gather that
Christ gives protection and defense unto his ministers, when they are faithful
and walk in their calling according to his will: which is a matter to be
considered of all that are called into this office: For they have sundry
occasions of discouragement: as the negligence and backwardness of their
people; the slanders and mockings of the enemies: But this protection of Christ
must comfort them against them all; seeing they are in Christ's right hand, they
must go on with all godly boldness.

Thirdly, this shows the dignity of this calling. Indeed it is despised and
reputed base in the world; and hereby many are driven from it. But let the
wicked judge what they will: Behold Christ honors it, for his faithful
ministers are not only present before him which were no small thing: but he
holds them in his right hand; then which, what greater glory can be done
unto them? This must be an inducement unto all those that are endued with
gifts fit for this calling, to affect the same.

Lastly, every minister of the gospel must hereby learn to be faithful in
his calling, and holy in his conversation: for by virtue of his calling he is
placed in Christ's right hand. Now shall we think that Christ will long bear in
his right hand any that are unfaithful, or profane* Nay, he will take them
out of his right hand and put them under his feet of brass, and there grind
them to powder: For as they are honored above others by their place, so shall
their confusion be the greater, unless they be faithful. This we may see in
Nadab and Abihu, Leuit. 10.1. and Hoph^^^ and Phineas, 1. Sam. 3.13. And in the
same respect ought all the people of God to be careful to their ways; for by
their calling of christianity they be members of Christ. Now if they be not
faithful and answerable to their profession, he will surely deal with them,
as with unfaithful ministers, put them under his feet of brass and confound
them for ever: They must therefore make conscience of all sin, and become not
hearers only, but doers of his will: so shall Christ protect them in this
life, and save them eternally.

And out of his mouth went a sharp two edged sword. This sword that came out
of his mouth is nothing else but the doctrine of the Law and the Gospel
uttered and propounded in the writings and ministry of the Prophets and
Apostles, Heb. 4.12. The word of God is lively, mighty in operation and
sharper than any two edged sword. And it is thereto compared, because as a
sword with a double edge enters sharply into the flesh, and pierces deeply
into the bones, even to the very marrow: So the doctrine of the Law and the
Gospel enters sharply and pierces deeply into the very marrow of the heart
of every man, to the dividing of the thought and the spirit. This two edged
sword, the word of God has a twofold operation. One upon the wicked: Another
in the elect. It wounds the wicked at the very heart with a deadly wound, and
thereby brings them to eternal death, Isay. 11.4. Christ shall slay the wicked
with the breath of his lips: that is, with his word which is this two edged
sword. Herewith shall he consume Antichrist, 2. These. 2.8. visit Leuiathan and
slay the dragon, that is, the greatest enemies of his church, Isay. 27. verse. 1.

Here consider how the word of God should kill an impenitent sinner. There be
three degrees of spiritual death. First in this life, where an impenitent
sinner receives his deadly wound: The second at the end of this life, when the
body is laid in the grave, but the soul goes to the torments of the damned:
The third at the end of the world: when body and soul together go to hell
eternally. Now a sinner receives in this life his deadly wound after this
manner: Christ in the giving thereof has a threefold work in his heart by the
ministry of his word, which is this two edged sword. First, hereby he
reuealeth unto him his sins, as hypocrisy, pride, and rebellion of heart,
with all other his horrible and damnable transgressions against the first and
second table, 1. Cor. 14.24.25. When all Prophecy, and there comes in one
unlearned, he is reproved of all, the Prophets by the word judge him, and
thereby lay open unto him the secret sins of his heart, with the sins of
his life. Secondly, Christ hereby reue^leth unto him his indignation and wrath,
which is the curse of the law due unto him: In which regard the law is called
2^ Cor. 3.6
a killing letter, showing no mercy, but only thundreth out the fierce wrath
of God upon transgressors. Thirdly, hereby Christ awaketh his guilty
conscience, sharpneth the sting thereof, and terrifieth him at the hearing of
his word. Thus wicked Felix trembled when he heard Paul preach Act. 24.25
of temperance, righteousness, and the judgment to come* So when king Dan.
4.6.
Belshazzer, saw the palm of the hand* writing things against him upon the
^all, his countenance was changed, his thoughts troubled him, his joints were
loosed, and his knees stood one against another. And al these are wrought in
the wicked without apprehension of mercy, or reformation of life. It may please
God to recover one that ^s (...) wounded, but while he is (...) this estate he
has received a deadly wound, and without vnfamed repentance is already in the
first step toward eternal death: for these horror^ o^ conscience severed from
the apprehension of Gods mercy in Christ, are no grace but the flashes of hell
fire, and the beginning of eternal woe. And thus we see how Christ by this
sword wounds his enemies.

Hence we are to learn sundry duties, First, how to earne our selves toward
them that after they have heard the word preached unto them, will rage and
storm against it, and the preachers thereof, because it touched them. We must
not despise or malign them, but rather be moved with compassion toward them.
For this their behavior is a token they are wounded with the sword of Christ
at the very heart, and these their ragings are nothing but struglings before
death eternal: unless the Lord in mercy recover them of this deadly wound.

II. Hereby we are let to see and know the lamentable state of the greatest
number in those congregations where the word has long been preached; for we
shall find by lamentable experience, that in those place^ few come to true
knowledge, repentance, and obedience; but most remain ignorant and impenitent:
now this their condition is most fearful. A terrible judgment of God is upon
them: for when men have long heard Gods word and are not thereby bettered, for
knowledge in mind, and obedience of life; they are thereby wounded unto death.

This two edged sword has always his work: it either cures unto life by
working repentance and other graces of salvation; or wounds unto death them
that receive it not. We must therefore lament the case of such persons as
remain^ ignorant and impenitent under the ministry of the word, for they are
as yet dead men for ought we know, how soever they may make a fair show by
their ^^ill honesty: If any man should come into a field, and there behold
many thousands slaughtered, and (...) ou^ blo^d, some in the ^ead, some in the
side* etc. this sight would make his heart to bleed. Well this (...) Gods
church, though it be not seen with bodily eyes: the most men are wounded with
this sword of Gods word* and lie (...) wallowing in the blo^d of their souls,
(...) they continue in ignorance, in se^uritie and want of repentance.

III. This m^st admonish us all to labor earnestly to have further things
wrought in us, than a knowledge of our sins, an apprehension of wrath o^
horror of conscience* namely, (...) faith and repentance, and sound
reformation of life: for without this* we have nothing in us but the deadly
wounds of Christ's enemies. And (...) much for the work of the Word upon the
wicked.

The second work of this two edged sword is in Gods elect* in them it has
sundry works* all which ^end to their subjection* First, it wounds to the
quick the corruption of their nature. This is one special cause why it is
called a two edged sword, because it enters deeply into the heart of Gods
children, and gives their corruption such a deadly blow, as it shall never
recover again: It kills not the person, as it does in the wicked: but
quic^ening the soul, it wounds his corruption. Paul ministered the Gospel,
Romans 15 16
that the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable. Where rese^bling
Gods church to a sacrifice, he gives us to understand, that every true
Christian must be slain, though not in body and soul, yet in regard of
sinful motions, corrupt affections and rebellious actions, by this two edged
sword of the spirit. And this is his conversion whereby the root of corruption
is stocked up.

Secondly, after conversion* this two edged sword serves to cut off and pare
away the remnants of unbelief, doubting, impiety, anger, and other sins that
be in the elect: John 15.
Every branch (says Christ) that brings forth fruit in me, my father the
husbandman gruneth, to make it bring fo^rth more fruit.

Thirdly, it serves to keep Gods children in awe and subjection unto him. In
this vision, Christ stands in his church, holding up the scepter of his
kingdom, which he bears in his mouth: for this end* that though his enemies
will not be brought in subjection unto him, yet his own children might hereby
be kept in awe of him. He therefore that will not at the lifting up of this two
edged sword tremble and fear before Christ, is but a rebellious subject: If
there be brawling in humane societies, let the magistrate but show himself
with the sword of justice, and straightway every one is quiet: if any resist,
he is taken for a rebel. Now shall this be effected in civil policy, and not
be true in Christ's spiritual government* unless therefore we will show our
selves rebels against Christ, let us cease from sin and tremble before him,
seeing he holds out unto us the scepter of his word.

Fourthly, this sword serves notably for our defense and victory in all
temptations, Ephesians* 6.^^. This sword of the spirit, the word of God, is one
piece of the complete armor of a Christian. Herewith did Christ vanquish
Satan. Matthew. 4* And thus we see how the word of God is a two edged sword, in
regard of the elect.

Hence we are taught, that when we have the doctrine of the Law and of the
Gospel preached unto us, we must with all reverence hear and receive the
same. Men will hear it while it is taught generally, but if it once touch
their particular faults, then they cannot brook it. But we must suffer it to
ransacke our hearts, and be glad thereof: for by this means our corruption is
wounded, and sin slain in us: our souls are converted unto God, and shall
be saved. If any man were diseased with a fistula, or any other dangerous
sore, he would willingly suffer the surgeon to search and pierce into the fame.
Shall we do this for our bodily health, and shall we not suffer the word of
God to enter into our hearts to rip up our sins, that they being wounded and
subdued, we may be healed, and so our souls live for ever? we cannot live
unto God, till we die unto sin: and we can never die unto sin, till the
same be wounded in us by this two edged sword. Away therefore with all
niceness in disliking the word, when it crosses our humor* and if we love
eternal life, Let us then embrace it most willingly.

Saint John says f^^ther of this two edged sword; that it came out of Christ's
mouth. Other kings carry their swords and scepters in their hands; but Christ
bears his in his mouth, to teach us this special point, That we must
receive no doctrine from any man, which he has not received from the mouth of
Christ. For first, God reuealeth his will unto his son, and Christ delivers
it unto his Prophet^ and Apostles by the spirit, and to his ministers in their
writings. They therefore must deliver nothing unto Gods people* but that which
they have from Christ: if they deliver ought else, they hold no^ forth Christ's
sword; neither can it have that powerful effect either in the godly, or in the
wicked.

And his face (...) the Sun shines i^ his brightness. Here is the last
branch of this description of Christ* his face is compared to the shining of
the Sun, and that in his strength: because Christ is unto his church^ as the
Sun is to the world. And look what duties the Sun performs unto the
world, the same duties Christ performs unto his church, in a more excellent
manner, as their resemblance will evidently declare.

First, the Sun in the world dispelleth night and darkness, and makes the
day by bringing light: so Christ the son of righteousness, Malach. 4.2.
sends down the bright beams of knowledge and grace into his church, whereby
blindness and ignorance is taken away, 2. Corinthians. 4.6. And hereby every one,
of what sort or place soever, is taught: first, to labor for knowledge of the
will of God. A great shame it is for any to be ignorant her^in; when the day
comes, we set open our windows to let in the light of the Sun for our
comfort: behold Christ Jesus is ever a shining light in his church: Why then
should we not open our hearts, that the beams of light and knowledge, which
descend from him, may enter into us, and give us light? Secondly, we must
hereby learn in our whole conversation among men, to walk by this light. We
are here but pilgrims traveling toward heaven: and the way of this miserable
word is full of darkness; yet Christ Jesus is in the midst of his church,
shining as the Sun in his strength to give the light of knowledge* whereby
we may see the right way thither* Without him there is nothing but darkness
and wandering* his word is the light, and himself the day star. We therefore
must attend unto him in all our affairs of this life: and in the particular
duties of our lawful callings take direction from the light which shines from
his face.

Secondly, the Sun serves most excellently to comfort and revive cold and
dead starued bodies; as experience in the spring time teaches: So Christ Jesus
by the work of his spirit conueyeth spiritual life and heat unto the dead and
frozen heart of man: he is of power to comfort them that mourn, to give life
to the broken hearted* and to revive the spirit of the humble, Isay. 57.15. and
for this most excellent work may well be called the Sun of Righteousness^.
In regard whereof we must labor above all things to be partakers of this life
and joy which comes from Christ. In Winter time men use to stand in the sun
to comfort and warm themselves with the heat thereof. Behold Christ Jesus is
the sun of righteousness to his church, which gives heat and life to all
the true members thereof. We therefore must seek above all things to have his
blessed beams of grace to shine upon our cold and frozen hearts, that by his
spiritual heat we may be revived unto everlasting life. In this world nothing
is so much regarded, as riches, honors, and pleasures: Who will show us any
good, is the worldlings song. But with godly David we must say, Psalm. 4.4.
Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us, quicken thou us with
thy spiritual life* and comfort us with the beams of mercy. Quest. How may I
get the gracious beams of grace and life, to come from this Sun of
righteousness into my heart? Answ. Before a man can live by Christ, he must
be killed in himself. Men do not kill those whom they would restore to
temporal life, but the Lord takes that course. Thou therefore must suffer his
two edged sword to enter into thee, yea to be thrust up to the hilts into thy
heart, that so thy vile sins and corruptions may be ripped up, and the wrath
of God deserved thereby made known unto thee, that in thy self thou may
be out of hope: and then and not before art thou fit to receive comfort and
life by Christ; as a man that is cold in body is most fit to receive heat by
clothes and other means of warmenesse. Now being thus humbled in thy self,
thou must use the means which God has ordained, to wit, the hearing, reading,
and meditating in his word, with earnest prayer for grace and mercy: and th^^
shall thou perceive the joyful beams of life shining into thy soul. If a man
had all the world, and wanted this grace of life and comfort by Christ, it were
but a curse unto him: but though a man want all things else, yet by this life of
grace in Christ he is blessed for ever: and therefore above all other things
men should labor for it.

Thirdly, the sun serves to discover all things. In the night nothing is
discerned, but al things appear in one form: but when the same comes forth,
all things are made manifest, even the ^^all motes in the air. Even so Christ
Jesus the son of righteousness* he sees all things, and can discover the
most hidden secrets of men: nothing is hid from the light of his countenance,
so infinite is his divine wisdom and knowledge. In regard whereof we must be
moved to look unto all our ways, both thoughts, words, and actions, that they
be such as Christ approves: for though we may deceive the world by a false
gloss, yet all that we do, speak, or think, is naked and bare before him,
he knows the same, and can and will reveal it*

If this were believed and remembered, it would be a means to suppress much
fraud and injustice, and many grievous sins which is rise in the world. Men
think if they can bleare the eyes of the world, all is well, they may do what
they will: but we must think upon the shining face of Christ, which discerns
and discovers all secrets; and labor thereupon to make conscience of all our
ways, yea of our secret thoughts, that God may approve the same.

Verse. 17. And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead: then he laid his
right hand on me, saying, Fear not, I am the first and the last.

Verse. 18. And I am alive, but I was dead* And behold, I am alive for
evermore, Amen: And I have the keys of hell and of the earth.

Here Saint John describes Christ further by other Arguments: namely, by
sundry actions of his. The first whereof, is a confirmation of John, being sore
afraid, set down in this and the next verse. In which action note two things:
First, the occasion thereof: Secondly, the mean^ of his confirmation. The
occasion was John's exceeding fear, set down in these words: And when I saw
him, I fell at his feet as dead. The means of confirmation, as in the words
following, Then he laid his hand^ upon me, etc.

For the occasion. John's fear was exceeding great, and that of death: as
appears by Christ his confirmation: wherein he tells John, That be lives,
and has power over death. In this his fear note sundry points; The cause, the
effect, and the kind of this fear. For the first: The cause was Christ his
appearancen glo^ry and majesty unto John, set down in these words, When I saw
him. Where we learn, that sinful men since Adams fall cannot abide the
presence of God. Genesis 2.
Adam before his fall talked face to face with God without fear: but so soon
as he had sinned, Genesis 3.8.
be fled away at the hearing of his voice, and hid himself among the trees of
the garden. This fear comes by reason of man's guiltiness before God. Hence
Manoah said unto his wife, Judge. 13.2^
We shall surely die, because we have (...) seen God.

First, by this, The Use.
That no sinful man can abide the presence of God, we are taught to labor to
become new creatures, to have the image of sin defaced in us, and the image
of God restored in righteousness and true holiness. True happiness
consists in fellowship with God: but we can never have true fellowship with
him, while we live in our sins, 1. John. 1.6. If we say we have fellowship
with him, and walk in darkness, we lie. We therefore must labor to be
purged from our sins, and so his presence shall be our joy.

Secondly, this fear of John at Christ's presence in glory, teaches us. That
the sight and presence of Gods majesty is a most excellent means to humble a
man, and to make him know himself to be nothing in himself. When Abraham
talked with God, the more he beheld the majesty of God, the more he humbled
himself, confessing at last, that he was but dust and ashes, Genesis 18.27. And
Peter by a great draught of fishes seeing but a glimmering of divine majesty in
Christ, could not abide it, but cried out, Depart from me, for I am a sinful
man, Luke 5.8. And so the holy Angels when they stand before the majesty of
God are said Isay 6.3.
to cover their faces and their f^ete with the^^ wings: to signify, that they
are nothing in regard of the exceeding Majesty of God, and in themselves
unable to behold his glory.

Thirdly, hereby we are taught to acknowledge Gods great goodness toward us
in the ministry of the word: wherein he vouchsafes to speak unto us, not
in his own person, as he did in mount S^rra, which would be so terrible,
(...) none could abide it* but favorably and familiarly by the ministry of
men that are like unto our selves. Many abuse this mercy of God, and despise
the word because of the messenger: but we must learn by this bounty of God,
to receive the word with all reverence as from the Lord.

Lastly, in this exceeding fear of John, who was an Apostle and a very godly
and righteous man; we learn that the most holy man that is will be astonished
even to death with the presence of Gods glorious majesty. And if no man, be he
never so holy, can stand before Gods presence, much less can the most
righteous works of any man endure the trial of his judgment: if his person
cannot abide his presence; his works will never bear his judgment. For the
person must first be approved before the works be accepted. Therefore
damnable is the doctrine of the church of Rome, which teach that such as in
themselves are sinful men must stand before Gods judgment seat bringing with
them works of grace, as means of their justification, and part of satisfaction
to Gods justice. It is a doctrine of desperation: for how can our works be
perfectly holy, seeing our persons are but sanctified here in part? And who
can think that the infinite justice of God can be satisfied by the imperfect
righteousness of man?

II. point. The effect of this fear in his body, He fell down as dead at his
feet: This was no small fear but exceeding great, astonishing his senses and
laying him down as dead. Physicians say, and that truly, the mind follows
the temperature of the body. But hence we may as truly say, That the body
follows the disposition of the mind; for the affections of the soul will
work upon the body like unto strong diseases. John's fear casts his body
into a sound: And so horror of conscience when the heart is cold will make the
body hot, and the intrals to roll in the body. The same may be said of anger,
1. Reg. 21.4. When Ahab could not obtain Nabals vineyard, he laid him down on
his bed in displeasure, and was almost dead: Even so will other affections
work upon the body.

Hence we learn that the bodies of men being diseased must not always be
cured by bare physike, but sometimes by curing of the mind and ordering of the
affections: for when the distemper of the body arises from the disorder of the
mind, then till the mind be well composed and settled, physic will little
avail.

III. point. The kind of this fear is insinuated in these words, he fell at
his feet, Whereby the holy Ghost gives us to understand, that this was a
religious reverent fear, which he bare to Christ: For this kind of
prostrating the body betokens humility; and argues a reverent estimation of
the thing feared.

Hence we are taught, when we come into the presence of Christ, we must
prostrat our selves as John did, and look that we be stricken with a religious
fear of his majesty. If any shall think that Christ is now ascended into
heaven, and therefore we cannot now fall down at his feet as John did. I
answer, though Christ be now in heaven, yet has he his feet upon earth, at
which we must fall down. In the old testament the mercy-seat was the pledge of
Gods presence: and therefore it is called Gods footestoole, Psalm. 99.5. before
which the Jews were to fall down. Well, though the mercy-seat be now taken
away, yet some thing is instead thereof: For wheresoever Gods people assemble
themselves in the name of God, there is his footstool: and therefore in the
assemblies of Gods saints we must cast down our selves before Christ Jesus,
and do all duties unto him with all fear, awe, and reverence of his majesty.

This fear of John, though it was holy, yet is it tainted with some sin and
corruption: for it was an immoderat fear of death which made him thus
astonished and affright. Whence we learn that the most holy affections of
righteous men are not per^ectly holy, but mixed with imperfection according to
the measure of their sanctification, which is always in part in this life.
Whereby it appears that no man has in him a filial fear of God alone, but
some servile fear (whereby we fear God for his judgments) is mixed
therewith. And thus much for John's fear which is the occasion of his
confirmation.

Now follows the means of his confirmation in these words, Then he laid his
right hand upon me, saying, fear not, I am the first and the last: and I am
alive, but I was dead: and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen: and I have the
keys of hell and death. Here note two things, first, the time when Christ used
these means for John's confirmation: secondly, the means themselves. The time
is noted in this word, then, that is, after his presence had stricken a fear in
my heart, which made me as dead; then the Lord used means to comfort me. The
means of comfort and confirmation are then used when the party is humbled. And
thus the Lord deals with all his servants in the matter of their salvation:
First, he bruiseth their stony hearts, and wounds their sinful souls,
before he powers in the oil of grace. First, a man must be a lost sheep,
and then Christ finds him and lays him on his shoulders and brings him
home. And indeed they that would feel sound comfort by Christ, must first be
humbled in themselves. And the reason why men reap so little comfort either by
the word or sacraments, is the want of true humiliation before they come,
whereby the soul is fitted for grace and consolation.

II. point. The means used by Christ to confirm John, and they are two.
First, a sensible sign, He laid his right hand upon me. Secondly, comfortable
words, Fear not.

Here first observe in general Christ's gracious dealing with John: he uses
not one means apart, but in great mercy, that he may thoroughly confirm John,
he gives him both a sign and words. And so he has always dealt with his
servants: When he called Moses to be a deliverer of his people. First, he
gave him his word; saying, I will be with thee, and then a sign, saying, Upon
this mountain shall ye serve God, Ex^d. 3.12. So when he would confirm the
heart of Esaias. 7.
Ahaz against his enemies, he first gives him a promise of deliverance, verse.
7. then bids him ask a sign, verse. 11. And for this cause Christ in the
publishing of his Gospel, added signs and miracles unto his word, that the
truth thereof might be fully confirmed. And so in the work of our salvation,
besides his merciful promises which were sufficient in respect of his
fidelity; he gives us further signs and seals to support our weakness, and
to confirm our faith in the assurance thereof, even the use of the holy
Sacraments.

This teaches us that Christ has a special care over his church and people,
in that he does so condescend and abase himself unto their weakness, adding
unto his word, which of it self were sufficient, signs and tokens, that by
both he might more evidently give that assurance, which by one alone our
weakness would not so well conceive.

Again, in this means of confirmation note the order which Christ uses:
First, he gives him the sign of his presence: Laying his hand upon him, to
assure him of protection from al danger of death. The^ he gives him his wrod,
bidding him not to fear. Hence* we may learn that the assurance of Gods
presence and protection, is a souerigne remedy against all fear: when Moses
feared the great calling he was sent about, to take away that fear, the Lord
says, Exodus: 3.12
I will be with thee. Hence David says, Psa. 23*40
He will not fear though he walk through the valley of the shadow of death,
because God is his stay and comfort. Wherefore it concerns us to labor to be
assured not only of Gods presence, but of his providence and special
protection: And so in all dangers both of life and death, we shall have stay
and comfort for our souls.

The Lord having used these two means to confirm John, both a sign and his
word: does yet further condescend unto John's weakness, and establishes his
own word by two reasons. The first in these words, I am the first and the
last. Christ is the first; Because nothing was or could be before him: The
last, because nothing is or can be after him. These two titles are given unto
Christ to express his Godhead and eternity, as before we have heard, verse.
8. Now here they are again set down, to give us to understand that he has
in his own power the beginning and end of all things: and therefore is able to
protect his servants from all dangers, and from death: and will make good unto
them all his promises unto eternal life.

Verse. 18. And Am he that lives; but I was dead, and behold I am alive for
evermore, Amen: And I have the keys of hell and of death. These words contain
the second reason to confirm John. And it may thus be framed by way of a
distinction, Although I was dead, yet I am he that lives (for so the words
are) and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen: Yea I have power over death and
hell. This distinction contains three parts. First, Though I was once dead,
yet I am he that lives. Secondly, Though I was once dead, yet I live for
evermore. Thirdly, Though I was once dead, yet I have the keys of death and of
hell. Of these in order.

I. part. And Am he that lives, though I was dead. Here life is ascribed to
Christ in a special manner: For Christ lives in a peculiar sort different
from the life of other creatures. For first he has sufficient life in
himself and from himself: Secondly, he gives life to others. For the first:
that we may better conceive it, we must know that life is twofold, uncreated,
and created. Uncreated life is the life of God whereby God lives: This life is
eternal and infinite in it self, and from it self. Now as Christ is God he
lives this uncreated life: which is all one with the godhead. Again, created
is twofold. The first is natural preserved by means of meat and drink. The
second is spiritual, both begun and continued by means of the immediate
operation of Gods spirit, whereby we have fellowship with God. And this
spiritual life is more perfect than the natural. Now Christ lives not the
natural life but as he is God lives the uncreated life, and as he is man he
lives the spiritual life, his body and soul having al their subsisting and
sustentation in the second person in Trinity: and therefore he has in
himself most absolut and perfect life, and so lives of himself.

Secondly, Christ is here said to live, because, he gives life unto men: and
that two ways: First, as he is God; and so he gives life to all good and bad:
For in him every thing lives, moves, and has his being, Act. 17.28.
Secondly, as he is mediator God and man: and so he gives spiritual life unto
his church and people. Hence he says to his Disciples, Because I live, ye
shall live also, John. 14.19. For look as Christ died not for himself, but
for us, that we might not die eternally: So he lives now in heaven the
spiritual life, not for himself alone, but for us, that we might live that
spiritual life in and by him eternally. And therefore our life is said, To be
hid with God in Christ. And for this cause in the Sacrament* we do eat the
body and drink the blood of Christ really by the mouth of faith, that we
might know that our life is to be fetched from him. For as we receive grace
from his grace; so we receive life from his life.

Hereby we are taught to seek for this spiritual life at Christ hands: The
Use.
that we may say with Paul, I live not now, but Christ li^eth in me, Gal. ^.21.
and that Our life (...) ^id in Christ, as in a head and root. For he lives in
heaven that we might live by him: our care must not be so much for our
temporal life, which is but a vapor and like a fleeting shadow, as for this
spiritual life which is eternal. But the practice of this duty is rare to be
found, though the omission of it be a grievous sin. Men's whole care is for
temporal life: few think on this, how to procure to themselves this
spiritual life by Christ; though he have said, I live that you may live in me.
This appears by their common practice: They will go ten, twenty, yea an
hundred miles to provide means for their bodily preservation; and yet will
scarce go one or two miles for the means of their salvation for ever. The
cause thereof is, the hardness of men's hearts, which are not touched for their
sins, nor feel the smart and weight thereof. This we may see plainly in the
woman of Samariah: For when Christ sat at the well of Jacob talking with her,
John 4.
and telling her that he was the well of life, of whose water whosoever drank
should never thirst: She did nothing but cavil with him. But when he laid to
her heart her principal sins, then she left off cauelling, and in reverence,
and some beginning of faith, Acknowledged him to be the Messiah. Even so let
the minister say unto his people, he can bring them to the water of life; they
will nothing regard, but cavil at the doctrine of the Gospel, till their
sins be touched, and their souls humbled by the sight thereof. Wherefore if
we would have our hearts fit to receive spiritual life by Christ; we must
first labor to have a sense of our sins, and to fear Gods wrath due unto us
for the same. Hereby we shall be weined from the dangerous love of earthly
things, and our souls shall be ravished with desire of Christ Jesus. He is
the well of life; and if once we could feel a parching heat in our souls by
reason of our sins, then would we thirst and never be at rest till we had
drunk our fill, and dined our selves in his saving merits. This natural life
is but vanishing, and therefore we must labor for this spiritual life by
Christ which is eternal. This will comfort us in all distress: and take from
us the fear of death, of hell, and all danger.

The second part of the distinction: Though I was dead, yet behold I live for
evermore, Amen. This part is uttered and propounded by two notes to be
observed. First, by a note of certainty, Amen. Secondly, by a note of
attention, Behold. The note of certainty ( Amen) serves to assure us that
this is an infallible truth which Christ affirms of himself: saying, I live
for evermore. The note of attention which is prefixed, Behold, serves to
stir up John's mind, and the mind of every one of us to a serious
consideration of this which Christ says, I live for evermore. And because it
pleases Christ to propound this point in this manner, let us a little stand
thereon, and herein consider two points. First, in respect of what nature
Christ is said to live for ever. Secondly, for what end he lives for ever. For
the first, No doubt as Christ as the mediator of the church, He lives for
ever* and therefore this must be understood of Christ, in regard of both his
natures, godhead and manhood. In respect of his godhead, he is coeternall with
the father and with the holy Ghost, living of himself that uncreated and
essential life, which is all one with the godhead, being eternal, without
beginning or ending. Secondly, he lives for ever as he is man: for after his
death he ascended up to heaven, where in full glory he inioyeth immediate
fellowshippe with the godhead: for in him dwells the fulness of the godhead
bodily; his manhood being wholly and immediately sustained by his godhead.

II. Point. The end for which Christ lives for ever, is to give eternal life
to his church, and to every true member thereof. So Saint John says, This is
1. Io. 5 11
the testimony of God, even the father, that he has given us life
everlasting, and this life is in that his son. And here Christ must be
considered of us, as the head of his church, as the root and ground of our
salvation, and the fountain of all our happiness. For as the root of a tree
lives not for it self, but for the body and for all the branches: even so
Christ Jesus, he has eternal life in him, not for himself alone, but that he
may convey the same to al his members. Yea, we must consider Christ as the
common treasury and storehouse of all true felicity: wherein life eternal is
laid up for all the members of his church. For which cause he says, Ioh. 6.54,
55.
His flesh is meat indeed: and whosoever eats his flesh and drinks his
blood shall live for ever, To give us to understand, that his manhood has
quickening virtue in it: Yet not of it self or by it self, but as it is the
ma^hood of the son of God; For from the godhead it receives this quickening
power, to give eternal life unto the church: And here the means must be
considered, by which Christ gives life unto his church: namely, by virtue of
that mystical union which is between him and every member of his church.
Which union is thus caused: God the father gives Christ unto his church, and
to every one that is to be saved by Christ; and that really and truly according
to the terror of the covenant, in which he has promised to give Christ with
all his benefits to every one that believes. The manner and order of this gift
is this: Whole Christ God and man is given to every believer; even as he is
mediator. And yet the godhead of Christ is not given with the manhood, but only
the virtue and operation of the godhead in the manhood; by which the manhod is
made able to merit for the believer. But the manhood of Christ is given both
for substance, and in regard of all benefits that are conveyed to man by it, as
justification and redemption; as truly as lands and goods are given of man to
man. And when God gives Christ to any, he does withal give unto the same
party the spirit of Christ: for he that has part in Christ, has part in his
spirit: and this spirit creates in his heart the instrument of faith, by which
Christ given of the father, is received and apprehended; both his body and
blood, and the efficacy and the benefits thereof. Christ is not received in
imagination, as men receive things by conceit in the brain: but as he is
given of the father; namely in the word and sacraments really and truly, though
spiritually. And the same spirit that works this faith, does knit the
believer unto Christ really, though mystically, making him one with Christ, so
as Christ is the head, and the believer a member. And thus is this mystical
conjunction wrought, from whence proceeds this eternal life.

The benefits that come from this mystical conjunction are these.

I. Hereby a believer begins in this world to live eternal life: for by the
work of his spirit, Christ makes that man that is thus united unto him, to
begin to die unto all sin, and to live unto him spiritually, as himself
lives.

II. Hence comes the resurrection of the body: for this conjunction being
once begun, remains eternal, and is never wholly broken off, no not from the
body, while it is consumed to dust and ashes. Look as in the Winter season the
sap returns to the root of the tree, and then all the branches seem as they
were dead: but when Spring time comes, by virtue of the sun the sap
ascends and makes them fresh and green again: even so, the bodies of Gods
children have their Winter season, while they lie dead and rotten: but yet by
virtue of their union and conjunction with Christ, at the last day shall life
be conveyed from Christ Jesus unto them, whereby they shall be raised to life.

III. Hence comes eternal life to every believer: that is, glory and bliss
in body and soul in heaven for ever and ever: for being once begun (as it is
in this world) it is never dissolved. And thus we see how Christ conueyeth
eternal life unto his members.

The Use.
The words bearing this sense, do contain in them the foundation of two maine
articles of our belief, namely, the resurrection of the body, and life
everlasting: for both these are effected to us, by virtue of our union with
Christ: for he lives for ever to give life to us. And this is the ground of
all true joy: as we may see in Job, who in the midst of his misery stayed
himself on this, That he knew his Redeemer lived, and that he should rise
again, and behold him with those same eyes, wherewith he saw other creatures,
Job. 19.25, 26.

2. Again, if Christ live in heaven to give unto us eternal life, then must
we learn to have our conversation in heaven with Christ: for where our life
is, there should our conversation be. Now that our conversation may be with
him, we must often seriously consider with our selves of this everlasting life
which Christ there keeps in store for us: and for this cause principally does
Christ here say, Behold, I live for ever.

3. This also must move us to put all our affiance in him, and to place all
our joy and reioicing in him. Men have most regard to that part of their body,
by which the whole body and every member lives. Well, we profess our selves
to be members of Christ, and in him is hid our spiritual life: we therefore
must set our hearts and affections on him especially.

The third part of the distinction is this: Though I was dead, ye^ I have the
keys of death and of hell. Here we must not imagine that hell is a bodily
place kept with lock and key, and doors, as men's dwelling houses are: that
cannot be proved by any place of Gods word. Neither yet that the torments
thereof are bodily, such as be inflicted in this world: but rather they are
spiritual, being the apprehension and feeling of Gods wrath and vengeance,
whose jealousy burns like fire. But Christ in this phrase borrows a
comparison from stewards of great houses, who at their installing into their
stewardships, have the keys of all things given unto them. Which giving of the
keys is a token of regiment and authority bestowed upon them And the meaning
is this, That Jesus Christ though he once died, yet by his death did vanquish
hell and death, and has obtained full power and dominion over them both for
evermore.

Hence arise sundry instructions: first, that power and authority to forgive
sins properly, belongs only unto Christ. No mere creature has this
power; for he that can forgive sins, must be able to take away the
punishments of sin, namely, hell and death, which none can do but Christ
alone, who only has the keys thereof. And to say that a man can properly
forgive sins, is to say, that a man has power in himself over hell and
death. And therefore the priesthood of the church of Rome is full of
blasphemy, who take upon them properly to pronounce unto men the pardon of
their sins of themselves: and they deride the custom of reformed churches,
who from God pronounce the pardon of sins unto them that repent.

Secondly, hereby we are taught to reverence Christ, and to perform unto him
all due honor and loyal obedience. If we never have done this heretofore, we
must now begin; and if we have done it, we must endeavor to do it more. For
Christ has the keys of hell and death, he can open the gates thereof at his
pleasure, and cast thither whom he will. Many deceive themselves through their
false conceit of Christ, they think not of him as of a Judge, but as a Savior
only: they make him all of mercy and pity, and thereby they take occasion to
go on in sin. But we must consider, that Christ is likewise a righteous
judge, who has the power of hell and death in his hands, and therefore we must
not flatter our selves in our evil ways, but strive to please him continually
with fear and trembling, least by our sins we stir up his wrath against us,
and cause him to cast us into hell, whence is no redemption.

Thirdly, this is a matter of great comfort unto all those in Gods church, that
in this life unfeignedly cleave unto Christ: and especially in time of
affliction and temptation, and at the hour of death, for Christ having the
keys of hell and death is able to keep them from hell, and from the sting of
death. And this he will do because they trust in him, for he has promised
it. If this were always sounding in our ears, it would minister endless joy
unto our souls against the servile fear of hell and death.

Verse. 19. Write the things which thou have seen, and the things which are,
and the things which shall come hereafter. Here S. John propounds a second
action of Christ. For having confirmed John against his great fear, he gives
him a commandment to write the things which he had seen, etc. This
commandment was given to John in the eleventh verse, and is here again
repeated for these causes: First, that John might see the special care of
Christ over his church that he still continues a provident head thereof for
their good estate after his ascension. Secondly, that Gods church in all ages
may understand, that it is necessary men should know the estate of the church
to be subject unto troubles, that thereby they may better arm themselves
against the evils to come. Thirdly, that John might be fully assured of his
calling, to write and publish this book. Fourthly, that Gods church in all
ages might be out of doubt, that this book is no device of man, but a book of
God, and part of holy Scripture revealed from Christ to John for the good of
his church. If it be said: though Christ did faithfully reveal his will, yet
John might err in publishing it. Answ. As Christ delivered this to John, so
he received and published it faithfully, without all fault either in matter or
manner: for we must make a difference between the Prophets and Apostles, and
all other teachers. As the Prophets in former times, so the Apostles in the New
Testament were called immediately by Christ, and had such special assistance
of Gods spirit, that they could not err, when they propounded by preaching or
writing any doctrine of Christ unto the church of God: this appears by the
promises of Christ made unto them, Luke 10.16. He which hears you, hears
me, and be which refuses you, refuses me: and ^e which refuses me, refuses
him that sent me. Again, Matthew. 10.20. It is not you which speak, but the
spirit of your father speaking in you. Ioh. 14.26, he promises to send his
spirit to be their comforter, which shall teach them all things: yea, to lead
them into all truth, John 16.1^. Which promise some apply (...) al Gods
ministers; but if we mark the circumstances thereof, we shall see that properly
it agrees to the Apostles: for though in others the certainty hereof cannot
be affirmed, yet in them it may: for which cause, in the counsel at Jerusalem
thus they write unto the churches: It seemed good to Act 15 28.
the holy ghost and to us; as being assured of the certain direction of the
holy ghost: which no ministers ever since could say, being subject to error
both in speaking and writing. This distinction must be held for the
certainetie of our faith in the points of Religion, and for our assurance of
the faithful penning and publishing of this book. And thus much of the causes
of this repetition.

In the words of this commandment is contained the division of this whole
book, Write the words which thou have seen* that is, set down what I have
showed thee in this vision. And which are* that is, all things which I reveal
unto thee touching the present estate of the church. And which are to come
hereafter: that is, those things which concern the future estate of the church
to the end of the world, as I will reveal it unto thee. Thus then is the whole
book distinguished. I. It contains things touching the present estate of the
church in John's da^es. II. It entreats of things which concern the future
estate thereof from John's time to the end of the world.

The Use.
Hence observe the lawfulness of the art of Logic: for divisions be lawful
(else the holy ghost would not here have used them) and so by proportion are
other arguments of reasoning: and therefore that art which gives rules of
direction for the right use of these arguments is lawful and good. Those men
then are far deceived, who account the arts of Logic and Rhetoric to be
frivolous and unlawful, and in so saying, they condemn the practice of the
holy ghost in this place.

Verse. 20. The mystery of the seven stars which thou saw in my right
hand, and the seven golden candlestickes is this: The seven stars are the
seven Angels of the Churches, and the seven candlesticks which thou saw are
the seven Churches. This is the third action of Christ: namely the
interpretation of the Vision in the principal parts thereof; which he
expounds for these causes: First, John in this business was to show himself
a Prophet of God, by declaring the present and future estate of Gods church.
Now the principal part of a Prophet is to expound visions or dreams revealed
either to himself or to others: as we may see in Daniell and the rest of the
prophets. Secondly, that John might be encouraged in the publishing of this
book and of the things revealed unto him: For John's calling respected the
Church of God. And when he should perceive these visions to concern the
Churches; this would stir up his diligence, in observing, and penning the
things revealed.

Now Christ expounds not the whole vision, but two principal things therein;
namely, what was meant by the seven stars; to wit, the seven Angels, or the
seven ministers of the Churches. And what was meant by the seven golden
candlesticks: namely* The seven Churches themselves. The reasons why both were
so called, we have showed before, with the use thereof. Here only I will
observe these three points: First, why Christ in the interpretation of his
vision does not expound the whole, but only two principal parts thereof: This
he does for these causes, First, because he has given unto his church the
gift of interpretation, which he would have them to exercise about this
vision: For if he had expounded every part himself, then he had left herein
no matter to his church, whereabout she might exercise her gift. Secondly, to
provoke Gods ministers especially, with other members of his church, unto all
diligence in studying this and other parts of scripture. For if all things were
easy and plain, then men would grow careless in reading and searching out
the knowledge of Gods word. Thirdly, to stir up in every Reader of this book
an earnest and hearty desire to understand the same. Fourthly, to excite all
his servants to prayer and invocation upon God for his grace, that they may
with reading the Scripture understand the true meaning thereof.

II. point. Note here, the ministers of the churches are called Angels. What
these Angels are, appears in the chapters following; to wit, the pastors and
ministers of these seven churches of Asia. So Mat. 11.10. John Baptist is
called Christ's Angel or messenger, whereby we have good light for the
expounding of a place in Paul, 1. Cor. 11.10. saying, That the woman ought to
have power over her head, that is, be covered, because of the Angels. Where,
by Angels may well be understood the preachers and ministers of the Gospel.
And the reason of that precept may be this: Among the Corinthians the covering
of the head was not as it is with us, a token of prelieminence and
superiority, but a sign of subjection. And therefore the Apostle would have
the women of Corinth, when they came into the congregation, to have their heads
covered according to the custom of their country in other assemblies, to
signify their submission and reverence unto the ministry of the Gospel.

The Use.
Whereas Ministers are the Lords angels and ambassadors: hence we gather, that
every Minister of the Gospel must carry himself as the messenger of the Lord.
Messengers have regard of two things; of the matter of their message, and of
their manner of delivery, that they speak all which they are commanded: and
in such order as their Lord and master would have it spoken, or speak it
himself if he were present: and he that fails in either of these, may
justly be challenged of unfaithfulness. The Minister therefore being Christ's
messenger, must deliver the whole will of Christ alone unto his people: as also
in that manner which Christ approoueth, and would himself observe, if he were
present. Now can we once imagine, that Christ would deliver his will, partly in
English, partly in Latin and other Languages, or intermingle with the
testimonies of the Prophets and Apostles, the sentences of Fathers, of
Philosophers, Poets, and other writers? Those therefore that in this sort
dispense Christ's gospel, do hereby bewray unfaithfulness in their delivery.
Indeed this is counted the learned kind of preaching: But it is not that manner
which Christ approoueth. And besides, if this kind of teaching may take place,
it will bring in as great Barbarism, in regard of true Divinity, as was among
the Schoolmen, when Gods word was wholly turned unto needless disputation,
yea it would shortly banish the Gospel out of this land.

III. point. Note the phrase which the holy ghost uses: he says not, The
seven stars signify the seven Angels, but Are the seven Angels: and the
seven candlestickes Are the seven churches; giving to the sign the name of the
thing signified. Wherein we have a good warrant for our exposition of that
phrase in the Sacrament: This bread is my body: this cup is my blood: Which the
Papists understand properly of the very body and blood of Christ by real
transmutation. But as these seven stars are said to be seven Ministers,
because they did signify the seven Ministers: so is the bread called the body
of Christ, because it signifies and represents his body, and the cup his
blood. And as it is absurd to say, the seven ministers were indeed seven
stars, because they are so called: so it is absurd to hold the bread in the
Sacraments to be really Christ's body, or the wine his blood, because it is so
called. And thus much of the third action of Christ in the interpretation of
this Vision.

THE SECOND CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus write: These things says he
that holds the seven stars in his right hand and walks in the midst of
the seven golden candlestickes. IN this Chapter and in the next, is contained
the fourth action of our Savior Christ: wherein he gives seven particular
commandments to John, to write unto the seven Churches of Asia, and to send
unto them seven letters or Epistles. The first of which commandments is
expressed in the beginning of this first verse: Unto the Angel of the Church
of Ephesus write* Then after follows the Epistle, These things, says he,
etc. continuing to the eight verse. First, for the commandment: The party to
whom John must write is the Angel: which word may be expounded two ways:
either to signify the minister or pastor of the particular church of Ephesus,
and so it is commonly taken of the most: or else it may be token the company of
the ministers, teachers, and governors of the church of Ephesus: for therein
were many pastors and governors, as appears Act. 20.28. where Paul calls
together the Bishops (as the word signifies) and gives them charge over their
particular flocks. Now in Scripture the name of one person taken collectiuely,
oftentimes signifies the whole multitude, as Exodus 4.22. Israel is my son,
even my first borne, Where the whole body of the people of Israel is called by
the name of one man. And so though Antichrist be not one particular man, but a
state and company of men in the succession of Popes: yet is that whole estate
noted by the special name of one man^ as that 2. These. 2.
Antichrist; that man of sin: and son of perdition. Thus we see how the
word Angel may be taken: and whether we understand it of one man, or of the
whole company of elders, it is not much material.

In this particular commandment note two points: First, that Christ his
intent is to write to the whole church of Ephesus, as appears Chap. 1.11.
where John is commanded to write in a boohe, and send it to the Churches: as
also by the conclusion of this Epistle, where it is said, Let him that has an
ear to hear, hear what the spirit says unto the Churches: Verse. ^.
and yet he directs his Epistle not to the whole church, but particularly to
the Angel or pastor thereof. This he does for two causes: First, to intimate
unto this minister his duty: which stood in two things: In teaching the
contents of this Epistle unto the whole church: and in becoming a pattern and
example to them all, of doing the things therein required. Secondly because
either much good or much evil comes to every particular church by the
ministers thereof, such is the efficacy of his place and calling. If he be
faithful he brings great good to the church: if unfaithful, exceeding great
hurt: as might easily be proved by many examples in all ages. Now Christ
writes to the Angel of this church, that he might be a means of much good
unto them al, by exciting them to the practice of all good duties required in
this Epistle.

II. point. Among all the churches of Asia Christ writes first to the church
of Ephesus: not for that this church had authority over the rest (for they
were all candlestickes, and all of gold) but because Ephesus was the mother
city, far exceeding the rest in riches and estimation. Whereby Christ gives
us to understand, that his will is, that those people, towns and cities which
excel others in estimation and wealth, should also go before them in
knowledge* obedience and other graces of God. And so answerably should it be
with particular persons: They which excel others for outward reputation and
temporal blessings, ought to go before them in spiritual graces, as godliness
and religion. Those which shall fail herein, and suffer others that are far
their inferiors for outward things to go before them in spiritual graces,
shall find it true to their shame before men, but especially at the tribunal
seat of Jesus Christ.

Thus much for the commandment. Now follows the example it self, which
contains three parts (as all ordinary Epistles do.) A pereface* A
proposition; and the conclusion. The preface is in these words, These things,
says he, that holds the seven stars in his right hand, and walks in the
midst of the seven golden candlestickes. The proposition and conclusion, in
the verses following. The preface is borrowed from the former chapter, verse.
16. and 13. Where also it was handled. The intent of Christ herein is to draw
this church to a reverent adoration of his person; and to cause in them a
greater care to embrace and obey his admonition. This appears by that twofold
action which he avouches of himself, to wit, his holding the seven stars in
his right hand, and his walking in the midst of the seven golden candlestickes:
by the first whereof is signified his power in protecting and governing his
ministers. And by the second is noted his presence in the midst of his
church, guiding and blessing his ministers with all the members thereof. As if
he had said: If I be he that have power to protect and govern; that am present
also to bless and direct both ministers and people: then my admonitions are to
be reverenced and obeyed.

In this preface note two special points. First, that Christ here again
repeateth that which was before delivered touching his presence in his church,
and his mighty power and providence over the same in protecting, guiding, and
blessing both minister and people. By which reputation he would give us to
understand, the specall weight and moment of this point, to wit* that it ought
to be engraven in the hearts of every one in Gods church. And indeed till we be
persuaded thereof, we shall never learn religion soundly. The ground of true
religion is this*: To take the true God for our God. And Christ Jesus for our
redemer: and it consists not in a swimming notion hereof in the brain, but
in the sure persuasion of the heart, which we never have till we be resolved
both of Christ's presence with us: and of his providence over us; for our
blessing and defense.

II. point. In this preface also note: that the persuasion of Christ's presence
and special providence in his church, is a notable means to draw us on to all
good duties; for thereby Christ would persuade both the ministers and people of
Ephesus, to receive and embrace this his Epistle. And no doubt he that is
indeed persuaded hereof, cannot but be moved to walk before God in all
holiness and obedience: as did Enoch, Abraham, and all the godly patriarchs.
Thus much for the preface.

Verse. 2. I know thy works and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou
can not forbear them which are evil, and have examined them which say they
are Apostles and are not, and have found them liers. Here begins the second
part of this Epistle, to wit, the proposition; containing the substance and
matter of the whole Epistle. This proposition has two points. First, a
commendation of this church, in the second and third verses. Secondly, a rebuke
and reprehension, in the fourth verse. The commen^ation is first general in
these words: I know thy works. Then more particular, for special duties and
actions in the words following, and thy labor and patience, etc. For the
first, I know thy works: many do expound this of works of mercy and
liberality: but that will not so well stand; for he says to every church, I
know thy works; and yet some of them are blamed for want of these good works.
By works then is meant, the ways, that is, the practices and dealings of the
whole church: as well of ministers as people, in all their affairs. Also by
knowledge here we must understand a knowledge that goes with application, as
may appear by comparing this with the fourth verse, whither it has relation:
for thus they must go, I know thy works, and approve of them: and yet I have
something against thee. So that his meaning is, I know thy works, that is, all
thy ways and dealings in thy life and conversation are manifest unto me, and I
do generally approve of them.

Here first in this testimony of his knowledge, Christ ministers a remedy
against secret sins and offenses. The thief, the murderer, and adulterer
wait for the night wherein to attempt their shameful practices: The tradesman
in secret falsifyeth his weights, and mingleth his wares: among most men fraud,
oppression and injustice do abound: and all because they think, that if men
see not, all is well: as David says the wicked man says, God shall not see,
he will not regard. Psa. 94.7.
But if men could think and be persuaded of this, that Christ sees and
knows all their ways, it would cause them to make conscience not only of
gross sins, but even of their hidden and secret offenses.

Secondly, whereas this knowledge is joined with approbation, it may be
demanded how this can stand with the justice of God, to approve of that which
is not answerable to the tenor of his law, as the best works of the most
righteous man are not, being stained with some corruption, Isay. 64 6. Answ.
The Gospel, which is another part of Gods will, reuealeth more unto us than
ever the law could do: namely, that if a man be in Christ, to him there is no
condemnation; and that God will accept his true desire and endeavor to please
him for the deed it self, 2. Cor. 8.12. And thus according to the tenor of
the Gospel Christ approves of their works in this place, though they were
not able to abide the ^igor of his law. But a Papist will here reason thus: If
a righteous man's works be approved of God, then they are no sins (for God
will not approve of any thing that is sinful) and if his works be no sins,
then he may fulfill the law; and so be justified by his works. Answ. That
which Christ approves simply, has no sin in it; but here he only approves
of their works in part, namely, so far forth as they came from the work of
his spirit in them: but as they proceed from the will of the worker, which is
in part corrupt, they are not free from the stain of sin; and so he
approves them not. Again, works of grace are approved of Christ with the
pardon of sin: for accepting of the person, he remitteth the faults that be
in his good works, and so only approves his own work in him. And so here we
must conceive of his approbation of their works, to wit, as proceeding from
his spirit, and having the faults thereof remitted in his own merit.

The special commendation of this church is for particular actions: The first
whereof is diligent labor: which is an excellent work especally in a minister
of Gods word, to be painful in his particular calling, for the faithful
instruction and godly regiment of his particular charge. Hence Paul says, 1.
Tim. 5.17. He that labors in the word and doctrine is principally worthy
double honor. And herein Paul matcheth, yea prefers himself before other
Apostles, That he labored more abundantly in the ministry of the Gospel
than they all, 1. Cor. 15.10. Hence we learn that the work of the ministry,
The Use.
if it be done as it ought, is a work full of great pains and labor,
contrary to the common opinion of men, who think that the life of the minister
is full of ease, and his calling a matter of nothing, such as may be done with
the turning of the hand: but here the judgment of Christ is other ways, who
uses not thus to approve a light or idle work.

Secondly, this commendation of diligence in the minister must admonish all
christians that desire to be approved of Christ, to give all diligence to
learn and know the will of God that they may do the same. And here a common
fault is to be reproved: many will hear, but where is their labor to grow in
knowledge and in grace? that is wanting: which i^ the cause of such fruitless
hearing as is common in the world. For earthly things men refuse no pains: but
Gods heavenly knowledge and graces are not regarded. What a shame is this that
men should bestow their strength and wit about base and transitory things, and
yet neglect the main good which concerns their souls for ever.

Thirdly, the ministers diligence in teaching, must provoke conscience of
obedience in the hearers; that is the end of his work, without this he spends
his strength in vain, and therefore with the Apostle they must endeavor in all
things to keep a good conscience before God and all men, Act. 24.16.

The second thing which Christ here commends, is patien^e in bearing the
cross, which does usually accompany the Gospel of Christ. And this indeed is
praise worthy in the angel of this church: for herin he goes before sundry
worthy prophets: Jeremy was marvelous impatient, for the mockings of the
people: Ier. 20.14, 15.
And though Jonas had been schooled in the whales belly, yet when all things
went not according to his mind in the destruction of Niniuie, he became
exceeding discontent.

Herein must all the ministers of the Gospel become followers of the Angel of
this church. The Use.
While they labor in the Gospel of God* they must possess their souls with
patience, and make known to all men their meek and mild spirit. Yea every
christian in the profession of religion must learn to practice this duty. Luke
8.16. The good ground receives the seed, and brings forth fruit: but how?
with patience: Neither can we possibly attain to eternal life, unless we
arm our selves with patience to bear the cross: for whosoever will live
godly must suffer affliction, 2. Tim. 3.12. Through many tribulations we must
enter into heaven, Act. 14.22.

II. Again here observe how Christ joins labor and patience together: this
he does for two causes. First, to let us see the fruit of sin which God has
set on the labor of man. Before the fall, the labor of man's calling was
practiced without all trouble or pains; but since man's fall, the best callings
have their crosses and vexations, which are the punishments of man's
transgression. Socondly, to show us the malice of Satan against the good
progress of the Gospel, 1. The. 2.18.
Paul says to the Thessalonians, He would have come to them but Satan did
binder him. He seeks the trouble and sorrow of the minister, not only by
stirring up persecution, but by keepinh his people from profiting by his
ministry: and therefore every minister had need to take pains with patience
in his calling.

And as Christ joins together labor and patience in the work of the
ministry: so should every christian after this direction join patience with
his pains in the duties of his particular calling, whether it be in church,
commonwealth, or family. For look what is the estate of the minister in his
place, such shall be the estate of every child of God in his. This therefore
they must do: first seek to know the duties of their particular calling, and
therein labor and take pains with all good conscience: Then considering the
cross does accompany godly diligence, they must labor to join patience with
their diligence, for their continuance in weldoing even under the cross. And
for attaining of this patience, they must set before them the promises of Gods
blessing* and protection while they so continue, not suffering themselves to be
dismayed by any affliction. And if we shall thus walk in the duties of our
particular places painefully and with patience, we shall have our commendation
of Christ Jesus and his blessed reward, which far surpasses the praise of
men and their rewards. But on contrary* if we walk in our callings
negligently, or else forsake them because of afflictions: or be impatient in
our labor, we shall loose our reward, and undergo the rebuke of Christ, which
is worse than all outward evils that can befall us.

The third special work for which Christ commends this church is, severity
showed against wicked men: in these words, And how thou can not bear them
which are evil. By evil men, He means such as lived offensiuely, and
maintained manifest errors and heresies. These she could not bear, but judged
them as burdens: and therefore sought to disburden her self of them.

Hence we may gather, that it is a necessary thing for every church to be
purged of evil men. The Use.
The church of God in all ages has put in practice this work. So soon as
Cain had slain his brother Abel, Genesis 4.14.
God cast him out from his face, as appears by his own complaint, to wit,
from that particular place where Adam and his family worshipped God. When
false prophets and Idolaters did arise among the Israelits, the Lord commands
Deu. 13.7, 8.
That they should be killed and taken from among them. And therefore he says
to Jeremy Ier. 15.19.
If thou turn and repent, I will bring thee again, and if thou take away the
precious from the vile thou shall be according to my word. 1. Cor. 5.4, 5, Paul
commands in the name of Christ, that the incestuous man be delivered unto
Satan, the church purged of that old leaven, and that wicked man put from
among them, verse. 13. Besides the evidence of these testimonies, some reasons
may be added to prove the necessity of this separation. First, God will be
worshipped in an holy manner; and they that worship God must be purged and
sanctified; but evil men defile Gods worship, and therefore they ought to be
severed from the church. Secondly, lest the whole church be infected with the
contagion of their doctrine, or the infection of their life: for as leau^n
sowreth the whole lump, so will evil men defile the whole church. Thirdly,
they are burdens to the church, and therefore must be cast out. For the church
should be eased of every burden.

This doctrine is the truth of God, and ought to be practiced of Gods church.
Whereby we may see a common fault in the most co^gregations among us: wherein
all that will are admitted not only to the hearing of the word, but also unto
the Lords table, hand over head without restraint, as though every man were a
good and sound christian: Whereas experience shows, that many be ignorant,
many contemners of the Gospel, many Saboath breakers, drunkards and
blasphemers, all which ought to be barred from the sacraments: and in that
respect severed from the church as burdens.

Secondly, hence we may gather, that Christ has given to his church a power
judicial, to suspend evil men from the sacraments, and to excommunicate them
from the outward fellowship of the church: for else he would not have commended
this minister with his church for the execution of this power. The reasons
alleged to the contrary, are of no force. I. Say they, the parable, Matthew.
13.30. allows the growing together of tares and wheat till harvest: and
therefore evil men must be suffered in the church without separation. Answ.
In that parable Christ speaks not of any particular purging of the church by
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: but of the universal purging of his whole church
by his holy Angels in the end of the world: for there the field does not
signify any particular church, but the whole world: and the servants are not
m^n, but Angels* that must gather together all both good and bad in the end of
the world, to the last judgment. Again they allege, Luk* 14.23, Compel them
in the high ways to come into the supper. Here (say they) all must be brought
in, but none must be excluded the society of the church. Ans. Christ speaks
not of compelling men unto the sacraments, but unto the ministry of the word,
whereto men must be caused to subject themselves: which hinders nothing why
the ungodly should not be debarred from the sacraments, which are the seal of
Gods mercy in Christ, ordained only for such as repent and believe. Qu. Seeing
this separation must be made, how far forth may we converse with those that
are openly evil and offensive either for life or doctrine? Ans. Evil men must
be considered diverse ways: first, as they be members of some commonwealth, of
some city or incorporation: secondly, as they are members of some particular
church by tolleration. In the first regard, it is lawful for us to converse
with the^, I. for outward dealings and civil affairs, as bargaining, buying
and selling, etc. II. we may maintain outward civil peace with them. So Paul
commands the Romans Romans 12.18
to have peace with all men so much as in them lay: that is, so far as it would
stand with faith and good conscience. III. In this civil conuersing with the
wicked we must perform all duties of outward courtesy and love unto them, so
far forth as it does not dishonor God, or hinder the good of the church. And
therefore Paul commands us to be Tit. 3.2.
soft and courteous, showing all meekness unto all men; even to evil men, as
the reason following shows: Verse 3.
For we our selves were in time past unwise, disobedient, deceived, etc. and
then were we evil.

Secondly, consider them as dwellers in the church, and members by permission:
and so we may live with them in it: for we may not make a separation from the
church, because wicked men are permitted therein. Christ lived among the Jews,
though their teachers and rulers were both heretics and hypocrites: and yet
we must remember, that living among them, and beholding their wicked
conversation, we must not approve of their ungodliness, but be grieved for
the same, as righteous Lot was for the abominations of Sodom, 2. Pet. 2.7*
Further, if it fall out by the negligence of the governors, that evil men be
admitted to the Sacraments, we must not for their company refuse to
communicate: for our savior Christ living among the Jews communicated with them
in their Sacraments and service of the Temple, though many of them were
notorious both for wicked life and false doctrine. The reason is: for that
another man's evil conscience does not defile our good conscience: but we may
keep a good conscience in that action wherein the wicked is defiled. Now
though we may thus converse with evil men, yet these two caueats must be
observed, I. To have no private company with known and open evil persons.
This Paul expressly forbids, saying: I have written unto you, 1. Cor.
5.10, 1^
that you company not together: that is, in private and familiar manner. II.
We must not show special familiarit^^ to evil persons. God will not take the
wicked by the hand, Job. 8.20. and we should be followers of God. Therefore S.
John says: If any man come unto you, and bring not this do^trine, receive him
not into house, neither bid him God speed. 2. John. 9. Which must be
understood of special familiarity: for thereby we do not only perform
outward duty to the person, but also give countenance to their sins: which
in any case we must not do. And thus we see how to converse with evil men.

Hereby all those are justly blamed which fit themselves for the humors and
dispositions of al companies. The Use.
This ought not to be. If any be known to be openly wicked, either for life or
opinions, we must not keep private company with them, or afford them our
special familiarity; but by withdrawing our selves from them, case us of such
burdens:

Our Savior Christ having commended this church for her severity against the
wicked, in that she could not endure them, does prove the same to be true by
two arguments. The first whereof is contained in these words: And have examined
them, etc. to the end of the third verse. The second, in the sixth verse. For
the first: it is taken from the sharp and round dealing of this church against
evil men; and it has two parts: First, her discovery of false Apostles, And
have examined them which say they are Apostles, and are not, and have found
them liers. Secondly, her opposing her self against them, being discovered, in
the third verse: Thou have suffered, and have patience, etc.

In their discovery of these false Apostles note two special points: first,
that God has given to particular churches the spirit of wisdom, that is, the
spirit of discerning: This appears by sundry testimonies of Scripture, 1.
Cor. 2.15. The spiritual man, that is, be which is endued with Gods holy
spirit, discerns all things. And Paul 1. Cor. 11.29.
assumeth, That the faithful Corinthians did discern the Lords body: that
is, see and put a great difference between the bread and wine in that
sacrament, and other common bread and wine: which none that want the spirit of
God can do. Again, he bids them 2. Cor. 13.5
prove themselves whether they be in the faith or not: to give us to
understand, that they had a gift of discerning, whereby they did know their
own estate, whether they were under the curse, or under grace. And S. John
bids the Church to 1. Ioh. 4.1.
try the spirits: that is, those doctrines which men pretending the gifts of
the spirit, did teach. And in this place this churches discovering of false
Apostles, declares plainly, that she has a gift to discern who be sent of
God to teach his church, and who not. And hence the godly learned in the church
are said to have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil, Heb.
5.14. And in this regard, the churches of God differ from all other companies
of men. For unless men be of Gods church, they want this gift of discerning
spiritual things that differ, as true Apostles and false, good and bad, truth
and falsehood, etc.

Hence we may gather, that the church of God has a gift to discern which is a
true church, and which is not: The Use.
for the church can discern whether a man be a true Apostle, or not: and by
the same gift it may discern the state of any particular church. Whence also
it follows that we may easily see whether the church of England be a true
church, or not: It pleases some to call it into question, as it now stands;
and they avouch, That it is no church of God, that there are no true Ministers,
no true preaching, or right administration of the Sacraments in it: and that
these things with us are illusions of Satan, and our church his synagogue. But
that ours is a true church of God is thus proved: The churches of Germany,
France, Scotland, and Italy, that have received the Gospel, are the churches
of God: and they have the gift of discerning which is a true church of God, and
which is not. Now they give the right hands of fellowship unto us, and
reverence our church as the church of God. To whose testimony we must rather
cleave, than to the opinion of a few private men, and so resolve our selves,
that we are the true church of God.

Secondly, hence we may gather, that the church of God has a gift to discern
scripture from that which is no scripture. The papists say the church indeed
has this gift: but it is by counsel and commission from the church of Rome;
which is a mere forgerie. For the church of Ephesus, which could discern of
false Apostles, could no doubt by the same gift discern of the booke^ of God,
and that without counsel from the church of Rome; for at this time when John
writ* it was a more famous church than the church of Rome, and therefore went
not thither for counsel.

II. point. In what things this discerning of false Apostles does consist: it
is a judicial action of the church, consisting in two things here noted:
First, in examination of false doctrine and false teachers: secondly, in
condemnation afterward. The examination of them is set down in these words:
And have examined them that say they are Apostles, and are not. Their
condemning or sentence giving, in the words following, And have found them
liers.

For the first: examination is a gift of God to his church, and was here used
for the trial of false Apostles. Que. How may any church try a false teacher?
Answ. This is a point of large discourse: but the heads of true examination are
these.

First, that church or that man that would rightly examine a false teacher,
must prepare himself thereunto after this manner: he must look that he have a
meek spirit and an humble heart; for God reuealeth his will, not to the proud,
but to the meek and lowly: and as Isay says, to them that are of a contrite
spirit, Isay. 57.15. And in this humbling of himself, a man must renounce his
own natural wit and reason, and become nothing in himself but even a fool,
in respect of his own conceit. Also he must unfeignedly pray to God, that he
would reveal unto him his truth. Ask (says Christ) and it shall be given
you* even Luke 11.13
the holy ghost, unto them that desire of the father. And S. James says: James
1.5.
If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, which gives to all men
liberally.

Secondly, after preparation he must labor to know thoroughly what the false
teachers are, and what be their opinions, with the grounds and foundations
thereof; wherein they agree, and wherein they differ from the truth of God,
maintained by the church: for it is a foul oversight to misconceiue the state
of the adversaries question, by propounding it otherwise than they hold, as it
falls out with many in the handling of controversies.

Thirdly, due proof must be made, whether the adversaries doctrine be of men
or of God. This is Gods commandment, 1. John. 4.1. Prove the spirits, whether
they be of God, or not. And for trial hereof, we must have recourse unto the
word of God; it must be Judge in this cause, Isa. 8. verse. 20, To the law and
to the testimonies, if they speak not according to this word, it is because
there is no light in them. John. 5.39, Search the Scriptures, for in them ye
look to have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me. Who is so
fit to judge in the matters of God, as God himself? and so he does in his
written word, of all doctrine and opinions in religion. The Scriptures show
whether the doctrine examined be directly gathered thence, and by just
consequent, or not.

Fourthly, serious consideration must be had of the faith and lives of the
teachers examined: for a false teacher by Gods just judgment is usually a
wicked liver. And therefore Christ says: Mat. ^.1^*
ye shall know them by their fruits: if they be thoroughly examined, such they
will appear, howsoever for a time they may bleare the eyes of men: as the
hystories of the church in many famous heretics do plainly declare.

The second branch of this discovery, is sentence giving, in these words:
And have found them liers* The church here gives out a sharp and severe
sentence against them, she calls them false Apostles and liers; and yet she
sins not, for Christ commends her for it. Though to rail or taunt cannot
beseem any, yet magistrates and ministers in their places may give ou^ severe
speeches against offenders in token of detestation to their sins, and not
offend. Thus John called the Scribes and Pharisees a generation of vipers,
Matthew. 3.7: and our Savior Christ called Herod a fox, Luke 13.32. and Paul
called the Galathians fools, Gal. 3.1. And in this place the church calls
these false teachers liars, which is very much: for therein she accuses them
of three things: First, of teaching that which was false indeed: secondly, that
they know it to be false, and so sinned of knowledge. Thirdly, that they did it
of malice, with intent to blind the eyes of the Church, and to deceive the
people.

In this discovery, The Use.
we may observe the just accomplishment of Paul's prophecy, Acts. 20.29, 30.
namely, that there should rise up among the Ephesians grievous wolves, and men
speaking perverse things: and such were these false Apostles, who after
examination were found liers.

Again, seeing in the days of this Apostle John, men durst presume to claim
Apostolic authority, and call themselves Apostles when they were not: no
marvel if the Pope of Rome six hundred years after did challenge to himself
to be Peter's successor, and to have Apostolic authority: and that they dare
now avouch some books to be scripture which are not; as also bring in their
traditions and unwritten verities to be received and obeyed equally with Gods
word.

Verse 3. Thou have suffered, and have patience, and for my names sake have
labored. Here our Savior Christ declares how this Minister and church of
Ephesus opposed themselves against false teachers after their discovery. The
manner we shall see in handling the points particularly as they lie in order.
Thou have suffered, or, Thou have borne a burden: for the word signifies to be
pressed down under a great burden. This burden was the troubles which false
Apostles brought upon them after they were discovered, partly by open
affliction and persecution, partly by the spreading of their heretical and
schismatic doctrine. These false teachers were Ebion, Cerinthus, Marcion,
and such like, who in the days of John troubled this church, as hystories do
show.

Here we may observe, that it is Gods will, that the best churches should be
troubled by wicked men and heretical teachers, who both by false doctrine and
persecution become grievous burdens. This the Lord permits for weighty causes,
I. That true believers may be excited more constantly to embrace the sincere
doctrine of the Gospel: and therefore Jude Iud. 3.
most worthily exhorts the Christians in his time to fight for the common
faith. II. That professors may be tried whether they soundly hold the doctrine
of the Gospel, or not. 1. Cor. 11.19. It is ^ette (says Paul) that there
should be heresies in the Church, that they which are sound in the faith, and
approved, may ^ee known. III. That God may execute his judgments upon wicked
men and hypocrites that have not loved his truth, revealed unto them, 2 Thessalonians.
2.10, 11. God gave them up to strange illusions to believe lies, because they
have not loved his truth. For many know the word, that love it not.

This must teach us to take heed of a common scandale in the world, which is,
The Use.
to be offended at religion, because there be in the church schisms and
heresies: which come not from the Gospel, but from the malice of Satan, who
sows his tares among the Lords wheat. We must consider, that it is the will
of God there should be such evils in his church; and therefore should labor to
be so far from offense, that hereby we be rather provoked with more
cheerfulness and courage to love and embrace religion.

And have patience, and for my name have suffered, etc. Here is set down the
dealing of this church against these false Apostles in all their persecutions.
But first note the coherence of this virtue with the former: Thou have suffered
trouble, and have had patience. Quest. How can these stand together? It is
against man's nature in trouble to be patient: for troubles and afflictions make
men discontent, and to fret against God and man. Answ. They stand not by
nature* but by grace, Romans 5. verse. 4. Tribulation brings forth patience:
namely, to all those that have received to believe in Christ; for to them God
gives the spirit of meekness in their troubles, shedding his love into their
hearts, whereby they are enabled to suffer any thing for his name, even with
joy.

And have patience. This is the first means whereby this church opposed her
self against the false Apostles: they troubled her two ways; by persecution,
and by false doctrine. Now* by patience this church opposes her self against
their persecutions. And indeed that is the most excellent means for any man or
any church to oppose themselves against their enemies, and to vanquish them:
for hereby they shall stop their mouths, and if it be possible win them to
their faith and religion.

In this their practice we have an example for our direction: The Use.
how to oppose our selves against wicked men, with whom we live; or any enemy
that shall trouble us, either by oppression, or heretical doctrines: We must
not render taunt for taunt, and abuse for abuse; but labor for patience, not
in bearing with their sins (that may not be) but in a meek enduring of
their injuries and wrongs whereby they trouble us. Thus shall we stop their
mouths, and soonest overcome them.

And for my names sake have labored. Here Christ sets down the second
means whereby this church opposes her self against the spreading of false
doctrine by these false Apostles, which was the second way whereby they became a
burden unto her. The meaning of the words is this, that they had taken much
pains to maintain the glory of God, and the true doctrine of Christ Jesus,
laboring therein as much as the false Apostles did to broach their damnable
heresies.

Here we are taught a second duty how we are to oppose our selves against all
heretical and scismaticall teachers: namely, as they labor to publish their
false doctrine; so must we endeavor to maintain the glory of God and his true
religion. Hereunto a twofold labor is required: partly of the minister, and
partly of the people. The labor of the minister stands in these things
principally. I. He must endeavor by reading and study to furnish himself with
the true knowledge of the foundation and substance of the Gospel and true
religion, that he may be able soundly and plainly to teach the same. For this
cause S. John is commanded to eat the little book, Re. 10.9, 10, which was as
it were by study and meditation to have the same digested and settled in his
heart. Hence Malachie says Mal. 2.7.
The priests lips should preserve wisdom, and thither should the people
come for instruction. And every scribe taught of God must have store in the
treasury of his har^, like a good householder, Matthew. (...), he must deliver the
whole will and counsel of God, concerning salvation, truly and distinctly unto
his people, as it is propounded in the booke^ of the Prophets and Apostles.
This Paul commends by his own example, Act. 20.27. testifying unto this
Church that He had taught them all the will of God, and kept back^ nothing
which he was commanded to deliver unto them. III. He must labor to discern
and be able to discover false teachers unto the people; that he may not only
know them himself, but also cause the church to take notice of them, Tit. 19.
Paul requires that the teacher in the church, Be able to convince the
gainsaiers to his truth. In this discovery he must do two things. First,
detect their heretical doctrins. Secondly, their wicked manners. Thus dealt our
Savior Christ in his own person living in the church of the Jews, with the
Scribes and Pharisees: he did detect unto the people their false interpretations
of the law, Mat. 5.21, to the end. And also their wicked lives and damn^ble
hypocrisy, Mat. 23.3, 4. etc. to the end. And Saint Paul in all his Epistles,
labors to discover the wicked lives, and to confute the heretical opinions
of the false Apostles. IV. He must endeavor that the doctrine of the gospel
thus published, may edify. This is the end of all teaching, as Paul shows,
1. Cor. 14. throughout the whole chapter. Now it does edify, when it is so
applied to the hearers, that thereby they are won to Christ, suffering
themselves to be reformed by it in heart and life, and so made fit for the
kingdom of God. V. He must be careful in his own person to become a pattern
of the doctrine of the Gospel which he teaches, that so the people may have
a double light to follow. This is a notable means in the minister to make men
love the Gospel, and the neglect hereof causes many to contemn and despise
the same. VI. Lastly, he must be diligent in praying for his own and other
particular churches of God, that they may know, believe, and obey the same
doctrine which is taught them out of Gods word. Thus did Paul as we may see in
his particular Epistles pray for every church: that by the blessing of the
spirit, they might embrace and obey the Gospel of Christ, Phil. 1.4.9, 10.
Col. 1.9, 10, 11.

The people also for the name of Christ and his religion, must undergo a
threefold labor. I. Every one must see that himself know and believe the true
and sincere doctrine of the Gospel. This Christ inioyneth to all, in this
commandment, Repent and believe, which none can do unless they first know and
understand the doctrine thereof: and therefore every one must do as Mary did,
for which Christ so commends her: namely, lay aside matters of lesser moment,
and give our selves to hear and learn the doctrine of Christ, Luke. 10.39.42.
II. Every one must use all good means that knowledge of religion which
himself has received, be conveyed to others, And indeed if we truly believe,
we cannot contain our selves, but must needs teach others. For as Christ
says, He Ioh. 7.38.
that drinks of the water of life, out of his belly shall flow rivers of
water of life* streaming out for the good of others. Que. How should private men
convey their knowledge unto others? Answ. I. All masters and governors of
families are bound in conscience to teach those that are under them the maine
points and grounds of true religion: his place requires gifts, and God looks
for increase. For every christian family should be a little church, as it is
said of the house of Aquila and Priscilla, 1. Corinthians. 16.19. II* Every man in
his place must labor to convey that knowledge he has unto his neighbor, yea
to his enemies. The Jews Mat. 23.15
would compass sea and land to make a man a pros^lite: And Idolaters at this
day will travel far and near to make a man of their profession. Much more
therefore must all true christians labor to convey their knowledge to others,
so to win them unto Christ. III. Every man is to edify those that be
members of the same church, in these three things: faith, hope, and love, as
Jude notably exhorts in the end of his Epistle, Edify one another in your
most holy faith, verse. 20. Have compassion of some in putting difference, and
others save with fear in pulling them out of the fire, ver. 22.23. IV. Every
private man must profess and defend the true religion of Christ against all the
enemies thereof. 1. Pet. 3.15. Be ready always to give an answer to every man
that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you. And this confession must
be, not only in word, but in deed. For by a blameless and holy conversation
every christian holds forth the word of life, Phil. 2, 15, 16.

Seeing the maintenance of true religion is so excellent a work: The Use.
we must be admonished every one in our place, to take pains in all the
duties that belong unto us: that by us Christ^ religion may be furthered. For
Gods church is not called the pillar of truth, only because the minister
thereof maintains Gods truth: but also because every member of the church is
as a pillar in his place to maintain and profess the true doctrine of Christ
for his glory. Besides, this is a duty of the first table, and therefore we
must have more special care for the performance thereof. And thus we see the
two means whereby the church of Ephesus opposed her self against false
teachers.

And have not fainted. Here Christ sets down in what manner this church
labored to maintain his true religion, and thereby his honor and glory:
namely, by constancy and perseverance in labor. This is an excellent virtue,
and a notable example for us to follow: for we through Gods goodness have the
true religion of Christ among us, and for many years sundry among us have
maintained the same against all enemies, though not without some trouble and
danger. Now this which has been done is nothing, unless we hold on our good
course constantly, and labor unto death in the maintenance thereof. This
exhortation is the more necessary, because we know not how long we shall enjoy
the gospel with peace; for usually after long peace God tries his by
persecution: neither know we by what means of trial God will exercise us.
Therefore as we now profess the Gospel, so let us continue constant therein,
and not turn with time or state: for then we loose our commendation at
Christ's hands. And thus much of the commendation of this church for her virtues.

Verse. 4. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left
thy first love. These words contain the second part of the proposition of this
Epistle, to wit, a sharp and severe reproof of this church for decay in
grace; as will appear in the opening of the words. Nevertheless I have
somewhat against thee, Here Christ speaks as a Judge unto this church, and to
the minister thereof, and lays this action unto their charge: that they had
left their first love, that is, that love which they bare to God, and his
religion, and to their brethren, at that time when they were first called unto
the profession of the gospel. This love they are said to have left, not as
though they had quite lost it, but only because they suffered it to decay, and
to wax cold in good works. But some will say they are before commended for
their zeal and labor for Gods glory; and for their severity against false
teachers: how then had they left their first love? Answ. At this time when
Christ does thus reprove them, their love was commendable; but yet it was
nothing in regard of that which they had at their first conversion.

If Christ have something against this church for leaving her first love; The
Use.
then no doubt he has something against the church of England, and against us
at this day* howsoever we may persuade our selves that we be high in his
favor, yet we are in the like, or a worse estate than this church now was: for
a great part of the body of our church has left off their first love: and the
greatest part has no love at all. That many have left their first love is too
too evident. For such as in Queen Mary's time were content to suffer much for
the Gospel, as the histories of our church do show, after they inioyed a
little quietness became mere worldlings, as their lives have testified
afterward. And in such congregations where the word has long bin preached,
this is too apparent that men who for the space of twenty, of ten, or seven
years have showed fervent love to Christ and his Gospel, and to their
brethren, do now fall away and show none at all. He that has but half an eye,
may see many for a year or two very forward and zealous in religion, who soon
after suffer pleasures, profits, or preferments to draw them quite away: some
I confess through the mercy of God are free from this decay. But there is yet
a more grievous fault among us: for the greatest part of our people have no
love at all. These are the days whereof Christ said Matthew. 24.12.22.
love should wax cold. And whereof Paul said, Men should be 2. Ti. 3.2.
lovers of themselves: for take the most congregations where the Gospel has
been long preached, yet you shall find that the hearers are neither bettered
for knowledge nor for obedience, but remain still as ignorant and profane as
ever they were. This argues that they have no love of God in their hearts,
though they have a formal profession of his name in their mouth: For where the
love of God is, there most needs be increase in knowledge, in grace, and in
obedience. Again, see how men generally walk in their callings, and therein
behold a mere defect of love. All the pains they take is for their private
gain and pleasure; no regard is had of Gods glory, of the maintenance of true
religion, and of the good of their brethren: herein their own consciences
shall be the witnesses. So that generally this may be said, We have no love at
all. What an action then shall we think has Christ against us? It must needs
be grievous; and so our case fearful and dangerous. If an earthly prince and
potentat had an action against us, and his case were good, it would make us
look about us, yea to tremble and quake, and to be at our wits end. Behold,
not a worldly prince but the king of heaven and earth has a matter against us,
just and grieuo^^^ oh how should this move us to search our selves, to try our
estate, and to humble our selves upon the knees of our heart before his
majesty. We may not imagine that this charge of Christ does not concern us:
the conclusion of this Epistle shows it belongs to all that have ears to
hear. And therefore we should labor to prevent Gods judgment, by judging our
selves for our decay and want of love.

Again, this rebuke of Christ for decay of love, should teach us to labor for
increase in love to God and to our brethren; adding grace to grace in our
hearts, as we add day unto day in our lives, that so our love may obound: read
1. These. 4.1.9, 10, where Paul urges this duty at large: he confesses they
did love one another, and yet beseeches them to increase therein. Phil.
3.13.4. in Paul's person we have a worthy president, which we must follow, if
we think to come whither he is gone before: though he had gone far in the
love of God, yet he labored to perfection, and therefore considered not that
which was past, as resting in it, but rather how far he was too short, that
so he might use means to increase in love, and in all other good graces, till
he come to perfection. A christian man's life is a way that leads to heaven,
wherein we once setting foot, must ^uer go forward, and not stand still or
turn back, lest we never come there. The state of a christian is like unto a
child, which still grows till it come to a perfect strength: and so must
every child of God labor to grow in the graces of God, till they be perfect
men in Christ: For if they stand still, Christ has something against them.

The Rhemists in their annotations abuse this place, to prove that a man may
quite fall away from grace. Therefore to clear this text, and to confirm our
hearts in the truth of Gods word, thi^ question must be scanned, Whether a man
may quite fall away from grace? Answ. Grace in Scripture is taken two ways:
First, for that favor of God whereby he accepts of some for his children in
Christ. This is the first grace and the fountain of all other: and taking
grace in this sense, I say, that the signs of grace and the sense thereof in
the heart, may be lost: But the f^^our of God it self cannot be lost of them
that truly believe. When an earthly father is displeased with his child for
some notorious crime, he will turn the signs of his favor into signs of
displeasure, and show the same partly by words, and partly by stripes: and yet
he still continues his father, and holds him for his son, without any
purpose to disinherit him: Even so God deals with his children; for their
sins and corruptions, he will turn away his loving countenance from them, and
change the signs of his favor into anger and displeasure; when as yet the
good purpose of their adoption is not altered, but remains firm for ever:
and God is still their father, though an angry father through the provocation
of their sins. Secondly, grace in Scripture is taken for the gifts of grace
which are bestowed on them that believe in Christ. These gifts of grace be of
two sorts, some more principal, of absolute necessity unto salvation, without
which none can be saved; as faith, and also hope, and love, which proceed from
faith. There be others also less principal, which be very profitable and
requisite, yet not absolutely needful unto salvation: As the feeling of Gods
favor, alacrity in prayer, and sense of joy and comfort in the holy Ghost.
These less principal graces may quite be lost. The principal graces also may
be decayed, lessened, and covered, in regard of operation, even in Gods
children: but quite extinguished they cannot be, for God vpholdeth them by
perseverance; where faith, hope, and love are once truly wrought by Gods
spirit, they are never wholly or finally taken away, but only in part, and in
sense and feeling for a time. This answer is agreeable to this text, for the
church of Ephesus is here blamed, not for quite loosing her loue^ but because
she had left her first love, suffering it to decay and waxelesse than it was at
their first conversion.

And because this doctrine is oppugned earnestly, not only by the church of
Rome, but also by some churches and schools of the Protestants: I will first
show the truth hereof out of Gods word, and then scan the chief reasons that
are brought against it. That grace cannot be wholly and finally lost, these
reasons prove: I. Matthew. 16.18. The promise is made to Peter, and in him to all
the faithful: That upon that faith which he professed, Christ would build his
temple, and the gates of hell should not prevail against it. Which last words
must be marked, for they intimate, that the devil with his adherents would
show much force and violence against the faith of the elect, but yet they
should never get the victory, or overcome it wholly. II. Matthew. 24.24, Christ
foretelling that false Prophets should come, says: They should seduce, if it
were possible, the very elect. Where he takes this for granted, that the
elect, albeit they may be assaulted grievously, yet they can never be wholly
or finally drawn away from their faith. III. John. 10.27, 28, My sheep hear
my voice (says Christ) and I know them, and they follow me: and I give unto
them eternal life, and they shall never perish. To this they answer: It is
true, they shall never perish, so long as they remain the sheep of Christ.
But that cavil is cut off in the next words: Neither shall any pluck them
out of my hands, my father which gave them me, is greater than all, and none is
able to pluck them out of my fathers hands: And therefore neither the devil,
nor the world, nor the flesh, can by any temptation draw the sheep of Christ
from their faith, and make them to be no sheep. IV. Reason. John. 3.36. He
that believes in Christ has eternal life. They say he has it in hope, and
no otherwise. I answer; if they have it in hope, they shall never perish: Romans
5.5.
For hope makes not ashamed. V. Reason. Romans 8.30. Whom he predestinat, them
also he called: and whom he called, them also be justified: and whom he
justified, them also be glorified. Those which are elected, called, and
justified by faith, must needs be glorified, and therefore cannot fall away
finally: for such shall never be glorified. And in the end of the chapter,
verse. 38. he adds; That neither death, nor life, Angels, principalities, nor
powers, nor any thing else can separate us, viz. the faithful, from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. But if the faithful might fall away
finally, then they might be severed from the love of God. VI. Reason. Romans
11.29. The gifts of Gods calling (that is, the peculiar gifts that pertain to
salvation) are without repentance. They say it is true, God indeed never
repents him of his gifts: but yet a man may perish and fall away, because he
may refuse and reject Gods grace given unto him. This answer is frivolous,
maintaining this absurdity, that the powerful will of God should be brought
under the silly will of the creature: if man could repel Gods grace given unto
him, then should man's will take place, and Gods will be made frustrate and
void. VII. Reason. 1. John. 3.9. Whosoever is borne of God sins not, because
his seed remains in him: neither can be sin, because he is borne of God.
How is that true, for chap. 1.10, He that says he has not sinned, makes God
a liar, and his word is not in him? Answ. The place must be understood thus:
He that is borne of God sins not, that is, with full consent, and with all
his heart. Sin does not reign in him: for the regenerate man consists of
two parts; flesh and spirit: he sins not as he is spirit, that is,
regenerate; but as he is flesh and sinful. His will sins not as it is
spiritual, but as it is carnal. The papists say, Indeed he sins not, so
long as he continues to be borne of God. But this shift is cut off by the
words of the text, Neither can be sin, because the seed of grace, even the
word of God abides in him. This place plainly proves, even in the judgment
of the Papists, that the child of God cannot wholly or finally fall from grace.
They say it is a hard place, and indeed they cannot answer to it. VIII.
Reason. If a man may finally fall from grace, then may he be wholly cut off
from Christ: for grace is never wholly lost, till a man be quite cut off from
Christ. But it cannot be, that a member of Christ can be quite cut off: for
then it should follow, that one and the same man must be often joined to
Christ; namely, so often as he falls by sin, if he would be saved.
Whereupon this would also follow, that one and the same man must be often
baptized: for Baptism is the Sacrament of incision, the means of admission
into the church, and the seal of our union with Christ. But Rebaptization may
not be admitted. The church of God denies it upon this ground, because a man
is only once borne of God. IX. Reason. Christ teaches us to pray thus, Lead
us not into temptation: that is, suffer not Satan and sin wholly to prevail
against us, and finally to vanquish us. This petition being taught by Christ,
must needs be lawful, and according to Gods will: and therefore hereunto, as
to every lawful petition, belong these two things: First, Gods command to
make it: Secondly, his promise to assure us, it shall be granted. Whereby
this is evident: That there is in Gods word a promise, assuring every child of
God, that he shall never wholly be conquered of the devil: and therefore he
can never wholly or finally fall from grace; for if he might, then were he
wholly overcome in temptation.

The contrary arguments be of three sorts; places of scripture, Examples, and
Reasons: for the first, Exodus 32, 32. When the Israelits had sinned that great
sin of Idolatry, Moses prays God to forgive them; If not (says he) blot
me out of thy book. Hence they gather, that a child of God may be blotted
out of Gods book of life, and so finally perish. Answ. That place must be
understood with this condition: If is be possible; as in the like prayer it is
expressed by Christ: Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.
This condition must needs be added: for else we must say, that Moses prayed for
that which he knew was impossible; namely, that one private man should suffer
eternal punishments for the sins of others, though in temporal punishments
such a thing may be, yet in eternal, it is impossible. Again, Moses in this
prayer does principally show his exceeding affection and zeal for Gods glory,
and for the safety of his brethren, both which he preferred before his own
life; as if he should say: Lord pardon them, and rather than thy name should
loose glory, blot me out of thy book. The like affection was in Paul, when
he said, Romans 9.3.
He could wish himself to be separate from Christ for the love of his brethren
the Jews. They further urge the Lords answer to Moses, verse. 33. Whosoever
has sinned against me, I will put him out of my book. But as the Lord
therein answers to Moses prayer, so must it be understood, with the like
exception.

II. Object. Ezekiel. 18.24. If the righteous man turn away from his
righteousness, and commit iniquity, and do according to all the
abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live? All his righteousness
that he has done shall not be mentioned: but he shall die in his sin. Here
(say they) it is plain, that a man may fall from grace? Answ. Righteousness
is twofold: of the outward action, and of the person. So Paul distinguishes,
when he desires to be sound Phi^^p. 3.9
not in his own righteousness, which is of the law; that is, such as was in
him while he was a Pharisee: but in the righteousness of Christ. The
righteousness of the action is, when a man for outward actions keeps the law
of God. The righteousness of the person is that, whereby a man is accepted
righteous before God. And answerable hereunto, there be two kinds of righteous
men: one that is outwardly righteous before men, though not indeed: The other,
that is truly righteous before God. Now of the former of these two, must that
place be understood: for the Lord there pleads with such as did esteem and
auow themselves to be righteous, saying: Their fathers had eaten sour grapes;
that is, had sinned, and they were punished for their fathers offenses, though
they were righteous: And the Holy ghost speaking according to their own conceit
and opinion of themselves, calls them righteous: and of such it is true they
may turn from their righteousness.

III. Object. Luke 8.13. Some believe for a time, and in time of temptation go
away. Answ. There be three kinds of faith: Historical, Temporary, and saving
faith. In Histo^icall faith, is knowledge of the word of God, with assent unto
it. In temporary faith are three things: knowledge of the Word, Assent, and
Approbation also, with some joy. In saving faith, there are four things:
Knowledge, Assent, Approbation, and Apprehension: that is, an applying of the
promises of God unto a man's self; whence proceeds some joy. And answerably,
there are three kinds of believers. I. such as know the word of God, but yet
have no love thereof. II. such as know it, assent unto it, and rejoice in it
also, for a time. The third are such as apprehend the promises, and apply them
to themselves. Now the two first kinds of faith may be left: and the two first
kinds of believers may fall away, whereof Saint Luke speaks: But hence it
follows not, that saving faith, may be lost; for he that is endued therewith,
can never fall away. But faith (say they) is only one, Ephesians. 4.5. There is
but one faith, one God, one hope, and one Baptism. Answ. By one faith is there
meant one religion, and doctrine of salvation: as elsewhere is usual, by the
name of faith. 1. Tim. 1.19.

Their second kind of arguments are Examples: which are chiefly two: one of
Adam, the other of David, For Adam; they say he was created righteous, and yet
he fell wholly from grace: and therefore any believer now, may much more fall
away, who have far less grace than he had. Answ. This Argument is not good:
for though Adam had a greater measure of grace than we now have, yet our grace
has a greater privilege than his had: his grace came by creation; ours is by
redemption and regeneration. Adam had the first grace, to be able to obey; but
he wanted the second, to be sure to persevere: because God would permit his
fall, to make a way both to manifest his justice and mercy in our redemption
by Christ. But the child of God after his conversion, wherein he has the
first grace to repent and believe, has also an infallible promise, That he
shall receive the second grace, to abide in that faith. And therefore Paul
says: I Philip 1.6.
am persuaded, that he which has begun this good work in you, will perform
it until the day of the Lord Jesus Christ. And again, 2. These. 3 3
The Lord is faithful, who will stablish you, and keep you from evil.

Secondly, David (say they) by his two grievous sins fell wholly from grace?
Answ He fell indeed grievously, but not wholly: for after his fall he
contemned not Gods word, he hated not God, nor despaired of mercy; which he
must have done, if he had fallen wholly. And therefore he had remorse for his
sin, so soon as the Prophet Nathan come unto him. But (say they) he prays
God to create a new heart in him, therefore he had then no grace: For creation
is a making of that which has no being. Answ. David then speeketh not as he
was before God, but as he was in his own sense and feeling: for by his sins
Gods graces were sore decayed. But (say they) he repented not for the space of
one whole year: Now where there is no repentance, there is no faith, and
consequently no grace nor pardon. Answ. In repentance there be two things: the
gift of repentance, and the act and practice thereof. The gift of repentance
was in the heart of David, when he yet lay in his sins: but the act thereof
lay hid, and he wanted the renewing thereof all that time. Again, David had
the pardon of his sins past, though he had not the pardon of those two
sins, till he repented of them. Neither was his repentance lost but decayed
only, he wanted not the power of it simply, but the practice of it only in
that act.

Their third kind of arguments are drawn from equity and reason.

I. He that is a member of an harlot, and of the devil, cease wholly to be
a member of Christ: but a child of God truly believing, may become the member
of an harlot, and of Satan, as David did. Answ. There be three kinds of
members; dead, decayed, and living members: a dead member is that which is
only in show a member: as a leg of wood or of brass in a man's body. A
decayed member is a true member, though weak, as is a leg or arm that is
taken with a palsy, or sore wounded. But a lively member is that which does
move, and do all it functions perfectly. So in the church there be some members
dead, and only in show; others feeble and weak, that by reason of some
grievous sins are not able to do their duties. And there be lively members,
which serve God with an upright and perfect heart. Now, though a member of an
harlot cannot be a lively member of Christ, because by his sins he weakeneth
and wounds the graces of God (for every adulterer and fornicator does as much
as in him lies cut himself off from Christ) yet he may be a decayed member
of Christ. And this may the rather stand, because a man is made the member of
Christ one way, namely, spiritually; and the member of an harlot another way,
namely, bodily.

II. Reason. If a man cannot fall from grace, then preaching, prayer, the
sacraments, and all means of perseverance are needless? Answ. Nothing less:
for they have all their good and necessary use unto them which have grace:
even to make them constant in grace. For where the Scripture teaches the
certainty of salvation, it implies the use of the means of perseverance.
Paul in his journey to Rome was certain they should come all safe to land Act.
^7.2^
by the promise of God: yet when the marines would have gone out of the ship,
He tells the Captain, unless Verse 31.
these stay in, we cannot be saved: because they were the means to bring them
to land. So when Isay had told Ezekias from the Lord that he should live
fifteen years longer, he was thereby assured of recovery, and yet he used
Isa 38.21.
a bunch of figs as a means thereof: as also food and raiment to preserve
his life afterward.

III. Reason. This doctrine of certain perseverance maintains men in
security? Answ. Security is twofold, carnal, and spiritual: carnal, when a
man regards not at all the means of his salvation, but gives himself wholly
to the profits and pleasures of this world. Spiritual, when a man relieth on
God for his salvation, by believing his promises* and this security it
maintains, but not the carnal security: For it teaches the use of the
means of perseverance, as prayer, hearing, and reading of the word, and
receiving the Sacraments. And thus I conclude this question, That the true
child of God, who truly believes, when he sins, does neither wholly nor
finally fall away, neither can do.

Lastly, if this were true of this famous Church of Ephesus, which was founded
and preserved by the Apostles, that she suffered her first love to decay; then
how can it be otherwise with us, but that we should suffer our first love as
well toward God as man, to lessen and diminish? and that this is so, our
consciences will tell us, if we look to that love and zeal we had at our
first calling: and though we have not felt this decay, yet we must know we
be in danger of it continually. And therefore we must take heed that we suffer
not our good affections in religion to diminish. Water that has been once
hot, will afterward be most cold, and freese the hardest: even so, when our
hearts have been once heated with the fire of the Lords altar, as true love,
and other graces of the spirit, if we suffer them to decay, we shall become
more frozen in iniquity than any others. The hawke while she is quick to
take her prey, is set upon the hand of kings and nobles: but if she wax weak
and die, she is cast off to the dunghill. Even so while we are hot and
cheerful in love toward God and his church, we are carried as it were on
Gods own hand: but if we faint and decay in love, we shall be cast lower than
if we had never been so exalted. This love of God in us is like a little
flame of fire, for the maintaining whereof we must do three things: First,
take heed of all manner of sin, which quenches love and other graces of the
spirit, as water quenches fire. In the old Testament the priests kept fire
burning upon the altar day and night, to be always ready to sacrifice unto
the Lord: and so must we keep the flame of love and other graces continually
burning in our hearts, that thence we may offer up acceptable sacrifices of
praise and thanksgiving unto the Lord. Secondly, we must stir up the gifts of
grace that are in us, as Paul says to Timothy, 2. Tim. 1.6. using a
comparison from the fire, which burns more bright and clear when it is
stirred up. Lastly, we must exercise our selves in the duties of piety, as
faith, repentance, love, and such like: and so shall they not decay. And thus
much for the sin of this church.

Verse 5. Remember therefore whence thou art fallen, and repent and do thy
first works: or else I will come against thee shortly, and will remove thy
candlestick out of his place, except thou amend. Our Savior Christ the
faithful physician of our souls, having sharply rebuked this church, does
here prescribe unto them a sovereign remedy against their sin of decay in
love. From whence we may learn, that the law whereby sin is reproved is to be
taught, but yet with this qualification, that withal the doctrine of the
Gospel be joined thereunto, that the sins which are ripped up by the law,
may be cured by the Gospel. This is Christ's manner of preaching in this place,
whose practice is a most worthy platform for all his ministers: for we have
no warrant at this day to preach the law barely, which only makes the wound,
without the Gospel which alone shows the remedy.

This remedy here prescribed is of special use, and worthy our
consideration: generally, by it we have direction to answer to two necessary
questions of practice, which often fall out in the life of man. First, a man is
effectually called to profess the gospel, and yet after his conversion,
either through the corruption of his nature, or by the temptation of the devil
and the world, falls into sin again: what must this man do for his
recovery? Ans. He must remember whence he is fallen, and repent of those his
sins, and do his first works. The second question is this: A man that has
all his life long lived in ignorance and sin, is now touched in conscience for
his loose life; how shall this man escape the wrath of God, and become
reconciled unto him? Ans. He must first remember whence he is fallen by Adams
sin, and by his own transgressions: Secondly, he must repent of his sins:
Thirdly, endeavor to do the first works, whereto he is bound by the law of
creation, and so shall he escape the wrath of God, and be received into his love
and favor.

In particular, this remedy has three parts: The first, Remember whence thou
art fallen: The second, And repent: The third, And do thy first works. The
words following, Or else I will come against thee, etc. Are a reason of this
remedy to persuade them to do the duties prescribed.

For the first, Remember whence thou art fallen; The words bear this sense:
Examine thy self thoroughly, and see in thy self the decay of thy former love:
and then ponder the same in thy heart seriously and thoroughly. Here Christ
inioyneth to this church two duties. I. Examination, whereby she must descend
into her own heart, and search out her own wants; especially the want of her
love to God, to his word and to her brethren. II. Consideration, whereby she
must often think of these her wants, and lay the same to her heart unfeignedly.

This course which Christ takes with this church, teaches us first that it is
a dangerous thing for any person in Gods church not to be acquainted thoroughly
with his own estate, that so he may search out his own wants, and deeply
consider of the same. For this very thing Jeremy blamed the people in his
time, that no man said with himself, Ier. 8.6.
what have I done. And Christ lays this sin to the charge of the people of
the old world, that they were ignorant of their estate, (...) ^4^3^.39.
They knew nothing till the flood came and ^^oke them all away. And this is the
common sin of this age: no man almost does examine himself and consider in his
heart his own estate, by reason of his sins and wants. Nay, men are grown to
this, that they count it a means to breed melancholy, and therefore do ^lie
the practice of this duty, and so nuzzell themselves in their fearful
security.

Secondly, here we learn that it is a special duty for them that live in
Gods church, to be thoroughly acquainted with their own estate: to examine and
search out their own sins: and often to consider seriously of their
particular wants. Zephanie preaching the doctrine of repentance unto the
people, Cap 2.1.
begins thus: Search ye, search your selves oh nation not worthy to be
beloved. Where the word translated ( search) signifies such a search as a man
would make for some small thing in a great heap of chafe. This is the Lords
counsel, Hag. 1.7. Consider your own ways in your hearts: and it must be our
practice if we would be saved. This duty is the beginning and ground of true
repentance, and therefore Christ here gives it the first place; for no man can
truly repent before he be acquainted with his own infirmities, and with his
own fearful and damnable estate, by reason of his sins. And therefore
David says, Psalm. 119.59.
I first considered my ways and then I turned my feet into thy testimonies.
The cause why so few in the world do truly repent, is want of consideration
from whence they are fallen: and what be their sins and the dreadful
judgments thereby deserved. For till the mind do truly conceive her own
misery, the heart can never rightly hunger after mercy: Sin must be our
greatest woe, before Christ become our chiefest joy. The second part of this
remedy is Repentance i^ self, for after a man is well acquainted with his
wants, and has thoroughly considered of his own misery, then he comes to
repent. In the handling hereof five points are to be observed. I. What
repentanceis. II. How it is to be practiced. III. Who commands it. IV. To
whom it is commanded. V. For what they must repent.

For the first. Repentance properly is in the mind, as the word in this place
does import: for it signifies thus much, After some folly or ouerslip to be
better advised. Repentance then in the mind is a change from evil to good, or a
turning from sin unto God, Act. 26.20, Repent and turn to God. Which latter
words expound the former, and plainly show what repentance is. And this change
in the mind stands in this resolution, whereby a man by Gods grace purposes
to leave all his former sins, and to cleave unto God in holy obedience unto
all his commandments: And when this resolution is in the mind, therwithall
follows a turning of the whole man in will, in affections, and in all the
actions of his life. This appears by that description of the practice of
repentance, which Paul reduces to seven heads, viz. Care* clearing of
themselves, indignation, fear, great desire, zeal, and revenge, 2. Cor. 7.11.
whereof some are renewed affections, and some reformed actions.

The use.
Hereby appears that their description of repentance is not so fit and proper,
which say it stands in these three: contrition, faith, and new obedience. For
contrition is not a part of repentance, but a cause thereof, and so is faith,
as Christ teaches in his well-knowne Sermon: Mat. 1.15.
Repent, and believe the Gospel: where they are plainly distinct. And indeed a
man must first believe in Christ, and then follows repentance, and for new
obedience it is not a part of repentance, but a fruit thereof. Others make
regeneration and repentance all one, but that cannot so well stand: for
regeneration goes before, and repentance follows after as a fruit thereof,
for godly sorrow which is a part of regeneration, causes repentance. The mind
therefore must first be renewed, and then it turns it self unto God, and
withal turns the whole man. And thus we see what true repentance is.

II. Point. How must repentance be practiced? The practice of it stands in
two things: in true humiliation, and true reformation. In humiliation a man
humbles himself under the hand of God, making true confession of al his
sins, from a sorrowful heart, condemning himself for the same, and
earnestly craving pardon for them at the hands of God in Christ. Reformation is
a change of all bad actions into good; and if case require, a making of
satisfaction unto others for injuries done unto them: example hereof we have
in David; who having committed those two great sins of whoredom and murder,
when he was reproved by Nathan, repented, confessing his sins, and made the one
and fifty Psalm, and (as it is thought) the 32 Psalm, therein notably
showing both his humiliation in heart, and reformation of life. So Manasses,
when he was converted, 2 Cro. 33.12.
he repented, humbling himself before God, and praying for the pardon of his
sins, God heard him: And thus came the prodigal child unto his father,
saying Luc 15.21.
Father I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, I am not worthy to be
called thy son, make me one of thine hired servants. And so in all the
Psalms of repentance we shall see these duties of humiliation and
reformation, jointly practiced: as Psalm. 6. and 38. and 77. and 130.143.

Here then consider the fearful practice of the church of Rome in their
doctrine of repentance, received generally for many hundred years. Repentance
with them stands in three things: In contrition, in confession of all his
sins to the Priests, and in satisfaction to God by good works. But all these
things may a wicked man do: For Judas was grieved for betraying his master;
he confessed his sins; and also gave again the money wherewith he was hired.
A second abuse is, that they make contrition a part of the practice of
repentance: by contrition we must understand remorse of conscience for sin;
which is no grace of it self, though it may be an occasion thereto in Gods
elect. A third abuse is, that they prescribe a confession of all a man's sins
unto men; which i^ a gibbet for any man's conscience: wherein they require more
than God does. A fourth abuse is, that they require satisfaction to Gods
justice by man's good works; whereby they overthrow satisfaction by Christ, and
exact that of men which none is able to perform. We therefore must reject
their wicked doctrine, brought by the devil into Gods church, and embrace that
saving repentance which stands in true humiliation and reformation.

III. point. Who is it that commands repentance unto this church: namely,
Jesus Christ. Many, not only Papists but Protestants, gather upon this and
such like commandments, That God gives to every man sufficient grace to
repent if he will: For else (say they) he should but mock them, in bidding
them repent: considering that without his grace it is as impossible for any man
to repent, as for a man to rise and walk that is fast bound hand and foot.
Ans. This collection is unsound: For the manifestation whereof, I will first lay
down the grounds of the true answer: and then apply the same. First, this
commandment to Repent, is not given to every man, but only to the church of
God, or to that people which is to be a church: and God gives it to them for
this end, that he may gather among them his elect. In Gods church there be two
sorts of men: Elect, and Reprobat: both which are mingled in this life. Now
when the commandment to believe and repent, is given out in Gods church, it
is directed properly to the elect; and to the other whom God has refused only
by consequent, because they are mingled with the elect. Again, these
commandments be given to the elect for two causes. I. To teach them, not what
they are able to do of themselves* but what they ought to do. II. To ^e an
outward means to bring them to repent and believe. For with the commandment
Christ is present by his spirit to work in the elect grace to repent and
believe. Phil. 2.12, Work out your salvation in fear and trembling: rendering
this reason in the next words, For God works in you both the will and the
deed. In the church there be some reprobates who have the same commandment
given unto them: but for other uses: as I. to keep them in outward order. II.
to teach them their own impotencie. III. and principally, that God in his
justice may make them void of all excuse at the last day. From hence I answer
thus. This proposition is not true, to wit, If God command men to repent, then
he gives them grace to repent, unless it be thus qualified; That God command
them to repent, for this end that they may practice repentance. For God gives
out his commandments for diverse ends: Some that they may be practiced: and
others, to take from men al excuse in their disobedience. Thus he commanded
Pharaoh to let the people go; that by his disobedience his heart might be more
hardened, and God more justly manifest his glory in his destruction. So he
commanded Isay to go and preach unto the people: not for their conversion, but
to Isa. 6.9.
blind their eyes, and to harden their hearts. And so he commands the reprobate
to repent: but neither directly, as he does his children, in whom he intends
the practice of repentance; but by consequent, because they live among his
children: nor yet with intent they should obey, but rather to harden them, and
to make them inexcusable, because of their sins. And therefore in them his
commandment cannot import any ability to obey.

IV. point. Who be commanded to repent? namely, The Church of Ephesus, that
is, the minister with the whole body of the church. This may seem strange that
he should command them to repent, seeing they had already repented at their
conversion. Here therefore we must learn that there be two degree^ in the
practice of repentance: First, the beginning of repentance: Secondly, the
renewing of the same. And in those two consists the whole state of a
christian man's life. He must begin to repent when he is received to mercy: he
must renew that repentance for his daily offenses.

If God therefore have given ^s grace to repent, The use.
we must not content our selves with that good beginning, but add more
repentance daily unto it. For no man lives that has received grace to repent,
but he sees in himself continual cause of renewing the same, by reason of
his daily s^il^ and wants; for every sin decays grace, which must be
repaired by a new practice of repentance. This duty must needs be practiced.
It is the most dangerous case that can be for any man to lie in sin, for
sin makes a man liable to all Gods judgments. And it is not so much the act
of sin, as the lying in sin that brings damnation. For this cause Paul
2. Corin. 5.20, speaking to those that were reconciled to God, does still most
^arnestly beseech them to be reconciled unto him, saying, We beseech you in
Christ's steed, as though God did beseech you through us* that ye be reconciled
to God: Intending thereby to provoke them to the daily renewing of their
repentance, that thereby they might get a more full assurance of their
reconciliation.

V. point. For what must they repent? namely, for the decay of their love: not
for the want thereof, but for that they suffered it to wax lesser, both
toward God, and his word, and toward their brethren. The same thing is spoken
to us daily in the ministry of the word: that whereas our first love is gone,
many having fallen from it, and more having none at all, we would unfeignedly
repent of this our decay and want: that if we have had love, and now wax
cold, we may renew it; and if we never had it, we may labor for it; that so
we may be answerable to his blessed desire. And here observe, that Christ
enioyneth us a strait repentance. It is not enough for men to repent them of
gross sins, as whoredom, theft, drunkenness, and such like: but they must
repent them of their want^ of grace, as of the knowledge, and fear, and love
of God, and of brotherly love, and of decay in any grace, be it never so
little. We have many iusticiaries in conceit, that be Pharisaically minded,
thinking too well of themselves, that they need no repentance, because they
live ciuilely, and are not tainted with gross sins: But these consider
little what God does here require; even repentance for our secret wants and
decays. And great reason it should be so: for else to what end should we
examine our selves of our secret wants, unless we should repent us of them,
having found them in us?

Again, if this church must repent for her wants; then what great cause have
we to repent in this last age, of Atheism, a gross and common sin: of
outward pride in apparel, a sin flat against Gods word: and for contempt of
the gospel; a sin that enlarges it self more and more among us. And for
cruelty, and want of mercy and compassion, all which are rife in our church:
and may more easily remove the candlestick from us; then want of love could
remove the candlestick from this church. And thus much for the second part of
this remedy.

The third part of this remedy is, to do their first works: that is, show
the like zeal and feruencie of love to God, to his word, and to their
brethren, that they did at the first time of their conversion. This duty Christ
adds to the former; because true repentance never perishes in the heart, but
always breaks out into action in the life.

Here then is an excellent lesson for us to learn and put in practice: we
must search our own hearts, and see what good things have been in us: what good
motions and desires, or good affections. We must also call to mind our former
ways, and see what good things we have done: and if in heart or life we find
decay, we must recover our loss, and seek to do our first works, and strive
to continue so doing to our lives end, that so we may escape this heavy
charge of decay in grace. Thus much of the parts of this remedy.

If not, I will come against thee shortly, and remove thy candlestick out of
his place, except thou amend.

In these words Christ lays down a reason to persuade the church of Ephesus
to the practice of the former remedy; especially for repentance. This reason
contains three parts. I. A general commination in these words, If not, I will
come against thee shortly. II. A particular threatening of a particular
judgment, And remove thy candlestick out of his place. III. The condition of
them both: except thou amend.

I. point. If not, I will come against thee shortly, that is, if thou do not
practice this remedy and the duties therein prescribed, especially the duty
of repentance; then will I come against thee shortly. The words may as well be
read thus, If not, then will I come to thee shortly: For so they are in the
original, and do contain in them sufficient and profitable instruction. God
is said to come to any people two ways, in mercy, and in judgment. In mercy
when he testifies his presence by works of mercy: As when Christ in spirit
went unto the old world and preached unto them in the person of Noe an hundred
and twenty years before the flood, 1. Pet. 3.19, 20. Secondly, God comes in
judgment when he testifies his presence by judgments. In the second
commandment God says, He will visit the sins of the fathers upon the
children, that is, he will make inquiry among the children for the fathers
sins, and if he find them to live in the same sins that their fathers did,
then will he punish them, this is properly to visit. So in this place, If thou
repent not I will come unto thee, and testify my presence, not in mercy but
in judgment.

In this general threatening we may observe: The use.
that when a church or people decay in love to God, to his word, or to their
brethren; or else lie in any sin: then God prepares himself to come unto
them in judgment, Amo^ 4.12. Because I will do thus and thus unto thee, for
thy sins, therefore prepare to meet thy God, Oh Israel, meaning, that
because they lay still in their sins, therefore he would make known his
presence by more fearful judgments. This doctrine according to Christ's
direction is to be applied to us and to our church: for the sins that were
in the church of Ephesus are the sins of our church and people. They decayed
in love to God, to his word, and to the brethren, so do we. Nay, generally
there is no love at all in us, as has been showed: and besides these wants,
there be many other gross sins wherein our church and people do lie, as in
Atheism both in judgment and practice; in contempt and neglect of Gods
worship and true religion; in cruelty, oppression, and want of mercy: and
that which is more, though God summon men to repent by his daily judgments,
yet few or none by true humility prepare to meet God, and to prevent his
judgments. Security spreads it self over the whole body of our people. And
this being our case and state, it must needs be, that God has been long
since in coming to us by his judgments, and a^ this day he is still coming,
because we still decay in love and other graces, and more and more go on in
sin. So that if we thus continue, the truth is, he will come shortly unto
us, and that by most fearful judgments. For this was written to the church
of Ephesus, to be a direction, not only unto them, but to all churches to the
end of the world, that be in the like or worser case. What shall we then do?

Our duty is taught us in these words ( If not) that is, if thou repent not.
We must prevent the Lords coming in judgment by unfeigned repentance: every
man and every family apart must repent privately, and the whole Church openly
and publickely: no way else we have, to stay the Lords coming against us by
his fearful judgments.

The second part of this reason, is a more particular threatening than the
former: And will remove thy candlestick out of his place. Where he shows
with what particular judgment he will punish this church: namely, by
remoouing away the candlestick. The meaning whereof may be gathered out of
the former chapter, where particular churches were called candlestickes:
therefore here he threateneth to remove his church from the city of Ephesus,
to take away the Ministry of his Gospel, and the profession thereof; and in
his just judgment to send among them, Ignorance, Apostacy, and Heresy, in
steed of the knowledge of his truth. This particular judgment must be referred
to the first words, If not: that is, if thou repent not, this will I do; I
will make thee to be no Church, and take my Gospel from thee.

In this particular threatening, three points are to be observed: one
concerning the Minister; the second concerning the whole body of the church:
the third concerning every private man. Touching the Minister note this: If he
shall decay in love to God, to his word, or to his brethren, or if he lie in
any one sin known to himself, it is a means to deprive him either of his
calling, or of Gods gifts bestowed on him: for this threatening is here
directed especially unto the Angel of this Church of Ephesus. When Jeremy had
been wanting in delivering the Lord will unto the people, partly for fear,
and partly through impatience: then the Lord becomes a Prophet unto him,
saying, If thou Ier. ^^ ^^
return, I will bring thee again, and thou shall stand before me. Whereby he
would give him to understand, That if he returned not, he should cease to be a
Prophet unto him. The same thing is true of all Gods Ministers: if they decay
in love, fail in their duty, or lie in any sin, they must speedily renew
themselves by repentance, or else God will deprive them either of their calling,
or of the gifts thereof. True repentance and the renewing thereof is needful
unto all Christians; but especially to Gods Ministers, if they would continue
in his favor, and stand before him, becoming his mouth unto the people.

The second point concerns the whole body of a Church: to wit, if a Church
or people decay in love to God, to religion, and to their brethren; or do lie
in any common sin, they procure hereby the remoouing of the gospel from
them, and the abolishing of true religion. H^^^. 9.7.
The Prophet is a (...) (says the Lord) and the man of the spirit i^ mad: This
was a great and fearful judgment: but mark^ the cause; All is (...) thine
iniquity: that is* for the sin of the whole church does God send foolish
Ministers. If this be so, then we have just cause in our Church to fear the
remoouing of the gospel from us: for there is a general decay of love in
many, and in the most no love at all. Many scorn and contemn true religion,
and hate the professors thereof. In regard whereof, we may wonder at the
great patience of God, that yet continues his gospel among us: For ^. Thessalonians.
2.11.
God gives men up to strong delusion, to believe lies, because they love not
his truth. Wherefore, being in this danger, our duty is, to use all good
means to prevent this judgment of God: which can no other way be done, than
by true and unfeigned repentance by the whole Church in general: and by every
man apart, and every family apart. For when God shall speak suddenly against
a nation or kingdom, to root it up, and to destroy it: if that people repent
of their wickedness, the Lord will repent of the plague and judgment which
he thought to bring upon them, Ierem. 18. verse. 7, 8.

The third point concerns every private man: and it is this: If any man decay
in love, or want love to God and to his brethren, or lie in any sin known to
himself. This is a means to remove the candlestick from him; to deprive him
of his knowledge and other graces of God. The affection of love in the heart is
like the watch of the clock: if the watch stand, the wheels stand: as the
watch goes fast or softly, so go the wheels answerably. And so it is in man:
if his love to God and to his gospel do increase, then does his knowledge and
other graces of God increase in his heart: but if his love decay, then other
graces decay: and if love be gone, then farewell all piety and true religion.
If we would know the cause of such palpable ignorance as is in many that have
long heard the gospel preached, it is nothing but want of love. Heb. 3.12, 13.
The Holy ghost shows by what degrees men come to fall away from God. First,
sin deceiues them, by drawing them to commit it: then their hearts are
hardened by custom of sinning: Thence follows unbelief in maine points of
Religion: and so they make Apostacy from God, and set themselves against his
truth. Take heed therefore of lying in any sin, for that is the high way to
final Apostacy: rather strive to increase in love unto God and unto his word;
and so shall all his good graces increase in thine heart.

Out of this particular threatening some gather, That a man may be cut off
from Christ, and fall away finally from true faith and repentance. For (say
they) if a whole Church may be cut off from Christ, and become no Church: then
may any one member of the Church be cut off, and become no member: But a whole
church may be cut off, as here we see, and therefore may any one man. Answ.
This reason is not good: there is great difference between the state of a
whole Church, and of one man that is a true member of Christ. For a particular
Church is a mixed company of true professors and dissemblers: like unto a field
wherein are good corn and tares; and like unto a barn floor, wherein is
wheat and chafe mingled together: and yet all are reputed believers, because
they profess the Gospel outwardly. Now by reason of this mixture, it may come
to pass, that a particular visible Church may fall away, and become no Church:
either when the godly are taken away, and hypocrites and dissemblers made
manifest: or else when true believers waxing few, are not able to maintain the
public profession of the truth against the might and multitude of the
enemies, which may daily increase. But the case is not so with a particular
member of Christ, he cannot finally fall away, as has been showed at large,
verse. 4. And thus much for the second part of this reason.

The third part of this reason, is the condition of both the former
threatenings, in these words: Except th^^ amend: that is, I will come in
judgment unto thee, and take my gospel from thee, unless thou prevent my
coming by true repentance.

Here note, that all the threatenings of the old and new Testament are
conditional: (...) comes to Niniue, and cries, yet forty days, and Niniue
shall be destroyed. He said no more; but yet that threatening must be
understood with this exception, unless they repent. Why (will some say) are the
threatenings in Gods word propounded conditionally? Answ. Gods whole will and
pleasure is one alone in itself: and yet it may be thus distinguished, to be
partly secret, and partly revealed. Gods secret will is touching those things
which he has not made manifest unto men. His revealed will is touching those
things which are manifested in Scripture, or do fall out every day. Now Gods
secret will is without condition, for as every thing comes to pass, so God
willed it: when good things come to pass, them he wills simply: when evil
things fall out, them he permits to be done. And to make Gods secret will
conditional, is to bring Gods will under the power of man, and to subject the
Creator unto the creature. But Gods revealed will is conditional; because it
contains the matter of man's salvation: and this manner of propounding it, is
a most effectual way to bring the same to pass, for it keeps men more in
awful obedience, than if it were absolute.

In this condition note this thing, that Christ repeateth it twice, both in the
beginning of this reason, If not: and in the end, Except thou amend. Hereby he
would give us to understand, That when men commit sin, and lie therein: or
when they decay in any grace, then have they most necessary cause to repent,
if they would escape Gods fearful judgments. And seeing our estate is like
to the state of this Church, or else worser by much (for we lie in sin, and
thereby cause God to come to us in judgment) as we tender our own good both
in this life and after death, let us turn from our sins and repent, every
man apart, every family apart, and the whole church publickely: for repentance
is most needful, else would not the Lord have doubled this condition.

Verse. 6. But this thou ha^^, that thou (...) the works of the Nicolaitans,
which I also hate. These words are a second reason to prove that which was set
down in the second verse: namely, That this Church could not abide them that
were evil. In the second verse this was made manifest, by their discovery of
the false Apostles: and here he proves it by their affection of hatred,
toward the works of the Nicolaitans. These Nicolaitans were certain
heretics in the primitive Church that held these two opinions: First, that
adultery and fornication were no sins: Secondly, that men might communicate
with the sacrifices of idolaters in their Idol temples: and according to their
opinions were their practices. These heretics (as it is thought) came of one
Nicholas, one of the seven deacons mentioned, Acts 6. who though for a while
he did faithfully discharge his duty outwardly; yet after fell away, and
became the head of this heretical sect.

But* this thou have. This Particle But, has reference to the former verse. As
if he should say, Though this be thy fault, that thou failest in thy first
love; yet for this I commend thee, that thou hate the works of the
Nicolaitans.

This practice of Christ discovers the common sin of this age: which is,
The Use.
to set out in their colors men's faults and infirmities, to their greatest
disgrace: and yet by silence and oblivion to bury all their virtues, which are
praise worthy. This ought not to be so; we must follow Christ's example, who
with just reproof adioyneth due deserved praise. If our friend or our foe have
a fault, when we are called thereunto, we may speak of it, and we must
reprove them: but yet withal we must commend the good things that be in them.
Secondly, Christ here teaches us, That it is not sufficient to anymans good
estate before God, that he have good things in him: for that a man may have,
and yet be in danger to be cut off from Christ. Saul had good things in him
at the first entrance into his kingdom, but what was he afterward? John was
very zealous for Gods glory, in killing all the idolatrous priests, 2. King.
1^ 25, 31.
but he would not depart from the sins of Jeroboam. And Judas no doubt had
many good gifts while he was with Christ, but his end was most fearful* And
this church had many good things in her; yet i^ she in danger of being cut off
from Christ: And so many among us have excell^^t gifts: some for knowledge,
some for (...) and conceiving of prayer: and yet for all these they may be cut
off from Christ. Therefore we must not content our selves with these, but
labor for the principal which is true, hearty, and unfeigned repentance, which
we must daily renew for our continual falls. And this will keep us in Gods
favor, and from his judgments.

More particularly Christ here commends this Church, for hating the errors
of the Nicolaitans. Whereby he would teach us our duty if we be Christians;
namely, to take knowledge of the sins and errors of our times, and to hate
the same unfeignedly. Yet note, he commends them for hating their works, not
their persons: giving us direction how to temper our hatred in the world. We
must set it against the sin, not against the person of any man. Some will
say, the Prophets prayed against the persons of the wicked. And David professed
hatred of the men, Psalm. 139.21, Do not I hate them that hate thee? Answ.
David was an extraordinary Prophet, and no doubt had this revealed unto him,
that those his enemies were obstinate, and would not repent. Again,
imprecations of the prophets in Scripture, must be understood as prophecies of
Gods judgment to come upon those against whom they prayed. But we which want
that extraordinary spirit, must keep our selves to our ordinary rule: Hate
the sins, and love the persons.

Further, observe the works here hated: namely, Idolatry, and Adultery,
which are joined together in these Nicolaitans. Adultery is the punishment of
Idolatry; and Idolatry the punishment of Adultery. Spiritual Adultery is
punished with bodily adultery. This was verified in the old Jews: when they
fell a whoring after strange gods, God gave them up to unclean lust. And it is
palpable in the Church of Rome: they being fallen to idolatry, do abound in
all uncleanness: for they tolerate stews for fornication: and adultery and
Sodomic are common among them.

Again, sundry men may here be well admonished, who will be of no Religion,
because there are many sects and schisms among the professors thereof. These
men should consider, That in the best Churches planted by the Apostles, there
were sects and heresies, even in the Apostles times, as here in Ephesus, And
therefore no marvel, if there be sects and schisms among us at this day.
This offense should not move any to dislike the gospel: but rather cause them
more firmly to cleave unto the truth.

Which I also do hate. This Christ adds to encourage them to go forward in
the virtue for which he commended them, in hating evil works: for what could
more provoke them to zeal and constancy therein, than to know they did that
which Christ himself did? And here we see, that Christ would have every
member of his Church to be like minded, and like affected unto him, as he was
man. We must love those things which Christ loves, and hate those things
which Christ hates, rejoice wherein Christ rejoices, and mourn for those
things for which Christ mourned. And great reason it should be so: for we
profess our selves to be members of Christ, bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh, for out of his blood sprung the Church: and there must be consent and
conformity between the head and the members. Quest. If Christ hated these
wicked men, why did he suffer them to live, and not cut them off from
troubling his Church? Answ. Because hereby he would manifest his love to his
Church, and his justice upon the wicked: for he can bring light out of
darkness, and good not only out of good, but out of evil.

Verse. 7. Let him that has an ear, hear what the spirit says unto the
Churches: To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the tree of life,
which is in the midst of the paradise of God. These words contain the
conclusion of this Epistle: the scope whereof, is to excite this Church to the
more careful performance of the duties before prescribed. This conclusion has
two parts: a commandment, and a promise. The commandment in the beginning
of the verse: Let him that has a^ ^are he ar^ what the spirit says unto the
Churches. In this commandment note three points, I. who are commanded: These
which have ears. II. The duty commanded: They must hear. III. What they
must hear: namely, What the spirit says unto the Churches*

I. point. The parties commanded are thus set forth, He which has an ear* who
these be, Christ does more fully expound, Matthew. 13.9. when he says: Let him
that has an ear to hear, hear. Where he makes this distinction of hearers:
that some are deaf hearers, some hearing hearers. The deaf hearers are those
that bring with them to the ministry of the word their outward ears only,
but their hearts are not affected with it: neither do they care to learn, to
believe, or obey, that which is taught them. The hearing hearers are all such
as beside their bodily ears, have ears pi^^ced in their hearts by the spirit
of grace, whereby they do not only hear the word outwardly, but their hearts
are also affected with it, and made pliable unto it; so as they believe it, and
bring forth obedience unto it. This hearing ear is set forth by David, when
he says: Psa. 40 6.
Sacrifice and burnt offering^ thou would not have: but mine ^ares have thou
opened and prepar^d* and then I said, Lo^ I come. Hereof Isay says, Thou Isa.
50.5.
openedst mine ears, and I was no^ rebellious. And this hearing ear (...)
given her: when God Act. 16.14
opened her heart whereby she became attentive to the word of God preached by
Paul.

By this distinction of hearers which Christ makes, The Use.
we may learn, that Gods grace unto salvation is not universal, that is, God
gives not unto al men such measure of grace whereby (if they will themselves)
they may believe, repent, and be saved; For in Christ's time, and ever since
there have been in the church these two kind of hearers; whereof the deaf
hearer, does not receive nor believe the gospel unto salvation. Neither is it
true, that God gives grace sufficient unto all, whereby they might be saved,
if they by their malice and sin did not abolish the same. For though he admit
all sorts into his church, yet not all, but some only have ears pierced by
the spirit of grace that they can hear. And therefore when the Disciples asked
Christ, Mat. 13.
Why he spoke in parables? he answered thus, To you it is given to know the
will of God, Verse. 11*
and the secrets of his kingdom: but to others it is not given. Showing plainly
that the gift of hearing to salvation is not given to all, and in some made
void by their own wilfulness: but to some it is given, and they have hearing
ears: and to some it is not given and their ears are deaf.

Secondly, seeing this commandment is directed to the hearing hearers; we
must hereby be admonished to use all good means to become good hearers of Gods
word; bringing with us not only the bodily ears which we have by creation,
but the spiritual ears of the heart, which we have by regeneration. For it is
not sufficient to our salvation to receive the word into the outward bodily
ears, unless the inward ears of the heart be opened, that our soul may be
affected with the word, and fitted to receive, to believe, and obey the same.
Thus did good king I^sias hear the law read, the text says, 2. Chr. 34^27.
His heart (...) within him, And thus did David hear when the Lord said to the
church, Ps. 27.8.
Seek ^ee my face: his heart answered, I seek thy face O Lord. And as we must
be careful to get spiritual ears; so we must take heed of deaf ears.
Which is when a man comes and hears the word of God, but yet has no care
in his heart to learn, believe, or obey the same. This deaf ear is a
fearful judgment of God, whereof we may read, Isay. 6.9. where the Prophet
is sent, To make their ears heavy, and their hearts fat, that they might not
bear, nor believe: lest they should turn and be saved. And this the rather we
must look unto: because it is a judgment of God upon many among us at this
day. The greatest part of hearers are deaf hearers; which appears by this
that after long teaching they neitheir increase in knowledge, nor in faith, nor
in obedience: but remain the same for blindness of mind, hardness of heart,
and profaneness of life, that they were at their first hearing of the word;
these must know that Gods judgment is on them; and if they would be saved,
they must labor to come out of this estate, and endeavor so to hear with
their hearts that they may be turned unto God both in mind, heart, and life.

II. point. The duty commanded: namely, to hear. Hearing in Scripture is not
only to listen with the bodily ear: but to be atte^tiue to that, which is
taught, and with attention to bring faith, conversion, and obedience every way.
Ephesians. 4.21, 22, the hearing of Christ is notably described: It is not so much to
conceive the doctrine of Christ in our mind^, and to be able to utter it, as to
die unto sin, and to the lusts of the flesh, and to ris^ (...) new^^sse of
life. And indeed, a man does hear and learn no more of Gods word, than he
does believe and practice. From whence we are again to be admonished* that we
so hear with attention, that by hearing we suffer our selves to be changed*
and that with our change, we join ^are to believe, and conscience to obey.
This i^ that saving hearing which brings eternal life* all other hearing
does increase our sins to our further condemnation. Whereby also appears
the fearful state of many, who lend only the outward bodily ear to h^^re
the word, but then hearts be not moved, nor their lives changed thereby.

III. point. What is to be heard? namely, That which the spirit says unto
(...) Churches. Which words must be referred to that which went before, and
not to that which follows: for thi^ commandment belongs to the matter of
the Epistle which went before. The promise following rather concern* the
persons themselves than the matter. The things then that are to be heard, are
these. Christ his sharp reproof for sin: his threatenings of punishment: a
remedy prescribed: and motives to practice the same, especially repentance:
for of all these Christ spoke before.

The Use.
From this, that Christ bids them hear these things which co^cerned their
estate in sins, and amendment by repentance, we learn two things. First,
that it is a most necessary thing for every church of God, and every member
thereof, to know and consider their own wants and sins: and also, the
judgments of God that hang over them for the same. Secondly, that after any
man, or any church has considered of theri sins, and of Gods judgments; it
is a most necessary thing, to turn unto God by true repentance, if they have
not repented: and if they have repented, to renew the same daily, and do it
more: that so Gods judgments both private and common may be avoided. We
therefore must hereby be moved to search into our own ways, to find out our
own sins, and to consider of Gods judgments thereby deserved, that by true
repentance we may turn unto God, and so escape his fearful iudgement^.

Further, these words, What the spirit says unto the Churches, contain (...)
reasons to move every man to hear. I. Because they are spoken (...) the
spirit, that is, the holy ghost. II* because they (...) spoken to one man, o^
one church alone, but to all churche^* For the first^ It may (...) demanded
seein^ Christ sp^ke th^se word^, How (...) be said that the spirit speaks
the^* Ans. Both may stand: first* because all the outward (...) of (...) person
in (...) are common to the (...) to ^each the church is an outward action of
Christ, and therefore it agrees to the father, and to the holy ghost* As when
the father created things in the beginning, the son also created, and the
holy ghost created them. So her^ when the son ^eacheth, the father teaches,
and the holy ghost teaches: For as the three persons are one in nature, so
must they be joined in all outward actions. Secondly* Christ says the spirit
speaks, because he now sitting at the right hand of the father, does not
teach his church in bodily presence, but hy his spirit, which after his
ascension he sent to be their comforter and instructor.

Here then observe, that the holy ghost speaks to the church in Scripture.
The church of Rome appoints a Judge to speak unto men in all matters of
controversy, which is the church, because (say they) A judge must speak: and
Christ is absent from his church: and the word is a dumb letter, and cannot
speak: Therefore the church must needs be judge. But they err grossly: The
church cannot be judge: It is but Christ's minister to put in execution that
which he commands. Christ therefore must be judge unto his church by
Scripture, which is not a dumb judge, for therein his spirit speaks plainly
and sufficiently for the resolving of any point in controversy, that is
needful in Gods church.

The second reason to attention is, because these things are spoken to all
Churches. Where we see that things spoken to one church agree to all. From
whence we must learn this special duty in reading* and hearing Gods holy
word: namely, to read and hear with applicacation. We must not rest in a
flourishing knowledge of the story, but apply every precept and example unto
our selves. If it be an example of virtue, we must apply it to our selves for
imitation: if it be an example of vice, we must apply it to our selves to move
us to eschew and avoid the like. For God would have all to learn that which
he speaks unto one. And thus much of the commandment.

To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in
the midst of the paradise of God. These words contain the second part of
this conclusion, to wit, a most excellent promise: wherein consider two points,
First, to whom it is made. Secondly, what is promised. For the first. The
promise is made to him that overcomes: That is, to him that in fighting,
prevails against all the spiritual enemies of his salvation, sin, satan,
hell, and condemnation. There be three things requisite to make a man able to
overcome these enemies. First, he must be borne anew in Christ, of water, and
of the spirit, 1. Ioh. 5.4. He that is borne of God overcomes the world, so
by regeneration he is freed from the bondage of hell, death, sin, and Satan.
Secondly, he must have true faith, by virtue whereof he must deny and
renounce himself, and be whatsoever he is in the death, passion, and
obedience of Christ. Therefore S. John says in the same place: This is the
^ictorie which overcomes the world, even your faith. For when a man is in
Christ, by faith he is made partaker of Christ his victory upon the cross,
and by it receives power to subdue his own corruptions, the world, and the
devil. Thirdly, he that would overcome must keep faith, that is, true
religion, and a good conscience, standing out in life and death against all
adversary power whatsoever.

The Use.
In this, that life everlasting is promised to them that overcome. First, we
observe that the doctrine of universal grace, affirming that the promises of
the gospel for life and salvation belong to all and every man whatsoever,
unless he will reject them, is a device of man's brain. For life eternal is
not promised to every man as he is a man coming of Adam: but to a man as he
is in Christ by faith, and a new creature. The promises of the gospel be
universal indeed to all that overcome: but that is a property which
restraines them wholly to true believers. Secondly, hereby we are taught so to
live, that we may say truly in the testimony of a good conscience, we have
overcome all our spiritual enemies, and do continually stand conquerours over
them. This is a matter of endless joy and comfort, which will cheer the soul
in greatest distress: But to live and lie in sin, is or will be a hell to
the conscience. What avail the treasures and honors of this world to any man,
while his conscience shall tell him he is a vassal to sin and satan? for
while he continues in that estate, he is out of the favor of God, and has no
part nor portion in the kingdom of heaven. Therefore it stands us upon to
labor to feel in our hearts the certain evidence of this victory over our
spiritual enemies, by the sure testimony of the spirit of grace.

The second point is the thing promised, to wit, life everlasting, noted by
this gift, To eat of the tree of life. And it is set out unto us by two
circumstances. First, by the cause of it. Secondly, by the place where it is to
be found. The cause is Christ Jesus: I will give to him to eat of the tree of
life. Where he makes an opposition between himself and the first Adam. The
first Adam sinned; and thereby cast himself with all his posterity out of the
earthly paradise, and lost the benefit of the tree of life: But Christ the
second Adam comes and suffers for sin, and thereby opens the way to a
better paradise, than the first Adam lost: and to all that overcome he gives
liberty to enter in, and to eat of the tree of life. The tree of life
properly, was a tree placed in the midst of the earthy paradise: and it was
so called, first because it was a pledge and sacrament unto Adam, that he
should live for ever if he continued in obedience to God: secondly, because it
had in it (as may be proved) virtue and power, whereby it would have preserved
him from death and old age for ever, if he had stood in his innocence.

This earthly tree of life was a figure and sign of Christ our Savior and
mediator: who lives an eternal spiritual life, not only as he is God, but
as he is mediator, and that not for himself alone, but for this end, that h^e
may convey quickening spiritual life to all that believe in him: and for this
cause he terms himself the tree of life. Further, he says, He will give
hereof to eat: To eat, sometime signifies to believe: John. 6.50. but it
cannot hear be so taken; For faith ends with this life, and has no use
afterward. Therefore to eat, in this place signifies to have immediate
fellowship with Christ in heaven: where Christ shall be unto him a tree of
life to make him live for ever.

In this promise note two points. I. In what things eternal life consists:
namely, in immediate fellowship and communion with Christ in heaven. Secondly,
that life eternal stands not in outward means, as meat, drink, clothing,
physic, recreation, sleep, and such like: but in an immediate partaking with
Christ in all his blessings. So that when Christ is all in all unto us
immediately, then do we eat of the tree of life, and thereby shall live eternally.

II. Circumst. The place where eternal life is to be had, is in the paradise
of God. This paradise of God is the third heaven, a place wherein the Lord does
manifest himself in his glorious majesty, and which he has prepared for the
glory of all his elect. Hereof Christ spoke to the the^fe on the cross,
saying, This day thou shall be with me in paradise, Luke 23.43. and hither was
Paul wrapped in vision: and saw and heard things that cannot be uttered, 2.
Cor. 12.
and he calls it the third heaven, in respect of the heavens under it, for
the place wherein we breath is the first heaven, the starrie firmament is the
second heaven, and this paradise of God is the third: which is therefore called
paradise, because it is a place of endless joy and pleasure. And the adding of
the name of God, does not only put a difference between it and Adams earthly
paradise, but also shows it to be a great and most excellent place. So Rabel
says, I have wrestled with my sister ^en. 30* 8.
the wrestlings of God, that is strong wrestlings. And in the Psalms the
mountains of God, do signify high and mighty mountains. And that this
paradise is such an excellent, place appears at large* Revel. 22. For therein
must come none unclean thing, but the Saints and Angels do there enjoy the
presence of God, and behold his glory so much as the creature is able to
comprehend: There God communicates himself to all the elect, and becomes
all things unto the^ immediately; so that this must needs be^^ place of all joy
and comfort.

The consideration whereof must admonish us to seek the things that be above,
that we may have a place in this heavenly paradise. For why should we set our
heart^ upon the vain glory of this world which passes away as a shadow and
comes to nothing, and in the end is but labor and sorrow, when we have all
that the world can afford? But the joys and glory of this paradise of God
be endless and unspeakable: Let us therefore deny our selves, depend upon
Christ, and in all things keep faith and a good conscience unto the end. And
thus much for the first Epistle.

Verse. 8. And unto the Angel of the Church of the Smirnians write, these
things says he that is the first and the last, which was dead and is alive. In
this verse and the rest that follow, to the twelfth, i^ laid down the second
letter or Epistle of Christ to another church of Asia, called Smyrna. Before
the Epistle Christ gives a second particular commandment unto John; touching
the writing hereof unto this church in these words, And unto the Angel of the
Church of the Smirnians write: Which is prefixed to this Epistle, that this
church, and all other churches of God might be assured, that (...) had
sufficient warrant and calling for the writing hereof. Which thing is
necessary to every penman of the holy Ghost, that the church need not to
doubt of the authority of Scripture, but receive the same as the pure word of
God.

Hence we may gather, that all ordinary Ministers of the gospel must have
warrant and calling for every doctrine which they teach in Gods church: The Use.
for the Apostles, that were extraordinary men, of mo^e ^xcellent gifts, might
do nothing without warrant. Of the parts of this commandment we spoke in the
first verse of this chapter.

The Epistle it self follows, containing thr^e parts: a Preface, a
Proposition, and a Conclusion. The Preface contains a preparation to the
matter of the Epistle, in these words: These things, says ^e, that is, the
first to (...) last* which was dead, and is alive. In this Preface he shows
in whose name this Epistle was written unto this Church, namely in Christ's
name: which he sets down for two causes* First, to stir up the people in
this church to a religious attention, and a reverent care of receiving the
things therein written, as the pure words of Christ Jesus. Secondly, because no
commandment in the matter of Gods worship and religion is to be received from
any creature, but from Christ alone. And therefore this Epistle concerning the
true worship and religion of God is propounded in his name alone. In this
Preface Christ is described by two notable Arguments: First, To be the first
and the last: second, that he was dead, but is alive. The meaning of them both
was showed in the 17 and 18 verses of the former chapter, whence they are
borrowed. By the first, Christ would signify, that he is everliving God,
without beginning or ending, before all creatures and after them. By the
second, that he is true man, and assumed man's nature to suffer death for our
sins, and rose again to live for ever, and to give to man eternal life.

In this description two points of doctrine are expressed.

I. That Christ is a person, consisting of two natures; Godhead, and Manhood:
He is the first and the last, and therefore God: He was dead, and is alive, and
therefore is true man. If any ask how one person can consist of two natures?
Answ. As body and soul concur to make one man: so the Godhead and Manhood
of Christ concur to make one Christ; and therefore are united.

II. Doctr. Here is the foundation of all true comfort unto Gods Church and
people, in any misery or affliction. Which stands in two points: first, that
Christ is able to help them in any misery* either by freeing them quite from
it, or easing them in it, seeing he is God* the first and last. Secondly, that
as he is able so he is willing and ready to help them; for he is man, who
took on him our nature, died for us, and rose again unto life, to give to us
eternal life. This is the very scope and end for which Christ thus describes
himself to this church that was in affliction. Here then we have direction,
where and* whence to seek for true comfort (...) tribulation of this life;
namely, we must have recourse to Christ, and in him ^onsider both his ability
and his willingness; to ^ase all (...) children in affliction. And by these
we must arm our selves against d^spair^, and against immoderate grief^ and
sorrow under the cross*

Verse 9. I kn^^ thy works, and ^^ibulation and (...), (but th^^ ar^ (...))
and I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews (...) but are the
Synagogue of Satan. Here begins the Proposition of this Epistle, containing
the matter and substance of the whole Epistl^. This Proposition has two parts*
a commendation of this Church: and counsel how to behave (...) self* in the
time to come. The commendation is in this ninth verse, wherewithal are mingled
some comfort^ unto this Church, being in affliction.

I kn^w thy work^^. These word^ were handled in the former Epistle* The meaning
breefely is this: I know all thy dealings, and thy ways, I know the whole
tenor of thy life* and I do withal well like and approve of them. Here
Christ sets down an excellent property touching himself: namely, that he
sees and knows all things whatsoever, nothing is hid from him: and that this
Church might be resolved hereof, he repeateth this unto them: I know thy
works. Neither is it any vain repetition; being indeed the ground of all true
piety, and sincere obedience.

We therefore in a our affairs are here taught to labor, to be fully
resolved in our consciences, that Christ is with us, and sees us, and knows
the whole tenor of our ways in thoughts* words, and ^^eds. David had learned
this, when as he said* Psalm. (...).
Thou know my sitting and my rising, thou understand my thoughts a far
off. Thou compassest my paths and my lying down, and art accustomed unto all
my ways: there is not a word in my tongue, but thou know it wholly. This
persuasion is very necessary; for it will move a man to make conscience of
every thought, word, and action, and of his whole behavior: but where this
persuasion is wanting, there is no religion in the heart, nor good behauior in
the life. When this takes place, Religion begins and increases with it; so
does good conscience and true obedience: for he that has the Lord always
before him, will not greatly fall, Psalm. 16.8.

And tribulation. Mark here how works, that is, a godly conversation, and
tribulation go together. Hence we learn, that God will have tribulations
joined with his grace; where he bestows his graces, there also he lays
tribulation: and that for weighty causes, as to humble them for their sins
past, to make trial of their faith and other graces, and to prevent in them
sins to come. The consideration whereof must move all Gods children in this
our Church to look for some tribulation: for God has bestowed among us
plenty of his graces, with long peace, and many outward blessings: and his
will is, that trouble and affliction should accompany the same.

Further, Christ saying, I know thy tribulations, would hereby comfort this
Church; as if he should say, True it is thou art in great trouble, but it
comes not by chance, but by the special providence of my father; and I do
know and regard the same. Psalm. 113.6, 7, The raising up of the poor and
needy, is made a fruit of Gods beholding the things that are done upon the
earth. This is an excellent comfort for any church or people that be in
affliction: for when they shall know, that beside the hand of God therein,
Christ Jesus regards their sorrows; this must needs arm them with long
suffering and ioyfulnesse. We in this Church (as has been showed) may
persuade our selves, that God will send tribulations among us; now when they
come, what shall we do? Shall we sink under them? No: but we must now
forecast to use the means whereby we may stay our hearts under the smart and
burden of them; that is, by settling our hearts in this persuasion, that Christ
sees our affliction, and withal has special care to comfort or deliver us,
as he sees most for his glory, and the good of our soule^.

In the next words Christ sets down two kinds of tribulations in this
church, Poverty* and Repro^h: By Poverty he means want of temporal things,
to maintain this natural life. Where observe sundry things, I. That true
religion and piety will not free any from outward poverty. The religion of
this church was excellent, and yet they were in want: and therefore let no man
think, because he is godly, he shall be rich, or not fall into poverty. If it
be said: 1. Tim. 4.^.
Godliness has the promise not only of the life to come, but also of this
life, that is, of earthly blessings and riches: I answer, it is true; but yet
with difference: Eternal blessings only are promised absolutely; and
temporal blessings with restraint, namely, if they serve for Gods glory and
the good of his children: otherwise they must want as this Church did. II. The
Lord would comfort this Church in her poverty, by saying that he knew it and
regarded it. Where we see a means to comfort all those that be in want of
outward blessings: They must consider, that Christ sees and observes their
want whatsoever; and if they be his servants, he will free them from it, so it
be for his glory and the good of their souls; or else arm them with patience
to bear it, if they pray unto him. III. Christ here approves of works, where
he acknowledges poverty: so that good works and poverty may stand together.
And therefore good works do not consist only in large a^mes, as the Church
of Rome would have it; though these have due reward and praise in their place.
But every work of a man's lawful calling, done in obedience to God, with an
honest heart, from a good conscience, and for Gods glory, is a good work, be
the calling never so base. Thus may the shepherd please God in his calling as
well as the magistrate or minister. For it is not the matter of the work that
commends it unto God; but the manner of doing.

But thou art rich. Here Christ intends both to praise and to comfort this
church: as if he should say, Notwithstanding thy outward poverty, yet thou
art rich in God, (...) Luke 12.21. Men are rich in God in two respects: I. when
they are reconciled to God in the merits of Christ, 2 Cor. 8, 9. Christ became
poor for our sakes, that we through his poverty might be made rich: that is,
that we might have the pardon of sin, and be received into Gods favor.
Hereupon David calls the Lord his portion and his cup. And durable riches, and
righteousness are with wisdom, Proverb. 8.18. II. When they receive his
grace, whereby they are enabled to bring forth good works, both in duties to
God and man. Of this Paul speaks, when he exhorts rich men to be rich in
good works, and to lay up for themselves a good foundation against the time to
come, 1. Tim. 6.16.

In this commendation sundry duties are to be learned: I. poor men are here
taught, seeing God denies unto them earthly riches and wealth to labor to be
rich in God, to be reconciled unto him in Christ, and to get such grace, that
they may do good duties both unto God and man* in faith and with a good
conscience. II. Rich men, on whom God bestows outward wealth, must hereby be
admonished to embrace Paul's charge, 1. Tim. 6.17, 18, Above all things seek
for true riches in the living God: and not suffer these outward blessings to
puff up their minds; but use them as means to make the^ rich in God, by
getting Gods grace, doing good works, and distributing to the poor. This
admonition is most necessary, for though the promises of Gods grace be not
denied unto the rich; yet sure it is, riches do choke the seed of grace in
the heart, and hinder the care men ought to have for spiritual riches. And
hence it comes, that more of the poorer sort receive and obey the gospel than
of the rich. III. Herein behold the madness of the world. For the most men's
greatest labor and care is after worldly wealth and honor: never regarding
the true treasures of Gods grace which will commend them unto God, when the
other must perish, and the wicked owners thereof. Let us therefore judge as
Christ does of true riches, and accordingly labor to be rich in his ^igh^.

The second part of their tribulation is the reproach and blasphemy of their
enemies, in these words: I kn^w the blasphemy of them which say they are
Jews, and are not, etc. that is, I know the grievous slanders and reuilings
which thine enemies fasten upon thee. For Blasphemy signifies not only
speeches of disgrace against God, but also against men. As Na^^^b was accused,
1. King. 21.10, to (...) blasphemed God and the king. And of this Paul says:
When we are re^^led, we blesse^ when we are blasphemed, we pray, 1. Cor.
4.12, 13.

Hence we learn, that all churches and men that desire truly to serve God,
and to keep good consciences, must look for slanders and reuilings: Neither
must this seem strange unto them; for Christ has said, it must be so. Nay,
rather they might marvel, if they should suffer no reproaches for Christ's sake,
seeing he has said: Cursed are you, when all men speak well of you, Luke
6.26. It is indeed a grievous thing, to be so evil rewarded for well doing:
but this must be their comfort, and ground of patience, That Christ hears
and knows every reproach, and will in his good time remedy the same.

The persons which blaspheme this Church are thus described: Which say they be
Jews, and are not, but are of the Synagogue of Satan. As in other famous
cities, so in Smyrna dwelt some of the Jews, who had their Synagogues, that
is, such places of assemblies, where they served God after their manner: and
though they denied Christ, yet they thought themselves to be the only true
worshippers of God in all the world; and therefore did blaspheme and rail upon
the Christians that believed in Christ. And of these Christ says, though by
birth they were Jews, yet indeed they were not the Israel of God, nor his
true worshippers, as they accounted themselves. Whereby in general we may see,
from whom come railings and reproaches on Gods servants; namely, from those
which say they are true worshippers of God, and are not: For he is not a Jew
that is (...) outwardpunc; Romans 2.28. He therefore that slandereth the truth
and the professors thereof is an enemy to Christ, as well as to his servants:
for no friend of Christ can possibly speak evil of his gospel and religion.
This should be considered for the comfort of the godly, because they that
endeavor to serve God in synceritie, are of all men most subject to reproach:
He that refraineth from evil, makes himself a prey, Isay 59.1^.

Touching these Jews, two points are to be considered: I. What they are in
their own opinion: II. What they are in the judgment of Christ. For the
first, because they were Jews, by birth descending from Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, Gods ancient servants, therefore they thought themselves the only true
worshippers of God, as their forefathers were. And this is the manner of all
wicked men; to bless Psalm. 10.^.
themselves in their wickedness: and whatsoever they do, yet still to say and
think, God will bless them. Take an heretick^, who overthrows the truth of
God by his errors, and he will say he teaches that which in conscience he is
persuaded is the truth, for which he will shed his blood, and whereto he would
have all men yield. So take a professed witch, man or woman, they will say, all
that they do is by the power of the good Angels, and by some special gifts
given unto them above others; but they will not be brought to acknowledge,
that they do any thing by virtue of their league with the devil, from whence
indeed comes all they can do. And so the carnal protestants of our time,
they look for Gods blessings in this life, and for eternal life by Christ
after death, and yet walk in the broad way to destruction, in sin and
profanesse. Thus they bless themselves in their evil ways, and make Christ a
pack-horse for their iniquities. But in the example of these Jews we must
learn to lay down all presumptuous thoughts of our own goodness and vain
persuasions of gods favor, without his true grace, and rather look unto our
sins, and be humbled for them, that God may lift us up. II. point. Christ's
judgment of them is this: They are not Jews, but a Synagogue of Satan; that
is, a company of men that seemed to serve God after the Jewish manner, but did
indeed worship the devil. Herein are many things to be considered, I. How this
could be true of any company of the Jews, who were the chosen people of God?
Answ. Election is twofold: special, and general. Gods speci^ll election is,
when in his eternal couns^ll he chooses a man to life eternal; and ^his
befell not all the Jews, but some only: Gods general election is* ^he^ he
^ouchsafeth any people to become his visible church, to have and (...) the
outward signe^ and (...) his co^e^ant^ and thus* was the (...) of the Jews
elected, and therefore were circumcised, and received the passover* From this
general election* a church and people may fall, as the Jews did, Romans 9.
and so became the Synagogue of Satan; being indeed never within the
particular calling, from which a man cannot fall away: for Gods election
remains s^^e, 2. Tim. 2.19. his calling is without repentance, Romans 11.^9.

II. point. At what time did the Jews begin to be a synagogue of Satan? Answ.
Not at the crucifying of the Lord of life, (though that were a most heinous
sin) for though some therein sinned of malice, yet many did it of ignorance.
This Peter confess^th, Acts. 3.17. And therefore in his first Sermon after
Christ's ascension tells them, That the (...) belonged to them and to (...)
that were a far off, Act* ^.^^. But when the Apostles had a long time
preached Christ unto them, and convinced their consciences out of the old
testament that he was the true Messiah, and yet they remained obstinate,
rejecting and persecuting both them and their doctrine* then they ceased to be
a church of God, and became the synagogue of Satan: for this cause Paul and
Barnabas shook off the dust of their feet against them, and turned to the
G^^^ils, Act. 1^.46.^
Whereby we see when a church of God becomes no church, namely, not so soon
as they hold an heresy: for the church of the Galatians held justification by
works, yet thereupon ceased not to be a church* but when they embrace an
heresy against the foundation of religion, and be convicted of it, not by
private men, but by Apostolical authority, or by public judicial sentence of
the church, from the authority of Gods word.

Hence we may learn, first, what we are to think and judge of the church of
the papists, of the Libertines and Anabaptists, family of Love, and such like:
namely, that they are no churches of God: for they hold heresies against the
foundation which the Church long agone condemned by Apostolical and Judicial
authority. Again, here we learn what to judge of this our church of England:
many there be that say we have no church among us, because some private men
have reproved the same for some things that are amiss, and yet they are not
reformed. But this is a fond and foolish reason: For first, the error must be
against the foundation, and yet that makes not a church to be no church,
unless it be obstinatly maintained after sufficient reproof and judicial
conviction by the word of God: But no such thing can be affirmed of us, and
therefore we remain the true church of God.

III. point. How became the Jews a Sinagogue of Satan? Answ. Through their
unbelief: as is plainly proved, Roman. 11.20. Object. But they held the word
of God and defended the books of the old Testament, for which we are beholding
unto them. Answ. Indeed they held the letter: but if we regard the true meaning
of the Prophets, and the subject of the old Testament, which is Jesus Christ,
that they raced out and denied. And so though they held the letter, yet
worshipping God out of Christ they worshipped an idol, and not that God which
would give unto them eternal life. For out of Christ there is no salvation. And
so we may say of the church of Rome: though they hold the books of the Old
and New testament, with the Creed of the Apostles (whereupon some say we ought
not to depart from them,) yet the truth is, that indeed they hold them not. The
Christ of the Papists is but a fained Christ: for they take from him both his
nature (especially his humanity) and his offices: and therefore we have just
cause to separat from them.

This example of the Jews, that were once a most famous people, but are now
become the Sinagogue of Satan must be set before our eyes continually. For
when all the world were rejected, they stood high in Gods favor: but now for
their unbelief they are cast off from God, and are become the Sinagogue of the
devil. Which must admonish us, Not to be high minded but to fear, To. 11.20.
For if God spared not the natural branches, them that were his first chosen
people, he will not spare us that are but wild olives graffed into the true
vine. We must therefore take heed of unbelief, and labor for true faith,
which we must testify by obedience in our lives and co^uersations.

Verse. 10. Fear none of th^se things which thou shall suffer. Behold it shall
come to pass that the (...) shall cast (...) of you into prison that ye may
be trie^, and ye shall have tribulation ten days. Be thou faithful unto the
death and I will give thee the crown of life. Here follows the second part
of the proposition of this Epistle, to wit, that heavenly and spiritual
counsel which Christ gives to this church of Smyrna: which I call counsel,
because in the next chapter our Savior Christ calls such kind of instruction
by the name of counsel. First, ^ere note that Christ commends this church
and gives her counsel, but does not at all rebuke her for her faults, as he
did the church of Ephesus. Hence the Papists gather, that Gods church, and so
the members thereof, may live without sin, and ful^ill the law. But they are
deceived: Christ therefore abstaineth from reproof of this church, not for that
he had not any thing against them, but for these two causes especially. First,
because this church of Smyrna did truly repent and believe, and did not decay
in grace as the church of Ephesus did; and therefore had the pardon of her
sins, and was in Gods love and favor. Secondly, this church did endeavor to
obey Christ, and to testify her faith and love thereby. Now God accepts the
desire and will of obedience in his children, as obedience it self: and
therefore did not repro^ue them for any fault that was among them.

Seeing this church being in affliction is so far forth accepted, that Christ
reproves nothing in her; we are taught it is profitable for Gods church and
people sometime to be in affliction: for thereby, are the gifts and graces of
God preserved: as Faith and Repentance; and many grievous sins prevented,
which otherwise Gods children might fall into.

The counsel it self contains three parts. A precept. A prophecy. And a
precept again. The first precept is in these words, Fear none of those things
which thou shall suffer. This precept may seem to be against other places of
Scripture, as Phil. 2.12. Work out your salvation in fear and trembling. And
Romans 11.20. ^e not high minded but fear. Answ. There be three kinds of fear.
I. natural fear. II. fear proceeding from grace. III. a distrustful
fearful proceeding from unbelief. I. The natural fear is a declining and
eschewing of death and those things that tend thereto: this fear is in all
men, in as much as every thing desires to preserve it self: this was in
Christ, who in his agony feared death, as it was a separation of soul and
body asunder: yet this was no sin in him, but only an infirmity without
sin. The second kind of fear, is that which comes from grace, Mal. 1.6. If
I be a master where is mine ^onor, If I be a father where is my fear. This
fear is a reverent awe toward God in regard of his mercy and judgments: and
this is a virtue and no sin. The third is distrustful fear; when men for
affliction forsake religion and obedience to God, standing more in fear of men
than of God: and this is that fear which Christ in this place forbids,
being a sin that draws men from God unto perdition.

In this commandment Christ does two things. First, he gives them and us to
understand, what is the sin in which every man is conceived, and the seed
whereof remains still in the children of God; namely, distrustful unbelief,
whereby men fear the authority of the creature more than the glorious majesty
of the eternal God: which proceeds from this, that men consider not of God
as he extends his providence over all things, and as he is a mighty judge
taking revenge upon all sin and wickedness.

Secondly, here Christ describes the means whereby Gods people may arm
themselves against all perils and troubles whatsoever, to wit, Christian
fortitude: which is a gift of God proceeding from true faith inabling a man to
lay aside all fear, and with courage to undergo al dangers whatsoever, that he
may in life and death maintain faith and a good conscience. This virtue God
prescribed to the Prophets when they were to enter into their calling, and our
Savior Christ to his Apostles, and to this church of Smyrna. And it were to be
wished that all the ministers of the gospel might speak unto their people as
Christ speaks unto this church, Fear not. But the truth is, if they deal
faithfully they must change their note, and say with Ioell, Joel. 1.1^.15.
Wail and houle ye priests and people lying in sackcloth and ashes, because
the day of the Lords vengeance is at hand. For it is lamentable to see* the
state of the whole body of our people, of whom we may generally say with the
Prophet, Ho^* 4*^
There is no knowledge of God in the land. And where knowledge is, there is
little conscience to live thereafter. Consider also how the most are carnal
minded, dead in sin, they savor not the things that pertain to Gods kingdom,
but their hearts are wholly possessed with earthly desires and delights, and
spiritual things affect them not. Yea in all places we shall see that as
natural sleep wrappeth up the senses of the body: so a spiritual slumber
benummeth their minds and hearts. For though God preach daily unto us by his
judgments, yet like the old world we know nothing of the evil day: we never
call to mind the judgment to come. And if herunto we join the common crying
sins of this land, as swearing, cursing, oppression, Saboath breaking,
drunkenness, whordome, and all uncleanness, yea Atheism it self the ground
of all: How can we say with Christ, Fear not? yea rather we must call men to
repentance in sackcloth and ashes. For God is jealous of his glory, neither
will he always be chiding, nor wink at our iniquities, he has whet his sword,
and bent his bow, and unless we repent the day of havoc will come shortly,
wherein he will take vengeance upon all our iniquities. And although this be
the common state of our land, yet Christ has his remnant among us who mourn
for the sins and abominations of the times, and do endeavor to keep faith
and a good conscience in all things: and to these it may be said, Fear not,
but take to your selves christian courage, and arm your selves therewith; lay
aside all distrustful fear, and glorify God in your hearts, strive to keep
the faith in a pure conscience unto the end, and so shall Christ appear to
your joy when the wicked shall be ashamed. Isay. 66.5.
And to move Gods children to this christian fortitude; First, let them
consider what a judgment of God is due unto them that are distrustfully
fearful, when they should suffer any thing for the name of Christ, Revel.
21.8. They must have their reward in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone among the damned. Secondly, let them observe the Lords presence and
his gracious promise of protection in distress, Psa. 14.7.
He will cause his Angels to pitch their tents about them that no peril shall
hurt them. 2. King. 6. When a mighty army came against Elisha, his servant
was fore afraid: but mark how he comfort him, Verse. 16.
Fear not (says he) for they that be with us are more than they that be with
them: And so it is with Gods children. Thirdly, let them consider that it is a
most honorable estate to suffer any thing for the name of Christ. And
therefore the Apostles rejoiced exceedingly when they had been beaten, (...)
5.41.
That they were counted worthy to suffer any thing for Christ's sake. Gal.
5.14. The cross of Christ i^ (...) whole rejoicing. And if he would ^ost of
any thing it should be herein, 2. Cor. 1^.9, 10. Thus were Gods servants
affected: and therefore they that repent and believe, need not to fear what
flesh can do unto them.

The second part of Christ's counsel is his prophecy: which is a prediction of
that particular afflictions which this church of Smirna should suffer* and
first he prefixeth this note of attention, behold: then he sets down the
prophecy it self, The devil shall cast some of you into prison. Behold,
hereby he would teach us an excellent lesson: that we must often consider
before ^and of the day of our visitation, wherein God will try v^, lest we
perish therein: our Savior Christ coming toward Jerusalem Lu. 29.41.
wept over it, and when he came to it he foretold the final destruction of
that city which therefore came upon them, because they considered not the day
of their visitation, neither the things therein foretold that did concern
their peace. And the like destruction will come upon us in this land, if we
consider not the days of our visitation: let us therefore now in the days of
peace forecast what is to come, and prepare our selves against the day of the
Lords trial; and so shall we escape the fearful and final destruction that
shall come upon the wicked. It shall come to pass that the devil shall cast
some of you into prison that ye may be tried: and ye shall have tribulation
ten days. These words contain Christ's prophecy, wherein he shows himself
to be true God: for as Isay in many places shows, it is a property of God
alone to Isa. 44.7.
foretell a particular affliction that is contingent. But some will say, others
can foretell certain things to come; as the Physician, the sick man's death;
and the Astronomer the time of the eclips; how then is this proper to God?
Answ. The Physician foretells the sick man's death, only by virtue of causes
present, in which the future death is to him apparent: And the Astronomers
foretells the eclips by the consideration of the natural and ordinary
course of the heavens in present, and by that can come to foretell it in time
to come. So that simply none can foretell a thing contingent, except he see it
present in the causes: but Christ foretells things to come simply of himself,
though no cause be present, as appears in this place.

In this prophecy Christ describes this affliction by sundry arguments. First
by the cause thereof, which is the devil. Secondly, by the parties that were
to be afflicted, Some of you of the Church of Smyrna. Thirdly, by the kind of
punishment, Imprisonment. Fourthly, by the end thereof, their trial. And
fifthly by the time of it continuance, for ten days.

I. Argument. The cause of their affliction is the devil. Quest. How can that
be, for being a spirit he cannot offer violence to men's bodies to cast them
into prison? Answ. True, but he is the God of the world that rules in the
hearts of the wicked: he inclines their wills to hate Gods children, he
stirs them up to persecute, and makes them hi^ instruments to cast God^
servants into prison.

In this that the devil causes the affliction of Gods church, we learn
sundry points. I. What manner of men those be that persecute the church of God?
namely, wicked men, such as ar^ inspired by Satan, and wholly guided in mind,
will, and in affection by him: this made Paul say, 1. Tim. 1.15
He was the head of all sinners; because in persecuting the church of God he
was guided by the devil, and made his minister: which must teach us to take
heed how we persecute the church of God, or any membe^ thereof, either in word
or deed: for he that does so is the vassal of Satan in that action, and while
he holds that course he shows himself to be no better than one that is
wholly guided by the devil: for the devil is the principal agent in
persecutions, and wicked men be his instruments.

II. Hereby we are taught to take pity upon all persecutors, be they kings
or monarks, or whatsoever. Yea we must pray for them, though they be our
enemies: because they are possessed and guided by the devil, and in their
persecutions do his will, and become his servants and vassals.

III. Hence we learn with what weapons we are to defend our selves in time of
persecution: namely, with spiritual weapons of prayers, and invocation, wherein
we must show our faith in Christ, our repentance and true obedience; for our
principal adversary is a spirit, and hereby we shall best defend our selves
against him, and get the chiefest victory. Elia^ for his prayer is called 1.
(...) 2.^2.
The chariot and horsemen of Israel. Nothing does so much prevail in troubles
and persecutions as prayer from a penitent and believing heart. And if God
should send a foreign nation against us, howsoever the weapons of the soldier
must be used, yet our principal weapons must be prayer and fasting: for
thereby we shall soonest foil our principal adversary Satan, who ^easeth not
the spear nor sword, and yet will fly before these spiritual weapons.

II. Argument. The parties that must be afflicted, were some of the church of
Smyrna, not all.

III. Argument. The kind of their affliction was imprisonment.

IV. Argument. The end of their affliction, was the trial of their faith,
hope, love, and patience, with other graces of God, and the manifestation of
the same, first to their own conscience, and then unto the world. In these
three arguments note, first a special point touching Gods providence, to wit,
that it is the first cause of all, above all causes, ruling and disposing them
all. God in governing the world by his providence uses instruments of two
sorts: good, or evil. The good instruments are good Angels and regenerat men;
by whom comes no disorder, for God works both in them and by them. Wicked
instruments, are the devil and wicked men, and though God use them well, yet
from them is much disorder and sin: for he works not in them, but only by
them, permitting their sins and disorders, that thereby he may show forth his
justice, mercy, and power: which herein do notably appear in using these
instruments, which be evil in themselves, that notwithstanding their malice he
causes wonderful order: for first by his providence he restrains their
fury and rage, so as they cannot show it to the full as they desire. See this
in the devils persecution against this church: he cannot kill the members
hereof, but only cast them into prison: he cannot imprison them all, but some
only: neither can he keep them in prison always, but for a short time.
Secondly, by his providence he turns all that they do, to the good of the
church: the devil afflicts the church for the destruction and damnation of
their souls; but God turns it to their good, to make their faith manifest,
and to prevent many sins in them. These things we should often think of,
and bless Gods name for ever, that by his providence he does master Satan's
power and malice: and so dispose of all actions of the wicked, that they tend
to the good of his church. This must also teach us to renounce our selves, and
to put all our trust and confidence in Christ his providence, making that our
comfort, our stay and protection in all distress.

Again, whereas the end of afflictions in Gods church is the trial of faith
and other graces. Hence we are taught many things: First, to labor to have in
our hearts the power of godliness in true faith, and unfeigned repentance; and
not to content our selves with the form and show thereof in a naked profession
only: For we must be cast into the fie^ie trial of afflictions to see what is
in our hearts. In the day of trial shows will not serve the turn, nor stand
us in ste^d* Trials and afflictions will consume them, as the fire does dross
and stubble. Secondly, to be joyful and glad, when the Lords will is to call
us to suffer for his sake: Because this is a means to make known good graces
in our hearts. James 1.2. Brethren, count it exceeding great joy, when ye fall
into diverse afflictions, knowing that the trial of your faith brings forth
patience.

V. Argument. The time of their continuance in affliction is for ten days.
By which some understand a long time: according unto that which Jacob says to
Laban; Genesis 3^ 41.
Thou have changed my wages ten times, that is, often. And so the Israelits
are said to sin, Numb 14.22.
ten times against the Lord; that is, many times: but this Exposition will
not so fitly stand in this place; for Christ intends to comfort this church.
But what comfort could this be, to say they should be so long in affliction?
Others expound ten days to be ten years. And so the word days is
sometime used to betoken years: for in the Scripture there be years of
days, as well as years of weeks. But though this exposition may well stand
with the words, yet none can show by true record, That this church was
afflicted only f^^tenne years and no longer. Therefore a third exposition is
this, That by ten days is meant some short space of time: and I so
understand this place, because it is most suitable to all circumstances. For
here Christ intends to comfort this church, which is most fitly done, by
foretelling a short time of their affliction.

The Use.
In this circumstance of time, Christ sets down two things: First, that the
affliction of Gods church and people are for a certain time decreed of God,
which cannot be changed, lengthened, or shortened. Particular proofs hereof
we have in Scripture. So God foretold Abraham, That the afflictions of his
people should be 430 years: which time they were afflicted, especially in
Egypt: but at the same night when those years were expired, they were led out
of Egypt, and their afflictions ceased, Exodus 12.46. And the 70 years
captivity were well known unto Daniell to be determined of the Lord: And
therefore he armed himself with patience during that time, and prayed not for
deliverance, until it should be expired.

The consideration hereof must move us to arm our selves with patience when
God shall send affliction, because we cannot deliver our selves before the
time which God has appointed: for the continuance of our afflictions is set
down by God, and cannot be changed by us. Secondly, here Christ shows, that
the afflictions of his church are but for a short time: and therefore Paul 2.
Cor. 4.17.
calls them moment any, in regard of the eternal weight of glory which
shall be revealed at the end of this life, and never have end. Which is a
singular ground of comfort unto the child of God in any distress.

Thus we see the parts of this prophecy; yet in the words there is a further
thing intended, for every word contains a reason to comfort this church: as
first from the cause of their persecution, which is the devil; and therefore
they must not fear, for if he cast them into prison, their case is good, he
is Gods enemy, and so the Lord is on their side, who then can be against them
to do them hurt? Secondly, not all your whole church, but only some (says
Christ) must be afflicted. Thirdly, Satan cannot kill you, but only cast you
into prison. Fourthly, his imprisonment shall not tend to your damnation, but
make for the trial of your grace. And lastly, it is but for a short time. In
all which you may see the power of Gods providence ouerruling your enemy, and
turning his rage unto your salvation: and therefore take comfort and courage
unto your souls, lay aside all fear and al dread, and keep faith and good
conscience to the end.

The third part of this counsel, is a most blessed precept, containing most
heavenly advice: Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown
of life. Gods servants are called faithful, in regard of their fidelity which
they owe to God: and that is in two respects: I. Every member of Christ is
baptized, wherein God for his part promises Christ, with life everlasting: and
the party baptized promises unto God again, that he will deny himself,
and cast himself wholly upon God in life and death, and keep faith and a good
conscience. Which promise ^s called the stipulation of a good conscience, 1.
Pet. 3.21. And when a man keeps this promise made to God, then is he
faithful, and when he breaks it, he is unfaithful. II. God gives unto
his children many good gifts and graces, as knowledge, faith, repentance, and
care to keep a good conscience, which he would have them in all things to
keep and preserve. And therefore Paul bids Timothy, 1. Tim. 6.^0.
keep that thing which is committed unto him of trust. Now a man is faithful
unto God, when he makes good use of the gifts and graces of God, and still
preserves the same, using them for Gods glory and the good of his own soul,
and of his brethren: like as we are counted faithful with men, when we keep
that thing safe which is committed unto us of trust. The meaning then of Christ
is this: Thou have made a promise unto me in baptism, to renounce sin and
Satan, and to keep faith and a good conscience unto death; therefore perform
this thy promise: and for those gifts which I have committed of trust unto
thee, see thou keep them well, and use them to my glory in the good of thy
brethren.

Against this precept, three sorts of men offend, and be unfaithful unto God.
I. Those that being baptized, do yet live in ignorance and security, never
seeking to know God, or to understand his will, no not so much as for their
own vow in baptism; though none will brag more of fidelity unto God, than
these men do. II. Those that have knowledge and understanding in Gods will, and
yet make no conscience to live accordingly. III. Those that for a time show
forth many good things, as care to get knowledge, and to keep faith and a good
conscience, but after suffer themselves to be entangled and drawn away with
the profits and pleasures of the world, or else to be driven back by trials
and persecutions. And of these three sorts be most men generally: whose case is
fearful and dangerous, for they shall never have the crown of life, if they
continue thus unfaithful.

To induce men to fidelity, Christ adds a most forcible reason: promising
thereunto, The crown of eternal life. Hence the Papists conclude, that
Martyrs by suffering martyrdom do merit the kingdom of heaven; because it
is called a crown, therefore say they it is a reward. Whereto I answer two
ways: I. The kingdom of heaven is called a crown only in resemblance,
because as with men after the race is run, they receive the garland; even so
after men have fought the good fight of faith, and kept good conscience in this
life, then in the life to come they receive the crown of glory. For the
keeping of faith and good conscience is not the cause, but the antecedent of
eternal life. Secondly, the reward is promised not to the martyrdom but to
the martyr; and yet not for his sufferings, but because he is a member of
Christ, and by suffering death has showed his faith in Christ; for whose merit
alone he is so rewarded. And so must this and all other promises of like sort
be understood: for the Papists do foulely err, when they apply the promises
unto the works, which are made unto the workers. By this promise, we all that
have made our vow to God in baptism, must learn to become faithful in
keeping the same unto the end. It is a shame for a man to be unfaithful unto
men, much more with God. And the more fearful is this sin, because only
the faithful shall inherit eternal life. Secondly, all such as have made a
show of good things heretofore, and now do suffer the same to decay, must call
to mind from whence they are fallen, and become faithful keepers of the graces
of God, holding fast true religion and good conscience, and walk constantly in
obedience: and then shall they have the crown of life, though not for their
deserts, but only for the merits of Christ.

Verse. 11. Let him that has an ear hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches* he that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the second death. These
words contain the last part of this Epistle: namely, the Conclusion. Wherein
observe generally, as also in the two next verses, that Christ repeateth the
same things which he spoke before in this and the former chapters, yea, in the
very same words. This must be considered, because it is done by Christ, who is
the doctor of his church; whose example both for matter and manner of teaching
must be our rule and precept. The like did the Apostles: It grieved not Paul
to write the same things, Phil. 3.1. And Peter says unto the dispersed Church,
2. Pet. ^.12
That he will often put them in mind of the same things before his departing,
wherein they had knowledge and were established. Hereby all the Ministers of
the gospel in their Ministry have warrant, often to teach and repeat the
same points of doctrine, even in the same words. Yea, Gods faithful Minister
may preach the same Sermon oftentimes, if he do it not for ease to himself,
but for the benefit of the people. And therefore if any hearer of Gods word
shall at any time mark the Minister to deliver the same things often; he is
not curiously to find fault with his Ministry, for by that reason they may
find fault with Christ, who seven times repeateth the same things unto these
churches.

This Conclusion has two parts: a Commandment, and a Promise: The words of
this commandment have been expounded in the seventh verse, with the
doctrines and uses thereof: yet here is to be observed what the spirit
commends thus seriously to our hearing. The things are three, which were
handled in the former verses. First, touching Gods providence, that he sees
and regards the tribulations of his church. The second, touching trial: that
Gods church and people ought beforehand to consider of the day of visitation,
and thereby arm themselves with courage against all afflictions, that they
suffer not themselves to be overmuch daunted with any fear. The third
touching faithfulness: Gods people must consider what promises they have made
to God in baptism, namely, to keep faith, true religion, and good conscience
unto the end; and these they must perform unto death. These things being so
carefully commended unto us by Christ, we must labor to have them engraven in
our hearts, that we may practice them in our lives. And to incite us hereunto,
we must mark the two reasons contained in the words. First, because the
Spirit of Christ speaks to us. Secondly, because they concern all Churches,
(though principally they were spoken to the church of Smyrna) and therefore
none may seek excuse to exempt himself from learning and obeying these things.

The Promise, He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death. Of
the means of ouercomming, we have spoken in the seventh verse. By second death
is meant the condemnation of the soul and body for ever and ever. For there
be two kinds of death mentioned in Scripture: The first is the separation of
body and soul asunder at the end of this life: The second is, when soul and
body both are s^^ered for ever from Gods comfortable presence, Reu. 21.8. This
second death is expounded to be an abode in the lake that burns with fire
and brimstone. The meaning therefore of the promise is this; that they which
overcome, though they may suffer the first death, yet they shall never suffer
damnation: their soul and body may be severed one from the other for a time,
but neither soul nor body shall ever be severed from God to go into that
lake that burns with fire and brimstone. Which is a most gracious and happy
promise.

Here first mark to whom this promise is made, namely, To them that overcome.
Where learn, that it is not sufficient for a man to profess and approve, or
to teach the doctrine of the gospel: but withal he must join a fight against
himself, against sin, the world, the devil, and against all the enemies of
his salvation, and not suffer them to reign over him, but so fight, as by Gods
grace he may overcome; and then shall the second death never hurt him. It is
nothing to profess, if we still live in sin: and therefore we must not
content our selves with knowledge, but labor to feel in our hearts such power
of grace, as will make us truly to say we are conquerours over our spiritual
enemies. This is that blessed state of all those, unto whom life everlasting
belongs, who shall never taste of the second death.

Secondly, here is answered a great question, which every man's conscience will
move unto him; namely, How may I escape the second death, that lake that
burns with fire and brimstone? Answ. Thou must in this life truly turn unto
God from all thine evil ways, renounce thy self, and put all thine affiance
in Christ his death and passion; and evermore labor to keep true religion,
faith, and good conscience unto death in all estates. This do, and though thou
taste of the first, yet the second death shall never touch thee.

Thirdly, hereby Christ gives us to understand, that of the two deaths the
second is the worser. The bodily death is terrible unto Nature; but the second
is the proper death indeed, the destruction of the creature in soul and body
eternally. And yet behold the madness of man, who fears greatly the first
death, and regards nothing the burning lake; like unto little children that
fear their own shadows, and yet are not afraid of fire and water, that will
burn and drown the^. This is man's miserable estate, through the blindness of
his mind, and the hardness of his heart.

Verse. 12. And to the Angel of the Church which is at Pergamus write, This
says he, that has that sharp sword with two edges. Here is the third
particular commandment which Christ gave to John, whereof we have spoken
before in the first verse: showing there what is meant by Angel; and why this
particular commandment was given unto John. This third Epistle of Christ, as
the former, has three parts: a Preface in this verse: The Proposition of the
Epistle, verse 13, and so forward unto the 17: And the Conclusion in the 17
verse.

I. part. The Preface shows in whose name this Epistle is written; namely, in
Christ's name: The causes whereof we have showed before in the first verse.
Christ is here set forth by an action of his kingly office, borrowed from the
former Chapter, verse 16. These things says he, that has that sharp two
edged sword: that is, He who is not only Priest and Prophet of his church, but
the king thereof, to guide and govern the same. The sword which he has in
his hand, or in his mouth (as Isay says) is that two edged sword, yea, that
sharp two-edged sword* thereby is signified the whole word of God, the Law and
Gospel: which is so called, by reason of the operation thereof, as it is Hebr.
the 4.12.

Christ is thus described to comfort this Church of Pergamus. For hereby three
things are signified: First, his wonderful power in slaying original sin
and corruption by his word; in all them that believe in him: so as there is no
hope of recovery for sin, after it is once wounded. Secondly, that he will
strengthen and preserve his Church, and all the true members thereof, by the
same word, against all their enemies. This it does after this manner: The whole
word of God, both law and gospel, must both be known, and believed; then
whenever any temptation comes, faith makes the same word powerful in us,
to repel the temptation, and to strengthen us in affliction: for it is that
sword of the spirit, whereby we wound all our enemies. But if it be not
believed, it is but as a sword in a sheath, and will nothing help us. Thirdly,
hereby he signifies, that he destroys all their enemies: this is the chief
end why he so describes himself in this place. How Christ wounds his
enemies herewith, we have showed in the former Chapter, and the sixteenth
verse, with the uses thereof.

Verse 13. I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's
throne is: and thou keep my name, and have not denied my faith, even in
th^se days when Antipas my faithful Martyr was slain among you, where Satan
dwells. Here begins the second part of this Epistle; to wit, the
Proposition: which contains two parts: A commendation of this Church, in this
verse: and a Reproof, verse. 14, 15. The commendation is twofold: First,
general, in these words: I know thy works; then special, in the words
following, I know where thou dwell, etc. Of the general commendation we
have spoken in the former Epistles, verse 2. and 9. This yet must be observed,
that Christ herewith begins the matter of all his Epistles: intending no
doubt, hereby to settle the persuasion of his presence deeply in every one of
our hearts: for it is indeed the ground of the holy fear of God, which is the
beginning of all true religion and godliness. And here Christ gives a
president for his ministers: namely, that the first thing they must teach their
people is, to be persuaded of this presence of Christ; wheresoever they are
Christ is with them, and whatsoever they do he sees them. This will cause them
make conscience of all their ways, and it is impossible that any should ever
have sound knowledge or good conscience, till he be persuaded hereof. Abraham
knew well that in Abimelekes court they would make no conscience of murder,
because they Ge. 20.11*
wanted this fear of God: to fear God and keep his commandments is the
whole man: and therefore we should give all diligence hereunto. It is indeed a
hard lesson for us to learn, and of our selves we cannot learn it: but if we
use the means, Gods blessing will be upon our endeavor, and then shall we
have knowledge upon knowledge, and grace upon grace, with the comfort of a good
conscience.

The particular commendation of this church is, for her constancy in
maintaining the doctrine of the gospel, in these words, I know where thou
dwell, even in a place where Satan's throne is, and yet for all that thou
keep my name: that is, thou hold still my true religion and doctrine. The
throne of Satan is any place where superstition, idolatry, or profaneness is
maintained without controlement, and from whence wickedness is conveyed to
other places. For the devil is the God of the world* and he has his thrones
among men. Pergamus was a great city of the gentiles which maintained
idolatry, and persecuted the gospel, from whence also iniquity was derived to
other towns and places: therefore it is called the devils throne.

Herein we may observe sundry points of great importance. First, the exceeding
policy of Satan: he has his kingdom in this world: and for the
establishing thereof, he must have his thrones where wickedness and idolatry
is maintained without controlement, and whence sin is derived to other places.
In all ages it has been thus, and will continue so to the end. In the old
world he had his thrones among Cains posterity: in the church of the Jews,
even in the days of the kings of Israel, the high places and groves* where
the people sacrificed to their idols were the devils thrones: the oracles of
the gentiles where the devils gave answer unto men were his chief thrones: in
the days of popery, every church and chapel were thrones of Satan,
wherein were erected images and holy roods for the worship of saints; whither
the people came to worship from country to country. In most schools of
learning for many hundred years the devil had his thrones; For therein was
nothing taught but errors, heresies, and most abominable idolatries. In these
our days the devil has his thrones among us, where any wizard dwells, or
cunning person (as they are called) for thither whole countries do flock for
help and for counsel, and so yield homage to Satan. All dicing, and all
brothel houses, wherein abominable wickedness is freely committed, are
Satan's thrones. Yea all those families are the devils thrones, where men live
without love or practice of religion, in blindness and ignorance, in
blasphemy, drunkenness, whoredom, injustice, or any such impieties. And in
reason it must needs be thus, for the devil being a prince of this world,
will have his throne in some parts thereof.

Hereby we see it is most needful in every Christian kingdom, The Use.
there should be thrones of justice in civil courts, for the maintenance of
equity, the reward of virtue, and for the repressing of injustice and
iniquity. And also thrones of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction for the
reprehending and punishing of all those sins which the civil court reaches
not unto. And it is necessary that in these thrones justice should be
administered without partiality, that Gods throne may be erected, which is
opposite to the throne of Satan.

Again, the devils cunning appears notably in the choice of the place where
he sets up his throne: it was no petty town or village, but a chief and
famous city, which had been the seat of many kings. This has been his
practice in all ages, to choose the chiefest places for the seat of his throne.
Great Babylon in Scripture is called, A city of iniquity, that is, a throne
of the devil. And Rome that was once a famous church, is now, and has been
long that spiritual Babylon, the throne of the devil. Yea, in Jerusalem the
city of the great king, had the devil got up his throne, when Christ called
the temple a den of thieves. And in our days the people of great towns and
cities are generally more backward in embracing the gospel, than in little
villages. The cause hereof is, the malice of the devil, who will have his
throne in chiefest places, for the greater hinderance of religion: there he
much prevails by choking the word with pride, profit, and pleasures, causing
them to content themselves with a form of godliness, when as they want the
power thereof. And thus he deals in greater towns, that thence impiety may
be derived to the country round about, as tradesmen do their wares from place
to place. And therefore the people of great towns especially, must labor not
only to know the gospel, but to believe and obey the same. Every man must
reform himself, and every family themselves, that Gods throne may be
established, and the devils throne battered down among them.

Secondly, whereas this church dwells where the devils throne is, we may
observe, whence the church of God is gathered, namely, out of Satan's kingdom.
Gods church is a company of men ordained to salvation, taken from under the
power of the devil: though after their calling they be Gods peculiar flock,
yet they are by nature the children of wrath. Thus Paul speaks of all the
Gentiles, Act. 26.18. And particularly of the church of Colossa, Colos. 1.13.
that God delivered them from the power of darkness, and translated them into
the kingdom of his dear son.

Hence we learn. I. That no man is to stand upon his his gentilitie, The Use.
or glory in his parentage for nobility and great blood, but only rejoice in
this, that he is drawn out of the kingdom of darkness, and from under the
power of Satan, and placed by Christ Jesus in the kingdom of grace. For what
will it profit a man to wear about his neck a chain of gold, if so be his
heart, will, and affections be chained to the devils service? and what
avails it princes to sit upon their stately thrones, if they themselves be in
subjection unto Satan, and do homage unto his throne? yea what will all the
treasures, honors, and pleasures of the world avail to him that is debarred
from the riches of Gods love in Christ, and destitute of the treasures of his
grace, and so led captive by Satan at his will and pleasure? Secondly, some do
think that a man may be saved by any religion, the Jew by his religion, the
Turk by his, and the Papist by his, etc. Yea, it is the common received
opinion of our ignorant people, that every one shall be saved by his good
meaning. But all these are mere dotages of men's brain: for a man may hold his
good meaning, and yet serve the devil at his throne. It is not sufficient to
hold this or that religion, or to practice civil virtues, as justice,
temperance, etc. unless a man be one of Gods church, severed from the company
of the^ that serve Satan. Thirdly, here all Gods servants have a notable
means of stay and comfort in afflictions. If they be persecuted, and cast into
most dark dung^ons for the name of Christ, they must call to mind, that they
are taken out of the devils prison in the kingdom of darkness, and placed in
the glorious kingdom of Jesus Christ, and made members of his church, and
shall be inheritors of his glory. Fourthly, hence we learn, that the
preaching of the gospel has in it a divine power: no creatures, except the
good Angels, have power comparable to the devils: and yet the preaching of the
gospel is stronger than all the power of Satan, for it gathers a church
where the devil has his throne, it delivers men from under the power of
Satan, and places them in the glorious liberty of the sons of God:
although therefore it be preached by sinful man, yet it must be reverenced as
the power of God, and his own arm to save his elect. Fifthly, hence we gather
that God will have his people to dwell with wicked and ungodly men: for the
church of Pergamus dwells where Satan's throne is. This he does with wicked
and ungodly men for good causes: I. That their faith, obedience, and repentance
might be exercised, and they preserved from many sins which otherwise they
should fall into. Moses tells the Israelits that the Cananits must not be all
cast out at their first entrance, but dwell among them, lest wild beasts did
grow up which would devour them: and so the wicked must dwell among the godly
to exercise Gods graces in them, lest they fall into sin and security. II.
That they might shine forth as lights unto the wicked by their godly
conversation, Phil. 2.15. That ye may be blameles^e and pure, the sons of God
without rebuke in the mids of a naughty and crooked nation, and among whom
ye shine as lights in the world: holding forth word of life. And thus the
godly must do, that by their unblameable life others might be won to the
faith; for godly example is a notable means to draw men to love and embrace
faith and true religion, 1. Pet. 3.1. III. That God may show on the godly
tokens of his special love and favor: which he does when he sends
judgments upon the wicked, and spares his children. Hence it was, that when
the Lord would bring a common judgment upon the Jews, he causes those that
mourned for their own sins, and for the abominations of the people, Exe.
9.4.
To be marked in the forehead, that they might bespared. So that if any godly
person dwell among such as hate religion, and be profane, he must content
himself, knowing it is Gods will his church should be vexed and troubled by
the societies of the wicked and ungodly. Sixthly, hence it appears that Gods
people may lawfully dwell among wicked and ungodly men, always remembering that
they communicate not with them in their sins and rebellions against God: For so
Let dwelt in Sodom, and this church of Pergamus, where the devil had his
throne. 1. Cor. 7.2* This question is answered: a master is a heathen man, and
his servant is converted to the faith; whereupon he thinks that he is free
from serving his master: but Paul tells him he must do external service
still, so far forth as he keep good conscience, and be not constrained to
renounce true religion. Lastly, hence we have direction to answer a question
much urged against us by the Papists, to wit, Where our church was fourscore
years ago, when Luther first began to preach: they intend hereby to prove
our church to be but of fourscore years continuance, and so our religion to be
new. We answer by the like, Where was the church of Pergamus when the devils
throne was in that city? Surely it was there where the devil had his throne.
And so when Antichrist that man of sin, had spread popery over all Europe, at
that very same time was Gods church in Europe where popery was professed,
mingled with the Papists: which to be true appears by this, that in all ages
there have been some, who openly have oppugned popery, more or less, partly
by writing, and partly by speaking, as the records of all ages do testify and
make manifest: so that though iniquity had the upper hand, yet our church had
his being in the midst of popery.

And thou keep my name, That is, though thou dwell in a place where the
devil has his throne, yet thou hold fast my name, so as neither force nor
fraud of the adversary can take my name from thee: so much the words import.
By Christ's name we must understand the doctrine of the gospel: so Paul is said
to be Act 9.15.
A chosen vessel to carry Christ's name among the Gentiles: That is, to
publish among them the doctrine of the Gospel.

Here this church of Pergamus is particularly commended for her constancy in
holding fast true religion against all adversary power whatsoever. Hence we
learn that it is not sufficient to teach, or know, and believe the doctrine of
the gospel in time of peace: but we must be constant in holding it fast
against all gainsayers, and not be turned about with every wind of doctrine,
but in life and death keep sure the truth, that neither fraud nor forc^ of any
adversary power draw it from us, or us from it. Mat. 13. The kingdom of heaven
(...) compared to a treasure hid in the field, which when a man s^^deth be
goes and sells all he, has to buy the field. The scope of that par^ble is
this* If any man should come into any of our fields, and by searching find a
gold mine; he would not make it known to any, but cover it close, and go his
way and sell all that he had to buy that field, that thereby he might enrich
himself: even so having found this, that the gospel reuealeth the way to life
everlasting, though we must not conceal the same from others, yet we must be
like this man herein, that we could be content to part with all that we have,
that so we might make the gospel ours* 1. Tim. 3.9. Deacons must have this
property, To have the ministry of faith in a pure conscience. There a good
conscience is compared to a sure treasure house, which cannot be robbed by any
adversaries power: and faith, that is, true religion is the treasure that is
there safely laid up: such a storehouse must we get for the preservation of
the faith. Any thing else we may leese, but if we part with true religion,
salvation is gone and all is lost. And therefore in life and death we must
keep fast the faith.

Further Christ amplifieth the praise of their conscience by two arguments:
First, that they held Christ's name without denial: Secondly, that they kept
the faith in the time of bloody persecution. For the first in these words, And
have not denied my faith. This is an excellent commendation; for many will hold
the doctrine of the gospel for a time, and yet after deny the same by
apostacy: but this Church held fast true religion without any revolt at all.
Their practice must we follow: and so hold fast true religion that therein we
never make revolt: for if we shall once deny religion, we know not whether
God will give us the grace of repentance, that w^e may profess it again;
which if he do not, we perish eternally. Consider Esau^ example who sold his
birth right for a mess of red broth, and after lost the blessing* which when
he would have recovered he was rejected: (...). 12.17.
And found no place to repentance, though be sought it with tears. Therefore to
prevent the fearful danger of not repenting after reuoult, we must still hold
fast true religion without denial.

Here in this place the faith of Christ, is all one with Christ's name, that is,
with the true doctrine of the gospel. And it is called Christ's faith: first,
because Christ with the father and the spirit, is the author thereof: Secondly,
because Christ reuealeth the same from the bosom of his father: for God
reuealeth his Gospel unto men by his son Christ Jesus. Thirdly, because
Christ is the substance and matter of the gospel: for indeed Christ Jesus is
the principal subject of the whole Bible, being the end of the law, and the
substance of the gospel.

The second argument of their praise for conscience, is taken from the
circumstance of time; they hold fast true religion in the time of bloody
persecution: Even in those days (says Christ) when Antipas my faithful martyr
was slain among you where Satan dwells. Who this Antipas was, is not
known, neither certainly recorded in any history: it is thought he was the
minister of this church, unto opposed himself against idolatry and gentilisme
in this city of Pergamus.

In this argument note two points. I. That Christ commends Antipas, calling him
his faithful martyr. Whereby we see, that in Gods church it is lawful to
honor saints and martyrs. For that which Christ does, his church may do. This
their honor must stand in two things, In due deserved praise and commendation,
and in a careful imitatio^ of their good virtues and godly lives: and for this
end does Christ commend Antipas unto this church, that they might follow his
good conversation: but as for popish honor of invocation and adoration, it has
no ground in Gods word. Again, in calling him faithful martyr, he commends
more the cause of his death, than the death: to show, that the cause makes a
martyr, not the death: For an heretic may be put to death for his damnable
opinions. Therefore Antipas is a martyr, not because he was slain, but because
he was faithful unto death for the maintenance of Christ's true religion.

II. point. In the end of the verse Christ shows who were the authors of
Antipas his death; namely such among them in whom Satan ruled: for he was
slain (says Christ) among you, where Satan dwells. Which words he
repents, to give us to understand, that all persecutors, let them carry what
face they will, are in truth such, in whom the devil rules, where he has
his hold, and keeps possession. Quest. Why did Satan more dwell there than in
other places? Answ. Because many in this place were Gentiles, who contemned and
mocked the gospel, and maintained idolatry, whereby they became the holds of
Satan. And by proportion we may gather, that all contemners of religion, and
all that walk in their own wicked ways, are indeed the stables and holds of
the devil, though they should be the temples of the holy ghost. And so many
families as there are, where religion is mocked, Gods name blasphemed,
injustice and impiety practiced; so many holds of Satan there are where the
devil rules: and such they continue, till they reform themselves of their
impieties, and embrace the Gospel syncerely. And therefore all masters of
families especially should love the Gospel, and see that in their families
religion be taught, embraced and obeyed, that so the devil may have no hold in
their families. Que. Whether might not Antipas, being Pastor of this Church,
have fled for the safety of his life? Answ. There be two kinds of
persecution, one that is directly intended against the Pastor principally: the
other against the whole Church equally. In the persecution directed against the
Pastor, this must be considered, Whether God gave him opportunity and liberty
to fly, or not: if God give him liberty and opportunity, he may fly, and
the Church is to assist him, and to use means for his preservation: but if God
deny him means to escape, then he must judge himself to be called of God,
to suffer death for his name; and so he may not fly. And such was the cause
of Antipas in this Church. But if the persecution be directed against the whole
church equally, then the Pastor may not fly, but take part in their
sufferings, that he may be a means to stay and comfort his brethren.

Verse 14. But I have a few things against thee, because thou have there them
that maintain the doctrine of Balaam, which taught Balac to put a stumbling
block before the children of Israel, that they should eat of things
sacrificed unto Idols, and commit fornication. Here follows the reproof of
this Church of Pergamus, which is first generally propounded in these words, I
have a few things against thee: Secondly, in particular, for want of zeal, in
suffering among them such as maintained the doctrine of Balam. Thirdly, he
sets down a reason or confirmation thereof in the end of the 14 verse, and
in the 15.

The general reproof is the same which was given out against the Church of
Ephesus, verse. 4. Whereby he would teach us a special duty: namely, that
every man must seriously consider with himself what sins he has in him,
which Christ may have to lay unto his charge. For this very cause does Christ
rehearse it unto this Church. And therefore we must call our selves to
reckoning, and examine our selves not by our own wits, but by the rule of Gods
word, and search out all our thoughts, words, and actions; and see how many
things Christ may have against us, that so making a forehand reckoning, and
seeking to be cleared by true repentance we may not be condemned for them at
the last day: for if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. This
is a necessary duty, and the practice of it is the ground of all grace, and
conscionable obedience: as on the other side, the want hereof is the cause why
many that live in the Church do perish eternally. For a day of accounts will
come, wherein we shall never escape, unless by a forehand reckoning in the
practice of true repentance from dead works, and by faith in Christ Jesus we
prevent the same. Lamentable and fearful is the state of all those, that
never call themselves to this account: it causes them to go on in sin
without remorse, Hos 7.2. Hereof Jeremy complained, Ier. 8.6.
That no man said what have I done. And for that cause he denounces fearful
judgments against the people. This was the sin of the old world: Mat. 24.
men knew nothing till the flood came and destroyed them all. This security
brings men's souls to hell, before they wot where they are: And therefore
David cries out, Psalm. 50. verse. 22. Oh consider this (meaning the account
that God will take with them) least God tear them in pieces, and there be
none to deliver them. The end of preaching and hearing Gods word, is to bring
the soul to eternal life and salvation: but the want of this account makes
the holy ordinance of God to be of none effect to many a one. For how should
men embrace with comfort the word of reconciliation, till they feel in
themselves their enmity with God, and desert of condemnation.

II. point. Because thou have them that maintain the doctrine of Balaam, etc.
Here is the particular reproof of this Church for want of zeal, in that they
entertained and suffered heretical Ministers to live among them which
maintained the doctrine of Balaam. This showed, that though they loved the
gospel, and embraced it, yet it was very coldly, and without that fervent
zeal which they ought to have showed against such heretics.

The Use.
Here first Christ teaches this church to show forth zeal in excommunicating
and casting out such heretics as by damnable doctrine did trouble them. This
place is a sufficient ground for the practice of that Ecclesiastical censure.
When men hold heretical opinions, the Church after two or three admonitions is
to excommunicate them and cast them out. So did Paul to Hymaeneus and
Alexander, 1. Tim. 1.20* Secondly, Christ reproving this Church for
entertaining such heretics and wicked men, does give us to understand, that
every member of Gods church should have a great dislike of all persons, that
hold not the doctrine of Christ in truth, but maintain errors against the
tenor of Scripture, and the profession of the Church. For this cause Paul
charge Timothy to 1. Tim 6 3, 4, 5.
separat himself from such a^ teach otherwise than he had given direct on,
and consent not unto the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the
doctrine which is according to godliness: being puffed up and knowing nothing.
This then must be our careful practice: we have by Gods mercy true religion
among us, which we must maintain with zeal: and if any bring in other
doctrine, we must reject it, and show forth detestation to him that brings
it, not bidding him God speed. 2. John. 10. We must rather loose our lives,
than suffer the truth of God to be defaced. Thirdly, that which Christ lays
to the charge of this church may in sundry respects be charged upon our
churches and congregations at this day; namely, want of zeal against sin,
and severity against sinners: for though the governors of our Church repel
the heresies of Popery, Anabaptists, and family of Love, and suppress all
doctrines that race the foundation, which are commendable things: yet in the
midst of our congregations be abundance of Atheists, who by deed and
conversation deny Christ Jesus* for many know nothing in the matters of
religion, and more be profane, who both think and speak most basely of
religion, and of the teachers and professors thereof. Yea, we have flat
epicures permitted to live in our church, such as make their belly their God:
who give themselves wholly unto eating, drinking sports, and delights, without
all regard either of the general duties of Christianity, or of the particular
duties of their calling. We have also among us many cruel and merciless
persons, that in their affairs abound in the practices of fraud, wrong,
usury, and oppression, Amos 5.11
whose treading is upon the poor in the pride of their covetousness, whereby
also they eat the flesh of God^ people, and flea off their skin from them, and
break their bones, and chop them in pieces as for the pot, and as flesh within
the cauldron, Mich. 3.6. And yet all these, because they submit themselves to
the civil authority, are permitted without controlment to be partakers of the
privileges of Gods Church, even to the receiving of the seals of Gods
covenant, being themselves flat enemies to the grace of God. Yea, many of these
are greatly countenanced and graced for wisdom and reputation; when as such
as fear God, and make conscience of their ways, are counted vile. All which
as it argues exceeding want of zeal in severity against sin: so it cannot
choose but provoke the Lord to come against us in judgment, as he did against
this Church. The means whereby this evil is to be reformed, does follow
afterward.

III. point. The reason or confirmation of the former reproof, whereby the
Lord would move this Church to detest these false teachers, is taken from the
effect of their doctrine, and it is laid down in this similitude. As Balaam
the false Prophet taught Balac to put a stumbling block before the children of
Israel, to cause them to eat of things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit
fornication: so this Church maintained among them Nicholaitans, who taught, it
was lawful to eat things sacrificed to Idols, at Idols feasts, and to commit
fornication. The first part of this similitude is in the end of this 14 verse:
Which taught Balac to put a stumbling block, etc. The second part is in the 15
verse.

Touching the doctrine of Balaam we are to observe three points: First, What a
stumbling block, or an offense is. Secondly, what it is to cast or put a
stumbling block. Thirdly, by what means king Balac did cast a stumbling block
before the children of Israel. For the first, a stumbling block is properly
any thing, as wood, or stone, or such like, that is cast in a man's way, to
hinder him in his gate, and to cause him to trip or fall: And by rese^blance in
this place, an offense is any thing that causes a man to sin against God,
and so to slip or fall, or to go out of his way that leads to life. Further,
an offense is twofold; either given or taken. An offense given, is any speech
or deed, whereby a man is provoked to sin: and so was Peter an offense unto
Christ, though he took it not, Mat. 16.23. An offense taken, is when any man
takes occasion to fall and sin, by that which is well done by others: so
were the Pharisees offended at the sacred preaching of our Savior Christ. II.
point. The casting or putting of a stumbling block, or giving an offense, is
the doing or saying of any thing, whereby a man is occasioned to sin: and
this is done, either about things evil in themselves, or in things
indifferent. Things evil are such as Gods word forbids: and they are
twofold, either persuasions, or examples. Bad persuasions are false doctrine,
and evil counsel. Bad example is also a giving of offense, because it does
embolden evil men in their sin, and draw the godly to evil. Again, in
things indifferent, as meat, drink, apparel, etc. may offense be given,
when as they are used unseasonably, not in fit time and place, and before fit
persons. And of this Paul speaks, saying: If I knew my eating did offend my
brother, I would eat no flesh while the world stands. The offense here spoken
of, was an offense given in evil things, for it was an evil act done by
Balaam, and accordingly received and taken of the Israelits, for he used
outward prouocations to allure them unto sin. III. point. The means whereby
king Balac did cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, is set
down in the end of the verse, by provoking them to eat of things sacrificed to
Idols, and to commit fornication. That we may understand this fully, read
Numbers 25. The sum of the history is this: When Balaam had assayed sundry
ways to curse the children of Israel, and could not, he gave Balac counsel
to use means to cause them to sin. At his counsel Balac sent forth the
most beautiful women in his kingdom into the camp of Israel to entise them
to the service of their idols, and to banquet with them at their idol feasts,
that so they might draw them to fornication: whereunto the Israelites
condescended, and so sinned against God. Thus much of the meaning of the words.

First, The Use.
here observe a special property of false teachers: namely, to cast offenses
before men, to cause them to fall in the way that leads to salvation. By this
Christ intends to make known unto this Church the false doctrine of Balaam.
Paul in his Epistles 1 Timothy 6.^. Tit. 1.1.
calls the doctrine of the gospel a truth according to godliness: because
the intent of the gospel is, to lead men to true godliness. On the contrary,
the doctrine of Antichrist is called 2 Thessalonians. ^.
the mystery of iniquity; because the scope thereof is, to draw men to all
iniquity and abomination. Here then we have a rule, whereby we may judge
between true doctrine and false, even by looking into the end and scope
thereof: if it aim at true piety and sincere obedience, we may judge it to
be good; but if it tend to draw men to idolatry and sin, then it is a false
doctrine. Thus we might scan all false religions, as the religion of the Turk
and Jew at this day. But because we are more troubled with the doctrine of
Popery among our common people, who call it The old Religion, therefore let us
a little examine the same by this rule.

The end of Popery is to pull down the kingdom of Christ, and to disanull
his laws; as will appear by a short view in every commandment: and therefore
it cannot be the true religion. The first commandment teaches us, To choose
and acknowledge the true God for our God alone. But the Church of Rome teaches
to make more gods than one, and to acknowledge the creature to be God: for by
their doctrine men are to pray unto Saints, whereby they make them gods, in
giving this divine property unto them to know the heart. Their doctrine also
ascribes unto Saints power to merit; which is a property of God: for none
can merit but he that is God. The humane nature of Christ ^ould not have
merited any thing, unless it had been joined to the godhead. Yea they make
the wood of the cross to be God, for in their mass book at this day they
call (not Christ crucified on the cross) but the very cross it self, our
only hope: yea, the virgin Marie, who is but a creature, they place as a
queen in heaven, giving her power over Christ to command him in the matter of
salvation, and so they disanull the first commandment. The second
commandment they revoke, in teaching it to be lawful to make images of the
Trinity, according as they showed themselves in the old and new Testament: the
father like an old man, the son as he lived, and the holy ghost like a dove;
and therein to worship them. Again, they teach that men may adore the Images
of Saints, which is flat against that commandment. The third commandment
they disanull, in teaching it to be lawful to swear by Saints, and not by
God only. The fourth they disanull, by making the feastiuall days of Saints
equal with the Lords Sabbath, and to be kept holy unto God as solemnly as the
Lords day. Whereby also they take away the liberty of the church in the lawful
use of the six days, for honest labor in a man's calling. The fifth they
disanull in giving freedom and immunitie to their clergy from subjection to
civil authority: and in dispensing with subjects, for their loyalty and
allegiance to their lawful princes: and with children and servants from
yielding due help, service, and obedience, to their parents and masters. The
sixth, by their houses of refuge which they call Sanctuary, wherein murderers
may be in safety; and by maintaining ignorance in religion, through which they
murder many a simple soul. The seventh, by tollerating of stews, and allowing
of incest: for by their law it is lawful for the great uncle to marry his
niece, descending from his brother or sister, so it be without the fourth
degree, which is against nature. The eight, by making sale of all things, of
heaven, hell, of earth, of pardons, and delivering men from purgatory: which
is flat robbery, and most gross deceit and cousenage. The ninth they
disanull, by falsifying the canon of scripture, for they make that canonical
which is no Scripture: and besides in their doctrine practical they defend a
lie, for when a man has confessed his sins to the priest, if the magistrate
ask the priest what sins the man confessed, they teach the priest to say, I
know not; that is (say they) to tell it to thee: which is a flat lie. And
whereas they would defend this by an exposition of Christ's words, when he
says: Mat. 2 ^.
The day of judgment is not known to the Son of man: that is (say they) to
reveal it unto others, they do but deceive the simple by an exposition which
is not fit. The last commandment they disanull, by holding concupiscence
before consent to be no sin, when as we know by Gods word, that the first
evil motions in us be sins. So that hereby we may see, that Popery is but
a false religion, though it have falsely among our common people the name of
The old Religion, and therefore we must abhor the same, as ungodly.

Now, whereas some do charge the doctrine of our Religion to be sundry ways
scandalous, they may be easily answered: First they say, it is a doctrine of
desperation: because it imports, that God created men so, as he will save but a
few, making them for this end, to cast the greatest number to hell. To this I
answer two things: First, touching the number of them that are to be saved:
of which little is said in Scripture, and therefore I will not say much: yet
this may be auerred, The number of the elect in it self is Reu. 7.9*
a great company, but being compared with them that shall be damned, it is
but small. Secondly, touching the end of man's creation, our doctrine is not,
that God created me^ for this end, to cast them to hell: but this we teach,
that God created all men, to manifest his glory in them: in some, by their just
and deserved damnation for sin. We teach not, that men are otherwise
condemned than for their sins, and therefore he that is condemned has his
just reward. II. Charge, They say further our doctrine is a doctrine of
blasphemy; for that we teach God to have decreed the fall of man, and so make
God the author of man's sin. Ans. We teach indeed that God decreed Adams fall,
but thence it follows not, that he is the author of man's sin. For Gods will
is twofold, general, and special. Gods general will is, to permit that which
is evil, not simply, but because with God evil has some respect of good, and
in this respect we say God decreed Adams fall. Gods special will, is his
approouing will; whereby he takes pleasure and delight in that which is good:
and in this regard God nilled Adams fall, and man's sins: And yet in some
respect he may be said to will them. A magistrate, though he take no comfort or
delight in the death and execution of a malefactor: yet he decrees and
appoints it, and so may be said to will it. Even so God, who out of light
can bring darkness, permits evil because with him it has some respect of
good, and so may be said to will it. III. Charge. They say also that the
doctrine of our church is a doctrine of security: because we teach, that a man
may be certain of his salvation, and of perseverance in the faith unto the
end. Answ. This is not a doctrine of carnal security; because we do impose
necessarily the use of means to them that would be certain of their
salvation, and persevere unto the end, as namely, denial of themselves, and
humbling themselves in continual prayer, with hearing and meditating in the
word of God, and receiving the Sacraments for the increase of faith, and
renewing of their repentance: All which will rather make a man fearful and
careful than secure. For with the means, is certainty of salvation, both
atteined and preserved: so that our doctrine is not a doctrine of offenses, but
a true doctrine that beats out the plain way that ^eadeth unto life.

Secondly, Christ his detestation of this doctrine of Balaam, must admonish us
to be so careful of our behavior every way, that we give no offense unto
any, for if we do, we are Balaams scholars. This is a point of special
observation, we must look to our communication that it be void of railing and
bad speeches, and to our conversation, that it be holy and unblameable. In
every thing we must have care not to hinder others in the way of life, Woe
Mat. 18.6, 7.
be to them (says Christ) that give offenses: it were better that a huge
millstone (such as an ass can but turn about, as the word imports) were tied
about his neck, and that he were cast into the sea. The reason is, because
when a man by any means gives his brother an offense: he does as much as in
him lies, to plunge his brothers soul into the pit of destruction, and
therefore we must fly offenses as hell it self: yea rather on the contrary,
we must help our brethren forward in the way of salvation, and remove from
them all stumbling blocks that cause them to fall. If this duty were
practiced, our church would abound with grace and godliness: but this duty is
wanting, and hence it comes that we have so small increase after long labor in
preaching, for example and evil counsel do quench the graces of the spirit in
men's hearts.

Thirdly, hereby we must learn to have special care against offenses given
by evil counsel, or bad example. For if it be the property of a false
prophet to cast stumbling blocks before others, then is it a dangerous thing to
fall upon them when they are laid before us. While we live in this world we
shall see many offenses given: but we must take heed we take them not. And
therefore Christ bids us, Man. 1^.^
If thy foot offend thee, or thine hand, cut it off: or thine eye, pluck it
out: Teaching us to forgo the dearest thing that can be unto us, if it would
cause us to sin against God. And to move us hereto, mark the Israelits
example in the wilderness: while they kept a good conscience, and observed the
true worship of God, all Balaams curses were turned into blessings: but when
they fell to idolatry and fornication with the Moabitish women: then was Gods
wrath kindled against them, and his plague seized upon them. Even so, if our
church be careful to keep it self to the true religion, which by Gods mercy
we enjoy, and withal have care to keep good conscience in becoming a
penitent and obedient people unto God: then may Balaam curse, and al our
enemies spit their venom, yet we shall be safe: But if we let go true religion
and good conscience, and fall to sin, then we must look for ^ods heavy
judgments to fall upon us in his wrath, as they did upon his own people.
Fourthly, when Balaams cursing would not prevail, then did fair women, and
banqueting, draw them to idolatry and fornication. Hence we learn, that
temptations on the right hand, that is, taken from profits, pleasures, and
preferments, are most dangerous, and soonest prevail to draw men from God. The
state of a christian, is like a besieged city; when a huge army cannot sack
it, than silver and gold will open the gates hereof: even so, when adversity
cannot make a man to forsake religion and good conscience, then by prosperity,
ease, and pleasure has the devil stolen away his heart. Those therefore that
have ease, pleasures, and outward blessings at will, are in a far more
dangerous case in respect of sin than others; unless God vouchsafe unto them
special grace to watch against these pleasing temptations. This made godly Job
Job. 1.5.
To sanctify his children every day when they feasted each other at their
houses: lest any one then should have blasphemed God in his heart. Because he
knew the devil by pleasures would soonest wind himself into their hearts.

Lastly, note the order of these sins: First, they are drawn to sit at idols
feasts, and then to commit adultery: where we see that these two sins go
together, Spiritual adultery, that is, idolatry; and bodily adultery, one is
the plague and punishment of the other: that people which give themselves to
idolatry, will God give up to bodily adultery. As this was true in these
Israeli^s, so is it to be seen among the Turks, and with the Papists at this
day, who maintain* fornication* in tollerating stews, and further it much by
their vow of single life, wherewith they bind the conscience, though the party
want the gift of continence.

Verse. 15. Even so have thou them that maintain the doctrine of the
Nicholaitans, which thing I have. Here follows the second part of the
comparison, where Christ sets down two things: First, what the Nicolaitans
were: Secondly, how he was affected toward them. What they were is expressed
in the first words, Even so, which is a note of resemblance or comparison,
having reference to the words going before. They may be thus described: The
Nicolaitans were a sent in the church of Pergamus, that maintained two damnable
opinions according to the doctrine of Balaam. I. That it was lawful to eat
things offered to idols in the honor of idols, sitting in the idols temple. I^.
that fornication was no sin; but that a man might lawfully commit it. It may
seem strange, that in the days of the Apostles there should be men
professing the name of Christ, and yet hold such damnable opinions: but the
truth is hereby evident, that there were such in this church. And that we do
not conceive a liking of their wicked opinions, let us examine their reasons,
whereupon they might seem to be grounded.

For the eating of things sacrificed to idols, they would plead thus. I. From
the doctrine of christian liberty, Things indifferent may ^e lawfully used.
Things offered to idols are things indifferent, as meats, and drinks, and
therefore may lawfully be used. Ans. Meats and drinks, if they be considered
in themselves, are things indifferent, and may lawfully be used: yea after they
have been offered to idols, if they be sold in the market, they may be
lawfully bought and eaten in private houses, if it be done without offense of
the weak, as Paul teaches at large, 1. Cor. 10.25.29. But if these meats be
considered as they are offered to idols, and eaten in the idols temple in the
honor of idols, they be unlawful. And yet the Nicolaitans held this to be
lawful.

II. Reason. An idol is nothing, 1. Cor. 8.4. and therefore we sin not in
eating meats offered unto them* Ans. An idol is nothing, that is, in nature
subsisting* nothing created or ordained of God, it has no property of the
godhead* but yet an idol is something in man's imagination, which gives to it
the honor of God, and reputeth it as God, making it a God unto himself.

III. Reason. N^aman the Syrian 2. Ki. 5.1^.
went into the temple of the god Rimmon, and there kneeled down: Even so may
christians go eat in idols temples? Ans. When Naaman went in thither he did not
kneel down to the idol, but to the king, performing a civil duty unto his
Prince; who used to lean on Naamans shoulder and worship his false god. And
though Naaman were present at idoll-worship and service, yet it was with
protestation against it: for being cured of his leprosy, he promised to
worship no God but the God of Israel: and thereupon he laded two mules with
the earth of the land of Israel, in token of his public profession of
thankfulness to the true God for his clensing. If these in Pergamus whom
Christ disliketh, had gone as Naaman did into idol temples, they had not
sinned as they did. And at this day if men protest against the idolatry of the
mass, they may enter into those congregations where mass is said: for this
protestation is a flat condemning of their false worship.

The second opinion of these Nicolaitans was, That men might lawfully commit
fornication. This opinion they would thus justify: First, from the practice of
Lot, Who (...). 19.8.
offered to the men of Sodom his daughters, when they called for the strangers
that were come into his house. Which thing (say they) Lot would never have
done, if fornication had been a sin? Ans. It seems that Lot cannot be
excused in that action, though his purpose was by a lesser evil to prevent a
greater, but God has plainly taught, That no man may do the least evil, for
the procuring of the greatest good that can be, Romans 3.8.

II. Reason. The Lord (say they) commanded Hosea, To take a wife of
fornication, and children of fornication, Hos. 1.2. It is not therefore
unlawful? Ans. There be diverse interpretations of that place. Some say that
was only in vision, and not a fact done. Others say, it was in speech only,
because he prophesied unto the people that he himself was as a man of
fornication unto them. These expositions may well stand. Yet others hold that
the Lord commanding him this, it was to be done, and was done indeed. And
sundry circumstances seem to prove that it was a fact done, for the woman's
name is set down to be Verse. 3.
Go^er, and her fathers name Diblaim. Secondly, a thing in vision or in speech
only, does not so much prevail with wicked people, as that which is done
indeed. Thirdly, the ancient opinion of best divines that lived nearest to the
Apostles times, avouch it was a fact done. Object. But this maintains
fornication, against good manners, and the express law of God. Ans. It were so
indeed, if the Prophet had done it on his own head, but he did it by Gods
special appointment, who is Lord of his own law, and may dispense with it at
his pleasure. God in his law forbidd^th to kill, yet Abraham is commanded to
kill his son: Which if he had done he had not sinned, because he had a
special commandment for it, which a man must obey, though it be against a
moral precept. Again, Hosea took a wife of fornication, not to maintain her
in her sin, but to make her a chaste woman. And whereas he was commanded also
to take unto him children of fornication: it must not be understood of children
begotten by him, but borne of her in fornication: As if he should say, Take a
wife with her children which she brought forth in fornication. So that this
place which way soever we take it, does nothing maintain their wicked errors.

III. Reason. Acts. 15. The Apostles charge the churches, To abstain from that
which is strangled, from blood, and from fornication: There (say they)
fornication is reckoned among things indifferent, and therefore may be used
lawfully. Answ. It is there reckoned among things indifferent: First, because
it was so accounted of amongst the gentiles: Secondly, because the gentiles did
jointly by these three things offend the churches of the Jews. But hence it
follows not that it is indeed a thing indifferent.

II. Point. The affection of Christ toward these men is noted in these words:
Which thing I hate. This hatred must be referred not to the persons of the
Nicolaitans, but to their opinions, lives, and practices.

Hereby Christ would instruct us in sundry needful duties. First, The Use.
if we will follow him, we must hate all honor and approbation that may be
given to idols, be it never so little. These Nicolaitans might say, they
abhorred idols and worshipped them not, only they went with their friends into
their Temples, and sat down to eat meat before them; now even this dealing
Christ hates. Wherein he does notably condemn the practice of the Romish
church, which say, they worship not idols, but the true God: and yet they do
that which Christ hates; for they kneel down before them, they adore them,
and light candles unto them, and offer unto them many rich jewels, and much
sumptuous attire, which is a great deal more than the Nicolaitans did: And
therefore they are much more to be condemned, and their practice also hated of
us. Secondly, Christ's hatred of the lest honor of idols, does afford a
special caveat to such men as give themselves to a traveling life; as into
Italy, Spain, and other idolatrous places: they should content themselves
within the precincts of the church, and not proceed further without warrant of
a special calling, whereby they may assure themselves of Gods gracious
protection. For hereby they give occasion to themselves to do that which Christ
hates; though they say, they hate idolatry: For if a man escape to be
present at their abominable service, yet he cannot avoid going to their
Temples, where he is to offer some gifts, or perform some ceremony after the
custom of the country; whereby he shall give some approbatition at the least
of their idolatry: whereas he ought to hate the least appearance thereof, even
the garment spotted with the flesh. Thirdly, by this his affection Christ would
teach us to grow to an hatred of all familiar society with idolaters: for
though we may have society of concord with them, yet society of amity, which
is a special liking between man and man, we must not maintain with them.

Fourthly, Christ hates not only their idolatry, but their fornication also.
Hereby teaching us to grow to a hatred of fornication; which the rather must
be detested, because 1. Co. 6.19
The bodies of every man and woman be not their own, but Christ's: and
therefore ought not to be employed in the honor or service of the devil, but
of Christ. Again, the bodies of every christian man and woman are the members
of Christ, now it is an unseemly thing to take the member of Christ, and make
it the member of an harlot. Fifthly, their bodies are temples, and dwelling
places: not for earthly Princes, but for the holy Ghost: and therefore must be
furnished with Gods graces, and adorned with chastity and other gifts of Gods
spirit, that they may be fit mantion places for so worthy a guest. But by
fornication they are made the s^ies and stables of the prince of darkness.

Verse. 16. Repent thy self, or else I come unto thee shortly: and will fight
against thee with the sword of my mouth. Christ having laid down the sins of
this church, and the errors of the Nicholaitans, does here propound unto this
church, First, a remedy for her recovery: Secondly, a reason to enforce the
practice of the remedy. The remedy is in these words: Repent thy self. In it
consider these points: First, what it is to repent: Secondly, why Christ so
often urges thereunto: Thirdly, to whom Christ prescribes this remedy. Of
the first, we have spoken in the first verse of this chapter: Briefly
therefore, Repentance is a change of the mind from evil to good, and a turning
from sin unto God. Here repentance must be taken more largely, for all the
duties that accompany repentance in the practice thereof: as I. Humiliation of a
man by confessing of his sins unto God; and condemning of himself for the
sin. II. Prayer, whereby a man does earnestly entreat the Lord for the pardon
of the same sins. III. Reformation, whereby a man in heart proposes, and in life
indeuoureth to leave all his former sins, and for ever after to do all things
in obedience unto God: unto all these does the holy Ghost exhort them in this
place.

II. Point. Why does Christ so often prescribe this duty of repentance, and so
much urge it? An. Not for that it is a cause or a meritorious means to procure
remission of sins and life everlasting, as the Papists do falsely and damnably
teach; for that nothing can do but the obedience and passion of Christ: but
first because it is a token of Gods favor procured, and a most excellent fruit
of faith, such as makes a man cease to do evil, and moves him to do good:
Secondly, because it is a way wherein me^ must walk unto the end, that would
have remission of sins, and life eternal.

III. point. To whom is this remedy prescribed? Answ. First to the church of
Pergamus, and then to the Nicholaitans in that church, though they were most
wicked men* Touching the church of Pergamus: they were before commended for
most worthy graces, for they had repentance: and yet note, Christ says still
unto them, Repent thy self. Herein teaching us a most worthy lesson, which
every one ought to learn and practice: namely, that the life of a Christian is
a continual practice of repentance. When a man has once repented, that is not
sufficient; but every new day must have a new repentance for his daily slips.
We 2. Cor. 5.2*
are Gods ambassadors (says Paul) for Christ: beseeching you in Christ's
steed, that you would be reconciled unto God. Now they were reconciled to God
before, for they are called C^p* 6 16.
the Temple of the living God; His meaning therefore is, That they should
strive more and more after reconciliation with God; both in regard of their
further assurance, and also for their particular sins wherein they daily
offended. Every Christian must daily wres^^e with his own corruptions, which
he feels in himself, that the longer he lives, the more he may grow in
dislike with himself. And in this distaste of himself he must daily proceed,
that he may every day more and more grow up in Christ. And least any should
think, that this was spoken to this church alone, and not to us: consider,
that we are in the same case with them; their sins are our sins, as we have
proved: We want zeal and severity against sin and sinners. Now being in
the same fault with them, we must therefore practice the same remedy, and
renew our repentance, though we have repented heretofore.

Secondly, he prescribes this duty to the Nicolaitans, that held two damnable
errors, and no doubt lived accordingly in those sins: and yet Christ bars
them not from his kingdom, but bids them repent. Where note, that great and
grievous sinners are not barred from Gods mercy, if they will repent.
Excellent is that saying of Isay, God i^ much in sparing: and that of David
also, With God is plentiful redemption. Psalm. 130.7.
This point is seriously to be considered: for we have in our congregations
many that are well spoken of in the world: and yet for knowledge of God and
practice of life, are flat Atheists. We have also among us epicures,
blasphemers, murderers, and fornicators with these Nicolaitans. Now to all
these and such like this doctrine appertains* not to embolden them in sin,
but to assure them there is mercy in store for them with God, if they will
truly repent. They must not turn the grace of God ^o wantonness, and make his
mercy a bolster to their iniquity; for this is despising of Gods bounty,
whereby they help up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath: but if
with Job they humble themselves in dust and ashes, and cry to heaven for
mercy from a broken heart that carries a resolute purpose to leave all sin;
then, though their sins were never so many, they shall all be drowned in the
bottomless sea of Gods mercy: though they were as crimson and scarlet, which
will take no other dye, yet in Christ's blood they shall be made as white as
wool and snow: yea, though they have fallen often into the same sins which
is most fearful and dangerous, yet upon this unfeigned repentance they shall
be restored to mercy: for the fountain thereof cannot be dried up: but see
they do repent, for whosoever looks for Christ's merits, must know that he
looks for true repentance. Thus much for the remedy.

II. point. The reason whereby Christ would set an edge upon the former remedy,
contains a twofold threatening or commination: the first, against the whole
Church in these words: If not, I come unto thee shortly. The second against the
Nicolaitans in these words: And will fight against them with the sword of my
mouth. For the first, If not, I will come unto thee shortly, these words were
expounded in the fifth verse. The meaning is this: If thou repent not, I will
come unto thee, and testify my presence by taking punishment upon thee, for
thy want of zeal, and of severity against sin and sinners. To this effect
the Prophet Isay says, Chap. 30.27. The name of the Lord shall come from
far, to take punishment upon the Assyrians.

In this threatening the phrase is to be noted. Christ says: If not, I come
unto thee: expressing a thing to come, by a word of the time present. To give
them to understand, that his coming unto them by judgments was as certain,
as if it were present, unless they did repent. Where this general rule is to
be observed of all: namely, that when a Church or people do not repent, the
Lord will come unto them to execute his judgments upon them. Yea, though they
have before repented, if for particular sins and wants they do not renew
their repentance, he will surely come to punish them. This might be proved at
large by testimonies of the Prophets and Apostles: but it is so evident in this
text, that I omit all further proof; only I will apply it to this our
Church, of which this may be truly said; Thou do not repent, nor renew thy
repentance for thy daily sins. For albeit there be some among us, that by
Gods grace repent and set themselves daily to the exercise thereof: yet take
the greater part of our congregations, and they are so far from renewing their
repentance, that they do not repent at all: for either they have no knowledge
of Gods will; or if they have knowledge, yet they want care and conscience to
put the same in practice. This being our case and condition, what man may not
be a Prophet against our churches and congregations, being thus directed by
this portion of Scripture, to say and that truly, That God will come unto us in
judgments, to plague and punish us for our sins and iniquities? We may sooth
our selves in hope of mercy still, but the state of our Church continuing as
it is, nothing can be expected but judgments from the Lord. This then must be
a motive to persuade us to repent, every person apart, and every family and
congregation apart, we must humble our selves in dust and ashes for our sins
past, entreating the Lord to be reconciled unto us, and purpose fully in our
hearts, and strive in our lives to obey God in all his commandments: yea,
though we can say we have repented, yet for our daily wants and sins we
must renew our repentance. Thus doing, we shall stay the Lord when he is
coming against us. But if we go on in blindness, ignorance, and rebellion,
following the lusts of our own hearts, then nothing but vengeance and
judgments are to be expected: for this conclusion must stand with all
churches and people: If they repent not, God will come in judgment against
them.

The second threatening or commination is directed unto the Nicolaitans, in
these words: And will fight against them with the sword of my mouth; that is, I
will be at emnitie with them, and testify the same by waging battle against
those among you, that maintain the lawfulness of eating things sacrificed to
Idols, and of fornication. Thus I say will I fight against the^ with the sword
of my mouth; that is, with the preaching of my word, the law, and the gospel.

In this commination Christ alludeth still to the story of Balaam: for when
he was sent for by Balac to curse the people of God, the Lord stood against
him in the way with a naked sword, to keep him from going: and when his eyes
were opened, that he saw the Angel of the Lord withstand him in that sort,
he fell down and adored the Angel, for it was the Lord: yet because he
ceased not from his wicked covetousness, but gave bad counsel against the
Israelites, when he could not curse them, to cause them to sin: therefore he
was slain with the edge of the sword among the Midianites by the children of
Israel, Number. 31.8. Even so Christ deals with the Nicolaitans, because they
go on in their bad counsel, persuading the lawfulness of eating things
sacrificed to Idols, and also of fornication: therefore first he will fight
against them with the sword of his mouth, the ministry of his word, thereby to
reclaim them from their wicked ways, if it be possible: but if that will not
serve, he will still fight against them, and with the same sword destroy them
for ever.

First here mark, Christ says not, The Use.
I will kill them, but fight against them: for he intended not at the first to
destroy these Nicolaitans, but his purpose was to withdraw them from their
wicked ways; yet so, as afterward if they would not be reclaimed by his word,
he would therewith destroy them. Wherein we may behold the exceeding patience
of Christ Jesus toward leaud and grievous sinner^, that maintained the
lawfulness of idolatry and fornication, and gave themselves thereunto. So the
Lord ^
in spirit stro^e with the old world, and spared them 120 years to withdraw
them from their wickedness by the preaching of Noe. So likewise he spared the
Ammonites Genesis 15.16.
till their sins were come to the full; and the Egyptians also for many
hundred years, though they were most cruel persecutors of his own people.
And though the Jews most maliciously crucified the Lord of life; yet he spared
them fifty years, before he cut them off from being a people. Yea, daily
experience teaches us this his long suffering: we may hear most bloody and
bitter oaths from blasphemers, whereby they daily crucify Christ with their
tongues. The like may be said of the adulterers, and all cruel persons, and
yet he forbeares the same: yea, in our own selves we daily taste of this his
patience: for so soon as we were borne, we deserved to be cast into hell, and
yet in mercy he vouchsafes unto us, to some twenty, to some thirty, and to
some more years, for a time of repentance; when as every day he might in
justice condemn us. This therefore must admonish us in the fear of God, not
to abuse this his long suffering any longer, but now while the day of mercy
lasts, to humble our selves, and turn unto him by true repentance. These are
the days of grace, but how long they will last, God only knows: For when
death once comes, he shows no more mercy. The old world, because they
abused the long suffering of God 1. Pet. 3.19, ^0.
were destroyed, and are now in hell in prison for it, as Peter teaches. And
undoubtedly the same prison will be our portion if we take the same course
that they did.

Secondly, in this threatening we may observe, that all irrepentant sinners
have God for their enemy, to fight against them with a drawn sword. For this
cause sin in Scripture is called rebellion, and every sinner is a rebel
against God. A fearful thing it is to have God for an enemy: and yet this is
the condition, not only of such as did never repent, but of all those that
hold the name of Christ in profession, and yet continue in any one sin,
without renewing their repentance. This also must serve to induce every man
that has not repented now to begin: and if they have begun, to repent more,
daily renewing the same for their daily slips, and so shall they be the friends
of Christ, as Iam. 2 13
Abraham was, and a^ his disciples were, Io^. 15.15.

Thirdly, in these two threatening^ Christ shows himself to be the true
Doctor of his Church: for he will fight against these Nicolaitans, when as he
will only come unto his Church. Where we see he deuideth his word aright:
wherein consists the principal wisdom of a true Prophet, giving comforts
to whom comfort belongs, and threatening judgments to whom judgment is due;
and making difference of judgments according to the state of the persons
against whom they are threatened. For the heavy judgments of God must not be
threatened against all persons, but against the impenitent. And because there
be degrees of judgments, temporal, and eternal; therefore temporal
judgments must be threatened to those to whom they belong, and eternal
judgments denounced against those to whom they belong: observing the
circumstances of time, place, and persons, according to Christ's example in this
place, and else where. So likewise the benefits of the Gospel are not to be
propounded to every person hand over head without difference, but with
restraint to some only, as Gods Prophets have done. It is often a great
offense in the Church, when the benefits of the Gospel are propounded to all,
and the threatening of the law denounced against all, without limitation or
restraint. The conditions therefore of repentance and impenitencie, of faith
and unbelief, and also the degrees of them all, must carefully be observed in
the dispensation of the Law and the Gospel.

Fourthly, the end of Christ's fighting must be considered: for first he
intends to reclaim them from their evil ways; but if they will not be
reclaimed, then to cause the same word to be an occasion of their deeper
condemnation. This must be deeply weighed of us all, who have had by Gods
mercy for many years the plentiful preaching of the gospel, by which God
has continually rebuked and checked the sins that be among us, as
ignorance, blaspemie, and filthiness, cruelty, and all iniquities whatsoever:
and the same thing the Lord yet continues to do unto us. We therefore must
think, that all this while the Lord is fighting against us: when ignorance is
reproved in the ministry of the word, the ignorant person must think the
Lord is fighting against him: and so all Atheists, blasphemers, adulterers,
oppressers, and cruel persons, when their sins are reproved, they must know
that the Lord stands face to face against them with the sword of his mouth,
seeking to reclaim them from these iniquities, as he did to Balaam in his
way. And when any man's sins be thus touched, he must not rebel, but humble
himself, as Balaam fell before the Angel: considering it is the Lord that
wageth battle against him. When we hear that foreign nations shake their
swords against us, how are we moved, both high and low? Shall we fear the
sword of mortal man, and shall we not tremble when we hear that the sword of
the everliving God is shaken against us? Those therefore whose hearts are
guilty of any one sin, must humble themselves by true and speedy
repentance, there is no withstanding of the Lord: if his sword do not cure us,
it will cut us in pieces: if his word do not convert us from our sins, it
will be an occasion to cast our souls deeper into hell. Thus he dealt with
Balaam, when he would not be restrained from giving bad counsel, he was slain
among the Midianites. Few think on these things; from whence comes such
great contempt of Gods ordinance in the ministry of the word, as we see at
this day: but they must know, that either death or life come by the stroke of
this sword, and therefore they must repent.

Fifthly, note the title given to Gods word: it is called The sword of Christ's
mouth: not only because it was once delivered by himself, from his own mouth,
but because it does daily proceed from his mouth: for the Ministers of the
gospel, which be truly called, are the very mouth of Christ, from which Gods
people receive his word. Ie^. 15 19.
If thou shall return (says the Lord to Jeremy) and shall separate the
precious from the vile, then shall thou stand before me, and be according to my
word. 2. Cor. 5.19, We are the ambassadors of Christ, beseeching you in his
steed: which is an high and wonderful honor. The consideration whereof is a
ground of sundry duties.

First, all students that are in the way of preparation to higher callings,
must hereby learn to conceive a good opinion of the Ministry of the gospel,
and to affect the same above other callings. For though the blind world count
it a base calling, yet Christ we see makes the minister his own mouth: which
honor is not given either to the Lawyer or to the Physician.

Secondly, hereby every Minister of the Gospel is taught to deliver nothing in
his public Ministry, but the pure word of God, so far forth as Christ
shall enable him: and that also in so pure a manner, as in the persuasion of
his own conscience he thinks Christ would speak, if he were there present;
like unto faithful ambassadors, who speak only the will of their lord and
prince, and in that manner which their lord and prince does best approve. If
this were well weighed, we should not have such preaching as is commonly used,
consisting of a mixture of testimonies, partly divine, and partly humane,
considering that neither Christ nor his Apostles preached so.

Thirdly, the people also are hence taught their duty: when they hear a
sinful man like unto themselves speak unto them in the Ministry of the
word, they must not despise Gods ordinance, because it is delivered by man, but
receive the same, as from the mouth of Christ, and as the pure word of God, so
far forth as it consents with holy scripture. In this behalf Paul blessed
God for the Thessalonians, That they received the word from him, not as the
word of man, but as it is indeed the word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. verse. 13.

Sixthly, where Christ says, I will fight against them with the sword of my
mouth. We may observe, that the kingdom of Christ is spiritual, and not of
this world: for if it were worldly, then a civil sword, wielded by the hand of
man, should belong unto him: But he has no such sword, he gouernes his church
and people by the sword of his mouth, his holy word. Whereby appears, that the
primacie of the sea of Rome is from hell, not from heaven: for the Pope says
he is Christ's vicar, and yet he will be armed with both swords: when as Christ
deals not with the civil sword, but only uses the sword of his mouth.

Verse. 17. Let him that has an ear hear what the spirt says unto the
Churches: To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the Manna which is
hid, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written,
which no man knows, saving he that receives it. These words are the
conclusion of this Epistle, which contains two parts, a commandment, and a
promise. The commandment in these words, Let him that has an ear hear what
the spirit says unto the Churches. The promise in the words following, To him
that overcomes, etc. The commandment serves to stir up Gods church to
attention, in marking that which Christ delivers unto them, as has been
showed before verse 7.

In this commandment of Christ note two things: First, that all men in Gods
church are bound in conscience to frequent Sermons, whereby they may come to
the knowledge of those things that God prescribes unto them. At the nativity,
Easter, and such good times as they are called, ignorant people will come to
the church: but it may be not once more of a month after, or a quarter of a
year. But Christ says, Ioh. 10.27
My sheep hear my voice. So that he that will not come to hear the voice of
Christ, is none of his sheep. Math. 16.19, Christ says to Peter, I will give
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. There the preaching of the gospel,
is the key of the kingdom of heaven: So that look how necessary it is for a
man to have his soul saved and to enter into heaven, so behoouefull is it for
him to hear Sermons: for that is the turning of the key whereby we enter into
this kingdom, 2. Cor. 5.18. the preaching of the gospel is the doctrine of
reconciliation: and therefore look how necessary it is for a man to be
reconciled to God; so needful is it for him to hear the word preached. He
that is of God bears Gods word: and he that bears it not is not of God, 1.
John. 4.6. But men have many excuses to exempt themselves from hearing
Sermons: Some say if God himself would preach, or Christ, or an Angel from
heaven, then they would hear; but so long as sinful man preaches it is no
great matter though they absent themselves. Answ. This is a presumptuous
reason: for the preaching of the gospel by man, is Gods own ordinance; and
that for these causes: First, since Adams fall man cannot abide the voice of
God: so as if man should hear God speak, he would cry out with the Jews,
Exodus, 20.19, Let not God talk with us lest we die. And with Peter, Luke 5.^.
Depart from me I am a miserable sinner: Secondly, God speaks by man to try
the obedience and humility of men; to see whether they would be content to
receive and believe his word, being propounded by sinful man that is like unto
themselves: And thirdly, to maintain love between man and man, by mutual
conuersing in this holy ordinance. Others do say, they may well enough keep
themselves in their families, for there they have their Bible wherein be the
Sermons of Christ, and of his Prophets and Apostles* than which no minister can
preach better. Ans. It is Gods ordinance, that these Sermons of Christ, of the
Prophets, and Apostles, should be again handled, preached, and expounded in
his church: and therefore every man is bound in conscience to come into the
congregations, and there to hear with reverence Gods holy word. Others will
not come to the church, for (they thank God) they can serve God with as good a
heart on horseback, or on their iourneys, as those that come unto the
sermons. Answ. These persons are blind and ignorant, a seduced heart beguileth
them, and therefore they despise the ordinance of God: but let them hear what
Solomon says* Pro. 28.9.
He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, that is, the doctrine of
God: even his prayer shall be abominable. God speaks unto us in the
ministry of his word, and if we refuse to hear him there, shall we think
he will hear us when we pray? Know therefore, if thou refuse his word, he
will refuse thy prayers: neither indeed can any without the word pray aright.
Such people deceive themselves, their prayers in their needless iourneyes
shall be their judges to condemn them: for therein they confess God is to
be worshipped, and yet in practice they reject his direction for the same.
Lastly, others say they have knowledge enough, the ministers can teach them no
more than they know: and therefore they need not go hear so much preaching.
Answ. These that pretend such perfect knowledge, are commonly the most
ignorant, not knowing the end of this ordinance of God: for preaching serves
not only to teach men to know God and his will; but also to increase in
knowledge, and to yield obedience to that which they know. If therefore thou
have knowledge, it is well; but that is not enough, if thou would be blessed
thou must do that which thou know, John. 13.17. And for this cause the most
learned man that is, must still frequent the hearing of Sermons, to further
himself in obedience: because a man may know much and yet want conscience to
obey.

Secondly, in this commandment men are enjoined the reading of the word, and
hearing of it read, not only publicly but also privately in their families:
that thereby also they may come to the knowledge of that thing which Christ
propounds unto them. Luke 10.26, Christ says to one of the Scribes; what is
written, how read thou? Taking it for granted that men must read the
Scripture privately. And the Lord says, Isay. 5.1^.
My people go into captivity, because they have no knowledge: yea they perish,
Hose. 4.6. But woeful is the defect of this duty; for many have not the Bible
in their houses for their private exercise in the word: and in many families it
is set up for a show, or lies covered with dust, when as cards and tables are
worn with use. It is not amiss for men to get the statutes of the land into
their houses, and to read therein for the knowledge of men's laws: but yet
herein they are blame worthy, that either they have not, or else regard not
the book of God, whereby they might be acquainted with the statutes of the
Lord, for the better guiding of our unruly affections. Other things in this
commandment have been observed before.

The second part of this conclusion, is an excellent promise made to him that
overcomes, which for substance has been handled in the conclusions of the
former Epistles. Here only some special blessings are particularly promised:
In the handling whereof two points are to be considered: First, the persons to
whom the promise is made, To him that overcomes: whereof entreatie was made
before verse. 7. Secondly, the blessings promised, comprised in this threefold
gift of God: First, To eat of the Mannah which is hid: Secondly, To receive a
white stone: Thirdly, A new name written in the stone. All which three signify
in effect, The election, vocation, justification and glorification of Gods
people. But I will handle them in particular. The I. benefit is, The giving of
the hidden Manna to eat. Manna properly signifies that food which God gave
from the clouds to the people of Israel, which for the excellency of it is
called, The Psa. 78.24
wheat of heaven. The Verse. 25.
food of the strong, o^ the food of Angels. In form it was like Exodus 16.31.
Coriander seed, and in color white, in taste it was pleasant and sweet.
Herewith God fed his people in the wilderness 40. years: to Deu. 8.3.
teach them, That man lives not by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God. This is thought to be the same white Manna
which is used in shops at this day, but I will not dispute thereof, seeing it
is doubtful. That Manna did represent a more excellent food: and therefore
Paul calls it, 1. Co. 10.^.
A spiritual meat, because it represented unto them the spiritual food of the
soul, Christ Jesus the true Manna, Job. 6.5^.
The living bread that came down from heaven: as we may see at large, John.
6. And so in this place by Manna, we must not understand the Manna of the
people of Israel: But Christ himself the true food of life eternal. How
Christ does become unto us our spiritual Manna, and the true food of life, I
will show by these conclusions. I. He is this food, not in regard of his
doctrine, or of his miracles, nor yet only in regard of the blessings of his
death and passion: But Christ himself God and man is true food of life, as is
showed at large, John. 6. And in Christ himself are his death and passion, and
the benefits thereof, food unto the soul. II. Conclus. Christ is this food,
not as he lay in the manger, or as he now sits in heaven at the right hand
of his father: but as he suffered the wrath of God and pangs of hell upon the
cross, and as he died and was buried; for our life comes out of Christ's
death. III. Concl. He is this food, not in regard of his godhead, for that no
creature can receive or apply to his justification, or sanctification: but in
regard of his manhood, subsisting in the person of the son of God. Christ's
flesh profits nothing, severed from the godhead: but yet his body and blood
have this virtue, to be true spiritual food, because they are the flesh and
blood of that person which is God. IV. Concl. Christ is not a bodily food to be
received with the hand, eaten with the mouth, and digested in the stomach: but
he is a spiritual food, to be received, applied, and digested by faith^ And
being so received he does preserve the soul unto eternal life. This faith is
that whereby a man is enabled to believe that Christ crucified is his Christ.
And thus does he become our spiritual Mannah, when by true faith we assure
our selves that he suffered for our sins, and rose again for our
righteousness.

Is Christ crucified, the true bread of life, The Use.
and our spiritual Manna? then should we long after him, with a true
spiritual hunger in our very hearts, as truly as any man longs after meat
and drink. When a man is famished, for the staying of his hunger he will pull
his own flesh from his bones and eat it: Even so, for the satisfying of our
hungry souls with Christ Jesus this food of life, we must forsake the dearest
thing in all the world, though it be our own flesh: For that which we will do
for our bodies, we must do much more for our souls. Que. How shall we attain
to this true spiritual hunger? Answer. It is with the hunger of the soul, as
it is with the hunger of the body. In bodily hunger be two things: A great
pain in the stomach for want of nourishment: And a strong and earnest
appetite, which continues till the stomach be filled. Even so we should feel
a pain in our hearts, rising from a sense of the wrath of God for our sins:
And then we must labor to have a greedy appetite, and earnest desire to be
filled with Christ crucified; and never be at rest til we be satiat with the
merit of his passion, which only can free us from Gods wrath, and fill us with
true joy. But woeful be these times: for there is in most men's hearts a
deadness of spirit, whereby they are made insensible of inward wants and
miseries: They are like unto full men that feel no pain for want of food.
There is indeed an hunger, nay a greedy worm in many after the profits,
pleasures, and honors of this world: but few or none do hunger after Christ.
But if we would have Reu. 19.^
part in the feast of the Lamb, we must labor to have this longing appetite
after Christ: If we be full stomacked we shall have no refreshing from his
merits. Mary says truly in her song, Luke 1.5^.
God fills the hungry with good things, but the rich and full go away
empty. Which is a most fearful curse, when the soul is debarred from this
food of life, But Mat. 5.6.
blessed are we if we hunger after Christ and his righteousness, for then we
shall be satisfied: Christ will give unto us our fill of the water of life
freely, Revel. 21.6.

Secondly, here we may take a view of the profane madness of the world: For
though this bread of life Christ Jesus, be the most excellent food of all,
far surpassing the Israelits Manna, the food of Angels; yet it is nothing or
little desired. Men are like to the foolish Israelits that had more regard to
leekes and onions, and to the flesh pots of Egypt than to Angels food which God
gave them from heaven. They spend their wits, and their strength, by day and by
night, that they may satiate themselves with the frail riches and vain
pleasures of the world: And yet these men have the name to be the only men,
whereas indeed they are profane Esau^, and wicked Israelits. As therefore this
practice is damnable: so must we learn to detest it. And on the contrary,
seeing Christ Jesus is the true Manna, our principal care and desire must be
to be fed therewith. We must think it is a great disgrace to Christ Jesus,
which he cannot endure without revenge, that we should have less regard to
him the true bread of life, than to earthly food which perishes.

Thirdly, here we may see that which is usual in the Scripture entreating of
the Sacraments, to wit, the name of the sign given to the thing signified: for
Christ here promises them Manna, meaning thereby, not the Israelits food, but
himself, whereof their Manna was a sign, a seal, a pledge: as appears
plain, because Paul calls it spiritual meat, 1. Cor. 10^2.

Further Christ is not only called Manna, but hidden Manna; to put a difference
between himself and the Manna of the Israelits which was visible that every
man might see. And Christ is called hidden Manna for two causes: first, because
no man by nature knows this food, or desires it: secondly, because God does
not reveal this food to al men effectually; as may appear, Mat. 11.25. I give
thee thanks (oh father) that thou have hidden these things: (that is, the
doctrine of the gospel and the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven) from the
great and wise men of the world, and have opened them unto babes.

The Use.
Is Christ hidden Mannah? then first here learn to take knowledge of the state
of men in the world: They know not Christ, neither do they feel in themselves
any want of this food, and therefore they know not what it means: for meat
and drink is never known, till a man be hungry. Yea, to many that live in
the church this Manna is hidden: for though men hear the doctrine of Christ,
yet not one of an hundred feel in themselves any want of Christ: let the
conscience speak and this will prove true. Ignorant people bless themselves
and say all is well, Christ is a savior: when as indeed to them Christ is
hidden. Nay which is yet more lamentable, to many which teach and preach
Christ, Christ is hidden Manna: for many of them never felt in their hearts and
conscience, that they had need of Christ for the pardon of their sins, and
the salvation of their souls. It is not the knowledge in the brain that makes
Christ known to man; but knowledge in the conscience, when a man feels in his
heart and soul, that he stands in need of the blood of Christ, and all the
benefits of his passion for his redemption and salvation. And seeing this is
the condition of the world, we on the contrary must labor to feel in our
selves our own poverty, and to see in our selves that we stand in need of
Christ, and of all the benefits of his passion, to free our souls from the
gulf of hell, and the wrath of God. Away with bare mental knowledge: for till
we have this true sense of our own wants, we can never get into our hearts
any sound grace.

Secondly, is Christ's hidden bread not revealed to all? Then calling effectual
to salvation (so as if he will, every man may be saved) is not universal: for
then should Christ not be hidden, but revealed to all: which is not so.
Election therefore and effectual vocation is definite and particular. And thus
much of the first branch of this gift.

The second gift, is a white stone. Here Christ borrows a comparison from the
custom and manner of the gentiles, to whom these Epistles are directed. A
white stone was of great use among the^: For first, the judge in giving
sentence, used white stones, and black stones: the giving of a white stone was
a token of absolution; the giving of a black stone, a sign of condemnation.
Here then the giving of a white stone, may signify Absolution from Christ, of
all a man's sins and trespasses. Again, when the gentiles would know, which
were luckie days (as they spoke) and which were unlucky; they used to cast
lots with white and black stones, and that day which light on a white stone
was judged to be a lucky day, that which light on a black stone was judged to
be unlucky. This practice they used as might be showed by sufficient records.
And though this practice have no warrant, yet may Christ allude unto it, to
signify unto them that he will give them good success in all their actions;
yea happy days, and a blessed life full of all joys and pleasures. Others
do expound it of giving victory, whereof the giving of a white stone was a
sign: but this is not so fit, neither can it be showed by true record that
they had such a practice. I rather take it Christ alludeth to the first, and
here promises to him that overcomes, the true remission of all his sins,
and full absolution; not in regard of civil punishment, but in respect of
guilt and punishment before God, which is eternal damnation.

Here note one infallible token of the pardon of sin: namely, to overcome,
that is, to renounce our selves, and by faith rely wholly on Christ,
testifying this faith by maintaining good conscience and true religion unto the
end: And therefore if any desire to know whether God have absolved him of his
sins, let him labor thus to overcome, and then shall this assurance be
sealed up unto him.

The third gift is, a new name written in the stone. What this new name should
be S. John expresses in his first Epistle, chapter 3. verse. 1. saying: Behold,
what love the father has showed to us that we should be called the sons of
God. This new name therefore is to be the son and heir of God in Christ.
And because it is given of God himself, therefore we must not think it is an
idle name, or a bare title only: but withal God gives him a new condition,
whereof this name is a token and title. God changed Abrams name, and called him
Abraham; but it was when he had changed his estate, and made him the father of
the faithful. And there was a change in Jacob, when God called him Israel.
This new name then signifies the giving of a new estate to a man or woman,
which they had not before: namely, their regeneration, whereby they are made to
die unto sin, and to live unto God: for therewith goes the blessing of
adoption, whereby they become the sons of God, and heirs with Christ, and so
have heaven and earth for their possession; and all miseries and crosses, yea
sin it self turning to their good, they have also the protection of Gods
holy Angels in this life, and at the last gasp death to be no death, but a
strait passage to eternal life.

Further, this new name is said to be written in the white stone: that is, in
the pledge of absolution: which shows the union of these two: Absolution, and
Regeneration. So that whom the Lord of his mercy absolues from their sins,
them in his bounty he brings to a new estate and condition. He that is in
Christ, is a new creature, 2. Cor. 5.17. A point to be observed, as yielding
special advice to reform the gross and common abuse of Christ. Men persuade
themselves, that Christ is their Savior, and will pardon their sins, for he
is merciful: and thereupon they take occasion to live as they list. But let no
man herewith deceive himself: for they that have absolution, have regeneration
also: a new condition of life goes with the fruition of Gods mercy in Christ:
they that go on in sin, have not the pardon of sin: the corruption of sin
must be abolished, where the guilt of sin is absolved; and their lives are
reformed that have their sins remitted. Here some man may say, Why are not
those called by this new name, to whom Christ gives it, for usually men are
called after their names? The answer is made in the end of the verse: Because
no man knows that name save he that receives it: that is, in that manner and
certainetie as he that receives it. And therefore the children of God must
not be much offended when they are reviled for their profession, because the
world knows not their estate.

Here we may observe diverse points: First, that he which is the child of God,
and has this new name given him, knows that he is Gods child, justified and
sanctified. Neither is this knowledge by probable conjecture only, and good
hope, as the Papists would have it; but certain and infallible: for else
others should know it as well as he that receives it: which is here denied.
Each one is bound in charity to be persuaded, that godly professors are the
sons and daughters of God: But the man himself that has received this new
name and new estate, he knows it otherwise, and therefore certainly and
infallibly.

Secondly, if no man know this name but he that receives it; then can none
beside God and the conscience, know from within the man, his particular faith
and adoption. And hereby we are to be admonished, to beware of charging the
evil and hard censure of hypocrisy upon any that live in the church: in so
doing we ouershoot our selves: this judgment belongs to God, not to man, save
only to the man himself; for we cannot discern the good within the man
properly, but by effects. Quest. How far forth may a man judge of another
man's election? Answ. There be two degrees of judgment: judgment of certentie,
and judgment of charity. Judgment of certentie is when a man can set down
certainly, such a man shall be saved: This is peremptory judgment belonging
unto God, and to some men only, so far forth as the Lord reuealeth it unto
them: as he did the estate of some men, to David and to some Prophets.
Whereupon David sometimes prays for the final destruction of his enemies: but
this is not given ordinarily, no not to Gods ministers. The judgment of
charity is that which bind^ a man to judge the best of another: and herein be
two degrees. First, touching the unregenerate, charity binds us, not to
despair of such as yet live profanely; but to hope that God will in good time
call them. And touching the regenerate, who have given good testimonies of
their vocation, charity binds us to be persuaded without doubt that they be
the children of God. And this we may do without repugnance to this place: for
though we cannot from within the man know his estate, yet by the fruits we
may; which is the highest degree of judgment that charity can exercise.

Thirdly, here we see the church of Rome is deceived, who make Visibilitie the
mark of Gods church: for Gods church is a company of men which believe: the
ground of the church is Gods election, and adoption, and man's faith, which none
other can see but the parties that have them. The signs thereof may be seen,
but properly the church cannot be seen. It comes to be visible by the fruits
of election, and by the outward works of love, which proceed from faith. We
therefore hold far better, that we believe there is a church, and not that
we see the church.

Lastly, if others know not the name of Gods children, then what marvel is it,
if the wicked miscall them? 1. John. 3.2, The world knows us not. Gods
children therefore must not be daunted at the reproaches of the wicked, but pray
with Christ, Father forgive them, they know not what they do, Luke 23.34.

Verse 18. And unto the Angel which is at Thyatira write, These things says
the son of God, which has his eyes like to a flame of fire, and his feet
like fine brass. Here follows the fourth particular commandment of Christ
unto John, as also the fourth particular Epistle. The commandment in these
words: To the Angel which is at Thyatira write; of the substance of this
commandment I have spoken before: only remember the end thereof, which is to
certify this church of Thyatira, that John had a calling and commandment
from God to write this Epistle unto them: and further to certify the whole
Church of God, to the end of the world, of his calling to write this book of
the Revelation.

The Epistle it self contains three parts: a Preface, a Proposition, and a
Conclusion. The Preface in these words: These things says the son of God*
which has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet like fine brass:
all which things almost have been handled in the beginning of this chapter,
and in the former, Ver 5.1^.15.
from whence they are borrowed. In the Preface, first is set down in whose
name the Epistle is written, to wit, in Christ's name: the causes thereof we
have showed before. Then Christ is described by three arguments: First, To be
the son of God: Secondly, To have eyes like a flame of fire: Thirdly, To have
feet like fine brass. For the first, In the former chapter he was called The
son of man: but here he is called The son of God; where by God we must not
absolutely understand the godhead of the whole Trinity, but the person of the
father, who being opposed either to the son or to the holy ghost, is usually
called God: not that he is God more than the son, or than the holy ghost; but
because he is the first in order, and because he is that person from whom the
godhead is communicated to the son and to the holy ghost. So that here Christ
is called the son of the father: which mystery we cannot fully understand,
for the word has not revealed the same: neither can we find it elsewhere out
of the word. But yet for the better conceiving thereof, remember these two
rules. I. That Christ is the son of the father, not in respect of his godhead,
but in respect of his person: For the godhead of the son is the same with the
godhead of the father: The godhead of the father does not beget, neither is the
godhead of the son begotten. II. Rule. Christ is the son of the father, not
by creation, as the Angels and Adam were; nor by adoption, as every believer
is; but by nature, in that he is begotten of the substance of his father
before all worlds: for the father communicates from himself the whole godhead
that is in himself unto his son.

Christ is here called the son of God, The Use.
to stir up reverence, attention, and care in this church, in marking and
obeying the things that follow in this particular Epistle. And in their example
Christ also teaches us, that when we hear the word of God preached or read
unto us, we should receive it with fear, and trembling and reverence: because
he that speaks unto us out of his word, is the son of God. When Pilate was
about to condemn our Savior Christ, he heard it said, that Christ was the
son of God. And thereupon he trembled, and was the more afraid, Ioh. 19.
verse. 8. shall a ^illie heathen man that knows not Christ tremble toward him
when he hears his name; and yet we that profess our selves to believe in
him be nothing moved with reverence toward him, when he speaks unto us in
his word? At his presence the hills melt, and at his voice the rocks cleave in
sunder: and therefore if our hearts shall not melt and cleave asunder with a
reverent fear when he shall speak unto us, we are worser than these
senseless creatures.

Secondly, Christ is said, To have eyes like a flame of fire: which we must not
conceive literally. The words are borrowed from the former chapter, verse. 14.
where Christ is described not as he is in truth, but as he appeared to John in
vision. We have showed before what is signified by these fiery eyes: namely,
Christ's infinite wisdom in himself, and vigilant zeal over his church. The
end wherefore he so describes himself to this church, is, to give them to
understand, that he can see and discern their very secret sins: for sundry
among them were given to private offenses, as to fornication and idolatry, as
we shall see afterward.

Here then we have an excellent remedy against secret sins: The Use.
shame and fear of punishment will restrain some men from open sins, but
yet the same men when they are in secret, do without fear commit privy sins
against the first and second table. But these men must remember, that being
withdrawn from the presence of men, they are yet in the presence of Christ:
for he has fiery eyes, wherewith he sees their most secret sins, which
they hide from the world. For though we may make fair weather with men, yet
we can never bleare the eyes of Christ. If fornicators, wantons, usurers, and
blasphemers would remember this, by Gods grace it would be a notable means at
least to restrain them from their secret sins, if not to move them unto the
practice of true repentance.

Thirdly, Christ is said to have feet like fine brass. Whereby is signified
(as has been showed) his infinite power and strength, whereby he does subdue
sin, Satan, and al his enemies, first unto himself, and then unto his
members. And Christ is thus described unto this church, to terrify certain
wicked men among them, that gave themselves to fornication, idolatry, and
other sins: as also to affright this whole church, who by their wicked
company were almost drawn away to the same sins.

Here we have a notable remedy against looseness of life: namely, The Use.
to consider that Christ, whom we call our Savior, walks continually in his
church with feet of brass to tread Satan and all his enemies under his feet:
and such are all that will not submit themselves to the regiment of his word,
Luke 19.27. If the blasphemer could consider this, it would stop his mouth: and
when the adulterer, the thief, or any sinner goes about his wicked devices,
this by Gods grace would be a notable means to make him break off his wicked
purpose. When Benhadad heard, that the king of Israel would come against him in
battle, 2 King 20* ^1.
He sent his men with ropes about their necks to crave peace, and in them
humbled himself. Shall men be thus afraid at the fury of man, and shall not
we tremble and fear at the fury of Christ, who has these feet of brass to
trample in pieces all his enemies? The want of this consideration is one maine
cause why sin does abound.

Verse. 19. I know thy works, and thy love and service, and faith, and thy
patience, and thy deeds, which are more at the last than at the first. Here
begins the second part of this Epistle, to wit, the Proposition; which
contains the substance and matter thereof: and it has two parts; a
commendation of this church, and a rebuke thereof. The commendation in the 19
verse; the rebuke or dispraise in the 20 verse and those that follow, almost to
the end of the chapter. The commendation is twofold: general in these words, I
know thy works. This has been handled before, verse. 2. The particular
commendation stands in five notable works: to wit, Love, Service, Faith,
Patience, and, Increase in godliness.

For the first, by Love we must understand Love to men: for afterward they are
commended for duties to God in faith and patience: but love and service are
duties of man to man. Touching Love, note three points: What this love is; What
is the property of this love; and how it is to be practiced. First, Love to
man is a gift of the spirit of God, whereby a man is well affected to his
neighbor for Gods sake. That love is a gift of the Spirit, is plain, Galat.
5. verse 22. where it is reckoned among the gifts of the spirit. Next I add,
That hereby a man is well affected to his neighbor. To be well affected to
another, is to rejoice at his good, and to desire and seek the same; and
withal to be grieved at his misery, and to ^eare the bowels of compassion
toward him, being ready to relieve and help him to our uttermost. By
Neighbor, we must not understand only those that are near unto us in
habitation, but even all those that are of the same nature with us, even any of
mankind. He is thy neighbor that is a man as thou art, and so bearing the
image of God as thou do be he friend or foe, near or stranger unto thee;
and to him must thou be well affected. Lastly, I say, For Gods sake: for God is
first and principally to be loved for himself, and man in God and for God,
because he is the creature of God, and bears his image. The love we bear to
man, is a fruit of our love unto God: for this commandment we have of him,
That he that loves God, should love his brother also, 1. John. 4.21.

II. point. The property of this love is, To be fervent; and that for two
causes: First, if need require, every man is bound within his calling to
testify his love 1. Ioh. 3.16.
by giving his life for his neighbor, though he be our enemy, or a stranger;
which we shall never do, unless our love be fervent. Secondly, there is much
ingratitude, hatred, emulation, and many injuries in the world: Now the persons
from whom these come, must be loved: the unworthiness of the party must not
quench our love, but it must burn when the waters of men's injuries and malice
would quench the same.

III. point. The practice of our love must be squared by this rule, The love of
our selves, as we wish our own good heartely, so we must wish our neighbors
good. This is the law of Nature, To do as a man would be done unto: And it is
the law of God, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Example: A man of
some trade is to make a bargain, and if he will lie, or use false weights and
measures, he may advantage himself. This the devil and his own corruption
will suggest unto him, while he is about the bargain: he therefore must call
to mind this rule of love, and examine his own heart, whether he would have
another man to deceive him by lying, by false weights, etc. The same thing must
men do, when they are tempted to oppression or cruelty, let them think
whether they would have others to wrong or oppress them; and so show forth
love by this rule, doing as they would be done unto. It were to be wished,
that our Church might have the deserved praise of this virtue of love: But
Christ foretold of these our days, That love should wax cold, Matthew. 24.12.
And 2. Tim. 3.2.
that men should be lovers of themselves. And so it is: for every man now is
for himself, no man seeks another good. Go through towns, markets, and
fayres, and rare it is to find a man that in his affairs seeks the common
good, as well as his own. For this is the common rule, May I not make of mine
own what I will? But he that has the grace of love, Seeks not his own
only, but the good of others also, 1. Corinthians. 13.5.

Here then we must learn to practice this virtue, The Use.
that we may have Christ's commendations with this church. Every man in the
general calling of a christian will make great show of love; as when he comes
to the Lords table, and in prayer: But in their particular affairs few show
forth true love; nay many by lying, oppression, cruelty, Flea the skin from
the flesh, and the flesh from the bone of the poor, Micha 3.2, 3*
and break the bones within the flesh, and chop them as for the pot, as the
Prophet speaks. These little consider this rule, or that account which the
Lord will take of them, who has sworn never to forget these works, Amos. 8.7.
Learn therefore in thy particular calling to show forth love, and employ thy
commodities, not for thy self alone, but for the good of those with whom thou
live: herein is love, and hereby shall thou be known to be the servant of
Christ, John. 13.35. and the child of God, Translated from death to life, 1.
John. 3. verse. 14.

The second thing for which this church is commended, is service, To omit the
diverse significations of the word, here it betokens a work of love, whereby
a man within the compass of his calling becomes a servant unto every man for
that man's good. Read Heb. 6.10, where this is both commended and described.
Gal. 5.13. Do service one to another in love. 1. Cor. 13.5. Love seeks not
her own, but makes her self servant to all, to do them good. And Christ's
commandment is, Let him that would be chief among you, be as the servant,
Luke. 22.26. Now the principal part of this service is, when a man is ready
with h^s goods, according to his ability, to help the poor, especially those
that be godly. This is a fruit of love, and therefore it is here set after it,
as also in the places before named, Hebr. 6. verse. 10. Gal. 5.13.

The Use.
It were to be wished that our church and people might have the like praise for
this virtue. But the richer sort spend their substance and wealth upon hawks
and hounds, bulls, and bears, upon costly attire, and banqueting: so as when
the poor that are in need come for relief, they have nothing to spare; and if
any thing be given, it is drawn as hardly from them as a ribbe out of their
side: Men will give frankly to delight themselves with plays and pastimes, and
such like vanities; but the poor that be their own flesh, may die in the
streets for want of that which men give to their dogs. But if we respect the
commendation of Christ Jesus, let us abandon these vanities which hinder us in
the practice of this virtue of service for the good of our brethren. And to
induce all men hereto, let them consider I. how the church of the Old testament
was charged with giving the first fruits of their wine, corn, and oil: and
likewise with many sacrifices and ceremonies which belonged to the temple:
these things indeed be ceased, and yet we may not mispend these good which
hereby are spared; for in the New testament the poor are in steed of the
altar, and they must have that which the altar had among the Jews. Again,
Isay. 58.18, He that powers forth his soul to the hungry, that is, he that
seeing the poor in misery, has the bowels of compassion moved toward them,
and from his pitiful heart releeueth their wants, according to his ability;
his light shall never be put out, but shall spring out of the darkness, and
his darkness shall be as the noone day. This is pure religion, Iam ^.27^
and undefiled before God, to visit the fatherless, and the widow in their
adversity. Remember this, He that has mercy upon the poor lends unto the
Lord, Prou. 19.17. So that when the poor come for relief, God comes to
borrow of us some of that which he has given us. The poor are the Lords
collectors, now when the Lord would borrow of us, shall we make denial, and
send him empty away? Thirdly, consider that Christ himself comes in the person
of the poor that is hungry, sick, naked, or in any want; and therefore if
we would escape the fearful sentence of condemnation at the last day, Away
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, for I was an hungered, and ye gave me
no meat, etc. then we must have regard unto the poor, and show our bounty in
their relief, who are our own flesh: so shall we make God our debtor, and
be commended with this church by Christ himself in this world, and at the day
of judgment hear that blessed voice of his approbation, Come ye blessed,
Math. 25.34.

The third virtue for which this church is commended, is their faith. By faith
here we are to understand Fidelity; which is a virtue whereby a man is
faithful to God in keeping that vow and promise which he made to him in his
baptism: which was to renounce and deny himself, and wholly to give up
himself to acknowledge one God in three persons; and accordingly to believe
in, to worship and obey the same God all his life long. In this sense is faith
taken of Paul, 1. Tim. 5.12
when he says, That younger widows have damnation, because they have
forsaken their first faith. And in the former Epistles of Christ unto these
churches, where he commands them to be faithful.

The Use.
It were to be wished that our churches and congregations, might in like manner
be commended for their fidelity to God: but that cannot truly be done of us
generally. It is a common thing for men to swear by their faith; but it is a
rare thing to find a man to keep his faith: as will appear by this short
survey of our people: For first, the greatest part in all places are ignorant
of God, of his word, and of their vow to him in baptism; and also void of
care to attain hereto: Now all these are unfaithful unto God. Others, though
they have knowledge, yet they have no love, nor care of good things, which
concern the kingdom of heaven: but all their delight is in eating, drinking,
gaming, and in pastimes and pleasures: Herein they spend their time and
strength, and these also have denied their first faith, and their case is
dangerous: for as yet their belly and their pleasure is their god, and their
end will be damnation. A third sort are termed the wise men of the world; but
if we regard their fidelity to God there is nothing in them; they are worldly
persons and earthly minded, such as spend both wit and strength to get wealth;
like unto the mole, who is always in the earth. These also are unfaithful
unto God, in regard of their vow in baptism: For as they account gain
godliness, so gold is their god, and they say to the wedge of gold, Thou art
my confidence. Seeing then all these be unfaithful unto God, we must hereby be
admonished to remember what we have promised in our baptism: And withal have
care to perform the same as we tender the salvation of our souls. For if we
be unfaithful, as Paul said of the younger widows, damnation belongs unto us.

The fourth virtue for which this church is commended, is patience. Of this I
have spoken before verse. 2. Here only note, that it is joined with love to
men, with fidelity to God, and with service both to God and men in the duties
of love. Whereby Christ would signify that no good thing can be done by any
man, without patience. Love is no love without patience: neither is faith any
faith without patience: for when a man loves another, for his love he shall
sometime receive hatred. Now unless he have patience to bear that hatred,
his love will surcease. And so if a man have care to be faithful unto God, in
the world he shall be sure to have much contempt: so that unless he have
patience to bear the same, his faithfulness will fail, Patience brings
forth experience, and experience hope, Romans 5.4. and Romans 15.4, No comfort of
the Scriptures, nor hope without patience. And therefore in the parable of the
sower, The good ground Luke 8.15.
brings forth fruit with patience: though a man have never so good gifts, yet
without patience he cannot put them in practice. This therefore we must join
with all the good graces we have: as Peter counsels us, 2. Peter. 1.6. When
a man is in temptation, and apprehends the wrath of God, which is the sorest
thing that can be, without patience he will despair: Without patience a man
will be weary of well-doing, both in duties to God and man, and to his own
soul. Hence the Apostle says, ye have need of patience, Heb. 10.36.

And thy works. Here Christ repeateth his general commendation of this
church, which we must not think to be done in vain, but herby he would let us
see, how exceeding well he did approve of their works. The cause why he liked
them so well, was their increase in well-doing: whereof we shall entreat
afterward.

Christ repeateth his approbation of their works after four worthy virtues,
The Use.
to show unto us, what things are required in the doing of any work that shall
be acceptable to God: Namely, these four things, faith, love, service, and
patience. Faith is necessary, because in well doing a man must testify his
fidelity to God, which he shall best do, if first he learn out of the word,
whether God have commanded that work to be done or not: that so he may be
sure to do or not do that which God will have him: for it is not sufficient to
have a good intent in the doing of our works, as is commonly thought, though
falsely; but our works must be done in faith, that is in a sure persuasio^ out
of Gods word, that the things we do are approved of God: for whatsoever is not
of faith is sin. Secondly, love is necessary in every good work we go
about, For faith works by love, Gal. 5.6. Hence the Apostle says, 1. Cor.
13.3. If a man should give his body to be burned: and bestow all his goods in
alms upon the poor: yet if he did not these in love it would not please God.
Thirdly, service to man is required in our good works. This must be carefully
marked: for the end of man's life is in his calling to serve man, and by that to
serve God. Col. 3.24. Servants must obey their masters, and in their persons
do service unto Christ. And that which is there spoken of servants, must be
referred to the works of every man in his calling: they must be done for the
good of men, so as God may be served in them. This overthrows the foolish
conceit of the Papists, which think that the most excellent works of all are
fasting, pilgramage, wearing of rough attire, and whipping of their bodies: For
good works must be done in faith and love, to benefit men, either in soul or
body: but these works of theirs are not done in faith, neither do they profit
the doers nor any others; Fasting has it place, yet it is no good work but a
thing indifferent in it self. Lastly, patience is necessary in every good
work, that men faint not in doing that which is good: for they that do any
good thing shall be sure of many crosses, partly from men, and partly from
Satan, as also by Gods providence: Now when these befall a man in well doing
without patience they will stay his proceeding: And therefore it is truly said,
That be good ground brings forth fruit with patience.

The Use.
These being the virtues that make a work acceptable to God: we must labor in
every action of our lawful calling whatsoever it be, to practice the same in
faith, love, service, and patience. We must not tie good works to church
matters only, as hearing the word, and giving alms; but the practice of any
work of a man's lawful calling be it never so base, with these virtues is a
good work, and approved of God in it kind, as well as the best work that is:
not for the work it self, but because therein does appear faith, love,
service, and patience: and because this church so performed their works,
therefore does God double his approbation.

The last virtue for which this church is commended, is increase in godliness,
in these words, And that they are more at the last than at the first. The church
of Ephesus was before reproved for decay and loss of the graces of God; but
this church did grow and increase in graces, and therefore are her works more
approved, than the works of any other church.

It were to be wished that our congregations might be commended for their
increase in godliness, in faith, obedience, The Use.
and other good works; but that cannot justly be done, for the number of our
people is increased, but their growth in grace does not appear. Many live in
ignorance, and though they hear much, yet they profit little, so as it may be
said of them, as the Author to the Hebrews says, H^b. 5.12.
Whereas concerning the time ye ought to be teachers, you have need again that
we teach you the first principles of the word of God. And as Paul says of
certain women, ^. Tim. ^.7
They are always learning, and never come to the knowledge of the truth.
Others also, though they know something, yet they practice less than they
which know nothing. And which is worst of all, many that heretofore have ^ad
good beginning in them, by their bad conversation, and the greedy cares of
this world have lost the same again, and go backward in knowledge, in
obedience, in faith, and love. Rare it is to find those that are like to this
church of Thyatira, whose works are better at the last than at the first. A
fearful case it is, to be ignorant of Gods will, and a great judgment of God,
to decay in love and other graces: and therefore that we may prevent Gods
judgments, we must have care to get knowledge, and to increase therein, and
with knowledge to join obedience in all good duties to God and man. Some plead
for themselves by reason of age, want of memory, and capacity: but these must
learn to show forth better affections, and more sincere obedience.

The younger sort also must employ their wit and strength to get knowledge, and
with knowledge join obedience, that they may increase in grace as they grow in
days. Yea every one that has any good beginning, must endeavor to make it
more: For to him that has shall more given, and he shall have abundance; but
from him that hides his gift, or abuses the same, shall be taken away that
which he seems to have, Luke 8.18.

Verse. 20. Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, that thou
suffer that woman Iesabell, which calls her self a prophetess, to teach
and deceive my servants, to make them to commit fornication, and to eat meat
sacrificed to idols. Here is Christ's reproof of this church of Thyatira, and
it is twofold: First, of the whole church, in this 20. verse: Secondly, of a
woman in that church, verse. 21. In the reproof of the whole church note two
things: The reproof it self; And the reason thereof. The reproof it self is
contained in these words, Notwithstanding I have something against thee: That
is, though I have praised thee for many worthy works, yet there be some
things which I do not approve. This reproof has bin handled in the former
Epistles. The reason of the reproof follows in these words, That thou
suffer the woman Iesabell, who calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and
seduce my servants.

This reason of her reproof contains sundry points worthy our
consideration. I. From the phrase and form of the words we may consider the
large power that God gave to his church: which was, besides the power to preach
the word, and administer the Sacraments, a further power to appoint who should
preach among them, and who should not preach: and also a power to repress
evil men and evil women, and so to keep them in order. The like power was
given to the church of Ephesus, as we have seen in the Epistle to that church:
they had power to discern false Prophets, and Apostles, and to restrain the
same. The like power did God give to all churches, as we shall see if we read
the histories of the church; and great cause there is hereof: For without this
authority no church could long stand and be a church.

II. Here note that it is not sufficient for a church to have the preaching of
the word, but it must have severity and sharp government, whereby wicked
people may be restrained. This church is therefore discommended for that she
used not that severe authority which God had given her in suppressing of sin.
And in our congregations the like fault is to be found; where much preaching
is, yet sin abounds, as adultery, blasphemy, usury, and cruelty: and the
cause is for that this severe execution of government in restraining sins, is
not so straightly put in practice as it ought to be.

Again, in this reason of his reprofe Christ does charge the^ with two faults:
First, for suffering a woman to teach: Secondly, for suffering a woman to
seduce his people. For the first, the word translated teach, is in the New
testament commonly put for public teaching in the ministry. Their fault
then was this, that they suffered a woman to teach openly: and it is against
the word of God, 1. Tim. 2.12. I permit not a woman to teach. And, 1. Cor.
14.34, 35, Women ought to keep silence in the congregation, and be subject to
their husbands, and learn of them at home. Object. But Deborah was a
Prophetess, Iud. 4.4. And Hulda prophesied, 2. Kin. 22.4. For Josiah sent to
her for counsel, 2. Chro. 34. And therefore women may prophecy. An. These
women had extraordinary gifts and calling: and therefore upon their example we
may not make an ordinary rule. II. Ob. But it may seem Paul allows it, when
he says, A woman praying, or prophesying uncovered dishonoreth her head, 1.
Co. 11.5. Answ. Hereto some do answer thus, that in the infancy of the church
some women were extraordinarily endued with that gift, and did indeed
prophecy. Others judge it to have been a fault in that church, and therefore
say, in the 14. cha. the Apostle reproves it, commanding women to keep
silence in the churches. Thirdly, a woman may be said to pray when she gives
her assent to the prayer of the minister, by saying, Amen: and she may be said
to prophecy, when she Sings Psalms, or reads the Scripture: For so the
word is used in Scripture, 1. Chron. 25.1. Asaph and his company prophesied
with harpes and vials, That is (as it is translated) they sung prophesies, and
played thereunto upon their instruments.

From the rebuke of Christ against this church, The Use.
we gather that it is not warrantable by Gods word for a woman to administer
the Sacrament of baptism. For baptism is a seal of the covenant in the
public ministry, and so a part thereof, and must go with the preaching of
the word, and may not be administered by women, who are not allowed to preach,
no not in time and case of necessity when men are wanting. And although they
may not teach publicly, yet they may teach at home, and in the absence of
their husband it is her duty to teach her children. Proverb. 31, Lemuel, that
is, Solomon is taught many worthy things of his mother. And Timothy was
brought up of a child in the scriptures by his grandmother Lois, and his mother
Eunice, 2. Tim. 1.5.

Hence some would gather, that as a woman may not teach publickely, so she may
not publickely govern in the commonwealth. But this consequence is not good:
for public teaching is flatly forbidden to a woman, so is not public civil
regiment. There is special reason why she may not publickely teach; for it is
the will of God, that as Christ was a man, so they that stand in his room and
stead in the public ministry, should also be men. But the regiment of a
kingdom is a civil thing, and so may lawfully be administered by a woman when
she comes unto it by lawful succession to her father, whose whole
patrimony in the want of sons she may rightly enjoy. Object. But the woman
must b^e in subjection unto the man, 1. Cor. 14.^4. Answ. So she may, and yet
have soueraignetie in the kingdom. Object. But the man is the head of the
woman, 1. Cor. 11.3. Answ. That is, the man in that he i^ a man is a person
more excellent than the woman as she is a woman: Yet the person that in regard
of sex is inferior, may have more excellent gifts, and so likewise may
exercise authority and rule* and we find by good experience* that the
government of a woman is a ha^pie government; no records of time can show a
more happy regiment for blessings temporal and spiritual under any man, than
we have long enjoyed under our noble queen.

The second fault of this Church is, that they suffered a woman to seduce and
teach false doctrine, and thereby to seduce Gods people. That this is a fault,
Christ's reproof shows evidently, and therefore I will not stand to prove it.

The Use.
Hence we may gather, that every man is not to be left to his own conscience,
to teach and hold what doctrine he will: but all such men or women as ^each
erroneous doctrines, by the governors of the Church are to be restrained. It
is a grievous fault in any Church not to restrain the authors and maintainers
of sects and false doctrines, and of opinions which stand not with the truth of
Gods word: and on the contrary, it is a virtue and a good gift in any church,
when they restrain the authors and favorers of sects and false doctrine. And
in this regard our Church is to be commended and approved, and the
commonwealth likewise, for making laws to restrain both Popish recusants and
some Protestants, who depart from this our Church, as being no Church of God,
but a member of Antichrist and of Babylon.

Now that Christ might aggrauate these their offenses, he does describe both
the woman and her teaching. He describes the woman, first by her property,
in this name I^zabell, that is, one like Iezabell: secondly, by her action,
Which calls her self a Prophetess: her teaching is described in the end of
the verse. Touching her property, Christ calls her Iezabell for two causes:
First, for that she was like to Iezabell, and in her person revived the manners
and opinions of Iezabell. For as Iezabell brought among the Israelites the
false worship of the Idol Baal: so this woman labored to bring into this
Church of Thyatira, Idolatry, and other sins.

Again, Iezabell was given to fornication, as the Scripture records of her
by the mouth of Iehu, 2. Kings. 9.22. and so was this woman given to
fornication. Thirdly, Iezabell was a woman of authority, and by her place and
dignity did countenance and maintain Idolatry, and her wicked sins: so it
is lik^, that this woman was of some place and authority, and did ther^by
countenance her wicked opinions, and damnable sins*

In this reason of her name, The Use.
note first a notable practice of Satan for the furtherance of his kingdom,
which is this: In succeeding ages he labors to revive the erroneous
opinions and wicked vices of ungodly persons of former times. This we see
plain in this place: for long after ^^zabel^ death (the wife of Ahab, a wicked
woman) ^uen in the Apostles time, he raised up another woman like Iezabell both
for wicked life and doctrine. And the like practice he uses at this day. In
all such as follow the rules and counsel of Machiauell, is revived the craft
of Achitophell: in the Papists are revived the opinions and manners of the
wicked Scribes and Pharisees: in the recusant Protestants is revived the sect
of the Donatists, and the sect called Audiani. The family of Love reuiues the
opinions and manners of the Valentinians and the Montanists, and many other
damnable errors. Now this the devil does, because he knows by experience
the great hurt that these opinions and sins have formerly done unto Gods
Church.

Secondly, Christ calls this woman Iezabell, that he may provoke this church
to a greater detestation of her in regard of her damnable ways: and that she
might be in as great disgrace with them, as was Iezabell in the old Testament
to the people of God, that so they might better eschew her wicked seducement.
And herein we have a good direction for our profitable reading of the books of
the old and new Testament: namely, that when we meet with examples of wicked
men and wicked women, we must thereby take occasion to be unlike them. And if
we find our selves like them any way, either in wicked opinion, or in practice,
we must thereupon grow to a dislike with our selves. Again, finding the
examples of good men or good women, we must labor to conform our selves
thereto, and become like them: and in this regard approve our selves, when we
see our selves conformable unto the godly in any virtue and grace.

The second argument whereby Christ describes this woman, is her action: She
calls her self a Prophetess; that is, she chalengeth her self to be one
that does teach Gods will by the instinct of his spirit. And herein she became
a notable patron of the damnable sect of the Nicolaitans: for she held the
lawfulness of fornication, and of eating things sacrificed to Idols. And for
the maintenance hereof, she says she is a Prophetess, one that speaks
nothing but as she is taught by Gods spirit. This is the practice of
heretics, under pretense of the spirit to maintain their damnable devices,
as might easily be proved by induction of particular heretics in former
ages.

First, The Use.
hence then we are taught to labor to have the spirit of discerning; whereby
we may try the spirits whether they be of God or not. Many will be of no
religion, because there be so many false teachers, and such diversity of
opinions in religion. But herein they bewray their profaneness: they ought the
rather to labor for this gift of discerning, whereby to know what is from God,
and what is not.

Secondly, hence we are taught, that when we are unjustly slaundered,
disgraced, or injured, we ought not to fret and fume, but by patience to
content our selves: for we see that wicked men to maintain their wicked
opinions and manners, will not stick to abuse God himself, and make his
blessed spirit the author and patron of their errors and sins. We by our
sins deserve disgrace and reproach: but the spirit of God has done nothing
amiss. And therefore we must be patient, being in the same condemnation, as
Luke 23.40, 41. and rather rejoice, in as much as we are partakers of the
sufferings of the spirit, 1. Pet. 4* verse. 13.

Again here observe how she proves her self to be a Prophetess, namely,
by her own testimony only, She calls her self so. Where we may see the
note and mark of a false Prophet: to wi^, their own bare word and testimony.
A true Prophet or Prophetess has sundry testimonies, besides their own
words, to prove the lawfulness of their calling: as in the primitive Church,
they had the gift of speaking diverse languages without study, and of working
miracles: they had also purity of doctrine, joined with integrity of life;
and lastly, many excellent gifts of God, as zeal, courage, and constancy to
maintain the same.

Christ having described this woman, for her further disgrace, as also to
aggrauate the fault of this Church in suffering her, proceeds to describe her
doctrine. And first he shows the end and scope thereof, namely to seduce and
to deceive. Wherein he gives us a further note of a false Prophet or
Prophetess, to wit, to teach such doctrine as draws men to sin against the
first or second Table. True doctrine is according unto godliness, and leads
men thereto; but the end of false doctrine is impiety against God and man: as
was showed by the doctrine of Balaam, verse. 14. and such was the doctrine of
this woman.

The Use.
Sundry students now adays are maruellously affected with the sermons,
commentaries and postils of monks and friars. These they prefer before the
writings of other godly and sound Divines, which is a lamentable case: for they
are in their kind Iezabels; the scope of their doctrine is to draw men to
errors and transgressions against the law of God; yea, to bring men from
heaven to hell. And therefore this exceeding approbation of them is no small
offense: being in truth the right way to bring in again errors, Atheism, and
Popery. For turn a Papist from a moral point (wherein he often erreth) and
his doctrine and sermons are nothing but false and erroneous: and therefore as
Christ would have this Church to hate the doctrine of this woman, because it
did deceive; so must we labor to grow in dislike with the commentaries and
postils of monks and friars, which tend to that end.

Secondly, Christ sets forth the end of her doctrine by two arguments:
First, by the persons deceived, his servants: secondly, by the means whereby
they are deceived; to wit, by causing them to commit fornication, and to eat
mea^es sacrificed unto Idols.

Touching the persons. Whereas she deceived not all men, but the servants of
God (for here is a plain distinction of men) this increases her fault,
because they belonged unto God. But here two questions may be moved: First,
why some men are the servants of God, and some are not. Secondly, whether the
servants of God may be seduced by false teachers. To the first some answer,
that God would have all men (...) be his servants, and for his part does all
things needful unto all men, to make them his servants; redeeming them, and
giving them sufficient grace hereunto: yet some are not his servants, because
they themselves will not, but wilfully reject his grace that is offered unto
them. But this doctrine is against common reason, and does much derogate from
the glory of God: for hereby they make every man an emperor, and God an
underling, subject unto man; they make Gods good pleasure to depend upon man's
pleasure, and the accepting of his grace to depend upon man's will. But God is
the first cause of all things, his will ouerruleth man's will: and therefore it
is absurd to say, some men are not Gods servants, because they themselves will
not. The true cause hereof is Gods good pleasure, electing some, and they alone
become his servants because he has chosen them. But God did never choose all
men first to grace, and then to glory: and therefore as Luke says, Act. 13.48.
so many as were ordained to everlasting life, believed. So we may say: so
many as are elected of God to grace and salvation, they become his servants.

The second question. Whether may Gods servants be seduced by false Prophets?
Answ. There be two sorts of servants of God: servants in appearance, and
servants in truth. Servants in appearance are such as outwardly only embrace
the word, and receive the seals of Gods covenant: and the greatest part of
particular churches are such servants. Now these may fall away and that wholly:
and hence it comes, that whole particular churches may fall away, as did the
church of Galatia, and many other: and these are called servants, because we
must in charity judge, that all which make profession of true religion in Gods
church, are the servants of God. But the true servants of God, though they may
be seduced in part, and for a time, yet they can neither wholly nor finally
fall away: for the promise of Christ is to the contrary, Mat. 16.1^
Thou (...) Peter and upon this rock, that is, the faith which thou
professest, will I build my temple: and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against (...). Which last word ( prevail) insinuates, that the devil shall
show great malice and strength to vanquish their faith, but yet shall never
wholly overcome it. And Matthew. 6.13. we are taught to pray, L^ad us (...) into
temptation. To be lead into temptation, is wholly to be overcome in temptation,
which being a lawful petition, must needs have God^ promise to grant the same
belonging unto it. And therefore though Sa^han may assay to overcome the child
of God* yet he shall never get final victory over him: for true faith
purifieth the heart, and cannot stand with a purpose to continue in any one
sin: these two banish each other, sin brings the child of God upon his
knees; but true faith does raise him up again.

II. point. The means whereby she sought to seduce the^, was by drawing them to
commit fornication: and to eat things sacrificed to Idols. Whereby it is
plain, she was a favorer of the sect of the Nicolaitans: whereof entreatie
was made in the foureteenth verse. And thus much for the reproof of the Church.

Verse. 21. And I gave her space to repent of her fornication, and she
repented not. Here Christ reprooueth this woman for her obstinacy and
hardness of heart, whereby she went on in sin without repentance. By space
to repent, we are to understand, liberty to live: for though by her sins
she deserved present death, temporal and eternal; yet God of his mercy gave
her liberty to live, that she might repent.

The Use.
In her example we are taught what to judge of that space of time which God
gives us to live in this world; namely, th^^ it is a time of repentance: for
before a man be borne, and after this life, can none repent: but the time we
now live* or have lived, or shall live, is the only time allotted for
repentance. This point ought seriously to be considered of all estates, for it
does plainly rebuke the shameful practice of many at this day, who lead not
their life as a time of repentance, but spend it wholly in another course: some
in following their vain pleasures, as carding, dicing, etc. some in heaping up
riches, seeking nothing but temporal profits: others in good fellowship (as
they call it) that is, in company keeping, in eating and drinking. God in
justice might have cut off these men so soon as they were borne, and yet in
mercy he gives them time to repent, to some twenty, to others thirty,
forty, or fifty years* but they abuse this mercy of God, and in steed of
repenting, employ themselves in such works as are contrary thereunto. Their
case is most fearful, they treasure up to themselves wrath against the day of
wrath and declaration of the just judgment of God: like unto a man that every
day for some certain time, carries a faggot for his own burning in the end.

Secondly, from this end of life all that have not repented, must learn not to
defer their repentance, but now begin, while it is called to day, and in the
exercise thereof spend the whole time of their life. The end of all our
endeauours while we live, should be this, to get a room in the kingdom of
God, which we can never have without repentance.

Next consider, who it is that gives this time of repentance: neither man nor
Angel has this time in his hands, but the power of appointing it belongs unto
Christ alone.

Hereby then all persons whatsoever are to be admonished, without delay to
repent. The young man will take his pleasure in his youth, and repent when he
is old: but hereby he robs Christ of his honor, who only has power to
point out the time of repentance. Use therefore the time present while thou
have it, and defer not repentance: for how know thou that thou shall live
to be old? And though thou do, yet how can thou tell whether God will
give thee repentance, considering thou did refuse, while he called for it?
Men think, that if they die quietly and peaceably, all is well, they go to
heaven straight: but herewith many are deceived; for unless they have truly
repented, they go straight to the devil, let their manner of dying be what it
will. A quiet death is a comfortable thing, but no sure sign of grace, because
it may come by reason of some easy* lingering sickness. Considering
therefore we have no title unto this grace of repentance, to claim it at our
pleasure, it being the rare gift of God* nor any lea^^ of our life, but be
mere tenants at will* let us seek to turn to God with full purpose of heart,
while (...) is called to day: and if we have begun, let us daily renew this
grace to the end of our life*

Thirdly, consider to whom God gives space of repentance: namely, to a wicked
woman, as wicked as Iezabell. Wherein behold the endless mercy of God, that
unto such a wicked person, who blasphemed God, in fathering her sins upon the
spirit of grace, and dishonored God by seducing his servants, does yet
vouchsafe a time of repentance: This has been and is the dealing of God with
most grievous sinners. Manasses was one that sold himself to work
wickedness, giving himself to sorcerie and idolatry; and yet upon his
hearty repentance God received him to mercy. And Solomon fell most
fearfully, but yet before his death we may persuade our selves he repented
and was received to mercy: for he was a penman of Scripture, all which were
holy men of God, as Peter says, 2. Pet. 1.20. The Israelites were Isa. 1.10.
a people of Sodom and of Gomorrha, as bad as those who are condemned in hell,
and yet mercy is offered unto them upon their true repentance and conversion.

The Use.
Hereby no man must take occasion to live in his sins: but those that feel
themselves laden with the huge burden of their transgressions, have here a
comfort to keep them from despair: for if they can humble themselves, and
turn unto Christ, and pray for the pardon of their sins, there is yet with
the Lord mercy in store, that they may be saved.

Lastly, Christ says, He gave her space to repent of her fornication. No doubt
she had many other sins whereof she was to repent, for no sin goes alone,
but every capital sin draws many with it: Christ his meaning therefore is
not that she should let pass other sins without repentance: but he names this
one sin of fornication, because it was a principal sin in her: for she both
practiced it in her own body, and so made her self the stable of the devil,
who should have been the temple of Gods holy spirit: and also maintained this
sin, and so drew others thereto. Now special and principal repentance must
be of principal sins.

The Use.
Here then is a pattern for all sinners how to practice repentance. They must
begin with their capital sins, which burden their conscience, and whereto
they are most addicted, and repent of them. For the man that truly repents of
one sin, repents of all: for true repentance makes the heart alike
affected to all sins: And that heart which is brought to hate his special
sins, will never approve of petty sins. This lesson ought carefully to be
learned and put in practice: For the repentance of most men is only in
general, to say we are all sinners, Lord have mercy upon me, or God forgive
me. But this confused repentance is not good, it stands with a purpose to sin
again. In particular therefore we must search our consciences, and see wherein
we have most dishonored God, and what sin has nearest plunged our souls to
the pit of hell; and with that we must begin to bring our souls to heaven,
by repenting truly for the same, and turning from it with all our hearts.

Hence the Papists gather that man has free will to do that which is truly
good before God, as namely to repent: for say they, God gave Iesabell space of
time to repent, and therefore she had power to repent, or else the giving of
that time unto her had been in vain. Answ. Their reason is naught: it
follows not because God gave her time to repent, therefore she had power of
her self to repent: as will easily appear, if we consider the ends for which
God gives men space and time of repentance, and commandment so to do. The ends
are two. I. That in that time of repentance, which he allotteth to men, he
may give his children grace, whereby they may be enabled to obey his
commandment and to repent: for the Lord uses the commandments and
threatenings of the law, and the promises of the gospel as outward means of
giving grace unto men by the work of his spirit. II. He gives commandment
and time to repent, that men may see what they should do, not what they can
do: and that the wicked may be without excuse at the day of judgment, and be
ashamed of their slavery and bondage unto sin in this life.

And she repented not. Here the sin of Iezabell is expressed, namely, her
impenitencie and hardness of heart. Whereby without remorse she lived in her
fornication and idolatry: For the understanding of this her sin, two points
are to be considered. I. Where this sin of impenitencie is forbidden in Gods
word. II. What is the greatness of this sin: for the first, there be two
parts of Gods word, the Law, and the Gospel, which must not be confounded, but
distinguished, or else we shall ouerturne many points of Christian religion.
The law gives commandments touching things that were by nature in Adam before
his fall, forbidding those things which are contrary to those virtues which
were in his perfect nature. But the gospel commands, and forbids things that
are above nature, and in that part of Gods word is this sin of impenitencie
forbidden; for the law condemns no more than it reuealeth, but it never
revealed repentance, and therefore it does not forbid or condemn the want
thereof. Secondly, for the greatness of this sin, it may appear, because
hereby men heap sin upon sin, and Romans 2.5^.
Wrath unto themselves against the day of wrath. Some to aggrauate the
grieuousnesse of this sin, say that impenitencie is the sin against the
holy ghost: and that opinion is ancient, but yet false and erroneous, for the
sin against the holy ghost is a blasphemy, Mat. 12.31. but this is not a
blasphemy. Again the sin against the holy ghost is in this life, but final
impenitencie is never before the end of this life.

The Use.
Hence also the Papists gather free will to good by nature: she did not
repent, therefore she had freewill and power to repent if she would. Ans. This
reason is not good: thus much may hence be gathered, that she had freewil not
to repent, and to sin: for every man sins freely, but yet it follows
not, that they have the same power to cease from sin, or to repent without
Gods special grace, without which no man can will or do that which is truly
good before God.

Again, the same sin which is reproved in this wicked woman, may be laid to
the charge of the greatest number in our churches and congregations. God has
given unto men a long time of repentance, to some ten, to some twenty years,
but they repent not, as their lives do plainly testify: for some live in
irreligion and profaneness, some in Saboath breaking, some in fornication and
adultery, some in idleness, some in covetousness and extortion, giving
themselves wholly and spending all their time in seeking the things of this
life, never regarding with reverence the things of God.

Verse. 22. Behold I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit fornication
with her into great affliction, except they repent them of their works. Christ
having reproved this church and this woman for their several faults, does
here give special counsel and direction unto them both, whereby they may
avoid and escape the grievous judgments due unto them for their sins, both
in this life, and in the life to come. This counsel of Christ has two parts:
First to Iesabell and her company, verse. 22.23. The second to the church of
Thyatira, verse. 24, 25. The sum of Christ's counsel to Iesabell is, to
repent: which is not expressed, but instead thereof the reason to move her to
repentance is propounded. And it may be framed thus, If thou repent not I will
pun^sh thee with sundry judgments: But thou would not be so punished, and
therefore repent.

This reason has two parts, A threatening: and an exception thereof. The
threatening in these words, I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit
fornication with her into great affliction. And before this threatening, Christ
prefixeth a word of attention ( Behold) whereby he would teach them and us,
that we ought seriously to consider of the threatenings that are propounded in
Gods word against sin and sinners. When Josias heard the book of the law
read, hi^ heart Ki. 22.19.
melted: which it could never have done unless it had first trembled at the
judgments therein denounced. And the pricking that was wrought in the hearts
of the Jews, Act. ^.^7.
by Peter's first Sermon, was nothing else but a compunction wrought in them
upon consideration of the judgments and condemnation due unto them for
crucifying the Lord of life. The cause why sin is so rise in every estate and
condition of men at this day is, for that men set light by the threatenings of
Gods word. If men would tremble when they hear of Gods judgments, it would
make them cry out, Men and brethren what shall we do^ but because God is
merciful, therefore men fear him not, Isay. 57.11.

This threatening has three several parts according to the three several sorts
of persons whom it concerns. The* I. is against Iesabell her self, who was
the chief of them all, in these words, I will cast her into a bed. The meaning
whereof may be gathered out of the like words of Iona^^^ to Ammon* bidding him
^ Sa. 13.5.
lie down on his bed and make himself sick. So that Christ's meaning is, that
he will strike her with some grievous sickness: the place of the sick person
being put for the sickness it self: As if he should say, Iesabell takes her
pleasure in fornication, and thereto abuses the bed* I will therefore send on
her some great sickness which shall cast her into her bed.

The Use.
Here note Gods dealing with sinners: In those things which they abuse for the
furtherance of their sins* will the Lord plague and punish them I^sabell
abused her bed with fornication* and thither she must be cast with sickness:
Diue^ in his life time abused his tongue and taste by gluttony, and therefore
(...) now in in hell, therein most of all plag^d and tormented, at hi^ crying
Lu. 16 24.
(...) drop of water to cool his tongue, does import: gamesters take their
pleasure in ^^^ding and dicing, which many times God turns to their woe* for
thereby they are usually brought to extreme want and misery* Ahab shed Naboths
blood to get his vineyard* and for that sin must 1. Kin ^1* 23, 24.
his blood, the blood of Iezabell and his children* he shed. And now in these
days the covetous for their gain do suck^ the blood of the poor, but that
blood will have blood from them again, The Lord will spoil the soul of him
that spoyle^ the poor, Prou. 22.2^* This must make us to beware how we abuse
any creature of God to serve us for any sin: for the Lord will cause that to
be a means of woe and punishment unto us which we misuse unto our lusts.

Again, note here who is the author of grievous sicknesses, namely, Christ
himself: For he says, I will cast her into a bed. Sicknesses come not by
chance or fortune, but from the hand of God. This we must learn to believe,
and it will cause us to make better use of sicknesses than usually we do: If
men did believe this, it would make the hardest heart to repent in time of
sickness: for this they would say, Has God cast me down with sickness? no
doubt it is to humble me for some of my sins, to make me know them, to leave
them, and to turn unto him* This use the servants of God have made hereof,
Isa. 38.^
when the Prophet came to Hez^^ias, and told him he should die, he turned his
face to the wall and wept, as for other things, so for his sins especially.
And Iaacob being to die, Heb. 11* ^^
lea^ed on his ^^affe, and by faith worshippe^ toward the beds head, lifting
up his body to do reverence unto God, thereby testifying his humility, faith,
and hope* And the like ought we to do, which if we could, we should find our
sickness would become a blessing unto us.

The second part of Christ's threatening is the punishment of her followers,
which received her doctrine, and committed fornication with her* They must be
cast into great affliction.

First, this must teach all persons, that it is a diuell^sh speech to think
and say, The Use.
that fornication i^ but a trick and ship of (...)* for great affliction is
the punishment of this sin, which notably argues the haynousnesse thereof.

Secondly, hence we may gather some of the causes, why towns and kingdoms are
afflicted with grievous wars, famine, and pestilence* among the rest these are
two, fornication* and embracing of errors and superstition* Sodom for
fornication and other (...) was burnt with fire and brimstone from heaven* The
Israelits Number. 15*9.
for this sin suffered most grievous affliction^* And among the Corinthians,
for coming to the Lords table in this sin, among others, 1. Cor. 1^* ^0. with
cap. 6.18. and 10.^
many were sick, many (...)* and many sle^^* And this land of ours has been
afflicted with famine and pestilence, as for other sins, so for fornication;
which in time of peace is multiplied, and so will continue till it draw upon us
bloodshed also and great afflictions: For that which is said of the followers
of Iesabel must be verified of all that live in the like sins.

The second part of the reason is, the exception of these communications:
except they repent them of their works. Where we may see: First, that all the
threatenings of Gods judgments and of eternal destruction* must be
understood, with the exception of repentance. Whence also this follows, that
men of years living in the church are not so much condemned for other
particular sins, as for living in their sins without repent ^ee* every sin
makes a man subject to damnation, but it is this impenitencie that brings upon
the^ actual damnation. Want of repentance for sin is more dangerous than the
sin it self; the consideration whereof, must teach us not to lie in sin,
though we have committed it, but turn to God by speedy repentance: for it is
the continuance in sin without repentance that casts the soul to hell.
When thou shall turn from thy sin by true repentance, thou art free from the
threatening and the curse of sin. For they admitting the exception of true
repentance, (...). 18.8.

Further observe, how this exception of repentance is placed between two
threatenings of judgments, which shows how God mingleth his judgments with
mercy, he shows not wholly either justice or mercy, but tempereth them
together in all the works that concern man's salvation.

Thirdly, here note that repentance preuents not only eternal damnation, but
also temporal judgments, as grievous sicknesses* and other plagues and
afflictions. This point may have special use among us* We have by Gods mercy
enjoyed his gospel with long peace, but for our abuse thereof we may justly
fear it shall be taken from us; and if we would escape that judgment we must
repent both high and low.

Of their work^s. That is, of their idolatry and fornication* where he
shows of what things true repentance must be, namely, of bad works in
particular, whereto men give themselves: every man that would truly repent
must consider of his particular faults: The drunkerd in particular of his
drunkenness, and the covetous man of his covetousness: and instead of
injuries and hard dealing show mercy unto the poor. The common repentance of
the world that is done in general, is nothing but a visard of repentance, and
yet it is all that is used of the greatest part of our people: for they will
come to hear the word, and to receive the Sacraments, and in general confess
themselves to be sinners, and then they think they have done enough: But true
repentance is of particular sins: As David Psalm. 51. cried out of blood
guiltiness.

Verse. 23. And I will kill her children with death, and all the Churches shall
know that I am ^ee which searches the reins and hearts: and I will give unto
every one of you according to his works. Here is the third part of Christ's
threatening against Iesabels children: by children we are to understand
properly, those which are borne of her, and were of her husband, and not her
followers, for they were threatened with grievous afflictions in the former
verse. It had been sufficient to have said, I will (...) her children. But to
note the certainty and greeuousnesse of this punishment, he says I will kill
them (with death*) Quest. How can this stand with the justice of God, to punish
the offenses of the parents in the person of the children? Ans. God deareth so
for temporal punishments, not for eternal.

And though we could not perceive the justice of God in so doing, yet we must
reverence the ^ame, blaming our own ignorance. Albeit, even in reason we may
conceive of the equity of this course* for societies, as church, commonwealth,
and families, are Gods ordinance, and the parties in them must be considered
as members of those societies: for God conceiueth of them when he afflicts
the punishment deserved by one, upon another; as of the Prince upon the people,
of the parents upon their children. This he may justly do by reason of that
near bond which is between the members of the same society: like as in the
natural body when the stomach is distempered, the head aketh: and when the
head is wounded the stomach is sick; and the body may be smitten for the
errors of the tongue. Thus when David sinned the child died, and when he
numbered the Israelites, the people were plagued. And thus is the child stained
in blood for the fathers treason against earthly Princes: and so God punished
this woman in her children, that she might know the greatness of her sins,
he smote her children with death.

The Use.
Hence parents are taught to make conscience of every sin: For thereby they
may bring judgments upon their children and family even to death. Now what
bloody hearted parents are those, that will make no conscience of doing that
whereby they bring vengeance upon their own children? And by the same reason
must every man that lives in any society be admonished to take heed of sin:
because thereby a man (especially if he be a principal member of a society)
may bring destruction upon many* As David did by numbering the people: And Achan
by his covetous stealth, Joshua. 7: And Ahab upon his posterity. So that
impenitent persons which will not be reformed but go on in sin, ought to be
banished both from church and commonwealth, as hurtful members, yea enemies to
all good societies.

That these threatenings might take place in the hearts of Iesabell and her
followers, Christ remooueth two carnal conceits, whereby they might think to
delude or escape these judgments threatened. The first is this, Iesabell and
her company might think that their practices were secret, not known to the
world; and therefore they were not in danger of Gods judgments: This is a
wicked imagination that comes into the mind of all sinners, but this Christ
cuts off saying, And all the Churches shall know that I am he which search the
reins and the hearts: As if he should say to Iesabell and her company: you
may persuade your selves that because your sins are secret, therefore my
judgments shall not befall you. But know, that I will discover your secret
sins and practices in such sort, as all Churches shall know by experience in
your persons, that I do see and discern the most hidden thoughts of man's heart.

First, here observe to whom Christ will discover their sins; not to all the
world, but to the Church of God, All Churches shall know; This Christ does to
terrify Iesabell and her company: For as it is an excellent honor to be
well esteemed of with the Churches of God, so it is a most shameful dishonor
to be in disgrace with the Churches of God: For Mat. 1^*
whatsoever is bound or loosed by the Churches on earth, the same is bound or
loosed in heaven. And therefore by due proportion it follows, that they which
are in disgrace with God^ Churches on earth, are also in disgrace with God
himself in heaven.

Hence we are taught that howsoever we must (so much as in us lies) endeavor
to approve our selves to the whole world, The Use.
yet especially we must labor to be in good account with the Churches of
God, and the members thereof: And on the contrary, we must continually avoid
the doing of all such things as may justly bring us into disgrace with the
Church of God. Romans 16.16. The Churches of Christ salute you. And 1. Cor.
16.19. All the Churches of Asia salute you. Where the Apostle means not, that
they did by word of mouth send greetings unto them: But hereby he would
signify that all Churches did approve of them, which he says for their great
comfort. Paul received Timothy into the company, because the Churches gave
him a good report, Act. 16.2.3.

But what is the thing that all churches should know by experience in the
persons of Iezabell and her company? namely, that Christ is he which does
indeed search the reins and the hearts: where, by Reins and hearts we must
understand the same things, namely, the thoughts and affections of men: for in
that sense those words are often used in the old Testament. Quest. How can
reins signify the thoughts and affections* seeing the thoughts are seated in
the brain, and the affections in the heart? Answ. The reins are put for the
thoughts and affections, not because they are seated therein, but for that
resemblance and analogy that is between them: for as the reins are seated in
the most secret part of the body, so the thoughts and affections are seated in
the most secret place of the soul: and the heart is p^rt for the thoughts and
affections, first, because the affections are there seated; secondly, because
the thoughts, though they be seated in the brain, yet they have their
operation in the heart: for joyful thoughts make a merry heart, and fearful
thoughts an heavy heart. Again, the word ( Search) signifies a most narrow
search, and such a one as goes with finding; thereby showing that nothing is
so secret in man, but the Lord both can and does see and discern the same.

The Use.
Hence we learn first, that Christ our Savior is not only man, but very God,
one person standing of two natures. That Christ is man, heretics deny not:
but whether he be God or not, there is the question. Which yet is here
evidently proved: for he that has in him the peculiar properties of God,
must needs be God: But Christ has in him the true properties of God, he can
search and discern all the thoughts and all the affections of the hearts of
all men, which none can do but God only, Ierem. 17.9, 10, The heart is
deceitful and wicked above all things, who can know it? I the Lord search the
he^^t, and try the reins. And therefore Christ is the true and very God.

Secondly, hereby we are taught to beware and take heed of hypocrisy in all
things, but especially in the matters of religion. Hypocrisy is, when a man
seems outwardly to be that which he is not inwardly. But we must have care
to be truly in heart that which we appear to be in life and profession: we
must come as near Christ in thought and affection, as in our outward action:
for Christ knows as well the whole estate of every man's reins and heart, as
he does their speeches and their deeds.

Thirdly, hereby we must learn to suspect our selves of our unknown sins,
as of our unbelief and presumption; not contenting our selves with an
acknowledgement of our known sins, for we can never discern the depth of
our corrupt heart, and yet God knows them. This was David's practice, Psalm.
19.12.
after due examination of himself he yet cries, Lord cleanse me from my
secret sins: As if he should say, I have O Lord searched my heart, but I
cannot sufficiently know mine own corruptions; therefore do thou O Lord help
to cleanse me from them. If this were practiced, true religion would flourish:
for many justify themselves, when as they know not what is in their hearts,
little considering what Christ says unto the Pharisees, Luke 16.15.
You are they which justify your selves before men, but Christ knows your
hearts.

And I will give to every one of you according to your works. Here Christ
proceeds to remove a second wicked conceit, whereby they might seem to
illude Gods judgments threatened. For they might say, Let the Lord send
judgments and plagues upon us, yet we shall escape them: as Isay said of the
wicked in his time, That they made a league with death and hell, and said the
judgments of God shall pass over them, Isay. 28. verse 15. But to cut off
this vain conceit, Christ threateneth a just reward to every one, according to
his works. As if he should say; You may sooth up your selves* and falsely
think, that you shall escape my judgments: but know it, that I will reward
every one of you partly in this life, and principally at the day of judgment,
according to your works, be they good or bad. For these words must especially
^ee understood of the day of judgment, as they are used, (...). 2.^. and
Revel. 2^.12.

Hence the Papists gather, The Use.
that men are saved not only by faith in Christ, but also by works: for thus
they reason* ^y that whereby we must be judged, must we be justified and
^a^ed: but by works we must be judged, and therefore saved. Answ: The
Proposition is false: There is great difference between justifying and
judging: for judging is only the declaration of a man to be just; but
justification is the making of a man just: And because the declaration of a man
to be just, is by works, therefore is judgment by works. Again, it is not
said, I will give to you for your works, but according to your works. If he
had said, I will give to every one of you for your works, then it might have
seemed they had bin justified by them: But here Christ does only make works an
outward sign, or rule, whereto he will conform and square the last judgment.

Secondly, whereas every man must be judged, that is, saved or condemned
according to his works; hence we may gather, that good works are necessary
to salvation, yet not as causes thereof, either efficient, or helping any way,
but only as a way or means to come unto salvation: For faith is necessary,
and good works are the tokens and fruits of faith, and so are necessary.

Thirdly, here we must be admonished to be careful to abound in good works;
not to win heaven by them, but to get assurance of salvation in our selves. And
these good works are the doing of the duties of piety unto God, and of
charity unto our brethren, even the duties of the Moral law; or more
plainly, the doing of the general duties of a Christian, and the particular
duties of a man's calling: for if these be done in obedience to God and to his
glory, proceeding from faith and love unto our brethren, though the calling be
never so base, they are good works. And on the contrary, this must admonish
us to make conscience of every evil way: for sins be the marks of
condemnation: and so many wicked works as we commit, so many marks and brands
do we set upon our selves of our just and deserved condemnation, unless we
repent.

Lastly, hence we may gather, that there be degrees of joy in heaven, and of
torments in hell. For judgments and rewards go according to men's works: And
therefore they that testify their faith by great and many good works, shall
have great reward: they that testify their faith by lesser and fewer works,
shall have lesser reward: and so for sins, the more heinous they be, the
deeper condemnation they do procure.

Verse. 24. And to you I say, the rest of them of Thyatira, as many as have not
this learning, neither have known the deepenesse of Satan (as they speak) I
will put upon you none other burden.

25. But that which you have already hold fast till I come.

Here Christ comes to a second part of his counsel, which concerns the
Angel, and the better part of this Church of Thyatira: and first he begins
with the Preface of this counsel; wherein we may observe two points: First,
who speaks: Secondly, to whom he speaks. For the first, he that speaks
is Christ. I say, hereby Christ challenges unto himself the absolute and all
sufficient authority of the supreme Doctor of his Church, in that he speaks
in his own name. Whereby he puts a plain difference between himself and
all other his Ministers, either Prophets, Apostles, or ordinary teachers: for
they must not propound any thing unto Gods people in their own names, but in
the name of Christ. But Christ teaches in his own name, being the fountain
of all divine knowledge and understanding, that i^ revealed in the word of God.
And thus Christ himself speaks in his own name, to strike the hearts of the
Angel of this Church and the better part thereof with reverence, and to move
them to receive and obey the counsel following, considering it comes
immediately from Christ, the Doctor of the Church.

II. point. The parties to whom he speaks, To you: that is, the Angel and
the better part of this Church: for so Christ expounds it in the words
following, though first he say in general To you: that is, The rest of them
of Thyatira.

When as Christ will behave himself as the doctor and chief Angel of this
Church, note, that he makes a distinction of the persons in the Church, and
also deuideth his counsel, giving one doctrine and one judgment to one part,
and a diverse doctrine and judgment to another.

The Use.
This gives us good direction for sundry actions: for some may ask, how must
doctrine be delivered in a mixed congregation, where some are Papists, some
Protestants, some are hardened, others despair? Answ. The persons must be
distinguished after the example of Christ, and suitable doctrines divided for
them, that every one may have his due. Impenitent sinners must be terrified,
and threatenings delivered against them, with exception of them that repent:
Comforts must be propounded and applied to them that despair, with restraint
from all impenitent persons that go on in sin.

If any demand more particularly, who these be whom Christ calls The rest
of them of Thyatyra, Christ answers directly (as the words import) to as many
as have not this learning, neither have known the deepenesse of Satan. Where
Christ gives two notes whereby to discern who be the rest of them of
Thyatira: The first is, the not receiving or maintaining of the false doctrine
of Iezabell, whereof entreatie has been formerly made: The second note is,
ignorance in the deepenesse of Satan, neither have known the deepenesse of
Satan: that is, neither have acknowledged nor approved the doctrine of
Iezabell, which is the deep and profound learning, as themselves do judge.

In this observe a most wicked practice of Iezabell and her followers: they
esteemed highly of their own opinions, calling them profound and deep
learning: but for the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles in the Old and New
Testaments, in it there was no such matter. This in all ages has been the
practice of wicked persons, highly to esteem their own conceits, and basely
to neglect the word of God. The teachers of the Jews do hold to this day,
That the Lord gave to Moses a most plain and easy law which he delivered to
his people; but the most secret and profound doctrine was unwritten, showed to
Moses by revelation, and by him delivered to the Priests and Levites, which
they keep still in their Cabbala. And of the like judgment touching Scripture
are the Popish Churches: The Word written is but an inkie word, a dead letter,
or a nose of wax: but the most perfect Scripture is unwritten; which is, the
consent of faith and of doctrine in the hearts of all Catholics. And by such
great terms the Anabaptists, Libertines, and Arrians, maintain their
doctrine, and abuse Scripture, calling the written Word milk for every nouice:
but the consent of heart among themselves, with revelations, that is, the
strong meats. Yea, this opinion has crept in among us in part: men think
basely of Scripture, and prefer other men's writings before it. For let a man
preach plainly the bare word of God, and deliver doctrines and exhortations
out of the same, this is but plain preaching: But let another come and utter
his mind partly in Latin, and partly in Greek, and other languages,
alleging withal the testimonies of Fathers, Counsels, and other Writers;
that is the learned preaching. And thus do most men abase Scripture, and exalt
the writings of men above it. But seeing this is the practice of Iezabell and
wicked men, let us on the contrary learn to reverence the written word, and
give place thereto above all the testimonies and sayings of men whatsoever.

The deepenesse of Satan. As if he should say: They count it deep learning;
but it is the learning of the devil, wherein you may see his profound craft
and policy. Where note, that when Christ will allege the speech of Iezabell
and her followers, he does it with disgrace unto them: for they counted their
doctrine deep learning; but Christ repeating their opinion, calls it the
deepenesse of Satan.

Hence I gather, The Use.
that Christians cannot safely act and play the Comedies of heathen men: for
they are full of many blasphemous speeches and oaths flat against the word of
God: which they ought not to repeat, but with disgrace unto them. For Christ's
practice must be a pattern for our imitation: he would not repeat so much as
one word of a wicked woman, without some note of disgrace. If it be said, they
repeat these speeches with disgrace and dislike: I answer, it is not so: for
if they did, that would take away the whole Comedy, being full of such bad
speeches. And this I take to be the equity of Gods word, thus to reason from
Christ's example.

As they speak. These words Christ adds: First, to show that the words going
before were not his own, but the words of Iezabels followers touching her
doctrine. Secondly, to show the proud and presumptuous minds of heretics, in
maintaining their wicked opinions. Thus have false teachers vpheld their
errors by proud and swelling words, as Jude the 16. and 2. Pet. 2.18. The pure
word of God is not so maintained, but in the humility and lowliness of
spirit, and in the practice of piety from an humble heart: for God teaches
the lowly his ways, and gives grace to the humble, Psalm. 25.14. And therefore
this is a note of false doctrine, by swelling words to maintain the same.

Hitherto we have spoken of the Preface before Christ's counsel: now follows
the counsel it self in this sentence: Though I lay no other burden upon you,
yet I would have you to hold fast that which you have already, till I come.
This sentence is a distinction, containing two parts: First, in these words, I
will lay no other burden upon you, than that which you have already: that is,
howsoever I threaten my judgments unto Iezabell and her followers, yet I will
lay none other punishment upon you but my reproof only, for suffering
Iezabell among you with her false doctrine and followers.

This branch of this distinction contains a most comfortable instruction:
namely, that all those that give themselves to maintain purity of doctrine
and synceritie of life, shall be safely preserved in the time of common
judgments, under the blessed protection of God, so far forth as is for Gods
glory and their good. And considering this mercy is offered to the godly, we
must hereby learn to become followers of this Church of Thyatira: that is, we
must endeavor to maintain the pure truth of Gods holy word, and withal have
care to show forth synceritie of manners, in making conscience of every sin,
and endeavoring our selves to walk in all the ways of Gods commandments with
cheerfulness. Hereby we shall get protection from common judgments, when
they are laid upon the wicked: but if we partake with the wicked in their
sins, we shall receive part in their plagues.

The second part of this distinction is in these words: Verse. 25.
But that which you have already, hold fast till I come: that is, mine
Apostles have delivered unto you the pure and sound doctrine of salvation; now
I charge you that you hold that fast, and maintain it until I come to
judgment. Here is a plain and most excellent commandment, containing
special instruction mee^ for this Church of Thyatira, and all Churches.
Before, our Savior Christ had commended this Church for not approouing the
doctrine of Iezabell and her company: but here he gives them another
commandment, To hold fast the true doctrine of Christ, taught them by his
Apostles. Whereby he would teach them, and in them all Churches, to content
themselves with the pure doctrine of the Apostles, and not to affect or approve
any other doctrine besides whatsoever: According as Paul bids the Galatians
Gal. 1.8.
though we, or an Angel from heaven preach unto you any other doctrine than
that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

By the light of this commandment we are directed in sundry duties. First,
The Use.
not to regard unwritten traditions, which the church of Rome does so highly
magnify, for it cannot be proved, that the Apostles ever taught them.

Secondly, not to regard the doctrines of men, which some bring unto us under
color of Revelation from God since the Apostles times.

Thirdly, hereby we learn what to think and judge of the three great
religions of the Turks, the Jews, and Papists at this day. The Turkish
religion is not to be regarded: for it had it beginning six hundred years
after the Apostles time, with whose doctrine only we must content our selves.
Also the Jewish religion we must not regard, for they reject the doctrine of
the Apostles. And the religion of the Papists we must renounce, because it is
not of the Apostles teaching, but had it beginning by little and little long
after their times. If this commandment were safely kept, which is laid on
this Church, men would not be of so many religions: but all would be of one
religion, cleaving fast to the doctrine of the Apostles, and contenting
themselves with it, which is the true rule for reformation of life, and the
right way to attain salvation.

Lastly, here is a rule and direction for those which will be of no religion,
because of the diversity of opinions touching the same. They must have
recourse to the doctrine of the Apostles, and content themselves therewith,
nothing regarding new doctrines, be they never so glorious.

Till I come. Here Christ shows how long the doctrine of the Apostles must
be held fast: namely, not for a short time, but till his second coming to
judgment. Whereby we learn, that it is the duty of Gods Church to preserve
and maintain the purity of true religion unto the end of the world. This is
no small matter: but a most needful duty enjoined unto us by special
commandment, and withal a matter of great consequence: for the purity of
religion is the foundation and mark of the Church, and the right way to direct
men's souls to eternal life. For this cause Paul charge Timothy, 2 Timothy
1.1^ and 3.14.
To keep the true pattern of wholesome words, and to continue in the things
which he had learned. And in regard of this duty, 1. Tim. 3.15.
the Church is called, The pillar and ground of truth. And Christ for this
cause gave to his Church both Pastors and Teachers: Ephesians. 4.^1.
Pastors to instruct in righteousness, for the maintenance of purity in
manners: and Teachers to maintain the purity of doctrine in soundness of
judgment. This therefore must admonish us, that we have care not only to
learn religion in our own persons, but also to convey the same to ages
following, that the purity thereof may be preserved to the coming of Christ.
This duty especially concerns the preachers of the Gospel, they should teach
the truth, and confute errors, and beat down false doctrines, which poison
the truth of God. If in the night season a man set up a false light in the
haven, all the ships that are coming to land are in danger of shipwreck. So in
Gods Church, if the bright light of pure religion be not set up and advanced,
the souls of men are cast into the gulf of hell. The want of care in
performing this duty, is the cause why God sends heresies and Apostacies into
his Church. Thus came in the Apostacy of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11,
Because men loved not the truth. And I no doubt will the Lord deal with us, if
we have not care to maintain the purity of Apostolical doctrine.

Verse. 26. For he that overcomes and keeps my works unto the end, to him
will I give power over nations.

27. And he shall rule them with a rod of iron, and as the vessels of a potter
shall they be broken.

28. Even as I received of my father, so will I give him the morning star.

29. Let him that has an ear hear what the spirit says to the Churches.

Here is the conclusion of this Epistle, which contains two parts: First, a
promise, verse. 26, 27, 28. Secondly, a commandment, verse. 29. In the promise
note two things: the parties to whom it is made, and the benefit promised. The
parties to whom, are every one that overcomes; whom Christ describes by a
property of sincere obedience, To keep his works unto the end.

Here then we have a description of true obedience. First, the form thereof
consists in observing the works of Christ: which we must not understand, of
doing them according to the rigor of the law, but of a purpose and endeavor to
keep them. For this is a privilege belonging to all that are in Christ, that
God accepts their wills and endeavors of obedience, for perfect obedience it
self. This we must know and hold for truth, for many have but little
knowledge, and thereupon are driven to despair: yet they must know for their
comfort, that if they have care to get more knowledge, and make conscience to
obey that which they know, then they are keepers of the works of Christ, and
shall have the reward promised.

Secondly, obedience is here described by the object or matter thereof, to wit,
the works of Christ: that is, all such works as Christ has ordained in his
word, and those whereof he is the author by his spirit in his members.

The Use.
Hereby we learn: first, that he that will obey God in Christ Jesus, must not
think his own thoughts, speak his own words, nor do his own deeds* but he
must think, speak, and do that which Christ would have him: Secondly, that no
work is, or can be acceptable to Christ, but that which is ordained by him.
Isay Isa. 29.13
complains of them that would teach the fear of God by men's commandments:
so that there is no true fear of God, but that which is taught by Gods
commandments: and the like may be said of all other our obedience. This rule
overthrows all other religions besides the true religion, as of the Jews,
Turks, and Papists: For almost all their works are of men's inuenting, and
were never ordained by Christ: such are most points in popery, as saying of
mass, going on pilgrimage, fastings, vowing, and praying to saints, etc.

Thirdly, whereas he ^aith, my works, meaning not one or two, but all his
works; we learn that true obedience consists in doing all the works of
Christ: For Christ and the devil will never part stakes, God must either have
all our works or none: And therefore David says, I shall not be confounded,
because Psalm. 119.6
I have respect unto all thy commandments. And good king Iosia^ is comm^nded,
For that he turned to the Lord according to 2. Ki. ^3 25
all the law of Moses. This point must be learned of al: For many think if
they do many good things with Mat. 6 20
Herod, all is well; and for this cause many a man abhors covetousness and
pride, and yet is a contemner of the Gospel: But true obedience must be in
all things.

Unto the end. Here is the fourth branch of true obedience, it is constant.
That obedience which Christ will reward must not be for a day or a year: but
from time to time through the whole course of our life to the end of our days.
And thus we must judge of obedience, not by some particular actions, but by
the whole tenor of a man's life. Put case a man has made conscience of all his
ways, through the whole course of his life, and yet in sickness* by reason of
the extremity thereof is distracted, and raueth, blaspheming* God, and so
dies; What must we judge of this man? Surely, we must not censure him by his
behavior in his sickness, but consider what has been the ^enour of his
life* if that have been upright, then his obedience was good and shall be
rewarded.

II. Point* The benefits promised: and they are two* The first is, power to
rule, verse. 27. Verse 27.
And he shall rule them with a rod of iron: And as the vessels of a potter
shall they be broken: even as I received of my father. The second is the
morning star, verse. 28. where note by the way, that these words, Even as I
have received of my father, are referred amiss in our English translation, to
the giving of the morning star, when as they properly belong to the former
words in this sense: As I have received power over nation of my father, so will
I give to him that overcomes power to rule with the rod of Iron, etc. Now
come to the benefits.

First, here is promised by Christ, A power to rule over nations. Christ^ power
as he is mediator is very great: and here it is set forth by three arguments,
borrowed from the second Psalm verse. 8.9. First, by the largeness of it, i^
reaches not to one country alone, but to all countries, and to all men, in
all nations. Secondly, by the Sovereignty of it: Christ's power is absolute in
ruling and ouerruling. And this his Sovereignty consists in two things:
First, in making laws unto the consciences of men; so as if they be not kept,
he may justly condemn them: and in ouerruling the wills of all men, conforming
them to his will, will they nill they: which is signified by this, He shall
rule rule them with a rod of iron. Secondly, in that he has this absolute
power in himself to save and to destroy, and therefore is said to have Reu.
1.18.
The keys of heaven and hell. Which is signified in the next words, And as the
vessel of a potter shall they be broken. Thirdly, by the fountain of it,
Christ receives this power from his father. Indeed as Christ is God he is
equal with his father, and has this power of himself; But as he is mediator
his power is given him of his father, Mat. 28.18.

For the better understanding of this place, two questions must be handled:
First, how far forth does Christ give this his power unto men? Answ. Christ's
Sovereign and general power over the whole world is not indeed given to any
creature, nay it is incommunicable, and cannot be conveyed from the person of
Christ to the person of any creature man or Angel: this truth we must hold of
all Christ's offices, they are only in the person of Christ, and cannot pass
from him to any other. II. Quest. How then does Christ say truly, that he will
give him that overcomes, power over nations. Answ. Not that his Sovereign
power is actually given to the creature; but because the creature being in
Christ, has the fruit and benefit of this power in his salvation. And this
power is in them two ways: First, hereby Christ makes all his servants (being
his members) partakers of his glory in heaven, whereas the whole world besides
is condemned in hell: and therefore we are said to Ephesians. 2.6.
be raised up together, and made to sit together in the heavenly places in
Christ Jesus. And again he says, The 1. Cor. 6.2.
saints shall judge the world, not i^ giving sentence upon them; but as
witnesses and approuers of Christ his sentence: For the elect shall first
receive the sentence of absolution, and then being taken up into the clouds
shall sit with Christ, and there approve of the just condemnation of all the
wicked. Secondly, by this power he enableth those that be his, in their own
person to overcome all the enemies of their salvation. His meaning then is
this, as if he had said, Howsoever my Sovereign power over all creatures in my
self, cannot be derived to any other; yet by virtue of this my power, I will
exalt them that overcome, to partake of my glory: and will give them power in
themselves over their sins, over death, hell, the world, and all the enemies
of their salvation.

Here then behold unto what exceeding dignity every true servant of God is
advanced, not in himself, but in Christ: He has rule over nations, and
victory over all the enemies of his salvation, yea he is made partaker of
Christ's glory.

Hence we are taught to make conscience of every sin whatsoever; The Use.
for the privilege of every christian is to have power to judge the wicked
world: Now as it is a shame for a judge that sits and condemns a murderer
or a thief, to be a thief, or a murderer himself; so it is for any
christian to live in any one sin, seeing he himself must condemn the world
of those sins. Neither can we think that Christ will ever advance him that
lives in sin, to condemn the same in others, unless he first reform it in
himself.

Secondly, the consideration of this privilege of a christian, must be hid in
our minds against the time of adversity and affliction, and of the pangs of
death. For he that has kept faith and good conscience all his life, is a
prince in Jesus Christ, and shall rule over all his enemies. And therefore
though now he be afflicted and wronged by them, yet in Christ he is their
judge, and shall one day condemn them that do him wrong. And as for death, it
is subdued in Christ, and shall be no death unto him. 1. Corin. 15. verse, 54.

Again, the words in the original are thus, He shall feed and rule the
nations, (...).
as a shepherd rules and feeds his lambs with his book. The Papists upon
the words of Christ to Peter, John. 21.16, Feed my sheep, that is, feed and
rule my sheep, would gather Peter's supremacy over the church in all the
world. But their gross abuse of that place will appear, by comparing it with
this prom^se of Christ, to every one that overcomes: for if their collection
be good, then hence will follow, that every Christian man should have the like
supremacy, and be a Pope: which how absurd it is, every man may judge.
Therefore that place in John must not be understood of any supremacy: for there
Christ teaches Peter the faithful discharge of his office and duty. From
this first gift of Christ the Papists gather two things. I. That the several
saints in heaven are patrons of countries and kingdoms, as Saint George for
England, Saint De^is for France, Saint Patricke for Ireland, etc. Secondly,
that we may pray unto Saints, for the Saints rule the nations, and therefore
know all nations; and if they know them, then they must be prayed unto. But
they swar^e from the meaning of this text: for first, it is not said, that the
Saints shall have power, one over one country and another over another; but
every Saint has power over al nations: secondly, they have power over all
nations, not because they rule them actually, but because they have the fruit
and benefit of Christ's power, whereby they are ruled. And for their second
collection: we must by nations understand not all churches but unbelievers,
for the wicked are they that must be broken like po^ters vessels. Now the
faithful have not power over the churches but over infidels* and therefore both
their collections are absurd.

I will give him the mor^^ng star. Here is the second benefit promised by
Christ to him that overcomes. Verse. 28.
The morning star properly signifies that bright star which rises a little
before the Sun, some time of the year* which the heathen call Venus. And
hereby is meant Christ himself, as Reu. 22.16, I am the bright morning star.
Christ is called a star: First, because he illuminateth all men with the light
of understanding, and his church with the knowledge of the will of his father,
and that sufficiently in all matters that concern salvation. Secondly, to
show that the prophecy uttered by Balaam touching Christ whom he calls Number.
24.17.
the star of Iaacob, is now fulfilled, when as Christ by his Apostles has
plentifully revealed himself to all nations.

Further he is called a morning star: for that special resemblance which is
between him and it; for the morning star rises not in the beginning or middle
of the night, but in the end of the night toward the beginning of the day when
the sun is about to rise, and then it shines brighter than all other
stars. Even so Christ, he came not in the beginning or middle of the dark
time under the law; but in the last age of the world, wherein after his
incarnation he did shine most fully to all nations, so as there was no such
light of knowledge before his coming as has been since. This Peter verifieth
when he says, Pet. 1.19.
We have a most sure word of the Prophets, to which ye do well that ye take
heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day d^wne, and
the day star arise in your hearts. Where the time of the law and prophets is
called a time of darkness: and their preaching then, as a candlelight: but the
preaching of Christ under the Gospel, is as the day star which shines most
brightly; he is not called the morning star, because he shines to all the
world in all time as the morning star does, but because he shines unto men in
the last age of the world.

It is further said, I will give him it. Where is promised fellowship and
participation with Christ, a^ he is this day star. And herein are two
benefits comprised* First, perfect illumination, whereby ignorance shall be
wholly taken away after this life, when as men shall know God fully, so far
forth as a creature can know the creator. Secondly, the light of perfect
glory, for by fellowship with Christ we shall be made to shine as the
stars, as Daniel Dan. 1^.3.
speaks: yea, we shall become Col. 1.12.
Saints in light* ^s the Apostle says.

Whereas Christ compares himself to the morning star: First, The Use.
we see the gross error of many among us, who live in blindness of mind and
ignorance, walking in their wicked lusts and pleasures, without care of keeping
faith or good conscience, and yet persuade themselves that they have part in
Christ, and shall be partakers of his light and glory. But they are deceived:
for all such as live in blind ignorance, and in sin, are mere darkness,
and so can have no fellowship with Christ, who is that bright morning star:
for what fellowship can be between light and darkness? This bright morning
star serves only for them that receive the light thereof, and walk by it:
but those that walk in the darkness of their sins have no benefit by it.

Secondly, seeing Christ is this morning star, we must have care to learn
Peter's instruction^ namely, Labor that this bright star may rise and shine
in our hearts. This we shall feel, when we use those means whereby the beams
of this star may shine upon us, not only for the enlightening of our minds,
but also for the heating and reviving of our frozen and dead hearts. For as the
Sun in the Spring time quickens by it warm beams some things that lie
dead all Winter: so Christ Jesus this morning star by the beams of his
grace, does enlighten our minds, and revive our dead and frozen hearts. And
till such time as we feel these things wrought in us, we cannot say, that
this morning star is risen unto us, or has shone into our hearts.

Thirdly, whereas Christ appears in the morning, when darkness is past, we
are hereby taught to lead our lives in godliness, righteousness, sobriety,
and in all manner of upright and godly conversation, For the night is past, and
the day is come, wherein we may see to walk uprightly* And therefore we must
cast off the unprofitable works of darkness, as the Apostle exhorts us,
Romans 13.12. And know this, That those who in this light do not walk
accordingly, but delight in sins the works of darkness, shall one day have
their fill: He that loves the dark, Mat. 25.2^.30
for the hiding of his talent, must be cast for his reward into utter
darkness.

Let him that has an ear to hear, Verse 29.
hear what the spirit says unto the Churches. Here is Christ's commandment,
the second part of this conclusion: But hereof we have spoken before.

Motives to proceed.

Prou. 15.32. He that refuses instruction, despises his own soul. Luke
9.62. No man that puts his hand to the plough and looks back, is apt to
the kingdom of God. Gal. 6.9. Let us not be weary of well doing: for in due
time we shall reap, if we faint not. 1. Cor. 12.31. Desire you the best
gifts, and I will show you a more excellent way. THE THIRD CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. And write unto the Angel of the Church that is at Sardis, These
things says he that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven Stars, I
know thy works, for thou have a name that thou live, but thou art dead.
THese words contain the fifth particular Commandment of our Savior Christ
unto John, wherein he is enjoined to write and send a special Epistle to the
Church of God in Sardis: of this commandment we have spoken before. The
Epistle it self, is contained in the six first Verses, and it has three
parts. A Preface, the matter of the Epistle, and the Conclusion. The Preface in
these words, These things says he which has the seven Spirits of God, and the
seven Stars. In this Preface, first is set down in whose name this Epistle
is written, to procure authority unto it: it is in Christ's name, whose
sovereignty is described by two royalties: that is, by two prerogatives or
privileges belonging to him, as he is a sovereign king of his Church: the
first is, The having of the seven spirits of God. The second, his having of the
seven Stars. For the first royalty* In the first Chap. verse. 4. I showed
that by seven spirits, were meant the holy Ghost; from whom proceed all the
gifts and graces that any men enjoy: and therefore whereas Christ is said to
have the seven spirits of God: the meaning is, that he has the holy ghost. And
this is a royalty of Christ, as he is the King and head of his Church. If it
be said, that other servants of God, as David, Peter, and Paul, had the holy
Ghost

Answ. It is true: but not in the same manner with Christ, for he has the holy
Ghost two ways: in regard of his divine nature, and of his manhood: as Christ
is God, he is the beginning of the holy Ghost: for the holy Ghost is a person
in the Trinity, proceeding from the son as well as from the Father; in
regard of which proceeding, Christ is said to send the holy Ghost, and to do
whatsoever he does by the holy Ghost: as to overcome death by the eternal
spirit, and to rise from death to life.

Secondly, as Christ is man he has the holy Ghost: because, the holy Ghost
powered into him the perfection of all graces and gifts whatsoever. And for
this cause, he is said to be Psalm. 45.7.
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, and to be enriched
with the perfection of all graces, and that two ways: both for number and
degrees. For number: with men, some have some graces, and some men others; but
Christ he has the graces of all men, and all Angels: nay more graces in number
then all men and all Angels have. And as they are in number perfect, so they
are perfect in degree: for in measure they exceed the graces of all creatures,
men or Angels: and therefore the Father is said, to have given the spirit unto
his son, John. 3.14.
without measure: and thus much is meant by this first royalty of Christ. Now
the end why Christ is said to have the holy Ghost is, to show that he is a
most lively head of his Church, who is filled with plenty of all store of
graces, whereby he is able to enrich his Church, and to revive the members
thereof who are dead in their sins; and such indeed was the special state of
this Church.

First hence we learn, The use.
no man can have true fellowship with the holy Ghost but by Christ: it is
manifest, that none can have fellowship with the Father but by Christ. And here
the same is verified touching fellowship with the holy ghost, especially for
the obtaining of those graces that concern eternal life. This serves for our
special instruction, for among the Papists there are many, that have worthy
and excellent gifts of God, as knowledge, memory, etc. And yet in them be
wanting the special gifts of the spirit, as faith which justifies, and
regeneration: for touching assurance of these in themselves, they profess
themselves to be ignorant. And whence comes this, but only from their want
of Christ: for the Christ of the Papists, as they teach him, is an idol Christ
and therefore we are not to marvel though we see the most learned among them
to scoff and mock at our doctrine of assurance of Faith and certainty of
election. Secondly, we have many among us that will say, they look to be saved
by Christ, and to have their sins pardoned by him, and yet you shall perceive
in them no grace of knowledge or conscience of true obedience. But these things
cannot stand together, to wit, loosnes of life, and forgiveness of sins: and
therefore these men deceive themselves, for if they had Christ, they should have
his spirit, and the graces thereof purging their hearts, for Christ and his
spirit are never severed: he that has the spirit of Christ working in him
faith and good conscience, has an infallible token that Jesus Christ is his.
This must admonish us to labor for (...) union with Christ Jesus our head, to
become flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone: that in him we may have
fellowship with the father and with the holy Ghost, for till we be united unto
Christ we shall never have the graces of salvation wrought effectually in our
hearts.

The second royalty of Christ is, that he has the seven stars: that is, the
seven Pastors of the seven Churches of Asia, they are called stars, because
in their ministry they inlighten men in the way that leads unto life. And
Christ is said to have them, because he is a sovereign Lord over them, and
they be his servants. For he ^ppointeth that person that shall be his minister
among men, he gives him gifts meet for his calling, he prescribes also unto
him his office and duties. But the Pastors of Churches (will some say) are made
by the Church? Answ. The right of ordaining Pastors belongs to Christ, as his
royalty: the office of the Church is to testify, ratify, and according to
the word of God to approve of them whom Christ makes and indueth with gifts:
and for that cause is the Church said to call and ordain Ministers.

The end why Christ is said to have soveraigntie over the Ministers, is to
strike the heart of the minister of this Church of Sardis with conscience of
his former negligence, and to stir him up to diligence and carefulnes in his
place. And indeed, the consideration of Christ's sovereignty over them, is an
excellent motive to stir up all Ministers to be diligent in their place, and
so likewise all Christians. For considering that they are Christ's, and the
gifts they have come from him, this must move them to make conscience of all
good duties, for being Christ's they must give themselves wholly to do the will
of Christ, whose they are. If he would have us live, we must be thankful
because he is Lord of life: if our death will glorify him, we must be content,
because we are his. Thus much of the Preface.

The matter of this Epistle, contains two parts. A reproof of a vice, with
the remedy thereof. Verse. 1.2.3. And a praise or commendation: verse. 4. The
reproof in these words, I know thy works, that is, I know all thy works: they
are all manifest unto me, and I mislike of them. So must these words be
understood in this place, as may appear by the reason of this reproof in the
words following, Thou have a name that thou live, but thou art dead. Wherein
is set down the fault of this Church, namely, Hypocrisy: for that they
pretended christian religion in outward profession, but yet wanted the life of
christianity, and the power of godliness: for the meaning of the reason is
this: Thou have a name that thou live: that is, Churches round about thee
judge and speak of thee, as of a church that is borne anew in Christ, and is
guided by his spirit (for by life we must understand spiritual life not
corporal) but yet for all this thou art dead: that is, thou want true
spiritual life by regeneration, and art indeed dead in thy sins: this is a
great and a sharp reproof.

That which is here said of this Church of Sardis, may be truly verified of
diverse churches in this age. As first, of the great church of Rome, who are
guided by the Pope as by their head. That church has a name to be alive, and
in their own pretense it is the only true church of God in the world, but in
truth and before God it is dead. Some say, it is as a body full of diseases,
and whose throat is cut: but yet the heart pants, and life remains therein.
But we may say, it has no manner of spiritual life, but lies stark dead as
a carcass in the grave. The reasons that some allege for it, are of small
moment: first, they say it has the Sacrament of baptism, which is a note of a
true Church: and therefore it has some life? Ans. First, Baptism is not
always a note of a true church: for circumcision, in whose stead comes
baptism, was a sacrament used of the Samaritans when they were ^^se. 1.9.
no people of God, and so no church of God. Again, Baptism without the true
preaching of the Gospel, is no infallible sign of a church: it is but a seal
pulled from the writing, or set to a bare paper to no use: and further outward
Baptism without inward Baptism, is no note of a church: but such is baptism
in the church of Rome; it has not inward baptism joined unto it, neither the
true preaching of the word; for the doctrine which they teach, is a quite
ouerturning of Christ and his Gospel: and therefore outward baptism may be
where there is no church. Secondly, I answer, that baptism in the church of
Rome, is a Sacrament not to their synagogue, but to the hidden church of God
among them. For God had his Church among them, even in the midst of Popery.
There were always some among them that renounced their religion, whom God
called home unto himself by the means which were among them; as the use of
this Sacrament* the Apostles Creed, and of other books of holy Scripture. For
as God said to Elias in Ahabs time, ^. Kin. 19.18.
I have reserved seven thousand that never bowed the knee to Baal: So may it
be said of many among the Papists; God has there his secret Church, who never
yielded to the Popes government, and doctrine.

Second reason, Antichrist (say they) sits in the 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
Temple of God. Now the Temple of God, is Gods Church; and therefore the church
of Rome is Gods church? Answ. He sits there, not as a member thereof, but as
an usurper and deceiuer. For in the Church of Popery is the hidden church of
God: they are therein mingled as a little wheat with much chafe, and as little
gold with much dross. So that though the church of God be where Antichrist
sits, yet the Church whereof he is head, is no church of God: for whether
we regard their doctrine, or worship of God, there is no means to beget or
preserve spiritual life in their Church. Further, this which Christ says of
Sardis, may be said not only of the Papists, but of the churches of the
Protestants, as of this our Church of ENGLAND, and of the most congregations in
the great towns thereof, though not for doctrine, yet in regard of men's
conuersations^ for the body of our people seem to be alive by their outward
profession, but indeed they are dead in respect of the power of godliness; for
by occasion of outward peace these sins abound, fulness of bread, pride both
inward in heart, and outward in attire: also cruelty, covetousness, and carnal
security; like as it was in Noah's time* Now where these sins reign, there the
power of godliness is wanting: men content themselves with an outward
profession, but the spiritual life of grace is not to be seen. And yet this
does not prejudice the state of our church, to nullify it from being the
church of God: for God has his chosen among us in all places, who live indeed
a spiritual life: though the body of our people be dead in (...) and so will
continue while peace abides; the threatenings of the ministers* will not awake
me^ out of the sleep of sin; it must be the rod of correction that must put
into them the power of religion. Men are like to little children, who besides
admonition, must feel the smart of the rod to bring them to their duty.

Further, in this Church of Sardis, whom Christ calls dead, though they had a
name to live. Note the state of the Church of GOD, for this was a true Church
of God, who among the rest was washed in the blood of Christ. Chap. 1. verse. 5.
And yet Christ says, it is dead in sin: that is, in part, not wholly. And
therefore a Church that is in a very corrupt state, both in regard of outward
conversation, and of sundry erroneous opinions, may yet remain the true Church
of Christ, if so be they err not in the foundation. Which serves for answer
to them, that think our Church to be no Church, because it maintains not
that out-ward order which they think should be in it. And therefore though we
must prefer Church before Church: yet we must not condemn a Church to be no
Church* for some corruptions that be therein. A true body may have some
blemish, and a true Church some wants.

Again, the Churches of God say, this is a Church* yet Christ says, they are
dead. How can these two stand? Answ. The Churches about Sardis judged this to
be alive, according to the rule of charity, because of their outward
profession of true Religion: for as Infants are not indeed all holy, as
experience shows, yet till we see the same made manifest, we are in
charity to judge them to be holy that are borne of f^ithfull parents: even so
ought the Minister and every one in GODS Church, to think the best of every
one in Gods Church, till God make manifest what he is. Paul following this
rule, calls whole Churches elect.

But thou art dead. Here are two judgments, one of neighbor Churches, the
other of Christ, and Christ's judgment is preferred. We must therefore regard
specially the judgment of Christ, and labor to approve our selves and our
conuersations unto Christ, rather then to men: for let men say what they will
of us, it is Christ that must save and condemn* this made 1. Cor. 4.3.4.
Paul to say, I pass little to be judged of you, or of man's judgment: why
so? for he that judges me, is the Lord.

And indeed, without Christ's commendation, the judgment of men is nothing: for
Christ may condemn us, when men think well and speak well of us: and
therefore he says, Woe be unto you when all men speak well of you. Luke
6.26.

Verse 2. Be watchful, and strengthen the things that remain, that are ready
to die: for I have not found thy works perfect before God. There be two degrees
of hypocrisy: first, when men profess that which is not in their heart at
all. The second, when men make profession of more then is in their heart. This
second kind of hypocrisy often befalls the children of God; and it is that
which Christ reprooueth in this Church of Sardis, in the former verse. After
which reproof, here he propounds a remedy to their vice, and a reason to
move them to use the same. The remedy is in the beginning of the verse, where
are two duties prescribed: To be watchful, and to strengthen or confirm the
decayed graces of God in them. For the first, Be watchful: to be watchful
here, is a most worthy and excellent duty, it is not bodily, but spiritual:
and it is practiced when any man has a circumspect care and diligent heed in
respect of the salvation of his soul. This duty of watchfulness concerns
two things; sin, and death* Watchfulnes against sin stands in two duties;
First, a man must daily and continually bethink himself before hand of all
sins and vices into which he may happily fall and for the doing of this, he
must consider in himself two things; his Nature and his Calling* Touching his
Nature, he must consider, that in him remains the seed and root of all sin,
and therefore that he may fall into any sin whatsoever. Again, a man
considering his nature, shall find himself more inclined to some sins then
to others: and those he must especially mark and observe. Secondly, for his
Calling: a man must mark the sins thereof: for since the fall of man, every
calling has his especial sins, whereto men that walk therein are more
incident. The Magistrate has his sins, the Minister his: the Lawyer his, the
Physician his, and the Tradesman his. And touching these, a man must consider
unto what vices and abuses men are most subject, that walk in that calling
wherein he lives, and so shall he have a foresight of the sins that he may
fall into. Secondly, after this foresight of sin: he must watch his heart with
all diligence, that though it be tempted and assaulted, yet it be not tainted
with any one sin; as the wise man counsels, Pro. 4.21.
Keep thy heart with all diligence, that so the fountain of al thy actions
may be kept holy and pure. The second part of this, watchfulness respects
death, or the second coming of Christ. In this, two things must be practiced:
first, a man must every day bethink him self of his end, and of the coming
of Christ, either in general to all the world, or particularly unto him by
death: and in this consideration he must esteem and judge of every day, as of
the day of his death, or the day of judgment. Secondly, he must prepare
himself against death, and against the day of judgment, every day, eue^ this
present day, as though he should now die, or meet Christ in judgment; and
the next day do the like, and so go on continually to the day of his death.
And for our furtherance in this Christian watch, we must be mindful of
temperance and sobriety, that we keep mediocritie in the use of the creatures
of God, and of the things of this life. For when men plunge themselus, either
in the cares of this world, or in earthly delights, they quite forget both
sin and death, and the day of Judgment; and thus we see what Christ means
by watchfulness.

As Christ prescribes this duty unto this Church: The use.
so are we in the name of Christ to be enjoined the same Christian
watchfulness, both against sin and death, and the day of Judgment. And to
move us hereto, consider these reasons. First we are watchful for the
preservation of the things of this life: as if a town be in danger of sacking
or burning; there is watch and ward kept continually: and if a man's house be
in danger of robbing, he will sit up night and day to save his goods: yea
every man is very painful and watchful to heap up to himself, the things
of this world: Now, what a shame is it, that men should be watchful for
temporal things, and yet have no care of their soul that must live for ever?
Again, want of watchfulness is the forerunner of death, and eternal
destruction. I. These. 5. verse. 3. When men say peace and safety, then shall
come upon them sudden destruction. When the rich man had enlarged his barnes
upon the increase of his substance, he promised to himself case and security:
saying, ^uk. 12.1^.20.
Soul, soul, take thy rest, etc. but it was said unto him, Oh fool, this
night shall thy soul be taken from thee. And the Mat. 24.39.
old world knew nothing, till the flood came and destroyed them all. Now, if
the want of watchfulness be the forerunner of destruction, how great a cause
have we to watch?

The second duty enjoined, is to confirm the graces of God decayed in them.
Strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die: as if he should
say, sundry be the graces which I have bestowed on you: but many are lost and
gone: and those which remain, are about to perish, unless you confirm them;
therefore see now that you strengthen and repair the same.

In this duty, Christ teaches this church and us an excellent lesson, that
whosoever has received any gift of God, must have care to preserve it, and to
make the same gift strong in him by continual increase. If a man have received
knowledge, faith, and repentance, or any other gift of grace, he must not
suffer the same to lie dead in him, but stir up, increase, and confirm it
daily, that he may be a perfect man in Christ. For the gifts which men have
are not their own, but Gods also, who looks to receive his own with
advantage. And therefore men like good Stewards must so use the gifts received,
that they may return them to God with increase. Thus Paul persuades Timothy,
2 Timothy 1.6.
stir up the gift of God that is in thee: for else the receiver is an
unfaithful servant, and so shall be rewarded. And for the better perfourmance
of this duty: we must often read the word of God, and meditate therein: we
must hear it often preached; and with due reverence and preparation receive
the sacrament. And pray continually: striving earnestly against the corruptions
that be in us; and daily stirring up our heart to all good duties: Thus did
David check the corruption and deadness of his heart: Ps. 42.^1.
Why art thou so cast down oh my soul? and also stir up the same unto all
good duties, saying, I have applied my heart to fulfill thy statutes always,
even to the end. Ps. 119.112.

Hereby are reproved, the common sort of professors and hearers of the word:
The use.
who stand at a stay, and go not forward in grace. This is a great fault, for
as we have received grace, so we ought to stir up the same, that we may
confirm, and increase it daily.

Further Christ adds, Which are about to die, where he answers to a
question, that is moved by sundry at this day, namely: whether graces that
concern salvation, may be utterly lost or not? Christ answeareth by a
distinction, that some graces that pertain to salvation, may be lost quite:
and others may be decayed, so as they are about to die. For the graces of God
that pertain to salvation, be of two sorts: some be absolutely necessary, so
as without them a man of years cannot be saved: and such are faith and
regeneration. Others be less necessary, which sometime go with faith, but
not always; such are, A plentiful feeling of the favor of God, joy in the
holy Ghost, and boldness in prayer; these may be lost wholly for a time in the
servants of God. Yea, faith and regeneration themselves, may decay grievously,
and be ready to di^, as this text says. Secondly, consider faith and
regeneration in themselus, and they may be wholly lost, for nothing in it self
is unchangeable, but God. The state of the elect Angels by nature is
changeable, for they stand by the power of God. Thirdly, these graces may
perish and decay finally, unless thy be confirmed. Question. Why then do not
the elect finally fall away after their calling? Ans. Their standing comes not
from the constancy of grace or faith, but from the promise of God made unto
them, and to their faith, so Christ says to Peter, ^at* 16.1^
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock, that is, upon thy faith which thou have
professed, will I build my temple, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it: that is, though they may assault it, and grievously weaken it, yet
they shall never be able finally to overcome it.

The use.
Seeing sundry graces of God may be lost, and the most necessary graces greatly
decay, yea of themselves quite die: we that have received from God any grace,
either of faith or repentance, are hereby taught not to be presumptuous, or
over confident in our selus, but with fear and trembling work out our
salvation. Phillip. 2.13.

The reason to enforce the former remedy is this: For I have not found thy
works perfect before God: and therefore watch, and confirm the decayed graces
of God that be in thee. In this reason, Christ gives the^ and us to
understand, that he makes a search in his church of all the works that men do
in the same, that he may accordingly reward them; for not finding, does
presuppose a search. And so the scripture speaks of God usually. Before the
old world was destroyed, it is said; The Genesis ^.^.
Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great upon the earth, as if he had
looked from heaven upon the earth, and beheld that it was corrupt, speaking
after the manner of men, to signify that search which he makes into men's
actions. And so he is said to come down from heaven, at the building of Babell,
Genesis 11. and before he destroyed Sodom and Gomorrha, Genesis 18.2^
He came down to see whether they had done according to that cry, which was
come up to him: and so before the Lord punished the wickedness of the Israelits,
Ierem. ^.12
He made a search into their wai^^: and the second Commandment is this, God
will visit the sins of the father upon the children: that is, he will make a
search, whether the sins of the fathers be among the children, and if they
be, he will punish them.

Seeing Christ makes this search into all men's actions, The use.
we are taught in all things to have care to conform our selus to the will of
Christ: and to set our selves to the doing of all good duties, according to his
word: If we knew a Magistrate would come to make search in our house, we would
be sure to set all things in order against he came: shall we be thus
circumspect to prepare for the coming of an earthly man? and shall we not much
more prepare our selves against the search of our Savior Christ the everliving
God, from whom nothing can be hid?

I have not found thy works perfect. Works are perfect two ways; by the law,
or by the Gospel. By the law, when in our works we do all that the law
requires: and thus are no man's works perfect in this life. By the Gospel, our
works are perfect when they proceed from a believing heart, that has a care to
please God in all things: and these works are perfect not in the^selus, but in
the acceptance of Christ. Here by perfect works Christ means not the
perfection of the law, but of the Gospel, as if he had said, I have searched
into your ways; you do many works in show, but they proceed not from sincere
faith, nor from a heart that has care to please God in all his commandments,
and a full purpose not to sin against him: you have a show of godliness, but
you want the power thereof.

Here observe that Christ condemns this church, not because their works were
not outwardlye conformable to the will of God; but because they proceeded not
from a believing heart, that had a full purpose to forsake all sin, and to
please God in all things.

We therefore must take heed of all hypocrisy by the Example of this Church:
The use.
and labor to be of David's mind: and pray with him; Psa. 1^9.^0.
That our hearts may be upright in the Statutes of the Lord: that we may say
with Hezekias; Isay. 38.3.
Behold Lord how I have walked before thee with an upright mind: for this is a
notable token of grace, and an infallible badge of him that is the child of God.

Before God. Some may say, Christ here distinguishes himself from God, and
therefore he is not God. Answer. By (God) in this place we must understand
not God simply, but God the father. For Christ here speaks of himself, not
as he is God, but as he is mediator God and man; in which respect, even as he
is now glorified, he is inferior unto his Father.

Where note that Christ being now glorified in heaven, carries himself as
mediator, whence we gather that we may lawfully, and without presumption pray
unto Christ, without the means or intercession of Saints or Angels. The church
of Rome deny this; and say, because Christ is now in full glory in heaven,
therefore we must use unto him the mediation of Saints: but Christ being now
in heaven, marks our works in particular: and therefore we may without
presumption come unto him by prayer.

Verse. 3. Remember therefore how thou have received and heard, and hold fast,
and repent: If therefore thou will not watch, I will come on thee as a thief,
and thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee. When Christ has
reproved them for their sin of hypocrisy, and prescribed them a remedy
with a reason thereof; he does as a good Physician and pastor, show them the
way how they may practice that remedy. For they might say; we are commanded to
watch, and to renew our decayed graces, but how shall we do this? Christ
answers, by doing three things. I. by remembering that which thou have
received by hearing. II. by holding fast. III. by repenting of thy sins.

For the first, Remember therefore, that is, call to mind the doctrine of
salvation which thou have been taught by mine Apostles. This remembrance is a
most excellent means to move a man to subjection to Gods will, to repent, and
to practice all good graces. When David saw the prosperity of the wicked, his
fect had almos^ steps, but his remedy against that temptation was his Psa.
73.17.
go^^g to Gods sanctuari^, and there calling to mind the end of those men.
Again, Psa. 119.^^
I have remembered thy name, oh Lord in the night, and have kept thy law. Peter
denied his Master, when he forgot his words: but when he was put in mind
thereof by the look of Christ, and the crowing of a Cock, he then repented,
and wept bitterly, Luke 22.61.62. Sins committed by men of ignorance, are
many and grievous: and therefore all sins are called ignorances: Heb. 9 7. but
if men would by faith keep in mind the word of God, it would be a notable
means to keep them from sinning.

Here then we have a sovereign remedy against sin: namely, The use.
wheresoever we are, or whatsoever we do, we must call to mind the word of
God, and the promises of God: and those will be a lantern unto our steps, and
a light unto our paths. The Devil labors above all things, to bring us to
forget the word, for then he knows he can easily draw us into any sin. Quest.
How shall we keep in mind the word and promises of God? Answ. That is a grace
of God, and for the attayning unto it, we must first labor to have our hearts
affected with the love of Gods word and promises: for a man can never keep in
mind that, whereof he has no liking. Secondly, we must labor to believe the
word of God: For faith gives it rooting in our hearts, Colos. 2.7. The cause
why there is so little remembering of that which is taught is, for that it is
not mixed with faith in those that hear it.

Again, the thing to be remembered is, How thou have received and heard: that
is, look what Doctrine thou have received by hearing, and that remember. Where
we see Christ ioineth receiving and hearing together. Whence we may gather,
that ^^aching and receiving of the word of God by hearing, is the prescribed
general means, whereby God reuealeth his will, counsel, and purpose touching
the salvation of mankind: neither is there any other means appointed hereunto
in the word of God.

This shows, that their opinion is false, who teach that God calls all ^he
world effectually unto salvation, The use.
for how can they be called, that never heard of the (...) of God? but all in
all ages never (...) of the word of God; Albeit (...) the coming of Christ,
their sound has gone forth into all nations. Secondly, this shows the
fondness of their opinion, who defend the Doctrine of universal grace: that
God should give grace pertaining to salvation, unto every man in the world, so
as he may be saved if he will: for the means to receive grace, is the hearing
of the word, which all men in all ages never had vouchsafed unto them.

The second duty, prescribed, is the holding fast of this doctrine. To hold
fast here, signifies two things; first, to maintain the doctrine of the
Gospel received and taught by the Apostles. Secondly, to put the same in
practice in a godly life: of these we have spoken before. cap. 2.25.

The third duty is to repent: where by repentance is not meant the beginning
of repentance: but the renewing and restoring of the same, for their hardness
and deadness of heart, whereby they did slackly and coldly practice the good
duties which they did profess.

The use.
Hereby we are taught not to content our selves with the beginning of repentance,
but we must renew the same continually, and that not for gross sins only, but
even for the wants that be in us, as for our dullness and deadness of heart,
and for our hypocrisy, and decay in Gods graces.

And because this Church was very dead and dull of heart; therefore Christ
adds a reason to move them to the practice of this duty: which is, a most
terrible threatening, in these words: If thou will not watch, I will come on
thee (...) a thief, and thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee.

Here mark Christ's order and dealing: having prescribed a remedy for their
fault, he gives them a direction to practice the same; and after adds a
most terrible threatening to drive them thereunto; as if he should say, if thou will not watch against sin, and against death, and for that end remember my
word, hold fast the same, and repent; then look as a thief comes upon a man on
a sudden, and spoils his goods and cuts the throat of his children; so will
I come on thee on a sudden, and power upon thee my wrath, whereby I will
(...) cut the throat of thy soul, and thou shall have no means to escape my
punishment.

Here Christ threatens sudden and speedy destruction, but yet with
condition and limitation of repentance. Now, because we be like this Church (as
has been showed) by reason of the long peace which we enjoy: we may also use
the same reason and threatening at this day to stir up our dead hearts. We must
watch against all sin, and against death: and for this end must have in
memory the word of God, and hold fast the faith unto the end, and repent
continually of all wants: but if we do not this, then are the vengeances and
eternal punishments of God to be powered upon us without measure, and that
suddenly, when we cannot prevent them. If a man have but a spark of grace, the
consideration hereof will move him to repentance, and to watchfulnes; but if
this will not awake a man out of his sins, then nothing remains but a
fearful expectation of the wrath of God, which shall be unavoidable, and
endure for ever. Indeed if a man had some thousand years allotted for the
punishment of his sins, there were some cause why he might continue in them:
but seeing this punishment is eternal, and when many thousand years are
expired, they are as far from the end of their woe as ever they were;
therefore it must stir up all dead and drowzie hearts unto repentance, and
cause them to shake off security, ignorance, and coldness in Religion, and to
break off the course of every sin.

Verse. 4. Notwithstanding thou have a few names yet in Sardie, which have not
defiled their garments, and they shall walk with me in white; for they are
worthy. Here begins the second part of the matter of this Epistle, namely
the praise and commendation of some part of this Church. The words do thus
depend upon those which went before; whereas Christ had said, that this Church
was dead in sin, and had only a name to live; some man might a^ke, how it
could be a true Church. To this Christ answers in the beginning of this
verse, that though the greatest part in this Church were dead in their sins,
yet some few there were among them that were alive in Christ, and did testify
the the same by true and sincere obedience.

In this coherence we may observe two instructions. I. that a particular
congregation on earth is made a Church of God, and so called in regard of Gods
elect therein, who do truly believe. For the privileges of a Church belong
unto particular congregations, only by reason of the faith of the elect among
them. The Catholic church is the whole Company of the elect truly believing in
Christ, and particular congregations are members of it so far forth as they
do truly believe; the rest that do not truly believe are not members of the
Church before God, but (...) in the judgment of men: like unto superfluous
humors which are in the body, but no parts thereof. This confuteth the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, who teach that wicked men that are rejected in
Gods decree, may yet be true members of the Church of God.

Secondly, in this coherence Christ intimates unto us a distinction between
man and man in this Church, for all that were in this Church were men called,
professing Christ and his Gospel: and yet of them, some were dead in their
sins, and others were alive in Christ. Touching this distinction of men, we
must search the cause thereof. It must not be ascribed to any power or will in
man but to the good pleasure of God, as the scripture teaches; for when the
body of the Israelites had given themselves to Idolatry, there were yet Romans
11.4.
seven thousand that never bowed the knee to Baall: what was the cause why they
did not live like to the other Israelites? Surely nothing in the will of man,
(though the Idolatry of the other, was to be ascribed to themselves) but the
text is clear, it was the good pleasure of God, who had preserved and kept
them.

By this we see, how erroneous and false the Divinity of some Protestants is,
The use.
which ascribe the cause of this distinction between man and man, to the
liberty of man's will being renewed by grace: saying, That GOD gives to every
man saving grace, by virtue whereof, he may repent and believe if he will:
but yet because the will of man does still remain sinful, hence it comes,
that he has liberty, to obey, or not to obey. And therefore the cause why
some men lie dead in sin is, because they set their will to refuse the grace
of GOD; and the cause why some men live in Christ is, because they incline
their will to embrace the grace of GOD. But this Doctrine does greatly diminish
the grace of GOD, in that it makes the acceptance thereof to lie and depend on
the pleasure and will of man: when as the power of almighty GOD joined with
his will, is the true cause thereof, leaving some to themselves who do fall,
and enabling others to stand by his grace.

Now follow the words of this commendation. Notwithstanding thou have a few
names yet in Sardie; that is, There be yet in this Church a few persons
known to me by their names (for by Names, we must understand persons named)
which have not defiled their garments. Here (to omit many expositions) is an
allusion to the Ceremonial law, wherein GOD set down a distinction between
things clean and unclean, not in themselves, but by his appointment: and
among the Jews, if any man had but touched an unclean thing with his hand,
or with his garment, thereby he was defiled, and his garment defiled legally;
and so he or his garment were reputed unclean: whereupon they had a special
care not to touch the things that were defiled, no not with their garments.
Now this signified another thing unto them namely, That they ought to abstain,
not only from the outward sins of the moral Law, but even from all
occasions, intentions, shows, and appearances of evil. And in this place,
this is meant hereby: that some in this Church of Sardie, had so far made
conscience of sin, that they would not meddle with the very occasions and
appearances of evil.

Hereby we see* that the servants of GOD are but few in number: for the body
of this people were de^d in sin, and a few only in this great place lived
in Christ; so Christ says to his Disciples, The flock to whom the father
Luke 12.3^
will give the Kingdom of Heaven, is but a little flock. The Prophet Isay is
sent, Isay. 6.9.
To harden the hearts of the body of the people for their iniquities: and
Verse. 13.
the tenth part only must be saved: and in the Gospel it is said, The way to
hell is broad, Mat ^.13.1^.
and many there be that walk therein: but the way to heaven is straight, and
few there be that enter into it.

The use.
Hereby then we are taught not to follow the example of the multitude, but of
the fewer and better sort. It is a foul sin that keeps many from religion,
and brings them to destruction, when they will live after the manner of the
world, and as their Forefathers have done. This is a false rule, and a
dangerous course.

Thou have a few names, That is, persons whose names I know and have recorded.
They are called names, because Christ observes and knows them by their names.
Where note, that those that are the true servants of God, are particularly
known unto Christ ^uk. 12.7.
The hairs of your head are numbered (says Christ to his Disciples) much more
were their names known. Again, he bids them rejoice that their names Luke
10.2.
were written in heaven. And Christ the good Shepherd knows his sheep, and
calls them by their names. Ioh. 10.3.

This is a matter of endless comfort unto the people of GOD: for what can
cause a man more to rejoice, than to know that his name particularly is known
to the King of Kings, and that accordingly he has special regard unto him?
when the Lord would comfort Moses, and put courage into him in doing the duties
of his calling; he tells him, That he was known unto him by ^xod. 33.12,
13, 14, ad 1^.
name. Yea, this is the foundation of man's salvation: 2. Tim. 2.19
The Lord knows who are his.

Which have not defiled their garments: Here they are commended for
uprightness and sincerity of life and conversation, in that they kept
themselves from the very shows and appearance of evil; when as the rest of
this Church was dead in sin.

In their example Christ prescribes unto us a pattern of true piety, how
we ought to carry our selves in the Church of GOD on earth: we must not
content our selves with a bare profession of Religion, and keep our selves
from gross sins only, but abstain from the very shows of evil. Yea more
particularly, here are three things taught us touching sin. First, that we
ought to make conscience of every sin in our own person. Secondly, that we
ought to keep our selves from the con^agion of sin in others, either by
giving consent unto them, or furthering and allowing them any way therein.
Thirdly, that we ought to abstain from the very occasions, and shows, and
appearances of sins, so Paul teaches us 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
to abstain from all appearance of evil. Ephesians. 5.3, He will not have
sundry sins, as fornication, uncleanness, etc. so much as once named,
thereby to give the least approbation unto them. We must therefore look on
this example, lay it to our hearts, and conform our lives unto it: so shall
we be good servants of GOD, and have the same commendation with these few:
for true Religion stands not in knowledge, but in obedience, and this is true
obedience to make conscience of every sin in our own persons; to take heed
of the infection of sin in others: and to abstain from the appearance of
evil. A happy Church should we have, if these things were practiced: but
this is the shame and reproach of our profession, that we have no care of true
obedience in our selves and others, whereby we should glorify God, and grace
our holy Religion.

The church of Rome hence gather, that a man after baptism, may live without
mortal sin. For these few persons in this Church in their baptism, put on
Christ, and after kept themselves from all occasions of sins, so as they had
not committed any mortal sin. But their collection is unsound: for first,
though they had to this time abstained from all mortal sin, yet how can they
prove that they sinned not afterward? Secondly, they are said not to have
defiled their garments, not for that they had not committed any sin, but
because they endeavored to keep themselves from the appearance of all sin:
and so must the obedience which is ascribed to Gods children in scripture be
understood: namely, of their sincere purpose and endeavor to obey, and so among
us, those that have a settled purpose and resolution to make conscience of
every sin, and in all things to do the will of God, they are reputed for
keepers of the law. For GOD in his children accepts the will for the deed. And
they shall walk with me in white. After the commendation of these few Christ
adds a promise, of living with him in glory. For so white garments have
always been used to signify joy, happiness, life and glory. Ecclesiast.
9.8. At all times let thy garments be white, that is, take the delight and
pleasure in using the creatures of God; So that here these few have a promise
to be freed from all want, and to live with Christ in all glory, joy, and
pleasure.

This benefit, has been in effect further urged in the former Chapter: here
only I will note one Doctrine; namely, That they which live in the world
among the wicked, and do not communicate with their sins, shall not partake
with them in their punishments; for the body of this Church must have Christ
to come amongst them as a Thief, but the godly must walk with Christ in
white, in glory. Genesis 19.
Lot was freed from the destruction of the Sodomites, because he partaked not
with them in their sins: and among the Israelites, Ezekiel. 9.6.
Those that mourned for the sins of the people, are marked in the forehead,
that when Judgments came upon the wicked, they might be spared. This point
must be remembered, for by reason of long peace and prosperity among us many
sins abound, as Ignorance, Atheism, contempt of Religion, and profaning of
the Lords Sabbath, with innumerable sins of the second table. All which call
for Judgments from heaven, and no doubt they will be punished, partly in this
life, and partly in the life to come, unless our people do repent. Those
therefore that would not partake of the common Judgments that are to come,
must now beware that they communicate not with the common sins that d^e
abound, and see that they keep faith and good conscience, having their
righteous and zealous hearts grieved, for the abominations among which they
live.

After the promise, is adjoined the reason thereof, For they are worthy. Hence
the Church of Room does conclude, That a man by his works may merit heaven,
because they be worthy of reward. A most blasphemous conclusion, and a
manifest abuse of the word of GOD. Gods children indeed are worthy life
everlasting; but not by the merit of their works: Two kinds of worthynesse.
for then they should be done according to the rigor of the Law: but for the
worthynesse of their person, when as they stand righteous before GOD in Christ;
for when GOD will save any man, he gives Christ unto that man truly and
really; so as he may say, Christ is mine. And with Christ GOD gives his
spirit which works in his heart true saving faith, whereby he does receive
Christ: and so Christ and his righteousness belonges unto that man reallye,
and by virtue thereof he is worthy life everlasting; and this is the
worthynesse which Christ means in this place, and not any worthynesse of
their works: so that this does help them nothing at all, and yet it is the
most probable place of Scripture, to prove and justify the Doctrine of man's
merits.

Verse. 5. He that overcomes shall be clothed in white array, and I will not
put out his name out of the Book of life; but I will confess his name before
my Father, and before his Angels.

Verse. 6. Let him that has an ear, hear what the spirit says unto the
Churches.

Here is the conclusion of this Epistle: and it contains two parts: a
promise, and a commandment. The promise in the fifth verse, and the
commandment in the sixth. In the promise note two things: first, the parties
to whom it is made, To him that overcomes, whereof we have spoken Chap. 2.7.
before. Secondly, the things promised: to wit, glory and eternal happiness,
which is expressed three ways. First thus: he shall be clothed in white
array: that is, he shall have everlasting life and happiness, so much is
signified by white ^ayment as we have already showed.

Hence the Church of Rome conclude, that a man may do good works respecting a
reward. The use.
Answer. In some sort it is true; for so it is recorded of Moses, Hebr. 11.26.
He had respect to the recompense of reward. But yet the recompense of reward,
must not be the principal end of our good works: for cheefely we must
thereby intend to testify our faith, and our obedience unto God, and with that
we may have respect to everlasting life.

The second thing promised; And I will not put out his name out of the book of
life. For the understanding of this, two questions must be scanned: First what
this book of life is; Secondly, whether a man may be blotted out of this
Book. For the first: this book of life is nothing else, but Gods
predestination or eternal decree of Election, whereby he has chosen some men
unto salvation upon his good pleasure. And this is called a Book, because it
is like unto a Book. For as the General in a Camp, has the names of all his
soldiers that fight under him, in a Book; and as the Magistrate of a Town
has the name of every free man and Denison in^owled: so GOD in the book of
his Election, has the names of all that shall be saved.

For the second Question. A man may be written in the Book of life two ways:
either truly before God, or in the judgment of men only. Those whose names
are truly before GOD written in this book, cannot be blotted out; For Gods
counsel touching the eternal state of every man, is unchangeable. This the
goulden Chain of Gods decree, does plainly show: For whom he has
predestinate, Rom 8.30.
them he has called; and whom he called, them also he justified; and whom
he justified, them he also glorified. Others there be that have their names
written in this Book, only in the judgment of men: and thus are all men
written in the Book of life, that profess the Gospel of Christ in his
Church: for so charity binds us to judge of them: And these may have their
names blotted out. In this sense does the Scripture often speak: as when the
Prophet wishes, Psa. 69.28.
That God would blot his enemies out of the Book of life (meaning Judas
principally) his meaning is, that it might be made manifest, his name was
never written therein. This then is the meaning of this promise: that they who
do avoid the occasions of sin, and have care to keep faith and good
conscience unto the end, have their names written in the book of life, and
they shall never be blotted out.

Hence I gather two things. First, that the number of the elect, in respect of
God is certain: for the names of those which are to be saved, be as it were
written in a book, and being once written in, they remain there for ever.
Some do teach, that all may be saved, if they will: but this is a mere
fancy of man: for what should th^^e need any book of life, if that were so?
Secondly, hence I gather, that this number can neither increase, nor be
diminished, let men do wha^ they can: If they had been of us they would have
continued with us. 1. Ioh. 2.19. All that thou have given me have I kept, and
none of them is lost. Ioh. 17.12.

Whereas a man may be written in the book of life, to wit, The use.
in the judgment of men, and yet be blotted out: hereby we are to be
admonished, to look unto our selves, and to make conscience of every sin,
and to avoid and shun the very occasions thereof. For so long as we
profess the Gospel, and obey the same, our names be in the book of life:
but when we commit any sin, we do as much as in us lies make a pen, and
reach it up to heaven to blot our names out of that book: and they that keep
a course in sinning, do plainly show that they were never truly written
therein.

Secondly, considering that the number of the elect is certain, it must be a
motive to cause us to labor for some a^^^rance of election, that we may
truly say, we have our names written in Gods book. But here some bad person
will say, seeing the number of the Elect is unchangeable, I will live as I
list; for if my name be in the book of GOD, it shall never be blotted out;
and if it be not in, it can never be added. Ans. These men deceive their own
souls: for they that have their names written in the book of life, shall live
as these few did in this Church of Sardis, in true faith and holy obedience.
For he that is ordained to glorification, is ordained to justification and
sanctification: and it is impossible for him that shall be saved, to live always
in sin, and therefore these men must rather labor to repent and believe, and
to get some signs of their Election, that they may know that their names are
written in the book of life.

The third benefit is this: I will confess his name before my Father, and
before his Angels. That is, in the day of judgment I will acknowledge and
profess him to be mine: one of mine Elect, that keeps faith and good
conscience unto the end. I will take him from the company of the wicked world,
and set him on my right hand, and advance him to glory, pronouncing upon him
the blessed voice of absolution. Come, Thou blessed of my father. Mat. 25.34.
The end why this benefit is thus propounded, is to draw this church to profess
the name of Christ in this world: for if they would profess Christ before men,
he will acknowledge them for his own at the last day.

The use.
This same reason here propounded, must induce us to make a true confession of
Christ against the world, and all Christ's enemies: which to do is a very hard
matter, and man of himself cannot stand out; but yet the consideration of this,
that Christ will confess him at the last day, will be a notable motive and
means to enable him thereto. If an earthly Prince should come to a man among a
great company and call him by his name, speaking kindly unto him, he would
esteem it a great honor unto him; and for that he would not stick to die in
the Princes cause. Oh then, what honor is this, that Christ Jesus will in the
last day vouchsafe to all those that in this life do sincerely confess him,
and overcome! he will confess them to be his, and receive them to his own
glory. But on the contrary, those that will not confess him here, but
disgrace him; either by false doctrine or profanesse of life, will Christ at
the day of judgment utterly disgrace, by denying them to be his, and there
pronounce upon them the fearful sentence of condemnation, Go ye cursed, etc.
Which if we would then escape, and also procure unto us the joyful voice of
absolution: we must here labor to hold the truth of Christ's doctrine, and also
keep a good conscience unto the end. But if we only profess him in judgment,
and not in the practice of a holy life, surely Christ will profess that he
knows us not, and then give us our portion with the devil and his angels.

The commandment follows: verse. 6. Let him, etc: of which we have spoken.

Verse 7. And unto the Angel of the Church which is of Philadelphia, write:
These things says he, which is holy and true; which h^th the key of David,
which opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens. Here
begins the sixth particular Epistle of our Savior Christ, from this verse,
to the 14. And before it (as to the rest) is prefixed a special Commandment
unto John, whereby he is enjoined to write this Epistle unto the Church of
Philadelphia; the end of which commandment, is to warrant the calling of John
to write this Epistle: but of this we have spoken before.

The Epistle it self contains three parts: a Preface; the matter of the
Epistle; and the Conclusion. The Preface, in this verse: These things says he
etc. wherein is set down, in whose name this Epistle is sent; namely, in
Christ's: where (as in the former Epistles) he is excellently described, for the
winning of more credit unto this Epistle. And that, first, by his properties:
Holiness and truth. Secondly, by his kingly office, in the words following.

For his properties. First, Christ is said, to be holy. Quest. How can Christ
be said to be holy as he is man, considering he descended from Adam, who
c^^ueyed his sin and the guilt thereof, to all his posterity? The common
answer is this; That indeed, Christ descended from Adam, as he is man: but
his substance was sanctified by the holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin, and
thereby he was freed from Adams sin. This answer is true, but not
sufficient: for men besides the corruption original, take from Adam the
guiltiness of that sin which Adam committed. Now sanctification takes away
the corruption of sin, but not the guilt thereof, therefore a more full answer
is this: That all which come of Adam by natural generation, do receive by
that order which God set in nature at the creation, saying, increase and
multiply, both the nature of Adam and the sin and guilt thereof. But God for
the preventing of this in the Incarnation of Christ, ordained that Christ
should not come of Adam by natural generation, but by a miraculous Conception
of the holy Ghost: whereby he took the nature of man with the infirmities
thereof, without the sin of man's nature, or the the guiltiness thereof. And
thus is Christ free from sin as he is man.

Further, Christ is holy two ways. In himself; and in regard of his Church.
In himself, he is holy sundry ways: first, in regard of his Godhead, for his
divine nature is holiness it self. Secondly, as he is man; for his manhood
was not only freed from all manner of sin, by reason of his miraculous
conception, but it was also enriched and filled with holiness, and that in
greater measure than all men and Angels, for he received the gifts of the holy
Ghost without measure. And again, as he is man; Christ is holy in regard of
his obedience and actions, for living on earth he did actually as our suertie
fulfill the Law for us. Secondly, Christ is holy in regard of his Church.
First, because he is the author of that holiness, which is in every member
of his Church. Yea, he is holy in regard of men in a further respect; namely,
as the root of all man's holiness, as he is Mediator. For look as from Adam
is actually conveyed original sin to every one of his posterity that
comes by natural generation: so from Christ is righteousness and holiness
conveyed to all that believe in him: and for this cause he is called 1. Co^.
1.3^
our righteousness and sanctification: and in this sense especially is Christ
said to be holy in this place.

The use.
Whereas Christ is said to be holy not only in himself but for us: here we
must mark what is the principal thing in Christian Religion; namely, to have
care to be ingraffed into Christ, that from him we may receive grace to
become new creatures: and feel in us his power to kill our corruptions, and
daily to renew his own Image in us, in righteousness and true holiness; and
that as truly, as we feel in us Adams corruption. It is not sufficient for
us to plead, that Christ will be our Savior, and will free us from all
sins: but we must labor to have Christ convey holiness into us, and that
as sensibly as we see the root convey sap into the branches: and this
holiness we must make to appear in our lives, as the branches by their
fruit, and leaves do show they receive sap from the root.

Secondly, here note, Christ propounds himself unto us and to all Churches, as
a notable pattern to be followed; giving us to understand, that all that
believe in him and look to be saved by him, must be holy as he is holy:
making conscience of every evil way, for Christ is holy to make us holy. Let
us therefore behold Christ, and see wherein he expresses himself to be holy;
and therein let us follow him. So John says: He that has this hope,
purifyeth himself as he is holy: that is, uses all good means to conform
himself to Christ's holiness.

Thirdly, hereby we learn, that the common title given to the Pope, whereby
he is called (Holiness) is a blasphemous title: for to be holy, is here made
a property of Christ. And yet more is given to the Pope, than to Christ in
this place, for he is called Holiness, which is a title of God alone.

The second property, whereby Christ is described, is Truth: Christ is said to
be true, in three regards: First, because he is without all error or
ignorance, knowing every thing as it is. Truth is in Christ properly, and in
the creatures only by means of him. Secondly, because whatsoever he wills
and decrees, he does it seriously, without fraud, deceit, change or
contradiction, as the whole tenure of Scriptures do show, wherein every part
is suitable and agreeable to another; because he makes good every promise made
in his word, for in him all the promises of God are yea, and Amen. 2. Cor. 1.20.

The (...)*
Whereas Christ is said to be true, yea, Truth it self: First, We learn a
full difference between him, and all false wicked spirits, for they are
spirits of error and falsehood, for the devil is the father of lies, and the
author thereof.

Again, whereas Christ is true in all his ways, we ought without all doubting
to believe his word, and all the promises made therein, that concern our
salvation. If Christ could err or lie, and men be deceived by him, then they
might justly doubt of the truth of his word: but seeing he is true in all his
promises, we must believe in him: and in all our distresses either of body or
mind, depend upon him: for he has made a promise to help, and he will never
fail them that rest on him.

Thirdly, in this Property, he propounds himself an example, to be followed
of his Church and of us, that as Christ is serious in his decrees, and constant
in his promises; so must we purpose every good thing seriously, and also make
good whatsoever good thing we promise. For, Liars must be destroyed. Psalm.
5. Verse. 6. They that love, or make Lies, must never come into Heaven but ^e
shut out thence, and cast into the burning Lake of fire and brimstone. Revel.
22.15. But it is a note of a man, that is a good member of Gods Church in this
world, and that shall be inheritour of Christ's Kingdom in Heaven, to speak
the truth from his heart. Psalm. 15. Verse 22. And Lying is a note of the
child of the devil. Ioh. 8.44.

Secondly, Christ is described, by his kingly office; Which has the key of
David, which opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens.
Where first, let us see the meaning of the words: For which purpose we must
have recourse to Esaias. 22. verse. 22: whence these words are borrowed, being
there said of Eliachim. The circumstances of that Text, will easily show the
meaning of the words in this place: Shebna, who had been an ancient Steward to
many of the Kings of Israel, was Treasurer also unto King Hezekias: And because
he was an hinderer of Reformation intended by Hezekias, the Lord threatened to
cast him out of his office: and further, the Lord signifies that Eliachim
shall come in his room, and have the same office; now to express this thing,
the Lord says: The Key of the house of David shall be laid upon his
shoulders: That is, Eliachim shall be made a Steward of the house of David
even of the Kingdom of David, whereof Hezekias was Governor: (for so the
House of Judah, and the House of Israel, are often put for the whole Kingdom of
Judah and Israel.) And the giving of a Key was an ancient token of placing and
inuesting men in chief rule and authority; so that the meaning of this place,
is this: that God has given unto Christ sovereign power, and authority of
governing his Church. Quest. But why is Christ said to have the Key of David,
for David's kingdom was a temporal kingdom, but Christ's Kingdom is not of
this world, John. 18.36. And yet it is said, The Lord God shall give unto him
the Throne of his father David: and he shall reign over the house of Jacob.
Luke 1.32.33. Answ. Christ may be said to have the Keys of David, two ways.
First, Properly; for when he was borne of the blessed Virgin Marie, he was
borne King of the Jews, by right descent from his father David, as his
Genealogy plainly shows, Luke 3. And also the question of the wise men at
Jerusalem, saying: Where is the king of the Jews that is borne? Mat. 2.2. And
therefore when the Publicans asked tribute of him, he pleaded the privilege of
a Kings son: albeit, to avoid offense, he was content to yield of his right,
and to pay tribute; Thereby sh^wing* that he had right to the Kingdom of
Israel, though he would not take it upon him and therefore came in such a time
when the Kingdom was taken of the Roman Emperor. Secondly, he may be said
to have the key of David's kingdom, Tipically; for David's kingdom, was a
figure of Christ's kingdom; and David himself a type of Christ: as it is most
excellently dysciphered in the Prophets? Ier. 23.5.6. and Hosea. 3.5. where
Christ is plainly called David, by the name of him that was his type, sign,
and figure. Quest. Why were not as well the Kingdoms of Nebuchadnezzar and
Pharaoh, types of Christ's kingdom, as David's? Answ. Because David's kingdom,
was a kingdom of light and piety; but theirs were kingdoms of sin and
iniquity. And he is said, to have the key of David's kingdom, because his
kingdom and the righteousness thereof, was figured by the piety in David's
kingdom. And this kind of speaking is justifiable by Gods word. So Mat. 2.23.
Christ is called a Nazarite: which place has relation to that which is said
properly of Sa^pson Judge. 13.
who was a most excellent figure of Christ, and did most notably represent him
in his death, wherein he killed more than in his life. Now Christ is called an
Nazarite, not because he observed their rites, and orders, for that he did not:
he drank wine, so did not the Nazarites: but because he was the truth, and
substance of that order: for in him was fully accomplished that holiness,
which was figured by that order; for he was perfectly severed from all sin
and pollution. And so here, he is said to have the key of David, because he
had the sovereignty which was figured by David's Kingdom.

Which shuts and no man opens, and opens and no man shuts. Here
Christ's kingdom is compared to a house, which can be opened and shut, by none
but Christ; whereby is signified, that none has power above Christ in his
Kingdom, and that his power therein, is sovereign and absolute. So that
hereby is meant, that Christ Jesus sitting in heaven, has sovereign power and
authority over the whole Church of God, to govern the same. That we may the
better understand this sovereign power of Christ, we must know, it has three
parts. I. To prescribe. II. To judge. III. To save; or destroy. In Prescribing,
Christ has absolute power, and that in sundry things: as first, in prescribing
doctrines of Faith, and Religion unto his Church, to be believed and obeyed,
and that on pain of damnation. This power he puts in execution, when in the
books of the old and new Testament, he prescribes the doctrine of the Law
and the Gospel, to be obeyed and believed. And none but he can make an Article
of Faith, or a law to bind the conscience: and therefore Paul says, Whosoever
shall teach any other Doctrine, then that which ye have received of us, let him
be accursed. Gal. 1.8. Secondly, for regiment; he has absolute power to
prescribe how he will have his Church governed, and by whom: and therefore
Moses, when he was to make the Tabernacle, Exodus 32.42.43. Heb. 8.5.
did all things according to the pattern that the Lord gave unto him. So David
gave to Solomon patterns of all things that were in him, by the spirit
touching the building of the house of God, 1. Chron. 28.12. Thirdly, he has
absolute power to appoint the time of keeping his Sabbath: for as the ordaining
of a Sabbath belongs to Christ, so does the changing thereof: he that
prescribes worship must prescribe the ordinary set time thereunto, which is to
continue to the end. And therefore it is but an opinion of men, to hold that the
church may make two* or more Sabbath days in a week, if they will. Fourthly, In
prescribing the Sacraments; and therefore 1. Cor. 1^.23.
Paul says, What I have received of the Lord, that deliver I unto you:
speaking of the Lords Supper. For he that gives grace, must also appoint the
signs and seals of grace.

The second part of Christ's sovereign power, is power of Judgment: which is a
sovereign power to determine on his own will, without the consent of others,
or submission to men or Angels. And in determining, Christ has two
privileges. First, to expound scripture; the absolute power of expounding the
Law, belongs to the Lawgiver; and his exposition is Authentical. Secondly,
to determine of all Questions, and Controversies in Scripture. And therefore it
is a wicked opinion of the church of Rome which hold, that the principal Judge
of interpreting Scripture, and decyding controversies, is the Church.

The third part of Christ's sovereign power, is to save, and destroy. This is
expressed in these words: He opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no
man opens: and for this cause he is said Revel. 1.18
to have the keys of hell and of death. Whereby is signified; first, that he
has power to forgive sins: for that he procures at his Fathers hands.
Secondly, that he has power to condemn: for when men believe not his word,
he has power to hold them in their sins, for which he can cast them into
hell. The ground of this threefold power of Christ i^ this, because he is
sovereign Lord, over his Church, and the members thereof.

The Church of Rome says, that this key of David, has more in it then
sovereignty over his church: to wit, a power to make and depose Kings that be
in his Church. This they teach, that they might prove the Pope to have title in
ordayning and deposing of kings, by virtue of the keys. But they err grossly;
for though Christ as he is Mediator, be above all kings, yet in that regard
he neither makes nor deposes any kings: and therefore he says plainly, Ioh.
18.3^.
My kingdom is not of this world. This caused him to refuse to take upon him
the office of an earthly Judge or prince, to Luke 1^.14.
divide an inheritance between two brethren. Hence it was; that he Ioh. 8.11.
refused to give sentence of the adulterous woman. And yet as Christ is God,
he makes or, deposes earthly kings: so the wise mail speaks of him in the
person of wisdom: Pro. 8.15.
by me kings reign.

For the further clearing of this, we must handle another point, which is
derived hence; The power of the keye^
concerning the power of the keys: which is a power whereby the power of the
keys of David is put in execution. This power of the Keys is mentioned, Mat.
16.19, when Christ says unto Peter; I will give unto thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth* shall be bound
in heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.
This power of the keys, is a ministry granted to Gods church, to open and
shut the kingdom of heaven. First, I call it a Ministry: that is, a service;
because whatsoever the church does in Christ's name, is nothing but the duty
of servants unto their Lord: from whence it is, that the most worthy members
and officers that ever were in the Church, as the Prophets and Apostles, were
but the Ministers of Christ. That this is a service, I show more plainly thus;
When Adam fell; in his sin all mankind fell with him, and thereby were all
barred from the kingdom of heaven. Now since that fall, Christ became man, and
in his manhood satisfied the justice of God for man's sins. And this
satisfaction of Christ, is properly that key whereby heaven is opened, being
opposite to man's sin whereby it was shut. And Gods Church and Ministers
cannot properly open Heaven by any power they have, but only reveal unto men
what Christ has done for them; and withal apply unto them, the doctrine of
Christ's satisfaction which is revealed. And in this regard they are said, to
open and shut the kingdom of heaven; not as Lords, but as ministers and
servants.

Next I add, that this power is given to the Church: that is, to the company
of of true Believers called to salvation by Christ, and to none other: and
therefore it is said of them; Mat. 18.1^.
Whatsoever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, etc.

Thirdly, I add the end of this power of the keys: To open and to shut
heaven. How the Church does this, Christ that gave this power knows best, and
he has set it down, John. 20.23. Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are
remitted: and whosoeuers sins ye retain, they are retained. The Church
therefore opens heaven, when it pardons men's sins: and it shuts the same,
when it lawfully retains their sins, and holds them unpardoned: besides
this, there is no opening and shutting of heaven committed to the Church.
Quest. Can the Church pardon sin, or retain the same? Answ. Yes, for these
are the words of Christ: but let us see how. It is one thing to give sentence
of the pardon of sin, and another to pronounce the same sentence given. To
give the sentence of the pardon of sin, is only proper to Christ, the head
of the Church; no Saint, nor Angel has that privilege: but yet the Church
pronounces the sentence of pardon given by Christ. If we should say, the the
Church should pardon sin; we should rob Christ of his honor, for that is a
privilege of his Godhead. Thus we se^ what the power of the keys is.

The right use of this power, is when the Church does use the same for the
opening and shutting of heaven: First, in the name of Christ alone, as a
servant; Secondly, according to the rule of Gods word, not after men's
affections or inventions; Thirdly for this end, to bring sinners to repentance,
and to continue them therein that they may be saved: and to the Church thus
using this power, Christ has promised: that whatsoever they bind in earth,
shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever they loose in earth, shall be loosed
in heaven. Mat. 18.18.

Further, this power of the keys, has two parts: the ministry of the word;
and spiritual jurisdiction. The key of the Ministry of the word, is set
down and established by Christ Mat. 16.19, I will give unto thee the keys of
the kingdom of heaven etc. This ministry of the word is a key, because it
opens and shuts heaven; this it does two ways. First, by teaching and
explayning the substance of religion, the doctrine of salvation, whereby men
must come to heaven; and in that regard, is called the key of knowledge; Lu.
11.52. Secondly: by applying the promises of the Gospel, and the threatening of
the Law: For when in the ministry of the word, the promises of remission of
sins and life everlasting, are applied to believers that repent, then the
kingdom of heaven is opened; and when as in the same ministry of the word,
the curses of the law are denou^ced against impenitent sinners, then is the
kingdom of heaven shut. Yet touching the ministry of the word, this
distinction must be remembered; that otherwhiles the church is certain of the
faith and repentance of some men, or some congregation; and then they may
pronounce remission of sins absolutely. But otherwhiles they are uncertain of
their faith and repentance, or of their impenitencie; and then they must
accordingly remit or retain men's sins, that is, conditionally; pronouncing the
remission of sins to all that repent: and denouncing damnation to all that
repent not. And thus is the word to be publicly handled in Gods church at this
day, because our congregations are mixed companies, consisting of some that
repent and believe, and of others that do not truly repent nor believe.

The second part of this power of the keys, is spiritual jurisdiction: I call
it spiritual, to distinguish it from that outward jurisdiction whereby the
commonwealth is governed. That this spiritual jurisdiction is a key, may
appear, Mat. 18.16.17.18, If thy brother offend thee (says Christ) admonish
him privately: if he hear thee not, yet take with thee two or three: if he
hear not them, tell it to the Church; and if he refuse to hear the Church,
let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and as a publican. Then follows the
promise; Verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven; and what soever ye loose, shall be loosed in haauen.

This spiritual jurisdiction, is a power whereby the Church pronounces
sentence upon obstinate offenders in the Church, and puts the same in
execution. And it has two parts: Excommunication; and absolution.
Excommunication is an action of the Church in Christ's name, excluding an
obstinate offender that is a professor of the Gospel, from all the priuildedges
of the Church, and from the kingdom of heaven. So Paul 1. Cor. 5.5.
commands the incestious man to be committed to Satan: that is, not only
put out of the kingdom of Christ, but also after a sort made subject unto
Satan, to be outwardly afflicted by him. And therefore Christ says: If Mat.
18.18.
he hear not the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man: that is, as
one that has no title to the kingdom of heaven. Here may some say; Can the
Church thrust any man out of the kingdom of heaven? Answ. It is Christ only
that receives men in thither, and it is he alone that must thrust them out:
the Church does not properly either receive men in, or put them out; but only
pronounce and declare what Christ does in this behalf. As if a man that lives
in the church be a common drunk^rd; the Church finding in Gods word, that 1.
Co. 6.10
no drunkard can inherit the kingdom of heaven, which is the sentence of
Christ, may pronounce the same against him, and so exclude him from the
kingdom of heaven. Object. The true child of God may be excommunicated, but he
can never be excluded from the kingdom of heaven. Ans. The true child of God
may for a time, and in part be excluded the kingdom of heaven. In part; as a
man that has freedom in an incorporation, may lie in prison for some
trespasses, and so want the use of his freedom, though he be a freeman: so the
child of God, for committing sin, may want the use of his liberty and
freedom which he has in Gods kingdom; and for a time, while he lives in
sin without repentance, yet wholly and for ever he cannot: but so soon as
he repents, he shall be received certainly again: for no man is to be
barred either from heaven or the Church, any longer then he remains
impenitent.

The use.
Whereas this censure is such, as does exclude a man both from the kingdom of
heaven and the liberties of the Church till he repent; we may here see, that
this censure ought to be used with great reverence, fear and consideration:
even such or greater, as we would use in the cutting of a member from the
body. The abusing therefore of this sentence in small matters, cannot but be a
grievous sin, and a breach of the third Commandment, wherein one of Gods most
weighty ordinances is taken in vain.

Further, one special degree of Excommunication is Anathema: which is, when
one is pronounced to be condemned, whereof Paul speaks, 1. Cor. 16.22. But
this is not pronounced upon any, but on those that sin against the holy Ghost,
and therefore it is seldom used because that sin is hardly discerned: consisting
not so much in the speech, as in the malice of the heart against Christ.

The second part of this spiritual jurisdiction is absolution: which is, when
a malefactor upon his sufficient repentance, is approved to be a member of the
Church; and is admitted to the kingdom of heaven. And yet here the Church
receives him not into the kingdom of Christ, but only declares upon his
repentance what Christ does: and thus we see wherein Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction consists: and what be the parts of the power of the keys.

For the better discerning of this power of the keys, we must remember four
special abuses hereof that have taken place in Gods Church for many hundred
years. The first is this: that in former Ages the church has given this power
of the keys to Peter alone, debarring the same from all other, even from the
rest of the Apostles: as though they had only the use, not the right of this
power. But the ease is plain, this power belongs to every true minister of the
Gospel, though they be not Apostles, as well as it did to Peter; for in the
promulgation of this power, Mat. 16.19, though Christ direct his speech to
Peter, yet he speaks unto all, as the circumstances of the place do plainly
show; for Christ's question ( Whom say ye that I am) was made to all; now
because it would have been great disorder in that holy company, for all of
them to have spoken; therefore Peter being both ancient and bold of speech
speaks for all, and the rest answered in his person: and so accordingly
Christ speaking to Peter, does make a grant of this power unto all his
disciples in his person And therefore Ioh. 20.23: He gives this power to all;
saying plainly: Whosoeuers sins ye retain, they are retained, etc. So that the
word of God is plain in this point, to satisfy the conscience of any that is
not wilfully addicted to the Popish religion. Quest. Whence have the Ministers
of the Gospel this power? Answ. By succession from the Apostles; for Christ
says, Mat. 28.19.20, Go and preach, I will be with you to the end of the
world. Where he cannot mean the Apostles only; but with the^ all Ministers
that did preach and baptize after them, making this promise to the Apostles;
not as they were Apostles, but as they were Ministers and preachers of his
Gospel.

The second abuse is, that the Church of Rome, has turned the power of the
keys into a supremacy over the church: making it to be a sovereign
authority; whereby Peter, and his successors the Popes, have liberty to make
Laws, Canons, and constitutions which bind the conscience; as also to make
kings and to depose the same. A most notorious abuse of this power, which is no
superiority but a ministry: the chief power whereof, consists in the
dispensation of the word, and will of Christ. For Christ said not to Peter, I
will give thee the keys of the kingdoms of me^, but of the kingdom of heaven.
The third abuse hereof is, that the church of Rome, has thereby for a 1000.
years almost, barred Kings, Queens, and Emperors from being Governors over
the Churches of God: an error flat against Scripture; for when as good King
Josias intended the reformation of religion, and the abandoning of Idolatry,
he made a covenant with the Lord for the accomplishment of the same: and is
said 2. Chro. 34.32.
to have caused all that were found in Jerusalem, and Benjamin to stand to the
covenant which he made. Now shall we say Josias did evil in causing the^ so to
do? God forbid: It is recorded of him by the holy Ghost for his commendation.
Object. But Gods pastors and teachers have the power of the keys, and princes
have not? Ans. True; but yet they have a civil power whereby they rule over Gods
Church: for there is a civil power, and a spiritual power. Princes rule not by
any spiritual power, but ciuilly: and thereby they have power to compel all
their subjects to the outward means of Gods worship, and to forsake Idolatry,
and may also punish those that obey them not. Object. By this power of the
keys, Kings and Queens are brought under Pastors? Answ. In Pastors and
Ministers we must consider their persons and goods, and their office and word
which they bring: Princes are over their persons and goods, and yet may be
under their word and Ministry: because therein they stand in Christ's stead.
Yet all this shows nothing why Princes in Gods Church should be so robbed of
their right, as the Church of Rome does.

The fourth abuse is, that the Church of Rome for some 800. years, has turned
the power of the Keys unto the Priest, in their Sacrament of Penance: for
whereas by Gods word the Ministers power is only to pronounce the absolution of
Christ, with them every Priest sits as a Judge, and all the people come unto
him as to a Judge, making known unto him all their thoughts, words, and deeds,
(as near as they can) wherein they have broken any Commandment: which done,
the Priest enioynes him to bewail his sins, and after contrition, does
properly give sentence of pardon, even as Christ himself does: and then after
appoints him works of satisfaction, to be done for the temporal punishment of
his sins: which done, his sins are pardoned in heaven. Where behold a most
deuillish practice, as may appear by the manifold errors contained therein. As
first, the confession of all a man's sins; which has no warrant in Gods word.

Secondly, that the Priest should give sentence of pardon, is a most notorious
practice, whereby Christ is robbed of his honor: for the Pharisees could say,
None can forgive sins but God: that is properly, Mark. 2.7; Which Christ
approves, and it is must true; for he that can forgive sins properly, must
make satisfaction for sins. Thirdly, they absolve from the fault, but they will
not forgive the punnishment; and thereby they rob others to enrich
themselves. Fourthly, they enjoin satisfaction to God by men for their sins:
whereby they do nothing else but ouerturn the all-sufficient satisfaction of
Christ, and enioine that to man which is impossible. Al these are most horrible
abuses of this power, which ought to be known and considered, being a
sufficient warrant unto us, that the Church of Rome is no true church of God:
for though the Pope carry in his arms the keys, yet they are not the keys of
heaven, but of hell. For he has made more places of rest and woe, than ever God
did: as Limbus p^t^u^, and Purgatory, and therefore must needs make more doors
thither, and so more locks and keys.

By this doctrine, The use.
touching the keys of David given to Christ, and the power of the keys in the
church derived thence, we may learn sundry things. First, that Christ, who
has the keys of David to open and shut, does not open to all, but to some
only. The reason hereof is this: Adam being created in integrity, was in the
favor of God: but by his sin he lost the favor of God, and so barred
himself both out of the earthly and heavenly paradise: and all his posterity
by the same sin, and by their own actual sins are likewise debarred: for Isa*
59.2.
sin is a partition wall between us and God: and a Lam. 3.44.
cloud between our prayers and God himself; as Jeremy speaks: so that sin
is the cause of this exclusion: and so many sins as a man commits, so many
bolts and bars he makes to exclude himself from the kingdom of heaven.
The consideration whereof, should move every one to take a narrow view of his
miserable state in himself, through Ada^: for by original sin wherein we were
born and by our actual transgressions wherein, we live, we bar our self from
the kingdom of heaven. It is lamentable to see how the whole world lies in
sin, and how the devil bewitcheth men to conceal or diminish their sins;
making great sins small, and little sins none at all: when as the least sin
which they commit, (without repentance) is sufficient to bar them for ever
out of the kingdom of Heaven. Again, seeing every sin does bar us out of
Heaven, this must be a motive, to induce every one of us, to repent of all our
sins, to bewail the same, and to pray earnestly for the pardon of them in
the death of Christ: and continually to labor to turn unto God from all sin,
because if we live but in one sin, it will be a mighty bar^e sufficient to
exclude us the Kingdom of heaven eternally. Thirdly, seeing Christ keep^ the
keys of heaven; hereby we are taught to come unto Christ, and to seek by him
to enter into the kingdom of heaven. For Christ by his death has opened
heaven: as he said unto Nathaniell and Philip, Ioh. 1.51.
Verily, verily; I say unto you, hereafter shall ye see heaven open: meaning
by the ministry of the Gospel: and seeing it is open, we must strive to enter
into it, as the men in John Baptists time did, Mat. 11.12. This we do by
endeavoring to become good members of Gods church on earth: for that is the door
and suburbs of the Kingdom of heaven, which every one must enter into, that
would come to heaven it self; even as a man that would go into a house, must
needs come to the door. Now in the Church there is the true door which is
Christ himself: and the key thereof which is his word, and the ministry of
the word, which does lock and unlock the same. Quest. What shall we do to
become true members of the Church? Ans. We must do two things: First, humble
our selves for all our sins, praying unto GOD for the pardon of them, and
believing the same through Christ. Secondly, endeavor and purpose by Gods grace
every day to leave the same sins. This doing, we are at the door of heaven,
and if we would have our souls enter into heaven when we die, this we must
do while we live. But if we enter not into the door of grace, by the key of
knowledge in the ministry of the word while we live, we shall never come to
the gate of glory after death.

Verse. 8. I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door, and
no man can shut it, for thou have a little strength, and have kept my word, and
have not denied my name. In this verse, and so forward to the twelft, is
contained the matter of this Epistle, which may be reduced to three ^eads: a
Praise; a Promise; and a Commandment. The Praise in this eight verse. The
Promise in the 9. and 10. The Commandment in the 11. For the first, the
Praise of this Church is first summarily propounded: I know thy works: which
has been expounded, and the end thereof, with the uses in the former
Epistles. Then he adds the reason of his commendation, wherein are two things
to be observed. I the sign of Christ's approbation, in these words: I have set
before thee an open door. II. their conversation, or the works which Christ
approved: In the words following, Thou have a little strength, and have kept my
word, and have not denied my name. Both these may be vndetstood, either of the
Angel and Minister of this Church: or of the whole Church also. I take it to
be meant of both. Being spoken of the Minister of this Church, the words bear
this sense: Behold I have set before thee an open door, etc. That is, behold
and consider, I have vouchsafed unto thee opportunity and liberty to preach
the Gospel, and thereby to convert men unto me. So much S. Paul means by the
door of utterance, 1. Cor. 16.9. For thou have a little strength, and have kept
my word, and have not denied my name, That is, though thou be endued but with a
small measure of gifts pertaining to thy calling, yet thou have maintained my
Gospel, and have not denied my name.

These words being thus expounded, do afford us these instructions. First,
from the sign of his approbation we learn: that it is a great privilege for
any Minister to have liberty to preach the Gospel, and thereby to convert men
unto Christ: so much the word of attention behold imports, which may also
further appear by this, that the most famous and worthy Prophets of God, were
not always vouchsafed this favor, as Isay and Ezekiell: who were sent
sometime to harden Isay. 6.9.
thy people. And Christ himself complains of the want of this priuiledg,
saying, Isay. 49.4.
I have spent my strength in vain: and in regard of this privilege, the
Ministers of the Gospel are called Obad. 2^. 1. Tim. 4.1^.
Sauiors. And by reason of this liberty, they have title to the promise of
shining as stars in glory, Dan, 12.3. This therefore is an unspeakable
mercy, and so ought to be esteemed: and all Ministers that have the same
vouchsafed unto them ought highly to magnify the name of God for it, and to
value it more worth, than all earthly blessings whatsoever.

Secondly, from the works which Christ approved in the Angel of this Church,
we may observe, that Ministers endued with small measure of gifts, may be able
to do great service unto God in his Church. This thing is plain in the
Minister of this Church: and might also be showed by manifold examples of such
men in all ages: but to come to our times. In the days of Queen Marie, when
Religion was in banishing, this our famous School of the Prophets, Cambridge.
had many learned men in it: yet not one of them stood out for the defense of
the Gospel: when as a poor secular Priest not three miles off, who was far
behind them in gifts of learning and knowledge, yet having the truth revealed
unto him, did stand out for the maintenance of the same, even to the sealing of
it with his blood. And at this day many men of smaller gifts in the ministry,
do more further the Gospel, by the increase of the knowledge of Christ
crucified and true obedience, than those that are enriched with far greater
gifts of knowledge both in tongues and arts: so as though they be many hundred
degrees short in regard of schoole-learning, yet they go as far before them
in benefiting Gods Church.

If this be so (will some say) then it is needless for men to be brought up
so much in the schools of learning? Ans. Not so, for as much as may be, Gods
Ministers ought to have knowledge of Schoole-learning, both in Arts and
tongues. And yet for all this, it often comes to pass by Gods providence, that
the greatest Clerks for learning, are less profitable to the church, tha^ men
of smaller gifts. This God does to humble the learned, that they be not proud
in themselves: And to magnify the work of his spirit in the weaker
instruments.

Further, these words must also be understood of the whole Church. And then
they bear this sense. I have set before thee an open door: That is, I have
vouchsafed unto thee a special privilege, even liberty to enter into the
kingdom of heaven. From whence we observe: That liberty to life everlasting,
is a special priu^ledge belonging not to all men, but only to the Church of
God, and the true members of Christ.

This point has sundry uses. I. to confute this erroneous opinion: That
Christ did effectually redeem all and every man. Which is ^^at against Gods
word, and this text: for those that are effectually redeemed, have liberty to
enter into the kingdom of heaven: but all men have not that liberty; for then
it were no privilege of Gods Church alone, to have heaven opened unto them.

II. Seeing this is a privilege which God vouchsafes unto his church, to have
heaven gate opened unto them. Hereby we are taught to take the benefit of this
liberty while the door is open: and in time to strive to enter therein. For as
Christ tells Nathaniell, the church of the new Testament, shall by faith see
heaven open. Ioh. 1.5^.
We must not therefore neglect this opportunity. But it is our common shame,
that we be slack in seeking the kingdom of God, and the righteousness
thereof, suffering our selves so to be clogged with heaps of sins, and
worldly lusts, that we can neither walk in that straight way, nor enter into
that door that leads unto life; for sin is ^n heavy burden, like a great
pack that will not suffer a man to enter into so strait a door. We must
therefore cast off all sin, that he may so enter in, and walk in the way of
life.

And no man can shut it. Here is the continuance of the former benefit,
against all adversary power whatsoever. And this again confuteth another
opinion of the same kind with the former: to wit, That Christ dyed for every
man, but yet some are not saved, because they will not: they shut heaven door
against themselus. But this opinion cannot stand: for none can shut heaven door
against them, to whom Christ has set it open effectually: neither sin,
Satan, nor the world, no not man himself, nor all their power together. For
herein is the will of man ruled by the will of God: and look whom God will
have to enter into heaven, them does he incline to will their own salvation;
and also make unwilling ever to shut this door against themselus. For thou have
a little strength, and have kept my word, etc. That is, Thou art endued with
some measure of grace, as of faith, hope, and righteousness: and according to
that measure thou have maintained my word, and not denied my name.

Hence we learn, that a man endued with a small measure of Gods grace, may do
works pleasing unto God, and by the same grace come to life ^uerlasting.
Christ says to his Disciples; Mat. 17.20
If your faith were as much as a grain of mustard seed, by it should you be
able to remove mountains. Now that which is here said of the faith of
miracles, may in like sort be said of all faith, and so of justifying faith; if
a man have never so small a measure thereof, yet thereby he shall do works
acceptable to God: for as Paul teaches, Gods children receive, not the tenths,
but Romans ^.23.
the first fruits of the spirit; that is, a small measure of grace in this
life, which is, only a pledge of that which they shall fully receive in the
world to come; for this cause is Rahab commended for her faith, Heb. 1^.31
although it was but small and weak, as we shall see if we read the whole
History, Iosh^. 2: For God accepts of man, according to that he has
received. It is not so much the measure of grace that saves a man, as the
truth of grace before God.

This serves notably for the comfort of those that have care to keep faith
and good conscience. The use.
Such are most dismayed by reason of their wants and corruptions: but they must
know that God approoueth of their grace, though it be but small, if so be they
have care to increase in grace, and do strive to please God in all things,
according to the measure of grace received. II. Hereby every one must be
encoraged to embrace and obey true Religion. Many be dismayed herein, by
reason of the great measure of obedience, which they think God requires; and
therefore they leave of all obedience. But this ought not to be so* for God
approoueth of a man in Christ, according to that grace which he has, be it
more or less; and not according to that which by the law he ought to have. And
yet none of all this must make us slack and negligent in using those means
which God has vouchsafed unto us for the increase of grace, that so we may
also increase in true obedience.

And have kept my word, and have not denied my name. Here he sets down two
works, for the which he commends this church. First, their faithful keeping
of the word of Christ. Secondly, the profession of his name in the time of
persecution. This behauior of this church, must be a pattern and a looking
glass for us to square our conversation by. For these works; Thou have kept my
word, and have not denied my name, though the words be few, yet they continue
much in them: signifying, that this Church had special care of keeping Gods
word in every Commandment, both legal, and evangelical. Happy were our
Church if the same might truly be said of us, that we had care of obedience
unto God, and of the true profession of his name. But generally we fail in
practice, though in outward profession we make some show thereof, Thus much of
the praise of this Church.

Verse. 9. Behold, I will make them of the Synagog of Satan, which call
themselves Jews, and are not, but do lie; behold, I will make them, that they
shall come and worship before thy feet, and shall know that I have loved thee.
Here follows the second part of this Epistle; namely, the Promises of Christ,
which are two. First, concerning the conversion of certain Jews, verse. 9.
Secondly, concerning the deliverance of these Philadelphians in the time of
temptation. verse. 10. For the first of these promises: In all likelihood, there
was in this City of Philadelphia, a Synagog of the Jews which bare an outward
show, that they were the true worshippers of God; albeit they denied the name
of Christ, and persecuted his Church. Yet Christ here promises, that he will
convert them, and make them members of his Church, and cause them to worship
him in the congregation before this Church of Philadelphia.

In this promise, note three points touching the conversion of these Jews. The
Author thereof: The parties converted: and the fruit of their conversion. For
the first; I (says Christ) behold, I will make them. The words are very
significant, being doubled: and they make Christ the whole and sole author of
their conversion.

Hence we learn, that in the conuersision of a sinner, God has the whole and
sole work: true it is, that a man wills his conversion in the act thereof,
but yet it is God that works that will in him, it is not of himself. This
confuteth the erroneous Doctrine of free will in the Church of Rome, whereby
they teach, that a man can dispose himself to work out his salvation, being
only helped by Gods grace. Like unto a sick man, who though he be weak, yet
being holden up by another, can go of himself. Ans. But Saint Paul teaches
us, That a man by nature is not sick, or weak with sin, but stark Ephesians. 2.1.
dead in sin: and can no more move himself in the work of his conversion,
tha^ a dead man in the grave, in the work of his resurrection. But they say,
by this we make a man like unto a block. Answ. Not so, for though he cannot
turn himself unto God, yet he has his will and understanding free to use in
civil and outward actions: and besides the^e is a possibility in his nature
to be converted by grace, which is not in a block.

Again, whereas Christ says, I will make them come, and they shall come. Here
is plainly confuted the Doctrine and opinion of some, which hold, That a man
being effectually called, may come unto Christ, or not come at his pleasure;
when God has given grace, man may receive it, or refuse it, if he will. This
is flat against this text, for God will make them come, and man's will must be
pliable to Gods will in this matter.

But they allege, Mat. 23.37. Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have
gathered thee, as a hen, etc. but thou would not. Answ. Christ there speaks
not of the will of his good pleasure, for that cannot be resisted; But of his
signified will in the ministry of his Prophets, and by himself as he was a
Prophet, and the Minister of circumcision unto the Jews: for so he might will
their conversion, and yet they will it not. Object. 2. Act. 7.51. Ye
stiff-necked Jews, ye have always resisted the holy Ghost. Answ. That must
be understood of the ministry of the Prophets and Apostles, who spoke by the
spirit of God: and not of the spirit himself.

II. point. The parties converted, namely, Them of the Synagog of Satan; Such
as called themselves the only true worshippers of God, and yet indeed and in
truth, were no better than the slaves of Satan.

This is to be observed: for hereby we may see, that not only sinners which
commit small sins, are converted unto God; but even grievous and ancient
sinners: such as have long conc^^ued the slaves of Satan. Christ died not for
painted sinners, but for grievous sinners: and therefore Paul charge Timothy
and the Ministers with him, 2. Tim. 2.26.
To wait for the conversion, and repentance of them that were taken in the
snare of the Devil, and that according to the Devils own will. Romans 1.28,
Paul speaks of some Gentiles that were given up to a reprobate sense: which
was a fearful case, and yet no doubt, many of them were after turned to
believe the Gospel; for such are they, that are taken in the snare of the
Devil, and yet there is repentance to be waited for of them.

This Doctrine must not be abused to liberty in sinning; The use.
for that is the right way to cast our souls into the pit of destruction. But
yet seeing Christ will bring home into his kingdom most grievous sinners, we
must hereby take occasion not to be discouraged, either by the greatness or
multitude of our sins from coming unto Christ. For mark, Christ only raised
three that were dead to life: Iayrus daughter that was new dead: the widows
Son that lay on the herste and Lazarus that lay stinking in the grave. This
is a notable figure of the conversion of sinners: he will not only call to
repentance small and young sinners, but even great and old sinners that lie
rotting and stinking in the grave of sin, as Lazarus did in the grave of
death. He came to call sinners to repentance, and to save the lost sheep,
which are ready to be devoured by Woolues and wild beasts. We must all
bless the name of Christ for this his large mercy, and in time lay hold upon
it, and repent.

III. point. The fruit of their conversion, in these words: They shall come
and worship before thy foot, and shall know that I have loved thee. These
words may be fitly expounded by another place of scripture, 1. Corinthians.
14.24.25. If all prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, or one
unlearned, he is rebuked of all men, and judged of all, so as the secrets of
his heart are disclosed, and he will fall down on his face, and worship God,
and say plainly God is in you indeed: so that the meaning of these words is
this. I will cause the^ to come to the congregation of Gods people, and at
their feet to fall down and worship the true God.

Here are set down two notable fruits of the conversion of a sinner. First,
concerning God: The second, concerning the Church. The fruit of conversion that
respects God is, The true worship of God: noted in these words, I will make
them come and worship; that is, In spirit and truth with body and soul, to
adore the true God. This fruit no man can bring forth till he be converted:
For Psa. 14.4.
the wicked and natural man calls not upon God; True it is, they will
acknowledge there is a God, and that the same God is to be worshipped, and
therefore they will come outwardly, and hear the word, and receive the
elements of the sacraments; but the true worship of God, is in spirit and
truth from the heart, which a natural man cannot perform unto God. This is
the fruit of true conversion, which when a man receives, he does hear the
word of God with reverence, tremble at Gods judgments, and mingle the Doctrine
of the Gospel with faith in his heart; and in calling upon God he feels his
sins, and therefore by prayer does earnestly desire the supply of grace, and
the remission of his sins, having his heart also believing that he shall receive
mercy: And in thanksgiving his heart is filled with joy, and the grace of
thankfulness, so as being converted, all his worship unto God is in spirit
and truth.

In the worship of these Jews, are noted three properties required in God^
service. First, it must be willing and cherefull: so did these Jews worship
GOD; For they are said, not only to worship GOD, but to come and worship GOD:
and thus do all Gods children worship him. Isay. 56.7, Those whom God brings
to his mountain, he makes joyful in his house of prayer. Psalm. 110.3, They
shall come willingly in the day of assemblies. By this property, we may see a
great number at this day every where come far short in the true worship of
GOD: for most men never regard the preaching of the word, but content
themselves with morning and evening prayer: which they frequent to avoid the
penalty of the laws of the Magistrate, and the shame of the world. But these
are miserable worshippers of God, his worship ought to be free and willing.

The second property: The worship of God, must be expressed with seemly,
meet, and convenient gesture. The word translated Worship, signifies doing of
reverence with bowing of the body and knee: and therefore it is not an
indifferent thing, but necessary, to use convenient gesture in Gods worship,
that thereby the grace and humility of the heart may be expressed. The Isay.
6.^.
Angels that stand before the throne of God, have two wings to cover their
feet, and two to cover their faces: thereby testifying their reverence to Gods
Majesty; In this point also many come short: for as the common complaint is,
the manner of many is to lie snorting and sleeping under men's elbows at sermons,
and in the time of prayer to sit irreverently with their heads covered. These
things ought not to be: for God is Lord of body and soul, and ought to be
worshipped with both.

The third property. All that will truly worship GOD, must first be humbled
for their sins, and have the pride of their hearts brought down, and be
stricken with a fear of GODS glorious Majesty. So these Jews did prostrate
their bodies at the feet of the congregation, when they came to worship GOD.
The Act. 16.^^*
Iaylor that imprisoned Paul and Silas ouer-night, and put their feet in the
stocks, would then have very little regarded Paul's Doctrine, being so
cruel and rigorous to their persons: Yet when he was about to have killed
himself with his sword, (supposing the prisoners had been gone, because he
saw the doors open) he was glad and joyful to hear the voice of Paul, who
called unto him, that he should do himself no harm, for they were all
there: then being humbled by that strange and wonderful work of GOD, he
comes in unto them, humbles himself, and falls down before them, craving them
to tell him what he must do to be saved. In like manner, so long as men have
not their proud hearts beaten down, they will never worship God in spirit and
truth. Would we therefore know why the most part worship God formally?
Surely it is because they have not been humbled with a fear of Gods majesty,
and a terror of hell: Neither can it be hoped, that we shall ever worship God
sincerely, till our hearts be thus broken within us, and we touched with the
fear of Gods judgments. The want hereof is the cause, why men and women
content themselves with a bare mumbling over of the words of the Lords prayer,
the Creed, and ten Commandments, never seeking in the sincerity of their
heart, cheerfully, and willingly, both with soul and body, to do worship
unto God.

The second fruit of true conversion concerns man, and that is, A reverence
of the true worshippers of God, noted in these words, Before thy feet. These
Jews when they were converted, did not think themselves worthy to be members
of this congregation, but submitted themselves to be foot-stooles unto them.
This reverence shows it self in this one thing which is the ground thereof;
namely, a base opinion which every true converted person has of himself, by
reason of his own unworthiness. This was in Paul, causing him to call
himself the 1. Tim. 1.15.
chief of all sinners. And the same ought to be in every one of us; for this
is true grace, and a note of true repentance, when a man or woman can truly
abase themselves beneath all Gods people; so as if the question were, who is
the vilest person in the Church? the conscience of every man should answer: I
my self. The proud and pharesaicall heart, is far from true conversion; but
the humble heart is pleasing to God.

And shall know that I have loved thee: These words contain a reason of the
former submisse behavior of these Jews; for it might be asked, why shall
these Jews come to join themselves with Gods people, and be content to make
themselves foote-stooles unto them? The answer is, because Christ will make
them know, that he has loved his Church.

Here mark and see the ground of all true reverence, Gods love and favor.
Sundry persons, both in Church and Common wealth, have reverence due unto
them, as Masters from their servants; parents from their Children; and all
superiors from their inferiors. Now, if these men would attain to true
reverence indeed, first they must seek to be in the love and favor of God,
and of his children; and so shall they procure unto themselves true reverence:
for when men set their hearts to fear God, then will God turn the hearts of
men to reverence them. This ought to be thought upon of those that be great in
birth and wealth; They must not stand on these things, but look to the
foundation of true reverence; namely, the favor of God, which they must seek
for, and getting that, God will get them reverence, even of wicked men. The
cause why many in high place, as Magistrate, Masters, etc. want due reverence
is, for that they care not for the favor of God, the ground thereof.

Verse. 10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience, therefore will I
deliver thee from the hour of temptation, which will come upon all the world,
to try them that dwell upon the earth. These words contain the second promise
of Christ unto this Church, concerning their preservation in time of most
bloody persecution, for this Epistle unto this Church, as also this Book was
written by John, after the Ascension of Christ in the days of Domitian the
Emperor of Rome, after whom succeeded Tra^anus, who when he was seated in
his Empire, raised up grievous persecution against GODS Church in all places of
his Dominion, wherein he put to death innumerable thousands of Christians for
the space of fourteen years. Of this persecution our Savior Christ
fore-tels this Church, calling it; The hour of temptation, and withal he
promises to preserve this Church in the time of this bloody persecution:
adding a reason thereof, Because they had constantly and syncerely professed
his Gospel.

In this promise of preservation, note sundry points; I. the occasion thereof,
The keeping of the word of his patience. II. The thing promised, deliverance
under Traianus. III. A pr^diction of this persecution, That it shall come upon
the world, for this end, to try them.

I. point, The word of Christ's patience some expound to be, Christ's
commandment of patience: but that exposition is too strait; here it signifies
the whole Doctrine of salvation by Christ; which is called the word of
patience: first, because it teaches patience: Secondly, because it is the
instrument of patience; for when a man knows salvation by Christ, and also
bel^eues the same to belong to him, that will make him patient in all the
miseries of this life. Thirdly, because it cannot be professed and holden unto
death without patience, but as it is said of the good ground, It brings forth
fruit with patience: so must every one do that professes this Gospel.

In this occasion of Gods promise observe; that Gods grace well used, is
rewarded with increase. Those which have received but small measure of grace at
the first, by becoming faithful therein, have received increase, which serves
to move us to be faithful in the use of those tallents, which we have
received. For hereby we shall receive increase, when as those which having
received good gifts from God, as knowledge, and such like, because they have
not been faithful in the use thereof, have been deprived of the same.
Wherefore whosoever has begun to know the will of God, to believe, and to
repent; let the same parties proceed to use those gifts still to Gods glory,
and the good of his Church and people, among, whom they live; and they shall
see the Lord will double and treble, and greatly increase the same unto them.

Again, note the doctrine of the Gospel is a Doctrine of patience. This
shows how good and meet it is for every one to learn the Gospel in the
days of peace: for every one in times of trial, would wish for strength and
patience* and we know not how long these days of peace will last. Again,
each man in his calling, is subject to many crosses and miseries: for in the
sweat of our face must we eat our bread. And who is free from pains and
diseases, yea who can escape death it self? Now in all these, and in all other
troubles, we have need of patience. And therefore in the time of health and
ease, let us hide in our hearts the seeds of this grace, to wit, the Doctrine
of the Gospel: and then in due time, we shall reap the fruit of patience,
which will make us contented in all distresses both of life and death. And if
we would know why most men are so impatient in afflictions; it is because they
have so little knowledge and faith in the Gospel of his grace.

Secondly, seeing the Gospel is the word of patience; hereby all persons that
look to be saved by the Gospel, must learn to put on patience, keeping a
moderation in all their thoughts, wills, and affections; for when we be
impatien^ any way, we are not suitable to the Doctrine of our salvation.

Thirdly, this word of patience is called Christ's ( The word of my patience,)
because Christ is the author of it. This is added to beat down the pride of
this Church; for when God does praise them for their obedience, their hearts
might have been puff^d up with pride. But to prevent this evil in this
Church, whom he now praised, he calls it his patience, that they might not
think this good thing was of themselves. And the same consideration must
check the proud thoughts that rise in our hearts; namely, to remember that no
good thing we have is our own, but Christ's. What have thou which thou have
not received? Why then should thou boast? 1. Corinthians. 4.7.

II. point. The thing promised, is preservation and deliverance in the bloody
persecution under Traianu^* in which for the space of fourteen years
innumerable Christians were put to death. I will deliver thee from the hour of
temptation.

Here first observe* that God has appointed certain set hours and times for
the trial of his Church* as well for the gift^ of his grace; as of their
wickedness and hypocrisy. Thus he led the Israelites Deuteronomy. 1.2.
forty years, in the wilderness to see whether they would obey him, and he
sent Deuteronomy. 13.3.
false Prophets among them, to try whether they would turn from the true God
or no. And as God thus deals with his Church; so he bath appointed
particular times and hours, wherein he will try particular persons Genesis 2^.2.
God bid Abraham kill his Son, and that was his trial. And 2. Chro. 32.31.
Hezekias was left unto himself: That the Lord might see all that was in his
heart. And so for every Christian, God has a set time of trial, wherein he
will either make manifest his grace: or disclose their hypocrisy.

This point ought to be well weighed: for herein the Lord deals like the
worthy founders of great Schools: The use.
who have appointed certain set times of posing, for the trial of their
Scholars, to see what every ones proceeding is, that they may be accordingly
rewarded. And as it is a shame for one to have been long in a good School, and
to have made no proceedings in learning: so it is for any one, that has lived
long in the School of Christ, and has not profited in grace. This therefore
must teach us these duties: First, to try our selus, and that staightly
concerning our progress in knowledge, faith, repentance, and obedience; for
God himself will try us whose eyes we can never blind, though we may
deceive men: He will lay open our hearts, and make known what is in us,
whether it be true grace, or false hypocrisy. Let us not cover our selves
with fig leaves, for God will strip us naked; but rather let us search our
selus, touching our sins and Gods graces: and never rest contented, till we
have found in our souls the good gifts of grace, which will abide his trial.

Secondly, hereby we are admonished, as near as we can to conform our hearts
and lives, unto the word and will of God; for he will try us: wonderful it is
to see how common the reproach of presizenesse is, and if it were not well
known that the world is full of Athiests, that might discourage many a
Christian. But the remembrance of this trial, wherein hypocrisy will vanish
as the stubble before the fire, must move us to labor for sincerity. When we
have done our best, we shall be far short of that we ought to be. And
therefore through the reproach of the world, let us hold on our good endeavor,
and labor to have the maine graces of true faith, and a good conscience, with
a resolute purpose not to sin: that so we may stand in the day of trial. But
if we want these, and live loosely, we shall be found like the foolish
Virgins, that have only the blasing lamps of an outward Profession, and want
the saving oil of grace, which may make us acceptable unto God at his
appearing. We have been trained up in the School of Christ; what a shame
will it be, if when Christ comes to prove us, we be then found barren and
void of sound grace? David bethinking himself of this trial of the Lord, does
conform himself unto the will of God: and therefore offers himself unto
his trial, saying, Psa. 26.2^
Lord prove me: meaning in regard of the truth and synceritie of a good
conscience, not of the perfectness of his own ways. And hereunto must we
endeavor, not suffering any sin to reign in us.

Qu. But how was this promise verified touching their deliverance from
persecution, seeing no Church was free from it? For even the Churches of Asia,
whereof this in Philadelphia was a principal one, were persecuted by Traianus.
Answ. This and such like promises of deliverance to Gods children from trials
and afflictions, must be understood not simply; but with condition: to wit, so
far forth as they may be hurtful unto them, and in the least measure
hinder their salvation; and indeed they are promises of deliverance from the
evil of temptation and persecution; not from persecution and temptation it
self. Psalm. 91.10, The Lord promises to him that trusts in God, The plague
shall not come near his dwelling: and yet by experience we know that Gods
children in general plagues, are taken away as well as others; and therefore
that promise must be understood of deliverance, not from the plague it self,
but from the hurt thereof; so as it shall not hinder the good or salvation of
any in the godly man's house. We pray Lead us not into temptation; which we
must not understand of freedom from all temptation; for it is the will of God
we should be tried: but therein we are taught to pray, that God would not
forsake us in our temptations, or give us up wholly to the power of the devil;
but that it may tend to our profit, and not to our hurt, as well in respect of
grace, as of salvation. And so far forth was this promise accomplished to
this Church.

The use.
The due consideration whereof, is most comfortable to Gods church and people;
teaching the^ not to fear the cross in any temptation. God will have his
church tried, but the faithful therein need not to be dismayed: for God by his
promise has taken away the evil and poison of all trials and temptations, to
them that have care to keep faith and a good conscience, though they suffer a
thousand crosses in this world never so long; yea, though they die under the
cross: which may put comfort into the heart of any distressed soul
whatsoever, and revive those that are oppressed with temptations.

Again, in that this promise is not made simply and absolutely, but with
restraint; hereby we are taught, that the petitions of those persons which pray
simply and absolutely to be freed from all temptations and adversities, are not
according to Gods will and word: For every petition must depend upon some
promise of God; but we have no absolute promise of freedom from all trials
and temptations; but only so far forth as they be evil. And therefore in
praying against temptations, we must qualify our petitions for temporal
deliverance, according to the tenor of the promises of Christ: that is, so
far forth as may most advance Gods glory, and best further our salvation.

Quest. How can this great persecution be called but an hour of temptation,
seeing it lasted 14. years? Answ. In diverse respects it may be so called:
First, in regard of God 2. Pet. 3.3.
with whom a thousand years are but as one day: and therefore 14. years with
God are but as one hour. Secondly, in regard of that punishment which every
man by his sins deserves in hell eternally. Thirdly, in the affection of
Gods people which were tried: When Jacob served Laban seven years for Rahell,
his affection made him think Genesis ^9.20
it was but a short time: So when Gods children suffer for the name and Gospel
of Christ, the consideration thereof will make them think long afflictions to
be but short. This affection caused Paul to wish to himself eternal
perdition for the glory of God, in the salvation of the Jews. Romans 9.3.

The end of this phrase touching the shortness of time, was to comfort this
and all other Churches in the time of this grievous persecution: for the
consideration of the shortness of the time, is a means to ease any
affliction; and to arm an impatient man with some measure of contentation.

III. point. The prophecy, or prediction of this affliction; is in these
words: Which will come on all the world, to try them that dwell upon the
earth. Here Christ foretells a thing which was to come, simply by himself,
and from himself; not by the help of any cause, or any man or angel. And
hereby he proves himself to be true God; for it is a property and
privilege of the true God, of himself and by himself, to foretell a thing to
come, before it can be seen either in it self, or in the causes thereof: no
man, nor angel can so absolutely foretell that which is to come; but in their
predictions they first see the things present in their causes, unless they be
revealed unto them from God. But some may here demand, whether Christ's
foreknowledge and prediction, were the cause of this grievous persecution.
Answ. Not so, for things come not to pass because of Gods foreknowledge
thereof; but because they would come to pass, therefore God foreseeth, and
foretells them: there is a higher cause of all things, then prescience and
prediction; to wit, the good will and pleasure, and decree of God. So Christ is
said Act. 2.23.
to be delivered to be crucified, by the determinate will and counsel of God:
and from the same eternal counsel did this persecution under Traian
originally proceed: for the first cause of the event of every thing is Gods
decree, either ordaying, or disposing the same. It will be said, if this be so,
then is God the author of sin. Answ. God forbid: For the manner of Gods will
and decree is diverse; some things he decrees to cause and effect of himself,
and by himself, as all good things: some other things God decrees to be
effected by others, as sin. And so evil things though they be not according
to his revealed will, yet they come in some sort from his will and decree: for
if he simply nilled the^, they could never be. Beside, in Gods decree are set
down, not only the things to be done, but also the means and circumstances
thereof; as we may see in this persecution, the place and end are plainly noted.
This we must remember, and on the contrary take heed of the opinion of some
Protestants, which hold and teach that sundry things come to pass, God only
foreseeing them, and no way decreeing or willing them: as namely sin. But to
give unto God a bare foreknowledge without a decree, is to put upon him an
idle providence, which the nature of God will not admit.

The end why Christ alleges this Prophecy, is to expound his former saying:
For it might be asked, why does Christ call this persecution, the hour of
temptation? Christ answers, because it will certainly come, to try them that
dwell on earth. Where we may note, what is the property of afflictions and
persecutions be they public or private; Namely, they serve to discover the
state of men's hearts; either by making manifest their faith, repentance, and
fear of God: or by detecting their impacience and hypocrisy.

Verse. 11. Behold, I come shortly: hold that which thou have, that no man take
thy crown. Here is Christ's commandment to this Church; wherein consider first
what he inioyneth them: then the reason thereof. The thing he enioyneth is
this; Hold fast that which thou have; that is, hold as it were with both hands,
that little meaof faith and grace which thou have received from me, and in no
wise part with the same. This Commandment has been before expounded, Chap.
2. verse. 25.

The reasons to enforce this Commandment are two. One going before it, in
these words; I come shortly: That is, either in the general judgment, or by
death unto thee particularly. Before this reason is put a note of attention,
Behold; to give us to understand, that the speedy coming of Christ unto us,
either by death in particular, or in judgment general, is a matter of great
moment never to be forgotten, but said up and treasured even in the bottom of
our hearts. Herein we must not flatter our selves, and say with the bad
servant; Mat. 24.48, My master does foreslowe his coming: for that is the
cause of so much wickedness and impenitencie as is in the world. But rather
with an ancient Jerome.
Father, think we ever hear the sound of his trumpet.

This daily persuasion of the speedy coming of Christ, is of notable use. For
first, it will daunt the most desperate wretch that is, and make him to tremble
in himself, and restrain him from many sins. And if a man belong to God,
and be yet a loose liver, this persuasion will rowze him out of his sins, and
make him turn unto God, by using the means of repentance: for who would not
seek to save his soul, if he were persuaded that Christ were now coming to
give him his final reward? Secondly if a man have grace and have repented, and
do believe; this persuasion is a notable means to make him constant in every
good duty, both of piety to God, and of charity toward his brethren.
Thirdly, this serves to comfort any person that is in affliction: for when he
shall believe this which Christ has said, I come shortly: he cannot but think
but his deliverance is at hand; for at his coming, he brings perfect
redemption to all his Elect.

The second reason is set after the commandment; that no man take thy crown:
that is, the crown of thy glory, even everlasting life. This must not be
restrained to the minister of this Church, taking it only for the crown of his
ministry, though it be also understood of him; but the same must be referred
to the whole Church: as if our Savior Christ should say; If thou hold not
fast thy faith and other graces, thou will loose the crown of glory that is
ordained for thee.

Hence some gather, that a man ordained to life may finally perish, because
another may have that crown which was ordained for him. But this is a flat
abuse of this, and such like Texts of scripture: for the words are not
absolute, that a man may loose his crown; but conditional: Hold fast, or else
thou shall perish, and loose eternal life* though it be ordained for thee.
Now the use of such speeches, is not to signify falling from grace, but to
show unto us our own weakness in our selves; that we might acknowledge, that if
we were left of God wholly to our selves, we could not but perish. Therefore
they serve to stir up the child of God to humble himself in the
acknowledgement of his own weakness, unto a careful using of the means to
come to salvation. Like as a father that takes his child and sets him on a
horse, guiding the horse with one hand, and holding him with the other; and
then says unto the child, take heed least thou fall: Not meaning thereby that
the child shall fall, but intending to make him sit faster; and to let him
know that if he should leave him, he would fall.

Secondly, Christ uses such speeches, that thereby he may make his Church
persevere in grace unto the end: for all exhortations and threatenings in Gods
word, are instruments of perseverance in grace unto Gods children: because as
God has appointed who shall be saved certainly, so he has ordained certain
means to bring the same to pass: part whereof are exhortations and
threatenings, which do not import any final relapse, but serve as means and
causes of perseverance: and for this end, does Christ here bid this Church,
hold fast, lest another take her crown.

In this threatening we may note, that when God withdrawes his grace from one
man, or his blessings from any one people for the abuse thereof, he has
others ready to bestow the same upon, who will use the same well: when Judas
was cut off from the Apostleship, Matthias was chosen in his room: and when
the Jews by infidelity fell away from God, he had the Gentiles in store to
ingraffe in their stead; for the the arm of God is not shortened. When any one
people shall abuse his Gospel, he can give it to another that will bring forth
the fruit thereof, Mat. 21.43.

This must be thought upon, for by Gods mercy we are now Gods people, The use.
and do enjoy his Gospel; but we must not flatter our selves herewith, for
if we abuse the same, we must know that he has another Nation in store,
whom we now contemn, whither he can send his Gospel, and cause them to bring
forth the plentiful fruits thereof. We therefore must embrace and hold fast
this blessing of God which now we enjoy, and show forth the power of
obedience, or else God will take it from us. And we know not how near this
judgment is, seeing other particular judgments have not brought us to repent.
And what else mean the rumors of wars? are they not Gods warnings, bidding
us hold fast his Gospel, or else it will be taken from us? Although therefore
we loose all other things; as honor, riches, lands, or life it self; yet let
us hold fast our crown: When the Ark of God is gone, no glory is left, 1.
Sam. 4.21.

Verse. 12. Him that overcomes, will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God;
and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the Name of my God, and
the Name of the City of my God, which is the new Jerusalem, which comes
down out of heaven from my God, and I will write upon him my new Name.

Verse. 13. Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches.

These words are the conclusion of this Epistle, which contains two parts.
First, a promise, in the twelfth verse. Secondly, a commandment in the 13. for
the promise: In it we are to observe two points; The party to whom it is
made; and the thing promised. The party is, he that overcomes, of whom we
have spoken before: for this promise has been propounded six times, for
substance the same, though in other terms. Yet here the very word Overcomes
does give us to understand, that he that would have his service pleasing to
God, must dispose himself to a battle or combat, (for ouercomming
presupposes a fight.) The enemies which he is to fight against are spiritual:
to wit, his own corrupt nature, the wicked world, and the devil: and in this
spiritual combat a man must be a good soldier, before he can be a good
Christian: for all these enemies will seek to draw him back and hinder him,
so soon as he shall any way endeavor to please God. Indeed, God could have
freed his servants from all temptations, but he will not; it is Gods pleasure
by temptations to have his servants tried. Whereby it is manifest that they are
deceived, that imagine the state of a Christian to be a freedom from all
miseries and temptations, or a state of ease wherein is no strife or trouble to
disquiet the mind; nay, it is a soldiers condition in which he that would
overcome, must wage a-perpetuall battle against all his enemies; both within
him and without him, and that unto death.

The thing promised: will I make a pillar in the house of my God, and he shall
go no more out. Here Christ does most notably express the state and
condition of eternal life; In the description whereof he does allude to the
custom and practice of men, who minding to perserue the memory of their names
after their death, used to errect durable Pillars of wood or stone, in some
town, valley, or mountain; with their name engraven or written thereon. This
practice is common in humane hystories: and ^. Sam. 1^.18.
Absolon wanting issue, set up a Pillar with his own name upon it, in the
Kings dale, thereby to continue his remembrance with posterity. The meaning
then is: as if Christ had said. Others for the continuing of their memory
after their death, do in some special place errect some durable pillar of
wood or stone, with their own names written or engraven thereon; But to him
that overcomes, I will not set up such a pillar, but even make him a pillar
durable and everlasting, whose memory shall always continue.

He adds further, he shall be a pillar in the Temple of my God: as if he
should say; others set up their pillars in valleys and mountains, or such
places where some notable exployt has bin wrought; but the place which I will
choose (says Christ) is the temple of my God: that is, the Church tryumphant:
which was figured by the Temple in Jerusalem, and by the Tabernacle; as we may
see, Heb. 9.9, and Revel. 21.3, for those were two places where Gods people
worshipped him: and where God testified his presence in a special manner unto
his people. And so in the true Temple, the kingdom of heaven, Gods saints and
angels do worship him immediately; where God is present with them in most
glorious and comfortable manner. This then is Christ's meaning: he shall not
only be a part of that Temple, but an excellent part, even a pillar in the
triumphant Church in heaven. And to show what is meant by this temple, Christ
calls it the temple of his God; thereby noting the highest heaven. Where
observe, that God is called Christ's God; which argues inferioritie; and
therefore it must be understood of Christ, as he is man, and as he is
mediator: in which respect he receives from his Father all his offices, and
power to execute the same. But as Christ is God, he is equal with his Father,
and receives nothing from him.

And to instruct is yet further herein, (Christ says) He shall go no more
out. When men erected pillars for their memorial, in process of time they
would wear away; and therefore they caused them to be renewed, or else their
remembrance thereby would not continue: but he that is once made a member of
the tryumphant Church, shall there remain for ever and ever: and no time shall
ever come, wherein he shall cease to be a pillar in the same.

Further, in the pillars erected by men, their names were written or engraven:
And to this practice Christ alludeth, saying; that he that is made a pillar in
the triumphant Church, shall have names written on him; these names are three.
I. The Name of my God: that is, I will make it manifest, that this man is
indeed the son of God, and that God is all in all unto him. The second Name
is; The Name of the City of my God: By City, he means not the tryumphant
Church, but the place where the tryumphant Church shall be; to wit, the highest
heaven* as it is taken, Revel. 21.10. So that hereby Christ would teach us thus
much; that he which overcomes, shall be known to be a Citizen of heaven,
and that the privileges of that kingdom belong unto him

And lest any should doubt, what is meant by the City of God, Christ here
described it: first, by the resemblance thereof, calling it Jerusalem: because
that City, in regard of the Temple especially, was a figure of the kingdom
of heaven. Secondly, he calls it, the new Jerusalem: that is, the place of
the tryumphant Church, even the highest heaven: Which is not called new in
respect of being, for it was from the beginning; but in respect of the manner
of revealing and manifesting it. for in the old Testament, the New Jerusalem
was revealed to the Jews only, and that obscurely: but under the kingdom of
Christ, it is more fully revealed not only to the Jews, but to all the world.
Thirdly, he adds that it does now descend out of heaven from his God. Therein
answering to an objection; for it might be said, this temple of God in heaven
is so far off, that we cannot ascend or attain unto it, how then shall we
come thither? Christ answers, that this new Jerusalem comes down from God
out of heaven. Quest. How (will some say) can heaven come out of heaven? Answ.
As Paul says of Christ, that he was crucified among the Galatians before
their eyes, because his crucifying was so lively represented unto them in the
Ministry of the Gospel. So here, heaven may be said to come down from God
out of heaven, in regard of the preaching of the Gospel, which does most
visibly represent and set open heaven unto us, that Gods people may enter
therein: by the faithful embracing whereof, we become citizens with the
Saints, and of the household of God, Ephe. 2.19.

The third name which shall be written on him, is Christ's new name: whereby is
not meant any title of Christ, as Jesus, Mediator, etc; but the dignity,
power, and glory of Christ. Quest. How can that be called new, seeing he had
power and glory from all Eternity? Answ. It is called new, because it is
received of Christ, as he is Mediator* God incarnate; being that which was
given to him after his death and passion: standing in his rising again; in his
ascension and sitting at the right hand of his Father. Hereof Paul says, Phil.
2.9. God gave him a Name above every name; that is dignity, power, and glory:
as it is expounded, Heb. 2.7. And this glory, power and dignity, will Christ
give to them that overcome. And thus we have eternal life set out unto us by
the author of life himself. The sum whereof is this; That he which
overcomes shall be made a true member of the tryumphant Church, and there
continue for ever: and shall have three Names written on him: The Name of God,
having this made evident, that he is the child of God: The Name of Gods
City: being made partaker of the privileges of Gods kingdom of heaven. The
new Name of Christ, communicating with Christ in his glory and majesty.

And Christ does thus describe life eternal unto us for special causes; which
may be these. I. To comfort them which have care to keep faith and a good
conscience; and to encourage them against all hindrances and miseries of this
life; for what can more harten a man in good duties, than to set before him his
recompense and reward? Whereby we learn that in all miseries and trobles that
may befall us for the maintenance of true religion and good conscience; we must
comfort our selves and not faint. And to encourage us herein, we are carefully
to propound and set before us, the due consideration of life eternal; for this
it was that caused Heb. 11.24.25.26.
Moses to despise worldly honor, and to choose affliction with the people of
God. We must also look unto Christ, Heb. 12.2.
who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, and despised
shame. Soldiers that are uncertain of any reward, are yet content under their
General to adventure their lives at his command: how much more then ought
Christian soldiers to fight manfully, and stand fast in all troubles for
Christ's sake, who has set before them such a great reward?

Secondly, it is thus described, to bring Gods people to a view and taste of
life eternal, that thereby they may the more affect it. Many cast off all care
of Religion and good conscience, for the present delights of earthly things:
they can see no goodness nor pleasure in spiritual things: The sweetness of
earthly pleasures puts men's mouths out of taste, in regard of any relish of
life eternal: but this must not be so with us; we must be of Moses mind,
who desired to see the Land of Canaan when he was not permitted to enter into
it; and thereupon God took him up into Mount Nebo, and showed it unto him: So,
considering Christ has thus largely described this kingdom unto us, we must
labor to comprehend in our understandings, and in our hearts to possess by
faith, something of life eternal, though we cannot as yet fully inherit the
joys and pleasures thereof.

Thirdly, it is thus described, to teach us to practice Paul's rule. 1. Tim.
6.12. Namely, to pass through all the miseries and troubles of this world, and
to take hold of eternal life. This is a most necessary duty, but yet little
practiced: men with both hands lay hold upon the things of this world, upon
riches and pleasures; but who considere^h what is prepared by Christ in heaven
for them that overcome? and who labors to lay hold thereof, and to keep
that sure, though he loose all things else?

Lastly, this description of eternal life, here serves to make the people of
God to fear no death, though it were most cruel and terrible; for death is but
a strait door, whereby the child of God must pass to all glory and
happiness, when he shall be made a pillar in Gods temple. Thus much generally
of the thing promised: Now follow in particular the parts thereof.

First, whereas Christ promises to make them that ouercomme, pillars and
chief members in the Church tryumphant; Hereby we are taught to labor to
become true members of Gods Church in this life. For life eternal must begin
here, and they that would be pillars in his Church tryumphant, must now become
members of his Church militant: for not only Ministers and teachers are
pillars in Gods Church, though they be chief pillars therein; but every one
young and old, man and woman that is a true believer. And thus shall thou become
a pillar in Gods Church on earth, by maintaining and upholding the Gospel of
Christ; which thou must do, partly by teaching it to those, whom thou art
bound to teach within the compass of they calling: and partly by good example
of life and conversation; and chiefly by a true and bold profession thereof,
not only in time of peace, but even in the greatest trials and afflictions.

Secondly he adds; He will make him a pillar in the Temple of God; that is,
in the church tryumphant; for in the new Testament we have no other Temples,
but Gods Church tryumphant and militant. Hereby then we must learn to renounce
that ignorant opinion of the world, who judge every material church to be the
temple of God, and as holy as the Church in Jerusalem was. But the distinction
of place and place in regard of holiness which was under the Law, is taken
away by Christ. The house is now as holy as the Church; Churches indeed must be
regarded and maintained, not for holiness, but for order sake: now men may
every where offer the calves of their lips, and lift up pure hands from a pure
heart unto God.

Thirdly, I will writ upon him the name of my God: that is, whereas God the
Father is my God first, I will also communicate unto him the same name of God;
and he shall have God even my God, to be his God also. By this it is plain,
that no man can have fellowship with God but by Christ: we must not look to
have immediate fellowship with God of our selves, or by any other, but by
Christ: God hears not, God helps not, God saues not, but by Christ; nay, God
is no God unto us, out of Christ. For first, he is a God unto Christ, and then
in him and by him unto us. Therefore if we would call upon God, we must call
on him through Christ; if we would give him thanks, it must be in and by
Christ; for in him only are we heard. If we would know God, it must be by
Christ, for he is the very engraven Image of his Father, in whom is manife^^ed
the wisdom, justice, and mercy of God, in him dwells the fullness of the
Godhead: and to conceive of God out of Christ, is to make God an idol in the
brain. Lastly, if we would receive any temporal blessing from God, it must
be in and by Christ; as meat, drink and clothing. For if we receive them
from God out of Christ, we are but usurpers of them, and the use thereof shall
turn to our further condemnation.

Fourthly, he says: I will write on him the name of the city of my God: that
is, he shall have the privileges of the kingdom of heaven. We do all desire,
and look for the inheritance of Gods kingdom after this life: therefore here
we must live as citizens of Gods kingdom; conforming our selves to Gods
commandments, abandoning all sin, and so living in faith and a good conscience
unto the end, that after this life we may assuredly persuade our selves, we
shall be made partakers of the privileges of this kingdom.

Fifthly it is said: this City of God, is the new Jerusalem, which comes
down out of heaven from God; that is, by the preaching of the Gospel. Hereby
we are taught more carefully to seek to attain to the kingdom of God, for
behold Gods endless mercy herein: our sins shut heaven gates against us,
but by the blood of Christ he has opened them; and by the Ministry of the
Gospel, he makes heaven come down unto men: God therefore would not see us
damned; he has made open away, even a new and living way whereby we may come
to heaven and escape hell. God has brought down heaven among men, we must
therefore with the people in John Baptists time, violently enter into this
kingdom, and strive to take it by force. Matt. 11.12,

Lastly he says; I will write my new name on him: that is, I will make him
pertaker of that glory and digni^ie wherewith I my self am glorified since my
death and resurrection. Mark this: all that after this life must have Christ's
new name, must in this life become new creatures; So Paul says; 2. Cor. 5.17
If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. And again, Gal. 6.15.
Neither circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new
creation. Would we then partake with Christ in his glory? we must here be
partaker of his grace: herein stands true Religion to become new creatures;
and not in bare knowledge and profession. We must therefore put of Ephe.
4.23.24.
the old man which is corrupt with sin, and be renewed in the spirit of our
m^^ds, putting on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and
true holiness. But if we content our selves with the Image of the old man
wherein we were borne, we shall never partake of Christ's glory; for this new
name must be given to the new creature, the old man and it cannot agree
together.

Verse. 13. Let him that has an ear hear what the spirit says unto the
Churches. This conclusion has been handled in in the former Epistles.

Verse. 14. And unto the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans write: These
things says Amen, that fathfull and true witness, that beginning of the
creatures of God. Here follows the seventh and last Epistle, to the Church
of the Laodiceans: whereto is prefixed a commandment unto John, whereby he
is authorized to pen the same, in these words: And unto the Angel of the
Church of the Laodiceans write, which has been handled before.

The Epistle it self has three parts, A Preface: the substance or matter of
the Epistle, and the conclusion. The Preface is this 14. verse, wherein is set
down, in whose name this Epistle is written; to wit, Christ's: who is here
described by two arguments: I. he is called Amen, which is that faithful and
true witness. II. He is the beginning of the creatures of God.

For the first ( Amen,) is an Hebrew Aduerbe of asseueration, signifying as
much as verily, truly, or certainly. This title is given to Christ, and the
reason thereof is expressed in the words following, which are a full
exposition of the same. Amen, is that faithful and true witness: So that
Christ is called Amen, to testify that he is a witness, a faithful
witness, and a true witness; which title was given to Christ in the 5. verse
of the first Chapter: where it was expounded, and reasons rendered why he is so
called. Unto which title is here added, that he is a true witness; because
he speaks the truth, according as every thing is in it self, without
error, deceit, or falsehood, for that which he receives from his Father, is
the will of his Father, which is the Rule of all truth.

That we may come to the right use of this Argument; we must first search out
the ends, for which Christ is here called Amen, that a faithful and true
witness, which by the contents of the Epistle, we may easily guess to be
these. First, to set forth himself unto the Angel of this Church, an example,
and pattern of fidelity in his Ministry: in the duties whereof, he had been
slack and negligent: Christ therefore by his own example, would teach him
without respect of persons, to instruct the Church of God truly, and
faithfully. How this duty is to be performed, has been showed before, Chap.
1.5, And not only to the Angel of this Church of Laodicea, but also to all
the Church, and to all them that profess themselves to be his members, does
Christ propound himself an example of two most worthy virtues: Faith and
Truth. For the first: Faith is a virtue, whereby a man makes good all his
lawful words, promises, oths, leagues, compacts, and bargains whatsoever, so
as his word is as sure as an obligation, as we use to speak. Truth is another
virtue, whereby a man without fraud, lie, or deceit, speaks the truth from
his heart, that is necessary to be known for his own good, the glory of
God, and the good of others.

We therefore must set before our eyes this president of our Savior Christ:
As he is a witness, yea a faithful and true witness, without any faming or
falsehood, so let us labor to show our selves faithful in all lawful
promises: and true in all our speeches, that so by these virtues, we may be
known to be like unto Christ, through our whole lives and conuersations.
Secondly, Christ is here called Amen, to induce this Church of Laodicia, to
apply effectually unto her self the word of God, whether threatenings or
promises; This Church had been negligent in the duties of Religion, which came
for want of applying Gods word unto the selves. The right manner of applying
Gods word is this: In Gods word we are to consider the law, and the Gospel.
In the law, there are Commandments and threatenings: now a man must apply to
his own person and life Gods Commandments particularly; that thereby he may
come to know his particular sins: then he must also apply the threatenings of
God unto himself, that thereby he may be humbled through the sight of his
misery, and so made fit and capable of Gods grace. Thus the prodigal son
applied the law unto himself, when he said, Luke 15.21.
I have sinned against heaven and against thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy Son. So did Dan. 9.
Daniell, and ^zra. 9.
Ezrah, by applying the law unto themselves, humble themselves, and their
people: for this is the way to humble any man, and to make him fit to receue
grace: for the law is our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. Gal, 3.24, and
the want of this special application of the law, was a cause of the dullness
of the Laodicians, and is also of our slacknesse in Religion at this day.

Secondly, the Gospel also must be applied: not only by beleeing it to be
true, as the Papists teach: but also by applying unto our selves particularly
the promises of righteousness and life everlasting by Christ. A^cording as
Paul says, Philip. 3.8.9 10.
I desire to win Christ, and to be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ. Verse. 15, Let us (says he) as many as be perfect be thus minded,
teaching every one this special duty of particular application. For as saint
John says, he that by faith does not apply the promises of the Gospel
particularly to himself 1. Ioh. 5.10
makes God a liar. And the want of this application is the cause of negligence
in Religion, and of so many lukewarm Gospellers as be at this day. For it is
not sufficient to know the Gospel to be true, or to be able to teach it unto
others, unless we can thus apply it to our selves. This then serves to prove
that justifying faith must not only be a bare assent to the truth of the
Gospel, but a special faith which does apply particularly unto a man, those
promises which are propounded concerning righteousness, and life everlasting by
Christ.

The second argument and title whereby Christ is described is this; that he is
the beginning of the creatures of God. The meaning whereof is, that Christ is
he that is the Creator of all Gods creatures that were created: so it is said
Col. 1.16.
By him all things were created in heaven and in earth: and though this be
true, yet I doubt not but that Christ is here called the beginning of the
creatures of God, for a further respect; namely, because he is the beginning of
the new creature in regeneration: so it is said, Ephe. 2.10
We are the workema^ship of God, created in Christ unto good works. So that
every regenerate person is a new creature; to which purpose it is said of
Christ: Esai. 53.10.
When he shall give his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, etc.
Because Christ is the root and seed of all that are borne again. How is
Christ (will some say) the beginning of a new creature? Answ. Two ways: I. As
he is the author of regeneration; for he is the cause whereby a man is
regenerate, in which respect he is called the father of eternity. Esaias, 9.6.
And again he says: Behold, Esai. 8.18.
I and the children whom thou hest given me. Secondly, because he is the
matter and root, out of which a new creature does spring: and so the Church is
called Ephe. 5.30
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh: alluding unto Adam and Eve, who were
a type of Christ and his church. For as Eve was taken out of Adams side, so the
Church and every member thereof, sprang of the blood that issued out of Christ's
side, which was of infinite merit, being the blood of him that was God.

The end why Christ in this Epistle is called the beginning of Gods creatures
(as we see by the contents thereof) is to meet with this common vice of this
church; that they had more care to seem to be religious, then to be
religious indeed: now Christ would by this his title give them to understand,
that their chiefest ca^e must be, to become new creatures indeed. And no doubt
this is the fault of our days; our care is less for the power of godliness,
then for the name thereof; we more respect show than substance, and shadow
than truth it self. Which ought not to be, for if we would be in Christ, we
must become new creatures: to exercise our selves in the word and Sacraments,
and Prayers are good in their kind; but without this new creation, they are not
sufficient to salvation.

Secondly, hereby he would meet with this special pride of theirs, whereby
they did boast themselves, to be rich and to want nothing. But Christ tells
them, that there was no dignity in any thing out of this, whereby in Christ
they are made new creatures. We therefore must learn by them, not to be
puffed up with outward privileges of nobili^ie, wealth, strength, or such
like, as many do: but he that would rejoice must rejoice in this, that he is
a new creature in Christ Jesus.

Further, by calling himself, the beginning of the creatures of GOD, Christ
would teach them and us, that he does love his Church, and preserve the same.
Eve was created by the hand of God, not a part from Adam, but of his ribbe; for
this end, that he might love and protect her, and that she might reverence and
serve him: Even so every new creature springs out of Christ's heart blood,
which God has so wrought, that we might know how Christ has loved us, and
that we ought to magnify and honor him: Adam was not the author, but the
matter only, whereof Eve was made: but Christ is both the author, and the
matter of our regeneration: wherein appears his exceeding love unto us. And
look as the root spends it self for the preservation of the branches: so did
Ghrist spend his own blood for the salvation of his Church.

Fourthly, whereas he is called, The beginning of his Regeneration; hence we
may gather, that the Doctrine of the Church of Rome is erroneous, which teach,
that a man in his first conversion, hat^ use of his natural free will, and can
dispose himself in the act of his Regenera^io^. But the creature of God cannot
dispose himself in his creation; now every man that is regenerate, is the new
creature of God; and therefore has no power to dispose himself in his new
creation.

Verse. 15. I know thy works: thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou
werest cold or hot.

Verse. 16. Therefore because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot: it
will come to pass, that I shall spew thee out of my mouth.

In these words, and so forward to the 21. verse. is contained the substance, or
matter of this Epistle: and it has two parts: A dispraise, verse. 15.16 17. And
Counsel. verse. 18.19.20. They are dispraised for two vices: first,
luke-warmenesse, verse. 15.16. Secondly, for their pride. verse. 17.

I know thy works. This is a general reproof, signifying thus much: All thy
works are known unto me, and I utterly dislike them. Then follows the
reason of this dislike, Thou art neither cold nor hot: which is a comparison
borrowed from waters, whereof there be three sorts: hot, cold, and lukewarm.
Now hot and cold waters do not so much annoy the stomach, as lukewarm water
does: they are sometimes comfortable to the stomach, but lukewarm water does
disquiet it, till it be cast up, and to these three kinds of waters, he
compares three sorts of men. By cold water, he understanding such as are
enemies to Reliligion: as at this day are the Jews and Turks, and other
barbarous people. By hot water, he understands men that are earnest and
zealous of the truth. So that when he says of this Church, Thou art neitheir
cold nor hot, his meaning is; thou art neither an open enemy, nor truly
zealous of my Gospel.

I would thou werest cold or hot: Christ wishes not simply, that they were
enemies unto him; but only in respect of that estate of luke-warmnes, in which
they were; as if he should say: I had le^er thou werest either cold or hot,
than thus lukewarm as thou art. For if we should understand it simply, we
should make Christ to desire that men should be his enemies. By lukewarm
men, he understands a people, who are in show Gods Church, but in truth want
the power of godliness, and the zeal of the spirit. Because thou art such
(says Christ to this Church) therefore I will spew thee out of my mouth: that
is, look as he that has drunk lukewarm water, cannot abide it on his
stomach, but must needs spew it up again; so am I weary of this thy
securite, I cannot abide it, and therefore will I cast thee off from all
fellowship with me, and make of thee which art a Church in show, to be no
Church.

Thus we see their fault, namely, luke-warmenesse; the greatness whereof, he
aggrauates; first by comparing it with the extremes, cold and hot, both which
he prefers before it, as may appear by his wish and desire: And secondly,
by the punishment thereof; namely utter reiection.

Hereby we must examine our selves, whither this fault may not justly be
charged upon us: The use.
after due trial, it will appear, that we are guilty of this sin. The
which that it may the better appear, I will note the several kinds of
lukewarm Christians.

The first lukewarm Professor, is the Papist; as the tenor of his Religion,
and the manner of his worship of God, does plainly show, for he does part
stakes with Christ in the matter of salvation, affirming that he receives from
Christ to work out his own salvation, and so assumeth part of Christ's glory
to himself.

Secondly, all time-seruers are lukewarm Gospellers: that is, all such as
alter their Religion with time and state. and of this sort are the body of our
people, who profess themselves to be of the same Religion the Prince is of:
which shows evidently, what they will do in time to come, namely, turn with
the time, as their Forefathers have done:

The Third sort, are the followers of Nicodemus, who came to Christ by night
only: that is, such as say and think that they may go to mass with their
bodies, if they keep their hearts unto God, these halt between two opinions,
and neither serve God nor Ba^ll.

Fourthly, all Mediators: such as will make pacification between the Religion
of the Protestant and the Papists; so holding our Religion, as not caring ^o
embrace theirs also, because they think they differ not in substance, but in
circumstances only. Let these pretend what they will, they are in heart
Laoditians.

Fifthly, all Worldlings: which as Christ says, Luke 16.13. Serve God and
Mammon, God and the world by setting their heart upon riches. These men abound
every where, for though they hear God in the ministry of his word, and as it
were touch him in the Sacrament, yet their hearts are far from him, running
after their covetousness, Ezech. 33.31, and who are such, their consciences
will witness: yea their behavior proclaims it to the world; for though they
will hear the word, yet their wit and strength is spent upon the world, and the
things thereof.

Sixthly, those that profess Christ's Reliligion in outward actions of his
worship, but yet in their lives, give themselves to the common sins of the
time, some to drunkenness, to fornication, to covetousness or cruelty: some
to this sin, and some to that. To this sort, we must refer those, that in
word approve Religion, and yet their hearts delight is, in garnishing
themselves with the monstrous, brutish, and irreligious forms of strange and
foreign attire; These spend their time and wit in the decking of their bodies,
and so suffer their souls to go to wrack; when as apparel should be an
occasion to put us in mind of a shame through sin: and by modest attire, we
should express the virtues of the heart, but these hereby profess the vanity
of their mind.

Now, though we be not entangled with these gross sins, yet we cannot excuse
our selves from this sin of luke-warmenesse. For the want of zeal of Gods
glory, of love to his truth, of care to obey his commandments, and to keep
good conscience, the want of hatred of sin, what argue all these but
luke-warmenes? Herein we must lay our hand upon our mouth with Job; for we
cannot plead with God, no not for this common sin. But that we may be out of
all doubt that this sin of luke-warmenesse, has infected our congregations,
as it did this Church of Laodicea: I will make it plain by the signs thereof,
which are common among us, that so we may the better know our fearful
estate.

The first sign is, Negligence in the duties of that true Religion which we
profess: this appears sundry ways; for first, howsoever we come to the
assemblies where the word is preached, yet few do profit there, by increase
in the knowledge of that Religion which is taught, and in the amendment of
life. This may any man see to be true, that has half an eye to look into the
state of our assemblies, and men's own consciences will herein witness
against them. Again, where Gods word is ordinarily heard, there are very few
that spend any time in searching out, and trying whether the things be so or
not which are taught them. Nay, men will not be at cost to buy a Bible: and if
they have one, yet they will not take pains to read the same, at least in
such a constant course as they ought to do. Thirdly the Lords Sabbath is
broken, for though most men at set times will come into the congregation; yet
there is not that private sanctifying of the Sabbath after the congregations
are dissolved, which Gods word requires; but men betake themselves to their
own affairs, and to outward delights; to omit those that have no care at all
of sanctifying the Sabbath in any sort. Now these persons must needs want both
knowledge, obedience, and all sound grace that will not set apart some time,
wherein they should employ themselves in Gods word: and by these signs it is
evident, that there is a grievous disease of negligence in the duties of
Religion, that infects our congregations. Now where this negligence is, though
coldness be not, there cannot be zeal, and so luke-warmnesse must needs
abound.

II. Sign of luke-warmenesse: The Religion of most men is this; In the
general calling of a Christian they show Religion, but in the affairs of
their particular callings, where is religion? In the Church they are good
Christians, but in practice of the duties of their particular callings, who
shows his religion? for when as men should practice their callings, according
to Gods word and true godliness, they follow the desires of their own hearts.
Little conscience is made of lying and oppression; that love and plain
dealing, which ought to be between man and man is wanting; which proves them
plainly to be lukewarm Gospellers.

III. Sign. There be many that profess themselves to be lukewarm, neither
hot nor cold. For though all generally come to the hearing of the word, and the
receiving of the sacraments, yet many when they see some make conscience to
become answerable in some measure to the word which they hear, and the
Sacraments which they receive, do take up in their mouths this slander of
precizenesse against them: mocking them for doing that which in the word and
sacraments the^selus profes should be don. These men will not be enemies to the
Religion of Christ; and they profess themselves not to be zealous, by
reproaching zeal in others: Therefore they do more than these Laodiceans did,
even profess themselves to be lukewarm. For he that reproacheth another
for zeal in Religion, brandeth himself with this sin of Luke-warmenesse.
And who knows not how many of this ^ort are every where? I dare with good
conscience say, our congregations generally consist of such. Now mark what
follows hereupon.

First, that our common professors of religion are in worser case than heathen
men, Jews, and Turks that know not Christ. This Christ teaches in
preferring cold persons before the lukewarm; as if he should say; I had
rather thou werest a Pagan, than a Professor without zeal. And 2. Pet. 2.21
Saint Peter to this purpose speaking of such says; It had been better they
had never known the way of truth, than after they have known it, not to obey
the commandments of God. So that unless there be further matter in us than
knowledge and bare profession, our case is worse than the case of Jews and
Turks. Religion known, will not make thee better than them, but it is zeal
and obedience that must prefer thee before them.

Secondly, from the consideration of our estate, I gather that we are in
danger to be spewed out of the mouth of Christ, as lukewarm water out of the
stomach. This is the punishment here threatened, which was written for our
instruction, that we might know where luke-warmenesse takes place, there this
punishment will follow. We may flatter our selves as the men in the old world
did, and think all is well, never regarding till the judgment come: but the
truth is, that in regard of this sin, we are in danger to be cut off from
the Church, and from true society with Christ; God can do this sundry ways,
either by bereauing us of his Gospel, and making us as the heathen; or by
sending the enemy among us, to destroy and root us out of this land; and even
in our neighbor-countreys, and towns, he sets spectacles before us, that by
them we may see how he can spew us ou^, and cut us off from being a people.
And thus much of the first fault, namely, luke-warmenesse.

Verse. 17. For thou say, I am rich, and made rich, and have need of nothing,
and know not how thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked. Here is the second sin of this Church, namely, spiritual pride. The
words depend upon the former, as a reason thereof; before he charged the^ with
deadnes in religion, and here he painteth out the cause thereof; namely,
spiritual pride of heart. As if he should say: thou think thus within thy
self, I am rich, for it is the manner of the scripture to express the
thoughts of men by their speeches; because the thoughts of men, are as evident
to Christ, as any man's speeches can be to another. The use.


In that Christ does express men's secret thoughts and propound the same in
this Book; we may hence gather, that it is a part of Canonical scripture,
for it is a privilege of the scriptures to set down the thoughts of Countries,
of Churches, and of particular men, even as they conceive them. This can no man
do in any book of his own devising. And hence we may gather an argument
against Athiests; That scriptures are the word of God, because they reveal
men's secret thoughts.

Now follows the thought it self of the Angel and people of this Church, I
am rich, that is, I have many excellent gifts and graces of Gods spirit: by
this effect he expresses their spiritual pride; in ouerweening their estate
before God. This is a common sin in the world, and ever has been. Christ
said, Luke 5.32.
He came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance; by righteous,
meaning such as think themselves righteous. And the Luke 18.9, 10.
proud Pharisie* in his prayer, which he conceived in his heart, thought
himself far better, than the poor Publican, or other men. And Paul 1. Cor.
4.^.
brings in the Corinthians, thinking proudly of themselves, saying; We are
full and made rich, etc. This sin takes place in the Papists at this day; who
persuade themselus, that they can satisfy Gods justice by temporal works, and
fulfill the law of God, and merit for themselves, and for others.

To come to our selves, this same proud thought has place among us. First, we
think we are rich, in regard of knowledge: both young and old scorn to be
catechized, because they would not seem to be ignorant; some stick not to
profess this pride by bragging thus, that they know as much for substance, as
any man can teach them: when as indeed they know nothing but that which nature
will teach a man. Secondly, men plead that they have a most firm says, so as
they never doubted of Gods mercy: which is nothing but the presumption of a
proud heart, for true faith is troubled with doubting. Thirdly, men will
profess, that they are rich in love, both toward God, and their neighbors,
when as they love the world, and the pleasures thereof, more than Christ; and
so have no true love of God in their hearts. Fourthly, (to make more plain, that
this spiritual pride reigns in men's hearts) mark this: let any bodily calamity
be made known to a man that is newly befallen him, oh how is he presently
perplexed! but let Gods Minister out of his word, make known unto him his
inward fearful estate: that by reason of sin, he is in danger of Gods
judgments, and a firebrand of Hell, he is not affraide: Worldly news does
affright men much, when as the threatenings of the word move them nothing. What
argues this, but that their hearts are fore-stalled with this false conceit, I
am rich? The drunkard in his drunkenness, the filthy person in his
uncleanness, and every man in his sin sootheth himself with this, God is
merciful, I am rich, and in his favor, he will not condemn me. Well, it
being thus manifest that spiritual pride is our common sin; We must labor to
see it in our selves, and use all good means that it may be removed. The
means follow afterward.

And increased with goods: or, am made rich: so the words are: these words are
added only for amplification to show, that this church had not any small
portion, but an exceeding measure of spiritual pride; The doubling of the
words, shows the strength of this conceit. What Is the cause that this Church
was grown to such an height of pride? Answ. It may be it was knowledge,
wherewith no doubt the Angel of this Church, and many therein did abound: now
the holy Ghost says, 1. Cor. ^.1.
That knowledge pusseth up. This is true in all places: great knowledge,
(without special grace) great pride. This is the sin of the Schools of
learning; Where knowledge abounds, there pride of heart abounds, and men are
puffed up according to the measure of their gifts, unless by his grace and the
sight of their sins, God do humble them.

And have need of nothing: This is a further sign of their great pride, that
they thought they needed not the help of any thing, or any person beside
themselves: And all such as think they have no need of the blood of Christ for
the washing away of their sins, do surfeit and abound with this spiritual
pride of heart. This serves further to convince our congregations of this
damnable spiritual pride. If any one be sick in body, he straight sends
to the Physician: but not one of a thousand seeks to the Minister till the
pange of death draw near. The souls disease by sin is not felt; there is no
complaint for want of the blood of Christ. But if we would be emptied of this
pride, we must labor to see that we stand in need of Christ, and every
drop of his blood; till such time as we feel that in us, there is no
goodness in our hearts; We are but the proud Laodiceans, and our case is
wretched and damnable.

And know not how thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind,
and naked. Christ intending to strike this sin of pride to the very heart,
does here set down the true cause thereof; to wit, Ignorance, as if he should
say, Thou know not thine own natural estate, as thou art borne of Adam out
of Christ, and therefore thou art proud, and thy pride makes thee lukewarm.
Then he shows whereof they were ignorant, namely of their natural estate.

For the first; Christ making Ignorance the cause of their Pride, teaches us
that Pride is not the first sin, that ever was in the world, as many both
Papists and others have thought. True it is, Pride is a great and mother sin,
and the cause of many foul iniquities: but yet Ignorance is a mother sin,
whereof Pride springs. The cause why any person swelles with pride in
himself, is Ignorance of his own natural estate. By this then we are taught
to learn to know our own estate, what we are by nature in our selves
without Christ, for that is the way to pull down our hearts. For this cause
the Prophets of God, used to call men, To a searching of themselves, Zeph. 2.1,
when they would bring the people to humility and grace, that men seeing their
estate, by reason of their sins to be damnable, might be humbled and caused
to forsake themselves, and come unto Christ. And surely till such time as men
be humbled for their sins, they will never get sound grace, but be as the
proud Pharisie, hypocrites and dissemblers though they have much knowledge. But
when a man has searched his natural estate, then besides knowledge of himself
come other most excellent graces, as humility, the fear of God, and true
obedience with good conscience. And therefore first of all, let us labor to be
acquainted with our own estate in our selves and with our personal sins, and
with Gods judgments due unto us for them. For this is the ground of true grace.
The spots and blemishes of our bodies, we can soon espy, and wipe away: and
why should we be less careful of our souls, which be far better?

That Christ might fully make known unto them their ignorance of themselves,
it pleases him to desrcibe to the^ their natural estate, and so
proportionally the natural condition of all Churches, and of all people: which
is the state of man's misery. This he propounds two ways: first generally in
these words, and know not how thou art wretched and miserable: then by the
parts thereof, which be three, Poverty, Blindness, and Nakedness.

For the first. The word translated Wretched, signifies one subject to
calamities, griefs, and in a word, to all miseries. And that we may know who
is thus wretched, I will enter into a description of man's misery; whereof that
we may conceive aright, two things are to be considered: First the root and
fountain thereof; for therein we shall best see what misery means. This
root is original sin, and it has two branches: First, that particular
transgression whereby Adam sinned, which was not only the sin of his person,
but also of the whole nature of man, spreading it self to all his posterity,
Christ excepted. Secondly, the defacing of Gods Image, and the corrupting of
man's heart, which by reason of the fall of our first parents has in it a
pronesse unto all sin both in will, affection, and in all the faculties of the
soul. In these two stands original sin, and in them, and with them must we
conceive of man's misery, as in the root thereof. Secondly, we must conceive of
man's misery under the form of punishment, having relation to the first sin of
Adam, and to the corruption of each man's nature thereby received. The punishent
of sin, must be considered sundry ways, according to the diverse kind of man's
being: either in this world, or after. For it is either in this life; or at the
end of this life; or after this life. And so accordingly is misery to be
considered.

Now of the punishments in this life, some concern the whole man, some the
parts of man; some his estate. Punishments concerning the whole man, be of two
sorts: The first is subjection to the wrath of GOD, whereby a man since Adams
fall is made the child of wrath: a misery of all miseries: and yet the more
grievous because without some grace, a man cannot discern and see the same. The
second, is a Bondage under the Devil; whereby a man in his mind, will, and
affections, is subject every way to the will of the Devil* which though we
cannot describe, yet we may thus conceive of it. The regenerate man says: I
sin, but I would not sin. The natural man says: I sin, and I will sin: It is
my nature to sin, and my delight; and this was the state of this Church.

Punishments concerning the parts of man, be either miseries of his soul, or
of his body: the miseries of his soul be these. First, in the understanding,
Ignorance of Gods will. And in sundry, madness, and foolishness; and in all
men pain and difficulty, both to learn and remember whatsoever is good, which
was not in man by creation. In the conscience also, be accusations, secret
fears, and terrors. In the will is, rebellion to Gods will: In all
affections, perverseness. All which are miseries of the soul.

The body also has these miseries. First, it is subject to all infirmities,
sicknesses, diseases, and aches: which are so many, as all the books of
Physicians neither do nor can record the same. Secondly, man's body is mortal,
and subject to temporal death; which no man can possibly avoid or prevent by all
the art and skill in the world.

Punishments of man's estate, concern either his goods, or calling. In goods
there be these miseries; want of things necessary; for by reason of sin it is
a punishment, and in it own nature a curse: and all the hurts that come by the
creatures: for their enmity toward man, and toward one another; as also their
subjection to vanity; all these be miseries, and the punishments of man's
sin. In man's calling there is misery: for therein man is subject to trouble,
to losses, and sorrow; which come as a punishment of man's first sin. And all
these be the miseries of man in this life.

At the end of this life, comes bodily death, the separation of soul and body
asunder; which in it self is a most fearful curse, for so, it is the very
gate of Hell.

But after this life, is the accomplishme^t of all miseries, and that is
eternal destruction and condemnation in hell fire, which to be the end of all
misery, appears by this; because it is a separation of man's person from the
society and presence of God: and an enduring of Gods wrath in the whole
person* even in the place of the Devil and damned souls, and that not for a
time, but for ever and ever eternally. And thus we see what punishment is, and
answerably what misery is, whereby we may see what it is to be wretched: namely
in a word to be subject to al miseries; whether we consider the^ in the r^ot
thereof, original sin; or under the form of punishment; in this life, in the
whole person, and in soul and body severally: in goods and calling: at the end
of this life, and in the world to come.

The proper end that moves Christ to say to this Church, She knew not that she
was wretched, is this: to teach this Church and in them us, and all Churches,
to learn to know their own miseries, to feel the same, and to be touched in
conscience for them. We therefore must learn not to ^^atter our selus with hope
of our good state: but labor to see our misery both in sin, and the punishment
thereof. And seeing it, strive to be touched with it, that we may cry with the
Jews. Act. 2.37.
What shall we do to be saved? for till such time as this in some measure be
wrought in us, we shall be but lukewarm professors, having a show of godliness,
but wanting the power thereof: The true sight of our misery is the gift and
grace of God, but yet we must use all good means, that we may come to see the
same, and to be touched with it, that so we may have hearts hereby fit to
receive the Gospel, which contains the remedy of this our misery.

And miserable, that is, worthy to be pitied: this is added, not to set down
another thing; but to expres the greatness of their misery; as if he should say.
Thy misery is not small* but so great and so grievous, as indeed thou art in
that regard to be pitied of all men.

Hence we learn, that we must not despise parties miserable by reason of their
sins, The use.
or scorn and contemn them. But contrariwise lament and pity them. When David
saw men sin, and so pull heaps of miseries upon them, Psa. 119.13^.
he shed rivers of tears. The Lord makes it a good man's property Ezekiel. 9.4.
to mourn for the abominations of the people. Jeremy Ier. 9.1.
for the sins of the people wished his head were full of water. And just Lot 2.
Pe. 2.7.8
grieved his righteous heart for the abominations of Sodom. It was the fault
of the Corinthians which Paul reprooueth, that when the incestuous man had
sinned that grievous sin, 1. Cor. 5.
They were not humbled, but puffed with contempt against the party. And it is
a fault in sundry men at this day, that they are not humbled in themselves
when they see other men sin. We must not do so, but show the grace we have
above others, in being grieved for the miseries, which men without grace by
their sins pull daily upon them. Thus much of their misery in general.

The parts of their misery are three, which Christ notes particularly, that
if it were possible, he might cause this church to lay aside this damnable
pride; for these in all men are maine miseries. The First is poverty. And
poor: that is properly one that has not a rag to his back, nor bread to his
mouth, unless he beg the same of others. But here it is taken for one that
is spiritually poor: which poverty we shall better conceive, if we do
understand what be true spiritual riches. True riches be Gods grace and savor
in Christ; as the pardon of sin, and life everlasting. The poor man
therefore is he, that wants Gods favor for the remission of his sins, and
the gift of eternal life: and has in him no good thing that is acceptable to
God; but in regard of his soul, is as silly and poor, as any beggar in regard
of his body.

The end why Christ calls this church poor, is to beat down the proud
conceit of her own good estate, and to cause her to feel her spiritual
poverty, and so become poor in spirit. And we in them are likewise taught to
labor to feel our own poverty, how by nature there is no goodness in us;
but we are utterly destitute of the grace and favor of God, that so we may go
out of our selves, and in regard of our selves even despair of our salvation:
for till this poverty of spirit be wrought in us, we may make a show in
profession, hear the word and receive the Sacraments, but we shall never have
sound grace. And blessed were our estate, if we could lay aside that devilish
pride, which puffs up our hearts, and become poor in spirit; then were we
in the right way to receive the Gospel, and the graces thereof: but till we be
beggars in our selves, we never begin to be rich in Christ.

How can Christ truly charge this Church with poverty; for the Laodiceans
were a rich people, and had great store of wealth? Answ. True it is, they were
rich in wealth as histories show, and yet poor to God. For all honor and
wealth in the world, is nothing without the grace and favor of God in Christ.
Paul says, Col. 2.10.
We are complete in Christ: forth of him therefore we have nothing. To the
Corinthians he says, 1. Co^. ^.22.23.
All things are yours, and you Christ's, and Christ is Gods. But nothing is
ours till we have Christ, and Christ us.

The use.
As it was with this Church, so it is with all other. Every person and all
people are but poor, and beggarly, if they want Christ: and therefore if God
have given any man riches and wealth, he must lay this good foundation; use
them as helps to further his salvation: For by them he may attain to the
means of salvation, and also show forth the fruits of faith. But they that
have wealth and use it otherwise shall find it turn to their deeper
condemnation.

The second part of their misery is blindness. Quest. How can they be said to
be blind; for they had a learned teacher no doubt, that both was able, and did
teach the will of God; and the people likewise knew the points of Religion, and
believed the Gospel? Answ. They had knowledge indeed, but yet they were
blind: first, because they knew not their own estate. If a man had all skill
in all Arts and sciences, and great knowledge in the word: yet if he know not
himself in some measure, he is but a blind man. Secondly, because they did
not know God in Christ: They knew no doubt, that there was a God, and that
Christ was a Savior, but they could not apply it to themselves, to be able to
say, God is my God, Christ my Redeemer, and the holy Ghost my Sanctifier.
Thirdly, because they could not discern of things that did differ; as between
good and evil, between evil and evil, and between temporal things, and
eternal blessings: This spiritual discerning, is a gift of Gods grace.

The use.
In that Christ says, They were blind, though they had knowledge; we may
learn, that al knowledge is but mere ignorance before God, to those persons
that know not themselus, and God to be their God in Christ For want hereof
Christ calls the angel of this church blind* though otherwise he were a
very learned man. Which must teach us, not to rest content with any humane
learning, no not with the literal knowledge of the Gospel, but we must labor
further to know our selves, and to know God in Christ, and Christ our redeemer:
and be able in some good sort to discern between things that differ. David a
most worthy Prophet intituleth the 32. Psalm, his Learning. What learning
shows he there? Answ. Surely nothing but the knowledge of the pardon of his
sins. And indeed that is it, which seasoneth all our learning: and therefore
above all things we must labor for it.

The third part of their misery, is Nakedness. Nakedness is twofold; To the eye
of man, and to God. Nakedness to the eye of man is bodily, and that is also
twofold: either that which was before the fall in the bodies of our first
parents, whereby their bodies being uncovered, appeared very glorious without
shame: or that which is after the fall; whereby the body being naked and bare
appears full of shame, which is so excessive, by reason of man's sin, that if
necessity would permit, the whole body both face and hands should all be
covered. Nakedness before God, is when any man lies before God, a deformed
sinner. In this case Moses saw the Israelites Exodus 32.25.
when they had made a golden Calfe* For thereby they deprived themselves of
Gods Image, and were guilty of that most grievous sin of Idolatry. This is a
misery of all miseries; and the greatest nakedness that can be: And this is the
nakedness of this Church in this place. Qu. Why does Christ call them naked?
Ans. To move them, and in their persons all professors to have care not to
fly from God, Io^. 31.33.
and to hide their sins with Adam, but to bring themselves into his presence,
and there lay open their sins, that they may obtain a covering for them by
Christ. It is the practice of the world, to hide their sins from men, but never
to care how bare and naked they be in the sight of God, who yet sees them all
as plainly as we see the sores of any poor lazer that shows the same to move
our pity toward him: which if we could see, we should be ashamed not to seek
to cover our sins before God. We must therefore labor in our own consciences to
see the nakedness of our souls before God; and seek to be touched and
humbled for the same, that so we may earnestly entreat for the righteousness
of Christ, to be a covering to cloth our souls. This was David's practice, for
when he says: Blessed are they whose sins are covered, Psalm. 32.1; he would
give us to understand, that he used to uncover his sins, and lay them open
before God; that at his hands in Christ, he might get a cover for them.

These are the particular parts of a man's misery, which every man must labor
to feel in himself, if he would be partaker of the righteousness of Christ:
for thus has Christ both in general and in particular, set down the misery
of this Church; that he might prepare them to receive the blessed comfort which
follows in the next Verse.

Verse. 18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried by the fire, that thou
may be made rich: and white raiment that thou may be clothed, and that
thy filthy nakedness do not appear: and anoint thy eye with eye-salue that
thou may see. Here begins the counsel of Christ unto this Church.
Wherein, first he propounds a notable remedy for her misery before noted.
In this remedy, we are to consider three things: the manner of prescribing
it; the remedy it self; and the means whereby it is obtained.

For the first, this remedy is propounded; not in any sharp commandment, but
by a mild and gentle advise, I counsel thee. And herein Christ does take to
himself the office of the Counselor of his Church. For as God has his Church
and people, so he has his counselors, by whom in mercy he has revealed his
counsel unto his Church. The principale counselor is Christ; so he says in
the person of Wisdom, Pro. 8.14, Counsel is mine. Esaias 9.6.
And Isay says; To us a Child is borne, and he shall call his name,
wonderful, COVNSELLER, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
peace: yea, he is both King and Counselor to his Church. This office Christ
challenges to himself, for these causes: first, because he advises his
Church, touching the way whereby they must escape everlasting death, and come
to eternal life. Secondly, because he teaches them how they may practice
every business, so as it may please God. Thirdly, because he teaches them, how
they may in grievous dangers and distresses, find a good issue, or else be
able with patience to bear them. These things he works daily in his Church,
not by extraordinary means, but ordinarily by his word and spirit; and
therefore may justly challenge this honor to be called the Counselor of his
Church.

From this office of Christ, The use.
we learn two things. First, to do all the honor and reverence we can unto
his Majesty; for he is our professed Counselor, who imployes himself for the
good of his Church. Counselors of the State and of the Law, are highly
honored and respected of all sorts, even for their counsel in worldly
matters, though often it fail: how much more ought we to honor Christ our
heavenly Counselor, whose counsel leads unto glory, and is stable and sure
for ever? Look how much his counsel excels theirs, so much ought he to be
honored above them all. Secondly, in all distresses and grievous temptations,
and dangers either of soul or body, we must take counsel and advise from
Christ Jesus: for to this end does he reveal himself to be a counselor,
that men in distress coming to him, by his advise might be comforted and
eased. When Moab, Ammon, and Mount Seir banded themselves against Judah, the
people were in great distress and danger; but mark what good king Iehosophat
did, he betook himself to the Lord his counselor; saying, Lord we know not
what to do, but our eyes are toward thee, 2. Chron. 20.12; that is, direct
thou us in this danger, for of our selves we know not how to escape. This
pratise ought to be followed of all men, especially in time of any danger;
such as these days are by reason of sin. The counsel of Wizards, Sorcerers,
and Astrologians, ought not to be sought after; but by prayer we ought to
humble our selves, and call only and continually on this our only true
counselor.

II. Point. The remedy it self: which has relation to the former Verse, for
there he set down the Misery of this Church, in three parts: which were all
great Miseries. And here he so propounds his remedy, that it is answerable
to their Misery in the several parts thereof. For first, here is gold to
make them rich, answerable to their poverty; Secondly, raiment to hide their
nakedness; Thirdly, ointment to take away their blindness.

For the first; by gold, according to the Analogy of the Scripture, we are to
understand the graces of Gods spirit: as true faith, repentance, the fear of
God, love of God, and the true love of man: 1. Pet. 1.7, Faith is compared to
gold in the trial thereof: and so may all other gifts of the spirit be hereby
understood. Secondly, by gold, we are to understand Christ's merits; yea,
Christ himself, as the fountain of all grace.

This gold is further said, to be tried by the fire: that is, most pure and
precious gold purged from all dross, as fine as can be made by the art of man.
This is added to express the property of Gods graces and gifts; namely, that
they are more precious unto God then gold; Yea, than gold tried by the fire: as
Peter says.

The use.
By this every person is taught, how to beautify themselves both in soul and
body: It is the common blind opinion of the world, that foreign attire and
rich Jewels do adorn the body; and indeed in some cases the body may be
adorned with pearls and Jewels: but the right way to adorn any person indeed
is, to furnish the soul with these graces of the spirit, which unto God be
more precious than fine gold. Our bodies and souls ought to be the dwelling
places of the Holy Ghost; and therefore we must adorn them, and make them fit
for so worthy a Guest: which must be done, by the good graces of the spirit,
and not by strange and foreign attire, which no good man could ever abide.

Secondly, these graces have a further effect than to beautify; and that is,
to make rich. Here then see the common folly, yea the spiritual madness of
men in the world; who spend all their time, wit and strength, to furnish their
houses with treasure, and to enrich their bodies; and in the mean time leave
their souls ungarnished. What a madness is this, that men should neglect the
true riches, and follow after that which is nothing else, but counterfeit
copper? Seeing therefore Gods graces be the true treasure which fades not,
let us seek after them, as Wisdom counsels: Pro. 8.10, 11, receive mine
instruction, and not silver: and knowledge rather than fine gold: For wisdom
is better then precious stones. The second part of this remedy is, a white
garment: that is, Christ himself, and his righteousness imputed. So Paul
says, Gal. 3.27.
All that are baptized into Christ have put on Christ; There Christ is made a
garment, whom every one that believes in him does put on. Again, the fruits
of the spirit are a garment; and therefore we are commanded to Colloss. 3.12.
put on tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, and long
suffering. Further, Christ shows the end of this garment; namely, to cover
the nakedness of our souls: lest the filthynesse thereof, which we by our
sins have brought upon us, do appear. The third part of this remedy, is
anointing with eye-salue; where, by eye-salue, we must understand the spirit
of Illumination and knowledge wrought in the mind by the Holy Ghost, whereby
men know themselves and their estate: for as eye-salue sharpens the eyes and
cleeres the sight, where it was by some occasion dimned: so does Christ by the
illumination of the spirit, make a man know God in Christ, and to discern
between good and evil, and between things temporal, and blessings eternal.

Thus we have the meaning of the words: whereby we may see, that by all these
three, we can understand nothing else but Christ himself, and his merits. Now
one and the same thing in Christ, is signified by diverse terms: to show that
there is in Christ the fullness of all grace, and plentiful redemption; yea,
store of supplies for all our wants. The Laodiceans were poor, but Christ was
their riches; they were naked, Christ was their garment; and lastly, they were
blind, but Christ was their eye-salue. So that what wants soever be in us,
there is store of supply thereof in Christ. This must the more diligently be
marked, because the Papists make Christ but half a Savior, in putting our
merits unto his: and so disgrace him in his glorious work, wherein he is a
most absolute Savior, and Redeemer.

III. point. The means whereby these worthy gifts of God may be gotten, is by
buying and bargaining: so Christ says: I counsel thee to buy of me. Where he
alludeth to the outward state of this City; for it was rich, and also given to
much traffic as Hystories record: and therefore he speaks to them in their
own kind; as if he should say, you are a people exercised in much traffic,
and delighted with nothing more than buying and selling: well, I have wares
that will serve your turn; as gold, garments, and oil, therefore come and buy
of me. These words must not be understood properly, for so we can buy
nothing of Christ; because there is nothing that is good in any, but it
proceeds from the free gift of God in Christ. This is only spoken by way of
resemblance to buying and selling; which stands in these points, which are the
principal things in bargaining. First, a man sees his want, and desires to
have it supplied; and therefore goes to the place where such things are to be
sold. Secondly, he sees the thing and he likes it. Thirdly, he prizeth and
valueth it. Fourthly, he makes exchange for it, by money or money worth.
Fifthly, if it be a great sum, he gives earnest. So in the getting of Christ,
there is a kind of resemblance to all these. First, a man must feel himself,
to stand in need of Christ and his merits; because men see want of bread, meat
and drink in their houses, therefore do they go to buy the same. Now look
how fencibly any man feels these worldly wants; so evidently should we feel
our want of Christ, and his merits. For this is the first beginning that
causes us to seek to receive Christ Jesus. Secondly feeling our wa^ts, we
should hunger and long after Christ, that we might be made partakers of him and
the virtue of his merits: as a man that is to buy a thing does take a liking
thereof, which does stir up a desire in him to buy; so must we labor to have
liking of Christ, which will move us to seek unto him. Isay. 55.1. Hoe, all
they that thirst, come and buy: so that none make this bargain, but he that
thirsts. Thirdly we must prize and value Christ above all things in this
world, even at so high a rate that we account al things in regard of him to be
but lost; yea, even dross and dunge: P^ul. 3.8.
as Paul did, Fourthly we must make exchange, How? we can give Christ nothing
but his own? Answ. Properly there is no exchange, and therefore he says:
Isay. 55.1. Hoe, come and buy without money, for nothing. Simon Magu^, is
heavily checked and accursed, for offering to buy the gifts of the holy ghost,
Acts 8.20. And yet there is an exchange to be made, We must give him our sins,
and receive his righteousness; and therefore he is said, 2. Cor 5.21. To be
made sin for us, that we should be made the righteousness of God in him. See a
most blessed exchange; for our sin and shame, we receive his blessed grace
and righteousness. Quest. How is this exchange made? Answ. In the practice of
faith and repentance; for when we humble our selves and confess our sins,
praying earnestly for remission, and believe our reconciliation by Christ, then
is he our righteousness. Lastly, though we can give nothing unto Christ, yet
he giu^th unto us an earnest in this bargain: to wit, some portion of Gods
Ephe. 1.13. 2. Cor. 1.21.
spirit, and some small measure of his graces; as grace to bewail our sins,
to humble our selves, and to pray for the pardon of them, with purpose not to
sin again, these be the earnests of this bargain: And thus is heaven bought
and sold between Christ and us; the receiving of his true saving graces be they
never so small: even as a penie is a suffi^ient earnest for a bargain of a
hundred pound.

Here we see we are commanded to buy Christ, and to make a bargain with him,
The use.
whereby we may have right to him and his merits. But how goes the case with
the world? surely many come where this bargain is offered, but few there be
that buy. We are like to Passengers on the sea, who see many goodly buildings,
sumptuous Cities, and fruitful Islands, but they make no purchase of them; they
only praise them, as they behold them, and so pass by: so we come and hear
the doctrine of Christ and his merits, and approve of the same: but where is
the party that makes this bargain? Come to particular points, and it will
appear that few bargain for Christ. For who feels his own misery as he
ought? Who perceiues himself to stand in such need of Christ as he does?
worldly wants we feel and are affected with them, but in regard of spiritual
wants, we are senseless; and yet til we truly feel our misery, we never
come to make this bargain with Christ. Again, come to our desire and hungring
after Christ; In bodily thirst and hunger, we can say; I hunger, or I thirst:
but who can say, I hunger and thirst after Christ and his righteousness? Alas,
our hearts are full, we feel no want: nay they are dead, we fear none evil;
and as for our valuing and esteeming of Christ, we are plain Gaderens and
Esawes, we prefer the world and the basest things therein before Christ. And
for the exchange; we are loath to part with our sins, and to put on Christ's
righteousness. Which plainly shows we make no exchange, and though we be
willing to lay heaps of sins on Christ, yet who takes Christ's righteousness
and declares the same by the fruits thereof. And lastly, for the earnest of
the spirit, though some there be that have received it, yet the body of our
people as their consciences can tell them, have not received it: for they want
knowledge, faith, and other graces.

By all these, it is more than manifest, that this bargain is not made: And
yet true it is, that for worldly and base barganes he must rise early that will
go beyond them. But what a shame is this, that we should be so expert in vile
earthly things, and have no regard of this excellent and heavenly bargain?
Wherefore seeing Christ calls us hereunto, let us make this one bargain with
him, and that presently; which we shall testify by doing the five former
duties; let us never be at rest, till we may say each one for himself, I have
bargained with Christ, and received his earnest. Yea, our care should be that
this bargain be made not with us alone, but with our children. Many are
forward to bring up their children in good trades, wherein they may buy and
sell for their living, wherein they do well; but withal, they ought to be as
careful to teach them to make this bargain with Christ, and then they do
far better. For this is the cheapest and the chiefest merchandise that ever
was set to sale, which we may buy without money; and yet it will make us rich
for ever. Many labor in tafficke and take great pains, and yet often loose
thereby: but make this bargain once, and then thou shall never loose it, nor
any thing thereby; but continue for ever rich in God.

Verse. 19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore, and
amend. Because our Savior Christ had so sharply rebuked this Church, they
might thereby take occasion to distrust, and despair of his favor and mercy:
here therefore it pleases him, to take away all occasion of doubting, after
this sort. If I use to rebuke and chasten all those whom I love, then you are
not to despair of my mercy, by reason of my sharp reproof, whereby I have
threatened to spew you out of my mouth, for your sin of luke-warmnesse. But
thus I use to deal, with all those whom I love; and therefore in this regard
you need not to doubt of my love and favor.

The meaning. As many as I love, Christ loves the creatures two ways: as he
is Creator, and as he is Redeemer. As he is the Creator, he loves all his
creatures, with a common and general love, whether they be living or dead;
reasonable or unreasonable. As he is Redeemer, he loves his creatures with a
special and a peculiar love; which is not common to all, but proper to that
part of mankind, which is chosen to salvation before the world was. And of
this peculiar love he speaks here. I rebuke, The word in the original which
is translated, Rebuke, (...).
is more significant than can fitly be expressed in any one English word;
thus much is meant thereby, as if Christ had said; First, I will convince them
of their sins, and after reprove, admonish, and check them for the same. And
chasten: This must be understood of a kind of correction, which a father
uses on his child, called nurturing: which is correction to break the child
of his fault and bad manners, and to teach him his duty. This then is the
meaning: All those whom I bear special favor unto, do I convince of their
particular faults, and then check and reprove them and nurture them, as a
father does his Child: to make them leave their particular vices, and to walk
in obedience. And to assure us that this is the true meaning, read Pro. 3.12,
whence the words are taken; and Heb. 12.5, where they are more fully explained.

Here then Christ sets down his ordinary dealing with them, whom he takes
and chooses to be his disciples and members; namely, he conuinceth them of
their faults: he reproves and chasteneth them for this very end, to break
them of their sins, and to bring them to reformation. And this dealing of
Christ, belongs to every servant and member of Christ without exception: yea,
Christ lays rebukes and chastisments on all his children and that in diverse
measure, according to the nature of their sins, and the disposition of the
parties. Such as are hardly broken of their sins, he lays on them more
heavy judgments and chastisments that they may be brought (...)
humiliation, and so (...) true (...). And therefore every one that would be a
Discipl^ and member of Christ, must look to go under his correction and his
sharp and severe, rebuke; according as they are in heart disposed unto sins
either more or less; He must pass under the rod, that would come into the
bond of the Covenant. Ezech. 20.37.

The use of this doctrine is twofold, set down Prove. 3.12. The first thus, My
(...) despise no^ the correction of the Lord, for the Lord corrects whom he
loves; his chastycements are tokens of his love. That is, whenever the Lord
either in the ministry of his word reproves thy sins, or by any affliction
chasteneth thee, despise it not, neither set light by it; but make good use
thereof unto thine own soul. The second use is; Faint not when thou art
corrected: that is, let not the greatness of it daunt thee, but arm thy self
with patience, because he uses to correct all those whom he loves, making
his chastisments tokens of his love.

Secondly; Christ here sets before all governors, an example to follow,
especially to fathers and masters* his example is this; On every child that he
loves, he lays corrections, for this and to break them of their sins:
(...) answerably, Governors must show tokens of love toward those that are
under them, by due reproof and correction; that ^o they may be broken of their
misdemeanor, and brought unto obedience to God. It were to be wished, that
both Parents and Masters would follow Christ in this example, and so seek the
reformation of those that are under them; but more lamentable is the (...)
Parents and Masters do think it sufficient for them, if they provide for
their children and seruante^ food, and raiment, and necessaries for the body;
and so altogether neglect the good of their souls, which is the cause of many
sins, and so of many judgments; both which ought to move them to put in
practice this duty.

Thirdly, the very order of Christ's word, does minister unto us a necessary
instruction; ^^^ching his manner of correcting his servants. For first, he
propounds a direct end of all his corrections upon them; to wit, their
nurturing and reformation; then, that he may attain thereto* he proceeds
thus: First, he does convince their conscience of their sins* then by
reproves he rebukes and checks them, and lastly corrects them, by laying
chastisments on them. A most excellent and blessed order, in using correction
for the good of the party chastised, which ought to be followed of all
Governors, parents and masters especially. First they must propound a good end
of their correction, even the amendment and salvation of the party: and that
they may then proceed (...), they must first convince their conscience of the
(...)* then reprove, check, and admonish them: and if that take not place,
they must proceed unto meet and convenient bodily correction all which must
be done not for revenge; but to bring the^ to amendment, and to make them
obedient to the will of God. Whereby we see how far many Parents and
Governors over shoot themselves; when as they make their corrections matters
of revenge and choler; wherein they s^eldome intend the reformation of the
offender* which is a fault flat against the word of God; and therefore to be
considered of every good christian.

Be zealous therefore and repent. In the former Verse he propounded a remedy
against their* Spiritual pride* In (...) words he does directly propound a
remedy against their Luke-warmnesse. But first observe the coherence of these
words with the former. Christ has said; Whom I love I rebuke and correct,
according as their fault is: therefore says he to this Church; because I have
rebuked and corrected thee by severe threatenings, for thy Luke-warmnesse,
therefore now become zealous and amend.

Here see the proper and of all reprofes and corrections: namely, the
reformation and amendment of men's faults and misdemeanors whatsoever, that so
they may be more careful of their ways* and more zealous in good duties then
ever they were. Whenever therefore we are reproved by the word of God; or
when the Lord shall visit us in body, mind, or goods by any kind of cross,
we must remember to take occasion thereby to repent and amend, knowing that by
all these as by so many Sermons, the Lord calls us to amendment.

Now come to the remedy of their Luke-warmnesse; Be zealous. That we may
understand this Commandment, we are to handle some points touching Zeal.
First, what is zeal? Zeal is a burning affection in regard of Christian
Religion, and the true worship of God. This Zeal is compounded of two
affections; of love, and anger or indignation; so that in this Commandment are
two duties enjoined unto this Church. First, that they should love Christ, and
his Religion above all things. Secondly, that they should be greiued especially
for this, that Christ was dishonored, his worship profaned, and his doctrine
not embraced; but instead thereof false worship, and false doctrine
entertained; when both these concur, then zeal is in the heart. A most
notable Example hereof we have in Christ: Psalm. 69.9, where the Prophet David
in his person says, The zeal of Gods house had eaten him up. Whereby thus
much is signified; that the heat of his love for the maintaining of his Fathers
glory, had even consumed him; and that his indignation was so great, because
his Fathers Name was dishonored, and his worship profaned; that it did even
care him up. This we shall see to be true in Christ, if we read the History
of his life, John 2.17. Yea he professes of himself, that it was meat and
drink unto him to do his Fathers will, Ioh. 4.34. That thing he preferred
before his own life or safety: nay, for the accomplishment thereof, he was
content to suffer the pangs of hell. The like zeal was in Elias, when all
Israel was fallen to Idolatry; his heart was zealous for the Lord of Hosts. 1.
King. 19.14.

II. point; The kinds of zeal. Zeal. is either good or bad: In good zeal are
these things required. I. True faith, as the root thereof; 1. Tim. 1. verse. 5.
The end of the commandment is love (...) of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned; Now, one apart of zeal is love; and
therefore (...) proceed^ from true faith, so must true zeal (...) and that
which is not grounded on faith* is rather rashness and fierceness of nature,
than true zeal. II. Repentance; 2. Cor. 7.11, There are seven (...) of
repentance recyted, whereof zeal is one, that is good zeal: Even a burning
love of true Religion, and a godly indignation when false religion is embraced.
There may be zeal in a man that has no repentance; as was in Iehu, 2. King.
10.16. Come with me, (says he) and see the zeal that I have for the Lord.
Yet he wanted repentance, for Verse. 29.31, It is said, Iehu regarded not to
walk in the Law of the Lord God of Israel with all his heart: for he departed
not from the sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel to sin: and therefore he
had not in him the true zeal that is here commanded. III. Zeal must come
from knowledge: for without knowledge it is but rashness and bold-hardinesse,
such as the Jews had, Romans 10.2. whose Zeal was without knowledge. And such
as Paul had before his conversion, Phil. 3. verse. 6. In Zeal he persecuted
Gods Church: Knowledge therefore in Gods word, must be the guide and conductor
of our zeal.

III. point; The fruits of zeal must be considered for the better discerning
of true zeal. First, true zeal constrains a man in every thing to seek to
please God: 2. Cor. 5.13.14.
Whether we be out of (...) wits, we are it unto God: or whether we be in our
right mind, we are it unto you. For the love of Christ constrayneth us. So
wheresoever this true zeal is in any measure, it offers violence to the
heart; so as a man cannot but endeavor to do his duty, for the love he
bears unto Christ. Elihu said; The grace of God was in his heart as new wine
in a vessel, which must needs vent out, Job. 32.18.19. Secondly, true zeal
makes a man endeavor to serve and please God with all his heart, power, and
strength. So good king Josiah, hearing the words of the Law read, he turned
not slackely or negligently, but 2. kings. 23.25.
with all his heart, and all his soul, and with all his might, according to
all the Law of Moses: so as like him was no King before, neither after him
arose there any like him. Psalm. 51, David humbling himself for his sins,
prays for the pardon of them with such marvelous zeal, as no tongue can
utter: desiring God to remember him according to the multitude of his mercies:
often repeating the same thing in diverse terms, that in some sort he might
express the earnest desire of his heart: And in giving God thanks for his
benefits, he puts all the strength of his heart thereto, crying out; My
soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me. Psa. 103.1. And thus we
see what a thing it is to be zealous; whence true zeal arises, and what it
works in man's heart.

The use.
Seeing we (as has been showed) are tainted with this sin of Lukewarmnesse,
and coldness in religion; let us here learn how to redress this vice. We
must become zealous, having in our heart a fervent love of true religion, and a
vehement indignation when the same is disgraced, and false worship takes place.
Let Religion therefore take place in our hearts; and let us be fervent and
show that same in our lives by zealous obedience. Away with all slacknesse and
lukewarmnesse; it were better to be Jews and Turks, and to hold no Religion,
then to be lukewarm in the true profession. And thus much for zeal.

The second part of this remedy is; to Repent, or amend. This they are also
enjoined, because zeal without repentance, is nothing but rashness. Iehues
zeal was no true zeal, because he wanted repentance, even then when he was
zealous. But wherefore was this Church enjoined to repent? Namely, for
Lukewarmnes; not for that she had committed any horrible sin, but because she
was slack in good duties.

Here then we have a good Lesson for the ignorant sort, that challenge Gods
mercy unto themselves, because they are no notorious malefactors; as
murderers, and adulterers, they hate no man, but do good unto all: but here
they are taught to reform this their blindness and ignorance; For repentance
must be for want of good duties, yea for slacknesse therein: therefore let no
man sooth himself in his ignorance, with a false persuasion that all is well if
he live not in gross sins. This is the enchantment of the devil, whereby he
rocks many asleep in their sins, till he carry their souls to hell: A good
meaning will not serve the turn; God requires true zeal in well-doing.

Verse. 20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If any man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come in unto him, and will suppe with him, and he
with me. Here Christ, to keep his Church from despair, ministers unto them
the signs and tokens of his love and favor: and before the same sets down
this note of attention, Behold, hereby intending to make them more attentively
to mark the tokens of his love, that plainly seeing the same, they might not
doubt thereof.

Hereby in general we are taught; that if we would arm our selves against
desperation and distrust in any distress, we must both often and seriously
consider and mark the tokens of Gods love unto us, and that will fortify our
faith: Read Psalm. 23, In every Verse save the last, he sets down tokens of
Gods love and favor toward him; and then in the last concludes thus; Without
doubt, kindesse and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I
shall remain a long season in the house of the Lord. Our hearts are naturally
filled with doubting, which will bewray it self in any distress. But to
prevent and cut off all hurt that may come thereby, let us mark the good
dealing of our God toward us; and observe the tokens of his love and mercy in
his ordinary providence: and these will notably strengthen us against
distrust. And surely no person is so full of despair, but if he could look
back into the mercies of God, from the beginning of his days, and lay them to
his heart, they would minister comfort unto him in regard of his love and
favor at that instant.

More particularly, Christ ministering comfort unto this Church, does express
his meaning by a borrowed speech, comparing every man unto an house; his heart
unto a door, whereby entrance is made, and himself unto a guest or stranger
desiring to come and enter in, not so much to find courtesy, as to show favor
and kindness.

In the words of this verse, there be two signs of his love set down. First,
a hearty desire of their conversion, which he earnestly seeks: Secondly, a
promise of mutual fellowship after their conversion. The first, in these
words; Behold, I stand at the door and knock: In this desire, Christ
expresses two things; First, that this Church (if we regard the greatest part
thereof) had no true fellowship with Christ, nor Christ with them; for he
stands at the door of their hearts, which were closed up against him. This may
seem strange, but the case is evident: for though they had in them many good
things; as knowledge of Gods will, and did profess the Gospel, and were
partakers of the signs and seals of the Covenant of grace; yet they were
tainted with this notorious sin of Luke-warmnesse, which closed up the door
of their heart against Christ and barred him out.

Here then we are carefully to observe, that a man may have in him many good
things; and yet by living in one sin, we be quite cut off from all true
fellowship with Christ. Judas had many excellent gifts: he forsook all and
followed Christ, he preached the Gospel, and administered the Sacraments; and yet
by covetousness the door of his heart was quite barred against Christ. So
Herod reverenced John, and heard him gladly, and did many things at his
instruction; Mark. 6.20. yet by the sin of Incest, his heart was so closed,
that he had no fellowship with Christ. And so it is with us; It is good that
we know the will of God and approve the same, and profess the Gospel, and
also receive the Seals of the Covenant: But yet for all these, our case may be
such, as we shall have no true fellowshippe with Christ. For if we nourish,
though but one sin, and live therein; that will make a separation between
Christ and us, be the sin what it will; as covetousness, adultery,
profaneness, or such like. Hereby then, all that desire to have true
fellowshippe with Christ, are to be warned to purge their lives from all sin,
so as their hearts be not taynted with nourishing any one sin: for even one
sin w^^^^soeuer it be, is a strong bar (...) will keep Christ from
coming into us.

Secondly, whereas he says: (...)
I have stood at the door: (for so the words are) Here he speaks to this
Church, as he used to speak by his old Prophets. As by Jeremy, Ier. 7.25.
and 13.
I have sent unto you all my Prophets, rising early every day and sending them.
And by Esaias; Isay. 65.2.
I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walked
in a way that was not good; even, after their own imaginations. So here, I
have stood at the door; That is, long, even till night; as the word supping
imports.

Hereby Christ would signify his great patience, in waiting for the conversion
of this people of Loadicea. In justice he might long agone have cast them to
the pit of destruction for their sins, and yet in mercy he waits for their
conversion; and complains that he has waited long. Here then we have just
occasion to take a view of Gods patience in waiting for the conversion of a
sinner. And that which he says to this Church; he may as justly say unto us,
for he has stood very long at our doors, even 36. years and upward, and yet
still continues knocking, so as he may justly complain of his long waiting.
Let us then here learn to know the day of our visitation, which is then to any
people when Christ stands at their doors and knockes; and unto us this day is
present: We have the ministry of the Gospel; and therefore we must be
persuaded, that this is the time of our visitation, and hereupon learn the
duty which Christ teaches the Jews: namely, Acknowledge the day of our
visitation; which if we do not, we must look for like vengeance which fell
upon the Jews, because they regarded not when God sent his own Son from his
bosom to knock at the door of their hearts.

And knock. Here is a further signification of his desire of their
conversion. Wherein we may behold his great and unspeakable mercy toward this
Church, and in them toward all other his Children. This Church had bard out
Christ by their sins: and yet he pursues them, he knockes; he uses means
to enter for (...) good; and vouchsafes them mercy, (...) then when they refuse
it. Thus when Adam had sinned and fled, and hid himself, did the Lord seek him
in the garden, and make with him the covenant of grace. And therefore it is
truly said in Isay. 65.1.
Isay, The Lord is found of them that never sought him. Luke 15.4.5, Christ
fetches the lost sheep that was gone astray. All which show and set out unto
us the unspeakable greatness of Gods mercy in Christ unto miserable man, who
then shows mercy unto him when he never seeks it. This his mercy is
verified in all Churches, and unto us; Which must be an occasion to enlarge
and stir up our hearts to bless the name of Christ for this unspeakable
mercy, in vouchsafing us favor, when we never sought it, but refused it.

Quest. How does Christ knock?

Answ. The words going before, whereto these have reference, give light unto
this Question. Before Christ had threatened this Church, even to spew her out of
his mouth for her luke-warmenesse; and after he counsels her to buy of him
gold, and other remedies. Now, upon this grievous threatenings, the Church might
despair of his mercy: But Christ to comfort her, tells her here, that these
reproves and rebukes, were but knockings at the doors of their hearts to make
them open: For then Christ knocks at the hearts of any people, when he
vouchsafed them means to see their sins, and threatens them for the same; and
withal gives them coun- whereby they may escape the fearful punishments
thereby deserved.

Here then note the state of any people that have the ministry of the Gospel
vouchsafed unto them; they have Christ among them, standing at the door of
their hearts, and knocking to come in, by exhortations, admonitions,
threatenings, and by promises, which is a great and endless mercy.

First, seeing we have Christ knocking at our doors, The use.
there ought not to be in us such dullness and deadness of heart in hearing
him knock. If a man of any account come and knock at the door of our house;
oh what a stir will we make to let him in quickly! What a shame then is it,
that we should be dead-harted, when Christ Jesus the King of Heaven knockes at
the door of our hearts? Secondly, this must admonish us with all speed to turn
unto God by true repentance, for we know not how long he will continue
knocking; and if we do not hear and turn before he withdraw himself from
us, we perish eternally; For if we refuse when he knocks at the door of our
hearts, he will refuse when we knock at the door of his mercy. Prou. 1. 25.26.
Mat. 25.11.12.

Note further; this knocking is not ordinary, but it is joined with crying,
For he says, If he hear my voice; so that he both knocks and cries. It is
then the knocking of one that would enter; we therefore ought answerably, with
serious regard to receive the threatenings of the law and the promises of grace,
and so be as earnest in receiving and embracing him, as he is in knocking to
come into us.

The second token of Christ's love, is a gracious promise of fellowship with
them; in these words: If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come
in unto him, and will suppe with him, and he with me. These words have been
much abused: and therefore I will stand to set down the true use and meaning
of the same. Mark, the form of speech is such, as gives unto a man's will and
soul an action in his conversion, whereby he comes to Christ and receives
Christ.

This may seem strange, but it is for just cause used by the holy Ghost; for
in the conversion of a sinner, there be three workers; the holy Ghost; the
word, and man's will. The holy Ghost is the principal Agent inlightning the
mind with true knowledge, softning the heart, and changing the will from evil
to good. The word is the instrument of the holy Ghost; for now he works not
by revelation or special instinct; but ordinarily in and by the word, when a
man is reading, hearing or meditating, either publickely or privately: for the
word preached is the power of God to man's salvation from faith to faith.
Thirdly, man's will, though by nature it be evil and dead unto grace, yet being
renewed by the holy Ghost, in the first act of conversion moves and strives
to be turned; It is not like a piece of wax only passive, which without any
action receives impression: But as fire, so soon as it fire does borne; and
so soon as it burns it is fire: so the will though by nature it move not
yet being renewed by grace it moves, and so some as it moves, it is
renewed. And hereupon it is, that the holy Ghost ascribes action unto a sinner
that is to be converted: which argues not, that by themselves men can have a
will to be converted, but that being renewed, they may will their conversion.
And for this cause is the Gospel preached in these terms, Repent and
believe: not to show that man by nature can repent or believe; but that God in
man's conversion, does give him grace to will and desire the same.

Hence then it follows, thar this text has been diverse ways abused: First,
by the Papists, who hence would gather Free will of conversion in a sinner by
nature. True it is, a man has free will in his conversion; yet not by nature,
but by grace; neither can any more be gathered hence, for here it is only
said, If any man hear and open when I knock. Nay, hence we may rather
gather, that a man by nature cannot hear, nor open, because the counsel is
given to such as are poor, and blind, and naked by nature.

Secondly* they also abuse this text, that hereby would prove a flexible free
will by grace to be in man: which is this. Sundry men think, that after the
fall of Adam, all being wrapped up in sin, God gave a general grace, whereby
any man might will, and receive that which is good: and this grace, though it
dispose the will in some part to that which is good, yet it takes not the
corruption away, but that remains still; whereupon if he will, he may receive
Christ by that general grace, or if he will not, he may refuse Christ by his
natural corruption which yet remains in him. It is said, this may be
gathered from this text: But the truth is, here is no foundation for flexible
free will: all that can here be gathered is, that man has free will in his
conversion, yet not by a general, but by Gods special grace. Nay, Christ's
ministry serue^ for this end, that those which before could not turn of
themselves, might by grace be converted. This flexible grace is against Gods
word: Christ says; Ioh. 6.45.
Every one that has heard, and has learned of the Father comes unto me; He
says not, may come if he will, but peremptorily comes: For man's will cannot
dispose and over-(...) the work of God; but the work (...) God ouer-rules the
will of man: though man be unwilling, yet when God calls effectually he
cannot but come; For the creature cannot reject or resist the will and calling
of his creator.

If any man open unto me, I will come, etc. The proper intent of Christ in this
conditional promise, is to provoke them that be dull and heavy, to listen
diligently to Christ words, and to receive the doctrine of salvation from him
gladly.

In the example of this Church we are taught our duty. Seeing Christ in the
ministry of his word knockes, both by threatenings, by promises, and good
counsel: therefore we must all of us listen unto the words of Christ, and open
the doors of our hearts and receive him into the same. But alas the practice of
the world is far otherwise: men are churlish Nabals unto Christ, who though he
come friendly, yet they repel him; making no account of such against. Nay, we
are Bethlemites, which have no room for Christ in the Innes of our hearts, if
Christ will needs lodge with us, he must lie among the beasts in the filthy
stable; Nay, many send him out of their gates with the Jews, and crucify him
with their sins. But let us abandon this grievous sin, for it is the right
way to plunge our souls into the pit of destruction.

Quest. How must a man open his heart to receive Christ? Answ. By doing two
things. First, he must labor to see his own vileness; that he is unworthy
to receive so blessed a Guest, then he must humble himself, and acknowledge
this his unworthiness. Even as the ruler did when he said unto Christ; Lord, I
am not worthy that thou should come under my roof, Mat. 8.8. This
humiliation is the beginning of grace. This done, he must by true faith lay
hold on Christ; that is, believe that Christ's death and passion is for the
pardon of his sins, and for the salvation of his soul: For as Christ dwells
in men's hearts by faith, so by faith he must be received into their hearts. Here
some will say, if this be to receive Christ, then all is well. But take heed
thou deceive not thy self with a vain imagination of thine own brain in
stead of faith. Look therefore that thy faith be true and sound: If it be true
faith, it will work by love, even a true love of Christ and his members, which
will appear by keeping his Commandments. Ioh. 14.23.

I will come in unto him, and suppe with him, and he with me. Here is the thing
promised; to wit, mutual communion and fellowship with Christ. This is the
principal token of Christ's love, being indeed the very ground of all true
happiness, joy, and comfort: and therefore it is added to move them to open
unto Christ. This society, is here propounded in two parts. First, the sinner
being converted, makes a feast unto Christ; I will come in unto him, and suppe
with him. Secondly Christ makes a feast unto him; And he shall sup with me.
And in these two consists the sum of Salomons song of songs; where Christ
entertaineth the Church, and the Church again feasts Christ.

For the first; some may ask, how can a poor sinner make a feast for Christ?
Answ. Cantic. 4.16. The Church or every Christians soul, calls Christ unto
a feast in his Garden to eat his pleasant things. This Feast consists of
these things. First, of the fruits of true repentance. Psalm. 51, 17, A broken
and contrite heart, is a dainty di^^* acceptable unto God. Secondly, of an
heart believing the word and promises to God; for without faith it is impossible
to please God, Heb. 11.6. Thirdly, the penitent sinner must Romans ^^.1.
give up himself in soul and body, a holy and acceptable sacrifice unto God,
by serving God faithfully, not only in the duties of piety, but also in the
faithful perfourmance of the duties of his particular calling: these be the
delightful dishes wherewith Christ is fed.

The second feast is made by Christ, and he shall sup with me. Christ comes
not to be entertained only, but to entertain; And the feast which he makes
is his own body and blood: Ioh. 6.55.
For his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed. The vessels
whereon these meats are carried, are the Word and Sacraments. And all that be
his welcome guests, are true penitent sinners, which have hungring and
thirsting hearts after his body and blood. Luke 1.58. And from this feast
arise these blessings: Romans 14.17
Righteousness, peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost.

Seeing this fellowship with Christ is here promised to those that open and
receive him into their hearts: First, The Use.
hereby we are taught to renounce all earthly and carnal pleasures; and not to
addict our selves to drinking and quaffing or sumptuous fare; for here is a
better feast set before us, whereupon we must set our hearts, turning our
eyes from all worldly pleasures. We know by experience how friends entertain
each other; but we must labor to know how to entertain Christ, and to feast
him with his own graces, that he may suppe with us, and we with him; and so
have true fellowship with him.

Again, by this we may see a notable abuse of many that come to the Lords
table: for here we see is required an interchange of feasting, between
Christ and a Christian: but many there be that will come to the Lords table,
and feast with Christ, that will never feast Christ again: And yet we ougt to
be as careful to feast him, as to feast with him. It is a shame to suppe often
with Christ, and yet like ungrateful Nabals, never to have one good dish of
grace, and holy obedience to set before him, wherewith indeed we should feast
him daily. Others will seem to give him good entertainment, for that day
whereon they feast with Christ; but soon after they give him gall to eat, and
vinegar to drink, by their daily sins.

Verse. 21. To him that overcomes will I make to sit with me in my throne,
even as I overcame, and sit with my father in his throne.

Verse. 22. Let him that has an ear, hear what the spirit says unto the
Churches.

Here is the conclusion of this Epistle, and it has two parts. A Promise,
verse. 21, and a Commandment. verse. 22. In the Promise, note two things.
First, to whom it is made, To him that overcomes. Hereof we have spoken.
Secondly the thing promised; that is, fellowship with Christ in glory: I will
make to sit etc. whereby is not meant equality of glory and honor; for that
is not possible for any creature to receive. But a participation only of some
part of his glory: so much as shall suffice for his perfect happiness. And
because it might be thought no great matter; therefore it is illustrated by a
comparison, as I overcame, and sit with my father in his throne. As if he
should say; I will advance them, that overcome their spiritual enemies, into
the participation of my glory, even as my Father (when I had overcome)
advanced me into the fellowship of his glory. Now Christ as he is Mediator,
is inferior to his father, and in that regard is not advanced to equal glory
with his Father, though he sit with him: So the members of Christ, being
inferior unto him, may sit with him in his throne, though their glory be
unequal. These things for substance have been handled. Chap. 2. verse. 26.28.

The second part of this conclusion, Let him that has an ear, hear etc. has
also been handled before.

The fruit of the righteous, is as a tree of life:
And he that wins souls, is wise.
Prou. 11.30. FINIS.
The Errata.
GOod Reader, if thy Book be faulty in these places, correct them after this
direction; where the first number notes the page. The second, the Colume. The
third, the Line. Page 1. col. 1. lin. 7. Read, this time. p. 6. c. 2. l. 16.
Fifth argument. Ibid. l. 47. no doubt. pa. 17. c. 2. l. 51, no natural man. p.
19. c. 1. l. 12. Heb. 3.5.6. page 30. c. 2. l 49. The bread to be really
Christ's body. p. 45. c. 1. l. 24. they mispend. p. 46. c. 1. l. 22. read, this
verse, the eleventh, and. p. 49. c. 2. l. 15. read, of the word. p. 52. c. 1.
l. 1, set in the margent, verse. 13. Ibid. c. 2. marg. Mat. 3. Dan. 7.9. p. 54.
c. 1. l. 49. read, Dan. 7. p. 61. c. 1. l. 29, read, world is full. p. 62. c.
1. l. 34. read, of death. p. 65. c. 1. l. 31, created life is. p. 71. c. 2. l.
21, The Epistle. p. 72. c. 1. l. 13. repetition. c. 2. l. 16. approbation. p.
75. c. 2. l. 53. 2. Ioh. 10. p. 84. c. 2. l. 8.13.28. saving faith. p. 113. c.
1. l. 2, blot out with wicked and ungodly men. p. 114. c. 1. l. 24, their
constancy. p. 118. c. 2. marg. Mark. 13.32. p. 119. c. 1. l. 27. read, out of
darkness can bring light. p. 122. c. 2. l. 1. Thirdly, their. p. 176. c. 2. l.
6. feel in us, and l. 15. and that as. l. 21. propounds. p. 199. c. 2. l. 21.
our regeneration. p. 215. c. 1. l. 56. counsel.

A Table of the places of Scripture here cyted. The First number notes the
Chapter. The Second, the Verse. The Third, the Page. The letter C. the Colume.
Chap. Verse. Page. Genesis. 3 8 62. Colume 2. 15 41. c. 1. and 46. c. 1. 4 14
74. c. 2. 5 22 52. c 1. 6 3 124. c. 2. 5 168. c. 1. 11 5 168. c. 1. 15 ^2 41.
c. 2. ^6 125. c. 1. 17 1 36. c. 1. 18 17, 19 4. c. 2. 21 168. c. 1. 27 62. c.
2. 19 8 121. c. 1. 24 17. c. 2. 20 11 111. c. 1. 22 2 190. c. 1. 24 33 19. c.
1. 29 20 191. c. 1. 30 8 98, c. 1. 31 41 107, c. 1. 40 23 54, c. 1. Exodus. 3
12 64. c. 1. and 2. 14, 15 15, c. 1. and 17* c. 2. 4 22 71. c^ 1. 16 31 128. c.
2. 18 7 13. c. 2. 19 ^8. c. 2. 19 10, 11 10. c. ^. ^0 46. c. 1. 20 5 168, c. 2.
7 56, c. 2. 1^ 127, c. 2. 32 12, 13, 14 28, c. 2. 25 206. c. 2. 32 83. c. 2.
42, 43 178. c. 2. 33 12, 14, 17 172. c. 1. Leuiticus. 10 1 58. c. 2. 19 19 9.
c. 2. 23 54. c. 2. Numbers. ^ 23 13, c. 1. and ^9. c. 1. 1^ 6, 8 2. c. 1. 14 46
107, c. 1. 15 22 107, c. 1. 9 145, c. 2. 24 17 155. c. 1. ^5 10 117. c. 2.
Deutronomie. ^ 2 189, c. 2. 3 128. c. 2. 10 9 29. c. 1. 13 1* 2 2. c. 2. and 8.
c. 1.2. 3 190. c 1. 7, 8 74, c. 2. 34 0 195. c. 2. Joshua. 2 0 185, c. 1. 7 4, 5
57, c. 1. and 147. c. 1 Judges. 4 4 138^ c. 2. 13 4.5 178, c. 1. 22 62. c. 2.
1. Samuel. 3 4, 6.8, 10 46. c. 1. 13 58. c. 2. 4 21 193, c. 2. 12 18 57, c. 1.
2. Samuel. 13 5 145. c. 1. 18 18 194. c. 1. 24 15 57. c. 1. 1. Kings. 19 14
212. c. 2. 18 165, c. 1. 20 31 133. c. 2. 21 4 63. c. 1. 10 101, c. 2. 23.24
145. c. 1. 2. Kings. 2 12 28. c. 2 and 106. c. 1 5 18 120, c. 2. 6 16 105, c.
1. 9 22 139, c. 2. 10 16.29, 31 212, c. 2. 25, 31 93, c. 2. 22 4 138, c. 2. 19
144. c. 2. 23 25 153, c. 1. and 213, c. 1. 1. Chron. 25 1 138. c. 2. 28 12 178,
c^ 2* 2. Chron. 20 12 207. c. 2. 30 18 28, c. 2. 32 31 190. c. 1. 33 12 88, c.
2. 34 21 138. c. 2. ^7 95, c. 2. 32 181. c. 2. Ezra. 7 10 10 c. 2. 9 00 198, c^
1. 17 44. c 2. Job. 1 5 120, c. 1. ^ 14 207, c. 2. 20 75, c. 2. 19 25, 26 67,
c. 2. 21 7, 14 14, c. 2. 31 33 206, c. ^ 32 18, 19 213, c. 1. Psalm. 2 10, 11,
12 22, c. 2. and 55. c. 2 4 4 61, c. 2. 6 14, c. 1. 5 6 177, c. 1. 8 9 153, c.
2. 10 3 102, c. 1. 14 4 187, c. 1. 15 2 177, c 1. 16 8 100, c, 1. 18 97 31, c.
1. 30 56, c. 2. 19 12 148, c. 2^ 23 ^0 213, c. 2. 4 64, c. 2. 25 9 10, c. ^. 14
4, c. 2. and 151. c. 1. 26 2 190 c. 2. 27 8, 9 11, c. 1. and 95, c. 2. 32 00
206. c. 2. 1 207, c. 1. 34 7 105, c. 1. 40 6 11. c. 1. and 95. c. 1 42 11 167,
c. ^* 45 7 26. c. 1. and 163. c. ^ 9 51, c. 2. 50 22 115, c. 2. 51 00 213, c 1.
2 23, c 2. 14 146, c. 2. 17 217, c. 1. 52 5 51, c. 1. 69 9 212. c. 1. 72 11 ^2,
c. 1. 73 37 14, c* 2. 17 169. c. 1. 77 24, 25 128. c. 2. 89 37 18, c. 2. 91 10
190, c. 2. 11, 13 13, c. 2. 92 13, 14 55, c. 1. 94 7 72, c. 2. 96 7, 8 29, c.
2. 97 00 31. c. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8 31, c. 1. 99 5 63, c. 2. 103. ^^ 29* c. 2. and
213, ^. 1 105 15 26. c. 1. and 28, c. ^. 110 2 ^1. c. 2. and 22. c. 1. 3 22, c.
1. and 187, c. 1 111 7 56, c. 2. 113 6, 7 100. c, 1* 119 6 153, c. 1. 11 9. c.
2. 24 22, c. 1. 55 169, c. 2. 57 29, c. 1. 59 87, c. 2. 80 168, c. 2. 112 167,
c. 2. 136 205. c. 1. 139 2, 3 99, c. 2. 21 94, c. 1. 147 19, 20 5, c. 1. Prou.
1 25, 26 215, c. 2. 2 4 9, c. 1* 3 12 211. c. 1, and 210, ^ 4 ^* 28, c. 2. 24
166, c. 2. ^ 10, 11 208, c. 2^ 15 179. c. 1. 18 101. c. 1. 16 31 54, c. 2. 19
17 135. c. 2. 22 23 145. c. 1. 28 9 127. c. 2. 3^ 0 139. c. 1. 1.2.3.4 28. c.
2. Eccles. 9 8 173. c. 1. 12 5 54. c. 2. Canti^. 4 16 217. c. 1. 5 2 11. c. 2.
8 6 51. c. 2. Isay. 1 10 143 c. 1. 4 22 42. c. 2. 5 13 128, c. 1. 6 2 187 c. 2.
8 62, c. 2. 9 53, c. 1. and 89. c. 1. and 95, c. 2. and 172, c. 1. and 183, c.
2. 7 7.11 64. c. 1. 8 16 9, c. 2. 18 198, c. 2. 20 77, c. 2. 9 6 198, c. 2. and
207. c. 1. 11 2 ^3, c. 1. 4 21, c. 2. and 58, c. 2. 6 13, c. 2. 22 22 177. c.
1. 27 1 58, c. 2. 28 15 148, c. 2. 29 13 153, c. 1. 30 27 123, c. 2. 38 3 168,
c. 2. and 145, c. ^. 44 7 105, c. 2. 48 22 14, c. 2. 49 4 183, c. 2. 50 5 95,
c. 1. 53 10 198, c. 2. 55 1 209, c. 1, 2. 2 214. c. 2. and 215, c. 1. 4 17, c.
1. 56 7 187, c. 1. 5^ 11 145, c. 1. 15 10, c. 2. and 61, c 1. and 77, c. 1. 58
18 135* c. 2. 59 2 182, c. 2. 61 1 16, c. 2. 64 6 72, c. 2. 66 2 21, c. 2. 5
37, c. 1. and 105, c. 1 10 105, c. 1. 22 43, c. 2. Jeremy. 7 13, ^5 214* c. 2.
8 6 87, c. 1. and 115. c. 2 12 1^8, c. 2. 9 1 205, c. 1. 15 19 74, c. 2. and
126, c. 1 17 9, 10 14^, c. 1. 18 7, 8 92, c. 1. and 146, c. 1 19 15 91, c. 2.
20 14, 15 73, c. 2. 23 5, 6 177, c. 2. 59 15 102, c. 1. Lament. 3 44 182, c. 2.
Ezekiel. 9 4 113, c. 1. and 205. c. 1. 6 173, c 1. 18 24 84, c. 1. 20 37 211,
c. 1. 33 31 200, c. 2 Daniell. 3 27 5, c. 2. 5 6 59, c. 1. 6 10 39, c. 1. 7 9
52, c. 2. and 54. c. 1. 8 19 7, c. 1. 9 10, 11 198, c. 1. 20, 21, 22 35, c. 1.
21 7, c. 1. 10 14 7. c. 1. 12 3 51, c. 1. and 57. c. 2. and 183, c. 2. and 155,
c, 2. 4 11, c* 1. Hosea. 1 2 121, c. 1. 9 165, c. 1. 2 18 13 c. 2. 3 5 177. c.
2. 4 1 104, c, 2. 6 128, c. 1. 7 2 115, c. 2. 9 7 91, c. 2. Ioell. 1 13, 15
104, c. 2. Amos. 3 7 4, c. 2. 4 12 90, c. 2. 5 11 116. c* 2. 8 7 135, c. 1.
Obad. 21 183, c. 2. Micha. 3 2, 3 134, c, 2. 6 116, c. 2. 6 6, 7, 8. 8* c. 1.
Zephani^. 2 1 87, c. 1. and 203, c* 2 Haggie. 1 7 87, c. 2. Zakeri^. 2 8 5^, c.
2. Mala^. 1 5 104, c. 1. 2 7 28, c. 2. and 79, c. 1 3 1 2. c. 1. 4 2 61. c. 1.
Matthew. 1 16 17, c. 1. 2 2 177. c. 2 ^3 178. c. 1. 3 7 30, c. 1. and 77. c. ^.
16 52, c 2. 4 10 60, c 1. 5 6 129, c. 2. 21. ad 46 79. c. 2. 6 13 29, c. 2 and
141. c. 2 33 14. c. 2. 7 13, 14 172. c. 1. 16 77. c. 2. 8 8 216. c 2. 9 38 58,
c. 1. 10 ^0 68, c. 2. 11 10 70, c. 1. 12 183 c. 1. and 197* c. 1. 25 130, c. 1.
12 31 144 c. 1. 50 7, c. 1. 13 8 38, c. 1. 9, 11 95. c. 1. 30 75. c. 1. 44 113,
c. 2. 52 79 c. 1. 16 16 168, c. 1. 18 82. c. 2. and 141. c. 2 19 179, c. 1. and
180. c. 1. and 181. c. 1. and 127. c. 1. 23 117 c. 1. 17 20 185, c. 1. 18 7 6.
c. 1. and 119. c. 2 8 119, c. 2. 18 179, c 2. and 180. c. 1. and 2. and 147. c.
2. 21 43 193. c. 1. 23 3, 4 79. c. 2. 8 2. c. 1. 15 80, c. 1. 37 186, c. 1. ^4
12 81, c. 1. and 134, c. 2. and 21^, c. 2. 15, 25 11. c. 1. 24 82. c. 2. 38, 39
87, c. 1. and 115, c. 2 39 10. c. 2. 48, 49 11, c. 2. and 192 c. 2 25 5 11. c.
2. 10, 11 3^, c. 1. 25, 30 156, c. 2. 34 175, c. 1. and 135, c* 2. 28 18 154,
c. 1. and 3. c* 1* and 21. c. 1. 19, 20 181, c. 2. Mark. 1 15 ^8. c. 1. 2 7
182, c. 1. 4 25 42. c. 2. 6 ^ 153, c 2. 20 214. c. 1. 13 32 118. c. 2. Luke. ^
32.33 177. c. 2. 53 129. c. 2. and 117. c. 1. 2 19.51 9. c. ^. 5 8 62. c. 2.
and 127. c. 2 32 202. c. 2. 6 26 40. c. 2. and 101. c. 2 and 166. c. 1. 8 15 10
c. 2. and 136. c. 2 16 73. c. 2. 18 137. c. 2. 10 2 172. c* 1. 26 128. c. 1.
39.42 80, c. 1. 11 13 77. c. 1. 27 9, c. 2. 28 7, c. 1. 52 180, c. 1. 12 7 172.
c. 1. 19.20 167, c. 1. 21 101, c. 1. 24 179, c. 1. 31 25, c. 1. 32 71, c. 2.
35.36 53, c 2 and 54, c. 1. 13 1^^ 32 77, c. 2. 15 1.^4.5 215, c. 1. 21 88, c.
1. and 198, c 1 16 13 20. c. ^. 15 148, c. 2. 24 145. c. 1. 18 9 202, c. 2. 19
27 55, c. 2. and 133, c. 2 41 105, c. 1. 20 ^.3.4.5 8, c. 1. 22 26 135, c. 1.
61.62 169, c 2. 23 34 132, c. 1. 40.41 140, c 2. 43 98, c. 1. John. 1 1 2, c.
1. and 34, c. 2. and 54, c. 1. 15 8, c 1. 18 17, c. 1. 52 183, c. 1. and 184.
c. 2. 2 17 212, c. 2 3 34 163, c. 2. 36 83, c. 1. 4 10 65, c. 2. 34 19, c. 1,
and 112. c. 1 5 10 19, c. 2. 28.29 57, c. 1. 35 49, c. 2. 39 9, c. 1. and 77.
c. 2. 6 50 98, c. 1. 51 128, c. 2, and 216. c. 2. 54.55 66, c. 2 and 217. c. 1
7 17 4, c. 2. 38 80, c. 2. 8 11 179, c. 1. 14 19, c. 1. 26, 28 18, c. 2. 44
177, c. 1. 10 3 172, c. 1. 18 5, c. 2. 27, 28 82. c. 2. and 127. c. 1 29 3. c.
1. 11 43, 44 77. c. 1. 13 17 128. c. 1. 35 135. c. 1. 14 19 65. c. 2. 23 23. c
2. and 216. c. 2 26 68. c. 2. 15 2 60. c. 1. 15 125. c. 2. 16 13 17. c 2. and
68. c. 2. 17 4 18. c. 2. 12 174 c. 2. 18 36 177. c. 2. and 179* c. 1. 19 8 133.
c. 1. 20 17 52. c. 2. 19, 26 43. c. 2. 23 179. c. 2. and 181. c. 1. 31 9. c. 1.
21 16 154. c. 2. Acts. 2 23 191. c. 2. 33, 36 3. c. 1. 37 144. c. 2. and 205.
c. 1. 39 102. c. 2. 3 17 102. c. 2. 19 30. c. 1. 4 32 13 c. 2. 5 41 105. c. 1.
7 ^ 44. c. 1. 38 7. c. 1. 51 186. c. 1. 55.56 52. c. 2. 8 20 209 c. 2. 9 7 52.
c. 2. 15 113. c. 2. 10 2.3 45. c. 2. 11 41 c. 2. 19 47. c. 2. 13 46, 51 102 c.
2. 48 141. c. 2. 14 12 38. c. 1. 22 5. c. 1. and 73. c. 2 15 28 69. c. 1. 29
121. ^. 2. 16 2, 3 147* c. 2. 14 47. c. 1. and 95. c. 1. 29 187. c. 2. 17 18
65. c. 1. 30, 31 30. c. 1. 20 7, 11 43. c. ^. 26.^7 19. c. 1. and 79. c. 1. 28
24. c. 1. and 51. c. 2. and 71. c. 1. 29, 30 77. c. 2. 24 16 15. c. 2. and 73.
c. 2 25 59. c. 1. 26 18 112. c. 1. 20 87. c. 2. Romans 1 28 186. c. 2. 2 5 144.
c. 1. 6 148. c. 2. 28 10. c. 2. 3 8 121. c. 1. 4 25 44. c. 2. 5 1 13. c. 2. 4
78. c. 2. and 136 c. 2 5 23. c. 2. and ^3. c. 1. 8 15.16 18. c. 2. 23 185. c.
1. 30 83 c. 1. and 174. c. 1 37 28. c. 1. 38 83. c. 1. 9 0 102. c. 2. 3 84. c.
1. and 19^. c. 2. 11.20 57. c. 1. 13 23. c. 1. 10 2 212, c. 2. 11 4 171, ^. 1.
20 103. c. 1. and 104. c. 1. 29 83* c. 1. and 102. c. 2* 12 1 217, c. 1. 10 37,
c* 1. 14 29. c. 1. 18 75, c. 1. 21 24. c. 2. 13 12 156, c. 2. 14 ^7 25. c. 2.
and 136. c. 2 and 217. c. 1. 15 4 38, c. 1. and 136. c. 2 16 60. c. 1. 16 16
147. c. 2. 20 28* c. ^. 1. Corinthians. 1 20 177* c. 1. 24 2. c. 1. 30 176. c. 1. 2
25 76, c. 1. 3 6 59. c. 1. 21, 22 25, c. 1. 22, 23 106. c. 1. 4 3.4. 166, c* 1.
7 189. c. 2. 8 202. c. 2. 12, 13 101. c. 2. 5 ^ 205, c. 2. 4.5 74, c. 2* and
180. c. 2 10, ^^ 75. c. ^. and 180. c. 2 6 2, 3 27, c. 1. and 154. c. 1. 9 183.
c. 2. 18 145. c. 2. 19 122. c. 1. 7 2 113. c. 1. 19 7. c. 2. 8 1 203. c. 1. 4
15, c. 1* and 120. c. 2. 9 1, 2 12* c* 1. and 52. c. 2. 10 0 17. c. 2. 2 129.
c. 2. 3 128. c. 2. 8 145. c. 2. 25, 29 220. c. 2. 11 3 139 c. 1. 5 138. ^* 2. 6
3. c. 2. 19 5. c* 1 and 78. c. ^* 23 17^. c. 2. 29 76. c. ^. 30. 145. c. 2. 13.
3. 137. c. 1. 5. 134. c. 2 and 135 c. 1 14. 138. c. 2. 24.25. 59. c. 1. 79. c.
2. and 186. c. 2. 34.35. 138. c. 2. and 139. c. 1. 15. 9. 12. c. 1. 10. 73. c.
1. 20. 20. c. 2. 24. 3. c. 2. 54. 154 c. 2. 16. 1. 43. c. 1. 19. 80, c. 1. and
147. c. 2 22. 181. c. 1. 2. Corinthians. 1. 22. 209. c. 2. 4. 6. 209* c. 2. 17. 38.
c. 1. and 107 c. 2 5. 13.14. 21^. c. 2. 15. 52. c, 2 16.17. 7. c. 2. and 131.
c. 1. and 197. c. 1. 18. 127. c. 1. 19. 12^. c. 1. 20. 89.2. and 123. c. 1. 21.
209 c 2. 6. 16. 123. c. 1. 7. 11. 87. c. 2* and 212. c. 2 8. 9. 101. c. 1. 12.
73. c. 1. 11. 5. 12. c. 1. 12. 24. 98* c. 1. 9.10. 105. c. 1. 13. 5. 76. c. 1.
Galath. 1 8 178. c. 2. and 151. c. 2. 2 21 65. c. 2. 3 1 77. c. 2* and 195. c*
1 19 7. c. 1. 24 198. c. 1. 27 208. c. 2. 5 6 136. c. 2. 13 135. c. 1. 14 105.
c. 1. 22 134. c. 1. 6 15 197. c. 1. Ephesians. 1 13 209. c. 2. 2 1 186. c. 1. 6
154. c. 1. 10 198* c. 1. 17.18 23* c. 2. 19 195. c. 1. 4 5 84. c. 2. 11.12 58.
c. 1. and 152. c* 1 21.22 95. c. ^. 23, 24 197. c. 1. 1 3 172. c. 2. 8 50. c.
1. 30 199 c. 1. 6 17 60. c. 1. 18 28. c. 2. Philip. 1 4.9.10 79. c. 2. 6 85. c.
1. 2 9, 10 3. c. 1. and 21. c. 1. and 195. c. 1. 12 98. c. 1. and 104. c. 1. 13
168. c. 1. 15.16 49. c. 2. and 50. c. 1. and 80. c. 1. 3 1 109. c. 1. 6 212. c.
2. 8 209* c. 2. and 198. c. 2. 9 84. c. 1. and 198. c. 2. 10.15 198. c. 2.
13.14 81. c 2. 4 5 11. c. 2. 7 13. c. 2. Coloss. 1 9.10.11 97. c. 2. 12 155. c.
2. 13 112. c. 1. 16 34. c. 2. and 35. c. 1. and 198. c. 2. 18 20. c 2. 2 3 53.
c. 1. 7 169. c. 2. 10 206. c. 1. 3 12 208, c. 2. 16 28, c. 2. 24 137. c. 1. 1.
Thessal. 2 13 126. c. 2* 18 7^. c. 1. 4 9.10 81, c. 2. 5 3 167. c. 1. 22 172,
c. 2. 2. Thessal. 2 3 71. c. 1. 4 165. c. 1. 7 117. c 2. 8 58. c. 2. 9 8 c. 2.
10.11 78 c. 2. and 92. c. 1. and 152. c. 2. 3 3 85, c. 1. 1. Tim. 1 15 12. c.
1. and 106. c. 1. and 188. c. 1. 17 29. c. 2. 19 84, c. 2. 20 116. c. 1. 2 1
28, c. 2. 8 39. c* 1. 3 9 114. c. 1. 12 138 c. 2. 15 12. c. 2, and 152. c 1. 4
8 100. c. 2. 16 183, c. 2. 5 12 135, c. 2. 17 73, c. 1. 6 3.4.5 116, c. 1, and
117, c. 2. 12 196, c. 1. 16 101. c 1. 17.18 101. c. 1. 2^ 10^. c. 1. 2. Tim. 1
5 139. c. 1. 6 86. c. 1. and 167* c 2. 13 152. c. 1. 2 9 172. c. 1. 19 102. c.
2. 26 186. c. 2. 3 2 81. c. 1. and 134. c. 2. 7 137. c. 2. 1^ 5. c. 1. and 73.
c 2. 14 152. c. 1. 4 8 33. c. 2. Titus. 1 1 117. c. 2. 9 79. c* 2. 3 2.3.4 75.
c. 2. Hebr. 2 7 195. c. 1. 10 27. c 2. 3 5.6 19. c. 1. 12.13 92. c. 1. 4 2 10.
c. ^. 12 58. c. 2, and 110. c. 2. 5 11.12 10 c. 1, and 137. c. 2. 14 76. c. 2.
6 10 135. c. 1. 8 5 178, c. 2. 9 7 169, c. 2. 9 194, c. 2. 10 36 136, c. 2. 37
6, c. 2. 11 3 57. c 1. 22 145, c. 2. 24, 25, 26 195, c. ^. and 174, c. 1. 31
185, c. 1. 12 2 195, c. 2. 8 38, c 1. 17 114. c. c. 1. James. 1 2 38. c. 1. and
107, c. 1. 5 77. c. 1. 21 10. c. 1. 27 135. c. 2. 2 23 125 c. 1. 4 6 10. c. 2.
8 45 c. 2. 5 7 38. c. 1. 1. Peter. 1 7 208. c. 1. 3 1 113. c. 1. 15 80. c. 1.
19.20 90, c. 2. and 125. c. 1. 21 108, c. 1. 4 23 27. c. 2. and 140. c. 2. 2.
Peter. 1 12 109. c. 1. 19 155. c. 2. 20 143. c. 1. 2 3 6. c. 1. 7 75. c. 2. 8
205. c. 2. 18 151. c. 1. 21 202. c 1. 3 8 6. c. 1. and 191. c. 1. 1. Ioh. 1 3
9. c. 1. 6 62. c. 2. 10 83. c. 1. 2 13 54. c. 2. 19 174. c. 2. 27 26. c. 1. 3 1
23. c. 1. and 131. c. 1. 2 232. c. 1. 3 176. c. 2. 9 83 c. 1. 14 135. c. 1. 16
134. c. 1 4 1 76. c. 1. and 77. c. 1. 6 127. c. 1. 21 134. c. 1. 5 4 97 c. 1.
10 198. c. 2. 11 66. c. 2. 18 27. c. 1. 2. Ioh. 0 10 75 c. 2. and 116. c. 1.
Jude. 3 78. c. 1. 16 151. c. ^. 20.22. 80. c. 1. Revelation. 3 7 21. c. 2. 4 5
16. c. 2. 6 10 34. c. 1* 7 9 118. c. 2. ^0 9.19. 79, c. 1. 19 9 129. c. 2. 20
12 148. c. 2. 21 3 194. c. 2. 6 129. c. 2. 8 20. c. 1. and 105. c. 1. 109. c.
2. 10 194. c. 2. 22 15 177. c. 1. 16 155. c. 1. 20 34. c. 1

A Table of the special points to be observed in this Exposition: The first
number notes the Page: The second the Colume: B^ Notes the beginning of the
Colume; M: the middle: and E* the end.
A
ABsolution belonging to the Church. 181.1 m. Adam and Christ opposed. 97.2. m.
Adultery spiritual and bodily, (...) punishments each of other^ 94.1, m. and
120.1, c. Affections of the soul, work strongly upon the body: 63, ^ c. We
ought to be like aff^cted to Christ. 94.2 b. Afflictio^^: the ordinary state
of believers. 38.1. b they are profitable: 203 ^. c. they discover (...) state
of men's hearts: 192.1. m Christ tempers them according to the disposition of
offenders* 211.1. How grievous afflictions seem short. ^^^^.1. c. Grounds of
true comfort in affect (...) 48.2. m. 99.1. (...). m. ^07. 2. m. 11^. (...).
15^.2. c. 1^5.^. m. Aged men honored: 54.2. b. There duty thereupon, ibid.
Amen: a title given to Christ. 197.^* m Angels: the good angels are (...) for
Gods Church. ^.1. b. Application of the word needful 96.^. c. The right manner
of it (...). The true ^round thereof. ibid. ^. Approve* We must seek to
approve ourselves to Gods Church. 147.^. m. but chiefly to Christ. 166.1. b.
Ass^^erations when to be used. 33.2. b. Assurance of salvation by faith. ^8.2.
b Attyre^ A rule for it. 53.2 b.
B
How to beaut^fie soul and body 208.^. m Believers be (...) 25.21 b. when
ibid. 2. (...). Their duty in regard (...). and 27.^ Consolations thence.
^8.1. m. Blessing (...), how to be sought* 14.1. c. Blind spiritually, who*
206.1. m. Book of life: 17.4.1. m. How a man may be bl^^ed out of it. ibid. c.
Buy: To buy of Christ: how, and what, 209.1. m. Few bargain^ with him. ^10.1.
b.
C
Callings: A man should have a good calli^g for every action. 6.^. m. In our
particular Callings we should (...) Christ. 7.2. m. Best (...) have their
(...). ^4.1. b. (...) Law of (...) unclean. 171.2. m. Childre^^ how punished
(...) fathers offenses. (...) m. Christ is (...) Godpunc; (...) 1. m. God of
himself. (...): 34.2. m. All seeing. 99 (...). ^33.^. m. (...). with the
Father: 35.^. (...) 35.2. m. His power for his Church: ^6.1. b. and 133.2. b.
and 153.^. c. Over his church threefold. 178.^. c. Christ true man. 99.^. m.
Go^ ^e a^an. 99.^.^. 14^.^. m. Christ^ officies (...) office 2.2. m. and 21.1.
m. His kingdom: ^^.1. c. and 2.6. Christ's prophetical office, in two duties.
17.1. m. and ^.^.1.^. Christ^ priesthood, and the action^ thereof. 20.1. (...)
our high priest 5^.1. m. He has (...) holy Ghost. 1^3.^ c. His (...) of his
church: 2.^. c. and 64.^. b. Christ the Son of the ^ather, and how? 132.2. m.
(...) of his Father. 3.^. m. His holiness as man. 175. (...). 176.1. His (...)
presence not ^o be regarded. 52.2. m. He is spiritual food. 128.2. ^. Hidden
food. 130.1. b. (...) Catholic, only one. 12.1. ^. Church Tryumphant. 19^.2.
m. Church (...) the cross. 37.1. c Church has power to appoint (...). 13^ 1.
m. Several congregation^ be particular Churche^. (...) b. ^^1.^. b. They be
Candlestickes. 49.2. Of gold. ^1.1. m. The (...) truth. ^.^. b. 1^.2. m. It
has the spirit of discerning 76.2. c. It should be purged of evil me^. 74.2. b
It should be severe against the^. 138.1. c. and 139.1. c. When a Church becomes
no church: 102.2. c. Whence Gods Church is gathered: 112.1. c.: where our church
was before Luther: 113.2. b. Material Churches no more holy than other houses.
39.1. c. 196.1. c. Commandments: their use in the church 89.1. Comedies
unlawful: ^50.2. c. Communion of Saints: 38.2. m. Communicants ungrateful:
217.2. c. Confession of Christ. 175.1. c. Conscience evil: 33.1. m. Good
conscience a sure treasury: 114.1. b. Consideration of a man's sins: 115.2.
Constancy for the truth: 113.2. c. Signs of it 114.1. m. Controversies in
Religion: how to know truth therein. 18.1. c. Conuersing with evil men: 75.1.
c. and 2. Converting of souls a great privilege: 183.2. c. Of the conversion
of a sinner. 186.1. b. 215.2. c. Fruits of true conversion. 187.1.188.1.
Corrections should be for reformation: 211.1. and 212. Corruption of nature:
helps against it: 60.1. b. Corruptions in a Church, do not presently make it
no church: 165.2. c. Chief Counselor, Christ. 207.1. c.
D
Damnation: how escaped: 110.1. b. David's fall. 85.1. b. Dead: Christ's
priueledges among the dead: 20.2. b. and 21.1. b. Death twofold: 109.2. b.
Spiritual death has 3. degrees. 58.2. c. Comforts against death: 20.2. c. and
56.1. c. Decay in love and grace: 86.1.89.2. c. 90.2. c. 92.1. m. Degrees in
glory. 149.1. c. Despair: helps against it. 213.2. c. Diligence in a
Minister. 73.1. m. Disgra^ing of others. 93.2. m. Distrust in Gods providence:
104.1. c. Doctor of the Church is Christ. 125.2. b. 149.2. m. How to judge of
Doctrine: 117.2. m. The doctrine of Christ must only be received: 60.2. c
E
Election twofold: 102.2. b. How a man may fall from Election. ibid. The
number of the Elect certain: 174.2. m. Election known by sanctification: 175.1.
b. England a true Church: 103.1. b. Enemies of the Church: God restraines their
rage, and turns it good. 39.2. m. Estate: each one should consider and know his
own estate: 87.1. m. 96.1. c. 206.1. c Examination of false teachers 77.1. and
2. They that ^^^ell in temporal gifts, should be answerable in spiritual:
7^.2. b. Excommunica^ion: 75.1. b. and 180.2. b. To expound scripture: Christ's
royalty. 4.1. b. A duty of the Church from Christ^ 69.2 m.
F
Fall away: whether a true believer may quite fall away? 82.83.84.85.92.2. b
141.2. m. 186.1. m. 192.2. c. and 168.1. b. Faith put for the doctri^e of the
Gospel. 114.1. c. For fidelity: 198.1. b. Faith d^stinguished: 84.2. b.
Faithful to God: 107.2. c. and 108. Families irreligious; Satan's thrones:
111.2. m. and holds: 115.1. b. Favor of God, the ground of all blessings.
14.1. b. Fear threefold. 104.1. b. Grounds of Gods fear: 21.2. m. 68.1. m.
11.1 1. b. Signs of it. 21.2. c. Remedy against fear. 64.2. m. Fellowship
with Christ: 166.2.217.1. m Fidelity to God: 135.2. c. Rare: 136.1. b Fight
against sin: 109.2. c. 193.2. c. Flight in presecution: 115.1. m. To
foretell: a property of God alone: 105.2. b. 191.2. m. Forgive sins: 67.2.
c. Fornication: 121, 122, 145.2. c. Free Will by nature, conf^ted: 143.2. m.
144.1. c. 186, 1. b. 199.2. b. Free will by grace. 216.1. c. Of flexible
free will. 216.1. c.
G
God* put for excellency, or greatness: 98.1. c. Gods nature described: 15.1.
m. When God imports the first person: 3.1. b. Godly dwell with the wicked:
113.1. Gospel preached has divine power: 112.2. c. It is most hated* 41.1. b.
The sum of the Gospel: 41.1. b. Removed for decay in grace^ ^1.2. c Grace
distinguishe^^ 82.2. m. 13.1. c. Difference between the grace of Adam, and of
believers: 84.2. e Grace well used does increase* 189.1. m. Grace like purified
Gold: 208.1. b. By a small measure of grace, a man may please God. 185.1. b.
Great towns, most assaulted by Satan: 112.1. b.
H
Hatred: How to temperate: 94.1. b. Head coue^ed, noted subjection: 70.1. b.
Hearing Gods word. 169, 2. c. 127, 1. m. The art of hearing: 10.1. and 2.
Christ's hearing: 95, 2. c. Preparation to hearing: 46.2. b Attention: 46.2. c.
Reverence, 133.1. b. ^26.2. m. Hearers distinguished. 95.1. b. Hell place, and
torments: 67.2. ^. Heretics, pretend the spirit: 140.1. c. They may be in
the best churches* 78.1. c. how they must be withstood: 78.2. m. 79.1. m. Holy
Ghost is God: 16.1. ^. Person subsisting. 16.1. b. Called seven spirits: 15.2.
c. speaks in scripture. 96.2. m. Holiness grounded on Christ: 176.2. b. Hold
fast pure doctrine: 151.2. m. Means to humble a man^ 62.2. m. Hunger after
Christ: 129.1. m. Hyphocrisie in religion avoided: 148.1. c. two degrees of it.
166.1. c.
I
Idolatry of Papists: 122.1. b. Idolothits 122.2. m. Hate honor given to
Idols. 121.^. c. Iesabels properties: 139.2. m. Ignorance the ground of pride:
203.2. b The fearful state of the ignorant. 59.2 b. 155.2. b. Their duty:
50.2. c. Images of Christ and of the trinity: 35.1. b Impenitencie, 144.1. the
danger thereof: ibid. 125, 1. c. 170.1. c. 58.2. c. 59.2. m. Imprecations. 94.1.
b. Increase in godliness: 137.1. c. 167.1. c. Joy chiefly in Christ. 67.2. m.
Judgment day ce^ten: 30.2. b. 33.2. m The ^anner of it. 31.1.32.^. The uses of
it: 30.1. b 31.1. c. 192.2. b: 33.2. c. Judgments particular to the
impenitent. 124.1. b. Judging ^ashly of othe^s. 131.2. c.
K
Key of David. 177.1. c. Of hell and death: 67.2. Giving of a key notes
in^^sting into an office: 177.2. b. Power of the keys handled. 179.^. m. 180.
1. Abuses of that power 181.1. c. Kings sovereign gouer^ours next Christ:
22.2. b. Their duty for Religion. 22.1. m. etc. Christ's kingdom spiritual.
126.2. c. Knock. How Christ* knockes at our hearts. 215.1. c. Knowledge without
grace puffes up: 203.1. m. knowledge, for approbation 99.2. c. Knowledge of a
man's own salvation: 130.2. b.
L
Law must be preached: yet with the Gospel. 86.2. b. Whether any man fulfill
the Law. 103.2. m. Laye-people ought not to be debarred from the Scripture: 4.2
b. and 9.1. m. Lights. Each Christian a light: 49.2. m. reasons thereof.
50.1.2. Logic Art lawful: 69.1. m. Loose Livers admonished. 133.2. m. They
want remission of sins. 164.1. b. Love: Christ's love, with the degre^^ thereof:
22.2. c. and 199.1. c and 210. 2. m. Gods special love, the ground of man's
redemption. 23.1. m. First love lost among us: 81.1. m. Signs thereof and
danger. ib. 2. We must labor to increase in ^oue. 81.1. c. me^nes. 86.1. c.
Love to men handled. 134.1. b. What it is: the property and practice of it.
ib. 2. Luke^warme persons: who? 200.1. m. (...) kinds of Lukewarm Christians.
ibid. c. and 2. Signs of Luke-warmnesse, three: 201.1. m. (...) of Lukewarm
Christians: ibid. 2. ^. Life. kinds thereof: 65.1. m. How Christ lives 65.1.
m. c. and 66.1. m. and why? 66.2. b. Life eternal here (...): 67.2. m. 196.1.
m. Wherein (...) 98.1. b. See it largely desc^^bed, and the reasons thereof:
195. 1. c. Liberty hereto the preuiledge of God^ Church. 184.1. c. Lifetime on
earth a space of repentance. 142.1. m. why God gives it. 143.2. c.
M
Madness of me^ showed: 110.1. m. and 129.2. m. Magistrates may give out
severe speeches against offenders. 77.2. m. Mannah. what it is, and what it did
^epresent. 128.2. m. Martyrs. Whether they can merit? 108.2. b. Means needful
to perseverance. 85.2. m Mediatio^: Christ a Mediator, ever ready. 53.2. m.
169.1. b. Members of Christ distinguished. 85.1. c. Ministry, a painful
work. 73.1. c. The end thereof to the wicked. 125.2 c Ministry of the Church,
wholly governed by Christ. 57.2. c. the uses thereof. 58.1. It brings heaven
among ^en. 197.1. b. Ministers belong to Christ: 164.1. m. Ministers should be
faithful w^tnesses. 19.1. m. and show it four wa^es. 19.1. and 2 5^.1. c.
Ministers should forecast for troubles. 4.2. c. How to oppose themselves
against Heretics. 79.1. m. and 2 Ministers called Stars, and why? 57.2. m.
Angels or messengers. 70.1. b m. Christ's mouth to his people. 126.2. b.
Ministers bring much good, or much hurt to the people. 71.1. c. Ministers loose
their gifts through decay in Love. 91.2. b They ought to have good warrant for
every doctrine they teach* 98.2. c and 126.2. b. Wherein their wisdom and
fidelity consists. 125.2. b. Ministers of mean gifts do often much profit
the Church. 18^.1. b. Misery of man d^scribed. 204. by the fountain of it,
original sin. 20^.1. m. and under the form of punishment. ib. c. Munkish
life disalowed. 4.1. m
N
Na^mans fact. 121.1. b. N^bals to Christ many. ^16.2. c. The name of one
person collectiuely betokens a multitude. 71.1. m. Natural men, are enemies to
the word. 40.2. b. Nakedness twofold. 206.2. m. Names of Gods children known
to Christ. 172.1. m. Ch^ists new Name. 195.1. m. who have it. 197.1. m.
Naza^it: Why i^ Christ so called. 178.1. m. Necessity two fold: absolute, and
in in part. 5.2. m. The new name given by Christ. 131.1. b. Ni^holai^anes:
their sect. 93.2. b. and 120 2. b. and opinions: ibid. Number of Gods true
servants small. 171.2. c.
O
Obedience to Christ, absolute: 21.2 c. and 22.1. Renewed obedience needful:
90.1. c. True obedience, described in four things. 152.1. c. and 153.1.
Offense. what it is: the kinds of it: etc. 117.1. m. To cast offenses before
men, a property of false teachers. 117 2. m. To beware of giving offenses*
119.1. c and of taking them being given. ibid 2. m. Old sinners duty. 86.2.
c. How to open the door of our hearts to Christ. 216.2. c. and 217.1.
Op^nions: diue^sitie of opinion^ i^ Religion* ought not to make men negligent:
48.1. b. Overcome spiritual enemies: how? 97.1. m. each one should endeavor
thereto. ibid. ^. b. Many excellent Motives: 194.1. b.
P
Pa^adise of God desc^ibed: 98.1. m. our duty in respect of it: 98: 2. b.
Patien^e, the Christian man's a (...) our: 40.1. b. and 78.2. c. Needful to
Ministers 73.2. m. c. To each Christian: 73.1. m. Grounds of Patience: Gods
speedy deli^erance; 6.2. b. Gods decree for the end of the^. 107.2. b Patience
needful in every good work: 136.1. c. Gods patience toward grievous sinners:
124.2. c. and 143.1. b. In waiting for their conversion. 214.2. c Peoples duty
against Heretics: 79 2. c Peace: Christian peace in 6. branches. 13.2. b.
Persecutors of Gods Church inspired, and guided by Satan: 105.2. c. 114.2. c.
Perseuera^ce in grace, excellent. 30.2. m. Pilgrimage vain. 39.1. m. P^llars.
The use of erecting pillars, and Christ^ allusion thereto. 194.1.2. To pity
the afflicted. 37.^. c. Place: no difference thereof in the new Testament in
respect of holiness. 39.^ b Poor men should seek for spiritual riches: 101.1.
m. who are poor spiritually? 205.2. m. and 206.1. b. Poverty may accompany
true piety. 100.2. b. Popish writers too much affected. 4^.2. b. they be
Iezabels. 141.1. b. Pope^ Supremacy in the Church confuted. 5281. b. and
155.1. b. Title of Holiness blasphemous. 176.2. c. Popish Church no Church.
102.2. c. and 103.1. m. popish schools satan's thrones: 111.2. m Popery
overthrows Christ's kingdom, and laws. 117.2. c. and 118. Preparation of our
selves for the Lord needful. 54.1. b Prayer to Angels unlawful. 7.1. m. Power
from Christ given them that overcome. 154.1. m. Priests: Beleuers be Priests:
and how? 25.2. b. 26.1. b. Their duty in respect thereof: 18.2. b. Christ's
presence should be engraven in our hearts: 72.1. b. use of. ibid. m. and
105.1. and 111.1. b. Gods prescience is not the cause of things. 191.2. m.
P^^ate persons, how they must convey their knowledge to others. 80 1. m.
Promises of deliverance, are rather from the hurt of affliction, than from
^ffliction it self. 190, 2. c. Prophet. Mark of a true Prophet.8.1. c. and of
a fa^se. 140.1. m. Pro^e^ion in common judgments, to them that maintain
purity in life, and doctrine 151.1. c. Pride was not the first sin 203.2. m.
Pride spiritual common. 202.2. m. Providence. Gods providence the first cause
of all. 106.1. c. The power thereof, seen in the instruments which he ^seth.
ibid. 2. Punish^ents proportionable unto sin, even in the things men abuse. 145
1. m. and for measure: 148.2 m. Punishments of sin set out. ^04.1. c and 2.
Pu^itie of religion ought constantly to be maintained. 152.2. c.
R
Rag^ng persons against the word, are to be pitied: 59.1. c. Reading the word,
Gods ordinance. 481 2. m. Its enjoined both publicly and privately Direction in
reading the word for application. 140.1. m. Regeneration, and remission of
sins, go together: 131.1. c. Regeneration founded on Christ. 198.2. c
Religion: of the three great religions, Jews, Turks and Papists. 152.1. b.
How to know the true religion. 18.1 m. Only in true religion may a man be
saved. 112.2 m. Not to forsake it for contentions. 78.2. b. and 94.1. c.
Defense of our religion. 118: 2. c and 119 1 Remedy in Relaps. 86.2. c.
Remembrance of Gods word, an excellent thing. 169.1 c. How to remember Gods
word, read, or heard: 10.1. b 169.2. m. Repetit^on of the same doctrine,
lawful. 109.1. b. Repentance handled in 5. things. 87.2 m. 88.89. Repentance
described. 122.2. m. Why so often urged? ibid c. It must be renewed daily.
122.1. b. 170 1. m. The practice of it. 143.1. c. and 146.1. c* It must not be
deferred: 141.2 b. It preuents temporal punishments: 1^6.1. c. It must be for
want of good duties: 213.2. b. Reproaches follow piety. 101.2. m. From whom
they come: ibid. c. Not to be maruailed at. 132.1 m. The spirit of God is
reproched. 140.2. b Resurrection: grounded on Christ. 67.1. m. Revelation
described: 2.1. b. How many ways showed from God: ibid. in. How divine, and
diabolical Revelations differ. ib. 2. b. and 36.2. b. Reverence: all true
reverence proceeds from Gods favor. 188.2. b. Reverent behavior in holy
assemblies: 63.2. m. Rewards of God: 108.2. b. Riches spiritual, stand in tw^
things: 101.1. b 205.2. m. how to become rich in God. 208.1. c. Righteousness
distinguished. 84.1. m. Rome, not the mothe^ Church. 12.2. ^. It is dead.
164.2. c.
S
Saboth day, the Lords day, 42.2. c. and 43.1. why so called? ib. and whether
it may be changed. 44.1. m. Sabboth-breakers reproved. 14.2. m. and 45.1. Men
debarred from public assemblies, should keep the saboth. 45.2. m Sacraments:
not to be administered to all. 74.2. c. Saints may be honored: how? 114.2. m.
Saints i^ heaven: No patrones over kingdoms. 155.1. m. Nor to be ^^aved unto.
ibid. Sanctification in part in this life. 63.2. c Satan's policy for his
kingdom in re^iuing ancient vices and Heresies. 139.2. c. Scripture: Christ's
royalty. 3.2. m. Excellency of scripture. 4.1 m. and 8.2. m End of all
Scripture. 8.2. c. How to know the Scriptures to be the word of God. 17.2. c.
God certifies it. 47.2. c. Search by Christ in the church. 168.1. c Security
twofold. 85.2. c Security carnal abounds 57.1. c. Separation from the Church
unlawful: 75.2. b. Servants of Christ honored highly: 4.2. m. and 7.2. b. and
154.2. b. How men become his servants. 141.1. c We must do service each to
other, and how? 135.1. m. Motives to it. ibid. Sickness comes from Gods hand.
145.2. b. Si^nes: are filthy spots. 23.2. m they make us fly Gods presence.
62.2. b Our behauior in respect of the^. 17^.1. c Remedies and helps against
sin. 62.1. b and 72.2. m. and 1^3.1. c. and 169.2. m. Motives to avoid sin.
154.2. m. and 182.2. c. and 214.1. c. 55.2. b. Grievous sinners not debarred
from heaven, if they repent. 122.1. c. 143. 1. b. 106.2. b. Slumber spiritual
common. 104.2. m. Sound grace should each one labor for. 106.2. c. How to
speak in our own behalf: 12.1. m. Spirit promised to the Apostles
peculiarly. 69.1 b Star. Christ is the bright morning star. 155.1. c. Why
so called? ib. 2. State of men at the day of judgment, in respect of bodily
defects. 31.2. c. Suspicion of our selves for unknown sins needful. 149.2.
b. Christ is the Sun to his Church. 60.2. c. and 61.
T
Temple: None but Church triumph, and militant. 196.1. c. Temptations on the
right hand most dangerou^. 120.1 b. Ten d^yes. 107.1. m. Thankefulnes to God,
Motives thereto: 29.1. c. Form thereof. 29.2. b. Threatenings are conditional.
91.2. c. and 146.1. b. They ought seriously to be considered. 144.2. c.
Throne: Satan's throne, what it is 111.1. c. his policy in seating it. ibid.
In how many places it is ibid. Thrones of Justice needful every where. 121.2.
c. Transubstantiation confuted. 30.2. c. That defense needless. 52.2. c.
Travels: A Caveat to such as travel voluntary into popish countries. 122.1. m
Trance described. 41.2. m. The end of Traun^^^. 42.1. b. Trial. Christ appoints
s^t times of trial for his Church.189.2. c. the uses thereof. ibid.
Tribulation and grace, accompany each other. 100.1. m. Tree of life: 97.2. c. a
figure of Christ. ibid. What it is to ^a^e of that tree. 98.1. b. What truth
is. 198.1. Christ is truth 3. ways: 176.2. c.
V
Visibilitie, no true note of the Church. 132.1. m. Unbelief, a most horrible
sin. 19.^. c. that makes a people no Church. 103.1. m. Unfaithful to God: 3.
sorres 108.1. c. Universal grace confuted. 5.1. b and 95..m. 97.1: c. 88.2. m.
Voice of Christ most powerful. 57.1. m.
W
Walk with God: how? 52.1. m. Washing from sin be Christ's blood, what* and
how? 24.1. and. 2. Watchfulness of a Christian. 166.1. c. Motives thereto:
167.1. m. White stone given: notes absolution. 130.2. b. White raiment, what it
signifies. 173.1. b. and 2. c. Weapons of Christians afflicted. 106.1. m.
Wicked men, the holde^ of Satan: 115.1. b. Their properties. 102.1. b. and
150.1. c. Will, Gods will distinguished. 93.1. b. Wizards seats satan's
thrones^ 111.2. m. Women, then civil regiment approved. 139.1. b. For them to
preach is unlawful. 138.2. b. or to administer the Sacraments. ibid. c. They
may instruct privately. 139.1. b. Word of God, the excellency thereof. 9.2.
b. The operation of it in the wicked.58.2. m. in the Elect. 59 2. c. 110.2. m.
Works: all Gods works perfect. 56.2 They ought to be reverenced. 57.1. b.
Works cannot justify: 63.1. b. 148.2. c. nor merit: 173.2. b. Four things
needful in every good work. 136.2. c. Works perfect two ways. 168.2. m. How
we may do good works respecting reward. 174.1. b. How they are necessary to
salvation: 149.1. m. Good works and poverty* may stand together. 100.2. c.
How God approues imperfect works. 72.2. c. Good works reach to the duties of
a man's particular calling: 137.1. c. Three properties required in Gods worship.
187.1. c. Worship of God in an unknown tongue not warrantable. 34.2. b. No
commandment of man must be received in the matter of Gods worship. 99.1. b.
True worship of God, proves sound conversion: 187.1. b. Worthiness, twofold.
173.2. b. Wretched. 205.1. b.
Z
Zeal described. 212.1. m. Kinds thereof. ibid. 2. m. Fruits of zeal. ibid.
^. Zeal for the truth^ 116.1. m. Which wanting among us. 116.1. ^.
FINIS.

