A SALVE FOR A SICK MAN. or, A treatise containing the nature, differences,
and kinds of death; as also the right manner of dying well. And it may serve
for spiritual instructruction to 1. Mariners when they go to sea. 2.
Soldiers when they go to battle. 3. Women when they travel of child.


Printed at London by JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambridge.
1611. And are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Crown by
Simon Waterson.

To the right Honorable and virtuous Lady, the Lady Lucie Countess of Bedford.
THe death of the righteous, that is, of every believing and repenta^t sinner,
is a most excellent blessing of God, and brings with it many worthy benefits:
which thing I prove on this manner. I. God both in the beginning and in the
continuance of his grace, does greater things unto his servants, then they do
commonly ask or think, and because he has promised aid and strength unto
the^, therefore in wonderful wisdom he casts up them this heavy burden
of death, that they might make experience what is the exceeding might and power
of his grace in their weakness. II. Judgment begins at Gods house: and the
righteous are laden with afflictions and temptations in this life, and therefore
in this world they have their deaths and hells, that in death they might not
feel the torments of hell and death. III. When Lazarus was dead, Christ said:
He is not dead but sleeps: hence it follows that the Christian man can say,
My grave is my bed, my death is my sleep: in death I die not, but only
sleep. It is thought that of all terrible things death is most terrible: but
it is false to them that be in Christ, to whom many things happen far more
heavy and bitter then death, IV. Death at the first brought forth sin, but
death in the righteous by means of Christ's death, abolisheth sin, because it
is the accomplishment of mortification. And death is so far from destroying
such as are in Christ, that there can be no better refuge for them against
death: for presently after the death of the body, follows the perfect freedom
of the spirit, and the resurrection of the body. V. Lastly, death is a means
of a Christian man's perfection, as Christ in his own example shows, saying,
Behold I will cast out devils, and will heal still to day and to morrow, and
the third I will be perfected. Now this perfection in the members of Christ, is
nothing else but the blessing of God, the author of peace, sanctifying them
throughout, that their whole spirits, and souls, and bodies, may be preserved
without blame to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now having often thus considered with my self of the excellency of death, I
thought good to draw the sum and chief heads thereof into this small
treatise: the protection and consideration whereof, I commend to your Ladyship,
desiring you to accept of it and read it at your leisure. If I be blamed for
Writing unto you of death, whereas by the course of nature, you are not yet
near death, Solomon will excuse me, who says, that we must remember our
Creator in the days of our youth. Thus hoping of your H. good acceptance, I
pray God to bless this my little labor to your comfort and salvation.

September. 7. 1595. Your H. in the Lord, W. Perkins.

Eeclesiastes 7.3. The day of death is better then the day that one is borne.
THese words are a rule or precept, laid down by Solomon for weighty causes.
For in the Chapters going before, he sets forth the vanity of all creatures
under heaven; and that at large in the very particulars. Now men hereupon might
take occasion of coffeehouse in respect of their estate in this life:
therefore Salomo^ in great wisdom here takes a new course, and in this chapter
begins to lay down certain rules of direction and comfort, that men might
have somewhat wherewith to arm themselves against the troubles and the miseries
of this life. The first rule is in this third verse, that a good name is better
then a precious ointment: that is, a name gotten and maintained by godly
conversation, is a special blessing of God, which in the midst of the
vanities of this life, ministers greater matter of reioicing and comfort to
the heart of man, then the most precious ointment can do to the outward
senses. Now some man having heard this first rule concerning good name, might
object and say, that renown and good report in this life affoardes slender
comfort: considering that after it, follows death, which is the miserable end
of all men. But this objection the Wise man remooueth by a second rule in the
words which I have in hand, saying, that the day of death is better then the
day that one is borne.

That we may come to the true and proper sense of this precept or rule, three
points are to be considered. First, what is death here mentioned: secondly, how
it can be truly said, that the day of death is better then the day of birth:
thirdly, in what respect it is better.

For the first, death is a deprivation of life as a punishment ordained of God,
and imposed on man for his sin. First, I say, it is a depriuatio^ of life,
because the very nature of death, is the absence or defect of that life which
God vouchsafed man by his creation. I add further, that death is a punishment,
more especially to intimate the nature and quality of death; and to show that
it was ordained, as a means of the execution of Gods justice and judgment. And
that death is a punishment, Paul plainly avouches, when he says, that by one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin. And again, that death is
the stipend, wages, or allowance of sin. Furthermore, in every punishment
there be three workers: the ordainer of it, the procurer, and the executioner.
The ordainer of this punishment is God in the estate of man's innocence, by a
solemn law then made in these very words. In the day that thou eatest thereof,
thou shall die the death, Genesis 2.17. But it may be alleged to the contrary,
that the Lord says by the Prophet Ezechiel, that he will not the death of a
sinner; and therefore that he is no ordainer of death. Ezec. 33.11
The answer may easily be made, and that sundry ways. First, the Lord speaks
not this to all men, or of all men, but to his own people, the Church of the
Jews, as appears by the clause prefixed, Verse. 10,
Son of man say unto the house of Israel, etc. Again, the words are not
spoken absolutelu, but only in way of comparisoy, in that of the twain, he
rather wills the conversion and repentance of a sinner, then his death and
destruction. Thirdly, the very proper meaning of the words import thus much,
that God does take no delight or pleasure in the death of a sinner, as it is
the ruin and destruction of the creature. And yet all this hinders not but that
God in a new regard and consideration, may both will and ordain death,
namely, as it is a due and deserved punishment, tending to the execution of
justice; in which justice God is as good as in his mercy. Again, it may be
objected, that if death indeed had been ordained of God, then Adam should
have bin destroyed, and that presently upon his fall. For the very words are
thus, Whensoever thou shall eat of the forbidden fruit, thou shall certainly
die. Ans. Sentences of scripture are either Legal or Euangelical: the law and
the gospel being two several and distinct parts of Gods word. Now this
former sentence is legal and must be understood with an exception borrowed
from the Gospel or the covenant of grace made with Adam, and revealed to him
after his fall. The exception is this: Thou shall certainly die whenever thou
eatest the forbidden fruit, except I do further give thee a means of
deliverance from death, namely the seed of the woman to bruise the serpents
head. Secondly it may be answered, that Adam and all his posterity died, and
that presently after his fall, in that his body was made mortal, and his
soul became subject to the curse of the law. And whereas God would not utterly
destroy Adam at the very first, but only impose on him the beginnings of the
first and second death; he did the same in great wisdom, that in his justice
he might make a way to mercy: which thing could not have been if Adam had
perished.

The executioner of this punishment is he that does impose and inflict the same
on man, and that also is God himself, as he testifies of himself in the
prophet Esai, I make peace and create evil. Now evil is of three sorts: Isa.
45, 6.
natural, moral, material. Natural evil, is the destruction of that order,
which God set in every creature by the creation. Moral evil, is the want of
that righteousness and virtue which the law requires at man's hands; and that
is called sin. Material evil, is any matter or thing which in it self is a
good creature of God, yet so, as by reason of man's fall, it is hurtful to the
health and life of man, as henbane, wolfebane, hemlock, and all other poisons
are. Now this saying of Esai must not be understood of moral evils, but of
such as are either material or natural: to the latter of which, death is to
be referred, which is the destruction or abolishment of man's nature created.

The procurer of death is man not God; in that man by his sin and disobedience
did pull upon himself this punishment. Therefore the Lord in Oseah, O Israel,
one has destroyed thee, Ose. 13.6.
but in me is thine help. Against this it may be objected, that man was
mortal in the estate of innocence before the fall. Answ. The frame and
composition of man's body considered in it self was mortal, because it was
made of water and earth and other elements which are of themselves alterable
and changeable: yet if we respect that grace and blessing which God did
vouchsafe man's body in his creation, it was unchangeable and immortal, and so
by the same blessing should have continued, if man had not fallen: and man by
his fall depriving himself of this gift and blessing, became every way mortal.

Thus it appears in part what death is: yet for the better clearing of this
point, we are to consider the difference of the death of a man and of a beast.
The death of a beast is the total and final abolishment of the whole creature:
for the body is resolved to his first matter, and the soul arising of the
temperature of the body vanishes to nothing. But in the death of a man it is
otherwise. For though the body for a time be resolved to dust, yet must it
rise again in the last judgment and become immortal: and as for the soul,
it subsisteth by it self out of the body and is immortal. And this being so,
it may be demanded how the soul can die the second death? Ans. The soul
dies, not because it is utterly abolished, but because it is as though it were
not, and it cease to be in respect of righteousness and fellowship with God.
And indeed this is the death of all deaths, when the creature has subsisting
and being, and yet for all that, is deprived of al comfortable fellowship with
God.

The reason of this difference is, because the soul of man is a spirit or
spiritual substance, whereas the soul of a beast is no substance, but a
natural vigor or quality, and has no being in itself, without the body on
which it wholly depends. The soul of a man contrariwise being created of
nothing and breathed into the body, and as well subsisting forth of it as in
it.

The kinds of death are two, as the kinds of life are; bodily and spiritual.
Bodily death is nothing else but the separation of the soul from the body, as
bodily life is the conujnction of body and soul: and this death is called the
first, because in respect of time it goes before the second. Spiritual death is
the separation of the whole man both in body and soul from the gracious
fellowshippe of God. Of these twain the first is but an entrance to death, and
the second is the accomplishment of it. For as the soul is the life of the
body, so God is the life of the soul, and his spirit is the soul of our
souls, and the want of fellowship with him, brings nothing but the endless and
unspeakable horrors and pangs of death.

Again, spiritual death has three distinct and several degrees. The first
is, when a man that is alive in respect of temporal life, lies dead in sin. Of
this degree Paul speaks, when he says, 1. Tim. 5.6.
But she that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives. And this is the
case of all men by nature, who are children of wrath, and dead in sins and
trespasses. Ephesians. 2.5.
The second degree is in the very end of this life, when the body is laid in
the earth, and the soul descendes to the place of torments. The third degree
is in the day of judgment, when the body and soul meet again, and go both
to the place of the damned, there to be tormented for ever and ever.

Having thus found the nature and differences and kinds of death, it is more
then manifest, that the text in hand is to be understood, not of the spiritual,
but of the bodily death: because it is opposed to the birth or nativity of
man. The words then must carry this sense: the time of bodily death in which the
body and soul of man are severed asunder, is better then the time in which one
is borne and brought into the world.

Thus much of the first point, now follows the second: and that is, how this
can be true which Solomon says: that the day of death is better then the day
of birth. I make not this question to call the scriptures into controversy,
which are the truth it self, but I do it for this end, that we might without
wavering be resolved of the truth of this which Solomon avouches. For there
may be sundry reasons brought to the contrary. Therefore let us now handle the
question: the reasons, or objections which may be alleged to the contrary,
may all be reduced to six heads. The first is taken from the opinion of wise
men, who think it the best thing of all, never to be borne, and the next best
to die quickly. Now if it be the best thing in the world not to be borne at
all, then it is the worst thing that can be to die after a man is borne. Answ.
There be two sorts of men; one that live and die in their sins without
repentance; the other, which unfeignedly repent and believe in Christ. Now this
sentence maybe truly avouched of the first: of whom we may say as Christ said
of Judas, It had bin good for him that he had never bin borne. But the saying
applied to the second sort of men is false. For to them that in this life turn
to God by repentance, the best thing of all is to be borne: because their
birth is a degree of preparation to happiness: and the next best is to die
quickly: because by death they enter into possession of the same their
happiness. For this cause Balaam desired to die the death of the righteous:
and Solomon in this place prefers the day of death before the day of birth,
understanding that death which is joined with godly life, or the death of the
righteous.

The second objection is taken from the testimonies of Scripture. Death is ths
wages of sin, Romans 6.23. it is an enemy of Christ, 1. Cor. 15. and the curse
of the law. Hence it seems to follow that in and by death, men receive their
wages and payment for their sins: that the day of death is the doleful day
in which the enemy preuailes against us: that he which dies is cursed. Answ.
We must distinguish of death: it must be considered two ways; first, as it is
by it self in his own nature: secondly, as it is altered and changed by
Christ. Now death by it self considered, is indeed the wages of sin, an
enemy of Christ, and of all his members, and the curse of the law, yea the
very suburbs and the gates of hell: yet in the second respect, it is not so.
For by the virtue of the death of Christ, it cease to be a plague or
punishment, and of a curse it is made a blessing, and is become unto us a
passage or middle-way between this life and eternal life, and as it were a
little wicket or door whereby we pass out of this world and enter into
heaven. And in this respect the saying of Solomon is most true. For in the day
of birth, men are borne and brought forth into the vale of misery, but
afterward when they go hence having death altered unto the^ by the death of
Christ, they enter into eternal joy and happiness with all the Saints of God
for ever.

The third objection is taken from the examples of most worthy men, who have
made their prayers against death. As our Savior Christ, who prayed on this
manner, Father, if it be thy will let this cup pass from me, yet not my
will, but thy will be done. And David prayed, Psalm. 6.4.
Return, O Lord, d^liuer my soul, save me for thy mercies sake: for in death
there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall praise thee? And
Ezechiah, Esa. 38.10.
when the Prophet Esaias bade him set his house in order, and told him that he
must die, wept sore, and that in respect of death. Now by the examples of these
most worthy men, yea by the example of the son of God himself, it may seem
that the day of death is the most terrible and doleful day of all. Ans. When
our Savior Christ prayed thus to his father, he was in his agony, and he then
as our Redeemer stood in our room and stead, to suffer all things that we
should have suffered in our own persons for our sins: and therefore he
prayed not simply against death, but against the cursed death of the cross,
and he feared not death it self, which is the separation of body and soul,
but the curse of the law which went with death, namely, the unspeakable wrath
and indignation of God. The first death troubled him not, but the first and
second joined together. Touching David, when he made the sixth Psalm, he was
not only sick in body, but also perplexed with the greatest temptation of
all, in that he wrestled in conscience with the wrath of God, as appears by
the words of the text, where he says, Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath. And
by this we see that he prayed not simply against death, but against death at
that instant when he was in that grievous temptation; for at other times he
had no such fear of death, Psalm. 23.4.
as he himself testifies, saying, Though I should walk thorough the valley
of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil. Therefore he prayed against
death only as it was joined with the apprehe^sion of Gods wrath. Lastly,
Ezechiah prayed against death, not only because he desired to live and do
service to God in his kingdom, but upon a further and more special regard;
because when the Prophet brought the message of death, he was without issue,
and had none of his own body to succeed him in his kingdom. It will be
said, what warrant had Ezechiah to pray against death for this cause? Ans. His
warrant was good; 1. Kin. 8.15.3
for God had made a particular promise to David and his posterity after him,
that so long as they feared God, and walked in his commandments, they should
not want issue to sit upon the throne of the kingdom after them. Now Ezechiah
at the time of the Prophets message, remembering what promise God had made, and
how he for his part had kept the condition thereof, in that he had walked
before God with an upright heart, and had done that which was acceptable in his
sight; he prayed against death, not so much because he feared the danger of
it, but because he wanted issue. This prayer God accepted and heard, and he
added fifteen years unto his days, and two years after gave him Manasses.

The fourth objection is, that those which have been reputed to be of the
better sort of men, oftentimes have miserable ends: for some end their days
despairing, some rauing and blaspheming, some straungely tormented: it may
seem therefore that the day of death is the day of greatest woe and misery.
To this I answer first of all generally, that we must not judge of the estate
of any man before God by outward things, whether they be blessings or
judgments, whether they fall in life or death. For (as Solomon says) all
things come like to all: and the same condition is to the just and the wicked,
to the good and to the pure and to the polluted, and to him that sacrifices
and to him that sacrifices not: as is the good so is the sinner, he that
swears, as he that fears an oath* Secondly, I answer the particulars which
be alleged on this manner: And first of all touching despair, it is true
that not only wicked and loose persons despair in death, but also repentant
sinners, who oftentimes in their sickness, testify of themselves that being
alive and lying in their beds, they feel themselves as it were to be in
hell, and to apprehend the very pangs and torments thereof. And I doubt not for
all this, but that the child of God most dear unto him, may through the gulf
of desperation attain to everlasting happiness. This appears by the manner of
gods dealing in the matter of our salvation. All the works of God are done in
and by their contraries. In the creation all things were made, not of some
thing, but of nothing, clean contrary to the course of nature. In the work of
redemption, God gives life not by life, but by death: and if we consider aright
of Christ upon the cross, we shall see our paradise out of paradise in the
midst of hell. Eor out of his own cursed death does he bring us life and
eternal happiness. Likewise in effectual vocation, when it pleases God to
convert and turn men unto him, he does it by the means of the Gospel
preached, which in reason should drive all men from God. For it is as contrary
to the nature of man as fire to water, and light to darkness: and yet for all
this, though it be thus against the disposition and heart of man, it preuailes
with him and turns him to God. Furthermore, when God will send his own
servants to heaven, he sends them a contrary way, even by the gates of hell:
and when it is his pleasure to make men depend on his favor and providence,
he makes them feel his anger and to be nothing in themselves, that they may
wholly depend upon, him and be whatsoever they are in him. This point being
well considered, it is manifest that the child of God may pass to heaven by
the very gulfes of hell. The love of God is like a sea, into which when a man is
cast, he neither feels bottom nor sees bank. I conclude therefore that
despair whether it arise of weakness of nature, or of conscience of sin;
though it fall out about the time of death, cannot prejudice the salvation of
them that are effectually called. As for other strange events which fall out
in death, they are the effects of diseases. Rauings and blasphemings arise of
the disease of melancholy and of frensies, which often happen at the end of
burning fevers, the choler shooting up to the brain. The writhing of the
lips, the turning of the neck, the buckling of the ioints and the whole
body, proceed of crampes and convulsions, which follow after much
euacuatio^. And whereas some in sickness are of that strength, that three or
four me^ cannot hold the^ without bonds, it comes not of witchcraft, and
possessions, as people commonly think, but of choler in the veins. And
whereas some when they are dead, become as black as pitch (as Bonner was) it may
arise by a bruise, or an impostume, or by the black iaundise, or by the
putrefactio^ of the liver: and it does not always argue some extraordinary
judgment of God. Now these and the like diseases with their simptomes and
strange effects, though they shall deprive man of his health, and of the right
use of the parts of his body, and of the use of reason too: yet they can not
deprive his soul of eternal life. And all sins, procured by violent
diseases, and proceeding from repentant sinners, are sins of infirmity: for
which, if they know them, and come again to the use of reason, they will
further repent; if not, they are pardoned and buried in the death of Christ.
And we ought not so much to stand upon the stra^genesse of any man's end, when
we know the goodness of his life: for we must judge a man not by his death,
but by his life. And if this be true, that strange diseases, and thereupon
strange behauiours in death, may befall the best man that is: we must learn to
reform our judgments of such as lie at the point of death. The common opinion
is, that if a man lie quietly and go away like a lamb (which in some
diseases, as consumptions and such like, any man may do) then he goes straight
to heaven: but if the violence of the disease stir up impatience, and cause
in the party frantic behauiours, then men use to say, there is a judgment
of God serving either to discover an hypocrite, or to plague a wicked man. But
the truth is otherwise; for indeed a man may die like a lamb, and yet go to
hell: and one dying in exceeding torments and strange behauiours of the body
may go to heaven: and by the outward condition of any man* either in life or
death, we are not to judge of his estate before God.

The fourth objection is this: When a man is most nere death, then the devil
is most busy in temptation: and the more men are assaulted by Satan, the more
dangerous and troublesome is their case. And therefore it may seem that the day
of death is the worst day of all. Answ. The condition of Gods children in earth
is twofold. Some are not tempted, and some are. Some I say are not tempted, as
Simeon, who when he had seen Christ, brake forth and said, Luke 2.29.
Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, etc. fore-signifying no
doubt, that he should end his days in all manner of peace. As for them which
are tempted, though their case be very troublesome and perplexed, yet their
salvation is not further off, by reason of the violence and extremity of
temptation. For God is then present by the unspeakable comfort of his spirit,
and when we are most weak, he is most strong in us; because his manner is to
show his power in weakness. And for this cause, even in the time of death the
devil receives the greatest foil, when he looks for the greatest victory.

The sixth objection is this. Violent and sudden death is a grievous curse, and
of all evils which befall man in this life, none is so terrible: therefore it
may seem that the day of sudden death is most miserable. Ans. It is true
indeed that sudden death is a curse and grievous judgment of God, and
therefore not without cause feared of me^ in the world: yet all things
considered, we ought more to be afraid of an impenitent and evil life, then of
sudden death. For though it be evil, as death it self in his own nature is;
yet we must not think it to be simply evil: because it is not evil to al men,
nor in all respects evil. I say it is not evil to all men, considering that
no kind of death is evil or a curse unto them that are in Christ, who are
freed from the whole curse of the law. And therefore the holy Ghost says,
Apoc. 14.23.
Blessed are they that die in the Lord: for they rest from their labors:
whereby is signified that they which depart this life, being members of Christ,
enter into everlasting happiness; of what death so ever they die, yea though it
be sudden death. Again I say, that sudden death is not evil in all respects;
for it is not evil, because it is sudden, but because it commonly takes men
unprepared, and by that means makes the day of death a black day, and as it
were a very speedy downe-fall to the gulf of hell. Otherwise if a man be
ready and prepared to die, sudden death is in effect no death, but a quick
and speedy entrance to eternal life.

These objections being thus answered, it appears to be a manifest truth
which Solomon says, that the day of death is better indeed then the day of
birth. Now I come to the third point, in which the reasons and respects are to
be considered that make the day of death to surpass the day of man's birth: and
they may al be reduced to this one, namely, that the birth day is an entrance
into al woe and misery; whereas the day of death joined with godly and
reformed life, is an entrance or degree to eternal life. Which I make manifest
thus: Eternal life has three degrees: one in this life, when a man can truly
say that he lives not, but that Christ lives in him: and this al men can say
that repent and believe, and are justified and sanctified, and have peace of
conscience, with other gifts of Gods spirit, which are the earnest of their
salvation. The second degree is the end of this life, when the body goes to
the earth, and the soul is carried by the angels into heaven: the third is in
the end of the world at the last judgment, when body and soul reunited, do
jointly enter into eternal happiness in heaven. Now of these three degrees,
death it self being joined with the fear of God, is the second: which also
contains in it two worthy steps to life. The first, is a freedom from all
miseries which have their end in death. For though men in this life are
subject to manifold dangers by sea and land, as also to sundry aches, pains,
aad diseases, as feauers, and consumptions, etc. yet when death comes there is
an end of al. Again, so long as men live in this world, whatsoever they be,
they do in some part lie in bondage under original corruption and the
remnants thereof, which are doubtings of Gods providence, unbelief, pride of
heart, ignorance, covetousness, ambition, envy, hatred, lust, and such like
sins, which bring forth fruits unto death. And to be in subjection to sin on
this manner, is a misery of al miseries. 2. Cor. 12.7.
Therefore Paul when he was tempted unto sin by his corruption, calls the very
temptation the buffets of Satan, and as it were a prick or thorn wounding his
flesh, and paining him at the very heart. Again, in an other place wearied
with his own corruptions, he co^plaines that he is sold under sin, and he
cries out, o miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death? Romans 7.24.
David says, that his eyes gushed out with rivers of tears when other men
sinned against God: Psalm. 119.136.
how much more then was he grieved for the sins wherewith he himself was
overtaken in this life? And indeed it is a very hell for a man that has but a
spark of grace, to be exercised, turmoyled, and tempted with the inborne
corruptions and rebellions of his own heart: and if a man would devise a
torment for such as fear God and desire to walk in newnes of life, he can not
devise a greater then this. For this cause blessed is the day of death which
brings with it a freedom from all sin whatsoever. For when we die, the
corruption of nature is quite abolished, and sanctification is accomplished.
Lastly, it is a great misery that the people of God are constrained in this
world to live and converse in the company of the wicked; as sheep are mingled
with goats which strike them, annoy their pasture; and muddie their water.
Hereupon David cried out. Woe is me that I remain in Meshech, Psalm. 120.5.
and dwell in the tents of Kedar. 1. Kin. 19.4.
When Elias saw that Ahab and Iesabel had planted idolatry in Israel, and that
they sought his life also, he went apart into the wilderness and desired to
die. But this misery also is ended in the day of death, in as much as death is
as it were the hand of God to sort and single out those that be the servants of
God from all ungodly men in this most wretched world.

Furthermore, this exceeding benefit comes by death, that it does not only
abolish the miseries which presently are upon us, but also prevent those which
are to come. The righteous (says the Prophet Esaias) perishes, Isa. 57.1.
and no man considers it in his heart, and merciful men are taken away, and
no man understands that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.
2. Kin. 22.30
Example of this we have in Josias. Because (says the Lord) thine heart did
melt, and thou have humbled thy self before the Lord, when thou heardest what
I spoke against this place, etc. behold therefore I will gather thee to thy
fathers, and thou shall be put in thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not
see all the evil which I will bring upon this place. And Paul says, that
among the Corinthians some were a sleep, that is, 1. Cor ii.23.
dead that they might not be condemned with the world.

Thus much of freedom from misery, which is the first benefit that comes by
death, and the first step to life: now follows the second, which is, that
death gives an entrance to the soul, that it may come into the presence of the
everliving God, of Christ, and of all the Angels and Saints in heaven. The
worthiness of this benefit makes the death of the righteous to be no death,
but rather a blessing to be wished of all men. The consideration of this made
Paul to say, Phil. 1.
I desire to be dissolved: but what is the cause of this desire? that follows
in the next words, namely that by his dissolution he might come to be with
Christ. When the Queen of Sheba saw all Salomons wisdom, and the house that
he had built, and the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and
the order of his ministers, and their apparel, etc. she said, Happy are thy
men, happy are these thy servants which stand ever before thee and hear thy
wisdom: i. Kin. i0.8.
much more then may we say, that they are ten thousand fold happy which stand
not in the presence of an earthly king, but before the King of kings, the Lord
of heaven and earth; and at his right hand enjoy pleasures for evermore. Moses
has bin renowned in all ages for this, that God vouchsafed him but so much
favor as to see his hinder parts at his request; o then, what happiness is this
to see the glory and majesty of God face to face, and to have eternal
fellowship with God our Father, Christ our Redeemer, and the holy Ghost our
comforter, and to live with the blessed Saints and Angels in heaven for ever.

Thus now the third point is manifest, namely, in what respects death is more
excellent the^ life. It may be, here the mind of man unsatisfied will yet
further reply and say, that howsoever in death the souls of men enter into
heaven, yet their bodies, though they have bin tenderly kept for meat, drink,
and apparel; and have slept many a night in beds of down, must lie in dark and
loathsome graves, and there be wasted and consumed with worms. Ans. All this is
true indeed, but all is nothing: if so be it we will but consider aright of
our graves as we ought. We must not judge of our graves, as they appear to the
bodily eye, but we must look upon them by the eye of faith, and consider them
as they are altered and changed by the death and burial of Christ, who having
vanquished death upon the cross, pursued him afterward to his own wen, and
foiled him there, and deprived him of his power: and by this means Christ in
his own death has buried our death, and by the virtue of his burial, as with
sweet incense, has sweetened and perfumed our graves, and made the^ of
stinking and loathsome cabbines, Isa. 57.2.
to become princely palaces, and beds of most sweet and happy rest, far
more excellent then beds of down.

And though the body rot in the grave, or be eaten of worms, or of fishes in
the sea, or burnt to ashes, yet that will not be unto us a matter of
discomfort, if we do well consider the ground of all grace, namely our
conjunction with Christ. It is indeed a spiritual, and yet a most real
conjunction. And we must not imagine that our souls alone are joined to the
body or soul of Christ, but the whole person of man both in body and soul is
joined and united to whole Christ. And when we are once joined to Christ in
this mortal life by the bond of the spirit, we shall remain and continue
eternally joined with him: and this vnio^ once truly made, shall never be
dissolved. Hence it follows, that although the body be severed from the soul
in death, yet neither body nor soul are severed from Christ, but the very
body rotting in the grave, drowned in the sea, burned to ashes, abides still
united to him, and is as truly a member of Christ the^, as before. This point
we must remember as the foundation of all our comfort, and hold it for ever as
a truth. For look what was the condition of Christ in death, the same or the
like is the condition of all his members. Now the condition of Christ was this,
though his body and soul were severed each from other, as far as heaven and
the grave, yet neither of them were severed from the godhead of the sone, but
both did in death subsist in his person. And therefore though our bodies and
souls be pulled asunder by natural or violent death, yet neither of them, no
not the body it self shall be severed and disioyned from Christ. It will be
alleged, that if the body were then united to Christ, it should live and be
quickened in the grave. Ans. Not so: when a man's arm or leg is taken with
the dead palsy, it receives little or no heat, life, sense, or motion from the
body: and yet notwithstanding it remains still a member of the body, because
the flesh and the bone of it remain joined to the flesh and the bone of the
body: even so may the body remain a member of Christ, though for some space of
time it receive neither sense nor motion nor life from the soul or from the
spirit of Christ.

Furthermore we must remember that by the virtue of this conjunction, shall the
dead body, be it rotten, burned, devoured, or howsoever consumed, at the day of
judgment rise to eternal glory. In the winter season trees remain without
fruit or leaves, and being beaten with wind and weather appear to the eye as
if they were rotten trees; yet when the springtime comes again, they bring
forth as before, buds and blossoms, leaves and fruit: the reason is because
the body, grains, and arms of the tree are al joined to the root, where lies
the sap in the winter season, and whence by means of this coniu^ction it is
derived to all the parts of the tree in the springtime: Even so the bodies of
men have their winter also, in which they are turned to dust, and so remain
for the space of many thousand years, yet in the day of judgment by means of
that mistical conjunction with Christ, shall divine and quickening virtue
stream thence to all the bodies of the elect to cause the^ to live again, and
that to life eternal. But some will say, that the wicked also rise again. Ans.
They do so indeed, but not by the same cause, for they rise by the power of
Christ as he is a judge to co^demn the^: whereas the godly rise again by the
virtue of Christ's resurrection, whereof they are partakers by means of that
blessed and indissoluble coniu^ction which they have with Christ. And the
bodies of the elect though they consume never so much in the grave, yet are
they still in Gods favor and in the couenat of grace: to which, because they
have right being dead they shall not remain so for ever, but shall rise to
glory at the last judgment. Therefore the rotting of the body is nothing in
respect, and the death of the body no death. And therefore also death in the old
and new testament is made but a sleep, and the grave a bed, whereof the like was
never seen; wherein a man may rest, nothing at al troubled with dreams or
fantasies, and whence he shall rise no more subject to weakness or sickness,
but presently be translated to eternal glory. By this the^ which has been
said, it appears that the death of the righteous is a second degree to
everlasting happiness.

Now then considering our conjunction with Christ is the foundation of all our
joy and comfort in life and death, we are in the fear of God to learn this
one lesson, namely, that while we have time in this world, we must labor to be
united unto Christ that we maybe bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh. This
very point is as it were a flaggon of wine to revive our souls when they be in
a swowne at any instant. And that we may be assured that we are certainly
joined to Christ, we must show our selves to be members of his mystical body
by the daily fruits of righteousness and true repentance. And being once
certainly assured in conscience of our being in Christ, let death come when it
will, and let it cruelly part asunder both body and soul, yet shall they both
remain in the covenant; and by means thereof be reunited and taken up to life
eternal. Whereas on the contrary, if men be out of the covenant and die out of
Christ, their souls go to hell, and their bodies rot for a time in the grave,
but afterward they rise to endless perdition. Wherefore I say again and
again, labor that your consciences by the holy ghost may testify that ye are
living stones in the temple of God, and branches bearing fruit in the true
vine: and then ye shall feel by experience, that the pangs of death shall be a
further degree of happiness then ever ye found in your lives, even then when
ye are gasping and panting for breath.

Thus much of the meaning of the text, now follows the uses, and they are
manifold. The first and principal is this: In that Solomon preferres the day
of death before the day of birth; he does therein give us to understand, that
there is a direct and certain way whereby a man may die well; and if it had
been otherwise, he could not have said that the day of death is better. And
whereas he avouches this, he shows withal that there is an infallible way
whereby a man may make a blessed end. Therefore let us now come to search out
this way; the knowledge and true understanding whereof must not be fetched from
the writings of men, but from the word of God, who has the power of life and
death in his own hand.

Now that a man may die well, Gods word requires 2. things: a preparation
before death, and a right behavior and disposition in death.

The preparation unto death, is an action of a repentant sinner, whereby he
makes himself fit and ready to die, and it is a duty very necessary, to which
we are bound by Gods commandment. For there be sundry places of Scripture
which do straightly inioyn us to watch and pray, and to make our selves ready
every way against the second coming of Christ to judgment. Now the same
places do withal bind us to make preparation against death, at which time God
comes to judgment unto us particularly, Again, look as death leaves a man,
so shall the last judgment find him, and so shall he abide eternally: there
may be changes and conuersions from evil to good in this life, but after
death there is no change at all. Therefore a preparation to death can in no
wise be omitted of him that desires to make an happy and blessed end.

This preparation is twofold: general, and particular. General preparation is
that whereby a man prepares himself to die through the whole course of his
life. A duty most needful that must in no wise be omitted. The reasons are
these: First of all death which is certain is most uncertain. I say it is
certain, because no man can eschew death. And it is uncertain 3. ways: first,
in regard of time: for no man knows when he shall die: secondly, in regard
of place: for no man knows where he shall die, whether in his bed or in the
field, whether by sea or by land: thirdly, in respect of the kind of death; for
no man knows whether he shall die of a lingering or sudden, of a violent or
natural death. Hence it follows, that men should every day prepare themselves
to death. Indeed if we could know when, where, and how we should die, the
case were otherwise, but seeing we know none of these: it stands us in hand to
look about us. A second reason serving further to persuade us, is this: The
most dangerous thing of all in this world is, to neglect all preparation. To
make this point more manifest, I will use this comparison: A certain man
pursued by an Unicorn, in his flight falls into a dungeon, and in his fall
takes hold and hangs by the arm of a tree: now as he thus hangs looking
downward, he sees two worms gnawing at the root of the tree, and as he looks
upward he sees an hiue of most sweet honey, whereupon he climes up unto it, and
sitting by it he feeds thereon. In the mean season while he is thus sitting,
the two worms gnaw in pieces the root of the tree: which don, tree and man and
all fall into the bottom of the dungeon. Now this Unicorn is death: the man
that flies is every one of us, and every living man: the pit over which he
hangs, is hell: the arm of the tree is life it self: the two worms are day
and night, the continuance whereof is the whole life of man: the hiue of honey
is the pleasures, and profits, and honors of this world, to which when men
wholly give themselves not considering their ends, til the tree root, that is,
this temporal life be cut off: which being once done, they plunge themselves
quite into the gulf of hell. By this we see, that there is good cause that men
should not defer their preparation till the time of sickness, but rather every
day make themselves ready against the day of death. But some will say, it
shall suffice if I prepare my self to pray when I begin to be sick. Answ.
These men greatly deceive themselves; for the time the^ is most unfit to begin
a preparation, because all the senses and powers of the body are occupied about
the pains and troubles of the disease: and the sick party is exercised partly
in conference with the Physician, partly with the minister about his souls
health and matters of conscience, and partly with friends that come to visit.
Therefore there must some preparation go before in the time of health, when the
whole man with all the powers of body and soul are at liberty. Again, there be
some others which imagine and say, that a man may repent when he will, even in
the time of death: and that such repentance is sufficient. Ans. It is false
which they say; for it is not in the power of man to repent when he himself
will; when God will, he may. It is not in him that wills or runs, but in
God that has mercy. And Christ says that many shall seek to enter into heaven,
and shall not be able. But why so? because they seek when it is too late,
namly, when the time of grace is past. Therefore it is exceeding folly for men
so much as once to dream that they may have repentance at command: nay it is a
just judgment that they should be condemned of God in death, that did condemn
God in their life: and that they should quite be forgotten of God in sickness,
and did forget God in their health. Again I answer, that this late repentance
is seldom or never true repentance. It is sick like the party himself,
commonly languishing and dying together with him. Repentance should be
voluntary (as all obedience to God ought) but repentance taken up in sickness,
is usually constrained and extorted by the fear of hell, and other judgments
of God: for crosses, afflictions, and sickness will cause the grosses^ hypocrite
that ever was to stoop and buckle under the hand of God, and to dissemble
faith and repentance and every grace of God, as though he had them as fully as
any of the true servants of God: whereas indeed he wants the^ altogether.
Wherefore such repentance commonly is but counterfeit. For in true and sound
repentance men must forsake their sins; but in this the sin forsakes the
man; who leaves all his evil ways only upon this that he is constrained to
leave the world. Wherefore it is a thing greatly to be wished, that men would
repent and prepare themselves to die in the time of health before the day of
death or sickness come. Lastly, it is alleged that one of the thieves
repented upon the cross. Ans. The thief was called after the eleventh hour
at the point of the twelfth, when he was now dying and drawing on: Therefore
his conversion was altogether miraculous and extraordinary: and there was a
special reason why Christ would have him to be called then, that while he was
in suffering he might show forth the virtue of his passion; that all which saw
the one, might also acknowledge the other. Now it is not good for men to make
an ordinary rule of an extraordinary example.

Thus then this point being manifest, that a general preparation must be
made, let us now see in what manner it must be done. And for the right doing of
it, five duties must be practiced in the course of our lives, The first is the
meditation of death in the life time, for the life of a Christian is nothing
else but a meditation of death. A notable practice hereof we have in the example
of Joseph of Arimathea, who made his tomb in his life time in the midst of
his garden: no doubt for this end, to put himself in mind of death and that in
the midst of his delight and pleasures. Heathen Philosophers that never knew
Christ, had many excellent meditations of death, though not comfortable in
regard of life everlasting. Now we that have known and believed in Christ,
must go beyond them in this point, considering with our selves such things as
they never thought of, namely, the cause of death, our sin: the remedy
thereof, the cursed death of Christ, cursed I say in regard of the kind of
death and punishment laid upon him, but blessed in regard of us. Thirdly, we
must often meditate of the presence of death, which we do, when by Gods grace
we make an account of every present day as if it were the day of our death, and
reckon with our selves when we go to bed as though we should never rise
again, and when we rise, as though we should never lie down again.

This meditation of death is of special use, and brings forth many fruits in
the life of man. And first of al, it serves to humble us under the hand of God.
Example we have of Abraham, who said, Genesis 18.27.
Behold, I have begun now to speak to my Lord, and I am but dust and ashes.
Mark here, how the consideration of his mortality made him to abase and cast
down himself in the sight of God: and thus if we could reckon of every day as
of the last day, it would pull down our peacocks feathers, and make us with Job
to abhor our selves in dust and ashes.

Secondly, this meditation is a means to further repentance. When Jonas came
to Niniuie and cried, Yet forty days and Niniue shall be destroyed, the
whole city repented in sackecloath and ashes. When Elias came to Ahab and
told him that the dogs should eat Iesabel by the wall of Iesreel, and him
also of Ahabs stock that died in the city, etc. it made him to humble himself
so, as the lord says to Elias, See thou how Ahab is humbled before me. Now
if the remembrance of death was of such force in him that was but an hypocrite,
how excellent a means of grace will it be in them that truly repent?

Thirdly, this meditation seems to stir up contentation in every estate and
condition of life that shall befall us. Righteous Job in the midst of his
afflictions, comforts himself with this consideration. Naked (says he) came I
forth of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return again, etc, blessed be
the name of the Lord. And surely the often meditation of this, that a man of al
his abundance can carry nothing with him but either a coffin or a winding
sheet or both, should be a forcible means to repress the insatiable desire
of riches and the love of this world.

Thus we see what an effectual means this meditation is to increase and
further the grace of God in the hearts of men. Now I commend this first duty to
your Christian considerations, desiring the practice of it in your lives; which
practice that it may take place, two things must be performed. 1. labor to
pluck out of your hearts a wicked and erroneous imagination, whereby every man
naturally blesses himself and thinks highly of himself: and though he had
one foot in the grave yet he persuades himself that he shall not die yet.
There is no man almost so old but by the corruption of his heart he thinks that
he shall live one year longer. Cruel and unmerciful death makes league with
no man: and yet the Prophet Esai says, that the wicked man makes a league with
death: How can this be? there is no league made indeed, but only in the
wicked imagination of man, who falsely thinks that death will not come near
him, though all the world should be destroyed. See an example in the parable of
the rich man, that having stored up abundance of wealth for many years, said
unto his own soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, live at
ease, Luke 11.17.
eat, drink, and take thy pastime: whereas his soul was fetched away
presently. And seeing this natural corruption is in every man's heart, we must
daily fight against it, and labor by all might and maine that it take no place
in us: for so long as it shall prevail, we shall be utterly unfit to make any
preparation to death. We ought rather to endeavor to attain to the mind and
meditation of S. Hierome, who testifies of himself on this manner, Whether I
wake, or sleep, or whatsoever I do, In epist.
me thinks I hear the sound of the trumpet, rise ye dead and come to
judgment.

The second thing which we are to practice, that we may come to a serious
meditation of our own ends, is, to make prayer unto God that we might be
enabled to resolve our selves of death continually. Psalm. 39.4.
Thus David prayed, Lord make me to know mine end, and the measure of my
days, let me know how long I have to live, And Moses, Psa. 90.10.
Lord teach me to number my days, that I may apply mine heart unto wisdom. It
may be said, What need me^ pray to God that they may be able to number their
days? can not they of themselves reckon a few years and days, that are able
by art to measure the globe of the earth, and the spheres of heaven, and the
quantities of the stars, with their longitudes, latitudes, altitudes,
motions, and distances from the earth? No verily: For howesoeuer by a general
speculation we think something of our ends, yet unless the spirit of God be
our schoolmasters to teach us our duty, we shall never be able soundly to
resolve our selves of the presence and speediness of death. And therefore let
us pray with David and Moses that God would inlighten our minds with knowledge,
and fill our hearts with his grace that we might rightly consider of death, and
esteem of every day an hour as it were the day and hour of death.

The second duty in this general preparation is, that every man must daily
endeavor to take away from his own death the power and strength thereof. And
I pray you mark this point. The Philistims saw by experience that Sampson was
of great strength, and therefore they used means to know in what part of his
body it lay: and when they found it to be in the hair of his head, they
ceased not until it was cut off. In like manner the time will come when we must
encounter hand to hand with tyranous and cruel death: the best therefore is,
beforehand now while we have time to search where the strength of death lies,
which being once known, we must with speed cut off his Sa^psons locks, and
bereave him of his power, disarme him, and make him altogether unable to
prevail against us. Now to find out this matter, we need not to use the
council of any Dalilah; for we have the word of God which teaches us plai^ly
where the strength of death consists, namly in our sins, as Paul says, The
sting of death is sin. Well then, we knowing certainly that the power and
force of every man's partirular death lies in his own sins, must spend our
time and study in using good means that our sins may be removed and
pardoned. And therefore we must daily inure our selves in the practice of two
duties. One is to humble our selves for all our sins past, partly confessing
the^ against our selves, partly in prayer crying to heaven for the pardon of
them. The other is for time to come to turn unto God, and to carry a purpose,
resolution, and endeavor in all things to reform both heart and life according
to gods word. These are the very principal and proper duties, whereby the power
of death is much rebated, and he is made of a mighty and bloody enemy so far
forth friendly and tractable, that we may with comfort encounter with him and
prevail too. Therefore I commend these duties to your christian
considerations, and careful practice, desiring that ye would spend your days
ever hereafter in doing of them. If a man were to deal with a mighty dragon or
serpent hand to hand, in such wise as he must either kill or be killed, the
best thing were to bereave him of his sting, or of that part of the body where
his poison lies: now death it self is a serpent, dragon, or scorpion, and
sin is the sting and poison whereby he wounds and kills us. Wherefore without
any more delay, see that ye pull out his sting: the practice of the foresaid
duties is as it were a fit and worthy instrument to do the deed. Have thou
been a person ignorant of Gods will, a contemner of his word and worship, a
blasphemer of his name, a breaker of his Sabbaths, disobedient to parents and
magistrates, a murderer, a fornicatour, a rayler, a slanderer, a covetous
person, etc. reform these thy sins and all other like to them, pull the^ out
by the roots from thy heart, and cast them off. So many sins as be in thee,
so many stings of death be also in thee to wound thy soul to eternal death:
therefore let no one sin remain for which thou have not humbled thy self and
repented seriously. When death hurts any man, it takes the weapons whereby he
is hurt, from his own hand. It cannot do us the least hurt but by the force of
our own sins. Wherefore I say again, and again, lay this point to your
hearts, and spend your strength, life, and health, that ye may before ye die,
abolish the strength of death. A man may put a serpent in his bosom when the
sting is out: and we may let death creep into our bosoms, and gripe us with
his legs, and stab us at the heart, so long as he brings not his venime and
poison with him.

And because the former duties are so necessary, as none can be more, I will use
some reasons yet further to enforce the^. Whatsoever a man would do when he is
dying, the same he ought to do every day while he is living: now the most
notorious and wicked person that ever was, when he is dying will pray and
desire others to pray for him, and promise amendment of life, protesting that
if he might live, he would become a practitioner in all the good duties of
faith, repentance, and reformation of life. Oh therefore be careful to do this
every day. Again, the saying is true, he that would live when he is dead, must
die while he is alive, namely, to his sins. Would thou then live eternally?
sue to heaven for thy pardon, and see that now in thy lifetime thou die to
thine own sins. Lastly, wicked Balaam would feign die the death of the
righteous: but alas, it was to small purpose: for he would by no means live the
life of the righteous. For his continual purpose and meaning was to follow his
old ways in sorceries and covetousness. Now the life of a righteous man
stands in the humbling of himself for his sins past, and in a careful
reformation of life to come. Would thou then die the death of the righteous?
then look unto it, that thy life be the life of the righteous: if ye will
needs live the life of the unrighteous, ye must look to die the death of the
unrighteous. Remember this, and content not your selves to hear the word, but
be doers of it: for ye learn no more indeed, what measure of knowledge soever
ye have, then ye practice.

The third duty in our general preparation, is in this life to enter into the
first degree of life eternal. For as I have said, there be three degrees of
life everlasting, and the first of them is in this present life: for he that
would live in eternal happiness for ever, must begin in this world to rise
out of the grave of his own sins, in which by nature he lies buried, and
live in newness of life, as it is said in the Revelation, He that will escape
the second death, Reu. 20.6*
must be made partaker of the first resurrection. And Paul says to the
Colossians, that they were in this life delivered from the power of darkness,
Col. 1* ^3.
and translated into the kingdom of Christ. And Christ says to the church of
the Jews, the kingdom of heaven is amongst you. Now this first degree of life
is, when a man can say with Paul I live not, but Christ lives in me: that is, I
find partly by the testimony of my sanctified conscience, and partly by
experirience, that Christ my redeemer by his spirit guides and governs my
thoughts, will, affections, and all the powers of body and soul, according to
the blessed direction of his holy will. Now that we may be able truly to say
this, we must have three gifts and graces of God, wherein especially this first
degree of life consists. The first is saving knowledge, whereby we do truly
resolve our selves that God the father of Christ is our father, Christ his
son our redeemer, and the holy Ghost our co^forter. That this knowledge is
one part of life eternal, Ioh. 17.
it appears by the saying of Christ in John. This is life eternal, that is,
the beginning and entrance to life eternal, to know thee the only God and
whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Phil. 2.
The second grace, is peace of conscience which passes al understanding: and
therefore Paul says; that the kingdom of heaven is righteousness, peace of
conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost. Rom 4.
The horror of a guilty conscience is the beginning of death and destruction:
therefore peace of conscience derived from the death of Christ, is life and
happiness. The third is the regiment of the spirit, whereby the heart and life
of man is ordered according to the word of God. For Paul says, that they that
are the children of God are led by the spirit of Christ. Romans 8.14.
Now seeing this is so, that if we would live eternally, we must begin to live
that blessed and eternal life before we die; here we must be careful to
reform two common errors. The first is, that a man enters into eternal life
when he dies and not before; which is a flat untruth. Our Savior Christ
said to Zacheus, This day is salvation come to thy house: giving us to
understand, that a man the^ begins to be saved, when God does effectually call
him by the ministry of his Gospel. Whosoever then will be saved when he is
dying and dead, must begin to be saved while he is now living. His salvation
must begin in this life, that would come to salvation after this life:
Verily, Ioh 5.24.
verily, says Christ, he that hears my word, and believes in him that sent
me, has eternal life, namely, in this present life. The second error is, that
howsoever a man live, if when he is dying he can lift up his his eyes, and say,
Lord have mercy upon me, he is certainly saved. Behold a very fond and
foolish conceit, that deceiues many a man. It is al one as if an arrand thief
should thus reason with himself, and say, I will spend my days in robbing and
stealing, I fear neither arraignment nor execution. For at the very time when
I am to be turned off from the ladder, if I do but call upon the judge I know
I shall have my pardon. Behold a most dangerous and desperate course: and the
very ^ame is the practice of careless men in the matter of their salvation.
For a man may die with Lord have mercy in his mouth, and perish eternally;
except in this world he enter into the first degree of eternal life. For not
every one that says Lord, Math. 7.21.
Lord, shall enter into heaven but he that does the will of the father which is
in heaven.

The fourth duty is to exercise and inure our selves in dying by little and
little so long as we live here upon earth, before we come to die indeed. And
as me^ that are appointed to run a race, exercise themselves before in running,
that they may get the victory; so should we begin to die now while we are
living, that we might dywel in the end. But some may say, how should this be
done? Paul gives us direction in his own example, when he says, 1. Cor. 15.31
By the rejoicing which I have in Christ, I die daily. And he died daily not
only because he was often in danger of death by reason of his calling; but
also because in all his dangers and troubles, he inured himself to die. For
when men do make the right use of their afflictions, whether they be in body
or mind or both, and do with all their might endeavor to bear them
patiently; humbling themselves as under the correction of god, then they begin
to die well. And to do this indeed is to take an excellent course. He that
would mortify his greatest sins, must begin to do it with small sins; which,
when they are once reformed, a man shall be able more easily to overcome his
master-sins. So likewise he that would be able to bear the cross of all
crosses, namely, death it self; must first of all learn to bear small
crosses, as sicknesses in body. and troubles in mind, with losses of goods
and of friends, and of good name: Morspost crucem minor est.
which I may fitly term little deaths, and the beginnings of death it self:
and we must first of all acquaint our selves with these little deaths, before we
can be able to bear the great death of all. Again, the afflictions and
calamities of this life are as it were the harbingers and puruiers of death:
and we are first to learn how to entertain these messengers, that when death
the Lord himself shall come, we may in better manner entertain him. This
point Bilney the martyr well considered, who oftentimes before he was burned,
put his finger into the flame of the candle, not only to make trial of his
ability in suffering, but also to arm and strengthen himself against greater
torments in death. Thus ye see the fourth duty, which ye must in any wise
learn and remember, because we cannot be able to bear the pangs of death
well, unless we be first well schooled and nurtured by sundry trialls in this
life.

The fifth and last duty is set down by Solomon, All that thine hand shall
find to do, Eccles. 9.10
do it with all thy power. And mark the reason. For there is neither work,
nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go. To
the same purpose Paul says, Do good to all men while ye have time. Gal. 6.10.
Therefore if any man be able to do any good service either to gods Church, or
to the Commonwealth, or to any private man, let him do it with all speed and
with all his might, lest death it self prevent him. He that has care thus to
spend his days, shall with much comfort and peace of conscience end his life.

Thus much of general preparation. Now follows the particular, which is in
the time of sickness. And here first of all I will show what is the doctrine of
the Papists, and then afterward the truth. By the popish order and practice,
when a man is about to die, he is enjoined three things. First, to make
sacramental confession, specially if it be in any mortal sin; secondly to
receive the eucharist; thirdly to require his annoyling that is, the sacrament
(as they call it) of extreme unction.

Sacramental confession, they term a rehearsal or enumeration of all man's
sins to a priest, that he may receive absolution. But against this kind of
confession, sundry reasons may be alleged. First of all, it has no warrant
either by commandment or example in the whole word of God. They say yes: and
they endeavor to prove it thus: He which lies in any mortal sin, is by
Gods law bound to do penance and to seek reconciliation with God: now the
necessary means after baptism to obtain reconciliatio^, is confession of all
our sins to a priest, Because Christ has appointed Priests to be judges upon
earth, with such measure of authority, that no man falling after baptism can
without their sentence and determination be reconciled; and they can not
rightly judge, unless they know all a man's sins: therefore all that fall
after baptism are bound by Gods word to open all their sins to the priest.
Ans. It is false which they say that priests are judges, having power to
examine and take knowledge of men's sins, and jurisdiction whereby they can
properly absolve and pardon or retain the^. For Gods word has given no more
to man, but a ministry of reconciliation, whereby in the name of God, and
according to his word, he does preach, declare, and pronounce, that God does
pardon or not pardon his sins. Again, pardon may truly be pronounced, and
right judgment of the estate of any man, without a particular rehearsal of
all his sins. For he which soundly and truly repents of one or some few
sins, repents of all. Secondly, this confession is ouerturned by the practice
of the Prophets and Apostles, who not only absolved particular persons, but
also whole Churches without exaction of an auricular confession. When Nathan
the Prophet had rebuked David for his two great and horrible crimes, David
touched with remors said, I have sinned, 2. Sam. 12 ^2
and Natha^ presently without further examination declared unto him in the name
of God that his sins were forgiven him. Thirdly, it can not be proved by any
good and sufficient proofs, that this confession was used in the Church of God
til after five or six hundred years were expired. For the confession which
was then in use, was either public before the Church, or the opening of a
public fault to some private person in secret. Therefore to urge sick men unto
it lying at the point of death, is to lay more burdens on the^, then ever God
appointed.

And whereas they make it a necessary thing to receive the Eucharist in the
time of sickness toward death, and that privately of the sick party alone, they
have no warrant for their practice and opinion. For in the want of the
sacrament there is no danger, but in the contempt: and the very contempt it
self is a sin which may be pardoned, if we repent. And there is no reason why
we should think that sick men should be deprived of the comfort of the Lords
supper, if they receive it not in death, because the fruit and efficacy of the
Sacrament once received, is not to be restrained to the time of receiving, but
it extends it self to the whole time of man's life afterward. Again, the supper
of the Lord is no private action, but merely Ecclesiastical: and therefore to
be celebrated in the meeting and assembly of Gods people; as our Savior Christ
prescribes, when he says,, Do ye this: and Paul in saying, When ye come
together. Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 12, 10.
But it is alleged that the Israelites did eat the Pascal lamb in their
houses when they were in Egypt. Ans. The Israelites had then no liberty to
make any public meeting for that end: and God commanded that the Paschall
Lamb should be eaten in all the houses of the Israelites at one and the same
instant: and that in effect was as much as if it had bin public. Again, they
allege a Canon of the Council of Nice; which decrees, Can. 12.
that men being about to die, must receive the Eucharist, and not frau dari
viatico.
be deprived of the provision of food necessary for their journey. Ans. The
Council made no decree touching the administration of the Sacrament to all men
that die, but to such only as fall away from the faith in persequution, or fell
into any other notorious crime, and were thereupon excommunicate, and so
remained till death: and either then or somewhat before testified their
repentance for their offenses. And the Canon was made for this end, that such
persons might be assured that they were again received into the church, and by
this means depart with more comfort. Thirdly it is objected, that in the
primitive Church, part of the Eucharist was carried by a lad to Serapion an
aged man, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 36.
lying sick in his bed. Ans. It was indeed the custom of the ancient
Church from the very beginning, that the elements of bread and wine should be
sent by some of the Deacons to the sick, which were absent from the asse^bly.
And yet nevertheless here is no footing for private communions. For the
Eucharist was only then sent, when the rest of the church did openly
communicate; and such as were the^ abse^t only by reason of sickness, and
desired to be partakers of that blessed communion, were to be reputed as
present. Lastly, it is objected, that it was the manner of men and women in
former times B^sil. epi. ad Caes. Tert. lib. 2. ad vxor. Hier. in Apol. pro
lib. in Job.
to carry part of the sacrament home to their houses, and to reserve it till the
time of necessity, as the time of sickness, and such like. Ans. The reservation
of the sacrament was but a superstitious practice, though it be ancient. For
out of the administration, that is, before it begin, and after it is ended, the
sacrament cease to be a sacrament, and the elements to be elements. As for
the practice of the^ that used to cramme the Eucharist into the mouth of them
that were diseased, Conc. Carth. 3. can. 6.
it is not only superstitious but also very aburd.

As for the Annoying of the sick, that is, the anointing of the body,
specially the organes or instruments of the senses, that the party may obtain
the remission of his sins, and comfort against all the temptations of the
devil in the hour of death, and strength more easily to bear the pains of
sickness and the pangs of death, and be again restored to his corporal health,
if it be expedient for the salvation of his soul, it is but a dotage of man's
brain, and has not so much as a show of reason to justify it. The fifth of
James is commonly alleged to this purpose, but the anointing there mentioned
is not of the same kind with this greasy sacrament of the Papists. For that
anointing of the body was a ceremony used by the Apostles and others, when they
put in practice the miraculous gift of healing, which gift is now ceased.
Secondly, that anointing had a promise that the party anointed should recover
his health: but this popish anointing has no such promise; because for the
most part the persons thus anointed die afterward without recovery: whereas
those which were anointed in the primitive Church always recovered. Thirdly,
the ancient anointing served only for the procuring of health, but this te^ds
further to the procuring of remission of sins, and strength in temptation. Thus
having seen the doctrine of the Papists, I come now to speak of the true and
right manner of making particular preparation before death, which contains
three sorts of duties: one concerning god, the other concerning a ma^s own
self, the third concerning our neighbor. The first concerning God, is to
seek to be reconciled unto him in Christ, though we have bin long assured of
his favor. All other duties must come after in the second place, and they are
of no effect without this. Now this reco^ciliatio^ must be sought for and is
obtained by a renewing of our former faith and repentance: and they must be
renewed on this manner. So soon as a man shall feel any manner of sickness to
seize upon his body, he must consider with himself whe^nce it arises: and
after serious consideration, he shall find that it comes not by chance or
fortune, but by the providence of God. This done, he must go yet further and
consider for what cause the Lord should afflict his body with any sickness or
disease. And he shall find by gods word, that sickness comes ordinarily and
usually of sin. Lam. 3.36.
Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? man suffers for his sin. It is
true indeed, there be other causes of the wa^ts of the body, and of sickness,
beside sin; and though they be not known to us, yet they are known to the
Lord. Hereupon Christ when he saw a certain blind man, and was demanded what
was the cause of the blindness, answered, neither has this man sinned nor his
parents, but that the works of God should be showed on him, Ioh. 9, 2.
Yet we for our parts, who are to go not by the secret, but by the revealed
will of God, must make this use of our sickness, that it is sent unto us for our
sins. When Christ healed the man sick of the palsy, he says, Be of good
comfort, Math. 9.2.
thy sins are forgiven thee: and when he had healed the man by the poole of
Bethesda, that had bin sick 38. yers, Ioh. 5.14.
he bids him sin no more least a worse thing happen unto him: giving them both
to understand that their sickness came by reason of their sins. And thus
should every sick man resolve himself. Now when we have proceeded thus far,
and have as it were laid our finger upon the right and proper cause of our
sickness, three things concerning our sins must be performed of us in
sickness. First, we must make a new examination of our hearts and lives, and say
as the Israelites said in affliction, Lam. 3.40.
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. Secondly, we
must make a new confession to God of our new and particular sins, as God
sends new corrections and chastisment. Psalm. 32.5.
When David had the hand of God very heavy upon him for his sins, so as his
very bones and moisture consumed within him, he made confession of them unto
God, and thereupon obtained his pardon and was healed. The third thing is to
make new prayer and more earnest then ever before, with sighs and groans of
the spirit, and that for pardon of the same sins, and for reconciliation with
God in christ. In the exercise of these 3. duties stands the renouation of our
faith and repentance whereby they are increased, quickened, and revived. And the
more sickness preuailes and takes place in the body, the more should we be
careful to put the^ in ure: that spiritual life might increase as temporal
life is decayed. When king Ezechias lay sick, as he thought upon his
death-bedde; he wept as for some other causes so also for his sins, and
withal he prayed God to cast them behind his back. David made certain Psalms
when he was sick, or at the least upon the occasion of his sickness, as namely,
the 6. the 32. the 38. the 39. etc. and they are al psalms of repe^ta^ce: in
which we may see how in distress of the body and mind he renewed his faith and
repentance, heartily bewailing his sins and entreating the Lord for the
pardon of them. Manasses, one that fell from God, and gave himself to many
horrible sins, when he was taken captive and imprisoned in Babylon, 2. Chro.
33.12.13.
He prayed to the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of
his fathers, and prayed unto him: and God was entreated of him, and heard his
prayer, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom, and then
Manasses knew that the Lord was God. Now look what Manasses did in this
tribulation, the same thing must we do in the time of our bodily sickness.

Here I have occasion to mention a notorious fault that is very common in this
age, even among such as have long lived in the bosom of the Church; and that
is this: Men now adays are so far from renewing their faith and repentance,
that when they lie sick and are drawing toward death, they must be catechized
in the doctrine of faith and repentance, as if they had been but of late
received into the Church. Whosoever will, but as occasion is offered, visit the
sick, shall find this to be true which I say. What a shame is this, that when
a man has spent his life and days in the church for the space of 20. or 30.
or 40. years, he should at the very end of all and not before, begin to
enquire, what faith and what repentance is, and how his soul might be saved?
This one sin argues the great security of this age, and the great contempt of
God and his word. Well, let al men hereafter in time to come, be warned to take
heed of this exceeding negligence in matters of salvation, and to use all good
means beforehand, that they may be able in sickness and in the time of death
to put in practice the spiritual exercises of invocation and repentance.

Now if so be it fall out that the sick party cannot of himself renew his
own faith and repentance, he must seek the help of others. When the man that
was sick of the dead palsy could not go to Christ himself, he got others to
bear him in his bed; Mark. 2.
and when they could not come near for the multitude, they uncovered the roof
of the house, and let the bed down before Christ: even so, when sick men
cannot alone by themselves do the good duties to which they are bound, they
must borrow help from their fellow members; who are partly by their counsel
to put to their helping hand, and partly by their prayers to present them unto
God, and to bring them into the presence of Christ.

And touching help in this case, sundry duties are to be performed. Saint
James sets down four, two whereof concern the sick patient, and other two
such as be helpers. The first duty of the sick man is to send for help: where
two circumstances must be considered; who must be sent for, and when. For the
first S. James says, Is any sick among you? Iam. 5.14.
let him call for the elders of the Church. Whereby are meant not only
Apostles and all ministers of the Gospel, but others also (as I take it) which
were men ancient for years endued with the spirit of understanding and prayer,
and had withal the gift of working miracles and of healing the sick. For in
the primitive Church this gift was for a time so plentifully bestowed on the^
that believed in Christ, Tertul. de corona milit. ca. 11. and de Idol. c. 11.
that soldiers cast out devils, and parents wrought miracles on their
children. Hence we may learn, that howsoever it be the duty of the Ministers
of the word principally to visit and comfort the sick, yet is it not their
duty alone: for it belongs to them also which have knowledge of Gods word, and
the gift of prayer. Heb. 3.13.
Exhort one an other (says the holy Ghost) while it is called to day. And
again, 2 Thessalonians. 5.11.14.
Admonish them that are disordered, and comfort those that are weak. And
indeed in equity it should be the duty of every Christian man to comfort his
brother in sickness. Here we must needs take knowledge of the common fault
of men and women when they come to visit their neighbors and friends they can
not speak a word of instruction and comfort, but spend the time either in
silence, gazing, and looking on; or in uttering words to little or no purpose
saying to the sick party, that they are sorry to see him in that case, that
they would have him to be of good comfort, but wherein, and by what means they
cannot tell: that they doubt not but that he shall recover his health and live
with them still, and be merry as in former time: that they will pray for him:
whereas al their prayers are nothing else but the Apostles Creed, or the ten
Commandments, and the Lords prayer uttered without understanding. And this is
the common comfort thar sick men get at the hands of their neighbors, when
they come unto them: and all this comes either because men live in ignorance of
Gods word, or because they falsely think that the whole burden of this duty
lies upon the shoulders of the minister.

The second circumstance is, when the sick party must send for the Elders to
instruct him and pray for him. And that is in the very first place of al before
any other help be sought for. Where the Divine ends, there the Physician must
begin: and it is a very preposterous course that the Divine should there begin
where the Physician makes an end. For till help be had for the soul, and
sin which is the root of sickness be cured, physic for the body is nothing.
Therefore it is a thing much to be disliked, that in all places almost the
Physician is first sent for, and comes in the beginning of the sickness, and the
Minister comes when a man is half dead, and is then sent for oftentimes, when
the sick party lies drawing on and gasping for breath, as though Ministers of
the gospel in these days were able to work miracles.

The second duty of the sick party is to confess his sins, as S. James
says, Iam. 5.6.
Confess your sins one to another, and pray one for another. It will be
said, that this is to bring in again Popish shrift. Ans. Confession of our
sins, and that unto men was never denied of any: the question only is of the
manner and order of making confession. And for this cause we must put a great
difference between popish shrift, and the confession of which S. James
speaks. For he requires only a confession of that or those sins which lie
upon a man's conscience when he is sick: but the popish doctrine requires a
particular enumeration of al man's sins. Again, S. James inioynes confession
only as a thing meet and convenient, but the Papists as a thing necessary to
the remission of sins. Thirdly, S. James permits that confession be made to any
man, and by one man to another mutually; whereas popish shrift is made only to
the priest. The second duty then is, that the sick party troubled in mind with
the memory and consideration of any of his sins past, or any manner of way
tempted by the devil, shall freely of his own accord open his case to such as
are both able and willing to help him, that he may receive comfort and die in
peace of conscience.

Thus much of the sick man's duty: now follow the duties of helpers. The first
is to pray over him, that is, in his presence to pray with him and for him, and
by prayer to present his very person and his whole estate unto God. The Prophet
Elizeus, the Apostle Paul, 2 Kin. 4.32. Act. 20.10. Ioh. 11.14.
and our Savior Christ used this manner of praying, when they would
miraculously restore temporal life: and therefore it is very meet that the same
should be used also of us, that we might the better stir up our affection in
prayer, and our compassion to the sick when we are about to entreat the Lord
for the remission of their sins, and for the salvation of their souls.

The second duty of him that comes as an helper is to anoint the sick party
with oil. Now this anointing was an outward ceremony which was used with the
gift of healing, which is now ceased: and therefore I omit to speak further of
it.

Thus much of the duty which the sick man owes to God; now follow the duties
which he is to perform unto himself, and they are twofold: one concerns his
soul, the other his body. The duty concerning his soul is, that he must
arm and furnish himself against the immoderate fear of present death. And the
reason hereof is plain: because howsoever naturally men fear death through
the whole course of their lives more or less, yet in the time of sickness
when death approaches, this natural fear bred in the bone will most of all
show it self, even in such sort, as it will astonish the senses of the sick
party; and sometime cause desperation. Therefore it is necessary that we
should use means to strengthen our selves against the fear of death.

The means are of two sorts: practices, and meditations: Practices are two
especially. The first is, that the sick man must not so much regard death it
self as the benefits of God which are obtained after death. He must not fix
his mind upon the consideration of the pangs and torments of death; but all
his thoughts and affections must be set upon that blessed estate that is
enjoyed after death. He that is to pass over some great and deep river, must
not look downward to the stream of the water; but if he would prevent fear,
he must set his foot sure and cast his eye to the bank on the further side:
and so must he that draws near death as it, were, look over the waves of
death, and directly fix the eye of his faith upon eternal life. The second
practice is to look upon death in the glass of the Gospel, and not in the
glass of the Law: that is, we must consider death not as it is propounded in
the Law, and look upon that terrible face which the law gives unto it; but
as it is set forth in the Gospel. Death in the law is a curse and the
downe-fall to the pit of destruction: in the Gospel it is the entrance into
heaven: the lawsets forth death as death, the Gospel sets forth death as no
death, but as a sleep only: because it speaks of death as it is altered and
changed by the death of Christ; by the virtue whereof death is properly no
death to the servants of God. When men shall have care on this manner to
consider of death, it will be a notable means to strengthen and stablish them
against al immoderate fears and terrors that usually rise in sickness.

The meditations which serve for this purpose are innumerable* but I will touch
only those which are the most principal and the grounds of the rest: and they
are four in number. The first is borrowed from the special providence of God;
namely that the death of every man, much more of every child of God, is not
only foreseen, but also foreappointed of God; yea the death of every man
deserved and procured by his sins, is laid upon him by God, who in that respect
may be said to be the cause of every man's death, So says Anna, 1. Sam. 2.6
The Lord kills and makes alive. The Church of Jerusalem confessed that
nothing came to pass in the death of Christ, but that which the foreknowledge
and eternal counsel of God had appointed. Act. 4.28.
And therefore the death also of every member of Christ is foreseen and
ordained by the special decree and providence of God. I add further, that the
very circumstances of death, as the time when, the place where, the manner how,
the beginning of sickness, the continuance and the end, every* fit in the
sickness, and the pangs of death are particularly set down in the counsel of
God. The very hairs of our heads are numbered (says our Savior Christ:) and a
sparrowe lights not on the ground without the will of our heavenly father.
David faith excelle^tly. Psalm. 139.15.16.
My bones are not hid from thee, though I was made in a secret place, and
fashioned beneath in the earth: thine eyes did see me when I was without form,
for in thy book were al things written, which in continuance were fashioned,
when there was nine of them before. And he prays to God to put his tears into
his bottle. Psalm 56.8.
Now if this be true, that God has bottles for the very tears of his
servants, much more has he bottles for their blood, and much more does he
respect and regard their pains and miseries with all the circumstances of
sickness and death. The careful meditation of this one point is a notable
means to arm us against fear and distrust, and impatience in the time of
death; as some examples in this case will easily manifest, I held my tongue and
said nothing, says David: Psa. 39.10.
but what was it that caused this patience in him? the cause follows in these
words: because thou Lord did it. And Joseph says to his brethren: Genesis 42.
Fear not* for it was the Lord that sent me before you. Mark here how Joseph
is armed against impatience and grief and coffeehouse by the very
consideration of gods providence: and so in the same manner shall we be
confirmed against all fears and sorrows, and say with David, Psalm 116.13.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints: if this
persuasion be once settled in our hearts, that all things in sickness and death
come to pass unto us by the providence of god, who turns all things to the
good of them that love him.

The second meditation is to be borrowed from the excellent promise that God
has made to the death of the righteous: which is, Blessed are they that die in
the Lord, Apoc. 14.13
for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them. The author of
truth that cannot lie has spoken it. Now then let a man but thoroughly consider
this, that death joined with a reformed life has a promise of blessedness
adioined unto it, and it alone will be a sufficient means to stay the rage of
our affections, and al inordinate fear of death: and the rather if we mark
wherein this blessedness consists. In death we are indeed thrust out of our
old dwelling places, namely these houses of clay and earthly tabernacles of
our bodies, wherein we have made long abode: but what is the end? surely that
living and dying in Christ, we might have a building given of God, that is, 2.
Cor. 5.1^
an house not made with hands, but eternal in heaven, which is unspeakable
and immortal glory. If a poor man should be commanded by a Prince to put off
his torn and beggary garments, and in stead thereof to put on royal and costly
robes, it would be a great rejoicing to his heart: oh then what joyful news
must this be unto all repentant and sorrowful sinners, when the king of
heaven and earth comes unto the^ by death and bids them lay down their bodies
as ragged and patched garments, and prepare themselves to put on the princely
robe of immortality? No tongue can be able to express the excellency of this
most blessed and happy estate.

The third meditation is borrowed from the estate of all the^ that are in
Christ, whether living or dying. He that dies believing in Christ dies not
forth of Christ but in him, having both his body and soul really coupled to
Christ according to the tenor of the covenant of grace: and though after death
body and soul be severed one from another, yet neither of the^ are severed or
disioyned from Christ. The conjunction which is once begun in this life
remains eternally. And therefore though the soul go from the body, and the
body it self rot in the grave, yet both are still in Christ, both in the
covenant, both in the favor of god as before death, and both shall again be
joined together; the body by the virtue of the former co^iunctio^ being raised
to eternal life. Indeed if this vnio^ with Christ were dissolved as the
co^iunctio^ of body and soul is, it might be so^e matter of discomfort and
fear, but the foundation and substance of our mystical conjunction with
Christ both in respect of our bodies and souls enduring for ever, must needs
be a matter of exceeding joy and comfort.

The 4. meditation is that god has promised his special, blessed, and
comfortable presence unto his servants when they are sick or dying, or any way
distressed. When thou passest thorough the waters, I will be with thee (says
the Lord) and through the floods that they do not ouerflowe thee: when thou
walk thorough the very fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the
flame kindle upon thee. Now the Lord does manifest his presence three ways:
the first is by moderating and lessening the pains and torments of sickness and
death, as the very words of the former promise do plainly import. Hence it
comes to pass that to many men the sorrows and pangs of death, are nothing so
grievous and troublesome, as the afflictions and crosses which are laid on them
in the course of their lives. The second way of Gods presence is by an inward
and unspeakable comfort of the spirit, as Paul says, Romans 5 35.
We rejoice in tribulations, knowing that tribulation brings forth patience,
etc. but why is this rejoicing? because (says he in the next words) the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost. Again Paul having in
some grievous sickness received the sentence of death, says of himself, that as
the sufferings of Christ did abound in him, 2. Cor. 1 5.
so his consolation did abound through Christ. Here then we see that when
earthly comforts fail the Lord himself draws near the bed of the sick, as
it were visiting them in his own person, and ministering unto them refreshing
for their souls: with his right hand he holds up their heads, Cant. 2.9.
and with his left hand he embraces them. The third means of Gods presence is
the ministry of his good Angels, whom the Lord has appointed as keepers and
nources unto his servants to hold the^ up and to bear them in their arms as
nources do young children, Psalm. 30.
and to be as a guard unto them against the devil and his angels. And all this
is verified specially in sickness, at which time the holy angels are not only
present with such as fear god, but ready also to receive and to carry their
souls into heaven, as appears by the example of Lazarus.

And thus much of the first duty which a sick man is to perform unto himself,
namely that he must by all means possible arm and strengthen himself against
the fear of death: now follows the second duty which is concerning the body:
and that is that all sick persons must be careful to preserve health and life
till God do wholly take it away. For Paul says, None of us lives to
himself, Romans 14.5.8.
neither does any die to himself: for whether we live, we live unto the Lord:
or whether we die, we die unto the Lord: whether we live therefore or die we
are the Lords. For this cause we may not do with our lives as we will, but we
must reserve the whole disposition thereof unto God, for whose glory we are to
live and die. And this temporal life is a most precious jewel, and as the
common saying is, life is very sweet, because it is given to man for this end,
that he might have some space of time wherein he might use all good means to
attain to life everlasting. Life is not bestowed on us, that we should spend
our days in our lusts and vain pleasures, but that we might have liberty to
come out of the kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of grace, and from the
bondage of sin into the glorious liberty of the sons of God: and in this
respect special care must be had of preservation of life, till God do call us
hence.

In the preservation of life 2. things must be considered: the means, and the
right use of the means. The means is good and wholesome physic: which
though it be despised of many as a thing unprofitable and needles, yet must it
be esteemed as an ordinance and blessing of God. This appears because the
spirit of God has given approbation unto it in the Scriptures. When it was the
good pleasure of god to restore life unto king Ezekias, 2. Kin. 10.7.
a lump of dry figs by the prophets appointment was laid to his boil and
he was healed. Indeed this cure was in some sort miraculous, because he was
made whole in the space of 2. or 3. days, and the third day he went up to the
temple: yet the bunch of figs was a natural or ordinary medicine or plaster
serving to soften and ripen tumors or swellings in the flesh. Gal. l. 1. d^
art. curatiua, cap. 6.
And the Samaritane is commended for the binding up and for the pouring Luke
10.3^
in of wine and oil into the wounds of the man that lay wounded between
Jerusalem and Jericho. Now this dealing of his was a right practice of
physic: Valles. de sac. philos. c. 88.
for the wine served to cleanse the wound and to ease the pain within: and
oil served to supple the flesh and to assuage the pain without. And the
Prophet Esaias seems to commend this physic, when he says, From the sole of
the foot there is nothing whole therein, Isa. 1.6.
but ^^unds, and swellings, and sores full of corruption: they have not been
wrapped nor bound up, nor mollified with oil. And whereas God did not command
circumcision of children before the eight day, he followed a rule of physic
observed in all ages, that the life of the child is very uncertain till the
first seven days be expired, as we may see by the example of the child which
David had by Bathsheba which died the seaue^th day. And upon the very same
ground heathen men used not to name their children before the eight day. Arist.
de hist. ani^ l. 7. cap. 1.
Thus then it is manifest that the use of physic is lawful and commendable.

Furthermore, that physic may be well applied to the mainetenance of health,
special care must be had to make choice of such physicians as are known to be
well learned, and men of experience, as also of good conscience and good
religion. For as in other callings, so in this also, there be sundry abuses
which may endanger the lives and the health of men. Some venture upon the bare
inspection of the urine, without further direction or knowledge of the estate
of the sick, to prescribe and minister as shall seem best unto the^. But the
learned in this faculty plainly a vouch, Forest. de vrin iudiciis lib. 3.
Lang. l. 2. epist. 41.
that this kind of dealing tendes rather to kill then to cure; and that sundry
men are indeed killed thereby. For judgment by the urine is most deceitful:
the water of him that is sick of a pestilent fever even unto death, looks for
substance and color as the water of a whole man: and so does the water of them
that are sick of a quartane or of any other intermitting fever; specially if
they have used a good diet from the beginning: as also of them that have the
pleuresie, or the inflammatio^ of the lungs, or the Squinancie, oftentimes when
they are near death. Now then considering the waters of such as are at the
point of death, appear as the vrines of hail and sound men; one and the same
urine may foresignifie both life and death, and be a sign of diverse, nay of
contrary diseases. A thin, crude, and pale urine in them that be in health,
is a toke^ of want of digestion: but in them that are sick of a sharp or
burning ague, it betokens the frenzy, and is a certain sign of death. Again,
others there be that think it a small matter to make experiments of their
devised medicines upon the bodies of their patients, whereby the health which
they hoped for is either hindered or much decayed. Thirdly, there be others
which minister no physic at any time, or use phlebotomie without the direction
of judicial Astrology: but if they shall follow this course always, they
must needs kill many a man. Put the case that a man full bodied is taken with a
pleurisy, the moon being in L^one, what must be done? The learned in this art
say, he must presently be let blood: but by Astrology a stay must be made,
till the moon be removed from Leo to the house of the sun: but by that time
the impostume will be so much increased by the gathering together of the humors,
that it can neither be dissolved nor ripened: and by this means the sick
party wanting help in time, shall die either by inflammation, or by the
consumption of the lungs. Again, Lang. lib. 1. epist. ^3. Se Ganiuettus called
Amcus medico^^m.
when a man is sick of the Squinancie, or of the fever called Synaichus, the
moon then being in malignant aspects with any of the unfortunate planets (as
Astrologers use to speak) if letting of blood be deferred till the moon be
freed from the foresaid aspects, the party dies in the mean season. Therefore
they are far wide that minister purgations and let blood no otherwise then
they are counseled by the constitution of the stars, whereas it is a far
better course to consider the matter of the disease, with the disposition and
ripening of it; as also the courses and simptomes and crisis thereof. This
being so, there is good cause that sick men should as well be careful to
make choice of meet Physicians to whom they might commend the care of their
health, as they are careful to make choice of Lawyers for their worldly
suites, and Divines for cases of conscience.

Furthermore, all men must here be warned to take heed, that they use not such
means as have no warrant. Of this kind are all charms or spells, of what
words soever they consist: characters and figures either in paper, wood, or
wax: all amulets, and ligatures, which serve to hang about the neck or other
parts of the body, except they be grounded upon some good natural reason;
Gal. l. 6. and 10 de simp. medic.
as white peonie hung about the neck, is good against the falling sickness: and
woolfe dung tied to the body is good against the cholicke, not by any
enchantment, but by inward virtue. Otherwise they are all vain and
superstitious: because neither by creation, nor by any ordinance in Gods word,
have they any power to cure a bodily disease. For words can do no more but
signify, and figures can do no more but represent. And yet nevertheless
these unlawful and absurd means are more used and sought for of common
people, then good physic. But it stands all men greatly in hand in no wise to
seek forth to inchanters, and sorcerers, which indeed are but witches and
wizzards, though they are commonly called cunning or wise men and women. It
were better for a man to die of his sickness, then to seek recovery by such
wicked persons. For if any turn after such as work with spirits, and after
soothsayers, to go an whoring after them, Leuit. 20.6
the Lord will set his face against them, and cut them off from among his
people. When Ahazia was sick, he sent to Baalzebub to the god of Ekron to know
whether he should recover or no: as the messengers were going, the Prophet
Elias met them, and said, Go and return to the King which sent you, and say
unto him, Thus says the Lord, Is it not because there is no God in Israel, ^.
Kin. ^.6.
that thou sendest to inquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron? therefore thou
shall not come down from thy bed on which thog art gone up, but shall die the
death. Therefore such kind of help is so far from curing any pain or
sickness, that it rather doubleth them and fasteneth them upon us.

Thus much of the means of health: now follows the manner of using the means;
concerning which, three rules must be followed. First of all, he that is to
take physic, must not only prepare his body, as physicians do prescribe;
but he must also prepare his soul by humbling himself under the hand of god
in his sickness for his sins, and make earnest prayer to God for the pardon
of them before any medicine come in his body. Now that this order ought to be
used appears plainly in this, that sickness springs from our sins as from a
root, which should first of all be stocked up, that the branches might more
easily die. And therefore Afa commended for many other things, is blamed for
this by the holy Ghost, 2. Chr. 16.1^
that he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians, and put his trust in
them. Oftentimes it comes to pass, that diseases curable in themselves, are
made incurable by the sins and the impenite^cie of the party: and therefore
the best way is for them that would have ease, when god begins to correct them
by sickness, then also to begin to humble themselves for all their sins, and
turn unto God.

The second rule is, that when we have prepared our selves, and are about to
use physic, we must sanctify it by the word of God and prayer, as we do our
meat and drink. 1, Tim. 4.3.
For by the word we must have our warrant, that the medicines prescribed are
lawful and good; and by prayer we must entreat the Lord for a blessing upon
them, in restoring of health, if it be the good will of God.

The third rule is, that we must carry in mind the right and proper end of
physic, least we deceive our selves. We must not therefore think that
physic serves to prevent old age or death it self. For that is not
possible, because God has set down that all men shall die and be changed. And
life consists in a temperature and proportion of natural heat and radical
moisture, which moisture being once consumed by the former heat, is by art
vnrepairable; and therefore death must needs follow. But the true end of
physic is to continue and lengthen the life of man to his natural period;
which is when nature, that has bin long preserved by all possible means, is
now wholly spent. Now this period, though it can not be lengthened by any skill
of man, yet may it easily be shortened, by intemperance in diet, by
Intercu^aneus carni fex.
drunkenness, and by violent diseases. But care must be had to avoid al such
evils, that the little lamp of corporal life may burn till it go out of it
self. For this very space of time is the very day of grace and salvation: and
whereas god in justice might have cut us off and have utterly destroyed us, yet
in great mercy he gives us thus much time, that we might prepare our selves to
his kingdom: which time when it is once spent, if a man would redeem it with
the price of ten thousand worlds he cannot have it.

And to conclude this point touching physic, I will here set down two
especial duties of the physician himself. The first is, that in the want and
defect of such as are to put sick men in mind of their sins, it is a duty
specially concerning him, he being a member of Christ, to advertise his parties
that they must truly humble themselves, and pray fervently to God for the
pardon of all their sins: and surely this duty would be more commonly
practiced then it is, if all physicians did consider that oftentimes they want
good success in their dealings, not because there is any want in art, or good
will, but because the party with whom they deal is impenitent. The second
duty is, when he sees manifest signs of death in his patient, not to depart
concealing them, but first of all to certify the patient thereof. There may be
and is too much nicenes in such concealements, and the plain truth in this
case known, is very profitable. For when the party is certain of his end, it
bereaues him of all confidence in earthly things, and makes him put all his
affiance in the mere mercy of God. When Ezechias was sick, the Prophet
speaks plainly to him, and says, Set thine house in order: for thou must
die, And what good we may reap by knowing certainly that we have received the
sentence of death, Paul shows when he says. we received the sentence of
death in our selves, 2. Cor. 1.9.
because we should not trust in our selves, but in God that raises the dead,

Having thus seen what be the duties of the sick man to himself, let us now
see what be the duties which he owes to his neighbor; and they are two. The
first is the duty of reconciliation, whereby he is freely to forgive all men,
and to desire to be forgiven of all. In the old testament, when a man was to
offer a bullock or lamb in sacrifice to God, he must leave his offering at
the altar, and first go and be reconciled to his brethren, if they had ought
against him: much more then must this be done, when we are in death to offer up
our selves, our bodies and souls, as an acceptable sacrifice unto God.
Question. What if a man cannot come to the speech of them with whom he would
be reconciled? or if he do, what if they will not be reconciled? Answ. When
any shall in their sickness seek and desire reconciliation, and cannot
obtain it, either because the parties are absent, or because they will not
relent; they have discharged their conscience, and God will accept their will
for the deed. As put case, a man lying sick on his death bed, is at enmity
with one that is beyond the sea; so as he cannot possibly have any speech with
him, if he would never so feign, how shall he stay his mind? why, he must
remember that in this case, a will and desire to be reconciled, is
reconciliation it self.

The second duty is, that those which are rulers and governors of others, must
have care and take order that their charges committed to them by God, be left
in good estate after their death: and here come three duties to be handled; the
first of the Magistrate, the second of the Minister, the third of the Master of
the family. The Magistrates duty is, before he die to provide, as much as he
can, for the godly and peaceable estate of the town, city, or commonwealth:
and that is done partly by procuring the maintenance of sound religion and
virtue, and partly by establishing of the execution of civil justice and
outward peace. Examples of the practice in Gods word are these. When Moses was
an hundred and twenty year old, Deuteronomy. 31.1.
and was no more able to go in and out before the people of Israel, he called
them before him, and signified that the time of his departure was at hand, and
thereupon took order for their welfare after his death. And first of all, he
placed Joshua over the^ in his stead, to be their guide to the promised land:
secondly, he gives special charge to all the people, to be valiant and
courageous against their enemies, Ios. 25.
and to obey the commandments of God. And Joshua follows the same course. For
he calls the people together, and tells the^ that the time of his death is at
hand, and gives them a charge to be courageous, and to worship the true God:
which done, he ends his days as a worthy captain. When king David was to
go the way of all flesh, 1. Kin. 2.2.
and lay sick on his deathbed; he placed his own son Solomon upon his
throne, and gave him charge, both for maintenance of religion, and exequution
of justice.

The duty of Ministers when they are dying is, as much as they can, to cast and
provide for the continuance of the good estate of the Church over which they
are placed. Consider the example of Peter: I will (says he) endeavor always,
1. Pet. 1.15.
that ye also may be able to have remembrance of these things after my
departure. If this had bin well observed, there could not have bin such
abundance of schisms, errors, and heresies as has been, and the Church of
God could not have suffered so great havoc. But because me^ have had more
care to maintain personal succession, then the right succession, which stands
in the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles: therefore wolves have come into
the rooms of faithful teachers, Act. 20.29. 2. These. 2.1.
and the Apostasy, of which Paul speaks, has ouerspread the face of the
Church.

Thirdly, householders must set their families in order before they die, as the
Prophet Esaias says to Ezechiah. Isa. 38.1.
Set thine house in order: for thou must die. For the procuring of good order
in the family after death, two things are to be done. The first concerns this
life, and that is to dispose of lands and goods. And that this may be well and
wisely done; if the Will be unmade, it is with godly advise and counsel to be
made in the time of sickness; according to the practice of ancient and worthy
me^. Abraham before his death makes his will, Genesis 17.
and gives legacies: so did Isaac; and 9.
and Jacob, in whose last will and testament are contained many worthy
blessings and prophesies of the estate of his children. and 49.
And Christ our Savior when he was upon the cross provided for his mother,
specially commending her to his disciple John whom he loved. And indeed this
duty of making a will, is a matter of great weight and importance: for it cuts
off much hatred and contention in families, and it stays many suites in law.
It is not therefore always a matter of indifferency, which may be done or not
done, as many falsely think, who upon blind and sinister respects abstain
from making wills, either because their wealth should not be known, or because
they would have their decayed estate to be concealed; or because they fear
they shall die the sooner if the will be once made.

Now though the making of wills belong to another place and profession, yet so
much may be spoken here as the holy Ghost has uttered in the word: and that I
will reduce to certain rules. The first is, that the will must be made
according to the law of nature, and the written word of God, and the good and
wholesome positive laws of that kingdom or cuntry whereof a man is a member.
The will of God must be the rule of man's will. And therefore the will that is
made against any of these, is faulty. The second is, that if goods evil
gotten be not restored before, they must even then be restored by will, or by
some other way. It is the practice of covetous me^ to bequeath their souls
when they die to God, and withal to bequeath their goods evil gotten to their
children and friends; which in all equity should be restored to them to whom
they belong. Quest. How if a man's conscience tell him that his goods be evil
gotten, and he knows not where, or to whom to make restitution? Ans. The case
is common, and the answer is this: When he is known whom thou have wronged,
restore to him particularly: if the party be unknown, or dead, restore to his
executors or assigns, or to his next kin: if there be none, yet keep not
goods evil gotten to thy self, but restore to God, that is, in way of
recompense and civil satisfaction, bestow them on the Church or commonwealth.
The third rule is, that heads of families must principally bestow their goods
on their own children* and them that be of their kindred. This man (says God
to Abraham of Eleazar a stranger) shall not be thine heir, Genesis 7.^.
but the son which shall come of thy loins. And this was Gods commandment to
the Israelites, Number. 27.^ 17.
that when any man dies, his son should be his heir, and if he have no
son, then his daughter: and if he have no daughter, then his brethren: and if
he have no brethren, then his fathers brethren: and if that there be none, then
the next of the kin whosoever. And Paul says, Rom* 8.17.
If ye be sons, then also heirs: and again, He that prouides not for his
own, and namely, for them of his household, is worse then an infidel. ^. Tim.
5.8.
Therefore it is a fault of any man to alienate his goods or lands, wholly and
finally from his blood and posterity. Plato. de Repub. l. 2. ^rist. pol. l. ^
cap. 8.
It is a thing which the very law of nature it self has condemned. Again, it
is a fault to give all to the eldest, and nothing in respect to the rest; as
though the eldest were borne to be gentlemen, and younger brethren borne to
bear the wallet. Yet in equity the eldest must have more then any; even
because he is the eldest, and because stocks and families in their persons are
to be maintained; and because there must always be some that must be fit to
do special service in the peace of the common weal, or in the time of war:
which could not be, if goods should be equally parted to al. The fourth and
last rule is, that no Will is of force till the testatour be dead, Heb. 9.15.
for so long as he is alive, he may alter and change it. These rules must be
remembered, because they are recorded in Scripture: the opening of other points
and circumstances belongs to the profession of the law.

The second duty of the master of the family, concerns the souls of such
as be under his government: and that is to give charge to them, that they
learn, believe, and obey the true religion, that is, the doctrine of Salvation
set down in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. The Lord himself
co^mends Abraham for this: I know Abraham, Genesis 18.19.
says he, that he will command his sons, and his household after him, that
they keep the way of the Lord to do righteousness and judgment. And David
gives Solomon on his deathbed a most notable and solemn charge, 1. Kin. 2.
read all.
the sum and substance whereof is, to know the God of his fathers, and to
serve him: which being done, he further commends him to God by prayer: for
which purpose the 72. psalm. was made. This practice of his is to be followed of
all. Thus governors, when they shall carefully dispose of their goods, and
give charge to their posterity touching the worship of God, shall greatly
honor God dying as well as living.

Hitherto I have entreated of the twofold preparation which is to go before
death: now follows the second part of Dying-well, namely, the disposition in
death. This disposition is nothing else but a religious and holy behavior
specially toward God, when we are in, or near the agony and pang of death.
This behavior contains three special duties. The first is, to die in or by
faith. To die by faith is, when a man in the time of death does with all his
heart rely himself wholly on Gods special love and favor and mercy in
Christ, as it is revealed in the word. And though there be no part of man's life
void of just occasions whereby we may put faith in practice, yet the special
time of all is the pang of death, when friends, and riches, and pleasures, and
the outward senses, and temporal life, and all earthly helps forsake us. For
then true faith makes us to go wholly out of our selves, and to despair of
comfort and salvation in respect of an earthly thing; and with all the power
and strength of the heart, to rest on the pure mercy of God. This made Luther
both think and say, that men were best Christians in death. An example of this
faith we have in David, who when he saw nothing before his eyes but present
death, the people intending to stone him, comforted him at that very instant
(as the text says) in the Lord his God. ^. Sam. 30.^.
And this comfort he reaped, in that by faith he applied unto his own soul the
merciful promises of God; as he testifies of himself: Remember (says he)
the promise made to thy servant, (...). 49.50
wherein thou have caused me to trust. It is my comfort in trouble: for thy
promise has quickened me. Again, Ps. 73.26.
My flesh failed and my heart also, but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever. Now look what David here did, the same must every one of us
do in the like case. When the Israelites in the wilderness were stung with
fiery serpents, Ioh. 3.14.
and lay at the point of death, they looked up to the brazen serpent which was
erected by the appointment of God, and were presently healed: even so when any
man feels death to draw near, and his fiery sting to pierce the heart, he
must fix the eye of a true and lively faith upon Christ, exalted and crucified
on the cross, which being done, he shall by death enter into eternal life.

Now because true faith is no dead thing, it must be expressed by especial
actions; the principal whereof is invocation, whereby either prayer or
thanksgiving is directed unto God. When death had seized upon the body of
Jacob, he raised up himself, and turning his face toward the beds head,
leaned on the top of his staff by reason of his feeblenes, and prayed unto
God: which prayer of his was an excellent fruit of his faith. Heb. 11 22
Jobs wife in the midst of his affliction said unto him to very good purpose.
Job. 2.9.
Bless God and die. I know and grant that the words are commonly translated
otherwise, Curse God and die: but (as I take it) the former is the best. For it
is not like that in so excellent a family, any one person, much less a
matrone and principal governor thereof, would give such lewd and wretched
council; which the most wicked man upon earth, having no more but the light of
nature, would not once give, but rather much abhor and condemn. And though
Job call her a foolish woman, yet he does it not because she went about to
persuade him to blaspheme God; but because she was of the mind of Jobs
friends, and Do thou continue yet in thine up sightnes? v. 9.
thought that he stood to much in a conceit of his own righteousness. Now the
effect and meaning of her council is this: bless God, that is, husband, no
doubt thou art by the extremity of thine affliction at deaths door; therefore
begin now at length to lay aside the great ouerweening which thou have of thine
own righteousness, acknowledge the hand of God upon thee for thy sins,
confess them unto him giving him the glory, pray for the pardon of them, and
end thy days. This counsel is very good and to be followed of all: though
it may be the applying of it (as Job well perceived) is mixed with folly.

Here it may be alleged, that in the pangs of death men want their senses and
convenient utterance, and therefore that they are unable to pray. Ans. The very
sighs, sobs, and groans of a repentant and believing heart, are prayers before
God, even as effectual, as if they were uttered by the best voice in the
world. Prayer stands in the affection of the heart, the voice is but an outward
messenger thereof. God looks not upon the speech, but upon the heart. David
says, God hears the desire of the poor: Ps. 10.17. and 145.19.
again, That he will fulfill the desires of them that hear him: yea, their
very tears are loud and sounding prayers in his ears.

Again, faith may otherwise be expressed by the Last words, which for the
most part of them that have truly served God, are very excellent and
comfortable and full of grace: some choice examples whereof I will rehearse for
instructions sake and for imitation. Genesis 49.
The last words of Jacob were those, whereby as a Prophet he foretold blessing
and curses upon his children: and the principal among the rest were these, v.
10.
The scepter shall not depart from Judah, and the lawgiuer from between his
feet, till Shilo come: and, O Lord, v. 18.
I have waited for thy salvation. The last words of Moses are his most
excellent song set down, Deuteronomy. chap. 32. and the last words of David were
these, The spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue: the
God of Israel spoke to me, Sam. 23.
the strength of Israel said, Bear rule over men, etc. The words of Zacharias
the son of Iehoida, when he was stoned were, The Lord look upon it and require
it. Chro. 24.2.
The last words of our Savior Christ when he was dying upon the cross, are
most admirable, and stored with abundance of spiritual grace. 1. To his father
he says, Father, forgive them, Luke 23.24
they know not what they do. 2. to the thief, Verily I say unto thee, ^ers.
43.
this night shall thou be with me in paradise. ^oh. 19.26.^7.
3. to his mother, Mother, behold thy son: and to John, behold my mother. 4.
and in his agony, Mat. 27.46.
My God, thy God, why have thou forsaken me? 5. and earnestly desiring our
salvation, I thirst. Ioh. 19.^0
6. and when he had made perfect satisfaction, It is finished. ver. 30.
7. and when body and soul were parting, Father, into thy hands I commend my
spirit, Luke 23.48.
The last words of Steven were, 1. Behold, I see the heavens open, Act. 9.56.
and the son of man standing at the right hand of God 2. Lord Jesus receive
my spirit. 59 60
3. Lord lay not this sin to their charge. Of Polycarpe, Eus. 4. c. 15.
Thou art a true God without lying, therefore in all things I praise thee, and
bless thee, and glorify thee by the eternal God and high Priest Jesus Christ
thine only beloved Son, by whom and with whom, to thee, and the holy
spirit, be all glory now and for ever. Of Ignatius, I care not what kind of
death I die: Eus. l. 3. c. 30.
I am the bread of the Lord and must be ground with the teeth of lions, that I
may be clean bread for Christ, who is the bread of life for me. Of Ambrose,
Paulinus in ^ita cius.
I have not so led my life among you as if I were ashamed to live: neither do
I fear death, because we have a good Lord. Of Augustine, 1. He is no great man
that thinks it a great matter that trees and stones fall and mortal men die.
Possid. in vita Aug. c. 8.
2. Just art thou, O Lord, and righteous is thy judgment. Of Bernard, 1. An
admonition to his brethren that they would ground the anchor of their faith
and hope in the safe and sure port of Gods mercy. 2. Because (says he) as I
suppose I cannot leave unto you any choice examples of religion, I commend
three to be imitated of you, which I remember that I have observed in the race
which I have run as much as possibly I could. 1. I gave less heed to mine own
sense and reason then to the sense and reason of other men. 2. When I was hurt,
I sought not revenge on him that did the hurt. 3. I had care to give offense to
no man, and if it fell out otherwise, I took it away as I could. Of Zwinglius,
when in the field he was wounded under the chin with a spear; O what hap is
this? Oswold Mycon.
go to, they may kill my body, but my soul they cannot. Of Oecolampadius. 1.
An exhortation to the ministers of the Church to maintain the purity of
doctrine, to show forth an example of honest and godly conversation, to be
constant and patie^t under the cross. 2. Of himself. Whereas I am charged to
be a corrupter of the truth. I weigh it not: now I am going to the tribunal of
Christ and that with good conscience by the grace of God, and there it shall
be manifest that I have not seduced the Church. Of this my saying and
contestatio^, I leave you as witnesses, and I confirm it with this my last
breath. 3. To his children, Love God the father: and turning himself to his
kinsfolks: I have bound you (says he) with this contestation: you (which they
hear and have desired) shall do your endeavor, that these my children may be
godly, and peaceable, and true, 4. to his friend coming unto him, What shall I
say unto you? News, I shall be shortly with Christ my Lord. 5. being asked
whether the light did not trouble him, touching his breast, there is light
enough, says he. 6. he rehearsed the whole one and fifty psalm with deep
sighs from the bottom of his breast. 7. a little after, Save me Lord Jesus. Of
Luther, My heavenly Father, God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and God of
all comfort, I give thee thanks that thou have revealed unto me thy son Jesus
Christ, whom I have believed, whom I have professed, whom I have loved, whom
I have praised, whom the Bishop of Rome and the whole company of the wicked
persecuteth and reuileth. I pray thee my Lord Jesus Christ receive my poor
soul: my heavenly father, though I be taken from this life, and this body of
mine is to be laid down, yet I know certe^ly, that I shall remain with thee
for ever, neither shall any be able to pull me out of thy hand. Of Hooper, O
Lord Jesus son of David have mercy on me and receive my soul. Of Annas
Burgius, Forsake me not O Lord, least I forsake thee. Of Melancthon, If it be
the will of God I am willing to die, and I beseech him that he will grant me a
joyful departure. Of Calvine. 1. I held my tongue because thou lord have done
it. 2. I mourned as a dove. 3. Lord thou grindest me to powder but it
suffi^ceth me because it is thy hand, Of Peter Martyr, that his body was weak,
but his mind was well: that he acknowledged no life or salvation but only in
Christ, who was given of the father to be a redeemer of mankind: and when he
had confirmed this by testimony of Scripture, he added, This is my faith in
which I will die: and God will destroy them that teach otherwise. This done, he
shook hands with all and said, Farewell my brethren and dear friends. It were
easy to quote more examples, but these few may be in stead of many: and the
sum of all that godlyme^ speak in death is this: Some enlightened with a
prophetical spirit foretell things to come, as the Patriarchs Jacob and Joseph
did; Genesis 50, 24.
and there have bin some which by name have testified who should very shortly
came after them, and who should remain alive, and what should be their
condition: some have showed a wonderful memory of things past, as of their
former life, and of the benefits of God; and no doubt it was given them to
stir up holy affections and thanksgiving to God: some again rightly judging
of the change of their present estate for a better, do rejoice exceedingly,
that they must be translated from earth to paradise: as Babylas Martyr of
Antioch, when his head was to be chopped off, Ps. 11 6, 7.8.
Return (says he) O My soul unto thy rest: because the lord has blessed
thee: because thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears,
and my feet from falling, I shall walk before Iehoua in the land of the
living. And some others spoke of the vanity of this life, of the imagination of
the sorrows of death, of the beginnings of eternal life, of the comfort of
the holy Ghost which they feel, of their departure unto Christ.

Quest. What must we think if in the time of death such excellent speeches
bewanting: and in stead thereof idle talk be used? Answ. We must consider the
kind of sickness whereof me^ die, whether it be more easy or violent: for
violent sickness is usually accompanied with frensies, and with unseemly
motions and gestures, which we are to take in good part even in this regard,
because we our selves may be in the like case.

Thus much of the first duty which is to die in faith: the second is to die in
obedience: otherwise our death cannot be acceptable to God, because we seem
to come unto God of fear and constraint, as slaves to a master, and not of
love as children to a father. Now to die in obedience is, when a man is willing
and ready and desirous to go out of this world whenever God shall call him,
and that without murmuring or repining, at what time, where, and when it shall
please God. Romans 14.17.
Whether we live or die, says Paul we do it not to our selves but unto God;
and therefore man's duty is to be obedient to God in death as in life. Christ
is our example in this case, who in his agony prayed Father, let this cup
pass from me, yet with a submission, not my will, but thy will be done:
teaching us in the very pangs of death to resign our selves to the good
pleasure of God. When the prophet told king Ezechias of death, presently
without all manner of grudging or repining he addressed himself to prayer. We
are commanded to present our selves unto God as freewill offerings, without any
limitation of time, and therefore as well in death as in life. I conclude then
that we are to make as much conscience in performing obedience to god in
suffering death, as we do of any conscience in the course of our lives.

The third duty is to render up our souls into the hands of God, as the most
faithful keeper of all. This is the last duty of a Christian, and it is
prescribed unto us in the example of Christ upon the cross, who in the very
pangs of death when the dissolution of body and soul drew on said, Luke 15.
Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, and so gave up the ghost. The like
was done by Steven, who when he was stoned to death, said, Lord Jesus receive
my spirit. Act^ 7. Psalm. 3.5.
And David in his life time being in danger of death used the very same words
that Christ uttered.

Thus we see what be the duties which we are to perform in the very pangs of
death, that we may come to eternal life. Some men will happily say, If this be
all, to die in faith and obedience and to surrender our souls into Gods hands,
we will not greatly care for any preparation beforehand, nor trouble our selves
much about the right manner of dying well: for we doubt not, but that when
death shall come, we shall be able to perform all the former duties with ease.
Answer. Let no man deceive himself by any false persuasion, thinking with
himself that the practice of the foresaid duties is a matter of ease: for
ordinarily they are not, neither can be performed in death, unless there be
much preparation in the life before. He that will die in faith must first of
all live by faith: and there is but one example in all the whole Bible of a man
dying in faith that lived without faith; namely, the thief upon the cross.
The servants of God that are endued with great measure of grace do very hardly
believe in the time of affliction. Indeed when Job was afflicted he said,
Though the Lord kill me, yet will I trust in him: yet afterward, his faith
being ouercast as with a cloud, he says, that God was become his enemy, and
that he had set him as a mark to shoot at: and sundry times his faith was
oppressed with doubting and distrust. How then shall they that never lived by
faith nor inured themselves to believe; be able in the pang of death to rest
upon the mercy of God. Again, he that would die in obedience, must first of
all lead his life in obedience: he that has lived in disobedience can not
willingly and in obedience appear before the judge when he is cited by death
the sergeant of the Lord: he dies indeed, but that is upon necessity, because
he must yield to the order and course of nature as other creatures do.
Thirdly, he that would surrender his soul into the hands of God must be
resolved of two things: the one is that god can; the other is, that God will
receive his soul into heaven and there preserve it till the last judgment.
And none can be resolved of this except he have the spirit of God to certify
his conscience that he is redeemed, justified, sanctified by Christ, and shall
be glorified. He that is not thus persuaded, dare not render up and present
his soul unto God. When David said, Lord into thy hands I commend my spirit:
what was the reason of this boldness in him? surely nothing else but the
persuasion of faith, as the next words import: for thou have redeemed me. O
Lord God of truth. And thus it is manifest, ^sal. 31.5.
that no man ordinarily can perform these duties dying, that has not
performed them living.

This being so, I do again renew my former exhortation, beseeching you that
ye would practice the duties of preparation in the course of your lives,
leading them daily in faith and obedience, and from time to time commending
your selves into the hand of God, and casting all your works upon his
providence. They, which have done this have made most happy and blessed ends.
Enoch by faith walked with God, as one that was always in his presence,
leading an upright and godly life, Heb. 11.5.
and the Lord took him away that he should not see death. And this which
befell Enoch, shall after a sort befall them also that live in faith and
obedience: because death shall be no death, but a sleep unto them, and no
enemy but a friend to body and soul. On the contrary let us consider the
wretched and miserable ends of them that have spent their days in their
sins without keeping faith and a good conscience. The people of the old world
were drowned in the flood; the filthy Sodomites and Gomorrheans were destroyed
with fire from heaven; Dathan and Abiram with the company of Core were
swallowed up of the earth, Core himself (as it seems by the text) being burnt
with fire: Numb. 16.32. and Psalm. 106.17.
wicked Saul and Achitophel and Judas destroy themselves. Herod is eaten up of
worms and gave up the ghost: Julian the Apostata smitten with a dart in the
field, died casting up his blood into the air and blaspheming the name of
Christ. Arius the heretic died upon the stool scouring forth his very
entralls. And this very age affoards store of like examples. Hoffemeister a
great Papist, Illyric de fide.
as he was going to the council of Ralisbone to dispute against the defe^ders
of the Gospel, was suddenly in his journey prevented by the hand of God, and
miserably died with horrible roaring and crying out. In the University of
Louaine, Fox book of Acts and Momuments.
Guarlacus a learned Papist falling sick, when he perceived no way with him
but death, he fell into miserable agony and perturbation of spirit, crying out
of his sins how miserably he had lived, and that he was not able to abide
the judgment of God, and so casting out words of miserable desperation said,
his sins were greater then they could be pardoned, and in that desperation
ended his days. Iacobus Latromus of the same university of Louaine, after
that he had been at Bruxels, and there thinking to do a great act against
Luther and his fellows, made an oration before the Emperor so foolishly and
ridiculously that he was laughed to scorn almost of the whole court: then
returning from thence to Louaine again, in his public lecture he fell into
open madness, uttering such words of desperatio^ and blasphemous impiety,
that other Divines which were present, were feign to carry him away as he was
rauing, and to shut him into a close chamber. From that time to his very last
breath, he had never any thing else in his mouth, but that he was damned and
rejected of God, and that there was no hope of salvation for him, because that
wittingly and against his knowledge, he withstood the manifest truth of Gods
word. Crescentius the Popes Legate and Vicegerent in the council of Trent; was
sitting all the day long until dark night in writing of letters to the Pope:
after his labor when night was come, thinking to refresh himself, he began to
rise; and at his rising, behold there appeared to him a mighty black dog of
an huge bigness, his eyes flaming with fire, and his ears hanging low down
well near to the ground, which began to enter in and straight to come
toward him, and so to couch under the board. The Cardinal not a little
amazed at the sight thereof, somewhat recovering himself called immediately to
his servants which were in the outward chamber next by, to bring in a candle
and to seek for the dog. But when the dog could not be found there nor in
any other chamber about, the Cardinal thereupon stricken with a sudden conceit
of mind, immediately fell into such a sickness, whereof his Physicians which
he had about him could not with all their industry and cunning cure him: and
thereupon he died. Steven Gardener, when a certain Bishop came unto him and
put him in mind of Peter denying his master, answered again that he had
denied with Peter, but never repented with Peter, and so (to use M. Foxes
words) stinkingly and vnrepentantly died. More examples might be added, but
these shall suffice.

Again, that we may be further induced to the practice of these duties, let us
call to mind the uncertainty of our days: though we now live, yet who can say
that he shall be alive the next day or the next hour? No man has a lease of
his life. Now mark, as death leaves a man, so shall the last judgment find
him: and therefore if death take him away unprepared, eternal damnation
follows without recovery. If a thief be brought from prison either to the
bar to be arraigned before the judge, or to the place of execution, he will
bewail his misdemeanour past, and promise all reformation of life; so be it,
he might be delivered, though he be the most arrant thief that ever was. In
this case we are as fellons or thieves: for we are every day going to the bar
of Gods judgment, there is no stay or standing in the way, even as the ship in
the sea continues on* his course day and night whether the mariners be
sleeping or waking: therefore let us all prepare our selves and amend our
lives betime, that in death we may make a blessed end. Ministers of the
Gospel do daily call for the performance of this duty: but where almost shall
we find the practice and obedience of it in men's lives and conuersations?
Alas, alas, to lend our ears for the space of an hour to hear the will of
God is common; but to give heart and hand to do the same, is rare. And the
reason hereof is atha^d: we are al most grievous sinners, and every sinner in
the terms of Scripture is a fool: and a principal part of his folly is to
care for the things of this world and to neglect the kingdom of heaven, to
provide for the body and not for the soul, to cast and forecast how we may
live in wealth and honor, and ease, and not to use the least forecast to die
well. This folly our Savior Christ noted in the rich man that was careful to
enlarge his barnes, Luke 11.
but had no care at all for his end or for the salvation of his soul. Such a
one was Achitophel, who (as the Scripture terms him) was as the very oracle
of God for council, being a man of great wisdom and forecast in the matters
of the common wealth and in his own private worldly affairs: and yet for all
this he had not so much as common sense and reason, to consider how he might
die the death of the righteous, and come to life everlasting. And this folly
the holy ghost has noted in him. For the text says, when he saw that his
counsel was despised, 2. Sam. 17.23.
he sadled his ass, and arose, and went home into his city, and put his
household in order, and went and hanged himself. And the five foolish virgins
contented themselves with the blasing lamps of a bare profession, never seeking
for the horn of lasting oil of true and lively faith, that might furnish and
trim the lamp both in life and death. But let us in the fear of God, cast
off this damnable folly, first of all seeking the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, and leading our lives in faith and obedience that we may die
accordingly.

And thus much of the first point of doctrine, namely, that there is a certain
way whereby a man may die well: now I come to the second. Whereas therefore
Solomon says, that the day of death is better then the day of birth, we are
further taught that such as truly believe themselves to be the children of God,
are not to fear death overmuch. I say overmuch; because they must partly fear
it, and partly not. Fear it they must for two causes: the first, because death
is the destruction of humane nature in a man's own self and others: and in
this respect Christ feared it without sin; and we must not fear it otherwise
then we fear sickness, and poverty, and famine, with other sorrows of body and
mind, which God will not have us to despise or lightly to regard, but to feel
with some pain, because they are corrections and punishments for sin. And he
does therefore lay upon us pains and torments, that they may be feared and
eschewed: and that by eschewing them we might further learn to eschew the
cause of them, which is sin: and by experience in feeling of pain; acknowledge
that God is a judge and enemy of sin, and is exceeding angry with it. The
second cause of the fear of death, is the loss of the Church or Commonwealth,
when we or others are deprived of them which were indeed or might have been
an help, stay, and comfort to either of them, and whose death has procured
some public or private loss.

Again, we are not to fear death, but to be glad of it, and that for many
causes. First of al, in it we have occasion to show our subjection and
obedience which we owe unto God, when he calls us out of this world, as Christ
said, Father not my will, but thy will be done. Secondly, all sin is
abolished by death, and we the^ cease to offend God any more as we have done.
Thirdly, the dead body is brought into a better condition then ever it was in
this life, for by death it is made insensible, and by that means it is freed
from all the miseries and calamities of this life; and it cease to be either
an active or passive instrument of sin, whereas in the life time it is both.
Fourthly, it gives the soul passage to rest, life, and celestial glory, in
which we shall see God as he is, perfectly know him, and praise his name for
ever, keeping without intermission an eternal sabbath, therefore Paul says, I
desire to be dissolved and be with Christ, for that is best of all. Fifthly,
God exequutes his judgments upon the wicked, and purges his Church by death.
Now in all these respects, godly men have cause not to fear and sorrow, but
to rejoice in their own death and the death of others.

Thirdly, if the day of death be so excellent, yea a day of happiness, then it
is lawful to desire death, and men do not always sin in wishing for death.
Paul says, I desire to be dissolueds and again, O miserable man, who shall
deliver me from this body of death? Yet this desire must not be simple, but
restrained with certain respects; which are these: First, death must be desired
so far forth as it is a means to free us from the corruption of our nature;
secondly, as it is a means to bring us to the immediate fellowship of Christ
and God himself in heaven. Thirdly, death may be lawfully desired in respect
of the troubles and miseries of this life, two caueats being observed: the
first, that this desire must not be immoderate: the second, it must be joined
with submission and subjection to the good pleasure of God. If either of these
be wanting, the desire is faulty; and therefore Job, and Jeremy, and Jonas
failed herein, because they desired death being carried away with impatience.

On the contrary also a man may desire a continuance of life. Ezechias prayed
and desired to live, Isa. 38.18.
when he heard the message of present death, that he might do service to God.
And Paul desired to live, Phil. 1.24, 25.
in regard of the Philippians, that he might further their faith, though in
regard of himself to die was advantage to him.

Lastly, if death joined with reformation of life be so blessed, then the death
of the unbelieving and unrepentant sinner is every way cursed and most
horrible. Reasons are these: First, it is the destruction of nature, and the
wages of their sins. Secondly, in it there is no comfort of the spirit to be
found, no mitigatio^ of pain, and no good thing that may counteruaile the
miseries thereof. Thirdly, that which is the most fearful thing of al, bodily
death is the beginning of eternal death, desperation, and infernal torment,
without hope of deliverance. Therefore as I began so I end, have care to live
well, and die well.

FINIS.
An addition, of things that came to my mind afterward.
THe last combat with the both impugned together. This must be thought upon,
for when the devils temptation is, not to resist his temptation; it is most
deceitful of all: and it is more easy to overcome the enemy that compels us
to fight, then him that disswades us from it.

M. John Knox in time of his death is worth the marking. Lib. de obitu Knoxi.
He lay on his deathbed sile^t for the space of four hours, very often
giving great sighs, sobbes, and groans, so as the sta^ders by well perceived
that he was troubled with some grievous temptation: and when at length he was
raised in his bed, they asked him how he did, and what was the cause of his
much sighing, to whom he answered thus; that in his life he had endured many
combats and conflicts with Satan, but that now most mightily the roaring lion
had assaulted him: often (said he) before he set my sins before mine eyes,
often he urged me to desperation, often he labored to entangle me with the
delights of the world, but being vanquished by the sword of the spirit, which
is the word of God, he could not prevail. But now he assaults me an other
way: for the wily serpent would persuade me, that I shall merit eternal life
for my fidelity in my ministry. But blessed be God which brought to my
mind such Scriptures, whereby I might quench the fiery darts of the devil,
which were, What have thou that thou have not received, and, By the grace of
God, I am that I am: and, Not I, but the grace of God in me: and thus being
vanquished he departed

When thou art tempted of Satan and sees no way to escape, even plainly close
up thine eyes, and answer nothing, but commend thy cause to God. This is a
principal point of Christian wisdom, which we must follow in the hour of
death.

If thy flesh tremble, and fear Steven, Lord Jesus into thy hands I commend my
spirit, and then certainly Christ will come unto thee with all his Angels, and
be the guider of thy way. Luther.


