portrait of Martin Frobisher (explorer) Sr Martin Frobisher Knight
The noble flames that glowd in his stout breast
Could never be quenched, nor by that ^^^ oppressed
Of Northern Seas; His praise let him not ^rant
Whose worth deserves a print of Adamant
That he may still guide ships whose fame let grow
So long as sea shall have an Ebb and flow. A. H.


A TRVE DISCOVRSE of the late voyages of discovery, for the finding of a
passage to Cathaya, by the Northvveast, under the conduct of Martin Frobisher
General: Divided into three Books.

In the first whereof is showed, his first voyage. Wherein also by the way is
set out a Geographicall description of the World, and what parts thereof
have bin discovered by the Nauigations of the Englishmen.

Also, there are annexed certain reasons, to prove all parts of the World
habitable, with a general Map adjoined.

In the second, is set out his second voyage, with the adventures and
accidents thereof.

In the third, is declared the strange fortunes which happened in the third
voyage, with a several description of the Country and the people there
inhabiting. With a particular Card thereunto adjoined of Meta Incognita, so
far forth as the secrets of the voyage may permit.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Henry Bynnyman, servant to the right Honorable Sir
CHRISTOPHER HATTON Vizchamberlaine. Anno Domini. 1578.

What commodities and instructions may be ^eaped by diligent reading this
Discourse.
1 FIrst, by example may be gathered, how a Discouerer of new Countries, is to
proceed in his first attempt of any Discovery. 2 Item, how he should be
provided of shipping, victuals, munition, and choice of men. 3 How to proceed
and deal with strange people, be the^ never so barbarous, cruel and fierce,
either by lenity or otherwise. 4 How trade of Merchandise may be made
without money. 5 How a Pilot may deal, being environed with mountains of Ise
in the frosen Sea. 6 How lengths of days, change of seasons, Summers and
Winters, do differ in sundry regions. 7 How dangerous it is to attempt new
Discoueries, either for the length of the voyage or the ignorance of the
language, the want of Interpretors, new and unaccustomed Elements and airs,
strange and unsavory meats, danger of thieves and robbers, fierceness of
wild beasts and fishes, hugeness of wooddes, daungerousnesse of Seas, dread
of tempests, fear of hidden rocks, steepness of mountains, darkness of
sudden falling fogges, continual pains taking without any rest, and
infinite others. 8 How pleasant and profitable it is, to attempt new
Discoueries, either for the sundry sights and shapes of strange beasts and
fishes, the wonderful works of nature, the different manners and fashions of
diu^rse nations, the sundy^ sorts of gouernemente, the sight of strange
trees, fruit, fowls, and beasts, the infinite treasure of Pearl, Gold and
Silver, the news of new found lands, the sundry positions of the Sphere, and
many others. 9 How valiant Captains use to deal upon extremity, and
otherwise. 10 How trusty soldiers dutifully use to serve. 11 Also here may be
seen a good example to be observed of any private person, in taking notes, and
making observations of al such things as are requisite for a Discouerer of new
Countries. 12 Lastly, the Reader here may see a good pattern of a well
governed service, sundry instructions of matters of Cosmographie, Geographie,
and Navigations, as in reading more at large may be seen.


TO THE RIGHT HOnorable, my singular good Master, Sir Christopher Hatto^,
Knight, Captain of the Queens Majesty's Guard, Vizchamberlaine to her
Highness, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel.
RIGHT honorable, when I first intended the voyage of Discovery with Mr.
Frobisher, for the finding of the passage to Cataya (being a matter in our age
above all other, notable) I applied my self wholly to the science of
Cosmographie, and sec^ets of Navigations, to the end, I might enable my s^lf^
the better for the service of my Country, not only to understand what I read
and heard others speak, but also to execute in effect, and practice with my
own hands, the duty and office appertayning to a Mariner: and so thereby be
better able to make a true report of all occurrents in the same voyage. And
for that now the common report thereof is so vain and uncertain, because some
men rather contendyng what they are able to say, than considering what in truth
they should and ought to say, whereby, by sundry men's fantasies, sundry
untruths are spread abroad, to the great slander of this so honest and honorable
an action: I have thought good to lay open to your honorable judgment, the
plain truth, and full discourse of the whole service, which I have taken upon me
(though altogether unable) to write, and to dedicate unto your Honor
especi^lly, for these special causes following First, the world does
witness, and I my self by good proof have tasted and found (being a man by
your Honorable goodness and good countenance, specially supported, and even
(as it were) the handy work of your own hands) how honorable a regard you
bear to Virtue, how ready to countenance the meanest man that truly
serves his Country, how willing to give unto such both grace and opinion
with her Majesty, how ready to procure reward there, for those that shall
iustlye merit the same. And therewithal, considering the sound judgment you
have to discern, as well in this, as in all other causes of weight: And knowing
well, what place you hold with her highness, (who, for the faithful service
you daily do her, as well in Court, as common Weal, which now by the true
tuchstone of time, and long experience, she has found, and therefore
confirms a fast and sure opinion in you with the chiefest) I have specially
thought it necessary, besides my duty (which above all the world my
alleageaunce reserved, I owe you most) for these respects to make relation of
this service unto your Honor above others. And for that this action, both for
the worthiness of the attempt, for the good and quiet government, for the
great and marvelous dangers, for the strange and unknown accidents of the
unknown corners of the world, above all others, may appear most notable and
famous: I have been the rather desirous to take some pain therein, and what I
have aship-boorde rudely and unorderly framed or observed, to commend to your
Honorable construction the same: being willing rather to hazard mine own
shame, by showing my self an insufficient writer (which perchance may s^eme
somewhat besides my profession) than that so honest and worthy attemptes of our
own nation, wi^h the example of so well a governed service, should ly hidden
from your Honors sight. And for that I will be injurious to no man, which in
this action has borne place, and well discharged the same, and that those men
with the manner of their daily proceedings there, by name may be known unto
you, I have in their place remembered them in order as becomes: and have not
only named each principal, but every private person (if by any special
service he has merited the same) to the end, that the well deserving man,
receiving the due commendation of his deserte, may be encouraged to continue,
and take pleasure in well dooyng after, and others being animated by like
example, may for hope of like reward also, desire to deserve well.

By this Discourse, it may please your Honor to behold the great industry of
our present age, and the invincible minds of our English nation, who have
never left any worthy thing unattempted, nor any part almost of the whole
world unsearched, whom lately, neither storms of Seas by long and tedious
voyages, danger of dark fogs and hidden rocks in unknown coasts, congealed
and frosen Seas, with mountains of fleeting Ise, nor yet present death daily
before their face, could any whit dismaye, or cause to desiste from intended
enterpises: but rather preferring an honorable death before a shameful
return, have (notwithstanding the former dangers, (after many perilous
repulses) recovered their desired Port. So that, if now the passage to CATAYA
thereby be made open unto us, (which only matter hitherto has occupied the
finest heads of the world, and promises us a more riches by a nearer way
than either Spain or Portugale possesses) whereof the hope (by the good
industry and great attemptes of these men is greatelye augmented) or if the
Gold Ore in these new Discoueries found out, do in goodness, as in great
plenty answer expectation, and the success do follow as good, as the proof
thereof hitherto made, is great, we may truly infer, that the Englishman in
these our days, in his discoueries, to the Spaniarde and Portingale is nothing
inferior: and for his hard adventures, and valiant resolutions, greatly
superior. For what has the Spaniarde or Portingale done by the Southeast and
Southweast, that the Englishman by the Northeast and Northweaste has not
counteruailed the same?

And albeit I confess that the English have not hitherto had so full success
of profit and commodity of pleasant place (considering that the former
nations have happily chanced to travel by more temperate clymates, where they
had not only good meats and drinks, but all other things necessary, for the
use of man) all which things, the English, traveling by more inte^perate
places, and as it were with main force, making way through seas of Ise, have
wa^ted, which notwithstanding, argues a more resolution; for Difficiliora
pulchriora, that is, the adventure the more hard the more honorable: yet
concerning the perfecter knowledge of the world, and Geographicall description,
(wherein the present age and posterity also, by a more universal understanding
is much furthered, as appears by my universal Map with pricked bounds
here annexed) herein, the Englishman deserves chief honor above any other.
For neither Spaniard nor Portugale, nor any other besides the English, have
bin found by so great dangers of Ise, so near the Pole, to adventure any
discovery, whereby the obscure and unknown parts of the world (which
otherwise had lain hid) have bin made known unto us.

So that it may appear, that by our Englishmens industries, and these late
voyages, the world is grown to a more fullness and perfection: many unknown
lands and Islands, (not so much as thought upon before) made known unto us:
Christ's name spread: the Gospel preached: Infidels like to be converted to
Christianity, in places where before the name of God has not once bin heard
of: Shipping and Seafaring me^, have been employed: navigations and the Navy,
(which is the chief strength of our Realm) maintained: and Gentlemen in the Sea
service, for the better service of their Country well experienced. Al which
things, are (no doubt) of so great importance, as being well wayed, may seem to
counteruayle the adventures charges: although the passage to CATAYA were not
found out, neither yet the gold ore prove good, where of both, the hope is good
and great. But notwithstanding all these, even in this (if no otherwise) her
most excellent Majesty has reaped no small profit, that she may now stand
assured, to have many more tried, able, and sufficient men against time of
need, that are, (which with out vau^t may be spoken) of valor great, for any
great adventure, and of government good for any good place of service. For
this may truly be spoken of these men, that there has not bin seen in any
nation, being so many in number, and so far from home, more civil order,
better government or agreement. For even from the beginning of the service
hitherto, there has neither passed mutiny, quarrel, or notorious fact, either
to the slander of the men, or danger of the voyage, although the Gentlemen,
Soldiers, and Mariners (which seldom can agree) were by companies matched
together.

But I may perchance (right Honorable) seem to discourse somewhat too
largely, especially in a cause that (as a party) somewhat concerns my self:
which I do, not for that I doubt of your Honorable opinion already conceived
of the men, but for that I know, the ignorant multitude is rather ready to
slander, than to give good encouragement by due commendation to good causes,
who, respecting nothing but a present gain, and being more than needefully
suspicious of the matter, do therwithall condemn the men, and that without any
further respect, either of their honest intents, either of their well performing
the matter they did undertake (which according to their direction, was
specicially to bring home Ore) either else of their painful travel (which for
their Prince, and the public profit of their Countries cause they have
sustained.)

But by the way, it is not unknown to the world, that this our native country
of England, in all ages has bred up (and specially at this present abou^deth
with) many forward and valiant minds, fit to take in hand any notable
enterprise: where by appears, that if the Englishman had bin in times paste as
fortunate and foreseeing to accept occasion offered, as he has bin always
forward in executing any cause once taken in hand: he had bin worthily
preferred before all nations of the world, and the Weast Indies had now bin in
the possession of the English.

For Columbus, the first Discouerer of the Weaste Indies, made first offer
thereof, with his service, to King Henry the seventh, then King of England,
and was not accepted: Whereupon, for want of entertainment here, he was
forced to go into Spain, and offered there (as before) the same to Ferdinando
King of Castyle, who presently acceptyng the occasion, did first himself, and
now his successors, enjoy the benefit thereof.

Also Sebastian Cabota, being an Englishman, and borne in Bristowe, after he
had discovered sundry parts of new found land, and attempted the passage to
CATAYA by the Northweast, for the King of England, for lack of entertainment
here, (notwithstanding his good desert) was forced to seek to the King of
Spain, to whose use he discovered all that tract of Brasile, and about the
famous river Rio de la Plata, and for the same, and other good services there,
was afterward renowned, by title of Piloto Maggiore, that is, Graund Pylote,
and constituted chief officer of the Contractation house of Siuilla: in which
house, are handled all matters concerning the Weast Indies, and the revenues
thereof: and further, that no Pylot should be admitted for any discovery, but
by his direction.

But there has bin two special causes in former age, that have greatly
hindered the English nation in their attempts. The one has bin, lack of
liberality in the Nobility, and the other want of skill in Cosmographie, and
the A^t of Navigations. Which kind of knowledge, is very necessary for all
our noble men, for that we being Ilanders, our chiefest strength consists
by Sea. But these two causes are now in this present age (God be thanked)
very well reformed: for not only her majesty now, but all the nobility also,
having perfect knowledge in Cosmographie, do not only with good words,
countenance the forward minds of men, but also with their purses do liberally
and bountifully contribute unto the same, whereby it comes to pass, that
Navigations, which in the time of King Henry the.7. was very raw, and took
(as it were) but beginning (and ever since has had by little and little
continual increase) is now in her Majesty's reign, grown to his highest
perfection.

Thus right Honorable, as I have in these my first travels in these late
voyages, upon such occasions as passed there now, rendered your honor this
bare and true account: So being further resolved to offer my self a continual
sacrifice with the first, for her Majesty and my country, in this or any other
like service, I intend (God willing) according to this beginning, if any thing
hereafter fall out worth the memory, to present your honor therewithal, and
from time to time, to advertise you of every particular. And in all these
things which I deliver now, or shall hereafter advertise, I humbly pray, your
honor would vouchsafe to give some credit thereunto, and rather to think, I
may be deceived, than that I mean to deceive, color, or conceal any thing:
for I neither can, nor will, use any flourish in the matter, but a bare truth in
all: And thereupon I give my poor credit unto your honor in pawnne. And
herein I humbly pray pardon, for my rude order of writing, which proceeds
from the barren brain of a soldier and one professing arms, who desires
rather to be well thought of with your honor, for his well meaning, than for
any his cunning writing at all.

And thus, having presumed to present these vnt^mely and unripe fruits to your
honors best and favorable construction, I humbly take my leave, beseeching
God to bless you, as I do faithfully serve, and will honor you ever.

The handie work of your Honors hands and faithfully to serve you ever,
GEORGE BEST.

THE PRINTER to the Reader.
FOrasmuch as (gentle Reader) these three voyages lately by our Countrymen
performed, do both for the matter of discovery, for the strange and unknown
accidents, for the rare and hard adventures, and also for the good and
discrete order of government, appear above all others most notable and
famous: I have bin especially desirous, by all means possible I could, to
procure the publication thereof, thinking it too great an injury to our common
wealth, to bury in oblivion so worthy attemptes of our own nation, and to
hide the ensample of so good and so well a governed service. And for that (as
I understand) many trifling Pamphlets have bin secretly thrust out, not only
without the consent of the Captains and executioners of the same, but also
rather to the great disgrace of the worthy voyage, than otherwise, I having
intelligence of a substantial discourse which was diligently written
thereof, and privately dedicated to my very Honorable Master, Sir Christopher
Hatton Knight, by a Gentleman of his own, who was personally present a
Captain in all the same service, I have, without first making privy the
Author, procured his Coppie out of the hands of a friend of mine, who had
the vvriting and perusing thereof, and have presumed to publish and imprint the
same, to the end that thereby I might (gentle Reader) as well satisfye thy
greedy expectation, by unfolding these nevve and unknown matters, whereof
the nature of man is most desirous, as also to perform that duty which I
owe unto my said Honorable Master, in publishing such things as are
directed unto him. And for that the matter is worthy to pass under the
protection of his honorable name, I have herein bin vvilling, rather to bear
the burden of the Authoures private displeasure, if therevvith he should
afterward be offended, than not by publishing that same, seem not only to do
a public injury unto my native Country, but also show a light regard of
my duty, in obscuring the doyngs and travels of him, or any of his, whose
honor (as I am chiefly bound) I tender more than my own safety. And albeit
I have in a fevve p^aces somevvhat altered from my Coppie, and vvronged thereby
the Authoure, and have sought to conceal upon good causes some secrets, not
fit to be published or revealed to the world (as the degrees of Longitude
and Latitude, the distance, and true position of places, and the variation of
the compass,) etc which nevertheless, by a general, and particular Map
concerning the same, hereunto annexed, is so sufficiently explaned, that
easily any thing apperteyning unto the voyage, or in this discourse mentioned,
may sensibly be understood: And though the matter be entirely the Authors
own, yet am I contented (for thy sake) rather than the same should not be
published, to bear the burden of blame, and to abide the reprofe of the
faults escaped, taking upon me that reproach of presumption, and hazarding my
name to the world, al which things the Author peradventure takes for so
great disgraces, as willingly he would not adventure in his own name the
publishing thereof. But specially, for that the commendation of a History
consists in truth and playnenesse, I have desired to bring forth, and prefer
(before other Pamphlets) the same, knovving that the Authoure thereof, in
nothing more than in truth, desires to maynteyne credit with this honorable
personage, unto whom with his own hand written, he has privately
dedicated the same, as by the Epistle Dedicatorie may appear. If therefore
thou shalt accept my well meaning in good part, and yield but deserved
praise to the Authoure for doing, and thanks to me for publishing the same, it
shall suffice to make me think my travel well therein employed. And so fare
you well.

The first Book of the first voyage of Martin Frobisher Esquier, Captain
General for the discovery of the passage to Cataya and the East India, by the
Northweast, first attempted in Anno Dom. 1576. the.15. of May.
MAN is borne not only to serve his own turn (as Tullie says) but his
kinsfolk, Cicero O^fi^^ Lib. 1.
s^^eds, and the common wealth especially, look for some furtherance at his
hands, and some fruits of his labor: whereupon sundry men finding themselves
as it were tied by this bond and duty of humane society, have willinglye
endeavored sundry ways, to show themselves profitable members of their common
weal. Some men by study of the mind, have employed themselves to give out
good laws and ordinances for government, as Solon, Lycurgus, and others. Some
have spente their time in devising Arts and Sciences, for the better
sharpening of Man's wit, and the easier expressing his conceytes, as in time
past Aristotle for Logike and Philosophy, Cicero and Demosthenes for
Rethoricke, Euclide and others for Arithmeticke and Geometry. Others again by
long and diligent observation, have found out the motion and courses of the
celestial Orbs, that thereby man might have the distinction of times and
seasons, Astronomy.
the better to direct his doings, both for taking pains and rest, as occasion
and circumstance does require. Some delight in feats of Arms, thereby to be
better able to defend their Countries from the force of the enemy, and
rightfully (when occasion is) to enlarge their Dominions. And many others in
sundry faculties and s^iences, have both heretofore, and especially now in
these later days, do so bestow and employ their time, that rightly they may be
said to have deserved the name of profitable members in the common wealth: so
that now by continual practice, and exercising of good wits, the world is
waxed finer, and grown to more perfection, not only in all the speculatiue
Arts and Sciences, but also in the practical application of the same, to Man's
use, whereof as the one does exceedingly delighte the inward mind, in seeing
the sequel of things by art and reason, so the other in the Mecanicall and
practi^all application (which of late years, This is the flourishing age.
more than ever heretofore has bin used) does so pleasure and profit the
world, that this time only may rightely be called the liberal and flourishing
age. For when was there ever heard of such abundance of gold and silver (which
no doubt being well used, is the great benefit and good blessing of God to
Mankind) as in these our days. No, Solomon himself, with all the precious
metal of Ophir, which he (one only King) had in that only place, can not be
comparable to the great store of gold, and all other metals, which daily are
dug out of the bowels of the earth, almost in all parts of the world, and
now lately in the supposed hard and congealed frosen Lands, almost under the
Poles. Yea now every private man can witness this with me, that he is no more
contented with the wealth and riches that his Auncesters had, but thinks
himself base minded, if by his industry he increase not his private wealth
proportionallie, as the whole world increases in common wealth, and not only
of gold and silver is such great increase, but also of all other things,
serving as well for pleasure, and delights of the mind, as for the necessary
uses of ma^s life. For as we are p^aced in these lower Elements, Abundance of
all things.
first to know and acknowledge ye high Creator, and then tha^kefully to take
the fruition of things for our mayntenance, To what end Man is created.
which are especially two, that is, meat and drink, to sustain the body, and
couerture, to defend the same from the rigor of heat and cold, and so thereby
to glorify God in his works: what age has bin ever heretofore, that has so
abounded with store, not only of necessary meats, but also of pleasant and
delectable confections, to delight man withal? for whats^euer sundry sort of
corn, grain, and meats former years have had, we not only have all the same
in far greater abundance, but thereunto are added thousands of new things
simple and compound, never heretofore seen or heard of. And as for couerture
to defend the body, the matter is grown to such excellency of Architecture
and building, to such finenesse of cloth and silks of all sorts and colors,
that man studieth no more to multiplye the increase thereof, so much as to
devise fashions, to make it serve more for ornament, than for necessary uses.
And the chiefest cause of all these effects (next after ye divine Providence)
is the searching wit of man, which being more curious and inquisitiue of new
and strange devises, tha^ heretofore, brings out daily more strange
inventions, and causes others, through emulation, to do the like, not only in
providing ye necessary things aforesaid, but also a continual care and
co^sta^cie to find out other new Arts occupatio^s and faculties. For to
remember one or two inventions for all, found out of late years. The use and
benefit of Printing Books, Printing of Books.
a devise so commodious and necessary, saving within these few years in
respect, has layne utterly hid and unknown. The Art of War is now grown to
that excellency, The art of War.
that if Achilles, Alexander the Great, Julius Caesar, and other, should come
in these later days, they themselves would more admire and wonder at the
courages of our men, their engines, and their policies in war, than the
ignorant and barbarous multitude in their days did to them, in celebrating
their solemnities with all the honor that might be. But to draw near to my
purposed scope, that is, to discourse of inventions by way of discoueries, I
say, that one of the excellentest arts that ever has bin devised, is the Art
of Navigations, Navigations.
which in times past was so raw, and unknown, that no man durst travel by
Sea, saving only along the shore: and if by wind, current or tempest, he were
driven, against his will, so far from the land, yt he lost the sight thereof,
he made no other account, but to be cast away, his vessel was so rude, and
his skill so little.

In those days they knew not the singular use and benefit of the Load stone,
called in Latin Magnes, The Stone called Magnes.
which besides the property of drawing Iron unto it, it directs, and with
opposite points shows two principal parts of the World, the North, and
the South, and that more distinctly, than the rising of the Sun does show
East and West (except it be only in the days of Aequinoctium, which is but
twice a year) which rare property of the Load stone, if any Man desire at
large to see, let him put the said stone into a round dish, and they both so
together in some vessel of water, wherein they might swim at pleasure
voluntarily, which dish when it stands still, then do the two principal
and opposite points of the stone firmly and constantly point out North and
South: and if before the quarters of North and South were known, by this
experience he may find out the two principal points of the stone, so that the
one being known, the other can not be wanting. And that a man may be the
better persuaded of this effect, let him remove or turn round the dish after
it has once stood still, and he shall ever find it to return constantly to
the same point again. Also, a pillar, or piece of steel, being but touched
with the foresaid Magnes, playing Aequilibra upon some Piramid or point,
receives such virtue, that it produces like effect. Whereunto, if wood or
paper in circular form divided into.32. equal parts, be handsomely compacted,
Two and thirt^ points of the compass.
it will distinguishe and point out all parts of the Horizon, and direct into
all coasts of the world, and that only by the in^luent Spirit of the two
principal points, respecting ever North and South.

This excellent property and benefit of the Lodestone, I the rather remember
at large, because some Seamen which know this rare and miraculous effect as
well as I, do not sufficiently admire the same, because it is now so commonly
known, and yet indeed is to be preferred before all precious stones in the
world, which only tend to ornament, and have no other virtue, whereas this
serves to so necessary use. The virtue of this stone, as it is not long since
it was first found, so in these days it is like to receive his perfection,
concerning his Northeasting and Northwesting to be brought in rule, and
particularly in this noble voyage of our worthy Captain Martine Frobisher, who,
as you shall after understand in the discourse, has diligently observed the
variation of the Needle. The variation of the Needle,
And such observations of skillful Pylots, is the only way to bring it in
rule, for it passes the reach of natural Philosophy. The making and pricking
of Cards, the shifting of Sun and Moon, the use of the compass, the hour
glass for observing time, instruments of Astronomy to take Longitudes and
Latitudes of Countries, and many other helps, are so commonly known of every
Mariner now adays, that he that has bin twi^^ at Sea, is ashamed to come
home, if he be not able to ^ender account of all these particularities. By
which skill in Navigations, is brought to pass, that the people of Europe can
as easilye and far more easilier make long voyages by Sea than by land,
whereby has come to pass, that within the memory of man within these four
score years, there has been more new Countries and regions discovered, New
discoueries.
than in five thousand years before, yea, more than half the world has
been discovered by men, that are yet (or might very well for their age be)
alive. When I name the world in this sense, I mean the vppermoste face an^
Superficies of the Earth and Sea, which unite together, make one Globe or
Sphere. And this face of the Earth, which Almighty God has given man as most
convenient place to inhabit in, through the negligence of man has, until of
late days, layne so hid and unknown, that he has lost the fruition, and
benefit of more than half the earth.

A marvelous thing, that man, who has always abhorred so much thraldom and
restrainte, and so greedily desired liberty, could be contented so many
thousand years, to be shut up in so narrow bounds. For it is to be thought,
that only such Countries in times paste have bin known as either did bound
and hang together, or else were separated by very narrow Seas, as are Europa,
Africa, and Asia, out of which, from either to other, a man may travail by
land, or else shall find in some places very narrow Seas, separating them, and
so might sail from the one to the other, only by land marks, without the
Art of Navigations, because the one was within a ken of the other.

For even the great strength and stoutnesse of Hercules himself, when out of
Graecia Westward he had traveled, The W^east (...) of ^^e (...).
and conquered all the Regions and Countries coming to the straight between
Spain and Barbary, made account to have been at the Weast end of the
world, and therefore there erected two Pillars, as a perpetual monument of his
f^^e, which to this day are called Herculeae Columnae, the P^ll^^s of
Hercules, the one standing in Spain of Europe, the other in Africa, and
called the straight Fretum Herculeum: and now commonly is named the
straightes of Mal^ga, or Gibraltar. And having come so far Westward,
contented himself, and said: Non plus vltra, no further.

Likewise Alexander Magnus out of Macedonia in Greece, passing through Armenia,
Persia and India, coming to the great River Ganges, and conqueryng all these
Countr^es ^althoughe he was persuaded, that Asia extended somewhat further into
the East and Northeast (yet knowing them not to be very great Countries, and
thinking them to be of small moment, erected there certain Aultars, whi^he are
yet called Arae Alexandrinae, as beyond which, no man else in those days had
passed, or need to pass more Eastwarde, The E^st and o^ ^^e old Worl^^.
and this was accounted, as it were a ^ounder of the East side of the world,
although indeed Asia does extend further.20. degrees, and is environed with
M^re Eo^m, and the straight Anian, which our Captain Frobisher pretends to
find out.

Touching the South parts of the world toward Africa, Ptolomeus King of
Aegipt, a famous Cosmographer, who was more solicit and curious in describing
all the face of the Earth, than any King before him or after, (except of late
days,) delivered in plat described and known only 16. degrees beyond ye
Equinoctial to the Southwardes or pole Antartique, The end of the old ^orld
Southward.
and that bounder was called Montes Lunae, out of which the great river Nilus
is supposed to have his beginning and spring. And as for the known land on the
North parts of the world, Thyle being one of ye Islands of Orcades (more
probably than Iseland) was so long pronounced and continued Vltima, that it was
esteemed a great error for any man to imagine any land more North than
that. The end of ye old ^orld Northward.


Thus have I briefly named the four principal bounders of the world, which
was only known from the beginning of the world (as some think) until within
these 80. last years. That is the straights of Gibraltar or Malega Weastward.
The East part of Asia beyond Arae Al^xandrinae Eastwarde. Vltima Thyle by
Scot^ande Northward: and.16. Grades beyond ye Equinoctial Southward. But these
16. degrees of South latitude, are to be understood only in the continent of
Africa, which extends not passing.70 degrees in longitude. Therefore,
whatsoever Countries or Regions have since been discovered and known beyond
180. degrees in longitude.60. degrees in North latitude, and 16. degrees in
South latitude, The great discoueries of late years.
all the commendation, honor, renoume, glory, and fame thereof, must be
attributed to the Englishmen, Spaniardes, Portingales, Frenchmenne and
Italians, whose valiant courage and high minds, be such, that either they
already have, or shortly will dyscouer and search out, every narrow corner
of the world. By these men's valors and industries, the known Regions of the
world, which before were divided into three parts, that is, Europa, Aff^ica,
and Asia, are now made six, by addition of other three. For like as the whole
Massy frame of the world, being first divided into two principal regions,
the one Elementall, the other Heavenly, the Elementall contains four parts,
that is, the four Elements, the Earth, the Water, the Air, and the Fire: the
Heavenly Region, although one yet for diversity of motion, may be compted two,
that is, Primum Mobile, moving only upon the poles, Articke and Antarticke,
and all the rest of Orbs and Planets, moving upon the poales of the Zodiac
are by this difference of motion imagined two, whereby arises the number of
six substanciall parts of the world, that is, the four Elements, and the two
varieti^s of Orbs. So likewise the inferior world, I mean the Superficies of
the Earth, is also divided into six parts, that is, The Earth de^ided into
six parts.
Europa, Africa, Asia, Terra Septentrionalis, America, and Terra Austrialis,
whose bounders because this division seems somewhat strange, I thought good
for the more particularitie, here briefly to repeat.

The chief bounders of the principal parts of the world.
EVropa is bounded on the Weast side with our Weaste Ocean: (...)
on the South side with Mare Mediter^aneum: on the East with Mare Aegeum,
Pontus Euxinus, and the river Tanais, following the Meridian thereof Northwarde:
On the North side it was thought sometime to be bounded with Islands,
Hebrides, Orcades, and Hyperbore^ montes in Sarmatia of Europe. But now, by
the navigations of the Englishemen, the bounds are extended unto that Sea,
which compasses Norway, Laplande, and Moscouia.

Africa is bounded Westwarde with the Sea Atlanticum, (...)
Southward with the South Ocean, passing by Cape d'buona Speranza, Eastwarde
with the red Sea, and Northwarde by the Sea Mediterraneum.

Asia is bounded on the South side with the South Ocean, As^^
on the East side with Mare Eoum, and the straighte Anian, on the North side
with the Scithian Sea, on the Weaste side with the Meridian of the river
Tana^^, and pa^te of the Sea Mediterraeneum, as Pontus Euxinus, Mare Egeum,
Sinus Issicus, and the red Sea.

Terra Septentrionalis is divided from Asia by the Scythian Sea, Terra
S^p^^ntriona^^s.
from Europe by the North Sea about Iseland, called in times past Mare
Congela^um, the frosen Sea, and from America is divided by Frobishers straits.
It lies round about the Pole Artike, and is included by a Parallel, passing
about.70. degrees in North latitude, as it is also more at large described in
Mercators and Ortelius universal Mappes.

This part of the world has been most or only made known by the
Englishmens industry. For as Mercator mentions out of a probable Author,
there was a Friar of Oxforde, a great Mathmatician, who himself went ver^^
far North, above.200. years ago, and with an Astrolabe described almost
all the land about the Pole, f^^ding it divided into four parts or Islands,
by four g^eate gutters, indrafts, or channels, running violently, and
delivering themselves into a mostrous receptacle, and swallowing sincke, with
such a violent force and current, that a Ship being entered never so little
within one of t^ese four indraftes, c^nnot be holden back by the force of any
great wind, but runs in headlong by that deep sw^ll^wing sincke into the
bowels of the earth. He report^th, that the Southweast part of that land, is
a fruitful, and a wholesome soil. The Northeast part (in respect of England)
is inhabited with a people called Pygmaei, which are not at the vttermoste
above four foot high. One of these four great monstrous gulfes wy^h his
violent raging course, follows the Meridi^n of the fortunate Islands, and
receives the Ocean with th^ee mouths, and is frosen over three months in the
year, and is.37. leagues in b^^adth: the ne^te Eastwarde beyond the Island
Vag^ts, is (...). degrees in longitude, and receives the East Ocean with ^^ue
months, and being narrow and swifte, is never frosen. The third is at.19^.
degrees in longitude, and ^^ceiu^th the East Ocea^ with nineteen receipts. The
fourth is at.^^^. degrees in longitude. Al these indraftes and raging channels,
run directly toward a point under the Pole, where is also said to be a
monstrous great Mountain of wonderful great height, and about.35. leagues in
compass at the foot.

Gui^^elmus Postellus says, that here under and about the Pole is best
habitation for man, and that they ever have continual day, and know not what
night or darkness means. But this seems contrary to the principles of the
Sphere, which allows well that they should see the Sun half a year
together without any night. During the time of his being in the North signs
from the one Equinoctium t^ the other, yet, that in ye other half they should
have continual night without any day. But I think Postellus (being a good
Astronomer) doubted noth^ng of y^ reason of ye sphere, but means yt for their
great twiligh^s, and ye high swelling of ye earth, and ye high mountain under
the Pole, they have continual light: but hereof you shall hear more ^t large
hereafter in this treatise, when I speak of the ^ep^rature of ye North
Regions. This so particular a description of ye land and countries lying about
the Pole, argues, yt this Oxford Friar took great pains ther^in, and ^ndur^th
great probability and likelihood of ye truth thereof, bicau^^ he ob^^^ued so
diligently by measure, ye breadth of the in^raf^^, w^^t time, and how long they
co^t^nued frosen, and with how ^an^e mouths or receipts every one of them
received the Ocean.

Upon ye bounds and description of this part of ye earth, I have ye longer
staid, because I find it discovered only by the English nation. And although ye
greatest part hereof was ma^e known.200: and odd years past, yet some bounders
thereof were described and set out by ye travel of S. Hugh Wi^^oby ^night, an
Englishman, who ventured and lost his life in ye cause, and so died an
honorable death, and with him Ric. Chancellor, chief Pilot in that voyage, in
An. 1554. who discovered and found out, ye Norway and Lapland. etc. conjoined
not to Groneland, or any part of ye Northern regions, as one firm and
continent, but yt by sea a man might travel to ye country of M^sc^u^a, and a
great way more Estward, as far as the great river Obby. ^lso our worthy General
Ca. Frobisher in his.3. last voiages, w^er of we are briefly to entreat in
these.3. books, has discovered and described a great part of ye Southwest
bounds thereof, and meneth (God willing) not only to describe the one half
thereof in going to Cataia by ye Northwest, but also to put in tria^^, whether
he may return into England by the Northeast, and so also to discrybe ye other
part, which to do, is one of ye waightiest matters of the world, and a thing yt
will cause other Princes to admire ye fortunate state, and ye great valor of ye
English nation. But to return again to the bounding of the other parts of
the world.

A^^ri^a.
America an Island is included on the East side with the Sea Antartique: On the
Weast side with Mare del Sur, or Mare P^cificum: On the South side it is
bounded with the straight of M^gellanus: and on the North with Frobishers
straights.

(...)
Terra A^strali^ seems to be a great firm land, lying under and about the
South pole, being in many places a fruitful ^oy^e, and is not yet thoroughly
discovered, but onl^e seen and touched on the North edge thereof, by the
travail of the Portingales and Spaniards, in their voyages to their East and
Weast Indies.

It is included almost by a Parallel, passing at.40. degrees in South latitude,
yet in some places it reaches into the Sea with great Promontories even unto
the Tropicke Capricornus. Only these parts of it are best known, as ever
against Capo d'buona Speranza ^where the Portingales (...) Popingayes commonly
of a wonderful greatness, and again it is known at the South side of the
straight of Magellanus, and is called Terra del Fueg^.

It is thought this Southlande, about the pole Antar^^ke, is far bigger than
the North land about the pole Articke: but whether it be so or not, we have no
certain k^ow^^dge, for we have no particular description hereof, as w^ have of
the land under and about the North p^le.

Thus I have briefly ^utted and bounded out all the parts o^ the Earth,
according unto this latter division into si^e p^rts. Which, that i^ might be
more apparent and sensible to every man's vndersta^ding^ I have here unto
adjoined an universal Map, wherein my mind was to make known ^o the eye what
Countries have been discovered of late years, and what before of old time.
The old known parts have their boun^es traced and drawn with whole lines,
the new^ dis^ou^r^d C^u^tri^s (...) ^oun^s draw^n with po^nts or broken l^n^^,
w^^rb^ the (...) shall at the first sight see both the shape and fa^h^on of
the whole vn^uersall face of the Earth, compared al^^og^ther, and also all the
several parts the^^of, w^ether ^hey were of old tim^ discovered, or of l^te
years, the w^^ch M^ppe, though it be roughly fram^d, w^thoute degrees of
Longitude or L^titude, yet is it suffic^ent for the purpose it was ordained,
for herein, as in all the rest of this di^co^rse, of the three voyages of our
wo^th^ General Capt^^ne F^obisher, my intent is, more to set out simply the
true and plain proceeding and handling of the whol^ m^tter, than to use
circumstance of many words, o^ f^ne ^loquent phrases, wherein if I should once
go about to ^n^angle my self, it would do nothing else, but bewray my own
ignorance, and lack of Schole sk^ll. Therefore, of me there is nothing else to
be looked for, but such plain talk and writing, as Souldyers and Mariners do
use in their daily meetings and voyages, and this of necess^t^e must any man
use, that will deal with such a m^tter as this is, although he were curious
to the contr^rie.

By this discourse and Map, is to be seen, the v^liante cour^ges of men in
this later age, within th^s^.8^ years, that have so much enlarged the bound^^
o^ the Wo^lde^ that now we have twice and thrice so mu^^e s^o^e for ^ure
earthly p^^^grination, as we have had^e in (...), so that now men need no
more content^ou^^^ to (...) for ro^me to bui^d an house on, or for a little
(...), of one acre or two, when great Countr^^s, (...) Worlds, offer and
reach out themselves, (...) will first voutsa^e to possess, inhabit, and
(...) there are Countries yet remaining (...) and possessors, which are
fertile to b^^^g forth (...) of corn and grain, infinite sorts of land
(...) Horse, Elephantes, Kin^, Sheep, great variety (...) Fowls of the air,
as Ph^sants, Partridge, Quayle, Po^^ngeys, Ostridges etc. infinit^ kind of
fruts, as Almonds, ^ates, Quinces, Pomgranats, Oringes, etc. wholesome
mediem^ble, and delectable. Great variety of flowers c^ntinu^llie springing.
Winter and Summer beautiful, for couloure odorif^rous, and comfortable.
Abundance of fair hills and valleys, furnished with all manner woddes, and
pleasante rivers. Millions of new fashions, and strange beasts and fishes,
both in Sea and fresh waters. Mountains bringing forth a^l manner of Metals,
as gold, silver, yron^ etc. All sorts of precious stones and spices, in all
which land wa^teth nothing that may be desired, either for pleasur^, p^ofite,
or ^ecessarie vs^s, which sundry Countries, to possess and obte^ne, as it is
an easy thing, so would I not have our English Nation to be slack therein,
le^st perh^ppes again they ouershoote themselves, in refusing oc^casion
offered, as it was in the time of King Henry the seventh, when all the West
Indies were first pr^fered to the Englis^men, to be given into their hands,
which they little regarding, was aft^^w^rd offer^d to the Spany^rdes, who
presently a^cepted the occasion, and now enjoy the infinite treasure and
commo^itie thereof. I would not wish Englismen to b^ new unlike themselves,
^or in all the later discouerie^ the English n^tion has bin as forw^rd, as
an^ other. ^s first^^ by their Nauigations North^^stward, the bounds of Europe,
were made perf^ct on the North side, for Ptolomie, St^abo, and al other
Geogr^phers ^e^te it des^ribed but onel^ to the Islands Orcad^s i^ I^elande,
and Hyperboreos Montes in Sarma^i^, and finding the l^nd on ^he North sid^ o^
^^rm^ny, Poland, Moscouia, and Asia, (...) e^tend Northw^^d, ^hey le^t
^on^u^^dly, ^ kn^w ^ot whether it re^c^ed to the Pol^, as one (...), or (...)
voyage has since bin perfected by ye two breethren the Borowes, and other
valiant young me^ of our time Eastward, beyond ye great River Obij, as far as
ye Empire of ye great Came or Cane of Tartari^, as ^ppeereth in my general Map
by ye pricked bounds thereof. That voyage was then taken in hand, of ye valiant
Knight, with pretense to have gone Eastward to the rich Country of Cat^ya, and
was grounded briefly upon these reasons. First, because there was a Unicornes
horn found upon the coast of Tarta^ia by the River Obij, which (said he) was
like by no other ways to come thither, but from India or C^taya, where the
said Unicornes are only found, and that by some sea bringing it thither. Also
a fisherma^ of Tartari^ reported, yt he sailed very far South eastward, and
found no end of sea, or likelyhoode thereof. Lastly, a Tartarian, inhabiting
near ye Scithian Se^, reported such a stream and current to run there
co^tinually^ toward the West, that if you cast any thing therein, it would
presently be carried out of your sight toward the West, whereby necessaril^
follows, there should be some passage to some larg^r sea, wherein this
co^^inua^l stream might empty it self. And by ye experience of this vo^age,
it was found, yt the frosen ^ones were not fros^n, bu^ h^b table and nauigable,
a thing yt almost all the old Philosophers did deny, and went about with sundry
reasons ^o impugn, ^or ^n this voyage to Moscoui^, our men passed be^ond.72.
degrees in No^th Latitude, whereas ye frosen Zone begins at.66 d^grees and a
half. This enterprise, although it t^ke not effect, to find ye passage to
Cataya Eastw^rd, b^c^use ye worthy knight, the chief Author thereof, dyed in ye
way thither, yet has it bin very beneficial to England, in finding out ye
trade to S. Nicholas, both for ye mainten^nce of ye N^u^e, and the yearly
profit is reaped thereby, the which voyage is known to be more dangerous and
painful, tha^ any y^ Spaniards or Portugals have ever dealt in, for they being
borne in a somewhat hot country, happened to deal with easy voyages, although
they were long out, not much differing from their own te^perature.

And I think, a man might be bold to say, that in all their long voyages,
to the East and West Indies, they were never so much distressed and oppressed
with so infinite numbers, and sundry kinds of dangers, as our valiante
General Captain Frobisher, and his company were in every one of these his
three voyages, as readyng it, you shall understand more at large. And yet they
courageously persist and continue on their purposed enterprise, and will not
surceasse, until they have (God willing) found out that long wished passage
to Cataya, to the everlasting renown, glory, and fame of the English nation.

Also, the valor of the English men, did first of all discover and find out
all that part of America, which now is called B^cc^laos: for Sebastian Cabot,
an English man, borne in Bristow, was by commandment of King Henry the
seventh, in Anno.1508. furnished with Shipping, munition, and men, and sailed
along all that tract, pretending to discover the passage to Cataya, and went
alande in many places, and brought home sundry of the people, and many other
things of that Country, in token of possession, being (I say) the first
Christians that ever there set foot on land.

Also, the said Englishman Cabot, did first discover at the procurement of the
King of Spain, all that other port of America, adjoining next beyond
Brasill, lying about the famous River called Rio de la plata.

Also, the English men have made sundry voyages to Guinea and Bynny, although
the Spanyardes, and Portugalles, because of their near dwelling thereunto, get
thither the first starte of them, and there prevented them in building Towns
and Castles, whereby appears, that the English nation, by their long and
dangerous Nauigations, have diligently and paynefullie searched out by sea, the
temperature of all the Zones, whether they were burning, frosen, hot, cold, or
indifferent, even from the Pole Articke, to the Equinoctial, and crossing it
also, passed beyond the Tropicke of Capricorn, and returned again. And
therefore, as we are inferioure to no other nation, in making great and long
voyages by Sea, so know I no Nation comparable unto us, in taking in hand
long travels and voyages by land. For what Nation is it, that has ever had
such a long trade by land, as is the Englishmens into Persia, which besides two
Months sailing by Sea, along the Weast and Northern coasts of Norwey, and
Lapland, by Wardhouse, unto the Bay of Saint Nicholas, it remains more in
voyage by land and fresh rivers, about three thousand English miles: for
from the Merchantes house at Saint Nicholas, by the River Duina and Sughana, to
the City Volugda, is compted seven hundred English miles, from thence to the
City Yearuslane, standing upon the great River Molga, traveling by only land,
is reckned about.140. miles, where the Merchants making new Shipping for the
fresh River Volga, go Eastwarde about.700. miles: then the said River Volga
turning again South by many windings, at the last by the great City
Astracan, delivers it self into the South side of the Sea Caspium, that
tract being above nine hundred miles: then after in two or three days, with a
good wind crossing the Caspium Sea, they ariue at a port named Bilbill, where
after by land iourneying with Camels in one and twenty days, being almost.600
miles, they come to the famous City of Tauris or Teuris, being the greatest
City of Persia, for trade of Merchandise. This long and paynefull voyage by
land, was taken in hand by a worthy Gentleman Master Anthony Ienkenson, who
made thereof a Plat, with the first particular description that I have seen of
the whole Country of Moscouia, which is yet extant, and therefore the
Englishmen are to be preferred before all other Nations, in making long voyages
by land. The Spaniards and Portugalles undoubtedly are worthy immortal ^ame
and glory, for their great enterprises, and good ^uccesses, they have
therein: yet have they never seen nor hard such strange and extraordinary
accidents of the Sphere, as has happ^ned unto the Englishmen. For neither
Sp^nia^de nor Portugal, ever saw in all their long voyages, Sun and the
Moon to make whole and perfect reuolutions above the Horizon, as our men
yearly do see in their voyage to Moscouia, where when they abide any time at
Wardehouse, they see the Sun go continually above ground, the space of above
two months together, where if they take no great heed, they shall not know
what day of the month it is, after the order of our Calender, for that they
have no nigh^s. But yet because once every 24. hours, the Sun draws near
to the Horizon in the North parts, it is there commonly shadowed with vapors
and thick fogges, which usually rise from the Earth, and seem a little to
shad^we the body of the Sun: and that lowest approaching of the Snn to ye
Earthward, they count night, and so make good enough reckning of the days of
the month, according to our usual fashion. But one inconvenience there is,
that dismayeth and deterreth most men, (though they be of valiant courage)
from taking in hand large voyages, either by sea or by land, and that is, the
new and uncustomed elements, and the extreme airs, of hot and cold, whereby
(as some think) if they travel far Northward, they shall be frosen to death, in
the hard congealed and frosen sea: and again, if they travel far toward the
South, they fear they should be parched and broyled to death with the extreme
heat of the middle burning: or else if perhaps they escape alive, yet at least
they should be burned as black as a cole, as the Indians or Black Moors there
are and this to believe they are partlye persuaded by the sight of those
Indians, and partlye by the persuasions of certain Philosophers, who went
about with reasons to prove, yt between the 2. Tropicks was no dwelling or
being, for the extreme heat, the Sun beating on them continuallye: neither
near ey^her Pole, for the extreme frostes, cold, and snow, which
continuallye has there (from the beginning of the world as some think)
increased, the Sun being so far distante from them. Which opinion of some,
because it imports very much, I thought good here to do m^ endeavor to
refell, both because I know the contrary, by my own experience, and also for
that I find the course of the Sun in Zod^acke, which God has orda^ned to
give light and life to all things, can induce no such kind of ^x^remitie: and
so lastly to confirm all parts of the world to be habitable.

Experiences and reasons of the Sphere, to prove al parts of the world
habitable, and ^hereby to con^ute the position of the five Zones.
FIrst it may be gathered by experience of our Englishmen in An.1553. for
Captain Windam made a voyage with Merchandise to Guinea, and entered so far
within the Torrida Zona, that he was within.3. or 4. degrees of the
Equinoctial, and abiding there certain mone^hs, re^urned with gain.

Also the Englishmen made another voyage very prosp^rous and gainful, An^
1554 to ye coasts of Binin, lying East from Guinea, being within 3. degrees of
ye Equinoctial. And yet it is reported of a truth, that al ye tract from Cape
de las Pa^mas trending by C. de tres puntas along by Benin until the I Will of
Saint Thomas (which is perpendicular under the Equinoctial) al yt whole Bay is
more subject to many bloming and smothering heates, with infectious and
contagious airs, than any other place in all Torrida Zona: and the cause thereof
is some accidents in ye land. For it is most certain, yt mountains, Seas,
w^ods, and lakes, etc. may cause through their sundry kind of situation,
sundry strange and extraordinary effects, which the reason of the clyme
otherwise would not give. I mention these voyages of our Englishemenne, not
so much to prove that Torrida Zona may be, and is inhabited, as to show their
readynesse in attempting long and dangerous Nauigations. We also among us in
England, have black Moors, Ethiopians, out of all parts of Torrida Zon^,
which after a small continuance, can well endure the cold of our Country, and
why should not we as well abide the heat of their Country. But what should I
name any more experiences, seeing that all the coasts of Guynea and Bynnin
are inhabited of Portugals, Spanyardes, French, and some Englishmen, and there
have built Castles and Towns. Only this I will say to the Merchants of
London, that trade yearly to Marochus, it is very certain, that the greatest
part of the burning Zone, is far more temperate and cool, than the Country
of Marochus, as shall appear by these reasons and experiences following. For
let us first consider the breadth and bigness of this burning Zone, which as
every man knows, is.47. Degrees each Tropicke, which are the bounders
thereof, being.23. degrees and a half distant from the Equinoctial. Imagine
again two other Paralels, on each side the Equinoctial one, either of them
distant from the Equinoctial about twenty Degrees, which Paralels may be
described either of them twice a year by the Sun, being in the first
Degrees of Gemini the eleventh of May, and in Leo the thirtenth of July, having
North Latitude. And again, the Sun being in the first Degrees of
Sagittarius, the twelfth of November, and in Aquarius the ninth of January,
having South Latitude, I am to prove by experience and reason, that all that
distance, included between these two Paralels last named, containing fortye
Degrees in Latitude, going round about the earth, according to Longitude, is
not only habitable, but the same most fruitful and delectable, and that if
any extremity of heat be, the same not to be within the space of twentye
Degrees of the Equinoctial on either side, but only under and about the two
Tropickes, and so proportionally the nearer you do approach to either Tropicke,
the more you are subject to extremity of heat (if any such be) and so
Marochus being situate but.6. or.7. degrees from the Tropicke of Cancer, shall
be more subject to heat, than any place under or near the Equinoctial line^

And first by the experience of sundry men, yea thousa^ds, Trauailers and
Merchauntes, to the East and Weast Indies in many places both directly under,
and hard by the Equinoctial, they with one consent affirm, that it abounds
in the midst of Torrida Zona with all manner of grain, herbs, grass,
fruit, wood, and cattle, that we have here, and thousands other sorts,
far more wholesome, delectable, and precious, than any we have in these
Northern climates, as very well shall appear to him that will read the
Histories and Nauigations of such as have traveled Arabia, India, intra and
extra Gangem, the Islands Moluccae, America^ etc. which all lie about ye middle
of ye burning Zone, where it is truly reported, that the great herbs, as are
Radishe, Lettuce, Colewortes, Borage, and such like, do wax ripe, greater,
more sauerie and delectable in taste than ours, within sixeteene days after
the seed is sown. Wheat being sowed the first of February, was found ripe
the first of May, and generally, where it is less fruitful, the Wheat will
be ripe the fourth Month after the seed is sown, and in some places^ will
bring forth an ear as big as the wreste of a man's arm, containing.1000.
grains. Beans, Pease, etc. are there ripe twice a year. Also grass being
cut down, will grow up in six days above one foot high. If our
cattle be transported thither, within a small time their young ones become of
bigger stature, and more fat than ever they would have bin in these
Countries. There are found in every wood in great numbers, such timber trees
as twelve men holding hands together are not able to fadome. And to be short,
all they that have been there, with one consent affirm, that there are the
goodlyest green Meddowes and playnes, the faireste mountains, covered with
all sorts of trees and fruits, the fairest valleys, the goodliest pleasant
fresh rivers, stoared with infinite kind of fishes, the thickest woods, green
and bearing fruit all the whole year, that are in all the world. And as for
gold, silver, and al other kind of Metals, al kind of spices, and delectable
fruits, both for delicacie, and health, are there in such abundance, as
hitherto they have been thought to have been bred no where else, but there. And
in conclusion, it is now thought, that no where else but under the
Equinoctial, or not far from thence, is the earthlye Paradise, and the only
place of perfection in this world. And that the things may seem the less
strange, because i^ has bin accounted of the old Philosophers, that there
could nothing prosper, for the extreme heat of the Sun continually going
over their heads in the Zodiac, I thought good here to allege such
natural causes as to me seem very substanciall and sure reasons. First you
are to understand, that the Sun does work his more or less heat in these
lower parts by two means, the one is^ by the kind of Angle that the Sun beams
does make with the earth, as in all Torrida Zona, it makes perpendicularly
right Angles, in some place or other at noone, and toward the two Poles
very oblique and uneven Angles. And the other mean is the longer or shorter
continuance of the Sun above the Horizon. So that wheresoever these two
causes do most concur, there is most excess of heat: and when the one is
wanting, the rigor of the heat is less. For though the Sun beams do beat
perpendicularly upon any region subject unto it, if it has no continuance or
abode above the Horizon, to work his operation in, there can no hot effect
proceed. For nothing can be don in a momente. And this second cause, mora
solis supra Horizontem, the time of the Suns abiding above the Horizon, the
old Philosophers never remembered, but regarded only the manner of angles, yt
the Sun beams made with the Horizon, which if they were equal and right, the
heat was the greater, as in Torrida Zona: if they were unequal and oblique,
the heat was the less, as toward both poles, which reason is very good and
substancial: for the perpendicular beams reflect and reuerberate in
themselves, so that the heat is doubled, every beam striking twice, and by
uniting are multiplied, and continue strong in form of a Column. But in our
latitude of 50. and.60. degrees, the Sun beams descend oblique and slanting
wise, and so sthiketh but once and departs, and therefore our heat is the
less, for any effect that the angle of the Suns beams make. Yet, because we
have a longer continuance of the Suns presence above our Horizon than they
have under the Equinoctial, by which continuance the heat is increased, for
it shines to us.xvj. or.xviii. hours sometime, when it continues with them
but twelve hours always.

And again, our night is very short, wherein cold vapors use to abound,
being but.6. or.8. hours long, whereas theirs is always twelve hours long, by
which two adua^tages of long days and short nights, though we want the
equality of Angle, it comes to pass, that in Summer our heat here is as
great as theirs is there, as has bin proved by experience, and is nothing
dissonant from good reason.

Therefore, whosoever will rightly way the force of cold and heat in any
region, must not only consider the Angle that the Sun beams make, but
also the continuance of the same above the Horizon. As first to them under
the Equinoctial the Sun is twice a year at noone in their Zenith
perpendicular over their heads, and the ^^^re during the.ij. hours of those
two days the heat is very urgent, and so perhaps it will be in.4. or.5. days
more, an hour every day until the Sun in his proper motion, have crossed
the Equinoctial, so that this extreme heat caused by the perpendicular Angle
of the Sun beams, endures but two hours of two days, in a year. But if
any man say the Sun may s^alde a good while, before and after it come to
the Meridian, so far forth as reason leads, I am content to allow it, and
therefore I will measure and proportion the Suns heat, by comparing the
Angles there, with the Angles made here in England, because this te^perature is
best known unto us. As for example, the.11. day of March, when under the
Equinoctial it is half an hour paste eight of the clock in the morning, the
Sun will be in the East, because there it arises always at six of the
clock, and moves every hour 15. degrees above ye Horizon, and so high very
near will it be with us at London the said.11. of March at noone. And therefore
look what force the Sun has with us at noone, the.11. of March, the same
force has it under the Equinoctial at half hour paste eight in the morning,
or rather less force under the Equinoctial. For with us the Sun had been
already six y hours above the Horizon, and so had purified and cleansed all
the vapors, and thereby his force increased at noone, but under the
Equinoctial, the Sun having been up but^ 2 hours had sufficient to do,
to purge and consume the cold and moist vapoures of the long night, and as
yet had wrought no effect of heat. And therefore I may boldly pronounce, that
there is much less heat at half hour past eight under the Equinoctial,
than is with us at noone ( a fortiori.) Butte in March, we are not only
contented to have the Sun shining, but we greatly desire the same. Likewise
the.11. of June, the Sun in our Meridian is.62. degrees high at London: and
under the Equinoctial it is so high after.10. of the clock, and seeing then
it is beneficial with us a fortiori, it is beneficial to them after.10. of the
clock.

And thus have we measured the force of the Suns greatest heat, the hottest
days in the year, under the Equinoctial, that is, in March and September,
from six till after ten of the clock in the morning, and from two until
sun set. And this is concluded, by respecting only the first cause of he^te,
which is the consideration of the Angle of ye Sun beams, by a certain
similitude, that whereas the sun shines never above twelve hours, more than
eight of them would be cool and pleasant eue^ to us much more to them that
are acquainted always with such warm places. So there remains less than
four hours of any excessive heat, and that only in the two summer days of
the year, that is, the eleventh of March, and the fourteenth of September, for
under the Equinoctial they have two summers, in March, and September, which
are our spring and Autumn: and likewise two winters, in June, and December,
which are our Summer and Winter, as may well appear to him that has only
tasted the principles of the Sphere. But if the sun be in either Tropicke,
^or approaching near thereunto, then may we more easilye measure the force of
his Meridian altitude, that it strikes upon the Equinoctial. As for example,
the twelfth of June, the sun will be in the first degree of Cancer. Then look
what force the heat of the sun has under the Equinoctial, ye same force
and greater, it has in all that Parallel, where the Pole is elevated between
47. and 48. degrees. And therefore Paris in France, the 12. day of Iulye
sustayneth more heat of the Sun, than Saint Thomas Island lying near the
same Meridian, does likewise at noone, or the Islands Taprobana, Moluccae, or
the firm land of Peru in America, which al lie underneath the Equinoctial.
For upon the 12. day of June aforesaid, the sun beams at noone do make an
Isocheles Triangle, whose Vertex is the Center of the Sun, the Basis a line
extended from Saint Thomas Island, under the Equinoctial, unto Paris in
France, near the same Meridian: therefore the two Angles of the Base, In June
is greater heat at Paris than under the Equinoctial.
must needs be equal p. 5. primi, Ergo the force of the heat equal, if
there were no other cause, than the reason of the Angle, as the old
Philosophers have appointed. But because at Paris the Sun rises two hours
before it rises to them under the Equinoctial, and sets likewise two
hours after the^, by means of the obliquity of the Horizo^, in which time of
the Suns presence.4. hours in one place, more tha^ the other, it works
some effect more in the one place than in the other, and being of equal height
at noone, it must then needs follow to be more hot in the Parallel of Paris,
than it is under the Equinoctial. Also this is an other reason, that when the
Sun sets to them under the Equinoctial, it goes very deep and low under
their Horizon, almost even to their Antipodes, whereby their twylights are very
short, and their nights are made very extreme dark and long, The Twylights
are shorter, and the nights darker, under the Equinoct^al^ al than at Paris.
and so the moisture and coldenesse of the long nights, wonderfully
increases, so that at length the Sun rising, can hardly in many hours consume
and drive away the cold humors and moist vapors of the night paste, which
is clean contrary in ye Parallel of Paris: For ye Sun goes under their
Horizon but very little, after a sloping forte, whereby their nights are not
very dark, but lightsome, as looking into the North in a clear night
without clouds, it does manifestlye appear, their twilightes are long, for
the Parallel Cancer cutteth not the Horizon of Paris at right angles, (but at
angles very uneven, and unlike) as it does the Horizon of the Equinoctial.
Also the Summer day at Paris, is sixteen hours long, and the night but
eight: where contrariwise, under the Equinoctial, the day is but twelve hours
long, and so long is also the night, in what soever Parallel the Sunbe: and
therefore look what odds and difference of proportion there is between the
Suns abode above the Horizon in Paris, and the abode it has under the
Equinoctial, (it being in Cancer) the same proportion would seem to be
between the heat of the one place and heat of the other: for other things (as
the angle of the whole acke of the Suns progress that day in both places)
are equal.

But under the Equinoctial, the presence and abode of the Sun above the
Horizon, is equal to his absence, and abode under the Horizon, each being
twelve hours. And at Paris, the continuance and abode of the Sun is above
the Horizon sixteen hours long, and but eight hours absence, which
proportion is double, from which, if the proportion of the equality be
subtrahed to find the difference, there will remain still a double proportion,
whereby it seems to follow, that in June the heat at Paris were double to
the heat under the Equinoctial. For (as I have said) the angle of the Sun
beams, are in all points equal, and the cause of difference is, Mora Solis
supra Horizontem, the stay of the Sun in the one Horizon more than in the
other. Therefore, whosoever could find out in what proportion the angle of
the Sun beams heateth, and what increase the Suns continuance does add
thereunto, it might expressly be set down, what force of heat and cold is
in all regions.

Thus you partly see by comparing a Clymate to us well known, and familiarlye
acquainted by like height of the Sun in both places, that under the
Equinoctial in June, is no excessive heat, but a temperate air rather
tending to cold. For as they have there for the most part a continual
moderate heat, so yet sometime they are a little pintched with cold, They use
and have need of fire under the Equinoctial.
and use the benefit of Fire as well as we, especially in the euenyng when
they go to bed, for as they lie in hanging beds tied fast in the upper
part of the house, so will they have fyres made on both sides their bed, of
which two fires, yt one they devise superstitiouslye to drive away Spyrites,
and the other to keep away from them the coldenesse of the nights.

Al^o in many places of Torrida Zona, especially in the higher lands somewhat
mountainous, the people a little shrincke at the cold, and are often forced to
provide themselves clothing, so that ye Spaniards have found in the West
Indies, many people clothed, especially in Winter, whereby appears, that with
their heat, there is cold intermingled, else would they never provide this
remedy of clothing, which to them is rather a grief and trouble than
otherwise. For when they go to wars, they will put off al their apparel,
thinking it to be combersome, and will always go naked, that they thereby
might be more nymble in their fight. Some there be that think the middle
Zone extreme hot, because ye people of yt Country can live without clothing,
wherein they childishly are deceived, for our clime rather tends to
extreamitie of cold, because we cannot live without clothing: for this our
dubble lining and furring, and wearing so many cloths, is a remedy against
extremity, and argues not ye goodness of yt habitation, but incouenie^ce and
injury of cold: and that is rather ye moderate, te^perate, and delectable
habitation, where none of these troublesome things are required, but that we
may live naked and bare, as nature brings us forth. Others again imagine ye
middle Zone to be extreme hot, because the people of Africa, especially ye
Ethiopians, are so cole black, and their hair like wool ^urled shor, twhich
blackness and crooked hair, they suppose to come only by ye parching heat of
ye Sun, which how it should be possible I cannot see. For eue^ under ye
Equinoctial in America, and in ye East Indies, and in the Ila^ds Moluccae, yt
people are not black, but white, with long hair vncurled as we have, so that
if the Ethiopians blackness came by the heat of the Sun, why should not those
Americans and Indians also be as black as they, seeing the Sun is equally
distant from them both, they abiding in one parallel: for the concaue and
co^uexs Superficies of ye Orb of the Sun is concentrike, and equidistant to ye
earth, except any man should imagine somewhat of Aux Solis, and Oppositum,
which indiff^r^ntly may be applied as well to ye one place, as to the other. But
y^ same is thought to give no otherwise heat, but by way of angle in
reflection, not by his neerenesse, for throughout all Africa, yea in the
midst of ye middle, and in all other places, upon ye tops of Mou^tains, there
lies continual Snow, which is nearer to the Orb of the Sun, than the
people are in the valley, by so much as the height of these: Mountains amount
unto, and yet the Sun notwithstanding his nerenesse, can not melt the Snow,
for want of convenient place of reflections. Also the middle region of the
Air, where all the Hayle, Frost, and Snow is engendered, is nearer unto the
Sun than the earth is, and yet there continues perpetual cold, because
there is nothing that the Suns beams may reflect against, whereby appears
the neerenesse of the body of ye Sun works nothing. Therefore to return
again to the black Moors, I my self have seen an Ethiopian as black as a
cole brought into England, who taking a fair English woman to Wife, begatte
a Son in all respects as black as the Father was, although England were his
native Country, and an English woman his Mother: whereby it seems this
blackness proceeds rather of some natural infection of that man, which was
so strong, that neither ye nature of the Clime, neither the good complexion of
the Mother concurring, could any thing alter, and therefore we can not impute
it to the nature of ye Clime. And for a more fresh example, our people of Meta
Incognita (of whom and for whom this discourse is taken in hand) that were
brought this last year into England, were all generally of the same
color, that many Nations be, lying in the midst of the middle Zone. And
this their couloure was not only in the face which was subject to Sun and
Air, but also in their bodies, which were still covered with garments, as
ours are, yea, the very sucking child, of twelve Months age, The complexion
of the people of Meta Incognica.
had his skin of the very same couloure that most have under the
Equinoctial, which thing can not proceed by reason of the clime, for that
they are at least ten degrees more toward the North, than we in England
are, no, the Sun never comes near their Zenith by.40. Degrees, for in
effect, they are within three or four degrees of that, which they call the
frosen Zone, and as I said, forty degrees from the burning Zone, whereby it
follows, that there is some other cause than the Clymate, or the Suns
perpendicular reflection, that should cause the Ethiopians great blackness.
And the most probable cause to my judgment is, that this blackness
proceeds of some natural infection of the first inahbitants of that
Country, and so all the whole progeny of them descended, are still poluted
with the same blot of infection. Therefore it shall not be far from our
purpose, to examine the first original of these black men, and how by lineall
discente, they have hitherto continued thus black. The cause of the Ethiopia^s
blackenesse.
It manifestly and plainly appears by holy Scripture, that after the
general Inundation and ouerflowing of the Earth, there remained no more me^
alive, but Noe and his three sons, Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, who only were left
to possess and inhabit the whole face of the earth: therefore all the land
that until this day has bin inhabited by sundry discents, must needs come
of the offspring either of Sem, Cham, or Iaphet, as the only sons of Noe, who
all three being white, and their wives also, by course of nature, should have
begotten and brought forth white children. But the envy of our great and
continual enemy the wicked Spirit is such, that as he could not suffer our
old Father Adam to live in the felicity and Angelike state wherein he was
first created, but tempting him, sought and procured his ruin and fall: So
again, finding at this flood none but a father and three sons living, he so
caused one of them to transgress and disobey his fathers commandment, that
after him, all his posterity should be accursed. The fact of disobedience was
this. When Noe at the commandment of God had made and entered the Arc, The
Ark of Noah.
and the fludgates of Heaven were opened, so that the whole face of the earth,
every tree and Mountain was covered with abundance of water, he straitely
commanded his sons and their wives, yt they should with reverence and fear
behold the justice and mighty power of God, and that during the time of the
flood, while they remained in the Arc, they should use co^tine^cie, and
abstain from carnal copulation with their wives: and many other precepts he
gave unto the^, and admonitions, touching the justice of God, in revenging
sin, and his mercy in delivering the^, who nothing deserved it. Which good
instructions and exhortatio^s notwithstanding, his wicked son Cham disobeyed,
Chus y^ son of Cham accursed.
and being persuaded that the first child borne after the flood (by right and
law of nature) should inherit and possess all the dominion of ye earth, he,
contrary to his fathers commandment, while they were yet in the Arc, used
company with his wife, and craftily went about, thereby to disinherit the
offspring of his other two breethren, for the which wicked and detestable fact,
as an example for contempt of Almighty God, and disobedience of parents, God
would a son should be borne, whose name was Chus, who not only it self, but
all his posterity after him, should be so black and loathsome, that it might
remain a spectacle of disobedience to all the World. And of this black and
cursed Chus came al these black Moors which are in Africa, for after the
water was vanished from off the face of the earth, and that the land was dry,
Sem chose that part of the land to inhabit in which now is called Asia, and
Iaphet had that which now is called Europa wherein we dwell, and Africa remained
for Cham, and his black son Chus, and was called Chamesis, A^frica was
called Chamesis.
after ye fathers name, being perhaps a cursed, dry, sandy, and unfruitful
ground, fit for such a generation to inhabit in. Thus you see, yt the cause of
ye Ethiopians blackness, is the curse and infection of blood, and not the
distemperature of the clymate, which also may be proved by this example, that
these black men are found in all parts of Africa, as well without the
Tropicks, as within, even unto Capo d'buona Speranza Southward, where, by
reason of the Sphere, should be the same temperature as is in Spain, Laddigna,
and Sicilia, where all be of very good complexions. Wherefore I conclude, that
the blackness proceeds not of the hotenesse of the Clime, but as I said, of
the infection of blood, and therefore this their argument gathered of the
Africans blackness, is not able to destroy the temperature of the middle Zone.
We may therefore very well be assertayned, that under the Equinoctial, is the
most pleasant and delectable place of the world to dwell in, where, although
the Sun for two hours in a year, be direct over their heads, and therefore
the heat at that time somewhat of force, yet because it comes so seldom,
and continues so small a time, when it comes, it is not to be wayed, but
rather the moderate heat of other times is all the year to be remembered. And
if the heat at any time should in the short day ware somewhat urgent, the
coldness of the long night there, would easily refreshe it, according as
Honterus says, speaking of the temperature under the Equinoctial.

Quodque die solis violento incanduit aestu
Humida nox reficit paribusque refrigerat horis.
If the heat of the Sun in the day time do burn or parch any thing, the
moisture of the night does cool and refresh the same again, the Sun being
as long absente in the night, as it was present in the day. Also our Author of
the Sphere, Johannes d' Sacro bosco, in the Chapter of the Zodiac, deriueth
the Etimologie of Zodiacus, of the Greek word Zoe, which in Latin signifies
Vita, life, for out of Aristotle he alleges, that Secundum accessum and
recessum solis in Zodiaco, fiunt generationes and corruptiones in rebus
inferioribus: according to the Suns going to and fro in the Zodiake, the
inferior bodies take their causes of generation and corruption. Then it
follows, that where there is most going too and fro, there is most generation
and corruption: which must needs be between the two Tropikes, for there the
Sun goes too and fro most, and no where else, but there. Therefore, between
the two Tropikes, that is, in the middle Zone, is greatest increase,
multiplication, generation, Under the Equinoctial is greatest generation.
and corruption of things, which also we find by experience, for there is
Summer twice in the year, and twice Winter, so that they have two Haruests in
the year, and continual spring. Seeing then the middle Zone falls out so
temperate, it rests to declare where the hotest part of the World should be,
for we find some places more hot than others. To answer this doubt, reason
persuadeth, the hotest place in the World to be under and about the two
Tropickes, for there more than in any other place do both the causes of heat
concur, Greatest hear under the Tropiks.
that is, the perpendicular falling of the Sun beams, at right Angles, and
a greater continuance of the Sun above the Horison (the Pole there being
elevated three or four and twenty degrees.) And as before I concluded, that
though the Sun were perpendicular to them under the Equinoctial, yet because
the same continued but a small time, (their days being short, and their
nights long) and their speedy departure of the Sun from their Zenith,
because of the suddayne crossing of the Zodiake with the Equinoctial, and that
by such continual course and recourse of hot and cold, the temperature grew
moderate.

So now to the^ under ye two Tropikes, the Sun having once by his proper
permotio^ declined.20. degrees from the Equinoctial, begins to draw near
their Zenith, which may be (as before, about the eleventh day of May, and
then begins to send his beams almost at right Angles, about which time, the
Sun enters into the first degree of Gemini, and with this almost right
Angle, the Sun beams will continue, until it be past Cancer, that is, the
space of two Months every day at noone, almost perpendicular over their
heads, being then the time of So^stitium Aestiuale, which so long continuance
of the Sun about their Zenith, may cause an extreme heat (if any be in the
world) but of necessity far more heat, than can be under the Equinoctial,
where the Sun has no such long abode in the Zenith, but passes away
therehence very quickly. Also under the Tropikes, the day is longer by an hour
and a half, than it is under the Equinoctial, wherefore the heat of the
Sun, having a longer time of operation, must needs be increased, especially
seeing the night, wherein cold and moisture do abound under the Tropikes,
is less than it is under the Equinoctial. Therefore I gather, that under the
Tropikes is the hotest place, not only of Torrida Zona, but of any other part
of the World, especially because there both causes of heat do concur, that
is, the perpendicular falling of the Sun beams two Months together, and
the longer abode of the Suns presence above the Horison. And by this means,
more at large is proved, that Marochus in Summer, is far more hot, than at
any time under the Equinoctial, because it is situate so near the Tropike
Cancer, and also for the length of their days. Neither yet do I think, that
the Regions situate under the Tropikes, are not habitable, for they are found
to be very fruitful also, although Marochus, and some other parts of Africa
near the Tropike, for the dryness of the native sandy soil, and some
accidents, may seem to some to be intemperate for overmuch heat. For
Ferdinandus Ouiedus, speaking of Cuba and Hispaniola, Cuba Hispaniola.
Islands of America, lying hard under, or by the Tropike Cancer, says, that
these Islands have as good pasture for Cattle, as any other Country in the
world.

Also, they have most wholesome and clear water, and temperate air, by reason
whereof, the herds of Beas^es are much bigger, fatter, and of better taste,
then any in Spain, because of the rank pasture, whose moisture is better
digested in the herb or grass, by continual and temperate heat of the
Sun, whereby being made more fat and unctious, it is of better and more
steadfast nourishment. For continual and temperate heat does not only draw
much moisture out of the earth, to the nourishmente of such things as grow,
and are engendered in that Clime, but does also by moderation, preserve the
same from putrefying, digesting also, and condensating or thickning the said
moist nourishmente into a gummie and unctious substance, Under the Tropickes is
a mode^nte temperature
whereby appears also, that under the Tropikes is both wholesome, fruitful,
and pleasant habitation, whereby lastly it follows, that all the middle Zone,
which until of late days has bin compted and called the burning, broyling,
and parched Zone, is now found to be the most delicate, temperate, commodious,
pleasant, and delectable part of the World, and especially under the
Equinoctial.

Having now sufficiently at large declared the temperature of the middle Zone,
it remains to speak somewhat also of the moderate and continual heat in
cold Regions, as well in the night as in the day all the Summer long, and
also how these Regions are habitable to the inhabitants of the same, contrary
to the opinion of the old writers.

Of the temperature of cold Regions all the Summer long, and also how in
Winter the same is habitable, especially to the inhabitants thereof.
THe cold Regions of the World are those, which tending toward the Pole
Artike, and Antartike, are without the circuit or bounds of the seven
Climates, which agreeable to the opinion of the old Writers, is found, and
set out in our Author of the Sphere, Johannes de Sacrobosco, where he
plainly says, that without the seventh Climate, which is bounded by a
Parallel, passing at fifty degrees in Latitude, all the habitation beyond
that, Nine Climates.
to be discommodious and intolerable: but Gemma Phrisius a late writer,
finding England and Scotland to be without the compass of those climates,
wherein he knew to be very temperate and good habitation, added thereunto two
other Climates, the uttermost Parallel whereof, passes by.56. degrees in
Latitude, and therein comprehends over and above the first computation,
England, Scotland, Denmark, Moscouia, etc. which all are rich and mighty
Kingdoms.

The old writers persuaded by bare conjecture, went about to determine of
those places, by comparing them to their own complexions, because they felt
them to be hardly tolerable to themselves, and so took thereby an argument of
the whole habitable earth, as if a Man borne in Morochus, or other part of
Barbary, should at the later end of Summer, upon the suddayne, either naked,
or with his thin vesture, A comparison between Marochus, and England.
be brought into England, he would judge this Region presently not to be
habitable, because he being brought up in so warm a Country, is not able
here to live, for so sudden an alteration of the cold air: but if the same
man had come at the beginning of Summer, and so afterward by little and
little by certain degrees, had felt and acquainted himself with the Frost of
Autumn, it would have seemed by degrees to harden him, and so to make it far
more tolerable, and by use after one year or two, the air would seem to
him more temperate. It was compted a great matter in the old time, that there
was a brass pot broken in sunder with frosen water in Ponthus, which after was
brought and showed in Delphis, in token of a miraculous cold region and
Winter, and therefore consecrated to the Temple of Apollo.

This effect being wroughte in the Parallel of.48. degrees in latitude, it was
presentlye compted a place very hardly and uneasily to be inhabited for the
great cold. And how then can such men define upon other Regions very far
without that Parallel, where they were inhabited or not, seeing that in so
near a place they so grossly mistook the matter, and others their followers
being contented with the inventions of the old Authors, have persisted
willingly in the same opinion, with more confidence tha^ consideration of the
cause, so lightly was that opinion received, as touching the uninhabitable Clime
near and under the Poles.

Therefore I am at this present to prove, yt all the land lying between the
last climate even unto the point directly under either Poles, is or may be
inhabited, especially of such creatures as are engendered and bredde therein.
All the North regions are habitable.
For indeed it is to be confessed, that some particular living creature cannot
live in every particular place or region, especially with the same joy and
felicity, as it did where it was first bredde, for the certain agreement of
nature that is between the place, and the thing bredde in that place, as
appears by the Elephant, Elephant.
which being translated and brought out of the second or third climate, though
they may live, yet will they never engender or bring forth young. Also we see
the like in many kinds of plants and herbs: for example, Orange tree.
the Ora^ge tree, although in Naples they bring forth fruit abundantly, in Rome
and Florence they will bear only fair green leaves, but not any fruit: and
translated into England, they will hardly bear either flowers, fruit, or
leaves, but are the next winter pinched and withered with cold: yet it
follows not for this, that England, Rome, and Florence should not be
habitable.

In the proving of these cold regions habitable, I shall be very short,
because the same reasons serve for this purpose, which were alleged before in
the proving the middle Zone to be temperate, ^^uses (...)
especially seeing al heat and cold proceed from the Sun, by the means
either of the Angle his beams does make with the Horizon, or else by ye long
or short continuance of the Suns presence above ground: so that if the Suns
beams do beat perpendicularlye at right Angles, then there is one cause of
heat, and if the Sun do also long continue above the Horizon, then the
heat thereby is much increased by access of this other cause, and so grows
to a kind of extremity. And these.ij. causes, as I said before, do most
concur under the two Tropickes, and therefore there is the greatest heat of
ye world. And likewise, where both these causes are most absent, there is
greatest want of heat, and increase of cold (seeing that cold is nothing but
the privation and absence of heat) and if one cause be wanting, and the other
present, the effect will grow indifferent. Therefore this is to be
understood, that the nearer any region is to the Equinoctial, the higher
the Sun does rise over their heads at noone, and so makes either right or
near right angles, but the Sun tarryeth with them so much the shorter time,
and causes shorter days, with longer and colder nights, to restore the damage
of the day paste, by reason of the moisture consumed by vapor. But in such
regions, over the which the Sun rises lower (as in regions extended toward
either pole) it makes there unequal Angles, but the Sun continues longer,
and makes longer days, and causes so much shorter and warmer nights, as
retayning warm vapoures of the day paste. Hot nights neere^ (...).
For there are found by experience Summer nights in Scotland and Gothland very
hot, when under the Equinoctial they are found very cold. This benefit of
the Suns long continuance and increase of the day, Cold nights under the
Equinoctial.
does augment so much the more in cold regions, as they are nearer the poles,
and cease not increasing, until it come directly under the point of the Pole
Articke, where the Sun continues above ground the space of six months or
half a year together, and so the day is half a year long, that is the time
of ye Suns being in the North signs, from the first degree of Aries, until the
last of Virgo, that is all the time from our.10. day of March, until the.14.
of September. One day of six months.
The Sun therefore during the time of these.6. months without any offense or
hindraunce of the night, gives his influence upon those lands with heat
that never cease during that time, which makes to the great increase of
Summer, by reason of the Suns continuance. Therefore it follows, that
though the Sun be not there very high over their heads, to cause right angle
beams, and to give great heat, yet the Sun being there sometimes alm^^t 24.
degrees high, does cast a convenient and mean heat which there continues
without hinderaunce of the night the space of six months (as is before said)
during which time, there follows to be a convenient moderate and temperate
heat. or else rather it is to be suspected, the heat there to be very great,
both for continuance, and also, Quia virtus vnita crescit, the virtue and
strength of heat united in one increases. If then there be such a moderate
heat under the Poles, and the same to continue so long time, what should move
the old writers to say there cannot be place for habitation. And that the
certainty of this temperate heat under both the Poles might more manifestlye
appear, let us consider the position and quality of the Sphere, the length
of the day, and so to gather the heighte of the Sun at all times, and by
consequent, the quantity of his Angle, and so lastely the strength of his
heat.

Those lands and regions lying under the pole, and having the Pole for their
Zenith, must needs have the Equinoctial circle for their Horizon, therefore
the Sun entering into the North signs, and describing every.24. hours a
Parallel to the Equinoctial by the diurnall motion of Primum Mobile, the same
Paralels must needs be wholly above the Horizon, and so look how many degrees
there are from the first of Aries to the last of Virgo, so many whole
reuolutions there are above their Horizon yt dwell under the Pole, The Sun
never lets in a 18^. da^es.
which amounts to.182. and so many of our days the Sun continues with
them. During which time, they have there continual day and light, without
any hinderaunce of moiste nights. Yet it is to be noted, that the Sun being
in the first degree of Aries, and last degree of Virgo, makes his revolution
in the very Horizon, Horizon and Equinoctial al on under the Pole.
so that in these.24. hours, half the body of the Sun is above the Horizon,
and the other half is under his only Center, describing both the Horizon, and
the Equinoctial circle.

And therefore seeing the greatest declination of the Sun is almost.24.
degrees, it follows, his greatest height in those Countries to be almost.24.
degrees. And so high is the Sun at noone to us in London about ye.29. of
October, being in the.15. degree of Scorpio, and likewise the.21. of January
being in the.15. of Aquarius. Therefore look what force the Sun at noone has
in London the.29. of October, London.
the same force of heat it has, to them that dwell under the Pole, the space
almost of two months, during the time of the Summer Solstitium, and that
without intermingling of any cold night ^ so that if the heat of the Sun at
noone could be well measured in London, (which is very hard to do, because
of the long nights which engender great moisture and cold), then would
manifestlye appear by express numbers, the manner of the heat under the
Poles, which certainly must needs be to the inhabitaunts very commodious and
profitable, if it inclyne not to over much heat, and if moisture do not want.

For as in October, in England we find temperate air, and have in our Gardens
herbs, and flowers, notwithstanding our cold nights, how much more should
they have ye same good air, being continual without night. This heat of ours
continues but one hour, while the Sun is in ye Meridia^, but theirs
continues a long time in one height. This our heat is weak, and by the
coolness of the night vanishes, that heat is strong, and by continual
access, is still increased and strengthened. And thus by a similitude of the
equal height of the Sun in both places, Co^mo^io^s d^elli^^ under y^ Poles
appears the commodious and moderate heat of the regions under the Poles.

And surely, I can not think that the divine providence, has made any thing
vnco^municable, but to have given such order to all things, that one way or
other the same should be employed, and that every thing, and place, should be
tolerable to the next. But especially all things in this lower world, be
given to man, to have dominion and use thereof. Therefore we need no longer
to doubt of the temperate and commodious habitation under the Poles, during the
time of Summer.

But all the controversy consists in the Winter, for then the Sun leaves
those regions, and is no more seen, for the space of other six moenths, in
the which time all the Suns course is under their Horizon, for the space of
half a year, and then those regions (say some) must needs be deformed with
horrible darkness, The nights under ye Pole
and continual night, which may be the cause that beasts can not seek
their food, and that also the cold should then be intolerable. By which
double evils, al living creatures should be constrained to die, and were not
able to endure the extremity and injury of Winter, and famine ensuing thereof,
but that all things should perish before the Summer following, when they should
bring forth their brood and young, and that for these causes ye said Clime
about the Pole, should be desolate and not habitable. To al which obiectio^s,
may be answered in this manner: First, that though the Sun be absent from them
those six months, yet it follows not, there should be such extreme
darkness, for as the Sun is departed under their Horizon, The twylights
give light under the Pole almost all the Winter.
so is it not far from them. And not so soon as the Sun falls, so
suddenly comes the dark night, but the evening does substitute and prolong
the day a good while after by twilight. After which time the residue of ye
night, receives light of the Moon and Stars, until the break of the day,
which gives also a certain light before the Suns rising, so that by these
means the nights are seldom dark, which is veryfied in all parts of ye
world, but least in the middle Zone under the Equinoctial, where the twylights
are short, and the nights darker, than in any other place, because the Sun
goes under their Horizon so deep, even to their Antipodes. We see in
England in the So^mer nights when the Sun goes not far under the Horizon,
that by the light of the Moon and stars, we may travel al night, and if
occasion were, do some other labor also. And there is no man that doubts,
whether our cattle can see to feed in ye nights, seeing we are so well
certified thereof by our experience: The ending of twylight.
and by reason of the sphere, our nights should be darker than any time under
the Poles.

The Astronomers consent, that the Sun descending from our upper Hemisphere at
the.18. Parallel under the Horizon, makes an end of twylight, so that at
length the dark night ensues, and that afterward in the morning, the Sun
approaching again within as many Paralels, does drive away ye night by access
of ye twylight. Again, by the position of the sphere under ye Pole, the
Horizon, and the Equinoctial, are al one. These reuolutions therefore yt are
Parallel to ye Equinoctial, are also Parallel to the Horizon, so that the Sun
desce^ding under ye Horizon, and there describing certain Paralels not far
distant, does not bring dark nights to those Regions, until it come to the
Paralels distant.18. degrees from ye Equinoctial, that is, about ye.21. degree
of Scorpio which will be about ye.4. day of our Noue^ber, and after ye Winter
Solstitium, ye Sun retourning back again to ye.9. degree of Aquarius, which
will be about ye.19. of January, during which time only, that is from ye.4. of
Noue^ber, until the.xix. day of January, which is about six weeks space, those
regions do want ye commodity of twylights. But six weeks dark under the Pole.
Therefore, during ye time of these said six months of darkness under ye
Poles, ye night is destitute of ye benefit of ye Sun, and ye said twilights,
only for ye space of six weeks or thereabout. And yet neither this time of six
weeks is without remedy from Heaven. For ye Moon with her increased light,
has access at that time and illuminateth the months lacking light every one
of themselves severally half the course of ye month, by whose benefit it
comes to pass, yt the night named extreme dark, possesses those regions no
longer than one month, neither that continually, or al at one time, but this
also divided into two sorts of shorter nights, of yt which either of the^
endures for ye space of.15. days, and are illuminate of ye Moon accordingly.
And this reason is gathered out of the sphere, whereby we may testify, yt the
So^mers are warm and fruitful, and the Winters nights under the pole, are
tolerable to living creatures. And if it be so, that the winter and time of
darkness there be very cold, yet has not nature left the^ unprovided therefore.
The Creatures of that Country are are provided for the cold,
For there ye beasts are covered with hair so much the thicker, in how much the
vehemency of cold is greater, by reason whereof the best and richest furs are
brought out of the coldest regions. Also the fowls of these cold countries
have thicker skins, thicker feathers, and more stored of down, tha^ in other
hot places. Our Englismen yt travel to S. Nicholas, and go a fishing to Ward
house, enter far wtin the circle Artike, and so are in the frose^ Zone, and yet
there, as well as in Iseland, and all along those Northern Seas, ^hey find the
greatest store of the greatest fishes that are, as Whales, etc. and also
abundaunce of mean fishes, as Herings, Coddes, Haddockes, Brettes, etc. which
argues, that the Sea, as well as the Land, may be, and is well frequented
and inhabited in the cold Countries.

But some perhaps will marvel, there should be such te^perate places in ye
Regions about ye Poles, when at under degrees in latitude, our Captain
Frobisher and his company, were troubled with so many and so great
mountains of fleeting Ise, with so great storms of cold, with such
continual snow on tops of mountains, and with such barren soil, there
being neither woodde or trees, but low shrubbes, and such like. An objection
of Meta Incognita.
To al which objections may be answered thus: First those infinite Islands of
Ise were engendered and congealed in time of winter, and now by the great heat
of Summer, were thawed, and then by ebbes, floods, winds and currants, were
driven to and fro, and troubled the Fleet, so that this is an argument to
prove the heat in Summer there, to be great, that was able to thaw so monstrous
mountains of Ise. As for continual snow on tops of mou^tains, it is there no
otherwise, than is in the hottest part of the middle Zone, where also lies
great snow all the Summer long upon tops of mountains, because there is not
sufficient space for the Suns reflection, whereby the snow should be molten.
Touching the cold stormy winds, and the barrenness of the country, it is
there, as it is in Cornwall and Devonshire in England, which parts though we
know to be fruitful and fertile, yet on the North side thereof al along the
coast within seven or eight miles off the Sea, there can neither hedge nor
tree grow, although they be diligently by Art husbanded and seen unto: And
the cause thereof, are the Northern driving winds, which coming from the
Sea, are so bitter and sharp, that they kill al ye young and tender pla^ts, and
suffer scarce any thing to grow, and so is t in ye Islands of Meta Incognita,
which are subject most to East and Northesterne winds, Meta Incognita inhabited.
which ye last year choked up ye passage so with Ise, yt the Fleet could hardly
recover their Port: yet notwithstanding all the objections that may be, the
Country is habitable, for there are Men, Women, Children, and sundry kind of
Beasts in great plenty, as Bears, Dear, Hares, Foxes, and Dogs: all kind
of flying Fowls, as Duckes, Seamewes, Wilmots, Partriches, Larkes, Crows,
Hawks, and such like, as in the third Book you shall understand more at
large. Then it appears, that not only the middle Zone, but also the Zones
about the Poles are habitable. Which thing being well considered, and familiarly
known to our General Captain Frobisher, Captain Frobi^her.
as well for that he is thoroughly furnished of the knowledge of the Sphere, and
all other skilles apperteyning to the art of Navigations, as also for the
confirmation he has of the same by many years experience, both by sea and
land, and being persuaded of a new and nearer passage to Cataya, than by Capo
d'buon^ Speranz^, which the Portugalles yearly use. He began first with
himself to devise, and then with his friends to confer, and laid a plain
platte unto them, that that voyage was not only possible by the Northweast,
but also as he could prove, easy to be performed. And further, he determined
and resolved with himself, Frobishers first voyage.
to go make full proof thereof, and to accomplish, or bring true certificat
of the truth, or else never to return again, knowing this to be the only
thing of the World that was left yet undone, whereby a notable mind might be
made famous and fortunate. But although his will were great to perform this
notable voyage, whereof he had conceived in his mind a great hope by sundry
sure reasons, and secret intelligence, which here for sundry causes I leave
untouched, yet he wanted altogether means and ability to set forward, and
perform the same. Long time he conferred with his private friends of these
secrets, and made also many offers for the performing of the same in effect,
unto sundry Merchants of our Country, Captain Frobisher pretended this
discovery above.xv. years ago.
above.xv. years before he attempted the same, as by good witness shall well
appear (albeit some evil willers which challenge to themselves the fruits of
other men's laboure^, have greatly injured him in the reports of the same,
saying, that they have bin the first Authors of that Action, and that they have
learned him the way, which themselves as yet have never gone.) But perceiving
that hardly he was hearkened unto of the Merchantes, which never regard
Virtue, without sure, certain, and present gaynes, he repaired to the Court
(from whence, as from the fountain of our common wealth, all good causes have
their chief increase and mayntenance) and there laid open to many great
estates and learned men, the plot and sum of his devise. And amongst many
honorable minds, which favored his honest and commendable enterprise, he
was specially bound, and beholding to the right Honorable Ambrose Dudley,
Earl of Warwike, whose favorable mind, and good disposition, has always
bin ready to countenance and advance all honest actions, with the Authors,
and executers of the same: and so by means of my Lord his honorable
countenance, he received some comfort of his cause, and by little and little,
with no small expense and pain, brought his cause to some perfection, and
had drawn together so many adventurers, and such sums of money, as might
well defray a reasonable charge, to furnishe himself to Sea withal.

Furniture for the first voyage.
He prepared two small Barks, of twenty, and five and twenty tun a piece,
wherein he intended to accomplish his pretended voyage. Wherefore, being
furnished with the foresaid two Barks, and one small Pinnesse of ten tun
burden, having therein victuals, and other necessaries for twelve Months
provision, he departed upon the said voyage from Black wall the fiftenth of
June Anno Domini. 1576.

One of the Barks wherein he went, Gabriell and Michaell
was named the Gabriell, and the other the Michaell, and sailing Northweast
from England, upon the first of Iul^, at length he had sight of a high
and ragged land, which he judged Freeselande, (whereof some Authoures have
made mention,) but durst not approach the same, by reason of the great store
of Ise that lay along the coast, and the great mistes, that troubled them
not a little.

Not far from thence he lost company of his small Pinnesse, The Pinnesse
lost.
which by means of the great storm, he supposed to be swallowed up of
the Sea, wherein he lost only four men.

Also the other Bark named the Michaell, mistrusting the matter, The Michaell
returned home.
conveyed themselves privily away from him, and returned home, with great
report that he was cast away.

The worthy Captain, notwithstanding these discomfo^tes, although his Mast
was sprung, and his top Mast blown ouerboorde with extreme foul weather,
continued his course toward the Northweast, knowing that the Sea at length
must needs have an endyng, and that some land should have a beginning that
way: and determined therefore at the least, to bring true proof what land and
Sea the same might be, so far to the Northweastwardes, beyond any man
that has heretofore discovered. And the twentieth of July, he had sight
of a high land, which he called Queen Elizabethes Forlande, Queen
Elizabeth's forlande.
after her Majesty's name. And sailing more Northerlie along that coast, he
descried another forlande, with a great gutte, bay, or passage, dividing as it
were two main lands or continents asunder. There he met with store of
exceeding great yse all this coast alo^g, and coveting still to continue his
course to the Northwardes, was always by contrary wind deteyned ouerthwarte
these straytes, and could not get beyond. Within few days after, he perceived
the Ise to be well consumed, and gone, either there engulfed in by some swifte
currants or indraftes, carried more to the Southwardes of the same straytes, or
else conveyed some other way: wherefore he determined to make proof of this
place, Frobishers first entrance ^ithin, in the s^reightes.
to see how far that gutte had continuance, and whether he might carry
himself thorough the same, into some open Sea on the back side, whereof he
conce^ued no small hope, and so entered the same the one and twentieth of July,
and passed above fyftie leagues therein, as he reported, having upon either
hand a great main or continent. And that land upon his right hand, as he
sailed Westward, he judged to be the continente of Asia, and there to be
divided from the firm of America, which lies upon the left hand
ouer-against the same.

This place he named after his name Frobishers Streytes, Frobish^rs s^reytes.
like as Magellanus at the Southweast end of the world, having discovered the
passage to the South Sea (where America is divided from the continente of that
land, which lies under the South Pole) and called the same straites
Magellanes streightes.

After he had passed.6^. leagues into this foresaid strayte, he went
ashore, and found sign where fire had bin made.

Dear:
He saw mighty Dear, yt seemed to be Mankind, which ran at him, and hardly
he escaped with his life in a narrow way, where he was feign to use defense and
policy to save his life.

In this place he saw and perceived sundry tokens of the peoples resorting
thither. And being ashore, upon the top of a hill, he perceived a number of
small things fleeting in the Sea a far off, which he supposed to be
Porposes, or Ceales, or some kind of strange fish: but coming nearer, he
discovered them to be men, The first sight of the Saluage.
in small boats made of leather. And before he could discende down from the
hill, certain of those people had almost cut off his boat from him, having
stolen secretly behind the rocks for that purpose, where he s^eedily hasted
to his boat, and bent himself to his Holbert, and narrowly escaped the
danger, and saved his bote. Af^erwards, he had sundry conferences with the^,
and they came aborde his ship, and brought him Salmon and raw flesh and fish,
Salmon
and greedily devoured the same before our men's faces. And to show their
agilitie, they try^d many maisteries, upon the ropes of the ship, after our
Mariners fashion, and appeared to be very strong of the^r arms, and nimble of
their bodies. They exchaunged coats of Ceale, and Bears skins, and such
like, with our men, and received belles, loking glasses, and other toys in
recompense thereof again. After great courtesy, and many meetings, our
Mariners, Five Englishmen intercepted and raken.
contrary to their Captains dy^rection, began more easily to trust them, and
five of our me^ going a shore, were by them intercepted with their boat, and
were never since heard of to this day again. So that the Captain being
destitute of boat, bark, and al company, had scarcely sufficient number to
conduct back his bark again. He could now neither convey himself a shore to
rescue his men (if he had bin able) for want of a boat, and again, the subtle
traitors, were so wary, as they would after that never come within our men's
danger. The Captain (notwithstanding) desirous to bring some token from
thence, of his being there, was greatly discontented, that he had not before
apprehended some of them. And therefore to deceive the deceivers, he wrought a
pretty policy, for knowing well how they greatly delighted in our toys, and
specially in belles, he rang a pretty Lowbel, making wise yt he would give him
the same that would come and fetch it. And because they would, not come within
his danger for fear, he flung one bell unto the^, which of purpose he threw
short, that it might fall into the sea and be lost. And to make them more
greedy of the matter, he rang a louder bell, so that in the end one of them
came near the ship side, to receive the bell, which when he thought to take at
the Captains hand, he was thereby taken himself. For the Captain being redily
provided, let the bell fall, and cought the man fast, and plucked him with maine
force, boat and al into his bark, out of the Sea: Ta^^ng of y^ ^irs^ Sa^age
Whereupon when he found himself in captivity, for very choler and disdain he
bit his tongue in twain within his mouth: notwithstanding, he died not thereof,
but lived until he came in England, and then he died, of cold which he had
taken at Sea.

Now with this new pray (which was a sufficient witn^sse of the Captains
far and tedious travel toward the unknown parts of the world, as did
well appear by this strange Infidel, whose like was never seen, red, nor hard
of before, and whose language was neither known nor understood of any) the
said Captain Frobisher returned homeward, Frobishers return.
and arrived in England, in August following. An. 1^76. where he was highly
commended of all men, for his great and notable attempt, but specially, famous
for the great hope he brought of the passage to Cataya, which he doubted
nothing at alto find, and pass through, in those parts, as he reported.

And it is especially to be remembered at the first arriu^ll in those parts,
there lay so great store of Ise, all the coaste along so thick together, that
hardely his boat could pass unto the shore. At length, after diuer^^
attemptes, he commanded his company, if by any possible means they could get
ashoare, to bring him whatsoever thing they could first find whether it were
living or dead, stock or stone, in token of Christian possession, which
thereby he took in behalf of the Queens most excellent majesty, The taking
possession of Meta Incognita^
thinking that thereby he might justify the having and enjoying of ye same
things that grew in these unknown parts.

Some of his company brought flowers, some green grass, and one brought a
piece of a black stone, much like to a seacole in color, which by the
weight seemed to be some kind of metal or Mynerall. ^ow the Ore was ^ounde ^^
c^aunce.
This was a thing of no account, in the judgment of the Captain at the first
sight. And yet for nouelty it was kept, in respect of the place from whence it
came.

After his arriual in LONDON, being demanded of sundry his friends, what
thing he had brought them ^ome of that country, he had nothing lest to present
them withal, but a piece of this black stone. And it fortuned a gentlewoman,
one of ye adventurers wives, to have a piece thereof, which by chance she threw
and burned in the fire, so long, that at the length being taken forth, and
quenched in a little vinegre, it glistered with a bright Marquesset of gold.
Whereupon ye matter being called in some question, it was brought ^o certain
Goldfinders in London, to make assay thereof, who indeed found it to hold gold,
and that very ritchly for the quantity. Afterward, the same Goldfinders
promised great matters thereof, if there were any store to be found, and
offered themselves to adventure for the serching of those parts from whence the
same was brought. Many adventures.
Some that had great hope of the matter, fought secretly to have a lease at her
Majesty's hands of those places, whereby to enjoy the Mass of so great a
public profit, unto their own private gains.

In conclusion^ the hope of more of the same gold Ore to be found, kindled a
greater opinion in the hearts of man^, to advance the voyage again.
Whereupon, preparation was made for a new^ voyag^, against the year following,
and the Captain more specially derected by commission, In the second voyage
commission was given only for ye bringing of Ore.
for the searching more of this gold Ore, than for the searching any further
discovery of the passage. And being well accompanied with diverse resolute and
forward gentlemen, her majesty then lying at the right honorable the Lord of
Warwicks house in Essex, came to take their leaves, and kissing her highness
hands, with gracious countenance, and comfortable words, departed toward
their charge.

A true Report of such things as happened in the second voyage of Captain
Frobysher, pretended for the Discovery of a new passage to Cataya, China, and
the East India, by the Northwest. Anno. Do. 1577.
Being furnished with one tall Ship of her Majesty's, named ye Aid, of two
hundredth tun, and two other small Barks, the one named the Gabriell, the
other the Micha^l, about thirty tun a piece, being fitly appointed with
men, munition, victuals, and all things necessary for the voyage, the said
Captain Frobysher, with the rest of his company, came aboorde his Ships
riding at Blackwall, inte^ding (with Gods help) to take ye first wind and tide
serving him, the five and twentieth day of May, in the year of our Lord God,
a thousand five hundred, seventy and seven.

The names of such Gentlemen as attempted this discovery, and the number of
Souldyoures and Mariners in each Ship as follows.
Aboard the Aid being Admiral, were ye number of one C. men of all sorts,
whereof.xxx. or more were Gentlemen and Souldyers, the rest sufficient and tall
Sailors Aboorde the Gabriell being Uiceadmirall, were in all.18. persons,
whereof six were Souldyers, the rest Mariners. Aboorde the Michaell were
sixteen persons, whereof five were Souldyers, the rest Mariners. Aboorde the
Aid was General of the whole company for her Majesty Martin Frobysher. His
Lieutenant George Best. His Aunciente Richar. Philpot. Corporal of ye shot
Frauncis Forder. The rest of ye Gentlemen Henry Carew. Edmund Stafford. John
Lee. Haruie. Matthew Kynersley. Abraham Lyns. Robert Kynersley. Frauncis
Brackenburye. William Armshow.
The Master Christofer Hall. The Mate Charles Iackma^. The Pylotte Andrew
Dyer. The M. Gunner Richard Coxe.
Aboorde the Gabriell was Captain Edward Fenton. One Gentleman William
Tamfield. The Master William Smyth.
Aboorde the Michaell was Captain Gilbert York. One Gentleman Tho.
Cha^berlaine The Master James Bear.

ON Whitsonday, being the.26. of May, Anno. 1577. early in the morning, we
wayed Ancker at Blackwal, and fell that tide down to Grauesende, where were
mayned until Monday at night.

On Monday morning the.27. of May, aboorde the Aid, we received all the
Communion, by the Minister of Grauesende, and prepared us, as good Christians
toward God, and resolute men for all fortunes: and toward night we departed
to Tilberie Hope.

Tewsday the.28. of May, about nine of the clock at night, we arrived at
Harwitch in Essex, and there stayed, for the taking in of certain victualles,
until Friday, being the thirtith of May, during which time, came letters from
the Lords of the Counsel, streightelye commaundyng our General, not to
exceed his complemente and number appointed him, which was, one hundred and
twentye persons: The number of men in this voyage. The condemned men discharged.
whereupon he discharged many proper men, which with unwilling minds
departed.

He also dismissed all his condemned men, which he thought for some purposes
very needful for the voyage, and toward night upon Friday, the one and
thirtith of May, we set Sail, and put to Seas again. And sailing
Northwarde along the East coasts of England and Scotland, the seventh day
of June, we arrived in Saint Magnus sound in Orckney Islands, The first
ariuall after our departing from England.
called in Latin Orcades, and came to Ancker on the South side of the Bay.

Here our company going on land, the Inhabitants of these Islands began
to flee, as from the Enemy, whereupon, the Lieutenante wylled every man to
stay together, and went himself unto their Houses, to declare what we were,
and the cause of our coming thither, which being understood, after their
poor manner they friendly entreated us, and brought us for our money, such
things as they had. And here our Goldfyners found a mine of Silver. ^ ^^ne of
Silver ^ound in O^^ney.


Orkney is the principal of the Isles of Orcades, and stands in the Latitude
of.^^. degrees and a half. The Country is much subject to cold, aunswerable
for such a climate, and yet yields some fruits, and sufficient mayntenance
for the people, contented so poorly to live.

There is plenty enough of Poultrey, store of Eggs, Fish, and Foul.

For their bread, they have ^aten Cakes, and their drink is Ewes milk, and in
some parts Ale.

Their houses are but poor without, and sluttish enough within, and the people
in nature thereunto agreeable.

For their fire, they burn heath and turffe, the Country in most parts being
void of woodde.

They have great want of Leather, and desire our old shoes, apparel, and
old ropes (before money) for their victuals, and yet are they not ignorant of
the value of our coin. The chief town is called Kyrway. Kyrway the chief
town of Orkney.


In this Island has bin sometime and Abbey, or a religious house, called Saint
Magnus, being on the West side of the I Will, whereof this sound bears name,
through which we passed. Saint Magnus sound why so called
Their Gouernoure or chief Lord, is called the Lord Robert Steward, who at
our being there, as we understood, was in durance at Edinburgh, by the
Regents commandment of Scotland.

After we had provided us here of matter sufficient for our voyage, the eight
of June we set sail again, and passing through Saint Magnus sound, having
a merry wind by night, came clear, and lost sight of all the land, and
keeping our course West Northwest by the space of two days, the wind shifted
upon us, so that we lay in trauerse on ye Seas, with contrary, making good (as
near as we could) our course to ye Westward, and sometime to the Northward, as
the wind shifted. And heereabout we met with three Sail of English fishermen
from Iseland, bound homewarde, by whom we wrote our letters unto our friends
in England. We trauersed these Seas by the space of.26. days, without sight of
any land, and met with much drift wodde, and whole bodies of trees. Great
bodies of trees dryuing in the Seas.
We saw many monsterous Fish, and strange Foul, which seemed to live only by
the Sea, Mons^rous fis^ and strange Foul ^yuiug only by the Sea.
being there so far distant from any land. At length, God favored us with
more prosperous winds, and after we had sailed four days with good wind in
the P^upe, the fourth of July the Michaell (being foremost a head) shot off a
piece of Ordinance, and stroke all her sails, supposing that they descryed
land, which by reason of the thick mistes, they could not make perfect:
howbeit, as well our account, as also the great alteration of the water, which
became more black and smooth, did plainly declare we were not far off the
coast. Water being black and smooth, signifies la^d to be near.
Our General sent his Master aboorde the Michaell (who had bin within the
year before) to bear in with the place, to make proof thereof, who des^ryed
not the land perfect, but saw sundry huge Islands of Ise, Islands of Ise.
which we deemed to be not past twelve leagues from the shore, for about ten
of the clock at night, being the fourth of July, the weather being more
clear, we made the land perfect, and knew it to be Freeseland. The f^rste
fight of Freeselande.
And the height being taken here, we found our selves to be in the Latitude
of.60. Degrees and a half, and were fallen with the Southermost part of this
land. Between Orkney and Freeseland are reckned leagues.

This Freeseland shows a ragged and high land, having the Mountains almost
covered over with Snow, along the coast full of drift Ise, and seems almost
inaccessible, and is thought to be an Island in bigness not inferior to
England, and is called of some Authors, Weast Freeseland, Freeseland des^rib^d.
I think, because it lies more Weast, then any part of Europe. It extends
in Latitude to the Northward very far as seemed to us, and appears by a
description set out by two breethren Venetians, Nicholaus, and Antonius Genoa,
who being driven off from Ireland with a violent tempest, made Shipwreck
here, and were the first known Christians that discovered this land, about
three hundred years sithence, and they have in their Sea-Cardes set out every
part thereof, and described the condition of the inhabitants, declaring them to
be as civil and Religious people as we. And for so much of this land as we
have sailed along, comparing their Card with ye coast, we find it very
agreeable. This coast seems to have good fishing, for we lying becalmd, let
fall a hook without any bayte, On easy kind of Fishing.
and presently caught a great fish called a Hollibut, which served the whole
company for a days meat, and is dangerous meat for surfeiting. And sounding
about five leagues off from the shore, our lead brought up in the tallow a
kind of Corrall almost white, White Corrall got by sounding.
and small stones as bright as Crystal: and it is not to be doubted, but that
this la^d may be found very rich, and beneficial, if it were thoroughly
discovered, although we saw no creature there but little birds. It is a
marvelous thing, to behold, of what great bigness and depth some Islands of
Ise be here, some.70. some.80. fadome under water, Monstrous Isles of Ise, in
^ast fresh, wherehence they are supposed to come
besides that which is above, seemyng Islands, more than half a mile in
circuit. All these Ise are in taste fresh, and seem to be bredde in the
sounds thereaboutes, or in some land near the pole, and with the wind and
tides are driven along the coasts. We found none of these Islands of Ise salt
in taste, whereby appears they were not congealed of the Ocean Sea water, The
opinion of the frosen Seas is destroyed by experience.
which is always salt, but of some standing or little moving lakes, or great
fresh waters, near the shore, caused either by melted snow from tops of
Mountains, or by continual access of fresh rivers from the la^d, and
intermingling with ye Sea water, bearing yet the dominion (by the force of
extreme frost) may cause some part of salt water to freese so with it, and so
seem a little brackish, but otherwise ye maine sea freeseth not, and therefore
there is no Mare Glaciale or frosen Sea, as the opinion hitherto has bin. Our
General proved la^ding here twice, but by ye sudden fall of mistes (whereunto
this coast is much subject) he was like to lose sight of his Ships, and being
greatly endangered with the driving Ise along the coast, was forced aboard,
and feign to surceasse his pretense, till a better opportunity might serve: and
having spent.4. days and nights sailing along this la^d, finding the coast
subject to such bitter cold and continual mistes, he determined to spend no
more time therein, but to bear out his course toward ye streights called
Frobishers straightes, after ye Generals name, who being the first that ever
passed beyond.58. degrees to the Northwards, for any thing has bin yet known
of certainty of New found la^d, otherwise called ye continent or firm la^d of
America, discovered ye said streights this last year.1576. and hops that
there will be found a thorough passage into the sea, F^obishers streigh^es,
which lies on the back side of ye said new found la^d called Mare pacificum,
or Mare de Sur, by the which we may go unto Cataya, China, the East India, and
all the dominions of the Great Cane of Tartaria. Between Freeseland and the
straights we had one great storm, wherein yt Michael was somewhat in danger,
having her Steerage broken, and her top Mastes blowe^ over board, The Steerage
of the Micha^ll broken by Tempest.
and being not past.50. leagues short of ye straights by our account, we
struck sail, and lay a hull, fearing the continuance of the storm, the wind
being at the Northeast, and having lost company of the Barks in that flaw of
wind, we happily met again the.17. day of July, The first entrance of the
straightes.
having the evening before seen diverse Islands of fleeting Ise, which gave an
argument that we were not far from land. Our General in ye morning from the
maine top (ye weather being reasonable clear) descried la^d, but to be better
assured, he sent the two Barks two contrary courses, whereby they might
discrie either the South or North forlande, the Aid lying off and on at Sea,
with a small sail by an Island of Ise, which was the mark for us to meet
together again. And about noone, the weather being more clear, we made the
North Forlande perfect, which otherwise is called Halles Island, Halles Ila^d.
and also the small Island bearing the name of the said Hall, whence the Ore
was taken up, which was brought into England this last year 1576. the
said Hall being present at the finding and taking up thereof, who was then
Master in the Gabriell with Captain Frobysher. At our arrival here, all
the Seas about this coast were so covered over with huge quantity of great
Ise, that we thought these places might only deserve the name of Mare
Glaciale, and be called the Isie Sea.

The description of the streyghtes.
This North forlande, is thought to be divided from the continente of the
Norther land, by a little sound, called Halles sound, which makes it an
Island, and is thought little less, than the I Will of Wight, and is the first
entrance of the streightes upon the Norther side, and stands in the Latitude
of.62. Degrees.^^. Minutes, and is reckned from Freeseland leagues. God having
blessed us with so happy a land fall, we bare into the streightes, which
run in next hand Weast, and somewhat to the Northwarde, and came as near
the shore as we might for the Ise, and upon the eyghteenth day of July, our
General taking the Goldfiners with him, attempted to go on shore with a small
rowing Pinnesse, upon the small Island where the Ore was taken up, to prove
whether there were any store thereof to be found, but he could not get in
all that Island a piece so big as a Walnut, No more gold ore found in the
first Island.
where the first was found, so that it may seem a great miracle of God, that
being only one rich stone in all the Island, the same should be found by one of
our Countrymen, whereby it should appear, Gods divine will and pleasure is,
to have our common wealth increased with no less abundance of his hydden
treasures and gold mines, than any other nation, and would, that the faith of
his Gospel and holy name should be published and enlarged through all those
corners of the earth, amongst those Idolatrous Infidels. But our men, which
sought the other Islands thereaboutes, found them all to have good store of the
Ore, whereupon our General with these good tidings returned aboorde about
ten of the clock at night, and was joyfully welcomed of the company with a
volie of shot. He brought Eggs, Foul, E^ges and Fowls of Meta Incognita
and a young Seal aboard, which the company had killed ashore, and having
found upon those Islands, ginnes set to catch foul, Snares set to catch
birds withal.
and sticks new cut, with other things, he well perceived, that not long
before, some of the country people had resorted thither. Having therefore
found those tokens of the peoples access in those parts, and being in his
first voyage well acquainted with their subtle and cruel dispotion, he
provided well for his better safety, and on Friday the ninteenth of July in
the morning early, with his best company of Gentlemen and souldioures, to the
number of forty persons, went on shore, as well to discover the Inlande and
habitation of the people, as also to find out some fit harborowe for our
ships. And passing toward the shore with no small difficulty, by reason
of the abundance of Ise which lay alongest the coaste so thick together, that
hardely any passage through them might be discerned, we arrived at length upon
the maine of Halles greater Island, and found there also, as well as in the other
small Islands, good store of the Ore. And leaving his boats here with sufficient
guarde, passed up into the country about two English miles, and recovered the
top of a high hill, on the top whereof our men made a Column or Cross of
stones heaped up of a good height together in good sort, and solempnely
sounded a Trumpet, and said certain prayers, kneeling about the Ancient, The
building of a Column, called Mount warwick.
and honored the place by the name of Mount Warwick, in remembrance of the
Right Honorable the Lord Ambrose Dudley Earl of Warwick, whose noble mind, and
good countenance in this, as in all other good actions gave great
encouragement and good furthera^ce. This done, we retired our companies, not
seeing any thing here worth further discovery, the country seeming barren and
full of ragged mountains, in most parts, covered with Snow. And thus marching
toward our boats, we espied certain of the country people on the top of
Mount Warwick with a flag, wafting us back again, and making great noise,
with cries like the mowing of Bulls, seeming greatly desirous of conference
with us: The first sight of the country people, wafting with a Flag.
whervppon the General, being therewith better acquainted, answered them again
with the like cries, whereat, and with the noise of our trumpets, they seemed
greatly to rejoice, skipping, laughing, and dancing for joy. And herevppon we
made signs unto them, holding up two fingers, commanding two of our men to
go aparte from our companies, whereby they might do the like. So that
forthwith two of our men, ^he meting apart of two Englishmen, with two of
that Countr,
and two of theirs met together a good space from company, neither party
having their weapons about them. Our men gave them pinnes and points, and sued
trifles as they had. And they likewise bestowed on our men, two bow cases, and
such things as they had. They earnestlye desired our men to go up into
their Country, and our men offered them like kindness aboorde our ships,
but neither part (as it seemed) admitted or trusted the others courtesy. Their
manner of traffic is thus, they do use to lay down of their merchandise
upon the ground, The order of their tr^f^icke
so much as they mean to part withal, and so looking that the other party,
with whom they make trade, should do the like, they themselves do depart,
and then, if they do like of their mart, they come again, and take in
exchange the others merchandise, otherwise, if they like not, they take their
own and depart. The day being thus well near^ spent, in haste we retired our
companies into our boats again, minding forthwith to search alongest the
coast for some harborowe fit for our ships, for the present necessity
thereof was much, considering, that all this while they lay off and on between
the two lands, being continually subject, as well to great danger of fleeting
yse, which environed them, as to the sod^in flawes which the coast seems much
subject unto. But when the people perceived our departure, with great tokens of
affection they earnestly called us back again, following us almost to our
boats: whereupon our General taking his Master with him who was best
acquainted with their manner, went apart unto two of them, meaning, if they
could lay sure hold upon them, forcibly to bring them aboard, with intent, to
bestow certain toys and apparel upon the one, Another mee^ing of two of our
men with two of the^^
and so to dismiss him with all arguments of courtesy, and retain the other
for an Interpreter. The General and his Master being met with their two
companions together, after they had exchanged certain things the one with
the other, one of the Saluages, for lack of better merchandise, cut off the
tail of his coat (which is a chief ornament among them) and gave it unto
our General for a present. But he presently upon a watchword given, with his
Master suddenly laid hold upon the two Saluages. But the ground vnderfeete
being slipperie, with the Snow on the side of the hill, thire handfast failed,
and their pray escaping, ran away, and lightlye recovered their bow and
arrows, which they had hid not far from them behind the rocks. And being
only two Saluagies in sight, they so fiercely, desperately, and with such
fury assaulted and pursued our General and his Master, bebeing altogether
unarmed, and not mistrusting their subtlety, that they chased them to their
boats, and hurt the General in the Buttocke with an arrow, who the rather
speedily sled back, The Englishemen chesed to their boats.
because they suspected a greater number behind ye rocks. Our soldiors (which
were commanded before to keep their boats) perceiving the danger, and hearing
our men calling for shot, came speedily to rescue, thinking there had bin a
more number. But when ye Savages heard ye shot of one of our caliuers. And yet
(having first bestowed their arrows) they ra^ away, our me^ speedily following
the^. But a servant of my Lord of Warwickes, called Nicholas Conger, a good
footeman, and vncombred with any furniture, One of that Count^u^en taken.
besides a dagger at his back, ouertooke one of them, and being a Cornishman,
and a good wrastler, showed his companion such a Cornishe trick, that he made
his sides ache against the ground for a month after. And so being s^ayed, he
was taken alive, and brought away, but the other escaped. Thus with their
strange and new pray, our men repaired to their boats, and passed from the
maine to a small Island of a mile compass, where they resolved to ^arrie all
night, for even now a sudden storm was grown so great at sea, that by no
means they could recover their ships. And here every man refreshed himself
with a small portion of victualles, which was laid into the boats for their
dinners, having neither eat nor drunk all the day before. But because they
knew not how long the storm might last, nor how far off the ships might be
put to Sea, nor whether they should ever recover the^ again or not, they made
great spare of their victualles, as it greatly behooved them: For they knew full
well, that the best cheer the country could yield them, was golden rocks
and stones, a hard food to live withal, and the people more ready to eat
them, than to give them wherewithal to eat. And thus keeping very good
watch and ward, they lay there al night upon hard cliffes of Snow and Ise,
both wette, cold and comfortless.

These things thus happening with the company on land, the danger of the ships
at Sea was no less perilous. For within one hour after the Generals
departing in ye morning, by negligence of the Cook in ouer-heating, and the
workman in making the chimney, the Aid was set on fire, The A^de set on fire.
and had bin the confusion of the whole, if by chance a boy espying it, it
had not bin speedily with great labor and Gods help well extinguished.

This day also, were diverse storms and flawes, and by nine of the clock at
night the storm was grown so great, and continewed such until the morning,
that it put our ships at sea in no small peril: for having mountains of
fleeting Ise on every side, we went romer for one, and loofed for another, some
scraped us, and some happily escaped us, that the least of a M. were as
dangerous to strike, as any rock, The great danger of those rocks Ise.
and able to have split asunder the strongest ship of the world. We had a
scope of clear without Ise, (as God would) wherein we turned, being otherwise
compassed on every side about: but so much was the wind, and so little was our
sea room, that being able to bear only our forecoast, we cast so often about,
that we made fourteen bordes in eighte glasses running, being but four
hours: but God being our best Steresma^, and by ye industry of Charles Iackman
and Andrew Dyer then masters mates, both very expert Mariners, and Richard
Coxe the master Gunner, with other very careful sailors, then within board,
and also by the help of ye clear nights which are without darkness, we did
happily avoid those present dangers, Night without darkness in that country.
whereat since we have more marvelled than in the present danger feared, for
that every man within board, both better and worse, had enough to do, with his
hands to hale ropes, and with his eyes to look out for danger. But the next
morning, being the 20. of July, as God would, the storm ceased, and the
General espying the ships with his new Captive, and whole company, came
happilye aborde, and reported what had passed a shore, whereupon, altogether
upon our knees, gave God humble and hearty thanks, for that it had pleased
him, from so speedy peril to send us such speedy deliverance, and so from this
Norther shore, we stroke over toward the Southerland,

The one and twentieth of July, we discovered a bay, which ran into the land,
that seemed a likely harborow for our ships, wherefore our General rowed
thither with his boats, to make proof thereof, Our first coming on the
Southerland of the said stra^ghtes.
and with his goldfiners ^o search for Ore, having never assayed any thing on
^he south shore as yet, and the first small Island, which we landed upon,
here all the sands and cliftes, did so glister and had so bright a marquesite,
that it seemed all to be gold, but upon trial made, it proved no better than
black lead, and verifyed the proverb. All is not gold that shines.

A Mine of Blacklead.
Upon the two and twentieth of July, we bare into the said sound and came to
Anchor a reasonable breadth off the shore, where thinkyng our selves in good
security, we were greatly endaungered with a piece of dri^te Ise, which the
Ebb brought forth of the soundes, and came thwart us, ere we were aware. But
the gentlemen and soldiers within board, taking great pains at this pinche at
the Capstone, overcame the most danger thereof, and yet ^or all that might be
done, it stroke on our stern such a blow, that we seared least it had stryken
away our rudder, and being forced to cut our Cable in the hawse, were feign to
set our foresaile to run further up within, and if our sterage had not bin
stronger, than in the present time we feared, we had run ^o the ship upon the
rocks, having a very narrow Channel to turn in, but as God would, all came
well to pass. And this was named Iackmans sound, after the name of the
Masters mate, Iackmans sound.
who had first liking unto the place.

Upon a small Island, within this sound, called Smithes Island (because he first
set up his forge there) was found a Mine of silver, but was not won out of
the rocks without great labor Here our goldfyners made say of such Ore as
they found upon the Northerlande, and found four sorts thereof to hold
gold in good quantity. Upon another small Island here was also found a great
dead fish, which as it should seem, had bin embayde with yse, ^m^th^ Island
and was in proportion round like to a Porpose, being about twelve foot long,
and in bigness answerable, having a horn of two yardes long, growing out of
the snoute or nostrels. This horn is wreathed and strayte, The fyndyng of an
Unicornes horn
like in fashion to a Taper made of wax, and may truly be thought to be the
sea Unicorne. This horn is to be seen and reserved as a Jewel, by the Queens
majesty's commandment, in her Wardrop of Robes. The form whereof is here set
down.



Tewsday, the three and twentyth of July, our general with his best company of
gentlemen, soldiers and sailors, to the number of seauentie persons in all,
marched with Ancient displayde, upon the continent of the Southerlande (the
supposed continent of America) where, commanding a Trumpet to sound a call
for every man to repair to the Ancient, he declared to the whole company, how
much the cause imported, for the service of her Majesty, our country, our
credites, and the safety of our own lives, and therefore required every man to
be conformable to order, and to be directed by those he should assign. And
appointed for leaders, Captain Fenton, Captain York, and his Lieutena^t
George Best, which done, we cast our selves into a ring, and altogether upon
our knees, gave GOD humble thanks, for that it had pleased him of his great
goodness in preserving us from such imminent dangers, to bestow so great and
hidden treasures upon us his poor and unworthy servants, beseeching likewise
the assistaunce of his holy spirit, so to deliver us in saftie, into our
Country, whereby the light and truth of these secrets being known, it might
redou^d to the more honor of his holy name, and consequently to the advancement
of our common wealth. And so, in as good sort as the place suffered, we
marched toward the tops of the mountains, which were no less painful in
clyming, tha^ dangerous in descending, by reason of their steepness, and yse.
And having passed about five miles, by such unwieldy ways, we returned unto
our ships, without sight of any people, or likelyhoode of habitation. Here
diverse of the gentlemen desired our general to suffer them to the number of
twenty or thirty persons, to march up thirty or forty leagues in the
country, to the end they might discover the Inlande, and do some acceptable
service for their country. But he, not contented with the matter he sought
for, and well considering the short time he had in hand, and the greedy
desire our country has to a present savor and return of gain, bente his
whole endeavor only to find a Mine, to freight his ships, and to leave the
rest (by Gods help) hereafter to be well accomplished. And therefore the
twenty sixte of Iulye he departed over to the Northlande, with the two barks,
leaving the Aid riding in Iackma^s, sound, and meant (after he had found
convenient harborowe, and freight there for his ships) to discover further
for the passage. The Barks came the same night to Ancker, in a sound, upon the
Northerland, where the tides did run so swifte, and the place so subject to
indraftes of Ise, that by reason thereof they were greatly endaungered, and
having found a very rich Mine, and got almost twenty tun of Ore together,
upon the 28. of July the Ise came driving into the sound where the Barks
road, in such sort, that they were therewith greatly distressed. And the
Gabriell riding asterne the Michael, had her Cable gaulde asunder in the hawse,
with a piece of driving Ise, and lost another Ancker, and having but one cable
and ancker left, for she had lost two before, and the Ise still driving upon
her, she was (by (...) each side, with small Islands, lying of the main,
which break the force of the Tides, and make the place free from any indraftes
of yse, did prove a very fit harborow for our ships, where we came to Ancker
under a small Island, which now together with the sound, is called by ye name of
that right Honorable and virtuous Lady, Anne Countess of Warwick. And this is
the furthest place that this year we have entered up within the streyghtes,
and is reconed from the Cape of the Queens forelande, which is the entrance of
the straightes, Thirty leagues discovered within the straytes.
not above 30. leagues. Upon this Island was found good store of the Ore, which
in the washing h^lde gold plainly to be seen: where upon it was thought
best rather to lead here, where there was store and indifferent good, than to
seek further for better, and spend time with ^^operdie. And therefore cure
General setting the Myners to work, and showing first a good president of a
painful labourer and a good Captain in himself, A good president of a good
Captain showed b^ Captain F^obi^her.
gave good examples for others to follow him: whereupon every man, both better
and worse, with their best endeavors, willingly laid to their helping hands.
And the next day, being the.30. of July, the Michaell was sent over to
Iackmans sound, for the Aid and whole company to come thither. Upon the
maine land over against the Countesses Island we discovered, and beheld to our
great marvel, the poor caves and houses of those country people, which serve
them (as it should seem) for their winter dwellings, The manner (...) hou^^^
in (...) Co^n^rey.
and are made two fadome under ground in compass round, like to an ^uen,
being joined fast one by another, having holes like to a Fox or Conny berrie,
to keep and come together. They vnder^rench these places with gutters so, that
the water falling from the hills above them, may slide away without their
a^oi^unce: and are feated commonly in the foot of a hill, Wh^l^s bones ^sed in
(...) of timber.
to shield them better from the cold winds, having their door and entrance
ever open toward the South. From the ground upward they build with whales
bones, for lack of timber, which bending one over another, are handsomely
compacted in the top together, and are covered ever with Seals skins,
which instead of tiles, sen^eth them from the rain. In each house they have
only one roo^e, having the one half of the flower rayses with broad stone^ a
foot higher than ye other, whereon ^rawing Moss^, they make their nests to
sleep in. They defile these (...) most filthylie with their beastly ^ee^ing,
and dwell so long in a plac^ (as we think) until their own^ (...) the^, (...)
people.
they are forced to seek a sweeter air, and a new seat, and are no doubt) a
dispersed and wandering nation, as the Ta^tarians, and live in hords and
troops, without any certain abode, as may ap^^are by sundry circumstances
of our experi^ce. Here our c^tiue being ashore with us to d^clare ye v^e of
such things as we saw, stayed himself alone behind the co^^^ny, and did set up
five small ^t^ckes round in a circle, o^^ b^ another, with one small bone
placed just in ye nuddest of a^l: which (...) when on^ of ou^ men perceived, A
sign se^ up by the savage Cap^i^e, and the meaning thereof.
he called us back to behold the mat^er, thinking that he had meant some
charm or witchcraft therein. But ye best conjecture we could make thereof was,
that he would thereby his Countreyme^ should understand, yt for our five me^
which they be^^^^^^ the last year (whom he signifi^d by ye five sticks) he
^^s taken and kept prisoner, which he signified by ye bone in ye midst. For
afterward when we showed him ye picture of his Countre^ma^, which ye last
year was brought into England (whose counterfeit we had drawn, with boat, and
other furniture, both as he was in his own, The savage captive amazed of his
Countreymans picture
and also in english aparell) he was upon the suddayne much amazed thereat, and
beholding abuis^dly the same with silence a good while, as thou^h he would
streyne courtesy whether should begin ye speech (for he thought him no
doubt a lively creature) at l^ngth^ began to question with him, as with his
companion, and finding ^im dumme and mu^e, seemed to suspect him as one
disdeynful, and would with a little help have growe^ into choler at ye (...)
fear, either else for policy, to draw our men from rescue further within
their danger: wherefore our men construing their coming thither was but to
seek adu^untage, followed speedily after them, but they rowed so swiftly awa^,
that our men could come nothing near the^. Howbeit they failed not of their
best endeavor in rowing, and having chased them above two miles into the Sea,
returned into their ships again,

The morning following, being the first of August, Captain York with the
Michaell came into Iackm^ns sound, and declared unto the company there, that
the l^ste night^ past, he came to anchor in a certain baye (which he ^^thens
was named Yorkes Sound, Y^^^^^ sou^de.
) about four leagues distant from ^ackmans sound, being put to l^warde of
that place for lack of wind, where he discovered certain tents of the
Country people, where going with his comp^nye ash^^re, he entered into them,
but found the people departed, as i^ should seem, for fear of their
coming. But among^st sundry straun^e things, which these tents they (...),
there was raw and now killed flesh of unknown (...), with dead carcasses and
bones of dogs, The apparel ^ound again of o^^e En^lis^m^n wh^^che the ^eare
before were taken captive
and I know not what. They also beheld (to their greatest m^ru^ile) a du^le^ of
Canuas made after the English fashion, a shirt, a girdle, three shoes for
contrary feet, and of unequal bigness, which they well coniectured to be
the apparel of our five poor countriemen, which were intercepted the last
year by these Country people, about fi^tye leagues from this place, further
within the straightes. Whereupon, our men being in good hope, that some of them
might be here, and yet living, the Captain deu^s^ng for the best, left his
mind b^hind him in writing, with pen, ^ncke, and paper also, wh^r^by our poor
captive countriem^n if it might come to their hands, A good de^ic^ of
ca^t^ine York.
might know their frie^des minds, and of their arrival, and likewise
return their answer. And so without taking any thing away in their tents,
leaving there also looking glasses, points, and other of our toys the better
to allure the^ by such friendly means,) departed aboorde his Bark, A good
de^^^^ of Cap^^^^^ York^.
with intent to make haste to the Aid, to give notice unto the company, of
all such things as he has there discovered: and so meant to return to these
ten^s again, hoping, that he might by force or policy, entrappe or enti^^ the
people to some friendly conference. Which things, when he had delivered to the
company there, they determined for^hwith to go^ (...)ande with the matter.
Hereupon Captain York (...) of the Aid and his mate (who the night before
(...) at the te^^s, and came over from the other si^e in the Michael with him)
being accompanied with diverse of the Gentlemen and soldiers, to the number
of.3^ or.4^. persons in two small rowing p^nnesses, made toward the place,
where the night before they discou^r^d the t^nts of those people, and setting
Charles I^^kman, bring the Master mate, ashoare with a convenient number, for
that he could best guide them to the place, they marc^ed over land, moving
(...) on the one side, whil^st the Captain with his (...) might entrap them on
the other side. Bu^ landing at last at ye place where the night before they
left them, they found them with their te^ts removed. Notwithstanding, our me^
which marched up into ye country, passing over two or three tedious mou^tains,
by chance espied certain tents in a valley underneath the^ near unto a
creek by the Sea side, which, because it was not the place where the guide
had ^in the night before, they judged them to be another company, T^^ Savages
have Bo^^es of ^undry big^^^^^.

The English men p^rsue those people of that country.


and b^s^tting them about, determined ^o take the^ if they could. But they
having quickly descried our company, lanched one great, and another small
boat, being about.16. or.18. persons, and very narrowly escaping, put
thems^lues to sea. Whereupon our soldiers discharged their Caliuers, and
followed them, thinking the noise thereof being heard to our boats at sea, our
men there would make what speed they might to that place. And thereupon
indeed our men which were in the boats (crossing upon them in the mouth of
the sound, whereby their passage was ^et from getting sea room, wherein it
had bin impossible for us to overtake them by rowing) forced them to put
themselves ashoare upon a point of land within the said sound (which upon the
occasion of the slaughter there, The swift ro^ing of those people.
was since named the Bloody point) whereunto our men so speedily followed, The
bloody point.
that they had little leisure left them to make any escape. But so soon as
they landed, each of them brake his Oar, thinking by that means to prevent
us, in carrying away their boats for want of Oars. And desperately retorning
upon our men, resisted them manfullye in their landing, so long as their arrows
and darts lasted, and after gathering up those arrows which our me^ shot at
the^, A boat skirmish between the English, and them of that country
yea, and plucking our arrows out of their bodies, encountered afresh again,
and maintained their cause, until both weapons and life utterly failed them.
And when they found they were mortally wounded, being ignorant what mercy
means, The desperate nature of those people.
with deadly fury they cast themselves headlong from off the rocks into the
sea, least perhaps their enemies should receive glory or pray of their dead
carcasses, for they supposed us be like to be Canibales, or eaters of man's
flesh. In this conflict one of our men was dangerously hurt in the belly with
one of their arrows, and of them were slain five or six. The rest by flight
escaped among the Rocks, saving two wo^^^, whereof the one being old and
ougly, our men ^^^^ght she had bin a Devil or some Witch, and therefore (...)
the other being young, and combred with (...) at her back, hiding hirselfe
behind the ^^cks, was espied by one of our men, The taking of the woman and
her child.
who supposing she had bin a man, shot through the hear of her head, and
pierced through the child's arm, whereupon she cried out, and was taken, and
our Surgeo^ meaning to heal her child's arm, A pretty kind of Surgerie,
^^yche nature teaches.
applied salues thereunto. But she not acquainted with such kind of surgerie,
plucked th^se s^lues away, and by continual with her own tongue, not much
unlike our dogs, healed up the childs arm. And because the day was well
near ^pent, our men made haste unto the rest of our company, which on
the other side of the water remained at the ^entes, where they found by the
apparel, ^e^ter, and other English furniture, that they were the same
company which Captain York discovered the night before, having removed
themselves from the place where he left the^.

And now considering their sudden flying from our men, and their desperate
manner of fighting, we began to suspecte, that we had already heard the
last news of our men, which the last year were betrayed of these people.
And considering also their rauennesse and bloody disposition, in eating any
kind of raw flesh or carr^e^, howsoever stinking, it is to be thought,
that they had s^aine and devoured our men. For the doublet which was soun^e
in their tents had many holes therein, being made with their arrows and darts.

But now the night being at hand, our men with their captives and such poor
stuff as they found in their tents, returned toward their ships, when
being at Sea, there arose a sudden flawe of wind, which was not a little
dangerous for their small boats. But as God would, they came all safely
aboorde. And with these good news they returned (as before mentioned) into
the Countess of Warwicks sound, unto us And between Iackmans sound, from
whence they came, and the Countess of Warwickes sound, between land and land,
being thought the narrowest place of the straights, The narrowest place of the
^^raig^ts is.9. leagues over.
were judged nine leagues over at least: and Iackmans sound being upon the
Southerlande, lies directlye almost over against the Countesses sound, as is
reckned, scarce thirty leagues within the straightes from the Queens Cape,
which is the entrance of the straights of Southerland, being the supposed
continent of America. This Cape being named Queen Elizabethe; Cape, The
Quene^ Cape.
stands in the Latitude of degrees and a half to the Northwardes of New
found land, and upon the same continent, for any thing that is yet known to
the contrary.

Having now got a woman captive for the comfort of our man, The manner of the
meeting o^ (...) Captives, and their entertaynement
we brought them both together, and every man with silence desired to behold
the manner of their meeting and entertaynement, the which was more worth the
beholding, than can be well expressed by writing. A^ their first encountering,
they beheld each the other very wistly a good space, without speech or word
uttered, with great change of color and countenance, as though it seemed,
the grief and disdeyne of their captivity had taken away the use of their
tongs and utterance: the woman at the first very suddaynely, as though she
disdeyned or regarded not the man, turned away, and began to sing, as though
she minded another matter: but being again brought together, the man brake up
the silence first, and with stern and stayed countenance, began to tell a
long solemn tale to the woman, whereunto she gave good hearing, and
interrupted him nothing, till he had finished, and afterward, being grown
into more familiar acquayntance by speech, were turned together, so that (I
think) the one would hardly have lived, without the comfort of the other. And,
for so much as we could perceive, albeit they lived continually together, yet
did they never use as man and wife, though the woman spared not to do all
necessary things that apperteyned to a good huswife indifferently for them
both, as in making clean their Cabin, and every other thing that apperteyned
to his ease: for when he was Seasicke, she would make him clean, she would
kill and flea ye Dogs for their eating, and dress his meat. The shame
fastness and chastity of those savage Captives.
Only I think it worth the noting, the continency of them both, for the man
would never shift himself, except he had first caused the woman to depart out
of his Cabin, and they both were most sha^^ fast, least any of their privy
parts should be discovered, either of themselves, or any other body.

On Monday the sixth of August, the Lieutenante, with all the Souldyers, for
the better guard of the Myners, and the other things a shore, pitched their
tents in the Countess^^ Island, and fortifyed the place for their better
defense as well as they could, and were to the number of forty persons, when
being all at labor, they might perceive upon the top of a hill over against
them, Another appearance of that Country people.
a number of the country people wasting with a flagge, and making great out
cries unto them, and were of the same company, which had encountered lately
our men upon the other shore, being come to complain their late losses, and
to entreat (as it seemed) for restitution of the Woman and Child, which our
men in the late conflict had taken, and brought away: whereupon the General
taking the savage Captive with him, and setting the Woman where they might
best perceive her, in the highest place of the Island, went over to talk with
them. This Captive at the first encountrie of his friends, fell so out into
tears, that he could not speak a word in a great space, but after a while,
ouercomming his kyndnesse, he talked at full with his companyons, and bestowed
friendly upon them such toys and trifles as we had given him, whereby we
noted, that they are very kind one to the other, and greatly sorrowful for
the loss of their friends. Our General by signs required his five men
which they took Captive the last year, and promised them, not only to
releasse those which he had taken, but also to reward them with great
gifts and friendship. Our Savage made signs in answer from them, that our
men should be delivered us, and were yet living, and made signs likewise
unto us, that we should write our letters unto them, for they kn^we very
well the use we have of writting, These people know the use of writing.
and received knowledge thereof, either of our poor Captive Countre^men,
which they betrayed, or else by this our new ^aptiue, who has seen us
day^y write, and ^epeate again such words of h^s language, as we des^red to
learn: but they for this night, because it was (...), departed, without any
letter, although the^ called ^arne^^lie in have for the same. And the next
morning ear^lie, being the seventh of August, they called again for the
Letter, which being delivered unto them, they speedily departed, ^ Letter
sent unto ^he five English Cap^tiues.
making signs with three fingers, and poyntyng to the Sun, that they meante
to return within three days, vnt^ll which time we heard no more of them,
and about the time appointed, they returned, in such ^orte as you shall
afterward hear.

This night, because the people were very near unto us, the Lieutenaunte
caused the Trumpet to sound a call, and every man in the Island repayring to
the ^untiente, he put them in mind of the place so far from their
Country wherein they lived, and the danger of a multitude which they were
subject unto, if good watch and w^rde were not kept, for at every low
water, the Enemy might come a^most dryfoote from the main unto us,
wherefore, he wylled every man to prepare him in good readynesse upon all
suddayne occasions, and so giving the watch their charge, the company departed
to rest.

I thought the Captains Letter well worth the remembering, not for the
circumstance of curious enditing, but for the substance and good meaning
therein contained, and therefore have repeated here the same, as by himself
it was hastily written.

The form of Martin Frobishers letter to the English Captives.
IN the name of God, in whom we al believe, who I trust has preserved your
bodies and souls amongst these Infidels, I commend me unto you. I will be glad
to seek by all means you can devise, for your deliverance, either with force,
or with any commodities within my Ships, which I will not spare for your
sakes, or any thing else I can do for you. I have aboard, of theyrs, a Man, a
Woman, and a Child, which I am contented to deliver for you, but the man
which I carried away from hence the last year, is dead in ENGLAND. Moreover,
you may declare unto them, that if they deliver you not, I will not leave a man alive in their Country. And thus, if one of you can come to speak with
me, they shall have either the Man, Woman, or Child in pawn for you. And thus
unto God, whom I trust you do serve, in have I leave you, and to him we will
daily pray for you. This Tuesdaye morning the seventh of August. Anno. 1577.

Yours to the uttermost of my power MARTIN FROBISHER.
Postscript.
I have sent you by these bearers, Pen, Incke, and Paper, to write back
unto me again, if personally you can not come to certifye me of your estate.




NOw had the General altered his determination for going any further into the
straights at this time, The cause why F^obishe^ entered no further within ye
straights this year.
for any further discovery of the passage, having taken a man, and a woman of
that Country, which he thought sufficient for the use of language: and
having also met with these people here, which intercepted his me^ the last
year, (as the apparel, and English furniture which was found in their
tents, very well declared) he knew it was but labor lost to seek them
further off, when he had found them there at hand. And considering also the
short time he had in hand, he thought it best to bend his whole endeavor for
the getting of Mine, and to leave the passage, further to be discovered
hereafter. For his commission directed him in this voyage, only for the
searching of the Gold Ore, and to defer the further discovery of the passage
until another time.

On Thurseday the ninth of August, we began to make a small Fort for our
defense in the Cou^tesses Island, and entrenched a corner of a cliffe, which on
three parts like a wall of good heygth was compassed and well fenced with the
Sea, and we finished the rest, with caskes of earth, to good purpose, and this
was called Bestes Bulwark, Bestes Bulwark.
after the Lieutenants name, who first devised the same. This was done, for
that we suspected more least the desperate men might oppress us with
multitude, than any fear we had of their force, weapons, or policy of
battle: but as wisdom would us in such place (so far from home,) not to be
of our selves altogether careless: so the signs which our captive made unto
us, of the coming down of his Gouernoure or Prince, which he calls Catchoe,
Their King called Catchoe.
gave us occasion to foresee what might ensue thereof, for he showed by signs,
that this Catchoe was a man of higher stature far than any of our nation is,
How he is honored.
and he is accustomed to be carried upon men's shoulders.

About midnighte, the Lieutenant caused a false Alarm to be given in the
Island, to prove as well the readynesse of the company there a shore, as also
what help might be hoped for upon the suddayne from the Ships if need ^^
^^quired, and every part was found in good re^^ynes^e v^^on such a suddayne.

Saturday the eleventh of August, the people showed themselves again, and
called unto us from the side of a hill over against us. The General with (good
hope to hear of his men, and to have answer of his Letter) went over unto
them, where they presented themselves, not above three in sight, but were
hidden in deed in greater numbers behind the Ro^kes, and making signs of
delay with us, to entrappe some of us, to redeem their own, did only seek
advantage to train our Boat about a point of land from sight of our
companie^ whereupon our men justly suspecting them, kept aloof without
their danger, and yet set one of our company a shore, which took up a
great blather, which one of them offered us, and leaving a looking glass in
the place, came into the Boat again. A bladder changed for a ^o^ing glass.
In the mean while, our men which stood in the Countesses Island to behold,
who might better discern them, than those in the Boat, by reason they were
upon higher ground, made a great outcrye unto our men in the boat, for that
they saw diverse of the Savages creeping behind the Rocks toward our men,
No news of the English Cap^iues.
whereupon the General presently returned without tidings of his men.

Concerning this Blather which we received, our Captive made signs, that it
was given him to keep water and drink in, but we suspected rather, it was
given him to swim and shift away withal, for he and the woman sought diverse
times to escape, To what end the blather was delivered.
having loosed our Boats from a Stern our Ships, and we never a Boat
left to pursue them withal, and had prevailed very far, had they not bin
very timely espied, and prevented therein.

After our Generalles coming away from them, they mustered themselves in our
sight, upon the top of a hill, to the number of twenty in a rank, Those
people daunsing upon the hill toppes^
all holdyng hands over their heads, and dancing, with great noise and songs
together, we supposed they made this dance and show for us to understand,
that we might take view of their whole companyes and force, meaning belike, that
we should do the same. And thus they continued upon the hill tops until
night, when hearing a piece of our great Ordinance, which thundered in the
hollownesse of the high hills, made unto them so fearful a noise, that they
had no great will to tarry long after. And this was done, more to make them
know our force, than to do them any hurt at all.

On Sunday the twelfth of August, Captain Fenton trained the company, and
made the Souldyoures maineteyne skyrmishe among themselves, A skirmishe showed
to th^se people.
as w^ll for their exercise, as for the Country people to behold in what
readynesse our men were always to be found, for it was to be thought,
that they lay hid in the hills thereaboute, and observed all the manner of
our proceedings.

On Wensday the foureteenth of August, our General with two small Boats well
appointed, for that he suspected the Country people to lie lurking
thereaboute, went up a certain Bay within the Countesses sound, to search
for Ore, and met again with the Country people, who so soon as they saw
our men, made great outcryes, and with a white flagge made of blathers, Their
Flags made of b^athe^s.
sowed together with the guts and sinews of beasts, wafted us amayne unto
them, but showed not above three of their company. But when we came near
them, we might perceive a great multitude creeping behind the Rocks,
which gave us good cause to suspecte their traiterous meaning: whereupon we
made them signs, that if they would lay their weapons aside, and come forth,
we would deal friendly with them, although their intent was manifested unto
us: but for all the sign^^ ^f friendship we could make them, they cam^ still
creeping toward us behind the rocks, to get more advantage of us, as
though we had no eyes to see them, thinking belike, that our single wits
could not discover so bare devises and simple driftes of theyrs. Their
spokesman earnestly persuaded us, with many enticing shows, to come, eat and
sleep ashore, with great arguments of courtesy, and clapping his bare hands
over his head in token of peace and innocence, willed us to do the like. But
the better to allure our hungry stomachs, he brought us a trim bayte of raw
flesh, which for fashion sake with a boatehooke we caught into our Boat: but
when the cunning Cater perceived his first cold morssell could nothing sharpen
our stomachs, he cast about for a new train of warm flesh to procure our
appetites, Great offers.
wherefore, he caused one of his fellows in halting manner, to come forth as a
lame man from behind the rocks, and the better to declare his kindness in
caruing, he hoysed him upon his shoulders, and bringing him hard to the water
side where we were, left him there lymping, as an easy pray to be taken of
us. His hope was, that we would bite at this bayte, and spedily leap a shore
within their danger, whereby they might have apprehended some of us, to
ransom their friends home again, which before we had taken: but I doubt,
our flesh is so sweet meat for them, that they will hardly part from so good
morsels, if we come once nere their ha^dling. The Ge^tlemen and Soldiers had
great will to encounter them ashore, but the General more careful by process
of time to win them, than wilfully at the first to spoil them, would in
no wise admit that any man should put himself in hazard ashore,
considering the matter he now intended, was for the Ore, and not for the
Conquest: notwithstanding, to prove this Criples footemanshippe, he gave
liberty for one to shoot: whereupon the Criple having a parting blow,
lightly recovered a Rock, and went away a true and no fained Criple, and
has learned his lesson for ever halting before such Criples again. But his
fellows which lay hid before, full quickly then appeared in their likeness,
and maintained the skirmishe with their slings, bows and arrows very
fiercely, and came as near as the water suffered them: and with as desperate
mind as has bin seen in any men, without fear of shot or any thing,
followed us all along the coaste, but all their shot fell short of us, and
are of little danger. They had belayd all the coaste along, and being dispersed
so, were not able to be numbered, but we might discern of them above one
hundredth persons, and to suspecte, a greater number. And thus without loss or
hurt we returned to our ships again.

Now our work growing toward an end, and having only with five poor
Miners, and the help of a few Gentlemen and Soldiers, brought aboorde
almost two hundredth of gold ore, in the space of twenty days, every man
therewithal well comforted, determined lustilye to work afreshe for a boon
voyage, to bring our labor to a speedy and happy end.

And upon Wednesday at night, being the one and twentieth of August, we fully
finished the whole work. And it was now good time to leave, for as the men
were well wearied, so their shoes and clothes were well worn, their baskets
bottoms torn out, their tools broken, and the ships reasonably well filled.
Some with ouer-straining themselves received hurtes not alittle dangerous,
some having their bellies broken, and others their legs made lame. And about
this time the Ise began to congeale and freese about our ships sides,
which gave us a good argument of the Suns declyning Southward, and put us in
mind to make more have homeward.

It is not a little worth the memory, to the commendation of the Gentlemen and
Souldioures herein, who leaving all reputation aparte, with so great
willingness, and with courageous stomachs, have themselves almost overcome in
so short a time, the difficulty of this so great a labor. And this to be
true, the matter, if it be well wayed, without further proof, now brought
home, does well witness. God grant for their forward minds, they may be as
well considered, as their honest merits have well deserved.

Thurseday the.22. of August, we plucked down our tents, and every man
hasted homewarde, and making bonefires upon the top of the highest Mount of
the Island, and marching with Auntiente displayed round about the Island, we gave
a vollie of shot for a farewell, in honor of the right Honorable Lady Anne,
Countess of Warwick, whose n^me it ^eareth: and so departed aboorde.

The.23. of August, having the wind large at West, we set Sail from out of
the Countesses sound homeward, but the wind calming, we came to Ancker within
the point of the same sound again.

The.24. of August, about three of the clock in the morning, having ^he wind
large at West, we set Sail again, and by nine of the Clock at night, we
left the Queens forlande ast^rne us, and being clear of the Straytes, we
bare further into the m^yne Ocean, keeping our course more Southerly, to bring
our selves the sooner under the Latitude of our own C^ymate.

The wind was very great at Sea, so that we lay a hull all night, and had
Snow half a foot deep on the hatches. Snow ha^f^ a foot deep in ^ugust.


From ^he 24. until the.28. we had very mu^he wind, but large keeping our
course South Southeast, and were like to have lost the Ba^kes, but by good
hap we met again. The heygth being taken, we were in Degrees and a half.

The nine and twentieth of August, the wind blewe much at Northeast, so that
we cou^de bear but only a bu^t of our foresayle, and the Ba^kes not being
able to carry any sail at all.

The Michaell lost company of us, and shaped her course toward Orckney as we
supposed, because that way was better known unto them.

The thirtith of August, with the force of the wynd, and a surge of the Sea,
the Master of the Gabriell, and the Boateson, were stricken both ouerboorde,
The Master of the Gabriell stricken ouerboorde.
and hardly was the Boateson recovered, having hold on a roape hanging
ouerboorde in the Sea, and yet the Bark was laced fore and afte with ropes a
breast high within boorde.

This Master was called William Smyth, being but a young man, and a very
sufficient Maryner, who being all the morning before exceeding pleasant,
told his Captain he dreamed that he was cast ouerboorde, and that the
Boateson had him by the hand, and could not save him, and so immediately
upon the end of his tale, his Dream came right euelly to pass, and in deed
the Boateson in like sort held him by one hand, having hold on a rope with
the other, until his force failed, and the Master drowned. The heygth being
taken, we found our selves to be in the Latitude of Degrees, and a half, and
reckned our selves from the Queens Cape homeward, about two hundredth leagues.

The last of August, about midnighte, we had two or three great and suddayne
flawes or storms.

The first of September, the storm was grown very great, and continued
almost the whole day and night, and lying a hull to tarry for the barks, our
ship was much beaten with the Seas, every Sea almost ouertaking our poope,
that we were constrained with a bunte of our sail, to try it out, and ease
the rolling of our ship. And so the Gabriel not able to bear any sail to
keep company with us, and our ship being higher in the poope, and a tall
ship, whereon the wind had more force to drive, went so fast away, that we
lost sight of them, and left them to God and their good fortune of Sea. The
second day of September in the morning, it pleased God of his goodness to
send us a calm, whereby we perceived the Rudder of our ship torn in
twain, and almost ready to fall away. The Rudder of the Ay^e torn in twain.
Wherefore taking the benefit of the time, we slung half a dosen couple of
our best men ouerboord, who taking great pains under water, driving plancks,
and binding with ropes, did well strengthen and mend the matter, who returned
the most part more than half dead out of the water, and as Gods pleasure
was, the Sea was calm until the work was finished. The fifth of September,
the height of the stern being taken, we found our selves to be in the
latitude of degrees and a half. In all this voyage we took the latitude of the
place by the height of the sun, because the long day takes away the light
not only of the Polar, but also of all other fixed Stars. And here the North
Star is so much elevated above the Horizon, How the Latitudes were always
taken in this voyage rather with the Staff than astrolobe.
that with the Staff it is hardly to be well observed, and the degrees in the
Astrolobe, are too small to observe minutes. Therefore we always used the
Staff and the Sun; as fittest instruments for this use.

Having spent four or five days in trauerse of the seas with contrary wind,
making our Souther way good as near as we could, to raise our degrees to
bring our selves with the latitude of Sylley, we took the height the tenth of
September, and found our selves in the latitude of degrees and ten minutes.
The eleauenth of September about six a clock at night the wind came good
sowthwest, we were shot and set our course southest.

And upon Thursday, the twelfth of September, taking the height, we were in the
latitude of and a half, and reckened our selves not paste one hundred and
fifty leagues short of Sylley, the weather fair, the wind large at
westsouthwest, we kept our course southest.

The thirteenth day the height being taken, we found our selves to be in the
latitude of ^ degrees, the wind westsouthwest, then being in the height of
Sylley, we kept our course East, to run in with the sleeue or channel so
called, being our narrow Seas, and reckened us short of Sylley twelve leagues.

Sunday, the fifteenth of September about four of the clock, we began to
sound with our lead, and had ground at.61. fadome depth, white small
sandy ground, and reckned us upon the back of Sylley, and set our course
East and by North, East Northeast, and Northeast among.

The sixteenth of September, about eight of the clock in the morning sounding,
we had.65. fadome osey sand, and thought our selves thwart of Saint Georges
channel a little within the banks. And bearing a small sail all night, we
made many soundings, which were about forty fadome, and so shallowe, that
we could not well tell where we were.

The seventeenth of September we sounded, and had forty fadome, and were not
far off the lands, and branded sand with small worms and Cockle shells,
and were shot between Sylley and the lands end, and being within the baye,
we were not able to double the point with a South and by East way, but were
feign to make another boorde, the wind being at Southweast, and by Weast, and
yet could not double the point, to come clear of the lands end, to bear
along the Channel: and the weather cleared up when we were hard aboorde the
shore, and we made the lands end perfect, and so put up along Saint
Georges Channel. And the weather being very foul at Sea, we coueted some
harborough, because our Steeradge was broken, and so came to Ancker in Padstowe
road in Cornwall. The arrival of the Aid at Padstow in Cornwall.
But riding there, a very dangerous road, we were advised by the Country, to
put to Sea again, and of the two evils, to choose the less, for there was
nothing but present peril where we road: where upon we plied along the
Channel to get to Londy, from whence we were again driven, being but an
open road, where our Ancker came home, and with force of weather put to Seas
again, and about the three and twentieth of September, arrived at Milforde
Haven in Wales, which being a very good harborough, made us happy men, Our
coming to Milford Haven.
that we had received such long desired safety. And more happy we held
our selves, not for the safety of our selves so much, as the comfort that we
had that our Country should thereby have perfect knowledge of our
discovery, to the great benefyte of our common wealth.

About one month after our arrival here, by order from the Lords of the
Counsel, the Ship came up to Bristowe, where the Ore was committed to
keeping in the Castle there. Here we found the Gabriell one of the Barks,
The arrival of the Gabriell at Bristow.
arrived in good safety, who having never a man within boorde very sufficient
to bring home the Ship, after the Master was lost, by good fortune, when
she came upon the coast, met with a Ship of Bristowe at Sea, who conducted
her in safety thither.

Here we heard good tidings also of the arrival of the other Bark called the
Michaell, in the North parts, The Michael arrived in the North parts.
which was not a little joyful unto us, that it pleased God so to bring us to
a safe meeting again, and lost in all the voyage only one man, besides one
that dyed at Sea, which was sick before he came aboorde, and was so desirous
to follow this enterprise, Only one man dyed in this voyage.
that he rather chose to dye therein, than not to be one to attempt so notable
a voyage.

FINIS.
The third voyage of Captain Frobisher, pretended for the discovery of
Cataya, by Meta Incognito. Anno Do. 1578.
THE General being returned from the second Uoyage, immediatlye after his
arriual in England, repaired with all have to the Court ^eeing the^ at Windsore,
to advertise her Majesty of his properous proc^eding, and good success in this
last voyage, and of the plenty of gold Ore, with other matters of importance
which he had in these Septentrionall parts dis^ouered. He was court^ously
enterteyned, and heartily w^lcomed of many noble men, but especially for his
great adventure, commended of her Majesty, at whose hands he received great
thanks, (...) co^m^nded of her Mai^s^ie.
and most gracious countenance, according to his deserts. Her Highness also
greatly commended the rest of the Gentlemen in this service, for their great
forwardnes in this so dangerous toyling and painful attempt: but especially
she praised and reioiced, The Gentlemen c^me^ded
that among them there was so good order of government, so good agreement,
every man so ready in his calling, to do whatsoever the General should
command, which due commendation graciously of her Majesty remembered, gave so
great encouragement to all the Captains and Gentlemen, that they, to continue
her highness so good and honorable opinion of them, have since neither spared
labor, limme, nor life, to bring this matter (so well begone) to a happy and
prosperous end. And finding, that the matter of the gold ore had appearaunce
and m^de show of great riches and profit, and the hope of ye passage to
CATAYA, by this last vo^age greatly increased, her Majesty appointed speci^l
Commissioners, chosen for this purpose^ Commissioners appointed ^o (...) the
goodness of ^he Ore.
Gentlemen of great judgment, art, and skill, to look thoroughly into ye cause,
for ye true trial and due examination thereof, and for the full handling of al
matters thereunto appertaining. And because that place and country, has never
heretofore bin dis^ouered, and therefore had no special name, by which it
might be called and known, her Majesty named it very properly Meta Incognita,
A name given to the place new discouer^d.
as a mark and bounds utterly hitherto unknown. The commisioners after
sufficient trial and proof made of ye Ore, and having understood by sundry
reasons, and substanciall grounds, the possibility and likelihoode of ye
passage, advertised her highness, yt the cause was of importance, and ye voyage
greatly worthy to be adua^ced again. Whereupon preparation was made of ships and
al other things necessary, with such e^pedition, as ye time of the year the^
required. And because it was assuredly made account of, yt the commodity of
Mines, there already discovered, would at yt least counterua^^e in all respects,
the adue^turers charge, and give further hope and likelihood of greter matters
to follow: it was thought needful, both for the better guard of those parts
already found, and for further discovery of the Inland and secreats of those
countries, The hope of the pas^age to Cataya.
and also for further search of ye passage to Cataya (wh^rof the hope
continually more and more encrease^h) that certain numbers of chose ^o^diers
and discreet men for those purposes should be as^ig^^d to inhabit there. (...)
Whereupon the^e was a s^r^ng ^or^^ or house of timber, artificially fr^med, and
^^^ingly devised by a notable learned man here at home, i^ ships to be carried
thither, whereby those me^ that were appointed there to winter and make their
abode ye whole year, might as well be defended from the danger of ye falling
snow and cold air, as also be fortified from the force or offen^e of those
Country people, which perhaps otherwise with too great co^pan^es and
multitudes might oppress them. And so this great aue^ture and notable
exploit, many well minded and ^orward yo^g Gentlemen of our country willingly
have offered t^emselues. And first Captain Fenton Lieu^^^^^t G^^^rall, for
Captain Frobysher, and in charge of the ^o^pany with him there, Captain
Bent, and Captai^e (...), unto whose good discretions the government of (...)
was chiefly commended, who, as men not rega^ding p^rill in respect of the
profit and common wealth of their Coun^rie, were willing to abide the f^^s^e
br^^nt and adu^nture o^ those dangers among a sau^ge and brutishe kind of
people, in a place hitherto ever thought ^or e^treme cold not habitable. The
whole number of men which had offered, and were appointed to inhabit Meta
Inc^gnita all the year, were one hundredth persons, A hundredth men appointed to
inhab^tn there,
whereof.^l. should be Mariners, for the use of ships.30. Miners, for
gathering the gold Ore together for the next year, and.3^. soldiers for the
better guarde of the rest, within which last number are included ye gentlemen,
Gold^iners, B^kers, Carpe^ters, and al other necessary persons. To oath of ye
Captains was assigned one ship, as well for the further searching of the coast
and country there, as for to return and bring back their companies again,
if the necessity of the place so urged, or b^ miscarying o^ the fleet in the
year following, they might be disappointed of their further provision.

Fifteen Sayle^
Being therefore thus furnished with all necessaries, there were ready to depart
upon the said voyage^ xv. Sail of good Ships, whereof the whole number was
to return again with their loading of gold Ore in the end of the Summer,
except those three Ships, which should be left for the use of those
Captains which should inhabit there the whole year. And being in so good
readynesse, the General, with all the Captains came to the Court, then lying
at Greenewich, to take their leave of her Majesty, at whose hands they all
received great encouragemente, and gracious countenance. Her Highness, besides
other good gifts, and greater promises, bestowed on the General a fair
Cheyne of Gold, A cheyne of gold ^iuen to ^robishe^.
and the rest of the Captains kissed her hand, took their leave, and
departed every man toward their charge.

The names of the Ships with their several Captains.
1 In the Aid being Admiral, was the General Captain Frobisher. 2 In the
Tho. Allen Viceadmirall Ca. York. 3 In the Judith Lieutena^t General Ca.
Fe^ton. 4 In the Anne Frances Cap^ayne Best. 5 In the Hopevvell Captain
Carevv. 6 In the Bear. Captain Filpot. 7 In the Thomas of Ipsvvich Cap.
Tanfield. 8 In the Emanuell of Exceter Ca. Courtney. 9 In the Frances of Foy
Captain Moyles. 10 In the Moon Captain Vpcot. 11 In the Ema. of Bridgevvater
Ca. Nevvton. 12 In the Salamo^ of Waymouth Ca. Randal. 13 In the Bark Dennis
Captain Kendall. 14 In ^he Gabriell Captain Haruey. 15 In the Michaell
Captain Kinnersley.
The said.xv. Sail of Ships arrived and met together at Harwitch, the
seven and twentieth day of May Anno.1578. where the General, and the other
Captains made view, and mustered their companyes. And every several Captain
received from the General certain Articles of direction, for the better
keeping of order and company together in the way, which Articles are as
follows.

Articles and orders to be observed for the Fleet, set down by Captain
Frobisher General, and delivered in writing to every Captain, as well for
keeping company, as for the course, the 31. of May.
1 IN primis, to banishe swearing, dice, and cardplaying, and filthy
communication, and to serve God twice a day, with the ordinary service,
usually in Churches of England, and to clear the glass, according to the old
order of England.

2 The Admiral shall carry the light, and after his light be once put out, no
man to go a head of him, but every man to fit his Sails to follow as near
as they may, without dangering one another.

3 That no man shall by day or by night depart further from the Admiral, than
the distance of one English Mile, and as near as they may, without danger
one of another.

4 If it chance to grow thick, and the wind contrary, either by day, or by
night, that the Admiral be forced to c^st about, before her casting about,
she shall give warning, by shoot^ng off a piece, and to him shall answer the
U^zeadmirall, and the Rereadmirall, with every one of them a piece, if it be by
night, or in a fogge, and that the Uizeadmiral shall answer ^irste, and the
Rereadmirall last.

5 That no man in the Fleet descrying any Sail or Sails, give upon any
occasion any chase, before he have spoken with the Admiral.

6 That every evening, all the Fleet come up and speak with the Admiral,
at seven of the Clock, or between that and eight, and if weather will not
serve them all to speak with the Admiral, then some shall come to the
Uizeadmirall, and receive your order of your course of Master Hall, chief
Pylot of the Fleet, as he shall direct you.

7 If to any man in the Fleet, there happen any mischa^ce, they shall
presently shoot off two pieces by day, and if it be by night, two pieces, and
show two lights.

8 If any man in ye Fleet come up in y^ night, and hale his fellow, knowing
him not, he shall give him this watchword, Before the world was God. The other
shall answer him, if he be one of our Fleet After God came Christ his Son.
So that if any be found amongst us, not of our own company, he that first
descryeth any such Sail or Sails, shall give warning to the Admiral by
himself, or any other that he can speak to that Sails, better than he, being
nearest unto him.

9 That every Ship in the Fleet, in the time of fogges, which continually
happen with little winds, and most part calmes, shall keep a reasonable
noise with Trumpet, Drum, or otherwise to keep themselves clear one of
another.

10 If it fall out thick or misty that we lay it to Hull, the Admiral shall
give warning by a piece, and pu^ting out three lights one over another, to the
end, that eu^ry man may take in his Sails, and at his setting of Sails
again do the like, if it be not clear.

11 If any man discover land by night, that he give the like warning, that he
does for mischances, two lights, and two pieces, if it be by day one piece,
and put out his slagge, and strike all his Sails he has aboorde.

12 If any Ship shall happen to lose company by force of weather, then any
such Ship or Ships, shall get her into the Latitude of..and so keep
that Latitude, until they get Freeselande. And after they be past the West
parts of Freeselande, they shall get them into the Latitude of..and..and not
to the Northwarde of.and being once entered within the straytes, all such
Ships shall every watch shoot off a good piece, and look out well for
smoke and fire, which those that get in first, shall make every night, until
all the Fleet be come together.

13 That upon the sight of an Ensign in the Mast of the Admiral, and a
piece shot of, the whole Fleet, shall repair to the Admiral, to understand
such conference, as the General is to have with them.

14 If we chance to meet with any enemies, that four Ships shall attend
upon the Admiral, viz. the Frances of Foy, the Moon, the Bark Dennis, and
the G^brie^^^ and four upon my Lieutenant general in the Judith, viz. the
Hopewell, the Armenall, the Bear, and the Solomon: and the other four upon
the Uizadmirall, the Anne Frances, the Thomas of Ipswich, the Emanuell, and the
Michaell.

15 If there happen any disordered person in the fleet, that he be taken and
kept in safe custody until he may conveniently be brought aboorde the
Admiral, and ther^ to receive such punishment as his or their offenses shall
deserve.

By me Martine Frobysher.
Our departure from England.
Having received these articles of direction, we departed from Harwich the one
and thirtith of May. And say^ing alongest the South parts of England westward,
we at length came by the coaste of Ireland, at Cape Clear the sixth of June,
and gave chase there to a small bark which was supposed to be a Pyrat, or
Rouer on the Seas, but it fell out in deed that they were poor men of
Bristowe, who had met with such company of Frenchmen, as had spoiled and
slain many of them, and left the rest so sore wounded, that they were like to
perish in the Sea, having neither hand, nor foot hole, to help themselves
withal, nor victuals to sustain their hungry bodies. Our General, who well
understands the office of a Souldioure, and an Englishman, and knows well
what the necessity of the sea means, pitying much ye misery of the poor
men, releiued them with Surgerie and salues, to heal their hurtes, and with
meat and drink to comfort their pining hearts. A charitable deed.
Some of them having neither eat nor drunck more than olives and stinking
water in many days before, (as they reported.) And after this good deed done,
having a large wind, we kept our course upon our sa^de voyage without
staying for the taking in of fresh water, or any other provision, whereof many
of the fleet were not thoroughly furnished, (and sailing toward the Northwest
parts, from Ireland, we met with a great current from out of the
Southwest, which carried us (by our reckning) one point to the Northestwardes
of our said course, which current seemed to us to continue it self toward
Norway, and other the Northeast parts of the World, whereby we may be induced
to believe, that this is the same which the Portugalles meet at Capo d'buona
speranza, Mark^ this Current.
where striking over from thence to the straytes of Magellanes, and finding no
passage there for the narrowness of the said straytes, runs along into
the great Bay of Mexico, where also having a let of land, it is forced to
strike back again toward the Northeast, as we not only here, but in
another place also, further to the Northwardes, by good experience this year
have found, as shall be hereafter in his place more at large declared.

Now had we sailed about fourteen days, without sight of any land, or any
other living thing, except certain Fowls, as Wylmots, Nodies, Gulles, etc.
which there seem only to live by Sea.

The twentieth of June, at two of the clock in the morning, the General
descryed land, and found it to be Weast Freeseland, now named Weast England.
Weast England.
Here the General, and other Gentlemen went ashore, being the first known
Christians that we have true notice of, that ever set foot upon that ground:
and therefore the General took possession thereof to the use of our Sovereign
Lady the Queens Majesty, and discovered here a goodly harborough for the
Ships, where were also certain little Boats of that Country. And being
there landed, they espied certain tents and people of that Country, which
were (as they judge) in all sorts, very like those of Meta Incognita, as by
their apparel, and other things which we found in their tents, appeared.

The savage and simple people, so soon as they perceived our men coming
toward them (supposing there had bin no other World, but theirs) fled
fearfully away, as men much amazed at so strange a sight, and creatures of
humane shape, so far in apparel, complexion, and other things different from
themselves. They left in their tents all their furniture ^or haste behind
them, where amongst other things were found a box of small nails, and
certain read Hearings, boordes of Fyrre tree well cut, with diverse other
things artificially wroughte, whereby it appears, that they have trade with
some civil people, or else are in deed themselves artificial workmen.

Our men brought away with them, only two of their Dogs, leaving in
recompense belles, looking-glasses, and diverse of our Country toys behind
them.

This Country no doubt, promises good hope of great commodity and riches,
if it may be well discovered. The description whereof you shall find more at
large in my second book, Page.5.

Some are of opinion, that this Weaste England is firm land with the
Northeast parts of Meta Incognita, or else with Groenlande. And their reason
is, because the people, apparel, boats, and other things, are so like to
theirs: and an other reason is, the multitude of Islands of Ise, which lay
between it and Meta Incognita, does argue, that on the North side there is a
b^y, why^h cannot be, but by co^ioyning of these two lands together.

And having a fair and large wind, we departed from thence toward
Frobyshers straites, the three and twentieth of June. But first we gave name to
a byghe clyffe in Weast England, the last that was in our sight, and for a
certain similitude, we called it Charing Cross. Charing Cross.
Then we bare Southerly toward the Sea, because to the Northwardes of this
coaste we met with much driving Ise, which by reason of the thick mistes
and weather might have bin some trouble unto us.

On Monday the last of June, we met with many great Whales, as they had
been Porposes. A Whale mo^e a ship.


This same day the Salamander being under both her corses and bonets, happened
to strike a gr^^te Whale with her ^ull stem, with such a blow, that the ship
stood still, and stirred neither forward nor backward. The Whale thereat made
a great and ugly noise, and cast up his body and tail, and so went under
water, and within two days after, there was found a great Whale dead
swimming above water, which we supposed was that the Salamander stroke.

The second day of July early in the morning, we had sight of the Queens
forelande, and bare in with the land all the day, and passing through great
quantity of Ise, by night were entered somewhat within the straites,
perceiving no way to pass further in, the whole place being fro^en over from
the one side to the other, and as it were with many walls, mountains, and
bulwarks of yse, choked up the passage, and denied us entrance. Frobishers
straites choked up with Ise.
And yet do I not think, that this passage or the Sea hereaboutes, is frosen
over at any time of the year: albeit it seemed so unto us, by the abundaunce
of Ise gathered together, which occupied the whole place. But I do rather,
suppose these Ise to be bredde in the hollow soundes and freshets
thereaboutes: which by the heat of the Summers Sun, being loosed, do
empty themselves with the ebbes into the Sea, and so gather in great abundance
there together.

And to speak somewhat here, of the auntiente opinion of the frosen Sea in
these parts: I do think it to be rather a bare conjecture of men, than
that ever any manne has made experience of any such Sea. And that which
they speak of Mare Glaciale, may be truly thought to be spoken of these
parts: for this may well be called in deed the ysie Sea, but not the frosen
Sea, for no Sea consisting of salt water ca^ be frosen, Salt water cannot
freese
as I have more at large herein showed my opinion in my second book page.6.
for it seems impossible for any Sea to be frosen, which has his course of
ebbing and flowing, especially in those places, where the tides do ebb and
flow above ten fad^me. And also all these aforesaid Ise, which we sometime
met a hundredth mile from land, being gathered out of the salt Sea, are in
taste fresh, and being dissolved, become sweet and wholesome water.

The cause why this year we have been more combred with Ise (than at other
times before) may be by reason of the Easterly and Southerly winds, which
brought us more timely thither now than we looked for. Which blowing from the
Sea directlye upon the place of our straites, has kept in the Ise, and not
suffered them to be carried out by the ebb to the maine Sea, where they would
in more short time have been dissolved. And all these fleeting Ise, are not
only so dangerous, in that they wind and gather so near together, that a
man may pass sometimes ten or twelve miles as it were upon one firm Island
of Ise: But also, for that they open and shut together again in such sort
with the tides and Sea-gate, that whilst one Ship follows the other with
full sails, the Ise which was open unto the foremoste, will join and close
together, before the latter can come to follow the first, whereby many times
our Ships were brought into great danger, as being not able so
sodainelye to take in our sails, or stay the swifte way of our Ships.

We were forced many times to stem and strike great rocks of Ise, and so
as it were make way through mighty mountains. By which means some of the
fleet, where they found the yse to open, entered in, and pas^ed so far
within the danger thereof, with continual desire to recover their port, that
it was the greatest wonder of the world, that they ever escaped safe, or were
ever heard of again. For even at this present, we missed two of the fleet,
that is, the Iudyth, wherein was the Lieuetenaunt general Captain Fenton, and
the Michael, whom both we suppoposed had been utterly lost, having not
heard any tidings of them, in more than twenty days before.

And one of our fleet named the Bark Dennys, Bar^ Den^is sunk.
being of an hundereth Tun burden, seeking way in amongst these Ise, received
such a blow with a rock of Ise, that she sunk down therewith, in the sight
of the whoale fleet. Howbeit having signified her danger by shooting of a
piece of great ordinance, new succor of other ships came so readily unto
them, that the men were al saved with boats.

Within this ship that was drowned, there was percell of our house, Part of
the house lost.
which was to be erected for them that should stay all the Winter in Meta
Incognita.

This was a more fearful spectacle for the Fleet to behold, for that the
outrageous storm, which presentlye followed, threatened them the like fortune
and danger. For the Fleet being thus compassed (as aforesaid) on every side
with Ise, having left much behind them, through which they had passed, and
finding more before them, through which it was not possible to pass, there
arose a sudden and terrible tempest at the Southeast, which blowing from the
main Sea, directlye upon the place of the straytes, brought together all the
Ise a seaborde of us, upon our backs, and thereby debarde as of turning back
to recover sea room again: so that being thus compassed with danger on every
side, sundry men with sundry devises, sought the best way to save
themselves. Some of the Ships, where they could find a place more clear of
Ise, and get a little berth of sea room, did take in their Sails, and there
lay adrift. Other some fastened and mored Ancker upon a great Island of Ise, and
road under the ^ee thereof, supposing to be better guarded thereby, from the
outrageous winds, and the danger of the lesser fleeting Ise. And again some
were so fast shut up, and compassed in amongst an infinite number of great
Countries and Islands of Ise, that they were feign to submit themselves, and
their Ships, to the mercy of the unmerciful Ise, and strengthened the sides of
their Ships with iunckes of cables, beds, Mastes, planckes, and such like,
which being hanged ouerboord, on the sides of their Ships, might the better
defend them from the outrageous sway and strokes of the said Ise. But as in
greatest distress, men of best value are best to be discerned, so it is
greatly worthy commendation and noting, with what invincible mind every
Captain encouraged his company, and with what incredible labor, the paynefull
Mariners, and poor Miners (unacquainted with such extremities) to the
everlasting renown of our nation, did overcome the brunt of these so great
and extreme dangers: for some, even without boorde upon the Ise, and some
within boorde, upon the sides of their Ships, having poles, pikes, pieces of
timber, and Ores in their hands, stood almost day and night, without any
rest, bearing off the force, and breaking the sway of the Ise, with such
incredible pain and peril, that it was wonderful to behold, which otherwise
no doubt had stricken quite through and through the sides of their Ships,
notwithstanding our former provision: for planckes of timber, of more than
three inches thick, and other things of greater force and bigness, by the
surging of the Sea, and billowe, with the Ise, were sheuered, and cut in
sunder, at the sides of our Ships, that it will seem more than credible to
be reported of. And yet (that which is more) it is faithfully and plainly to
be proved, and that by many substantial witnesses, that our Ships, even
those of greatest burdens, with the meeting of contrary waves of the Sea, were
heaued up between Islands of Ise, a foot welneere out of the Sea, above their
watermarke, having their knees and timbers within boorde, both bowed, and
broken therewith.

And amidst these extremes, whilst some labored for defense of the Ships,
and sought to save their bodies: othersome of more mylder spirit, sought to
save the Soul by devout Prayer and mediation to the Almighty, thinking
indeed by no other means possible, than by a divine Miracle, to have their
deliverance: so that there was none, that were either idle, or not well
occupied, and he that held himself in best security, had (God knows) but
only bare hope remaining for his best safety.

Thus all the gallant Fleet, and miserable men, without hope of ever getting
forth again, distressed with these extremities, remained here all the whole
night, and part of the ne^t day, excepting four Ships, that is, the Anne
Frances, the Moon, the Frances of Foy, and the Gabriell, which being somewhat
a Seaboorde of the Fleet, and being fast Ships, by a wind, having a more
scope of clear, tried it out all the time of the storm, under Sail, being
hardly able to bear a coast of each.

And albeit, by reason of the fleeting Ise, which were dispersed here almost
the whole Sea over, they were brought many times to the extremest point of
peril, Mountains of Ise ten thousand times scaping them scarce one ynch,
which to have stricken, had bin their present destruction, considering the
swifte course and way of the Ships, and the vnwildynesse of them to stay and
turn as a man would wish. Yet they esteemed it their better safety, with such
peril to seek Searome, tha^ without hope of ever getting liberty, to lie
striving against ye strea^e, and beating amongst the Isie Mountains, whose
hugeness, and monstrous greatness was such, that no man would c^e^ite, but
such as to their pains saw and felt it. And these four Ships by the next
day at noone, got out to Sea, and were first clear of the Ise, who now
enio^ing their own liberty, began a new to sorrow and fear for their
fellows safeties. And deuoutely kneeling about their main Mast, gave unto
God humble thanks, not only for themselves, but besoughte him likewise highly
for their friends deliverance. And even now, whilst amiddest these
extremities, this gallante Fleet and valiant men were altogether ouerlaboured,
and forewatched, with the long and fearful continuance of the foresaid
dangers, it pleased God with his eyes of mercy to look down from Heaven, to
send them help in good time, giving them the next day a more favorable wind
at the West Northweast, which did not only disperse and drive forth the Ise
before them, but also gave them liberty of more scope and Sea room, and were
by night of the day following perceived of the other four Ships, where to
their greatest comfort they enjoyed again the fellowship of one another. Some
in mending the sides of their Ships, some in setting up their top Mastes,
and mending their Sails and tacklings. Again, some complaining of their false
Stem borne away, some in stopping their Leakes, some in recounting their
dangers past, spent no small time and labor, that I dare well auouche, there
were never men more daungerously distressed, nor more mercifully by Gods
Providence delivered. And hereof both the torn Ships, and the forweeryed
bodies of the men arrived, do bear most euidente mark and witness. And now
the whole Fleet plied off to Seaward, resolving there to abide, until the
Sun might consume (or the force of wind disperse) these Ise from the place of
their passage: and being a good berth off the shore, they took in their Sails,
and lay adrift.

The seventh of July, as men nothing yet dismayed, we cast about toward the
inward, and had sight of land, which rose in form like the Northerland of the
straytes, Another assault^
which some of the Fleet, and those not the worst Mariners, judged to be the
North forlande: howbeit, othersome were of contrary opinion. But the matter was
not well to be discerned, by reason of the thick fogge, which a long time
hung upon the coast, Fogge, snow, and mi^^es hinder the Mariners marks.
and the new falling Snow which yearly alters the shape of the land, and
takes away oftentimes the Mariners marks. And by reason of the dark mistes,
which continued by the space of twenty days together, this doubt grew the
greater and the longer perilous. For whereas indeed we thought our selves to
be upon the Northeast side of Frobishers straytes, we were now carried to the
Southweastwards of the Queens forlande, and being deceived by a swift Current
coming from the Northeast, were brought to the Southweastwardes of our said
course, many miles more than we did think possible could come to pass. The
cause whereof we have since found, and shall be at large hereafter declared.

Here we made a point of land, which some mistook for a place in the
straytes, called Mount Warwick: but how we should be so far shot up so
suddaynely within the said straytes, the expertest Mariners began to marvel,
thinking it a thing impossible, that they could be so far overtaken in their
accomptes, or that any Current could so deceive them here, A Currant^
which they had not by former experience proved and found out. Howbeit, many
confessed, that they found a swifter course of flood than before time they had
observed. And truly it was wonderful to hear and see the rushling and noise
that the tides do make in this place with so violente a force, that our
Ships lying ahull, were turned sometimes round about even in a momente,
after the manner of a whirlepoole, and the noise of the stream no less to be
heard a far off, than the waterfall of London Bridge.

But whilst the Fleet lay thus doubtful amongst great store of Ise in a
place they knew not, without sight of sun, whereby to take the height, and
so to know the true elevation of the pole, and without any clear of light to
make perfect the coast, the General with the Captains and Masters of his
Ships, began doubtfully to question of the matter, and sent his Pinnesse
aboorde to hear each man's opinion, and specially of James Bear, James Bear a
good Mariner.
Master of the Anne Frances, who was known to be a sufficient and skilful
Mariner, and having bin there the year before, had well observed the place,
and drawn out Cards of the coast. But the rather this matter grew the more
doubtful, for that Christopher H^ll chief Pylot of the voyage, Christopher
Hall chief Pylot.
delivered a plain and public opinion in the hearing of the whole Fleet,
that he had never seen the foresaid coast before, and that he could not make
it for any place of Frobishers straytes, as some of the Fleet supposed, and
yet the lands do lie and trend so like, that the best Mariners therein may be
deceived.

The tenth of July, the weather still continuing thick and dark, some of the
Ships in the fogge lost sight of the Admiral and the rest of the Fleet,
and wandering too and fro, with doubtful opinion whether it were best to seek
back again to seaward through great store of Ise, or to follow on a doubtful
course in a Sea, bay, or straytes they knew not, or along a coast, whereof by
reason of the dark mistes they could not discern the dangers, if by chance
any Rock or broken ground should lie of the place, as commonly in these parts
it does.

The Uizeadmirall Captain York considering the foresaid opinion of the Pylot
Hall, who was with him in the Thomas Allen, having lost sight of the Fleet,
turned back to Sea again, having two other Ships in company with him.

Also the Captain of the Anne Fraunces having likewise lost company of the
Fleet, and being all alone, held it for best to turn it out to Sea again,
until they might have clear weather to take the Suns Altitude, and with
incredible pain and peril got out of the doubtful place, into the open Sea
again, being so narrowly distressed by the way, by means of continual fogge
and Ise, that they were many times ready to leap upon an Island of Ise, to
avoid the present danger, and so hopyng to prolong life a while, meante
rather to dye a pining death.

Some hoped to save themselves on chestes, and some determined to tie the
Hatches of the Ships fast together, Hard shifts to save men's lives.
and to bind themselves with their furniture fast thereunto, and so to be
towed with the Shippeboate ashore, which otherwise could not receive half of
the company, by which means if happily they had arrived, they should
either have perished for lack of food to eat, or else should themselves
have been eaten of those ravenous, bloudye, and Man eating people.

The rest of the Fleet following the course of the General which led them
the way, passed up above.60. Leagues within the said doubtful and supposed
straytes, having always a fair continente upon their starreboorde side, and
a continuance still of an open Sea before them.

The General albeit with the first perchance he found out the error, and that
this was not the old straytes, yet he persuaded the Fleet always that they
were in their right course, and known straytes. Mistaken straytes.
Howbeit I suppose he rather dissembled his opinion therein, than otherwise,
meaning by that policy (being himself led with an honorable desire of
further discovery) to enduce ye fleet to follow him to see a further proof
of that place. And as some of the company reported, he has since confessed,
that if it had not bin for the charge and care he had of ye Fleet, and
fraughted Ships, he both would and could have gone through to the South Sea,
called Mare del Sur, and dissolved the long doubt of the passage which we seek
to find to the rich Country of Cataya. Pr^bisher could ^aue passed to Cataya.


1 Of which mistaken straytes, considering the circumstance, we have great
cause to confirm our opinion, to like and hope well of the passage in this
place. For the foresaid bay or Sea, the further we sailed therein, the wyder
we found it, Fair open way.
with great likelyhoode of endless continuance. And where in other places we
were much troubled with Ise, as in the entrance of the same, Reasons to prove
a passage here.
so after we had sailed 50. or.60. leagues therein, we had no let of Ise, or
other thing at all, as in other places we found.

2 Also this place seems to have a marvelous great indraft, and draws
unto it most of the drift yse, and other things, Great indraftes.
which do fleet in the Sea, either to the North, or Eastwardes of the same, as
by good experience we have found.

3 For here also we met with boordes, latthes, and diverse other things
driving in the Sea, which was of the wrack of the ship called the Bark
Dennys, which perished amongst the Ise, as beforesaid, Current.
being lost at the first attempt of the entrance overthwart the Queens
foreland, in the mouth of Frobishers straytes, which could by no means have
bin so brought thither, neither by wind nor tide, being lost so many leagues
off, if by force of the said Current the same had not bin violently brought.
For if the same had bin brought thither by the tide of fludde, look how
far in the said fludde had carried it, the ebb would have recaryed it as
far back again, and by the wind it could not so come to pass, because it
was then sometime calm, and most times contrary.

And some Mariners do affirm, that they have diligently observed, Nine
hours (...) to (...) ho^res eb^e^.
yt there runs in this place nine hours flood to three ebb, which may thus
come to pass^ by (...) o^ the said current: for whereas the Sea in most places
o^ the world, does more or less ordinarily ebb and flow once every twe^ue
hours, with six hours ebb, and si^e hours flood, so also would it do
there, were it not for the violen^e of this hastening current, which forces the
^loud to m^ke appearance to begin before his ordinary time one hour and a
half, and also to continue longer than his natural course by an other hour
and a half, ^ntil the fo^ce of the ebb be so great, that it will no longer
b^ resisted (according to the saying: Naturam expellas furca li^^t ^^men vsq
recurrit, Although nature and n^turall courses be forced and resisted never so
much, yet at l^ste it will have their own sway ^ga^ne.)

Moreover, it is not possible, that so great course of floods and current, so
high swelling tides with continuance of so deep waters, can be digested here
without vnburdening themselves into some open Sea beyond th^s place, which
argues the more likelihood of the pass^ge to be hereaboutes. Also we suppose
these great indrafts do grow, and are made by the reue^beration and reflection
of that same Current, which at our coming by Irelande, met and crossed us,
of which in the first part of this discourse I spoke, which coming from
the bay of Mexico, passing by, and washing the Southweast parts of Ireland,
rebou^deth over to the Northest parts of the world, as Norway, Islande. etc.
where not finding any passage to an open Sea, but rather is there increased by
a new access, and another Current meeeting with it from ye Scythian Sea,
passing the bay of Saint Nicholas Westwarde, does once again rebound back,
by the coasts of Groenland, and from thence upon Frobishers straites being to
the Southwestwardes of the same.

5 And if that principle of Philosophy be true, The sea moves from East to
Oest continuallye.
that Inferiora corpora reguntur a superioribus, that is, if inferior bodies be
governed, ruled, and carried after the manner and course of the superiors, the^
the water being an inferior Element, must needs be governed after the
superior Heaven, and so to follow the course of Primum mobile from East to
Weast.

Authority.
6 But every man that has written or considered any thing of this passage,
has more doubted the return by the same way, by reason of a great downfall
of water, which they imagine to be thereaboutes (which we also by experience
partly find) than any mistruste they have of the same passage at all. For we
find (as it were) a great downfall in this place, but yet not such, but that
we may return, although with much ado. For we were easilyer carried in in one
hour, than we could get forth again in three. Also by an other experience
at an other time, we found this current to deceive us in this sort: Hard, but
yet possible turning back again.
That whereas we supposed to be 15. leagues off, and lying a hull, we were
brought within.2. leagues of the shore, contrary to al expectation.

Our men that sailed furthest in the same mistaken straites, (having the
maine land upon their starboorde side) affirm, that they met with the
outlet or passage of water which comes through Frobyshers straites, and
follows as all one into this passage.

Some of our company also affirm, that they had sight of a contine^t upon
their larbordside, being.60. leagues within the supposed straites: howbeit
except certain Islands in the entrance hereof, we could make no part perfect
thereof. All the foresaid tract of land seems to be more fruitful and better
stored of Grass, Dear, Wild foul, as Partridges, Larkes, Seamews, Guls,
Wilmots, Falco^s and tassell Gentiles, Ravens, Bears, Hares, Foxes, and other
things, than any other part we have yet discovered, and is more populous. And
here Luke Ward, a Gentleman of ye company, traded merchandise, and did exchange
knives, bells, looking glasses. etc. with those country people, Traffic.
who brought him foul, fish, bears skins, and such like, as their
country yields for the same. Here also they saw of those greater boats of
the Country, with twenty persons in a piece.

Now, after the General had bestowed these many days here, not without
many dangers, he returned back again. And by the way sailing alongest this
coaste (being the backeside of the supposed continent of America) and the
Queens forelande, he perceived a great sound to go through into Frobyshers
straites. Whereupon he sent the Gabriell the one and twentieth of July,
Return out of t^^ mistaken s^raites.
to prove whether they might go through and meet again with him in the
straites, which they did, and as we imagined before, so the Queens forelande
proved an Island, as I think most of these supposed continentes will. And so
he departed toward the straites, thinking it were high time now to recover
his Port, and to provide the fleet of their lading, whereof he was not a
little careful, as shall by the process and his resolute attempts appear.
And in his return with the rest of the fleet, he was so entangled, by reason
of the dark fogge, amongst a number of Islands and broken ground that lies
of this coast, that many of the ships came over the top of rocks, which
presently after they might perc^iue to ly a dry, having not half a foot
water more than some of their ships did draw. And by reason they could not
with a small gale of wind stem the force of ye flood, whereby to go clear of ye
rocks, they were feign to let an ancker fall with two bent of Cable together,
at a.C. and odd fadome deapth, where otherwise they had bin by the force of
the tides carried upon ye rocks again, and perished: so that if God in these
fortunes, as a merciful guide, Great dangers.
(beyond ye expectation of man) had not carried us through, we had surely more
than.x. M. times perished amiddest these dangers. For being many times driven
hard aboorde the shore without any sight of land, until we were ready to
make shipwreck thereon, heeyng forced commonly with our boats, to sound
before our ships, least we might light thereon before we could discern
the same. It pleased God to give us a clear of Sun and light for a short
time, to see and avoid thereby the danger, having bin continuallye dark
before, and presently after. Many times also by means of fogge and currants,
being driven near upon the coaste, God lent us even at the very pintch one
prosperous breath of wind or other, whereby to double the land, and avoid the
peril, and when that we were all without hope of help, every man
recommending himself to death, and crying out, Lord now he^pe or never: now
Lord look down from Heaven and save us sinners, or else our safety comes
too late: even then the mighty maker of Heaven, and our merciful God, did
deliver us: so that they who have bin partakers of these dangers, do even in
their souls confess, that God eue^ by miracle has sought to save them,
whose name be praised evermore.

Long time now the Anne Frances had layne beating off and on all alone, before
the Queens forelande, not being able to recover their Port for Ise, albeit
many times they daungerously attempted it, for yet the Ise choked up the
passage, and would not suffer them to enter. And haueng never seen any of the
fleet since twenty days past, when by reason of the thick mistes they were
severed in the mistaken straites, Anne F^aun^^e^ met ^ith some of ^he ^^ee^e^.
did now this present three and twe^^^th of July overthwart a place in the
straites called Hattons Hedland, where they met with seven ships of the
Fleet again, which good hap did not only rejoice them, for themselves, in
respect of the comfort which they received by such good company, but
especially, that by this means they were put out of doubt of their dear
friends, whose safeties long time they did not a little suspecte and fear.

At their meeting they haled the Admiral after the manner of the Sea, and with
great joy welcomed one an other with a thundering voly of shot. And now every
man decla^ed at large the fortunes and dangers, which they had pass^d.

The four and twenti^h of July we met with the Frances of Foy, Fraunces of
Foy.
who with much ado s^ughte way back again through the yse from out of the
mistaken straites, where to their great peril, they proved to recover their
Port. They brought the first news of the Uizeadmirall Captain Yo^ke, who
many days with themselves, and the Busse of Bridgewater was missing.
Bri^gewater Ship.
They reported that they left the Uizeadmiral reasonably clear of the Ise,
but the other ship they greatly ^eared, whom they could not come to help,
being themselves so hardly distressed, as never men more. Also they told us of
of the Gabriel, who having got through from the backside, and Wester point of
the Queens forelande, into Frobyshers straites, fell into their company about
the Cape of Good hope.

And upon the seven and twentieth of Iulye, the ship of Bridgewater got out
of the Ise, and met with the fleet which lay off and on under Hattons
Hedland. They reported of their marvelous accidents and dangers, declaring
their Ship to be so leake, that they must of necessity seek harborowe,
having their stem beaten within their huddings, that they had much ado to
keep themselves above water. They had (as they say) five hundredth strokes at
the poupe in less than half a watch, being scarce two hours. Their men
being so ouer-weari^d therewith, and with the former dangers, that they desired
help of men from the other Ships. Moreover, they declared, that there was
nothing but Ise and Danger, where they had bin, and that the straites within
was frosen up, And that it was the most impossible thing of the world, to
pass up unto the Countess of Warwickes sound, Straightes f^osen over.
which was the place of our Port.

The report of these dangers by these Ships thus published amongst the
Fleet, with the remembrance of the perilles paste, and those present before
their face, brought no small fear and terror into the hearts of many
considerate men. So that some began privily to murmr against the General
for this wilful manner of proceeding. Some desired to discover some harborowe
thereaboutes, to refreshe themselves, and reform their broken vessels for a
while, until the North and Northwest winds might disperse the Ise, and make
the place more free to pass. Other some forgetting themselves, spoke more
undutifully in this behalf, saying: that they had as leeue be hanged when
they came home, as without hope of safety, to seek to pass, and so to
perish amongst the Ise.

The General not opening his ears to the peeuishe passion of any private
person, but chiefly caryng for the public profit of his Countries cause, and
nothing at all regardyng his own ease, life, or safety, but especially
respecting the accomplishement of the cause he had undertaken, (wherein the
chief reputation and fame of a General and Captain consists,) and calling
to his remembrance the short time he had in hand, A valiant mind of
F^ob^sher.
to provide so great number of Ships their loading, determined with this
resolution, to pass and recover his Port, or else there to bury himself with
his attempt, and if such extremity so befell him, that he must needs
perish amongst the Ise, when all help should be paste, and all hope of
safety set aside, having all the ordinance within boorde well charged,
resolved with powder to burn and bury himse^fe and all together with her
Majesty's Ships. And with this peale of ordinance, to receive an honorable
knell, in steed of a better burial, esteeming it more happy so to end his
life, rather than himself, or any of his company or any one of her
Majesty's Ships should become a pray or spectacle to those base bloudye and
man eating people.

Notwithstanding, somewhat to appease the feeble passions of the fearefuller
sort, and the better to entertain time for a season, whilst the Ise might
the better be dissolved, he haled on the Fleet, with belief, that he would
put into harborowe: therevppon whilst the Sheppes lay off and on, under
Hattons Hedlande, he sought in with his Pynnesses amongst the Islands there,
as though he meant to search for harborowe, where in deed he meant nothing
less, but rather sought if any Ore might be sound in that place, as by the
sequel appeared.

In the mean time, whilst the Fleet lay thus doubtful without any
certain resolution what to do, being hard aboorde the ^eeshoare, there
arose a sudden and terrible tempest at the Southsouthest, whereby the Ise
began maruellouslye to gather about us.

Whereupon every manne, as in such case of extreamitie he thought best,
sought the wisest way for his own safety. The most part of the Fleet
which were further shot up within the straites, and so far to the
leewarde, as that they could not double the land, following the course of the
General, who led the^ the way, took in their Sails, and laid it a hull
amongst the Ise, and so passed over the storm, and had no extreamitie at
all, but for a short time in the same place.

Howbeit the other Ships which plied out to Seawarde, had an extreme
storm for a longer season. And the nature of the place is such, that it is
subject diversely to diverse winds, according to the sundry situation of the
great Alps and mountains there, every mountain causing a several blaste,
and pirrie, after the manner of a Leuant

In this storm being the six and twentieth of July, there fell so much snow,
with such b^tter cold air, that we could not scarce ^ee one another for the
same, Snow in I^ly.
nor open ^ure eyes to handle our ropes and sails, the snow being above half
a f^ote deep upon the hatches of our ship, which did so wette ^horowe our
poor Mariners clothes, that he that had five or six shifte of apparel,
had scarce one dry threede to his back, which kind of wette and
coldenesse, together with ^he ouer-labouring of the poor men amiddest the
Ise, bred no small sickness amongst the Fleet, which somewhat discouraged
some of the poor men, who h^dde not exp^^ience of the like before, every man
persuading himself, that the winter there must needs be extreme, where they be
found so unseasonable a Summer. E^^reame (...).


G^^at heat in (...).
And yet notwythstandyng this cold air, the Sun many times has a marvelous
force of heat amongst those mountains, insomuche, that when there is no breath
of wind to bring ye cold air from ye dispersed Ise upon us, we shall be weary
of the bloming heat, and then suddenly with a perry of wind which comes
down from ye hollownes of ye hills, Unconstant weather.
we shall have such a breath of heat brought upon our face, as though we were
entered within some bastow or hote-house, and when the first of the pirry and
blast is past, we shall have the wind suddenly anew blow cold again.

In this storm the Anne Fraunces, the Moon, and the Thom^^ of Ipswich, who
found themselves able to hold it up with a S^yle, and could double about
the Cape of the Queens forelande, plied out to Sea-warde, holding it for
better policy and safety, to seek Sea room, than to hazard the
continuance of the storm, the danger of the Ise and the leeshoare.

And being uncertain at this time of the Generalles private ^eterminations,
the weather being so dark, that they could not discern one another, nor
perceive wh^che wa^e he wrought, betook themselves to this course ^or best and
saf^st.

The General notwithstanding the great storm, following his own former
reso^ution, sought by all means possible, by a shorter way, to recover his
Port, and where he saw the Ise never so little open, he gat in at one gappe,
and out at another, and so himself valiantly led the way through before, to
induce ye Fleet to follow after, and with incredible pain and peril, at
length gat through the I^e, and upon the one and thirtith of July recovered his
long wished Port after many attemptes, The General recouereth his port.
and sundry times being put back, and came to Ancker in the Countess of
Warwickes sound, in the entrance whereof, when he thought all peril past, he
encountered a great Island of Ise, which gave the Aid such a blow, having a
little before wayed her Ancker a cock bill, that it stroke the Ancker flouke
through the Ships bows under the water, which caused so great a leake, that
with much add they preserved the Ship from sincking.

At their ariuall here, they perceived two Ships at Ancker within the
harborough, whereat they began much to marvel, and greatly to rejoice, ^or
those they knew to be the Michaell, wherein was the Lieutenante general
Captain Fenton, and the small Bark called the Gabriell, who so long time were
missing, and never heard of before, whom every man made the last reckning,
never to hear of again.

Here every man greatly reioysed of their happy meeting, and welcomed one
another after the Sea manner, with their great Ordinance, and when each party
had reaped up their sundry fortunes and perils past, they highlye praised
God, and altogether upon their knees gave him due, humble and hearty thanckes,
and Marster Wolfall a learned man, Master Wolfall Preacher.
appointed by her Majesty's Council to be their Minister and Preacher, made
unto them a godly Sermon, exhorting them especially to be thankful to God for
their strange and miraculous deliverance in those so dangerous places, and
putting them in mind of the uncertainty of man's life, willed them to make
themselves always ready, as resolute men, to enjoy and accept thankefully
whatsoever adventure his divine Providence should appoint. This Master Wolfall
being well seated and settled at home in his own Country, with a good and
large living, having a good honest woman to wife, and very towardly Children,
being of good reputation among the best, refused not to take in hand this
paynefull voyage, for the only care he had to save Soul^s, and to reform those
Infidels, if it were possible, to Christianity: and also partly for the great
desire he had that this notable voyage so well begun, might be brought to
perfection: and therefore he was contented to stay there the whole year, if
occasion had served, being in every necessary action as forward, as the
resolutest men of all. Whefore in this behalf he may rightly be called a true
Pastor and minister of Gods word, which for the profit of his flock, spared
not to venture his own life.

But to return again to Captain Fentons company, and to speak somewhat of
their dangers (albeit they be more than by writing can be expressed.) They
reported, The adventures of captain Fenton and his company.
that from the night of the first storm, which was about the first day of
July, until seven days before the Generalles arrival, which was the six
and twentieth of the same, they never saw any one day or hour, wherein they
were not troubled with continual danger and fear of death, and were twenty
days almost together fast amongst the Ise. They had their Ship stricken
through and through on both sides, their false stem borne quite away,
Extremity causes men to devise new ar^^s and remedies.
and could go from their Ships in some places upon the Ise very many miles,
and might easily have passed from one Island of Ise to another, even to the
shore, and if God had not wonderfully provided for them, and their necessity,
and time had not made the^ more cunning and wise to seek strange remedies for
strange kinds of dangers, it had bin impossible for them ever to have escaped:
for among other devises, wheresoever they found any Island of Ise of greater
bigness than the rest (as there be some of more tha^ half a mile compass
about, and almost.400. fadome high) they commonly coueted to recover the same,
and thereof to make a bulwark for their defense, whereon having more^ Ancker,
they road under the lee thereof for a time, being thereby guarded from ye
danger of the lesser driving Ise. But when they must needs forgo this new
found forte, by means of other Ise, which at length would undermine, and
compass them round about, and when that by heauing of the billow they were
therewith like to be bruised in pieces, Hard shifts.
they used to make fast the Ship unto the most firm and broad piece of Ise
they could find, and binding her nose fast thereunto, would fill all their
Sails, whereon the wind having great power, would force forward the Ship, and
so the Ship bearing before her the yse, and so one yse driving forward another,
should at length get scope and searoome. And having by this means at length
put their enemies to slight, occupied the clear place for a pretty season,
among sundry Mountains, and Alps of Ise. One there was found by measure to
be.65. fadome above water, which for a kind of similitude, was called Salomons
porch. Some think those Islands eight times so much under water, as they are
above, because of their monstrous weight. But now I remember. I saw very
strange wonders, men walking, running, leaping, and shoting upon the maine
seas.40 miles from any land, without any Ship or other vessel under them.
Strange wonders,
Also I saw fresh Rivers running amidst the salt Sea a hundred mile from land,
which if any man will not believe, let him know that many of our company lept
out of their Ship upon Islands of Ise, and running there up and down, did
shoot at buttes upon the Ise, and with their Caliuers did kill great Ceales,
whic^e v^e to lie and sleep upon the Ise, and th^s Ise melting above at the
top by re^lection of the Sun, came down in sundry streams, which
uniting together, made a pretty brook able to drive a Mill.

The said Captain Fenton recovered his Port ten days before any man, and
spente good time in searchyng for mine, and found good store thereof, which
because it proved good, was after called Fentons Fortune. He also discovered
about ten Miles up into the Country, where he perceived neither Town,
Uillage, nor likelyhode of habitati^n, but seems (as he says) barrennous as
the other parts which as yet we have entered upon: but their victuals and
provision went so scante with them, that they had determined to return
homeward within seven days after, if the Fleet had not then arrived.

The General after his arriual in the Cou^tesses sound, spent no time in
vain, but immediately at his first la^ding, called the chief Captains of his
Council together, and consulted with them for the speedier execution of such
things as then they had in hand. As first, for searching and finding out good
Mineral for the Miners to be occupied on. Then to give good orders to be
observed of the whole company on shore. And lastly, to consider for the
erecting up the Forte and House for the use of them which were to abide there
the whole year. For the better handling of these, and all other like important
causes in this service, it was ordained from her Majesty and the Council,
that the General should call unto him certain of the chief Captains and
Gentlemen in council, to co^ferre, consult, and determine of al occurre^ts in
this service, whose names are here as follow. Captain Fenton. Captain York.
Captain Best. Captain Carew. Captain Philpot.
And in Sea causes ^o have as assistants, Christopher H^l, and C^arles Iackma^,
^eing both very goo^ Pylo^s, (...)ficient Mariners, whe^eof ^he one was chi^f^
Pylot of ^he voyage, and the other for the discovery. From the place o^ our
habitation weastward, Master Selm^n was appointed Notarie, to register the
whole manner of proceeding ^n these affairs, that true relation thereof might
be made, i^ it pleased her Mai^stie to require it.

The first of August every Captain by order, from the General and his
counsel, was commanded to bring ashore unto the Coun^esses Island, al such
g^ntlemen, soul^iou^s, and Myners, as were under their charge, with such^
provision as they had of victuals, tents, and things necessary for the speedy
getting together of Mine, and fraught for the ships.

The Muster of the men being taken, and the victuals with all other things
viewed and considered, every man was set to his charge, as his place and office
required. The Myners were appointed where to work, and the Mariners discharged
their ships.

Upon the second of August, was published and proclaimed, upon the Countess
of Warwickes Island, with sound of Trumpet, certain orders by the general and
his counsel, appointed to be observed of the company, during the time of their
abiding there. The copy whereof here follows.

Orders set down by M. Frobisher Esquire, Captain General for the voyage to
Cataya, to be observed of the company, during the tim^ of their abode in Meta
Incognit^. P^bl^shed the second day of August. Anno.1578.
1 IN primis, the General in her Majesty's name, straightly charge and
commands, that no person or persons, with Boat nor Pinnesse, shall go
ashoare, for any cause, but to the Countess of Warwickes Island, and Winters
Furnace, without license of the general, or his deputies. And if they fortune
at any time, having license, to meet with any of the Country people, that
they shall not enter into any conference or arms with them, until they have
given intelligence thereof to the General or his Lieutenaunt.

2 Item that no person of what calling soever he be, shall make an assay of any
manner of metal, matter, or Ore, in ye parts now called Meta Incognita, but
only such as shall be appointed by the General, or in his absence by his
Lieutenaunt, to do the same: nor that any person shall take up and keep to
his private use, any part or parcel of Ore, precious stone, or other matter
of commodity to be had or found in that land, but he the said person, so
seized of such Ore, stone, or other matter of commodity, shall with all speed,
as soon as he can, detect the same, and make delivery thereof to the
General, or his Lieuetenaunt General, upon pain to forfaite for every
such ounce thereof, the value treble of any wages he is to receive, after the
day of such offense committed: And further, to receive such punishmente as to
her Majesty shall seem good.

3 Item that no ship or ships, shall take upon them to load any manner of
Ore, without license of the General, or he that shall be appointed deputy for
him, for ye view of the same.

4 Item that all the Masters of every ship or ships within the Fleet,
shall upon Mundaye next coming, by four of the clock in the morning, with all
the most part of their companies, make their repair to the Countesses Island
aforesaid, there to view and make such places, for loading and unloading of
Ore and other things, as shall be most commodious and meet for that purpose.

5 Item that no person or persons within this service, by sea or l^nde, shall
use any discovered speeches, swearyng, brauling, or cursing, upon pain of
imprysonmente.

6 Item that no person or persons, either by Sea or land, shall draw his or
their weapons in quarrellyng manner, to the intent to offend or disturb the
quiet of any person or persons within this service, upon pain that being so
taken, he or they whatsoever, immediately to loose his right hand.

7 Item that no person or persons, shall wash their hands or any other
things, in the Spring, upon the Countesses Island, where the water is used,
and preserved for the dressing of their victuals, upon pain to receive such
punishmente as shall be thought good, by the general or his Lieutenaunte, for
the same. And for the better preservation and health of every manne, that no
person or persons shall do his easemente but under the cliffes where the Sea
may wash the same away upon pain that every one so offending, for the
first time shall be imprisoned in the billow fourteen hours, and for the
second time being so taken by the prouest Martial, to pay twelve pens.

8 Item, that no person or persons of what nature or condition soever, shall
cast out of their ship or ships, any ballast or rubbish, into the road,
where these ships now rydeth, or may conveniently ride, within this sound,
that thereby the same sound or road stead may be impared, but shall carry
the same, and lay it where it may not offend. Upon pain that every man so
offending, the owner of such ship or ships, shall forfaite the fraught of
one tun.

By me Martyn Frobisher.
IN the mean time, whylest the Mariners plied their work, ye Captains sought
out new Mines, the Goldfiners made trial of the Ore, the Mariners discharged
their ships, the Gentlemen for example sake labored heartily, and honestlye
encouraged the inferior sort to work. So that small time of that little
leisure, that was lest to tarry, was spent in vain.

The second of August, the Gabriel arrived, who came from the Uizeadmirall, and
being distressed sore with yse, put into harborrow near unto Mount Oxford. And
now was the wheale Fleet arrived safely at their port, excepting four,
besides the ship that was lost: that is, the Thomas Allen, the Anne Frances,
the Thomas of Ipswich, and the Moon, whose abse^ce was some let unto the works
and other proceedings, as well for that these ships were furnished with the
better sort of Myners and other provision for the habitation.

The ninth of August, the General with the Captains of his counsel assembled
together, began to consider and take order for the erecting up of the house
or forte, for them that were to inhabit there the whole year, and that
presently the Masons and Carpentees might go in hand therewith. First
therefore they perused the Bills of ladyng, what every man received into his
ship, and found that there was arrived only the east side, and the Southside
(...) house, and yet not that perfect and (...), for many (...) thereof were
used for fenders in many ships, and so b^^ken in pieces, whiles they were
distressed in the Ise. And after due examination had, a true account taken,
there was found want of drink and fuel, to serve one hundredth me^, which was
the number appointed first to inhabit there because their greatest store was
in the ships, which were not yet arrived. Then Captain Fenton seeing the
scarcity of ye necessary things aforesaid, was contented, and offered himself
to inhabit there, with sixty men. Whereupon they caused the Carpenters and
Masons to come before them, and demanded in what time they would take upon
them to erect up a less house for sixty men. They required eight or nine
weeks, (...)
if there were Timber sufficient, whereas now they had but six and twenty
days in all to remain in that Country. Wherefore it was fully agreed upon,
and resolved by the General and his couunsell, that no habitation should be
there this year. And therefore they willed Master Selman the Register, to set
down this decree, with all their consentes, for the (...) of her Majesty, the
Lords of the Counsel, and the (...).

The Anne Frances, since she was parted from the Fleet, in the last storm
before spoken of, could never recover above five leagues within the straightes,
the wind being sometime contrary, and most times the Ise compassing them
round about. And from that time, being about the seven and twentieth of July,
could neither hear nor have sight of any of the Fleet, until the third of
August, when they descried a sail nere unto Mount Oxford, with whom when they
had spoken, they could understand no news of any of the fleet at all. And
this was the Thomas of Ipswich, who had layne beating off and on at sea, with
very foul weather, and contrary winds, ever since that foresaid storm,
without s^ght of any man. They kept company not long together, but were forced
to lose one an other again, the Moon being consort always with the Anne
Fraunces, and keeping very good company plied up together into the straites,
with great desire to recover their long wished port: and atempted as often, and
passed as far as possible the wind, weather, and Ise, gave leave, which
commonly they found very contrary. For when the weather was clear, and without
fogge, then commonly ye wind was contrary. And when it was either easterly or
southerly, which would serve their turns, then had they so great a fogge,
and dark miste therewith, that either they could not discern way through the
Ise, or else the Ise lay so thick together, that it was impossible for them
to pass. And on the other side, when it was calm, the Tides had force to
bring the Ise so sodaynelye, about them that comm^nlye then they were most
therewyth destressed, having no Win^e to carry them from the danger thereof.

And by the sixte of August, being with much ado, got up as high as Leicester
point, they had good hope to find the Souther shore clear, and so to pass
up toward their port. But being there becaulmed, and lying a hull openly
upon the great Bay which comes out of the mystaken straites before spoken
of, they were so sodainlye compassed with Ise round about, by means of the
swifte Tides which run in that place, that they were never before so hardly
beset as now. And in seeking to avoid these dangers, in the dark weather,
the Anne Fra^ces lo^t sight of the other two ships, who being likewise hardly
d^st^essed, signified their danger, as they since reported, by s^^^ting off
their ordinance, which the other could not hea^e, nor if they had heard,
could have given them no ^emedie, ^^ing so busily occupied to wind themselves
out of their own troubles.

The Fleeboate called the Moon, The Moon^.
was here heaued above the water with the force of the I^e, and received a
great leake thereby. Likewise the Th^mas of Ipswich, and the Anne Frances were
sore bruised at that instant, having their false stem borne aw^y, and their
ship^e sides stricken quite through.

Now considering the continual daunge^s and contraries, and the little leisure
that they had left to tarry in these parts, besides that, every night the
roapes of their ships were so frosen, that a man cou^de not handle them
without cutting his hands, together with ^he great doubt they had of the
Fleetes safely, thinking it an impossibility for them to pass unto their
port, as well for that they saw themselves, as for that they hard by the
former report^ of the ships which had proved before, who affi^med that the
straites were al frosen over within. The^ thought it now very hie time, to
consider of their estates and sa^eties that were yet left together. And
herevppon the Captains and masters of these ships, desired the Captain of
the Anne Frances to enter into consideration with the^ of these matters, The
Anne F^ances the T^omas of Ipswich and the Moon consult.
wherefore Captain Tanfield of the Thomas of Ipswich, with his Pylot Richard
Coxe, and Captain Vpcote of the Moon, with his maist^r John Lakes came
aboorde the Anne Frances the eight of August to consult of these causes. And
being assembled together in the Captains Cabin, sundry doubts were there
alleged. For the fearefuller sort of Mariners being ouertyred with the
continual labor of the former dangers, coueted to return homewarde, saying
that they would not again tempte God so much, who had given them so many
warnings, and delivered them from so wonderful dangers: that they rather
desired to loose wages fraughte and all, than to continewe and follow (...)
desperate fortunes. Again their ships were so leake, (...) the men so we^rie,
that to (...) ^he one, and refresh the other, they mu^^e of neces^it^^ ^^^ke
into harborough.

But on the other side, it wa^ argued ag^ine, to the contrary, that to seek
into ha^b^row thereabou^es, was but to subject themselves to double dangers,
for if happilye they escape the dangers of rocks in their entering, yet being
in, they were nevertheless subject there to the danger of the Ise, which with
the swift tides and currantes, is carried in and out in most harborowes
thereaboutes, and may thereby gaul their Cables asunder, drive them upon ye
shore, and bring them to much trouble. Also the coast is so much subject to
broken ground and rocks, especially in the mouth and entrance of every
harborow, that albeit the channel be sounded over and over again, yet are you
never the near to discern the dangers. For the bottom of the sea, holding
like sh^pe and form as the land, being full of hills, dales and ragged
rocks, suffers you not, by your soundings, to know and keep a true guess
of ye depth. For you shall sound upon the side or hollownesse of one hill or
rock under water, and have a hundredth, fifty, or forty fadome depth: and
before the next cast, ere you shall be able to have your lead again, you shall
be upon the top thereof, and come agrounde, to your utter confusion.

Another reason against going to harborowe, was, that the cold air did
threaten a sudden freesing up of the sounds, seeing yt every night there was
new congealed Ise, even of that water which remained within their ships. And
therefore it should seem to be more safe to lie off and on at sea, than for
lack of wind to bring them forth of harborow, to hazard by sudden frostes to
be shut up the whole year.

After many such dangers and reasons alleged, and large debating of these
causes on both sides, the Captain of the Anne Fr^nces delivered his opinion
unto the company to this effect. First concerning the question of returning
home, Ca^^a^ne (...) resol^^i^n.
he thought i^ so much dishonorable, as not to grow in any farther question:
and a^ayne to return home at length (as at length they must needs) and not to
be able to bring a certain report of the Fleet, whether they were living or
lost, or whether any of them had recovered their port, or not, in the
Countesses found (as it was to be thought the most part would if they were
living) he said that it would be so great an argument, either of want of
courage or discretion in them, as he resolved rather to fall into any danger,
than so shamefully to consent to return hom^, protesting that it should never
be spoken of him, that he wound ever return, without doing his endeavor to
find the Fleet, and know the certaynetie of the Generals safety. He put his
company in remembrance of a pinnesse of five tun burden, which he had within
his Ship, which was carried in pieces, and unmade up for the use of those
which should inhabit there the whole year, the which if they could find
means to join together, he offered himself to prove before therewith,
whether it were possible for any Boat to pass for Ise, whereby the Ship
might be brought in after, and might also thereby give true notice, if any
of the Fleet were arrived at their port or not.

But notwithstanding, for that he well perceived that the most part of his
company were addicted to put into harborough, he was willing the rather for
these causes somewhat to enclu^^ thereunto. As first, to search along the
same coast, and the soundes thereaboutes, he thought it to be to good purpose,
for that it was likely to find some of the Fleet there, whi^he being leake,
and sore bruised with the Ise, was the rather thought lykely to be put into an
ill harborough, being distressed with foul weather in the last storm, than to
hazard their uncertain safeties amongst the Ise: for about this place they
lost them, and left the Fleet then doubtfully questioning of harborough.

It was lykely also, that they might find some fit harborough thereaboutes,
which might be houefull for them against another time. It was not likewise
impossible to find some Ore or Mine thereaboutes, wherewithal to fraughte
their Ships, which would be more commodious in this place, for the
neerenesse to Seawarde, and for a better outlette, than further within the
straytes, being lykely here always to load in a shorter time, howsoever the
strayte should be pestered with Ise within, so that if it might come to
pass, that thereby they might either find the Fleet, Mine, or convenient
harborough, any of these three would well serve their present turns, and
give some hope and comfort unto their companyes, which now were altogyther
comfortless. But if that all fortune should fall out so contrary, that they
could neither recover their Port, nor any of these aforesaid helps, that
yet they would not depart the coast, as long as it was possible for them to
tarry there, but would lie off and on at Sea athwart the place Therefore his
final conclusion was set down thus, First, that the Thomas of Ipswiche and
the Moon, should consorte and keep company together carefully with the Anne
Frances as near as they could, and as true Englishmen, and faithful friends,
should supplye one another want in all fortunes and dangers. In the morning
following, every Ship to send of his Boat, with a sufficient Pylot, to
search out, and sound the harboroughes for the safe bringing in of their
Ships. And being arrived in harborough, where they might find convenient
place for the purpose, they resolved forthwith to join, and set together the
Pinnesse, wherewythall the Captain of the Anne Frances might according to his
former determination, discover up into the straytes.

After these determinations thus set downe^ the Thomas of Ipswiche the night
following lost company o^ the other Ships, and afterward shaped a contrary
course homewarde, which fell out as it manyfestlie appeared, very much
against their Captain Master Tanfieldes mind, as by due examination before
the Lords of her Majesty's most Honorable pri^te Counsel, it has since bin
proved, to the great discredit of the Pilot Coxe, who specially persuaded his
company, against the opinion of his said Captain, to return home.

And as the Captain of the Anne Frances does witness, even at their
conference together, Capta^ne T^nfield told him, that he did not alittle
suspect the said Pylot Coxe, saying, that he had neither opinion in the man of
honest duty, manhood, or constancy. Notwythstanding the said Ships
departure, the Captain of the Anne Frances being desirous to put in
execution his former resolutions, went with his Shyppeboate (being accompanied
also with the Moons Skyffe) to prove amongst the Islands which lie under
H^ttons headland, if any conueniente harborough, or any knowledge of the
Fleet, or any good Ore, was there to be found. The Ships lying off and on
at Sea the while under Sail, and searching through many soundes, they saw
them all full of many dangers, and broken ground, yet one there was, which
seemed an indifferent place to harborough in, and which they did very
diligently sound over, and searched again.

Here the said Captain found a great black Island, whereunto he had good
liking, and certifying the company thereof, they were somewhat comforted, and
with the good hope of his words rowed cheerfully unto the place, where when
they arrived, they found such plenty of black Ore of the same sort which
was brought into England this last year, that if the goodness might
answer the great plentye thereof, it was to be thought that it might
reasonably suffice all the gold gluttons of the world. This Island the
Captain for cause of his good hap, called after his own name, Bestes
blessing, Bestes blessing
and with these good tidings returning aboorde his Ship the ninth of August,
about ten of the Clock at night, he was joyfully welcomed of his company,
who before were discomforted, and greatly expected some better fortune at his
hands.

The next day being the tenth of August, the weather reasonably fair, they
put into the foresaid harborough, having their Boat for their better
security sounding before their Ship. But for all the care and diligence that
could be taken, in soundyng the Channel over and over again, the Anne
Frances came agrounde upon a a suncken Rock within the Harborough, Anne
Frances in danger.
and lay thereon more than half dry until the next flood, when by Gods
Almighty providence, contrary almost to all expectation, they came afloate
again, being forced all that time to vndersette their Ship with their main
yard, which otherwise was lykely to ouersette and put thereby in d^unger
the whole company. They had above two thousand strokes together at the
Pumpe, before they could make their Ship free of the water again, so sore
she was bruised by lying upon the Rocks. The Moon in harborough.
The Moon came safely, and road at Ancker by the Anne Fraunces, whose help
in their necessity they could not well have missed.

Now, whilst the Mariners were romaging their Ships, and mending that
which was amiss, the Miners followed their labor, for getting together of
sufficient quantity of Ore, and the Carpenters endeuou^ed to do their best,
for the making up of the boat or pinnesse, which to bring to pass, they
wanted two special and most necessary things, that is, certain principal
timbers that are called Knees, which are the chiefest strength of any boat,
and also nails, wherwithal to join the plancks together. Whereupon having by
chance a Smyth amongst them, (and yet unfurnished of his necessary tools to
work and make nails withal,) they were feign of a gunnne chamber to make an
a^^ile to work upon, and to use a pickare in steed of a sledge, to beat
withal, and also to occupy two small bellows in steed of one pair of
greater Smiths bellows. And for lack of small Iron, for the easier making of
the nails, were forced to break their tongs, grydiern, and fiershouell in
pieces.

The eleauenth of August, the Captain of the Anne Fraunces, taking the Master
of his Ship with him, went up to the top of Hattons Hedland, Hattons Hedlande.
which is the highest land of all the straites, to the end to descry the
situation of the Country underneath, and to take a true plot of the place,
whereby also to see what store of Ise was yet ^^fte in the straites, as also to
search what Mine matter or fruit that soil might yield. And the rather for
the honor ye said Captain does owe to that Honorable name which himself gave
thereunto the last year, in the highest part of this Hedlande, he caused his
company to make a Column or Cross of stone, in token of Christian
possession. In this place there is plenty of black Ore, and diverse preatie
stones.

The seventeenth of Auguste, the Capitaines with their companies chaced and
killed a great white Bear, which adventured, and gave a fierce assault upon
twenty men being weapned. And he served them for good meat many days after.

The eighteenth of August, the Pinnesse with much ado, being set together,
the said Captain Best determined to depart up the straites, to prove and
make trial, as before was pretended, some of his company greatly persuading
him to the contrary, A Pinnesse there builte.
and specially the Carpe^ter that set the same together, who said that he
would not adventure himself therein, for five hundredth pounds, for that the
boat hung together but only by the strength of the nails, and lacked some
of her principal knees and tymbers.

These words somewhat discouraged some of the company which should have gone
therein. Wherevpo^ the Captain, as one not altogether addicted to his own
selfe-wil, but somewhat foreseeing how it might be afterward spoken, if
contrary fortune should happen him (Lo he has followed his own opinion and
desperate resolutions, and so thereafter it is befallen him) calling the
Master Mariners of best judgment together, declared unto them how much
the cause imported him in his credit, to seek out the General, as well to
confer with him of some causes of weight, as otherwise to make due
examination and trial of the goodness of the Ore, whereof they had no
assurance but by guess of the eye, and was well like the other: which so to
carry home, not knowing the goodness thereof, might be as much as if they should
bring so many stones. And therefore he desired them to deliver their plain
and honest opinion, whether the Pinnesse were sufficient for him so to
adventure in or no. It was answered, that by careful heed taking thereunto
amongst the Ise, and the foul weather, the Pinnesse might suffice. And
herevppon the Masters mate of the Anne Frances called John Gray, manfully and
honestly offering himself unto his Captain in this adventure and service, gave
cause to others of his Mariners to follow the attempt.

And upon the ninteenth of August, the said Captain being accompanied with
Captain Vpcote of the Moon, and xviij. persons in the small Pinnesse, having
convenient portion of victualles and things necessary, departed upon the said
pretended voyage, leaving their ship at ancker in a good readiness for the
taking in of their freight. And having little wind to sail withal, they
plied alongest the Souther shore, and passed above.30. leagues, having the
only help of man's labor with Ores, and so entendyng to keep that shore
aboorde until they were got up to the farthest and narrowest of ye straites,
minded there to cross over, and to search likewise alongest the Northerland,
unto the Countessss sound, and from thence to pass all that coaste along,
where by if any of the Fleet had been distressed by wrack of rock or Ise,
by that means they might be perceived of them, and so they thereby to give
them such help and relief as they could. They did greatly fear, and ever
suspecte that some of the Fleet were surely cast away, and driven to seek
sour sallets amongst the cold cliffes.

And being shot up about.40. leagues within ye straites, they put over toward
ye Norther shore, which was not a little dangerous for their small boats.
And by means of a sudden flawe, were driven, and feign to seek harboroughe
in the night amongst all the rocks and broken ground of Gabiels Islands,
Gabriels Ila^d^
a place so named within the straites above the Countess of Warwickes sound:
And by the way where they landed, they did find certaiue great stones set
up by the Country people, as it seemed for marks, where they also made
many Crosses of stone, in token that Christians had hin there. The.xxij. of
August, they had sight of the Countesses sound, and made the place perfect
from the top of a hill, and keepyng along the Norther shore, perceived the
smoke of a fire under a hills side. whereof they diversely deemed, when they
came nearer ye place, they perceived people which wafted unto them, as it
seemed, with a flagge or ancient. And because the Caniballes and country
people had used to do the like, when they perceived any of our boats to pass
by, they suspected them to be the same. And coming somewhat nearer, they might
perceive certain te^ts, and discern this aunt^ent to be of mingled colors,
black and white, after the English fashion. But because they could see no
ship, nor likelihoode of harborowe within five or six leagues about, and
know that none of our men were wont to frequent those parts, they could
not tell what to judge thereof, but imagined, that some of the Ships being
carried so high with the storm and mistes, had made shipwreck amongst the
Ise or the broken Islands there, and were spoiled by the Country people, who
might use the sundry colored flagge for a policy, to bring them likewise
within their danger. Whereupon the said Captain with his companies, resolved
to recover the same Ancient, if it were so, from those base, cruel, and man
eating people, or else to lose their lives, and all together. One promised
himself a pair of garters, an other a scarffe, the third, a lace to tie his
Whistle withal, of the same. In the end, they discerned them to be their
Countrymen, and then they deemed them to have lost their Ships, and so to
be gathered together for their better strength. On the other side, the company
a shore feared, that the Captain having lost his ship, came to seek
forth the Fleet for his relief, in his poor pinnesse, so that their
extremities caused each part to suspecte the worste.

The Captain now with his pinnesse being come near the shore, commanded
his Boat carefully to be kept as^ote, least in their necessity, they might
win the same from him, and seek first to save themselves (for every manne
in that case is next himself. Proximus ^^m ^gome^ mihi.
) They haled one another according to the manner of the Sea, and demanded what
cheer? and either party answered ye other, that all was well: whereupon
there was a sudden and joyful outeshoote, with great flinging up of cappes,
and a brave voly of shot to welcome one an other. And truly it was a most
strange case, to see how joyful and glad every party was to see
themselves meet in safety again, after so strange and incredible dangers:
Yet to be short, as their dangers were great, so their God was greater.

And here the company were workyng upon new Mines, which Captayn York being
here arrived not long before, Captain York arriue^
had found out in this place, and it is named the Countess of Sussex Mine.

After some conference with our friends here, the Captain of the Anne
Fraunces departed toward the Countess of Warwickes sound, to speak with
the General, and to have trial made of such metal as he had brought
thither, by the Goldfiners. And so determined to dispatche again toward his
ship. And having spoken with the General, he received order for all causes,
and direction as well for the bringing up of his Ship to the Countesses
sound, as also to freight his Ship with the same Ore he himself had
found, which upon trial made, proved to be very good.

The thirteenth of Auguste, the said Captain met together with the other
Capitaines (Commissioners in counsel with the General) aboorde the Aid,
where they considered and consulted of sundry causes, which particularly
registered by the Notarie, were appointed, where and how to be done against an
other year.

The fourteenth of August, the General with two Pinnesses and good numbers of
men, went to Bears sound, commanding the said Captain with his Pinnesse,
to attend the service, to see if he could encounter or apprehe^d any of the
Caniballes, for sundry times they showed themselves busy thereaboutes,
sometimes with.7. or.8. boats in one company, as though they minded to
encounter with our company, which were working there at the mines, in no
great numbers. But when they perceived any of our ships to ride in that
road (being belike more amazed at the countenance of a ship, and a more
number of men) did never show themselves again there at all. Wherefore our
men sought with their Pinnesses to compass about the Island, None of the
people will be taken.
where they did use, supposing there suddenly to intercept some of them. But
before our men could come near, having belike some watch in the top of the
mountains, they conveyed themselves privily away^ and left (as it should
seem) one of their great darts behind them for haste, which we found near
to a place of their caves and housing. Therefore, though our General were very
desirous to have taken some of the^^ ^o have brought into England, they being
now (...) more wary by their former losses, would not at (...) ^ome within
our dangers. About (...) Captain of the Anne Fraunces (...) course over the
(...) about fifteen (...) over, the five (...), to the great (...) of his
(...) ^^pected his coming, where (...) rigged and laden. Wherefore (...)
again the next morning toward the (...) ^ounde, where he arrived the eight
and (...) same. By the way he set his Miners ashoare a^ Bears sound, for
the better dispatche and gathering the Ore together, for that some of the ships
were behind hand with their fraighte, the time of the year passing speedily
away.

The thirtith of August, the Anne Fra^ces was brought a ground, and had.viij.
great leakes mended, which she had received by means of the rocks and Ise.
This day the Masons finished a house which Captain Fenton caused to be made
of lyme and stone upon the Countess of Warwickes Island, ^ house builded and
lef^e there.
to the end we might prove against the next year, whether the snow could
ouerwhelme it, the frosts break up, or the people disme^ber the same. And
the better to allure those brutish and uncivil people to courtesy, against
other times of our coming, we left therein diverse of our country toys, as
belles, and knives, wherein they specially delight, one for the necessary use,
and the other for the great pleasure thereof. Also pictures of men and women in
lead, men a horseback, looking lasses, whistles, and pipes. Also in the house
was made an oven, and bread l^st^ baked therein, for them to see and taste.

We buried the timber of our pretended forte, with many barrels of meal,
pease, griste, and sundry other good things, which was of the provision of
those which should inhabit, if occasion served. And insteede thereof we freight
our ships full of Ore, which we hold of far greater price. Also here we
sowed pease, corn, and other grain, to prove the fruitfulness of the soil
against the next year.

Master Wolfall on Winters Furnace preached a godly Sermon, which being
ended, he celebrated also a Communion upon the land, at the pertaking whereof,
was the Captain of the Anne Fraunces, and many other Gentlemen and Soldiors,
Mariners, and Miners with him. The celebration of divine mystery was ye first
sign, seal, and confirmation of Christ's name death and passion ever known
in all these quarters. The said M. Wolfall made sermons, and celebrated the
Communion at sundry other times, in several and sundry Ships, because the
whole company could never meet together at any one place. The fleet now being
in some good readiness for their lading, ye General calling together the
Ge^tlemen and Captains, to consult, told them, that he was very desirous, yt
some further discovery should be attempted, and yt he would not only by Gods
help bring home his Ships laden with gold Ore, but also meant to bring some
certificat of a further discovery of ye Country, Consultation for a further
discovery.
which thing to bring to pass (having sometime therein consulted) they found
very hard, and almost invincible. And considering, that already they had
spente some time in searching out the trending and fashion of the mistaken
straites, and had entered very far therein, therefore it could not be
said, but that by this voyage they have notice of a further discovery, and
that the hope of the passage thereby is much furthered and increased, as
appeared before in the discourse thereof. Yet notwithstanding, if any means
might be further devised, the Capitaynes were contented and willing as the
General should appointe and command, to take any enterprise in hand.
Which after long debating, was found a thing very impossible, and that rather
consultation was to be had of returning homewarde, especially for these
causes followyng. First, the dark foggy mistes, the continual falling Snow
and stormy weather which they commonly were vexed with, and now daily ever
more and more increased, have no small argument of the Winters drawing near.
And also the froste every night was so hard congealed within the sound,
that if by evil hap they should be long kept in with contrary winds, it
was greatly to be feared, that they should be shut up there fast the
whole year, which being utterly unprovided, would be their utter
destruction. Again, drink was so scant throughout all the Fleet, by means
of the great leakage, that not only the provision which was laid in for the
habitation was wanting and wasted, but also each Ships several provision
spent and lost, which many of our company, to their great grief, found in
their return since, for all the way homewards they drank nothing but water.
And the great cause of this lekage and wasting was, for that ye great timber
and seacole, which lay so weighty upon ye barrels, brake, bruised, and rotted ye
hoopes in ^u^der. Yet notwithstanding, these reasons alleged ye General
himself (willing the rest of the Ge^tleme^ and Captains every man to look to
his several charge, and la^ing, that against a day appointed, they should be
all in a readiness to set homeward) himself went in his Pinnesse, and
discovered further Northward in the straytes, and found that by Bears sound
and Halles Island, the land was not firm, as it was first supposed, but all
broken Islands in manner of an Archipelagus, and so with other secret
intelligence to himself, he returned to the Fleet. Where presentlye upon his
arrival at the Countesses sound, he began to take order for their returning
homeward, and first caused certain Articles to be proclaimed, for the better
keeping orders and courses in their return, which Articles were delivered to
every Captain, and are these that follow.

Articles set down by Martin Frobisher Esquier, Captain General of the
whole Fleet, appointed for the Northweast discoueries of Cataya, published and
made known to the Fleet, for the better observing certain orders and course
in their return homevvarde.
1 First and principally he does straytely charge and command, by virtue of
her Majesty's commission which he has, and in her Majesty's name, that every
Captain and Captains, Master and Masters of the said Fleet, do vigilently
and carefully keep company with the Admiral, and by no manner of means break
company willingly now in our return homewards, upon pain of forfeture his
or their whole frayte, that shall be found culpable therein, and further, to
receive such punishment, as to her Majesty shall seem good therein, and also
to answer all such damages or losses as may happen or grow by dispersing and
breaking from the Fleet. And therefore for the better keeping of company, the
General straytely charge and commands all the Masters of these Ships,
and every of them, that they repair to speak with the Admiral once every
day, if he or they may conuenientlye do it, upon pain of forfeting of one
tun fraighte to her Majesty, for every day neglecting the same.

2 Item, that every Master in the said Fleet, observe and keep orderly and
vigilantly, all such Articles as were outwardes bound, drawn, and published
by the General in her Majesty's name, whereof there was delivered to every
Ship a copy.

3 Item, that all Captains and Masters of every Ship and Ships, do
proclayme, and make it known to their company, that no person or persons
within the said Fleet, of what condition soever, do take or keep to their
use or uses any Ore, or stones, of what quantity so ever it be, but forthwith
upon publication hereof, to deliver them, and yield them to the custody of
the Captain, to deliver unto the General his officers, that shall be
appointed to call for them, upon pain or loss of his or their wages, and
treble the value of them or him that shall be found guilty, the one half
thereof to be given unto him that shall apprehend any such person, and the
other half at her Majesty's appoyntme^t, and the party found guilty therein,
to be apprehended as a fellon.

4 Item, that no person or persoos, convey or carry out of any Ship or
Ships, any Ore or stone, or other commodity whatsoever were had or found in
the land called Meta Incognita, before they come in the place appointed, which
is against Dartford creek in ye River of Thames, and then and there to deliver
none to any person or persons, but such as shall be appointed by her Highness
most honorable privy Counsel, upon the pain and danger abouesayd.

5 Item, forasmuch as in my voyage hither bound, I landed upon Freeseland,
and diverse other of the said Fleet, which land I named West England, from
which la^d some brought stones, Ore, and other commodities, whereby hereafter
they might use coulorable means, to convey as well Ore, stones, and other
things found in the abouesayd land, I do therefore charge every person and
persons in the said Fleet, to deliver, or cause to be delivered, al manner of
Ore, stones, and other commodities, found as well there, as here, to the
Captains of every Ship or Ships, to be redeliuered by him or them to the
General, upon pain and danger abouesayd.

6 Item, that if any Ship or Ships by force of weather, shall be separated
from the Admiral, and afterward happen to fall, or shall be in danger to fall
into the hands of their enemies, that then all and every such Ship or
Ships shall have special regard before his falling into their hands, to
convey away, and cast into the Seas all soche plattes or Cards, as shall be in
any such Ship or Ships, of the abouesayde discovered land, and all other
k^^wle^^es thereof.

7 Item, that if any such Ship or Ships by force of weather, shall be
separated from the Fleet or Admiral, and shall afterward arrive at any Port
in England, that then in such case he shall not depart from that Port, but
shall give order and aduertisemente to Michaell Lock, Treasourer of the
company, by whom he or they shall have order from the Lords of the privy
Council, what they shall do.

8 Item, forasmuch as sundry of the Fleetes companies have had lent the^ Crows
of Iron, ^ledges, pikeares, shouels, spades, hatchets, a^es, and diverse other
instruments for Mines, and mining used. And also diverse of the said kind of
instruments above named, was left at the Countess of Su^lex Mine by the Aids
company, and are yet kept from their knowledge by such as wrought at the said
M^ne, which instruments do apperteyne to the right honorable and worshipful
company of the abouesayde discovery. I do therefore charge all Captains and
Masters of every Ship or Ships, to make it known to his or their
companyes, to the end that all such instruments, as well those lent, as those
that are otherwise deteyned and kept away, may be again restored, and brought
aboard the Admiral upon pain and danger expressed in the third Article.

By me Martin Frobisher.
The Fleetes returning homevvard.
Having now received Articles and direction for our return homewardes, all
other things being in forwardness and in good order, the last day of August,
the whole Fleet departed from the Countesses sound, excepting the Judith, and
the Anne Frances, who stayed for the taking in of fresh water, and came forth
the next day, and met the Fleet lying off and on, athwart Bears sound,
who stayed for the General, which then was gone ashore, to dispatch the two
Barks, Return homeward.
and the Busse of Bridewater, for their loading, whereby to get the companyes,
and other things aboorde. The Captain of the Anne Frances having most part of
his company ashore, the first of September, went also to Bears sound in his
Pinnesse, to fetch his men aboorde, but the wind grew so great immediately
upon their landing, that the Ships at Sea were in great danger, and some of
them hardly put from their Anckers, and greatly feared to be utterly lost, as
the Hopewell, wherein was Captain Carew and others, who could not tell on
which side their danger was most, for having mighty Rocks threatening on the
one side, and driving Islands of cutting Ise on the otherside, they greatly
feared to make shipwreck, ye Ise driving so near the^, that it touched their
board sprete. And by means of ye sea, that was grown so hie, they were not
able to put to seas with their small Pynnesses, to recover their ships. And
again, the ships were not able to tarry or lie athwarte for them, by means
of the outrageous winds and swelling seas. The General willed the Captain of
the Anne France, with his company, for that night to lodge aboorde the Busse
of Bridgewater, and went himself with the rest of his men aborde the barks.
But their numbers were so great, and the provision of the Barks so scant, that
they pestered one another exceedingly. They had good hope, that the next
morning the weather would be fair, whereby they might recover their ships.
But in the morning following it was far worse, for the storm contin^ed
greater, the sea being more swollen, and the Fleet gone quite out of sight.
So that now their doubts began to grow great, for the ship of Bridgewater
which was of greatest receipt, and whereof they had best hope and made most
account, road so far to leewarde of the harborow mouth, that they were not
able for the rocks (that lay between the wind and them) to lead it out to
sea with a sail. And the Barks were so already pestered with me^, and so
slenderly furnished of provision, that they had scarce meat for six days,
for such numbers.

The General in the morning departed to sea in the Gabriel, to seek for the
Fleet, leaving the Busse of Bridgewater, and the Michael, behind in Be^res
sound. The Busse set sail, and thought by turning in the narrow channel
within the harborow, to get to windewarde: but b^ing put to leewarde more. by
that means was feign to come to Ancker for her better safety, amongst a
number of rocks, and there left in great danger, of ever getting forth again.
The Michaell set sail to follow the General, and could give ye Busse no
relief, although they earnestly desired the same. And the Captain of the Anne
Frances was le^^e in hand election of two evils: either to abide his fortune
with the Busse of Bridgewater, which was doubtful of ever getting forth, or
else to be towed in his small Pinnesse at the s^^rne of the Michael through the
raging seas, for that the Bark was not able to receive or relieve half his
company, wherein his danger was not a little perilous.

So after, resolved to commit himself, withal his company, unto that
fortune of God and sea, he was daungerously towed at the stern of the Bark
for many miles, until at length they espied the Anne Frances under sail,
hard under their Lee, which was no small comfort unto them. For no doubt, both
those and a great number more had perished for lack of victuals, and
conueniente room in the Barks, without the help of the said ships. But the
honest care that the Master of the Anne Frances had of his Captain, and the
good regard of duty toward his General, suffered him not to depart, but
honestly abode to hazard a dangerous road all the night long,
notwithstanding all the stormy weather, when all the Fleet besides departed
And the Pinnesse came no sooner aborde the ship, and the m^n entered, but she
presently sheauered and fell in pieces, and sunk at the ships stern, with all
the poor men's f^rniture: so weak was the boat with towing, and so so^^^^e
was the sea to bruise her in pieces. But (as God would the men were all saved.

At this present in this storm many of the fleet were daungerously
distressed, and were severed almost al asunder. And there were lost in the
whole Fleet well near xx. b^^tes and Pinnesses in this storm, and some men
stroke^ ^u^r boorde into the sea, and utterly lost. Many also spente their
main yardes and mastes, and wi^h the continual frostes, and deawe, the roapes
of our ships were now grown so rotten, that they went all asunder. Yet
thanks be to God, all the fleet arrived safely in England about (...)

The (...) (...) discoue^ed.
Southeastwarde (...) in the la^itude of Degree^, which was n^u^r y^^ ^ounde
before, and sa^led thr^^ days (...) the co^st the land seeming to be fruiteful,
full of woods, and a champion country.

There dyed in the whole Fleet in all this voyage not above forty persons,
which number is not great, considering how many ships were in the Fleet, and
how strange Fortunes we passed.

A general and brief Description of the Country, and condition of the
people, which are found in Meta Incognita.
Having now sufficiently and truly set forth ye whole circumsta^ce, and
particular hand^ing of every occurrente in the three Uoyages of our worthy
General, Captain Frobisher, it shall not be from the purpose to speak
somewhat in general, of the nature of this Country called Meta Incognita, and
the condition of the savage people there inhabiting.

A (...) M^t^ In^ognita.
First therefore concerning the Topographicall description of the place. It is
now sound in the last voyage, that Queen Elizabethes Cape, being situate in
Latitude at Degrees and a half, which before was supposed to be part of the
firm land of America. And also all the rest of the South side of Frobishers
straytes, are all several Ila^ds and broken land, and likewise so will all the
North side of the said straytes fall out to be, as I think. And some of our
company being entered above.60. leagues within the mistaken straytes, in the
third Book mentioned, thought certaynely that they had descryed the firm
land of America toward the South, which I think will fall out so to be.

These broken lands and Islands, being very many in number, do seem to make
there an Archipelagus, which as they all differ in greatness, form, and
fashion one from another, so are they in goodness, couloure, and soil much
unlike. They all are very high lands, Mountains, and in most parts covered
with Snow, even all the Summer long. The Norther lands have less store of
Snow, more grass, and are more plain Countries, the cause may be, for that
the Souther Islands receive all the Snow, yt the cold winds, and percing air
bring out of the North. And contrarily, the Norther parts receive more warm
blastes of milder air from the South, whereupon may grow the cause why the
people covet and inhabit more upon the North parts, than the South, as far
as we can yet by our experience perceive they do. The^e people I judge to be a
kind of Tartar, or rather a kind of Samowey, of the same sort and co^ditio^ of
life yt the Samoweides be to the Northeastwards, beyond Moscouy, who are called
Samoweydes, which is as much to say in the Moscouy tongue, as eaters of
themselves, and so the Russians their borderers do name them. And by late
conference with a friend of mine (with whom I did sometime travel in the
parts of Moscouy) who has great experience of those Somoweides and people of
ye Northeast, I find, that in all their manner of living, those people of the
Northeast, and these of the Northweast, are like. They are of the couloure of a
ripe Olive, which how it may come to pass, being borne in so cold a climate, I
refer to ye judgment of others, for they are naturally borne children of the
same couloure and complexio^ as all the Americans are, which dwell under the
Equinoctial line.

They are men very active and nimble. They are a strong people, and very
warlike, for in our sight, upon the tops of the hills, they would often
muster themselves, and after the manner of a skirmish, trace their ground very
nimbly, and manage their bows and darts with great dexterity. They go
clad in coats made of the skins of beasts, as of Ceales, Dear, Bears,
Foxes, and Hares. They have also some garments of feathers, being made of the
cases of Fowls, finely sowed and compact together. Of all which sorts, we
brought home some with us into England, which we found in their tents. In
Summer, they use to wear the hearie side of their coats outward, and
sometime go naked for too much heat. And in Winter (as by signs they have
declared) they wear four or five fold upon their bodies with ye hear (for
warmth) turned inward. Hereby it appears, that the air there is not
indifferente, but e^ther it is fervent hot, or else extreme cold, and far
more excessive in both qualities, than the reason of the clymate should
yeelde^ For there it is colder, being under Degrees in latitude, tha^ it is at
W^r^in^ in the voyage to Saint Nicolas in Moscouie, being at above 70. degrees
in lati^ude. The reason hereof perhaps, may be, that this Meta Incognita is
much freque^ted and vexed with eastern and Northeasterne winds, which from
the sea and Ise brings often an intolerable cold air, which was also the
cause that this year our straites were so long shut up. But there is great
hope and likelyhoode, that further within the straightes it will be more
constant and temperate weather.

These people are in nature very subtle, and sharp witted, ready to concei^e
our meaning by signs, and to make answer, well to be understood again. As
if they have not seen the thing whereof you ask them, they will winck, or
cover their eyes with their hands, as who would say, it has been hyd from
their sight. If they understand you not, whereof you ask them, they will
stop their ears. They will teach us the names of each thing in their
language, which we desire to learn, and are apt to learn any thing of us.
They delight in Music above measure, and will keep time and stroke to any
tune which you shall sing, both with their voice, head, hand and feet, and
will sing the same tune aptlye after you. They will row with our Ores in our
boats, and keep a true stroke with our Mariners, and seem to take great
delight therein. They live in Caves of the Earth, and hunte for their dinners
or pray, even as the Bear, or other wild beasts do. They eat raw flesh
and fish, and refuse no meat, howsoever it be stinking. They are desperate
in their fight, sullen of nature, and ravenous in their manner of feeding.

Their sullen and desperate nature does herein manifestly appear, that a
company of them being environed of our men on the top of a hie cliffe, so
that they could by no means escape our hands, finding themselves in this
c^se distressed, chose rather to cast themselves h^^dlong down the rocks into
the Sea, and so to be bruse^ and drowned, rather than to yield themselves to
our men's mercies.

For their weapons, to offend their en^^ies, or kill their pray with^l, they
have Darts, slings, bows, and arrows headed with sharp stones, bones, and
some with iron. They are exceeding friendly and kind hearted, one to the other,
and mourn greatly at the loss or harm of their fellows, and express their
grief of mind, when they part one from an other, with a mournful song, and
Dirges. They are very shamefast in bewraying the secrets of nature, and very
chaste in ye manner of their living: for when the man which we brought from
thence into England ye last voyage should put of his coat, or discover his
whole body for change, he would not suffer the woman to be present, but put her
forth of his Cabyn. And in all the space of two or three months, while the
man lived in company of the woman, there was never any thing seen or
perceived between them, more than might have passed between brother and
sister: but the woman was in all things very serviceable for the man, attending
him carefully, when he was sick, and he likewise in all the meats which they
did eat together, would carue unto her of the sweetest, fattest, and best
morsels they had. They wondered much at all our things, and were afraid of our
horses, and other beasts, out of measure. They began to grow more civil,
familiar, pleasant, and do^ib^e amongst us in a very short time.

They have boats made of leather, and covered clean over, saving one place in
the middle to sit in, pla^cked within with timber, and they use to row therein
with one Ore, more swiftly a great deal, than we in our boats can do with
twenty. They have one sort of greater boats wherein they can carry above
twenty persons, and have a Mast with a Sail thereon, which Sail is made of
thin Skins or bladders, sowed together with the sinews of fishes.

They are good fishermen, and in their small Boats, being disguised with
their coats of Ceales skins, they deceive the Fish, who take them rather
for their fellow Ceales, than for deceyuing men.

They are good mark men. With their dart or arrowe they will commonly kill
Ducke, or any other foul, in the head, and commonly in the eye.

When they shoot at a great fish with any of their Darts, they use to tie
a bladder thereunto, whereby they may the better find them again, and the
fish not able to carry it so easily away, for that the bladder does boy the
darte, will at length be weerie, and dye therewith.

They use to traffike and exchange their commodities with some other people, of
whom they have such things, as their miserable Country, and ignorance of art
to make, denies them to have, as bars of iron, heads of iron for their
darts, needles made fouresquare, certain buttons of copper, which they use
to wear upon their forheads for ornament, as our Ladies in the Court of
England do use great pearl.

Also they have made signs unto us, that they have seen gold, and such bright
plates of metals, which are used for ornaments amongst some people, with
whom they have conference.

We found also in their tents a Guinney Bean, of read couloure, the which
does usually grow in the hot Countries: whereby it appears they trade with
other Nations which dwell far off, or else themselves are great travelers.

They have nothing in use among them to make fire withal, saving a kind of
Heath and Moss which grows there.

And they kindle their fire with continual rubbing and fretting one stick
against an other, as we do with flints. They draw with dogs in sleads upon
the Ise, and remove their tents therwithal, wherein they dwell, in so^mer, when
they go a hunting for their pray and provision against Winter. They do
sometime parboyle their meat a little and sees the same in kettles made of
beasts skins: they have also pannes cut and made of stone very artificially:
Their Kettls and Pannes.
they use preaty ginnes wherewith they take foul. The women carry their
sucking children at their backs, and do feed them with raw flesh, which
first they do a ^ittle chawe in their mouths. The women have their faces
marked or painted over with small blewe spots: they have black and long
hair on their heads, and trim the same in a decent order. The men have but
little hair on their faces, and very thin beardes. For their common drink,
they eat Ise to quench their thirst withal. Their earth yields no grain or
fruit of sustenaunce for man, or almost for beast to live upon: and the
people will eat grass and shrubs of the ground, even as our Kine do^. They
have no woodde growing in their country thereaboutes, and yet we find they
have some timber among them, which we think does grow far off to the
Southwardes of this place, about Canada, or some other part of new found
land: for there belike, the trees standing on the cliffes of the Sea side, by
the weight of Ise and snow in Winter ouercharging them with waighte, when the
Summers thawe comes above, and also the Sea vnderfretting them beneath,
which wins daily of the land, they are undermined and fall down from those
cliffes into the Sea, and with the tides and currants are driven to and fro
upon the coasts further off, and by conjecture are taken up here by these
country people, to serve them to plancke and strengthen their boats withal,
and to make darts, bows, and arrows, and such other things necessary for
their use. And of this kind of drift woodde we find all the Seas over, great
store, which being ^utte or sawed asunder, by reason of long driving in the
Sea, is eaten of worms, and full of hoales, of which sort theirs is found to
be.

We have not yet found any venomous Serpent or other hurtefull thing in these
parts, but there is a kind of small fly or gnat that stingeth and offends
sorelye, leaving many red spots in they face, and other places, where she
stingeth. They have snow and hayle in the best time of their Summer, and the
ground frosen three fadome deep. Frost and Snow.


These people are great inchaunters, and use many charms of Witchcraft: for
when their heads do ache, they tie a great stone with a string unto a stick,
and with certain prayers and words done to the stick, they litte up the
stone from ground, which sometimes with all a man's force they cannot stir, and
sometime again they lift as easily as a feather, and hope thereby with
certain ceremonious words to have ease and help. Inchanters.
And they made us by signs to understand, lying groueling with their faces
upon the ground, and making a noise downewarde, that they worship the
Devil under them.

They have great store of Dear, Bears, Hares, Foxes, and innumerable numbers
of sundry sorts of wild Foul, as Seamews, Gulles, Wilmotes, Duckes, etc.
Store of wild Foul.
whereof our men killed in one day fifteen hundred.

They have also store of Hawks, as Falcons, Tassels, etc. whereof two alighted
upon one of our Ships at their return, and were brought into England, which
some think will prove very good. They have also great herds of Dogs which they
use for their ready provision to eat.

There are also great store of Ravens, Larkes, and Partridges, whereof the
Country people feed.

All these Fowls are far thicker clothed with down and feathers, and have
thicker skins than any in England have: for as that Country is colder, so
nature has provided a remedy thereunto.

Our men have eaten of their Bears, Hares, Partriches, Larkes, and of their
wild Foul, and find them reasonable good meat, but not so delectable as
ours.

Their wild Foul must be all fleyne, their skins are so thick: and they
taste best fried in pannes.

The Country seems to be much subject to Earthquakes.

The air is very subtle, piercing and searching, so that if any corrupted or
infected body, The quality of their
especially with the disease called Morbus Gallicus come there, it will
presentlye break forth and show it self, and cannot there, by any kind of
salve or medicine be cured.

Their longest Summers day is of great length, without any dark night, so
that in July all the night long, we might perfitely and easily wright and
read whatsoever had pleased us, which lightsome nights were very beneficial
unto us, being so distressed with abundance of Ise as we were.

The Sun sets to them in the Evening at a quarter of an hour after ten
of the clock, The length of their day^^
and rises again in the morning at three quarters of an hour after one of
the clock, so that in Summer, their Sun shines to them twenty hours and a
half, and in the night is absent but three hours and a half. And although
the Sun be absent these 3 hours, yet is it not dark that time, for that the
Sun is never above three or four degrees under the edge of their Horizon:
the cause is, that the Tropicke Cancer does cut their Horizon at very vneauen
and oblique Angles. But the Moon at any time of the year being in Cancer,
having North Latitude, does make a full revolution above their Horizon, so that
sometimes they see the Moon above.24. hours together. Some of our company,
of the more ignorant sort, thought we might continually have seen the Sun
and the Moon, had it not bin for two or three high Mountains.

The people are now become so warye, and so circumspecte, by reason of their
former losses, that by no means we can apprehend any of them, although we
attempted often in the last voyage. But to say truth, we could not bestow
any great time in pursuing them, because of our great business in lading,
and other things.

To conclude, I find in all the Country nothing, that may be to delight in,
either of pleasure or of account, only the show of Mine, both of gold,
silver, steel, iron and black lead, with diverse preaty stones, as blewe
Saphyre, very perfect and others, whereof we found great plenty, may give
encouragement for men to seek thither. And there is no doubt, but being well
looked unto and thoroughly discovered, it will make our Country both rich and
happy, and of these prosperous beginnings will grow hereafter (I hope) most
happy endings. Which GOD of his goodness grant, to whom be all Praise and
Glory.

Amen.
AT LONDON, Printed by Henry Bynnyman. Anno Domini. 1578. Decembris. 10.


