A DISCOVRSE OF Conscience: Wherein is set down the nature, properties, and
differences thereof: as also the way to Get and keep good Conscience.

Printed by John Legate, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1596



The contents.
Cap. 1. What conscience is. 2. The actions or duties of conscience. Where this
point is handled, How any thing is said to bind conscience. 3. The kinds and
differences of conscience. Where is handled, Liberty of conscience, and the
question disputed; whether a man may in conscience be infallibly certain of his
salvation. 4. Man's duty touching his conscience, which is to get and to keep
it.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR WILLIAM PIRIAM Knight, Lord chief Baron of her
Majesty's Exchequer. Grace and peace.
RIght Honorable, it can not be unknown to your self, or to any man of a
days experience, that it is thought a small matter to commit a sin, or, to
lie in sins against a man's own conscience. For many when they are told of
their duty in this point, reply and say, What tell you me of conscience?
Conscience was hanged long ago. But unless they take better heed, and prevent
the danger by repentance, Hanged-conscience will revive and become both gibbet
and hangman to them either in this life or the life to come. For Conscience is
appointed of God to declare and put in execution his just judgment against
sinners: and as God cannot possibly be overcome of man, so neither can the
judgment of conscience being the judgment of God be wholly extinguished.
Indeed Satan for his part goes about by all means he can, to benumme the
conscience: but all is nothing. For as the sick man, when he seems to sleep
and take his rest, is inwardly full of troubles: so the benumbed and drousie
conscience wants not his secret pangs and terrors; and when it shall be roused
by the judgment of God, it waxes cruel and fierce like a wild beast. Again,
when a man sins against his conscience, as much as in him lies, he plungeth
him self into the gulf of desperation: for every wound of the conscience,
though the smart of it be little felt, is a deadly wound: and he that goes on
to sin against his conscience, stabbes and vvounds it often in the same
place: and all renewed wounds (as we know) are hardly or never cured. Thirdly,
he that lies in sins against his conscience, cannot call upon the name of
God: for guilty conscience makes a man fly from God. And Christ says, God
hears not sinners, understanding by sinners, such as go on in their own
ways against conscience: and what can be more doleful then to be barred of
the invocation of Gods name? Lastly, such persons after the last judgment,
shall have not only their bodies in torment, but the vv^ in the soul and
conscience shall never (...): and what will it profit a man to gain the whole
world by doing things against his own conscience, and loose his own soul.

Now that men (...) this manner careless touching conscience, may see their
folly and the great danger thereof and come to amendment; I have penned this
small treatise: and according to the ancient and laudable custom, as also
according to my long intended purpose, I now dedicate and present the same to
your Lordship. The reasons which have imbolde^ed me to this enterprise (all by
respects excluded) are these. General doctrine in points of religion is dark
and obscure, and very hardly practiced without the the light of particular
examples: and therefore the doctrine of conscience, by due right pertaines to a
man of conscience, such an one as your Lordship is, who (others of like place
not excepted) have obtained this mercy at Gods hand to keep faith and good
conscience. Again, considering that justice and conscience have always bin
friends: I am induced to think that your Lordship being publicly set apart
for the execution and maintenance of civil justice, will approve and accept a
Treatise propounding rules and precepts of conscience. Thus therefore craving
pardon for my boldness, and hoping of your Lordships good acceptance, I commend
you to God and to the word of his grace.

1596. June 14. Your Lordships to command, W. Perkins.

OF CONSCIENCE.
CAP. I. What conscience is.
COnscience is a part of the understanding in all reasonable creatures,
determining of their particular actions either with them or against them.

I say conscience is a part of the understanding, and I show it thus. God in
framing of the soul placed in it two principal faculties, Understanding and
Will. Understanding is that faculty in the soale whereby we use reason: and it
is the more principal part serving to rule and order the whole man, and
therefore it is placed in the soul to be as the wagginer in the waggin. The
Will is an other faculty, whereby we do will or nill any thing, that is,
choose or refuse it. With the will is joined sundry affections, as joy,
sorrow, love, ha^^ed, etc. whereby we embrace or eschew that which is good or
evil. Now, conscience is not placed in the affections nor will, but in the
understanding, because the actions thereof stand in the use of reason.
Understanding again has two parts. The first is that which stands in the view
and contemplation of truth and falsehood, and goes no further. The second is
that which stands in the view and consideration of every particular action, to
search whether it be good or badde. The first is called the Theorical, the
second the practical understanding. And under this latter is conscience to be
comprehended: because his property is to judge of the goodness or badnes of
things or actions done.

Again I say that conscience is a Vnderst^ding has ^o part^ properly but by
analogy in respect of diverse objects and actions.
part of the mind or understanding, to show that conscience is not a bare
knowledge or judgment of the understanding (as The Aq^i^ p^^. 1. q. ^9. (...).
13. Dominic. (...) on this place. (...), etc.
men commonly write) but a natural power, faculty, or created quality from
whence knowledge and judgment proceed as effects. This the Scriptures
confirm in that they ascribe sundry works and actions to conscience, as
accusing, excusing, comforting, terrifying. Which actions could not thence
proceed, if conscience were no more but an action or act of the mind. Indeed
I grant, it may be taken for a certain actual knowledge, which is the effect
thereof: but to speak properly, this knowledge must proceed of a power in the
soul, the property whereof is to take the principles and conclusions of the
mind and apply the^, and by applying either to accuse or excuse. This is the
ground of all, and this I take to be conscience. If it be obtected that
conscience cannot be a natural power, because it may be lost: I answer if
conscience be lost, it is only in respect of the use thereof, as reason is
lost in the drunken man, and not otherwise.

I add, that the proper subjects of conscience are reasonable creatures; that
is, men and angels. Hereby conscience is excluded first of all from (...)
beasts for though they have life and sense, and in many things some shadows of
reason, yet because they want true reason, they want conscience also. Secondly
from God the creator, who being righteousness it self, needs not conscience
to order and govern his actions. And whereas Peter says, 1. Pet. 2. 19. that
men must endure griese wrongfully for conscience of God, his meaning is not to
show that God has conscience, but that men are to suffer many wro^gs because
their consciences do bind the^, in so doing to obey Gods will, which conscience
directly respects.

And I say that conscience is in all reasonable creatures, that none might
imagine that some men by nature have conscience in them, some none at all. For
as many men as them are, so many consciences there be: and every particular man
has his own particular conscience.

The proper end of conscience is, to determine of things done. And by this one
thing, conscience is distinguished from all other gifts of the min^ as
intelligence opinion, science faith, prudence. Intelligence simply conce^ thing
(...) opinion (...) (...) ^*
to be or not to be: science judges it to be certain and sure: faith is a
persuasion, whereby we believe things that are not: (...) discerns what is
meet to be done, what to be left undone; but conscience goes further yet then
all these: for it determines or gives sentence of things done, by saying unto
us, This was done, this was not done: this may be done, this may not be done
this was weldone, this was ill done.

The things that conscience determines of, are a man's own actions: his own
actions, I say. To be certain what an other man has said or done, is commonly
called knowledge: but for a man to be certain what he himself has done or
said, that is conscience. Again conscience meddles not with generals, only
it deals in particular actions: and that, not in some few, but in all.

The manner of consciences determination, is to set down his judgment either
with the creature or against it: I add this clause, because conscience is of a
divine nature, and is a thing placed by God in the midst between him and
man, as an arbitratour to give sentence and to pronounce either with man or
against man unto God. For otherwhiles, it consents and speaks with God against
the man in whom it is placed: other whiles again it consents with him and
speaks for him before the Lord. And hence comes one reason of the name of
conscience. Scire, to know, is of one man alone by himself: and conscire is,
when two at the least know some one secret thing; either of them knowing it
together with the other. Therefore the name (...), or Conscientia conscience,
is that thing that combines two together, and makes them partners in the
knowledge of one and the same secret. Now man and man, o^ man and Angel can not
be combined; because they can not know the secret of any man unless it be
reucaled to them: it remains therefore that this combination is only between
man and God. God knows perfectly all the doings of man, though they be never
so hid and concealed: and man by a gift given him of God, knows together with
God, the same things of himself: and this gift is named Conscience.

CAP. II. Of the duties of conscience.
THe proper actions or duties of conscience are twofold, to give (...) 1. of
the testimony of conscience.
testimony or to give judgment. Romans 2. 15.

Conscience gives testimony by determining that a thing was done or it was not
done, Romans 2. 15. Their conscience also bearing witness. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our
rejoicing is the testimony of our conscience, that in, etc.

Here we must consider three things: I. of what things conscience bears
witness: II. in what manner: III. how long.

For the first, conscience bears witness of our thoughts, of our affections,
of our outward actions.

That it bears witness of our secret thoughts, it appears by the solemn
protestation which at some time men use In my conscience I never thought it:
whereby they signify that they think something, or they think it not, and
that their consciences can tell what they think. Neither must this seem
strange. For there must be two actions of the understanding, the one is simple,
which barely conceiueth or thinks this or that: the other is a reflecting or
doubling of the former, whereby a man conceiues and thinks with himself what
he thinks. And this action properly pertaines to the conscience. The mind
thinks a thought, now conscience goes beyond the mind, and knows what the
mind thinks; so as if a man would go about to hide his sinful thoughts from
God, his conscience as an other person within him, shall discover all. By
means of this second action conscience may bear witness even of thoughts, and
from hence also it seems to borrow his name, because conscience Consci^ (...)
sci^ (...) (...) sci^.
is a science or knowledge joined with an other knowledge; for by it I conceive
and know what I know.

Again, conscience bears witness what the wills and affections of men be in
every matter, Romans 9. 1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie nos, my conscience
bearing me witness in the holy Ghost, that I have great ^ea^ines and continual
sorrow in my heart: for I could wish my self to be separate from Christ for my
brethren.

Lastly it witnesses what be men's actions. Eccles. 7. 24. Oftentimes also
thine heart knows, [that is, conscience witnesseth] that thou likewise have
cursed others.

The manner that conscience uses in giving testimony stands in two things.
First it observes and takes notice of all things that we do: secondly, it does
inwardly and secretly within the heart, tell us of them all. In this respect it
may fitly be compared to a notarie, or a register that has always the pen
in his hand, to note and record whatsoever is said or done: who also because
he keeps the rolls and records of the court, can tell what has bin said and
done many hundred years past.

Touching the third point. How long conscience bears witness, it does it
continually; not for a minut, or a day, or a month, or a year, but for ever:
when a man dies, conscience dies not; when the body is rotting in the grave,
conscience lives and is safe and sound: and when we shall rise again,
conscience shall come with us to the bar of Gods judgment, either to accuse
or excuse us before God, Romans 2. 15. 16. Their conscience bearing witness at the
day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ.

By this first duty of conscience, we are to learn three things. The first,
that there is a God: and we may be lead to the sight of this even by very
reason. For conscience bears witness. Of what? Of thy particular doings. But
against whom or with whom does it give testimony? thou may feel in thy
heart that it does it either with thee or against thee. And to whom is it a
witness? To men or Angels? that can not be, for they can not hear the voice
of conscience, they can not receive consciences testimony, nay they can not see
what is in the heart of man. It remains therefore that there is a spiritual
substance, most wise, most holy, most mighty, that sees a I things to whom
conscience bears record; and that is God himself. Let Atheists bark against
this as long as they will: they have that in them which will convince them of
the truth of the godhead will they nill they, either in life or death.

Secondly we learn, that God does watch over all men by a special providence.
The master of a prison is known by this to have care over his prisoners, if
he send keepers with them to watch them and to bring them home again in time
convenient: and so Gods care to man is manifest in this, that when he created
man and placed him in the world, he gave him conscience to be his keeper to
follow him always at the heels and to dog him (as we say) and to pry into
his actions and to bear witness of them all.

Thirdly hence we may observe Gods goodness and love to man. If he do any
thing amiss, he sets his conscience first of all to tell him of it sec^edy: if
then he amend, God forgives it: if not, then afterward conscience must openly
accuse him for it at the bar of Gods judgment before all the saints and
angels in heaven.

The second work of conscience is to give judgment of things done.

To give judgment is to determine, that a thing (...) (...). Of consciences
^^dgement.
is well done or ill done. Herein conscience is like to a Judge that holds an
assize and takes notice of inditements, and causes the most notorious
malefactor that is to hold up his hand at the bar of his judgment. Nay it
is (as it were) a little god sitting in the middle of men's hearts arraigning
them in this life as they shall be arraigned for their offenses at the
tribunal seat of the everliving god in the day of judgment. Wherefore the
temporary judgment that is given by the conscience is nothing else but a
beginning or a fore-^unner of the last judgment.

Hence we are admonished to take special heed that nothing past lie heavy upon
us, and that we charge not our consciences in time to come with any matter. For
if our conscience accuse us, god will much more condemn us, says S. John. 1.
Io^. 3. 18. because he sees all our actions more clearly and judges them
more severely then conscience can. It shall be good therefore for all men to
labor that they may say with Paul, 2. Cor. 4. I know nothing by my self,
that they ^ay stand before God without blame for ever.

H^^st we must consider two things: first, the c^^se that makes conscience give
judgment: secondly, the manner how.

The c^use is the Binder of the conscience. The 3. Of the binding oe the
conscience.
Binder is that thing whatsoever which has power and authority over conscience
to order it.

To bind, is to urge, cause, and constrain it in every action either to accuse
for sin, or to excuse for well doing: or to say, this may be done or it may
not be done.

Conscience is said to be bound as it is considered a part by it self from the
binding power of gods commandment. For then it has liberty and is not bound
either to accuse or excuse, but is apt to do either of them indifferently but
when the binding power is set once over the conscience, the^ in every actio^ it
must needs either accuse or excuse: eue^ as a man in a city or town having his
liberty, may go up and down or not go, where and when he will: but if his body
be attached by the magistrate and imprisoned, the^ his former liberty is
restrained, and he can go up and down but within the prison or some other
allowed place.

The binder of conscience is either proper or improper. Proper is that thing
which has absolute and sovereign power in it self to bind the conscience.
And that is the word of God written in the books of the old and new Testame^^.
Reason. I. He which is the Lord of (...) by his word and laws binds con^: but
God is the only Lord of conscience* bec^^se he once created it, and he alone
gouer^ (...) none but he knows it. Therefore his word and laws only bind
conscience properly. II. (...) which has power to s^^e or destroy the (...)
for the keeping or breaking of his laws, ^ath absolute power to bind the soul
and cons^^ence by the same laws: but the first is true of God alone, Iam. 3.
12. There is (...) lawgiver which is able to save and destroy. Isa^. 33. 22.
The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our lavvginer, the Lord is our King, and
he will save us. Therefore the word of God alone by an absolute and sovereign
power binds conscience. Because this point is clear of it self, further
proof is needless.

Hence we are taught sundry points of instruction. I. Such as are ignorant
among us must labor to get knowledge of gods word, because it binds
conscience. Neither will the plea of ignora^^e serve for excuse: because whether
we know gods laws or know them not, they still bind us. And we are bound not
only to do them, but when we know them not, we are further bound not to be
ignorant of them, but to seek to know them. If we had no more sins our
ignorance were sufficient to condemn us. II. Gods word is to be obeyed though
we should offend all men, yea loose all men's favor, and suffer the greatest
damage that may be, even the loss of our lives. And the reason is at hand*
because gods word has this prerogative to bridle, bind, and restrain the
conscience. III. Whatsoever we enter^se or take in hand, we must first search
whether God give us liberty in conscience and warra^^ to do it. For if we do
otherwise, conscience (...) bo^nd* presently to charge us of sin before god.
Lastly we do here see how dangerous the case is of all time-seruers that will
live as they list and be of no certain religion till differences and dissentions
therein be ended, and they have the determination of a general counsel: for
whether these things come to pass or no, certain i^ is that they are bound in
conscience to receive and believe the ancient, Prophetical, and Apostolical
doctrine touching the true worship of god and the way to (...) everlasting,
which is the true religion. The same is to be said of all drowsy protestants
and lukewarme-gospellers that use religion not with that care and conscience
they ought, but only then and so far forth as it serves for their turns,
commonly neglecting or despising the assemblies where the word is preached: and
seldom frequenting the Lords table unless it be at Easter. Like silly wretches
they neither see nor feel the constraining power that gods word has in their
consciences.

Gods word is either Law or Gospel. The law is a part of Gods word of things to
be done o^ to be left undone. And it is threefold^ moral, judicial,
ceremonial.

Moral law concerns duties of love partly to God and partly toward our
neighbor ^t is contained 4. Of the moral law binding.
in the decalogue or 10. commandments: and it is the very law of nature
written in all men^ heart^ (for substance though not for the m^ner of
propounding of it) in the creation of man: and therefore it binds the
consciences of all men at all times, even of blind and ignorant persons that
neither know the most of it nor care to know it. Yet here must be remembered 3.
exceptions or cautions. I. When two commandments of the moral law are
opposite in respect of v^so as we can not do them both at the same time: then
the lesser commandment gives place to the greater and does not bind for that
instant. Example. I. God commands one thing, and the magistrate commands the
flat contrary: in this case which of these two commandments must be obeyed,
Honor God, or, (...). C^.
Honor the Magistrate? the answer is, that the latter must give place to the
former, and the former must only be obeyed. Act. 4. 19. Whether it be right in
the sight of God to obey you rather the^ God judge ye. II. The 4. commandment
prescribes rest on the Sabbath day* now it (...) out that at the same time a
whole tow^ (...) set on fire, and the sixth commandment requires our help in
saving our neighbors life and goods. Now of these two commandments which must
be obeyed? for both can not. The answer is, that the fourth commandment at
this time is to give place, and the sixth commandment alone binds the
conscience: so as then (if need should require) a man might labor all the day
without offense to God. Matt. 9. 13. I will have mercy and not sacrifice. And
the rule must not be omitted, That charity toward our neighbor is subordinate
to the Love of God, and therefore must give place to it. For this cause the
commandment concerning Charity must give place to the commandment concerning
love to god: and when the case so falls out, that we must either offend our
neighbor or God, we must rather offend our neighbor then God.

II. Caution. When God gives some particular commandment to his people,
dispensing with some other commandment of the moral law: for that time it
binds not. For all the 10. commandments must be conceived with this condition,
Except god command otherwise. Example. I. The sixth commandment is, Thou shall
not kill: but God gives a particular commandment to Abraham. Abraham offer thy
son Isaac in sacrifice to me. And this latter commandment at that instant
did bind Abraham: and he is therefore commended for his obedience to it. II.
And when God commanded the children of Israel to compass Ierico seven days
and therefore on the Sabbath, the fourth commandment prescribing the
sanctifying of rest on the Sabbath for th^^ instant and in that action did not
bind conscience.

III. Caution. One and the same commandment in some things binds the
conscience more straightly, and in doing some other things less* (...) 6. 10.
Do good to all men, but sp^ (...) them that be of the household of faith. Hence
it arises, that though all* sins be mortal and deserve eternal death, yet
all are not equal, but some more grievous then others.

Judicial laws of Moses are all such as prescribe order for the execution of
justice and 5. Of Iu^^cials binding.
judgment in the commonwealth. They were specially given by God, and directed
to the Jews: who for this very cause were bound (...) conscience to keep them
all: and if the commonwealth of the Jews were now standing in the old estate,
no doubt they should continue still to bind as before.

But ^^uching other nations and specially Christian common wealths in these
d^^es, the case is otherwise. Some are of opinion, that the whole judicial law
is wholly abolished: and some again run to the other extreme, holding that
Judicial laws bind Christians as straightly as Jews: but no doubt, they are
both wide* and the safest course, is to keep the mean between both.
Therefore the Judicial laws of Moses according to the substance and scope
thereof must be distinguished* in which respects they Iuris particul^.
are of two sorts. Some of them are laws of particular equity, some of I^^is
(...).
common equity. Laws of particular equity, are such as prescribe justice
according to the particular estate and condition of the Jews commonwealth and
to the circumstances thereof time, place, persons, things, actions. Of this kind
was the law, (...) brother should rais^ up seed to his brother, and many such
like* and none of them bind us because they were framed and ^pered to a
particular people.

I^als of common equity are such as are made according to the law or instinct
of nature common to all men: and these, in respect of their (...)nce, bind the
consciences not only of the Jews but also of the Gentiles: for they were not
given to the Jews as they are Jews, that is, a people received into the (...)
above all other nations, brought from Egypt to the land of Canaan, of whom the
Messiah according to the flesh was to co(...) but they were given to them as
they were mortal men subject to the order and la(...)s of nature as all other
nations are. Again judicial la(...), so far forth as they have in them the
general or common equity of the law of nature are moral: and therefore
binding in con^, (...) the moral law.

A Judicial law may be known to be a law of common equity, if either of these
two things be found in it. First, if wise men not only among the Jews, but
also in other nations have by natural reason and conscience judged the same to
be equal, just, and necessary: and withal, have testified this their
judgment by inacting laws for their commonwealths, the same in substance
with sundry of the Judicial laws given to the Jews: and the Roman^ Emperors
among the rest have done this most excellently, as will appear by conferring
their laws with the laws of God. Secondly a Judicial has common equity, if
it serve directly to explane and confirm any of the ten precepts of the
Decalogue: or, if is se^ directly to maintain and uphold any of the three
estates of the family, the commonwealth, the Church. And whether this be so or
no, it will appear, if we do but consider the matter of the law, and the
reasons or considerations upon which the Lord was moved to give the fame unto
the Jews. Now to make the point in hand more plain, take an example or two.
It is a Judicial law of God that murderers must be put to death: now the
question is whether this law for substance be the common equity of nature
binding consciences of Christians or not and the answer is, that without
further doubting it is so. For first of all, this law has bin by common
consent of wise lawgiuers enacted in many countries and kingdoms beside the
Jews. It was the law of the Egyptians and ^ip i^ H^^^^^.
old Grecians of Draco, of Numa, and of many of the Roman T^^^d of and
A^^^^^. lib. 3. C. de Episc. (...).
Emperors. Secondly this law serves directly to maintain obedience to the
sint commandment: and the consideration upon which the law was made is so
weighty that without it a commonwealth can not stand. The murderers blood
must be shed (says the Lord Numb. 35. v. 33, 34.) because the whole land
is defiled with blood, and remains vn^d, till his blood be shed, Again it
was a judicial law among the Jews that the adulterer and adulteress should
die the death; now let the question be whether this law concern other ^ns as
being derived from the common law of nature: and it seems to be so. For first
wise men by the light of reason and natural conscience have judged this
punishment equal and just. Judah before this Judicial law was given by Moses,
appointed Genesis 38. 14.
Tamar his daughter in law to be ^rnt to death for playing the whore.
Nabuchadnezzar burnt Echa^ and Zedechias because they Iere. 29. 23.
committed adultery with their neighbors wives. By Dracoes law among the
Grecians I^st. (...) lex Julian. de publ iudicii^.
this sin was death, and also by the law of the Romans. Again, this law
seems directly to maintain necessary obedience to the seventh commandment:
and the considerations upon which this law was given are perpetual, and serve
to uphold the common wealth. Lev. 20. 22. Ye (says the Lord) shall keep all
mine or dinances and. my judgments [the law of adultery being o^^ of them.)
Now mark the reasons. 1. (...) the land (...) you out. 2. For the same suns
I have ab borred the nations.

The ce^oniall law is that which prescribes (...). Of ceremonial l^w^ biuding.
Aug. (...). 19. ad (...).
rites and orders in the outward worship of God It must be considered in three
times. The first is time before the coming (...) death of Christ: the second,
the time of publishing the (...) by the Apostles: the third, the time after the
publishing of the Gospel.

In the first, it did bind the consciences of the Jews, and the obedience of
it was the true worship of God. But it did not th^^ bind the consciences of the
Gentiles, for it was the partition wall between them and (...) ^es. And it did
continue to bind the (...) ^^ll the very death and ascension of C^. For (...)
the hand writing of ordinances (...) was against us was nailed on the cross
(...) cancelled. And when Christ says, that the (...) and the (...) endured
till ^ohn, Luke (...). (...). (...) meaning is not, that the ceremonial law
ended then: but that things foretold by the prophets, and ob^ly prefigured by
the (...) law, began then more plainly to be preached and made manifest.

The second time was from the ascension of Christ, till about the time of the
destruction of the Temple and city: in which, ceremonies ceased to bind
conscience and remained indifferent. Hereupon Paul circumcised Timothy: the
Apostles after Christ's ascension, as occasion was offered were present in the
^emple, Act. 3. 1: And the council of Jerusalem tendering the weakness of
some believers, decreed that the Church for a time should abstain from
strangled and blood And there was good reason of this, because the Church of
the Jews was not yet sufficiently convicted that an end was put to the
ceremonial law by the death of Christ.

In the third time, which was after the publishing of the Gospel; ceremonies
of the Jews Church became unlawful, and so shall continue to the worlds end.

By this it appears what a monstrous and miserable religion the Church of Rome
teaches and maintains; which stands wholly in ceremonies, partly heat
heathenish and partly Jewish.

As for the Gospel, I take it for that part of the word of God which promises
righteousness 7. Of the Gospel binding.
and life everlasting to all that believe in Christ, and withal commands
this faith.

That we may the better know, how the gospel binds conscience, two points must
be considered: one touching the persons bound, the other touching the manner of
binding.

Persons are of two sorts; some be called, some be uncalled. Persons called are
all such to whom God in mercy has offered the means of salvation, and has
revealed the doctrine of the gospel in some measure more or less by means
either ordinary or extraordinary. All such I think are straightly bound in
conscience to believe and obey the Gospel. For that word of God, whereby men
shall be judged in the day of judgment, must first of all bind their
consciences in this life, considering absolution and condemnation is according
to that which is done in this life: but by the Gospel, all men that have been
called, shall be judged as Paul says, Roman. 2. 16. God shall judge the
secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel. And our Savior Christ
says, He that believes has life everlasting, he which believes not is
already condemned. It remains therefore, that the gospel binds the
consciences of such men in this life. By this we are all put in mind not to
content our selves with this, that we have a liking to the Gospel, and do
believe it to be true (though many protestants in those our days think it
sufficient ^oth in life and death, if they hold that they are to be saved by
faith alone in Christ without the merit of man's works) but we must go yet
further, and enter into a practice of the doctrine of the Gospel as well as of
the precepts of the moral law; knowing that the gospel does as well bind
conscience as the law, and if it be not obeyed will as well condemn.

Men uncalled, are such as never heard of Christ by reason the gospel was
never revealed unto them, nor means of revelation offered. That there have been
such in former ages, I make it manifest thus. The world since the creation may
be distinguished into four ages. The first, from the creation to the floode:
the second, from the flood to the giving of the Law: the third, from the
giving of the law to the death of Christ: the fourth, from the death of Christ
to the last judgment. Now in the three former ages, there was a distinction of
the world into two so^^es of men, whereof one was a people of God, the other
^o-people. In the first age in the families of Seth, Noe, etc. were the sons
of God, in all other families the sons of men. Genes. 6. 2. In the second age
were the sons of the flesh and the sons of the promise, Roman. 9. 7. In the
third, Jews and G^ the Jews being the Church of God, all nations b^ no
church. But (...) the last age, this distinction was taken a^ the Apostles had
a commission given them that was never given before to any namely, to go teach
not only the Jews but all nations. Now this distinction arose of this, that
the gospel was not revealed to the world before the co^ing of Christ, as the
scriptures wi^^es. The Prophet Esa^ says, 52. 14. that kings s^ (...) their
(...) (...) at Christ because that which ^ad not b^ld (...) they shall see, and
that which they ^^d (...) (...) (...)l they understand. And 55. 5. that a
nation that knew him not shall run unto him. Paul says of the Ephesians that
in former times they were without God and without Christ, strangers from the
^^venant, Ephesians. 2. 12. And to the Atheni^^s he says, (...) the times before the
co^ing of Christ were times of ignorance, Act. 17. 30. And that it may not be
thought that this ignorance was affected, Paul ^aith further that God in ti^e^
past suffered the Gentiles to walk in their (...) (...) (...), Act. 14. 16.
and that the myster^e of the Gospel was kept secret from the beginning of the
world, ^^d^s now in the last age r^led to the whole world, Romans 16. 25. Some
allege that the Jews being the Church of God, had tr^cke with all nations,
and by this means sp^^d some little knowledge of the Messia^ thorough the
whole world: I answer again that the conference and speech of Jewish merchants
with forrainers was no sufficient means to publish the promise of salvation by
Christ to the whole world* first because the Jews for the most part have
always bin more ready to receive ^^y new and false religion, then to teach
their own: secondly because the very Jews thems^, though they were well
acquainted with the ^es of their religion, yet the s^^stance thereof which was
Christ figured by ex^ll ceremonies, they knew not: and hereupon the Pharisees
when they made a Prosolyte, they made him ten times more the child of the d^ll
then themselves. Thirdly, because men are ^^^ome or never suffered to profess
or make any speech of their religion in foreign countries. Again, if it b^
alleged that the doctrine of the Gospel is set down in the books of the old
Testament, which men through the whole world might have read, searched, and
known if they would; I answer that the keeping of the books of the old
Testament, was committed to the Jews alone, Romans 3. 2. and therefore they were
not given to the whole world, as also the Psalmist testifies, H^ s^th his word
unto Jacob his statutes and his judgments unto Isra^l; he has not dealt so
with every nation, neither have they k^ his judgments, Psalm. 147. 8.

Now touching such persons as have not so much as heard of Christ, though they
are apt and fit to be bound in conscience by the Gospel in as much as they are
the creatures of God, yet are they not indeed actually bound till such time as
the Gospel be revealed or at the least (...) of revelation offered. Reasons
hereof may be these I. Whatsoever doctrine or law does (...) conscience, must in
some part be know^by (...) or by grace or by both: the understanding must first
of all conceive, or at the least have means of conc^ing, before conscience can
constrain: because it b^^deth by virtue of known con^ in the mind. Therefore
things that are altogether unknown and vnconceiued of the understanding, do
not bind in conscience: now, the Gospel is altogether unknown and vn^d of
many, as I have already proved, and therefore it binds not them in
conscience. II. Paul says. Romans 2. 12. They which s^e without the law
[written] shall be condemned without the law: therefore they which sin
without the Gospel, shall be condemned without the Gospel: and such as shall be
condemned without the Gospel after this life, were not bound by it in this
life. Augustine the most judicial Div^^^ of all the ^ent f^^hers upon these
words of Christ, but now they (...) (...) (...) Ioh. 15. 10.
of their (...), says on this manner, A doubt Augu^^. ^rac^. 89. (...) Job.
may be ^d whether they to whom Christ has not co^^, neither has spoken
unto them, (...) a^ excuse for their s^e. For if they have (...) not, why is
it said that these [namely the Iewes] (...) (...) excuse because he came and
sp^ke to the (...) and if they have it, whether it be that their p^t may be
taken a^y quite, or in part l^d. To these dem^des according to my capaciti^ as
the Lord (...) i^ me I answer, that they to whom C^ (...) not, neither has
spoken unto them, (...) (...) (...) not of every s^e but of this (...), (...)
^y have not believed in Christ. Again, (...) (...)* to inquire whether those,
who before Christ (...) in his Church to the ^^^til^^, (...) (...) ^eard his
Gospel, have bi^ (...) (...) (...) death, may use this excuse? D^ (...), but
they shall not therefore es^ (...)* (...) whosoever have s^ed without the*
(...) perish without the Law.

As for the reasons which some of the schoolmen have alleged to the contra^,
they are answered all by T^. (...). 2. (...). 10. art. 1.
men of the same order, and I will briefly touch the principal. First i^ (...)
objected that the holy Ghost shall judge the worl^^ of (...), because they have
(...) bele^ved in Christ, Ioh. 16. 9. I answer that by the world we must not
understand (...) and ^y man s^e the creation, but all nations and kingdoms in
the last age of the world, to whom the Gospel was ^ed. Thus has Paul
expounded this word, Romans 11. 12. The fall of them is the riches of the world,
and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles. v. 15. The casting of
them away is the reconciling of the world Secondly it is objected that the law
binds all men in conscience though the greatest part of it ^e unknown to them.
Ans^. The low was once given to Adam and imprinted in his heart (...) his first
creation, and in him as b^^ing the root of all mankin^, it was given to all
men: and as when he ^ed (...) men ^ed in him, so when he was inlighte^d all
were enlightened in him, and consequently when his conscience was bound by the
l^w, all were bound in him. And though this knowledge be lost by man's default,
yet the bond r^s still on Gods part. Now the case i^ otherwise with the
Gospel, which was never written in man's nature, but was g^n after the fall and
is above nature. Here a further reply is made, that the covenant made with
Adam. The seed of the (...) shall br^se the serpe^^s ^ead, was also made with
his seed which is all mankind, and was afterward con^d with Abraham to all
nations. I answer again, that Adam was a ^^o^e of mankind only in respect of
men's (...) with the gifts and (...) thereon was no root in respect of grace
which is above nature, but Christ the second Adam. And therefore when God gave
the promise unto him and faith to believe the promise, he did not in him give
(...) both to all mankind: neither, if Adam had afterward fallen from faith in
the M^, should all ^inde agai^^ (...) ^f grace w^ (...) ^o Ad^^^ (...) (...)
(...) (...) it appears; b^^^^se (...) God did (...) (...) the cov^t, b^ (...)
to the (...) of N^^ and Abr^, (...) it w^^ res^ed to Isaac, (...) Isaac (says
the Lord) (...) ^hy s^^^^ be (...); yea in the very (...) of the (...) (...) is
a distinction made of the se^d^ of the w^m^n and the se^^ of the serpe^ which
^eed^ of the ^erpent is a (...). Io^. 3. (...).
part of mankind, (...) it (...) ex^^^ded from the covenant. And where the
(...) promised to Abraham that in his ^eede all (...) ^ions of the earth should
be blessed, the ^ise must not be understood of all men in (...) ^^e, but of all
^^tion^ in the last age of the (...). And thus P^ath cleared there^, (...). 3.
8. The Scripture fore se^ing that God vv^ld iusti^ the Gentiles thr^^gh ^aith
[which was done after Christ's (...)] (...) pre^hed before the ^^spel to A^,
(...) t^ shall (...) be blessed. Lastly it may be objected, (...) if any man be
ignorant of the doctrine of ^tion by Christ, it is through his own fault: it
is true indeed that all ig^ce of the doctrine of salvation com^ ^h man's fault
and sin: but sin must be ^istinguished; it is either person, o^ the (...)
of man's nature. Now in them that (...) heard of Christ, (...) (...) i^ this
point proceeds not of (...) personal (...) in them, but ^ly from the (...) of
(...) nature, (...) i^, the ^e of (...) (...) to ^kind^* which (...) is
punished when God (...) (...) (...) to the. Now many things there be (...) men
proceeding from this s^, which (...) are no sins, as the m^nifold miseries of
this li^^: and so I take the ignorance of things above ma^^ nature altogether
vn^^^ealed, to be no ^inne (...) a punishment of original sin.

Thus much ^f the persons which are bound by the Go^^^^: now (...) (...) how
farre^ they are ^d by (...)*

God in the Gospel g^lly (...) two points unto (...) the first that there is
perfect ^igh^^ousnes and life (...) ^o (...) Christ: the second, that the (...)
to obtain righteousness and life (...) Christ. Moreover when this Gospel (...)
dispe^sed and preached unto us, God ^les unto us two points more: the first,
(...) ^ee (...) make us particularly to be partakers of true righteousness and
life everlasting by C^ the second, that he will have us with doubting to
believe thus much of our s^, and for this cause every man to (...) ^he (...) is
^led, i^ bound to believe his (...) no d^^tion, justification, sanctification,
and glori^^cation in and by Christ. The reasons and (...) (...) this point out
of the w^^d of God ^re th^^^* (...). 1. Io^. (...). This is his (...) that we
believe i^ the name of his s^e ^^s^^ Christ, and love (...) (...) (...) as ^e
ga^e us c^ment. Now to believe in Christ, is not con^^sedly to believe that he
is a redeemer of mankind, but withal to believe that he is my ^iour, and that
I am elected, justified, sanctified, and shall be glorified by him. This is
granted of all then, yea of the Papists themselves, which otherwise are (...)
^f this doctrine. For ^berd says, To belee^e i^ Go^ is by believing to love,
^^d (...) i^ ^^re to g^^ into God: by belee^ing (...). (...). 3. (...). (...).
to cl^ unto him, and as it were to be (...) into his ^bers. II. Paul, Gal. 2.
^6. first of all propounds a general sentence, That a (...) is (...) justified
by the works of the law, (...) by the faith of Christ. Afterwa^d he adds a
special application, Even we (namely Iowes) (...) believed in Jesus Christ,
that we might be justified by the faith of Jesus Christ; and in v. (...). he
descends more specially to apply the Gospel to himself, I live (says he) by
the faith of the son of God, who has loved (...) and (...) himself for me.
And in this kind of application there is nothing peculiar to Paul, for in this
very action of his he is an example unto us, 1. Tim. 1. 16. F^^ this cause
(says he) was I received to (...), that Jesus Christ should she^ first (...)
(...) all long ^^ffering unto the e^sample of the^ which shall in time to c^e
belee^e in ^im to ^ter^^ll life. Again Philip. 3. 8. he says, I think
allthings but loss, that I might win Christ, and might be fo^n^ in him not
having mi^e ^vv^e righteousness, but that which is through the faith of Christ,
that I may know him (...) the v^^^^^ of his resurrection: and af^erward he
^ddeth. v. 15. Let us as many as be perfect be (...) mi^^ed. III. Whatsoever we
pray for according to Gods will, we are bound to believe that it shall be given
unto us. Mark. 11. 24. Whatsoever ye des^ when ye pray, belee^^ that y^ shall
have i^, and it shall be done unto you. But we pray for the pardon of our own
sins, and for life everlasting by Christ; and that according to the will of
God. Therefore we are bound in conscience to believe the p^^don of our own
sins and life everlasting. IV. If God should speak particularly to any man,
and say unto him, Cornelius, or Peter, believe thou in Christ, and thou shall
be saved; this commaundem^^^ should bind him particularly. Now when the
Minister lawfully called, in the name and stead of God publishes the Gospel to
the congregation, that is as much as if God himself had spoken to them
particularly; calling each of them by their names and promising unto them life
everlasting in Christ. 2. Cor. (...). 20. We as ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did be seech you through us, pray you in Christ's stead, that ye be
re^^^ciled to God.

It may be and is objected, that if every man be bound in conscience to believe
his own Election and salvation by Christ, then some men are bound to believe
that which is false, because some there be even in the midst of the Church,
which in the counsel of God were never chosen to salvation. I answer, that
this reason were good, if men were bound absolutely to believe their salvation
without further respect or condition: but the bond is conditional, according
to the tenor of the covenant of grace; for we are bound to believe in Christ,
if we would come to life everlasting, or if we would be in the ^uour of God, or
if we would be good disciples and members of Christ.

In that we are bound in conscience on this manner to believe the promises of
the Gospel with an application of the benefits thereof to our selves, sundry
necessary and profitable points of instruction may be learned. The first, that
the popish Doctors abolish a great part of the Gospel, when they teach that
men are bound to believe the Gospel only by a Catholic says, which they
make to be nothing else but a gift of God, or illumination of the mind,
whereby assent is given to the word of God that it is true; and more specially
that Jesus is Christ, that is, an all-sufficient Savior of mankind. All which
the damned spirits believe: whereas the Gospel for the comfort and salvation of
men's souls has a further reach, namely to inioyne men to believe that the
promise of salvation is not only true in it self, but also true in the very
person of the believer, as appears evidently by the Sacraments which are as it
were a visible Gospel, in which Christ with all his benefits is offered and
applied to the particular persons of men: to this end, no doubt, that they
might believe the accomplishment of the promise in themselves.

Secondly, we learn that it is not presumption for any man to believe the
remission of his own sins: for to do the will of God to which we are bound,
is not to presume: now it is the will of God to which he has bound us in
conscience, to belo^ue the remi^^ion of our own sins: and therefore rather
(...) to do it is p^ous disobedience.

Thirdly, we are here to ^^rke and to re^ber with care, the foundation of the
(...) certen^e of man's salo^ion For if man be bound in conscience first to give
assent to the Gosp^t and secondly to apply (...) to himself by true faith,
then without doubt a man by faith may be certainly persuaded of his own (...)
and salvation in this (...) without any ext^ordinarie revelation: Gods
commandments being in this and the like case^ possible. For commandments
are either Legal or Evangelicall. Legal show us ^^t disease, but give us no
remedy: and the perfect doing of them according to the intent of the law
giver, by reason of man's weakness and through man's default, is impossible in
this world. As for Evangelicall commandments, they have this privilege, that
they may and can be performed according to the intention of the Lawgiuer in
this life: because with the commandment is joined the inward operation of the
spirit, to enable us to effect the duty commanded: and the will of God is not
to require absolute perfection at our hands in the Gospel as in the law: but
rather to qualify the rigor of the law by the satisfaction of a mediator in
our steads and of us (we being in Christ) to accept the upright will and
endeavor for the deed; as the will to repent, and the will to believe, for
repentance and true faith indeed. Now then if things required in the Gospel,
be both ordinary and possible, then for a man to have an unfallible certainty
of his own salvation, is both ordinary and possible. But more of this point
afterward.

Lastly, all such persons as are troubled with (...), distrustings, unbelief,
despair of Gods mercy, are to learn and consider that God by his word binds
them in conscience to be^^^ue the pardon of their own sins be they never so
grievous or many, and to be^^^e their own Election to salvation whereof they
doubt, M^^^^hat are but civil have care to avoid robbing and killing, because
God gives commandments against stealing and killing: why then should not we
much more strive against our manifold doubtings and distrustings of Gods love
in Christ, having a commandment of God that calls upon us and binds us to do
so.

Thus we see how Gods word binds consciences now conscience being thus bound,
again binds us.

The bond of conscience is called Guiltines. Guiltines is nothing else but a
work of the conscience, binding over a man to a punishment before God for some
sin.

Thus much of the propet binder of the conscience: now follows the improper.

The improper binder is that which has no power or virtue in it self to bind
conscience: but does it only by virtue of Gods word or of some part of it. It
is threefold, Humane laws, an Oath, a Promise.

Touching humane laws, the special point to be considered is, In what manner
they ^8. Of humane laws binding.
bind. That this may in part be cleared, I will stand a while to examine and
confute the opinion that the very pillars of the popish Church at this day
maintain; namely, that Civil and Ecclesi^sticall Iuris^^ction have a coactive
power in the conscience, and that the (...) made thereby do as truly and
properly bind (as they speak) to mortal and venial sin, as Gods law it
self. The arguments which they commonly use, are these.

Argum. 1. Deuteronomy. 17. That man that will (...) presumptuous^y, and not ob^y the
Imperis.
au^ horitie of the priest, or I^dge, shall (...) and th^^ shall take away
evil from Israel. Here (say they) the precepts of the high priest are princely
commandments.
Imperia, not ^dmonitions or exhortations, and they bind in conscience;
otherwise the transgressors thereof should not have bin punished so severely.
Answ. The intent of this law (as a very child may perceiu^) is to establish the
authoriue and right of the highest appeals for all matters of controversy in
the Synedrium o^ great court at Ierusa lem. Therefore the words alleged do
not give unto the priest a sovereign power of making laws, but a power of
giving judgment of controversies, and that according to laws already made by
God himself: from which judgment there might be no appeal. Now this power
of determining does not constrain conscience, but the outward man to maintain
order and peace. For what reason is there that that sentence which might be
either a gainsaying of Gods law, or a mistaking of it, should bind the
conscience to a sin. Again, not every one that refused to subject themselves
to the sentence of this court, were straightway guilty of sin (for this did
Jeremy the Prophet, Ier. 26 11, 1^
and Christ our Savior, when they were condemned for wicked persons) but he
that presumptuously despised the sentence, and by consequent the authority it
self, which was the ordinence of God, was guilty. Lastly, the severity of
the punishment, which is temporal death, does not argue any power in the judge
of binding conscience: this they might have learned of their own D^ct^^ (...),
who holds 1 (...) (...). (...) sect. 4.
that they that bind any man to mortal sin, m^st be able to punish him with
answe^rable punishment, which is eternal death.

Argum^ Math. 16. What soever ye shall bind upon (...) shall be (...) in
heaven. Here to bind, is to make laws ^ning conscience according to Matthew.
23. 4. They bind (...) bur^^ns, and lay the^^ (...) men's (...). Answer. The
(...) power of binding and soo^, is not belonging to any creature; but is
p^op^^ to Christ, who has the keys of heaven and hell, he opens and no man
she h^ (...) ^^d no man opens, R^ 3. 7. As for the power of the Church it is
nothing but (...) ministry of service whereby men publish and pro^ that
Christ binds or Ido^eth. Again, this binding stands not in the power of
making laws, but in remitting and retaining of m^n's sins, as the words
going before declate, v. 18. If thy brother sin against thee, and^. and
Christ ^^eweth h^* own meaning, when he ^^ith, Whose sins ye remit they are
remitted, and ^^hose sins (...) retain they are retained, Ioh. 20. 23. (...)
before in the person of Peter promised them this honor, in this form of
words, Math. 16. I vvillgiue unto thee the keys of the king dome of ^e (...),
what soever th^^ shall bind upon earth, sh^^ be bo^ in ^e (...). This which I
say, is approved by consent of ancient Divines, August. Psalm. 101. ser. 2.
Remission of s^ (says he) is loosing: therefore by the law of contraries,
binding is to hold sin unpardoned. Hilar. upon Math. cap. 18. Whom they
bind on earth, that is (says he) leave untied of the knots of their s^^nes.
Lumberd the popish master Lib. 4. di^t. (...). cap. 4.
of sentences, The Lord, says he, has given to priests power of binding and
loosing, that is, of making manifest that men are bound or loosed Again both
Origin, on Mat. (...).
Augustine, and Theophilact attribute the power of biuding to all upon Ioh.
Christians, and therefore they for their parts never dreamed that the power
of binding should be an authority to make laws. Lastly, the place Matt. 23. 4.
overturnes the argument, for there the Scribes and Phanses are condemned,
because they laid upon men's shoulders the burdens of their traditions as means
of God^ worship and things binding conscience.

Arg. 3. Act. 15. It seems good unto us and the Holy Ghost, to lay no more
burden on you the^ these necessary things, that ye abstain from things
offered to i^ols, and blood, and that which is strangled, and fo^nication.
Here, say they, the Apostles by the instinct of the holy ghost make a new law
not for this or that respect, but simply to bind consciences of the Gentiles
that they might be exercised in obedience. And this is proved because the
Apostles call this law a burden, and call the things prescribed necessary, and
S. Luke terms them, the commandments of the Apostles: and Chrysostom calls
the Epistle sent to the Church, Imperium, that is, a lordly charge. To this
they add, the testimonies of Tertullian, Origin, Augustine. Answ. Though all
be granted that the law is a burden imposed, a precept of the Apostles, a
charge, again that things required therein are necessary: yet will it not
follow by good consequent, that the law simply binds conscience: because it
was given with a reservation of Christian liberty, so as out of the case of
scandal, that is, if no offense were given to the weak Jews, it might freely
be omitted. And that will appear by these reasons. First of all Peter says,
that it is a tempting of God, to impose upon the Gentiles the yoke of Jewish
ceremonies: he therefore must needs be contrary to himself if he intend to
bind men's consciences to abstinence from strangled, blood, and things offered
to idols. A reply is made, that this abstinence is prescribed not by the
ancient law of Moses, but by a new Ecclesiastical or Apostolical authority. I
answer again, that a Mosaicall ceremony is still the same thing though it be
stablished by a new authority. And whereas Christ by his death put an end to the
ceremonial law, it is absurd to think that the Apostles by their authority
revived some part of it again, and bound men's consciences thereto. Secondly the
Church of god in all places suffered this commandment to cease, which the
faithful servants of God would never have done, if they had bin persuaded that
this law had bound conscience simply. It is answered, that this law ceased not
because the giving of offense unto the Jews ceased, but because it ceased
universally: yea but it could not have ceased universally, if it had bound
conscience simply, specially considering it was propounded to the Church
without any mention or limitation of time. Thirdly Paul was present in this
counsel and knew the intent of this law very well, and therefore no doubt he
did not in any of his Epistles gainsay the same. This being granted, it can
not be, that this law should bind conscience out of the case of offense. For he
teaches the Corinthians that things offered to idols 1. Cor. 8 9.
may be eaten so be it the weake^ brother be not offended. Here it is answered
that when Paul writ his first Epistle to the Corinthians, this commandment of
the Apostles touching things strangled and blood was not come unto them. Well,
to grant all this which can not be proved, let it be answered, why Paul did
not now deliver it, and why he deliuereth^ doctrine contrary to that which he
had (...) (...) Jerusalem, which was that the Gentiles should absolutely
abstain from things o^d to Idols. As for the testimonies of the fathers they
^bused. Indeed T^li^^ (...) plainly, that christians A^^ cap. 9. Lib de P^.
in his days abstained (...) of blood, and he persvvades men to (...) (...) so
doing, because he is of opinion (being indeed far deceived) that this very
law of the Apostles must l^st to the end of the world ^which conceit if the
Papists hold not, what mean they to build upon him. Origin says, that this
law was very (...). (...). (...)^. (...).
necessary in his days: and no (...). For by Idolithy^^s he understands not
things that have been offered to idols, and are afterward brought 1.
to private houses or to the market as other common meats, but he understands
things that remain 2.
consecrated to idols, and are no where else used but in their temples, which we
grant with him must for ever be avoided a^ means and instruments of Idolatry
whereas the law of the Apostlesspeaks only of the first kind. As for things
strangled and blood, he takes them to be the devils food: and for this cause
he approoues abstinence from them. And whereas Augustine (...). 154. (...)
(...).
says, that it is a good thing to abstain from things offered to idols, though
he be in necessity, (...) must be understoode of the first kind of Idolithy^^^
which ^re yet remaining in the idoltemples still consecrated unto them, and not
of the second, of which the Apostles law (as I have said) must be understood.

Arg. 4. Ioh. 21. Christ says to Peter, [(...)] (...) my (...): that is, (as
the word imports) (...) and rule my sheep. Answ. This feeding and ruling
stands not in making new laws, but in teaching and governing the Church of God
according to the doctrine which they had received from Christ. And this action
of feeding is ascribed to all Christians Revelat. 3. 27. who can not thereupon
challenge a power of making laws to the conscience.

Argum. 5. Ioh. 20. As my father sent me, so I send you: but Christ was sent of
his father not only with power of preaching and ministering the sacraments, but
also with authority of commanding and giving judgment. Answ. Is this kind of
reasoning may stand, all the Apostles shall be made redeemers; for they were
all sent as Christ was: and he was sent not only to preach the redemption of
mankind, but also to effect and work the same. It this be absurd, then it is
a flat abusing of scripture to gather from this saying of Christ, that the
Apostles had power of binding conscience because he had so. It is true indeed
that there is a similitude or analogy between the calling of Christ and his
Apostles; but it wholly stands in these points. Christ was ordained to his
office before all worlds, and so were the Apostles: Christ was called of his
father immediately, and so were they of Christ: Christ was sent to the whole
world, and so were they: Christ received all power in heaven and earth as
being necessary for a mediator; and they received an extraordinary authority
from him with such a plentiful measure of the spirit as was necessary for the
Apostolical function. Lastly Christ was sent even as he was man to be a
teacher of the Jews: and therefore be is called the minister of circumcision,
Romans 15. 8. and so the Apostles are sent by him to teach the Gentiles. Thus far
is the comparison to be enlarged, and no further. And that no man might imagine
that some part of this resemblance stands in a power of binding conscience,
Christ has put a special exception when he says, Go teach all nations,
teaching them to observe al things that I have commanded you.

Arg. 6. Romans 13. Whosoever resists the power resists the ordinance of God:
and, they that resist ^^all receive to them selves judgment: and, ye must be
subject not only for wrath, but also for conscience s^^e. Answ. Magistracy
indeed is an ordinance of God to which we owe subjection, but how far
subjection is due there is the question. For body and goods and outward
co^versation I grant all: but a subjection of conscience to man's laws, I deny.
And between these two there is a great difference to be subject to authority
in conscience, and to be subject to it for conscience, as will be manifest if we
do but consider the phrase of the Apostle, the meaning whereof is, that we must
perform obedience not only for anger, that is, for the avoiding of
punishment, but also for the avoiding of sin, and so by co^sequent for
avoiding a breach in conscience. Now this breach is not properly made because
man's law is neglected, but because Gods law is broken which ordains
magistracy, and withal binds men's consciences to obey their lawful
commandments. And the damnation that is due unto men for resisting the
ordinance of God comes not by the single breach of magistrates commandemet, but
by a transgression of the law of God which appoints magistrates and their
authority. To this answer papists reply nothing that is of moment. Therefore I
proceed.

Arg. 7. 1. Cor. 4. What will you that I come unto you with a rod, or in the
spirit of meeknes? Now this rod is a judicial power of punishing sinners. Answ.
For the regiment and protection of Gods Church. There be 2. rods m^oned in
scripture: the rod of Christ, and the Apostolical rodd. The rod of Christ is
termed a rod of iron or the rod of his mouth, and it signifies that absolute
and sovereign power which Christ has over his creatures whereby he is able to
convert and save them, or to forsake and destroy them. And it is a peculiar
privilege of this rod to smite and wound the conscience. The Apostolical
rod was a certain extraordinary power whereby God enabled them to plague and
punish rebellious offenders with grievous judgments not in their souls but in
their bodies alone. With this rod Paul smote Elimas blind, and Peter smote
Ananias and Saphira with bodily death. And it may be that Paul by this power
did give up the incestuous man when he was excommunicate, to be vexed in his
body and tormented by the devil: but that by this rod the Apostles could
smite conscience, it can not be proved.

Arg. 8. 1. Tim. 3. Paul made a law that none having two wives should be
ordained a Bishop: now this law is positive and Ecclesiastical and binds
conscience. Answ. Paul is not the maker of this law, but God himself, who
ordained that in marriage not three but two alone should be one flesh: and that
they which serve at the altar of the Lord, should be holy. And to grant that
this law were a new law beside the written word of God, yet does it not follow
that Paul was the maker of it: because he used not to deliver any doctrine to
the Churches but that which he received of the Lord.

Argum. 9. Luc. 10. He which hears you, hears me. Answ. These words
properly concern the Apostles, and do not in like manner belong to pastors and
teachers of the Church. And the end of these words is not to confirm any
Apostolical authority in making laws to the conscience; but to signify the
privilege which he had vouchsafed them above all others, that he would so
far forth assist them with his spirit, that they should not err or be
deceived in teaching and publishing the doctrine of salvation, though otherwise
they were sinful men: according to Matthew. 10. It is not you that speak, but
the spirit of my father which speaks in you. And the promise to be led into
all truth was directed unto them.

Arg. 10. 1. Cor. 11. I praise you that ye keep my commandments. Answ. Paul
delivered nothing of his own concerning the substance of the doctrine of
salvation and the worship of God, but that which he received from Christ; the
precepts here meant are nothing else but rules of decency and comely order in
the congregation: and though they were to be obeyed, yet Paul's meaning was not
to bind any man's conscience therewith. For of greater matters he says, This I
speak for your commodity, and not to entangle you in a snare, 1. Cor. 7. 35.

Arg. 11. Councels of ancient fathers when they command or forbid any thing, do
it with threatening of a curse to the offenders. Ans. The church in former time
used to annexe unto her Canons the curse anathema, because things decreed by
them were indeed, or at the least thought to be the will and word of God: and
they had respect to the saying of Paul, If any teach otherwise though he be an
angel from heaven, let him be accursed. Therefore councels in this action were
no more but instruments of God to accurse those, whom he first of all had
accursed.

Arg. 12. An act indifferent if it be commanded is made necessary: and the
keeping of it is the practice of virtue, therefore every law binds conscience
to a sin. Ans. An act in it self indifferent being commanded by man's law is
not made simply necessary, for that is as much as gods law does or can do, but
only in some part, that is, so far forth as the said act or action tends to
maintain and preserve the good end for which the law is made. And though the
action be in this regard necessary, yet does it still remain indifferent as it
is considered in it self out of the end of the law: so as if peace, the
common good and comely order may be maintained and all offense avoided by any
other means, the act may be done or not done without sin before God. For
whereas God himself has given liberty and freedom in the use of things
indifferent, the law of man does not take away the same but only moderate and
order it for the common good.

Arg. 13. The fast of Lent stands by a law and commandment of men: and this
law binds conscience simply: for the ancient fathers have called it a
Tradition Apostolical, and make the keeping of it to be necassary, and the not
keeping of it a sin, and punish the offenders with excommunication. Answer.
It is plain to him that will not be obstinate, that Lent fast was not
commanded in the Primitive Church, but was freely kept at men's pleasures, and
in several Churches diversely both in regard of space of time, as also in
respect of diversity of meats. Ireneus in his epistle to Victor ^ed by Eusebius
Eusebius. l. 5. 26.
says, Some have thought that they must fast o^ day, some two days, some
more, some 40. hours day and night, which diversity of fasting commends the
unity of faith. Spiridion a good (...). lib. 7. cap. 19.
man did eat flesh in Lent, and caused his guest to do the same, and this he
did upon judgment because he was persuaded out of Gods word, that to the
clean all things were clean. And Eusebius records that Montanus the hereuke
was Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 1^.
the first that prescribed solemn and set laws of fasting. And whereas this
fast is called an Apostolical tradition it is no great matter, for it was the
manner of the ancient Church in former times to term rites and orders
Ecclesiastical not set down in scriptures Apostolical orders, that by this
means they might commend Hi^. epist. 1. 8. ad Luc.
them to the people: as Jerome testifies, Every province (says he) may think
the constitutions of the ancestors to be Apostolical laws. And whereas it is
said to be a sin not to fast in Lent (as Augustine speaks) it is not by
reason Ser. de T^. 62.
of any commandment binding conscience, for Augustine says plainly, that
neither Christ nor Epist. ^6.
his Apostles appointed any set time of fasting: and Chrysostom, that Christ
never commanded C^^ysost. on Mat. hom. 47.
us to follow his fast: but the true reason hereof is borrowed from the end.
For the Primitive Church used not the popish fast, which is to eat whitmeate
alone, but an abstinence from all meats used specially to morufie the flesh
and to prepare men beforehand to a worthy receiving of the Eucharist. And in
regard of this good end was the offense. And whereas it is said, that
ancient fathers taught a necessity of keeping this fast, even Hierome whom
they allege to this purpose says the contrary. For confuting the error of
Montanus who had his set times of fast to be kept of necessity, he (...) ed
Marcel. de error. (...).
says, We fast in Lent according to the Apostles tradition as in a time meet
for us: and we do it not as though it were not lawful for us to fast in the
rest of the year except Penticost: but it is one thing to do a thing of
necessity, and anothing to offer a gift of free will. Lastly, excommunication
was for the open contempt of this order taken up in the Church, which was, that
men should fast before Faster for their further humiliation and preparation to
the sacrament. So the 29. cano^ of the council of (...) must be Cang^^
understood. As for the Canons of the Apostles (so falsely called) and the 8.
council of Toledo, I much respect not what they say in this case.

Arg. 14. Gods authority binds conscience: magistrates authority is Gods
authority: therefore magistrates authority binds conscience properly. Ans. Gods
authority may be taken two ways: first for that sovereign and absolute power
which he uses over all his creatures: secondly, for that finite and limited
power which he has (...) that men shall exercise over men. If the minor, (...)
that Magistrates authority is Gods authority, be taken in the first sense, it
is false: for the sovereign power of god is mooue^ic able. If it be taken in
the second sense, the (...) (...) false. For there be sundry authorities
ordained of God, as the authority of the father oner the child, of the master
over the servant, the authority of the master over his scholar, which do not
properly and (...) bind in conscience as the authority of gods laws does.

By these arguments which I have now answered, and by many other being but
lightly (...), it will appear that necessary obedience is to be performed both
to civil and ecciesiasticall jurisdiction: but that they have a constraining
power to bind conscience as properly as gods laws do, it is not yet proved,
neither can it be, as I will make manifest by other arguments.

Arg. 1. He that makes a law binding conscience to mortal sin, has power, if
not to save yet to destroy: because by sin, which follows upon the
transgressio^ of his law, comes death and damnation: But God is the only
lawgiuer that has this privilege, which is, after he has given his law, upon
the breaking or keeping thereof, to save or destroy. Iam 4. 12. There is one
lawgiuer that can save or destroy. Therefore God alone makes laws ^inding
conscience properly, and no creature ca^ do the like. Answer is made that S.
James speaks of the principal lawgiver, that by his own proper authority
makes laws, and does in such manner save and destroy, that he need not fear
to be destroyed of any: and that he speaks not of secondary lawgiuers that are
deputies of god and make laws in his name. I say again that this answer sta^ds
not with the text. For S. James speaks simply without distinction, limitatio^,
or exception: and the effect of his reason is this. No man at all must slander
his brother, because no man must be judge of the law: and no man can be judge
of the law, because no man can be a lawgiver to save and destroy. Now then
where be those persons that shall make laws to the souls of men, and bind
them unto punishment of mortal sin; considering God alone is the saving and
destroying lawgiuer.

Arg. 2. He that can make laws as truly binding conscience as gods laws, can
also prescribe rules of Gods worship: because to bind the conscience is nothing
else but to cause it to excuse for things that are well done, and therefore
truly please God, and to accuse for sin whereby god is dishonored: but no
man can prescribe rules of gods worship; and humane laws as they are humane
laws, appoint not the service of God. Esai. 29. 13. ^^^ir fear toward me was
taught by the precept of (...). Mat. 15. 9. they worship me in vain teach^^^
doctrines which are the commandments of (...). Papists here make answer, that
by laws of men we must understand such laws as be unlawful or unprofitable
being made without the authority of God or instinct of his spirit. It is true
indeed that these commandments of men were unlawful: but the cause must be
considered: they were unlawful not because they commanded that which was
unlawful and against the will of God, but because things in themselves lawful
were commanded as parts of gods worship. To wash the outward part of the cup or
platter, and to Matt. 23. 15.
wash hands before meat; are things in respect of civil use very lawful, and
yet are these blamed by Christ and no other reason ca^ be rendered but this,
that they were prescribed not as things indifferent or civil, but as matters
pertaining to Gods worship. It is not against Gods word in some politic
regards to make distinctions of meats, and drinks, and times: yet Paul calls
these things doctrines of devils, because they were commanded as things wherein
God would be worshipped.

Arg. 3. God has given a liberty to the conscience whereby it is freed from
all laws of his own whatsoever, excepting such laws and doctrines as are
necessary to salvation. Col. 2. 10. If ye be dead with Christ, ye are free
from the elements of the world. Gal. 5. 1. Standye in the liberty where with
Christ has freedyou, and be not again entangled with the yoke of bondage.
Now, if humane laws made after the grant of this liberty, bind conscience
property, then must they either take away the foresaid liberty, or diminish
the same; but that they cannot do: for that which is granted by an higher
authority, namely God himself, cannot be revoked or repealed by the inferior
authority of any man. It is answered, that this freedom is only from the
bondage of sin, from the curse of the moral law, from the ceremonial and
judicial laws of Moses, and not from the laws of our superiors. And I
answer again, that it is absurd to think that God gives us liberty in
conscience from any of his own laws, and yet will have our consciences still to
remain in subjection to the laws o^ sinful men.

Arg. 4. Whosoever binds conscience, commands conscience. For the bond is
made by a commandment urging conscience to do his duty, which is to accuse or
excuse for evil or well doing. Now Gods laws command conscience in as much as
they are spiritual, commanding body and spirit, with all the thoughts, will,
affections, desires, and faculties, and requiring obedience of them all
according to their kind. As for the laws of men, they want power to command
conscience. In deed if it were possible for our governors by law to command
men's thoughts and affections, then also might they command conscience: but the
first is not possible, for their laws can reach no further then to the outward
man, that is, to body and goods, with the speeches and deeds thereof: and the
end of them all is not to maintain spiritual peace of conscience, which is
between man and God, but only that external and civil peace which is
between man and man. And it were not meet that men should command
conscience, which cannot see conscience and judge of all her actions, which
appear not outwardly and whereof there be no witnesses, but God and the
conscience of the doer. Lastly, men are no fit commanders of conscience,
because they are no lords of it, but God himself alone.

Argum. 5. Men in making laws are subject to ignorance and error: and
therefore when they have made a law (as near as possible they can) agreeable
to the equity of Gods law, yet can they not assure themselves and others that
they have failed in no point or circumstance. Therefore it is against reason
that humane laws being subject to defects, faults, errors, and manifold
imperfections, should truly bind conscience, as Gods laws do which are the
rule of righteousness. All governors in the world, upon their daily experience
see and acknowledge this to be true which I say, (by reason that to their old
laws, they are constrained to put restrictions, ampliations, modifications of
all kinds, with new readings and interpretations) saving the Bishop of Rome
(so falsely termed) which persuades himself to have when he is in his
consistory, such an infallible assistance of the spirit that he can not
possibly err in judgment.

Argum. 6. If men's laws by inward virtue bind conscience properly as Gods
laws, then our duty is to learn, study, and remember them as well as Gods
laws, yea ministers must be diligent to preach them, as they are diligent in
preaching the doctrine of the Gospel: because every one of them binds to
mortal finne, as the Papists teach. But that they should be taught and learned
as Gods laws, it is most absurd in the judgment of all men, Papists
themselves not excepted.

Argum. 7. Inferior authority can not bind the superiors no we the courts
of (...) and their authority are under conscience. For God in the heart of
every man has ^rocted a tribunal seal, and in his stead he has pl^^^d
neither saint nor angel, not any other crea^ what soever but conscience it
self, who therefore is the highest judge that is or can be under God; by whose
direction also courts are kept and laws are made.

Thus much of the popish opinion: by which it appears that one of the
principal notes of Antichrist, agrees fuly to the Pope of Rome. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. makes it a special property of Antichrist to exalt himself against
or above all that is called God, or worshipped. Now what does the Pope else,
when he takes upon him authority to make such laws as shall bind the
conscience, as properly and truly as Gods laws? and what does he else, when he
ascribes to himself power to free men's consciences from the bond of such laws
of God, as are unchangeable: as may appear in a canon of the council of
Trent: the words are these, If any shall say, that th^se degrees of
consanguinitie which be expressed in (...).
Leviticus, ^^e (...) hinder (...) to be made, and break it being made, and
that the Church cannot dispense with some of them, or appoint that more degrees
may hinder or break ^^^^age, let him be accursed. O sacrilegious impiety!
considering the laws of affinity and consanguinitie, Lev. 18. are not
ceremonial, or judicial laws peculiar to the Jews, but the very laws of
nature. Wh^^^ this canon else, but a public proclamation to the world, that the
Pope and Church of Rome do sit as lords, or rather idols in the hearts and
consciences of men. This will yet more fully appear to any man, if we read
popish books of practical or Case aivinitie, in which the common manner is, to
bind conscience where God loses it, and to loose where he binds; but a
declaration of this, requires long time.

Now I come (as near as possibly I can) to set down the true manner, how men's
laws are by Divines and may be said to bind conscience. That this may be
cleared, two things must be handled, By what means they bind, and How far
forth.

Touching the means, I set down this rule. Whole some laws of men, made of
things indifferent, bind conscience by virtue of the general commandment of
God, which ordains the Magistrates authority: so as who soever shall
wittingly and willingly, with a disloyal mind, either break or omit such
laws, it guilty of s^^^e before God.

By whole some laws, I understand such positive constitutions, as are not
against the law of God, and withal tend to maintain the peaceable estate and
common good of men.

Furthermore I add this clause, made of things indifferent, to note the
peculiar matter where^ (...) laws properly (...) (...) (...) things (...) are
neither (...) commanded or forbidden by God.

Now such kind of laws have no virtue or power in themselves to constrain
conscience, but they bind only by virtue of an higher commandment. Let every
soul ^e subject to the higher powers, Romans 13. 1. or, Honor father and
mother, Exodus 20. which commandments bind us in conscience to perform
obedience to the good laws of men. As S. Peter says, Submit your selves to
every humane ordinance for the Lord, 1. Pet. 2. 13. that is, for conscience of
God, as he says afterward, v. 19. whereby he signifies two thing: first that
God has ordained the authority of governors: secondly that he has appointed
in his word, and thereby bound men in conscience to obey their governors
lawful commandments.

If the case fall out otherwise, as commonly it does, that humane laws be not
inacted of things indifferent, but of things that be good in themselves, that
is, commanded by God, then are they not (...) properly but divine laws. Men's
laws entreating of things that are morally good, and the parts of Gods
vvorshippe, are the same with Gods laws: and therefore bind conscience, not
because they were inacted by men, but because they were first made by God: men
being no more but instruments and ministers in his name to revive, renew, and
to put in exequution such precepts and laws as prescribe the worship of God,
standing in the practice of true religion and virtue. Of this kind are all
positive laws touching articles of faith, and the duties of the moral law.
And the man that breaks such laws sins two ways, first because he breaks
that which is in conscience a law of God, secondly because in disobaying his
lawful magistrate, he disob^ the general commandment of God touching
magistracy.

But if it shall fall out that men's laws be made of things that are cuill and
forbidden by God, then is there no bond of conscience at all but contrariwise,
men are bound in conscience not to obey, Act. 4. 19. And hereupon the three
children are commended for not obaying Nabuchadnezzar, when he gave a
particular commandment unto them to fall down and worship the golden image,
Dan. 3.

Moreover, in that man's law binds only by power of Gods law, hence it follows,
that Gods law alone has this privilege, that the breach of it should be a
sin. S. John says 1. epist. 3. Sin it the anomie, or, transgressio^ of the
law, understanding Gods law. When David by adultery and murder had offended
many men, and that many ways, he says Psalm. 51. against thee, against thee
have I sinned. And Augustine defined sin to be some thing said, done, or
desired against the law of God. Some man may say, if this be so, belike then we
may break men's laws without sin. I answer, that men in breaking humane
laws, both may and do sin; but yet not simply, because they break them,
but because in breaking them, they do also break the law of God. The breach
of a law must be considered two ways. First as it is a trespass, hinderance,
injury, damage, and in this respect it is committed against men's laws:
secondly the breach of a law must be considered as it is sin, and so it is
only against Gods law.

The second point, namely How farreforth men's laws bind conscience, I explane
on this manner. It is all that the laws of God do or can do, to bind
conscience simply and absolutely. Therefore humane laws bind not simply, but so
far forth as they are agreeable to Gods word, serve for the co^mongood, stand
withgood order, and hinder not the liberty of conscience. The necessity of
the law arises of the necessity of the good end thereof. And as the end is
good and profitable more or less, so is the law it self necessary more or
less.

Hence it follows that a man may do any thing beside humane laws and
constitutions without breach of conscience. For if he shall omit the doing of
any law I. without hindrance of the end and particular considerations, for
which the law was made: II. without offense giving as much as in him lies:
III. without contempt of him that made the law, he is not to be accused of
sin. Example. In time of war, the magistrate of a city commands that no
man shall open the gates: the end is, that the city and every member thereof
may be in safety. Now it falls out that certain citizens being upon occasion
without the city, are pursued by the enemy and in danger of their life's.
Herupon some man within opens the gate to res^e them. The question is,
whether he have sinned or no. And the truth is, he has not: because he did not
hinder the end of the law, but rather further it, and that without scandal to
men, or contempt to the magistrate.

And this stands even by the equity of Gods word. God made a law, that the
priests only should eat of the shewbread: now David being no priest, did upon
urgent occasion eat of it without sin. If this be true in Gods law, then it
may also be true in the laws of men, that they may in some cases be omitted
without sin, against God.

Neither must this seem strange. For as th^re is a keeping of a law, and a
breaking of the same; so there is a middle or mean action betw^^ne them both,
which is, to do thing Fa^^^^ aliquid pr^ter (...), (...) (...) (...).
beside the law, and that without s^^^e.

To proceed further, men's laws be either civil or ecclesiastical. Civil
laws are for their substance determinations of necessary and profitable
circumstances, tend^^^ to ^^hold and maintain the commandem^ of the (...)
(...) More specially they prescribe what is to be do^ and what is to be left
undone, touching actions both civil and criminal, touching offices and
b^rgines of all so^^^, etc. yea they conclude, inioyne, and command not only
such affairs as be of smaller importance. but also things and actions of great
weight, tending to maintain common peace, civil society, and the very state
of the common wealth. Now such laws bind so far forth, that though they be
omitted without any apparan^ s^^ndal or contemp^, yet the breach of them is a
sin against God. Take this example: A subject in this land upon poverty, or
upon a couctous mind, against the good law of the land, coins money, which
after ward by a sleight of his wit, is cunningly conuaied abroad into the hands
of men, and is not espied. Here is no evident offense given to any man, nor
open contempt showed to the lawgiuer: and yet in this action he has sinned, in
that closely otherwise then he ought to have done, he has hindered the good of
the common wealth, and robbed the sovereign prince of her right.

Eccles^sticall laws, are certain necessary and profitable determinations of
circumstances of the commandments of the first table. I say b^^e (...),
because all doctrines pertaining to the foundation and good estate of the
Church, as also the whole worship of God, (...) (...) down and comma^nded in
the written word of God, and cannot be prescribed and concluded otherwise by
all the Churches in the world. A^^or the Creedes and Confession^ of particular
Churches, they are in substance Gods word, and they bind not in conscience by
any power the Church has, but because they are the word of God.

The laws then which the Church in proper speech is s^^de to make, are decrees
concerning outward order and comelines in the administration of the word and
sacram^^s, in the meetings of the congregation, etc. and such laws made
according to the general rules of Gods word, (which requires that all things
be don to edificatio^, in comelines, for the avoiding of offense) are cessarie
to be observed, and the word of God binds all men to the^ so far forth as the
keeping of them maintains decent order, and p^s open offense. Yet if a law
concerning some ^nall ri^e of thing indifferent, be at some time upon some
occasion omitted no offense given, not contempt showed to Ecclestasticall
^^^horitie, there is no b^each made in the conscience: ^^d that appears by the
example before han^^^^. The Apostles guided by the holy Ghost, made a decree
for the avoiding of offense, necessary to be observed, namely that the
Gentiles should abstain from strangled and blood and ido^ithy^^s: and yet Paul
out of the case of scandal and contempt, permits the Corinthians to do
otherwise, 1. Cor. 8. and 9. which he would not h^^^ done, if to do otherwise
out of the case of scandal and contempt had bin sin.

Again, laws are either mixed or merely penal. Mix^, are such laws as are
of weighty matters, and are propounded in commanding or forbidding ^ea^^es:
and they bind men first of all to obedience, for the necessary good of humane
societies and secondly to a punishment, if they obey not, that a supply may be
made of the ^indrance of the common good. In the breach of this kind of laws,
though a man be never so willing to suffer the punishment, yet that will not
discharge his conscience before God when he of^ds. If a man coin mo^y with this
mind to be willing to die when he is con^icted, yet that will not free him
from a sin in the action, because Gods law binds us not only to subjection
i^ ^earing of punishments, but also to obedience of his ^e commandment, it
being lawful, though ^e should set down no punishment.

A law merely pe^^ll is that, which being m^ of matters of less importance,
and not vt^d pre^isely in comm^ding terms, does only declare and show what
is to be done, or conditionally require this or that with respect to the
punishment, on this manner. If any person do this or that, then he shall
forfeit thus or thus. This kind of law kinds especially to the punishment, and
that in the very intent of the lawgiuer, and he that is ready in omitting the
law to pay the fine or punishment, is not to be charged with sin before God:
the penalty being answerable to the loss that comes by the neglect of the law.

Thus we see how far forth men's laws bind conscience. The use of this points
is this: I. hence we learn that the immunitie of the Popish clergy whereby
they take themselves exempted from civil courts and from civil authority in
criminal causes, has no warrant: because Gods commandments binds every man
whatsoever to be subject to the magistrate, R^. (...). Let every soul be s^ct
to the higher powers. II Hence we see also, what notorio^^ rebe^ those are,
that being borne subi^cts of this land, yet choose rather to die then to
acknowledge (as they are bound in con^) the Q^ Ma^estie to be supreme
governor under God in all causes and over all persons. III. Lastly we are
taught hereby to be ready and willing to give subjection, obedience,
reverence, and all other duties to magistrates, whether they be superiou or
inferior: yea with chearefulnes to pay (...) and subsidies, and all such
lawful charges (...) appointed by them. Give to Ces^^ that (...) (...) Cesars,
and to God that which is Go^^. Romans 13. (...). Give to (...) (...) their duty:
tribute to (...) tribute: (...) to whom custom.

Now follows the Oath, which is either assertorie (...). Of an Oath binding.
or promissorie. Assertorie, by which a man avouches that a thing was done or
not done; Promisserie, by which a man promises to do a thing or not to do
it. Of both these I mean to speak, but specially of the second. And here two
points must be considered, the first by what means an oath binds, the second
when it binds.

An oath binds by virtue of such particu^ commandments, as require the
keeping of oath^^ lawfully taken. Number. 30. 3. Who soever s^ an ^ath to bind
his soul by a bond, ^e shall not (...) his word, (...) shall do according to
all that (...) (...) of his (...).

This being so ^questio^ may be made, whether the (...) of insi^ bi^d
conscience, and by what v^, (...) they ^^ither know the Script^ no^ the true
God. A^s. They Thu^ says Aug^. epist. 154. ad Public^. and L^d. s^. (...). 3.
did. 39.
do bind in conscience. For example: Jacob and Laban make a (...) confirmed by
oath. Jacob swears by the true God, Laban by the god of N^or, that i^, (...)
his idols. Now Jacob, though he approve not the form of this oath yet he
accepts it for a civil bond of the covenant: and no doubt, though Laban
believed not Gods word revealed to the P^ks, yet he was bound in conscience to
keep this ^th even by the law of nature, and though he (...) not the (...) God,
yet he (...) the false god of Nac^^r to be the true God. Genesis 31. 53.

Again, if a lawful oath by virtue of Gods commandments bind conscience,
then it must need^ be that the Roman Church has long erred, in that ^ee ^th
and maintains that governors, as namely the Pope and other inferior T^.
(...). (...). 89.
Bishops, have power to give relaxations and dispensations, not only for
oaths unlawful (from which the word of God does sufficiently free us, though
they should never give absolutio^) but from a true and lawful oath made
wittingly and willingly without error or deceit of a thing, honest and
possible: as when the Pope frees the subjects of this land, as occasion is
offered, from their sworn allegiance and loyalty to which they are bound, not
only by the law of nature, but also by a solemn and particular oath to the
Supremacy, which none ever deemed v^full but such as carry traitors hearts.
Now this erroneous divinity would easily be revoked, if men did b^^ consider
the nature of an oath, one part whereof is Invocation; in which we pr^^ unto
God, first that he would become a witness unto us that we speak the truth and
purpose not to deceive: secondly if we fail and break our promise, that he
would take ^ge upon us: and in both these petitions we bind our selves
immediately to God himself, and God again who is the ordainer of the oath,
accepts this bond and (...) it by his commendement, till it be accomplished.
Hence it follows, that no creature ca^ have power to v^^ie the bood of an ^^th
that is truly and lawfully an ^^th, unless we will (...) the creatures above God
himself. And our Savior Christ gave better ^ell when he commanded us to
perform our (...) to the Lord for the p^ting of perjury, Matthew. 5. 33.

Next let us consider the time when an oath binds or binds not.

An oath binds the^, when it is made of things certain and possible, in ^^uth,
justice, judgment, for the glory of God and the good of our neighbor.

Question. I. Whether does an oath bind conscience if by the keeping of it
there follow losses and hindrances? Answ. If it be of a thing that is
lawful, and the domages be private to him that swears, then does it bind
conscience. For example: A man makes a purchase of land at the sea side: his
bargain is confirmed only by oath: and it falls out that before he do enter
possession, the sea breaks in and drownes a part of that purchase. Now he is
in conscience to stand to his bargain, because the thing is lawful, and the
damage is private, and great reverence must be had of the name of God which
has bin used in the bargain making. David makes it the property of a good
man, to swear to his own hinderance and not to change, Psalm. 15. v. 4.

Question. II. Whether the oath which a man has taken, being induced thereto
by fraud and guile, does bind conscience. Answ. If it be still of a thing
lawful, and bring nothing but private losses, it is to be kept. When the
Gibe^^ites had by a fraud brought Joshua to make a league with them, and to
bind it with an oath, he and the princes of the people answer them thus, We
have sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel, now therefore we may not
touch them. Ios. 9. 19. And 300. years after, when Saul slew certain of the
Gib^onites against this oath, the plague of (...) (...) was upon the people of
Israel three years, and was not stayed till certain persons of Saul's family
for a recompense were put to death, 2. Sam. 21. v. 7.

Question. III. Whether an oath made by fear or compulsion bind in conscience.
For example. A thief disappointed of the bo^^y (...) he looked for, binds the
true man by solemn oath upon pain of present death to fetch and deliver unto
him some portion of money at one 100 or 200 crowns for the redeeming of his
life. Well, the oath is taken, and the question is, whether it bind him or not
to perform his promise. An answer may be this: some P. (...). (...) 2. (...).
13. (...). (...). Mel^. in, (...). (...). de (...).
protestant divines think it does bind: some again think no: but I take it
the safest course to bold the mean between both, on this manner. The oath
seems to bind, and is to be performed: neither C^ (...) Psalm. 15.
is it against the good of the commonwealth ((...) then it were unlawful) but
it is rather a furtherance in that a member thereof is preserved: and the losses
which follow are only private to the man, rather to be endured then the loss
of life. Yet that a remedy may be had of this private injury, and that a
public mischief may be prevented, the party is to reveal the matter to the
magistrate, whose office it is to punish robbers and to order all things
according to equity for the common good. But if the case fall out, that the man
through exceeding fear do further swear to keep silence, I see not how his
oath may be kept, except he be sure that nothing will ensue thereof, but a pri^
damage to himself. For otherwise perpetu^^^ ^ence seems to be a secret
consenting to the robber, and an occasion that others fall into the like danger
and hazard of their lives.

Ag^^ne, in six cases an oath binds not conscience at all. I. If it be made of a
thing that is flat against the word of God For all the power of binding which
it has is by the word of god: and therefore when it is against Gods will, it
has no power to constrain. And it is an old received rule, that an oath must
not be a bond of iniquity. Hereupon David when he had made a rash oath to kill
Nabal and (...) his household, rejoiced when he had an occasion offered by
Abigail to break the same, 1. Sam. 25. 32. And though he swear to Shemi, that
he would save his life, 2. Sam. 19. 23. yet afterward upon better consideration
(as it may seem) he commanded his son Solomon to put him to death, as one that
had long ago deserved the same. 1. King. 2. 9. And Herod was far deceived,
that thought he was bound by his oath to give to the da^sell John Baptists head
in a platter. Mat. 14. 7. II. Is it be against the good and wholesome laws of
any kingdom or country, whereof a man is a member it binds not at all:
because on the contrary Gods commandment binds us to keep the good laws of
men. III. If it be made by such persons as want sufficient reason and
discretion, as young children, fools, mad men. For the conscience can not
indeed be bound, where the understanding can not discern what is done. IIII.
If it be made of such as have no power to bind themselves, it binds not:
because it is made against the law of nature, which is, that Qui sui i^ri^ non
est obligar^ se non potest. a Bellarm. li. 2. de (...). cap. 36.
he which is ot in his own power can not bind himself. Hence it follows,
that papists err grossly when they teach, that a child may enter into any
rule or order of religion, yea bind himself thereto by oath, and the oath to
be good, flatt against his parents consent. Number. 30. 4. If a woman vow unto the
Lord, and bind her self by a bond, being in her fathers house in the time of
her youth, etc. 6. If her father disallow her the same day that he hears all
her vows and bonds, they shall not be of value. And an ancient council
decreed that all children that upon pretense of Gods worship should depart from
their parents, and not do C^^^il. G^^g. cap. 16.
them d^e reverence, should be accursed. Secondly they err in that they teach
that the promise made privately by a child in way of marriage without and
against consent of wise and careful parents, binds them: whereas indeed if
this promise were further bound by an oath, it could not stand: because children
under government and tuition of parents can not give themselves. V. It binds
not if it be made of a thing that is out of a ^^ns power, as if a man swear to
his friend to give him another man's goods. VI. If at the first it were lawful,
and afterward by some means become either impossible or unlawful, it binds
not conscience. For when it becomes impossible, then we may safely think that
God from heaven frees a man from his oath. And when it begins to be
unlawful, then it cease to bind, because the binding virtue is only from
the word of God. For example: a king binds himself by oath to a foreign
Christian prince to find him men and money to defend his people against all
enemies. This oath is lawful. Well, afterward the prince becomes a professed
enemy to him, his religion, and people: and then the kings oath becomes unlawful
and binds him not: because the word forbids that there should be any league of
amity with Gods enemies: though there may be leagues of concord with them.

Seeing a lawful oath must bind conscience, though a man be deceived and great
losses follow, it shows in how great reverence we should have Gods name, and
with what care and consideration take an oath. And by this we must be aduertiseo
to take heed of customable swearing in our common talk, whether our oaths be
great or small. We must think of an oath as a part of Gods worship: nay the H.
ghost often puts it for the whole worship of God. Isai. 19. 18. In that day
shall five cities in the land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan, and
shall swear by the Lord of hosts, that is, acknowledge and worship him.
Ierem. 12. 16. If they will learn the ways of my people, to swear by my
Name, The Lord lives, then shall they be built in the midst of my people.
This serves to show unto us, that such as give themselves to swearing, want
religion and good conscience: and that those families in which there is
risenesse of oaths, abandon all care of religion, and banish God out of their
houses. And indeed it is a very hard thing for the common swearer to avoid
common perjury. If we see a man hold up his hand at the bar of an earthly
judge we pity him and are sorry for him: on then why do we not pity
blasphemers and common swearers. For with God they are no better then rebeis,
that hold up their hands at the bar of his judgment seat as guilty
malefactors. Exodus 20. 7. Augustine says well, They that worship stocks and
stones fear to swear falsely by stones, and do not then fear God that is
present, God that lives, God that (...) God that takes revenge of contemners:
but of bad custom when thou art believed, thou svvearest: when none requires
it, thou svvearest: and when men cannot abide it, then svvearest.

Thus much of an Oath: now follows a promise which is either to God or man:
the first is called a vow, the second a single promise.

A vow is taken three ways. First generally 1^. Of a vow binding.
for a promise of moral obedience: and this vow is first made in Baptism and
continued in the Lords Supper, as also in the spiritual exercises of
invocation and repentance. It is called of Peter 1. Epist. 3. 21. the
stipulation which a good conscience makes to God.

This kind of vow binds all and every member of the Church of God. And the
not keeping of it is the common sin of the world: for most men make not
conscience to perform that which they have promised to God in Baptism: and
therefore their Baptism is become unto them the sacrifice of fools.
Ecclesiast. 4. 17. But considering we are bound in conscience by this vow, let
us hereafter endeavor to be as good as our word; and that shall be when we
begin to die to our sins and rise to newness of life: we will seem to have
care to keep touch with men: what a shame is it for us then not to keep
covenant with God.

Again a vow is taken for a promise of ceremonial obedience, whereof read
Number. 6. and 30. and Levit. 27. This vow is peculiar to the old Testament and
did not bind all men, but only such as had peculiar occasion to vow, and
thereupon bound themselves: as the Nazarites, and some other.

Thirdly a vow is taken for the performance of some outward and bodily
exercises taken up of a man's own accord, as being things in a man's own
liberty, without any commandment of God: as the keeping of set times of fast,
of praying or reading, the performance of set taskes, alms giving, abstinence
from certain meats and drinks, in the use whereof through our own
weakness we fear any occasion of sin. And this kind of vow is more
peculiar to the new Testament.

In the making of it that it may be warrantable, four things must be observed.
I. It must be agreeable to the word of God. II. It must not be against a man's
general or particular calling. III. It must be in a man's power, and not
against Christian liberty. IIII. It must be so made and be observed without any
opinion of ^^^rit or worship of God to this end alone, that it may be a means
to exercise and cherish repentance and invocation, temperance, patience, and to
show forth thankfulness to God.

A vow thus made, binds conscience by virtue of Gods commandment. Eccles. 5.
3. When thou have (...) a vow to God, (...) not to pay it.

And the vow once made continues to bind so long as the thing is in force
which was the (...) of the vow For example: A man desirous to practice
sobriety and temperancy, finds that drinking of wine is hurtful to him
hereupon he vows to God to drink no wine: now (...) vow once made (...) him
(...) (...) estate of his body alter, and he feel no inconvenience in wine;
and then (...) cease to bind any longer.

Question Whether Papists are bound in conscience to keep the vows of single
life and voluntary poverty which they make, or no. Ans. No. Reasons. I. They
are (...) against Gods co^^ (...) if they cannot abstain, let them (...) for
it is better to marry then to (...). 1. Cor. 7. 9. This we warned (...) of that
if there were (...) (...) would not (...) they should not (...). 2 Thessalonians. 3.
10. II they are not in the power of him that voweth: as the promise of (...)
chastity in single life. III. they abolish christian liberty in the use of the
creatures and ordinances of God, as riches, and marriage, meat, drink, appar^^
making that necessary which God left to our liberty. IV. They are made that men
may thereby merit life eternal and worship God: whereas Paul says, 1. Tim.
48. Bodilyexercise profits little, but godliness (...) profitable for all
things. Therefore they are better broken then kept.

As for a single promise, it also binds a man according as he will to whom
the promise is 11. Of a single promise binding. Aug. epist. (...) 205.
made, though he be an heretic or an infidel. As for the purpose of the mind
it binds not, but may upon convenient cause be altered.

Yet we must remember that there are so^ cases in which a promise made binds
not. I. If it be against Gods word. One says well, In evil Isid. lib. 4. Sy^.
promises cut off thy faith. It is a (...) promise which cannot be performed
without an offense, II. If he which makes it want reason or sufficient
discretion. III. If he make the promisae who can not bind himself: as a child
under the government of his parents. IV. If a man be induced to make his
promise by fraud and guile. V. If the promise being at the first lawful become
afterward either impossible or unlawful.

And though men be bound in conscience to keep their promises: yet this
hinders not but that there is and may be a good and lawful use of Indentures
and obligations. For the bond of conscience is between man and God: but the
bond of an obligation is only between man and man. Abraham when he bought a
purchase of Ephron the Hi^^^te, he paid his money and made it sure before
witness, Genesis 23. verse. 17.

Here we must consider the general sin of this age, which is to speak
deceitfully every one to his neighbor. It is an hard thing to find a man that
will stand to his word and lawful promise. It is a rule of Machi^vell that a
man may practice many things against his faith, against charity, and humanity,
and religion: and that it is not necessary to have these virtues, but to
counterfeit and dissemble them. But let all such as fear God, make conscience
of their word, because they are bound so to do: and hereby they shall resemble
their heavenly father who is true in all his promises; and they shall also
bring soorth a notable fruit of the spirit, Galat. 5. verse. 22.

Hitherto I have spoken of the cause that makes conscience to give judgment
Now follows 12. How conscience gives judge meant.
the manner of judgment.

Conscience gives judgment in or by a kind of reasoning or disputing, called a
practical syllogism Romans 2. 15. their reasonings [(...) (...), (...).] (...)
(...) excusing (...) other.

In the making of this reason, conscience has two assist^ mind, and memory.

The mind is the storehouse and (...) (...) of all manner of rules and
principles. It may be compared Min^^ tells what is law.
to a book of law, in which are (...) down the penal statutes of the land.
The of it it is to prefer and present to the conscience rules of divine law
whereby it is to give judgment.

Memory serves to bring to mind the particular actions which a man has done or
not done, Memory given evidence.
that conscience may determine of them.

Now conscience assisted by these (...), proceeds in judgment by a kind of
argumentation: an example whereof we may take from the conscience of a murderer
thus. Every (...) ^er is (...) ^ed, says the mind;
Thou art a murderer, says conscience assisted by memory.
ergo, Thou art accur sed, says conscience, and so gives her sentence.

To proceed: Conscience gives judgment either 1^. How many wai^^ conscience g^
judgment.
of things past or things to come.

Of things past two ways, either by accusing and cond^ning, or by excusing and
absoluing. To. 2. 15.

To accuse is an action of conscience giving (...) that this o^ that thing was
^ll don; (...) that still by reasoning on this manner. (...) (...) (...) is a
(...):
This thy action is (...) der:
(...)* This thy action is a (...).

To (...) is another action of the conscience ^^yned with the former, whereby
it gives iudg^t that a man by this or that sin has deserved death: on this
manner. ^ry (...) ^^rer (...) serves a double death:
Th^^ art a (...) ^^rer:
ergo, Thou have de served a double death.

These two actions are very sorcible and terrible: for they are the ^ctions and
prickings that be in the heart. Act. 2. 37. they are the stripes as it were, of
an iron rod, wherewith the heart of a man smites it self, 2. Sam. 24. 10.
And by reason of them, conscience is compared to a wo^^e that never dies but
always lies gnawing and grabbling, and pulling at the heart of man, Marc. 9.
42. and causes more pain and anguish, then any disease in the wo^ld, can.

The time when conscience perfourmes these actions is not before the sin, or
in the act of s^^^ing, but specially after the sin is done and past. Reason.
I. Before a man sin, the devil does extenuate the fault and make sin to be
no sin. II. Corrupt affections do for a time so blind and ouercast
judgment, that it does not see or at the least consider what is good or bad,
till afterward.

Neither does conscience ^ccuse and conde^ only for time present, but also long
after a thing is done. The consciences of Joseph's ^hren accuse them 22. years
after they had sold him into Egypt. Genesis 42. 21.

The effect of the accusing and conde^ning conscience is to stir up sundry
passions and ^otions in the heart, but specially these five.

The first is sha^, which is an affection of the heart, whereby a man is
gr^eued and displeased with himself, that he has done any evil: and this
shame shows it self by the rising of the blood from the heart to the (...).

Yet we must here remember that (...) such as have the pardon of their sins,
and are not guilty, may be ashamed and b^^sh, Romans 6. 21. What fr^ had ye in
those things, whereat ye now blush, or, be ashamed. Whereas those which are most
guilty may be without all shame. Ierem. 6. 15. were they (...) (...) they had
^itted (...) ^^y, ^^y, they were not ashamed, (...) they (...) (...) (...):
because they are grown to some great height in sin, Ephesians. 4. 18.

The second passion is sadness and sorrow: which is commonly thought to be
nothing else but Melancholy: but between them twa^^e, there is great
difference. Sorrow that comes by melancholy arises only of that humor
annoying the body, but this other sorrow arises of a man's sins for which his
conscience accuses him. Melancholy may be cured by phi^e this sorrow (...) not
be cured by any thing but by the blood of Christ.

The third is fear: in causing whereof conscience is very forcible. If a man
had all the delights and pleasures that heart can wish, they can not do him
any good, if conscience be guilty. Belshazzar when he was in the midst of
all his delights, and saw the hand writing upon the wall: his countenance
changed, his thoughts trouble^ him, his ioy^ts loosed, and his knees smote
together, Dan. 5. 6. Yea the guilty conscience will make a man afraid, if he
see but a worm peep out of the ground, or a silly creature to go cross his
way, or if he see but his own shadow on a sudda^, or if he do but forecast
an evil with himself. Proverb. 28. 1. The wicked flies vvh^^ no man pur
sueth him.

Terrors of ^o^scie^ce when they are more vehecause other passions in the body,
as exceeding hear, like that which is in the fi^t of an ag^e, the rising of
the entrals toward the mouth: and swounding^ as experience has often showed.
And the writer of the book of Wisdom says truly, cap. 17. verse. 10. It is a
(...) full thing when malice is condemned by (...) (...) test^monie: and a
conscience th^^ is (...), (...) ever forecast cruel things. For fear is
nothing else, but the betraying of the succ^, that reason offers, etc. they
that did (...) the night that was ^llerable, etc. sometimes (...) The (...) of
Eg^.
were troubled with mon^s visions, and sometimes they s^^^ned, as though
their (...) soul should betray them: for a sudden fear (...) looked for, came
upon them.

The fourth is desperation, whereby a man through the vehement and constant
accusation of his conscience, comes to be out of all hope of the pardon of his
sins. This made Saul, Achitophel, and Indas, to hang them selves; this makes
many in these days to do the like as appears by the declarations of such as
have been presented, when they were about to hang or drown them selves, or to
cut their own throats.

The last is a perturbation or disquie^^es of the whole man: whereby all the
powers and faculties of the whole man are forth of order, Isa. 57. 20. The
wicked are like the raging of the sea that (...) test, whose waters cast up
^ire and ^rt.

Thus much of the two first actions of conscience, which are to accuse and
condemn: the second follows to excuse and absolve.

To excuse, is an action of the conscience giving judgment that the thing is
well done.

To absolve, is an action of the conscience giving judgment that a man is free
or clear from fault and so from punishment.

From these two actions arise some special affections: I. bold^es and
confidence, Prove. 28. 1. The righteous are bold as a lion. II. joy and
rejoicing, 2. Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is the testi^nie of my conscience, that
in all simplicity and godly pure^es I have had my conuer sation in the world.
Hence it is said, that a good conscience is a continual feast.

Hithe^to I have spoken how conscience gives judgment of things done and past:
now follows her judgment of things to be done.

Conscience gives judgment of things to come, by foretelling and as it were
saying inwardly in the heart, that the thing may be well done or ill done. Of
this kind of judgment every man may have experience in him self, when he is
about to enterprise any business either good or badde.

By this we may see the goodness of God to all men. If a man being to make an
unknown journey, should find one that would go with him and show him the
way, with all the turnings thereof, he could not but take it for a great point
of curtosie. We are pilgrims in this world, our life is our journey. God also
has appointed our conscience to be our companion and guide, to show us what
course we may take and what we may not.

And here it must be noted, that in all things to be done, conscience is of
great force and bears a great stroke. For, This is the beginning of a good
work, that the conscience first of all give her judgment truly, that the
thing may be done, and is acceptable to God. Romans 14. 23. Whatsoever is not of
faith, that is, whatsoever is not done of a settled persuasion in judgment and
conscience out of Gods word, howsoever men judge of it, is sin. Again, God
regardes not the outward pomp of the action or the doer, but obedience and
especially the obedience of the heart: therefore unless the conscience first
of all approve the thing to be good and agreeable to Gods will, it can be
nothing else but a sin. And he that shall do a thing, because it is good in
his own eyes, not knowing that God does allow of it, preferres himself
before God, and disobaies him as the servant that in his masters house will not
do his masters will but his own will.

From this former rule arise three other: the first, What soever is done with
a doubting conse^^^e is a s^e. For example: some believers in the Primitive
Church held, that still after the ascens^on of Christ there remained a
difference between meat and meat, and therefore it was a scruple to them to
eat of sundry kind of meats! ^ow put the case, by example they are drawn
on to eat swines flesh, or some other thing which they think is forbidden:
and there (...) no question but in so doing they have sinned, as Paul proves,
Romans 14. v. 14. I know and (...) persuaded through the Lord Jesus, that there
is nothing unclean of it self: but unto him that judges any thing unclean,
it is unclean: and v. 23. He that doubts is condemned, if he eat: because
he eats not of faith.

The second What soever thing is done with an erroneous conscience, is a
sin. For example, in the primitive Church diverse of the Gentiles held this
error, that fornication was a thing indifferent, and therefore ^onscience told
them that they might do i^ and yet nevertheless fornication in them was a
sinne^ because conscience erred in her judgment. And evil r^maines evil,
though conscience ^^y the contrary a thousand times.

The third. What soever is done Erroneous conscience binds. For he that
judges a thing to be evil. if he do it, has sinned, as much as in hi^ lies.
against conscience, though it err and be deceived, it sin in the d^er.
Example. An Anabaptist holding it utterly unlawful to swear, is brought
before a magistrate; and urged either through fear or so (...) cause, takes an
oath and that against his o^ne conscience: now the question is, whether he has
sinned or no. Ans. He has indeed sinned not so much because he has taken an
oath, for that is the ordinance of God: but because he has taken an oath in a
bad manner, that is, against his conscience, and therefore not in faith.

Thus it is manifest that consci^nce bears a great stroke in all things that
are to be said or done. And hereby we are advertised of many things. First, if
a thing done without good direction of conscience be a sin, then much more
that which is done without direction of Gods word is a flat sin: for
without direction of Gods word conscience can give no good direction. And if
God will hold that for a sin which is done without direction of his word,
then no doubt Gods word ministers sufficient direction for all actions
whatsoever: so as if a man be to put but a bit of bread in his mouth, it can so
far forth direct him, that in doi^g of it he shall be able to please God: If
this were ^ot true, man's ease were most miserable. For then we should sin in
manifold actions, and that without remedy. And here by the Word, I mean
nothing but the Scriptures of the old and new Testament, which contain in
themselves sufficient direction for all ^ctions As for the law of nature,
though it af^oard in deed some direction; yet is it corrupt, imperfect,
uncertain: and whatsoever is right and good therein is contained in the written
word of God. And as for the best vnwritte^ traditions, let all the Papists in
the world answer if they ca^, how I may in conscience be persuaded that they
are the word of God. If they say that the ancient fathers of the primitive
Church avouch in their writings that they are Apostolical traditions, I answer
again, how (...) I know and be certain in conscience that the fathers subject
to error, in saying so have not erred.

Again we learn hence, that a good intention is not sufficient to make a good
work, unless withal conscience can give judgment that God does approve the
action. This shows the ignorance of our people, that when (...) (...) their
dealings they run upon a good meaning, then always they think they do well
and please God.

Thirdly, hence it appears that all things devised by man for the worship of
God, ^re fiarre sins; because conscience (...) not say of them that they
please God. Esa. 29. 13. Mark. 7. v. 7.

Lastly, we learn here that ig^or^nce of Gods will and word, is a dangerous
thing, and makes the life of man to abound, yea to flow with a sea of offenses
against God. Men commonly think that if they keep themselves from petiurie,
blasphemy, murder, theft, whordome, all is well with them: but the truth is,
that so long as they live in ignorance, they want right and true direction of
conscience out of Gods word, and therefore there best actions are sins, even
their eating and drinking, their sleeping and waking, their buying and selling,
their speech and silence, yea their praying and serving of God. For they do
these actions either of custom, or example, or necessity, as beasts do, and
not of faith: because they know not Gods will touching things to be done or
left undone. The consideration of this point should make every man most
careful to seek for knowledge of Gods word, and daily to increase in it, that
he may in all his affairs have Gods laws to be the men of his counsel, Psalm.
119. 24. that (...) may give heed to them as to a light shining in a ^^rke
place. (...). Pet. 1. 19. that he may say with P^^er, when Christ commanded him
to lanch forth into the deep, and to cast forth his net: Lord ^ve h^^e ben
all^ight, ana have catched nothing, yet in thy word will I let d^vvne my ^^t,
Luk 5. 5.

CAP. III. Of the kinds of conscience: and of conscience regenerate.
COnscience is either good or badde.

Good conscience is that which rightly according to Gods word, excuses and
comfort. For the excellence, goodness, and dignity of conscience, stands
not in accusing, but in excusing. And by doing any sin whatsoever to give an
occasion to the conscience to ^use or condemn, is to wound it and to offend in
Thus Paul says that the Corinthians ^ded the consciences of their (...) (...);
wh^ they used their liberty as an ^ccasian of offense to them 1. Cor. 8. 9.
(...). Again he calls a good conscience, a conscience without offense, that
i^, which has no stop o^ (...) to hinder it from excusing, Act. 24. 16.

Good conscience, is either good by (...) or by regeneration.

Good by creation was the conscience of Adam, which in the estate of innocence
did only excuse and could not accu^^ him for any thing: though it may be, an
(...) to accuse was not wanting* (...) afterward an occasion should be offered.
And hence we have further direction to consider what a good conscience is,
namely such an one as by the order set down in the creation, ex^th only
without accu^. (...) cuse is a defect in the (...), following ^ter the first
creation. Fee na^^rally there is an agreement and harmony between the parts
and the whole: but if the conscience should naturally accuse, there should be
ad^ssent and disagr^^ment and division between the conscience and the man
himself.

Regenerate conscience is that which b^eing corrupt by nature, is renewed and
purged by faith in the blood of Christ. For to the regenerating of the
conscience, there is required a conversion or change; because by (...) all
men's consciences since the fall are evil, and none are good but by grace. The
instrument ^ing to make this change is faith, Act. 15. 9. Faith purifieth the
heart. The m^orious cause is the blood of Christ, Hebr. 9. 14. How much more
shall the blood of Christ etc. purge your conscience from dead works to s^rue
the living God.

The property of regenerate conscience is twofold: Christian (...), and
C^ttenti^ of salvation. Because both these have their place* not in the outward
man, but in the (...) and conscience.

Ch^istian libe^, (...) spiritual and holy freedom, purchased by Christ.
(...) Of chri^ libe^ty.


I say, it is spi^ first to put a difference b^ne it and civil liberty, which
stands in outward and bodily freedoms and privileges: secondly to confute
the Jews, that look for earthly liberty by Christ: and the Anabaptists, who
imagine a freedom from all authority of magistrates in the kingdom of Christ.

Again, I say it is an holy freedom to confute the (...), who think that by
the death of Christ, they have liberty to live as they list.

Lastly I say that it is purchased by Christ, to show the author thereof, Gal.
5. 1. Standfast i^ the liberty where with Christ has made you free. And to
confute the Papists, whose doctrine in effect is thus much, that this liberty
is pr^red indeed by Christ, but is continued partly by Christ, and partly by
the man himself.

Christian liberty has three parts.

The first, is a freedom from the justification of the moral law. For he
that is a member of Christ, is not bound in conscience to bring the perfect
righteousness of the law in his own person for his justification before God,
Gal. 5. 1. with v. 3.

Hence it follows, that he that is a Christian, is likewise freed from the
curse and condemnation of the law, Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ. Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
law, when he was made a curse for us.

By this first part of Christian liberty, it appears that there cannot be any
justification of a sinner by works of grace before God. For he that will be
justified but by one work, is debtor to the whole law, Gal. 3. 3. but no man
that is a member of Christ is debtor to the whole law; for his liberty is to
be free in that point: therefore no man is justified so much as by one work.

The second part, is freedom from the rigor of the law, which exacteth
perfect obedience and condemns all imperfection, Romans 6. 14. Sin has no
more dominion over yo^: for ye are not under the law but under grace. 1. Ioh.
5. 3. This is the love of God, that ye keep his commandments: and his
commandments are not grievous.

Hence it follows that God will accept of our imperfect obedience, if it be
sincere: yea he accepts the will, desire, and endeavor to obey for obedience
it self. Malach. 3. 17. And I will spare them as a man spares his own son
that serves him.

The third part is, that the conscience is freed from the bond of the
ceremonial law, Gal. 3. 25. But after that faith is come, we are no more under
a schoolmaster. Ephesians. 2. 15. And has broken the stop of the partition wall,
in abrogating through his flesh, the law of commandments which stands in
ordinances. Coloss. 2. 14. And has put out the hand vvriting of ordinances
which was against us. v. 16. Let no man therefore condemn you in meat and
drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, etc.

Hence it follows, that all Christians may freely without scruple of
conscience, use all things indifferent, so be it the manner of using them be
good.

And first, when I say that all may use them, I understand a twofold uses
natural, or spiritual.

The natural use, is either to ^eleeue our necessities, or for honest delight.
Thus the Psalmist says, that God gives not only bread to strengthen the heart
of man, but also wine to make glad the heart, and oil to make the face to
shine, Psalm. 104. 15. and God has put into his creatures infinite varieties of
colors, savors, tastes, and forms to this end that men might take delight in
the^. Hence it follows, that Recreation is lawful, and a part of Christian
liberty, if it be well used. By recreation I understand exercises and sports,
serving to refresh either the body or the (...) and that they may be well
used, two rules esp^cially must be remembered. The first, that l^^full
recreation stands only in the use of things indifferent. For if the things be
commanded by God, there is no sporting in them; or if they, be forbidden, there
is no using of them at all. Upon this ground, sundry kinds of recreation are
to be neglected. As I. the dancing commonly used in these days, in which men
and women, yongmen and ma^^s, all mixed together, dance to the sound of the
instrument or voice in time and measure, with many wanton gestures, and that in
solemn meetings after great feasts. This exercise cannot be numbered among
things indifferent; for experience shows, that it has been usually either a
fruit or a follower of great wickedness, as idolatric, fornication, drunkenness:
hereupon, one well compared it to a Tripadium est circulus (...) (...) Di^b^l^^.
circle, whose center was the devil. Again, if we must give an account of
every idle word, then also of every idle gesture and pace: and what account
can be given of these paces backward and forward, of caprings, iumpes, gambols,
turnings, with many other ^riskes of lightness and vanity, more beseeming
goats and apes, of whom they are commonly used, then men. Whereas Solomon
esteemed laughter as madness, he would (no doubt) have condemned our common
lascivious dancing much more for madness, laughter being but the least part
of it. II. Dicing, which is precisely the casting of a lotte, not to be used at
our pleasures, but in matters of weight and importance. And of this kind are
all games, the ground whereof are not the sleight of man's wit, but lotte
alone. III. Plays and enterludes, that stand in the representation of the
vices and misdemeanour of the world. For if it be not lawful to name vices,
unless it be in the way of dislike, Ephesians. 5. 3. much less is it warrantable to
gesture and represent vice in the way of recreation and delight. The second rule
is, that recreation must be a sparing, moderate, and lawful use of things page
103. and 104.
indifferent, according to the rules following:

The spiritual use is, when we take occasion by the creatures to meditate and
speak of heavenly things: as, upon the sight of the vine and the branches
thereof, to consider the mystical conjunction between Christ and his Church:
by the sight of the rainbow to think of the promise of God of not drowning the
world by waters: and by any thing that befalls, to take occasion to consider in
it the wisdom, goodness, justice, mercy, providence of God, etc.

I add further, that things indifferent; as bondage, outward liberty, riches,
poverty, single estate, marriage, meat, drink, apparel, buildings, may be
used freely, because they are neither commanded by God nor forbidden: and in
themselves considered, they may be used or not used without breach of
conscience.

The right manner of using them, is to sanctify them by the word and prayer,
1. Tim. 4. 3, 4. and not only some of them, but the use of them all. Meat,
drink, and marriage are thus to be sanctified as the place before noted
declares. Paul sanctified his journey on this manner, Act. 21. 5. And the
Jews were commanded to dedicate their houses at the first entrance, Deuteronomy. 20.
5. By this dedication we may well understand not only the letting of the
house, or the providing of a tenant, but also the sanctifying of it by
invocation of Gods name, that by his blessing the place with the rooms thereof
might serve for their benefit and comfort. And on this manner to bless our
dwelling places when we first enter into them, is the best way that can be to
preserve them from the casualties of fire within, and lightning from heaven,
and from the annoiance and molestation of evil spirits, and other judgments
of God.

Things indifferent are sanctified by Gods word, because it shows what things
we may use, and what things we may not: and if we may use them, in what manner
it is to be done. And to this purpose the scriptures affoard four rules.

The first, that all things must be done to Gods glory, 1. Cor. 10. 31.
Whether ye eat or drink or what soever ye do, do all to the glory of God.
And that this may be performed, things indifferent must be used as signs and
tables, in which we may show forth the graces and virtues that God has wrought
in the heart. For example: we must so make our apparel both for matter and
fashion, and so wear it, that it may in some sort set forth to the beholder
our modesty, sobriety, frugalitie, humility, etc. that hereby he may be
occasioned to say, behold a grave, sober, modest person: and so of the rest.
And the common sin of this time is, that meat, drink, apparel, buildings,
are used as banners displaied to set forth to the world man's wit, excess, and
pride of heart.

The second We must suffer our selves lawfully to be limited and restrained in
the overmuch or ouer-common use of things indifferent. I say the ouer-common
use, because it is not Gods will utterly and absolutely to bar us of the use
of such things. Now the restrainers of our use are two, the first is the law
of charity. For as charity gives place to piety, so Christian liberty in
the use of outward things, gives place to charity. And the law of charity
is, that we should not use things indifferent to the hurt or offense of our
brother, 1. Cor. 8. 13.

Question. Whether may a man use his liberty before such as are weak, and not
yet persuaded of their liberty. Answer. Some are weak of simple ignorance,
or because they have been deceived by the abuse of long custom: and yet are
willing to be reformed. And before such we must abstain, least by example we
draw them to sin by giving occasion to them of doing that whereof they doubt.
Again some are weak upon affected ignorance or of malice, and in the presence
of such we need not abstain. Upon this ground Paul who circumcised Timothy
would not circumcise Titus.

The second restrainer is the wholesome laws of men whether civil or
Ecclesiastical. For howsoever things indifferent after the law is once made of
them, remain still indifferent in themselves: yet obedience to the law is
necessary, and that for conscience sake. Acts 15. verse 28.

The third: we must use things indifferent so far forth as they shall
further us in godliness. For we ought to do all things not only to the
edification of others, but also of our own selves. And therefore it is a flat
abuse of christian liberty, for men so to pamper their bodies with meat and
drink, that thereby they disable themselves to hear Gods word, to pray, to
give good counsel, to do the ordinary works of their callings.

The fourth: things indifferent must be used within the compass of our
callings, that is, according to our ability, degree, state and condition of
life. And it is a common abuse of this liberty in our days, that the mean man
will be in meat, drink, apparel, building, as the gentleman's the gentleman
as the knight; the knight as the lord or Earl.

Now then things indifferent are sanctified to us by the word, when our
consciences are resolved out of the word that we may use them, so it be in the
manner before named, and according to the rules here set down.

They are sanctified by prayer, when we crave at Gods hands the right use of
them, and having obtained the same, give him thanks therefore. Coloss. 3. v.
17. Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of our Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God the father by him.

Thus much of Christian liberty, by which we are admonished of sundry duties.
I. to labor to become good members of Christ of what estate or condition
soever we be. The liberties of the city of Rome made not only Romans borne
but even the men of other countries seek to be citizens thereof. Act. 22. 28.
The privileges of the Jews in Persia made many become Jews, Hest. 8. 17. O
then, much more should the spiritual liberty of conscience purchased by the
blood of Christ, move us to seek for the kingdom of heaven, and that we
might become good members thereof. II. Again by this we are taught to study,
learn, and love the scriptures, in which our liberties are recorded. We make
account of our charters whereby we hold our earthly liberties, yea we gladly
read them and acquaint our selves with them: what a shame then will it be for
us to make no more account of the word of God that is the law of spiritual
liberty. Iam. 2. v. 16. III. Lastly we are advertised most heartily to obey and
serve God according to his word, for that is the end of our liberty: the
servant does all his business more chearefully in the hope and expectation he
has of liberty. Again our liberty most of all appears in our service and
obedience, because the service of God is perfect freedom; as on the contrary
in the disobedience of Gods commandments stands our spiritual bondage.

The second property of conscience is an infallible certenty of the pardon of
sin and life everlasting. 2. Of certentie of salvation.
That this point may be cleared, I will handle the question between us and
Papists touching the certenty of salvation. And that I may proceed in order
we must distinguish the kinds of certenty. First of all, Certenty is either
Infallible or Conjecturall. Infallible, wherein a man is never disappointed.
Conjecturall, which is not so evident, because it is grounded only upon
likelihoodes. The first all Papiste^ (...), but the second they (...) in the
matter of salvation. Again certenty is either of faith, o^ experimental,
which Papists call ^^rall. Certenty of faith is, whereby any thing is certainly
believed; and it is either general or special. General certenty, is to
believe assuredly that the word of God is truth it self, and this both we
and papists allow. Special certenty is by faith to apply the promise of
salvation to our selves, and to believe without doubt that remission of sins
by Christ and life everlasting belongs unto us. This kind of certenty we hold
and maintain, and Papists with one consent deny it, acknowledging no assurance
but by hope; Moral certenty is that which proceeds from sanctification and
good works, as signs and tokens of true faith. This we both allow, yet with
some difference. For they esteem all certenty that comes by works to be
uncerten and often to deceive: but we do otherwise if the works be done in
uprightness of heart.

The question then is, whether a man in this life may ordinarily without
revelation be infallibly certain of his own (...), first of all ^^d principally
by faith, and then secondly, by such works as are unseperable ^panions of
faith. We hold this for a clear and ^tudent principle of the ^^^ord of God,
and ^^^trariwise the Pepists deny, it wholly. I will (...) pr^ the truth by
some ^ewe arg^, and then answer the common objections.

Arg^^^^t. 1. That which the spirit of God does first of all testify in the
heart and conscience of any ^^n, and then afterward fully confirm* is to be
believed of the same man as infallibly cert^ but the spirit of God first of
all does testify to some men, namely true believers that they are the sons
of God; and afterward confirms the same unto them: therefore men are unfillibly
to believe their own adotion. Now that the spirit of God does give this
testimony to the conscience of man, the scripture is more then plain. Romans
(...). (...) ^e have received the spirit of adoption whereby we cry, A^^a,
F^ther. The same spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the sons
of God. Answer is made, that this testimony of the spirit is given only by
an experiment or feeling of an inward delight or peace, which breeds in us not
an infallible but a coni^cturall certenty. And I answer again that this
exposition is flat against the text. For the spirit of adoption is said here
not to make us to think or speak, but to cry Abba, Father: and crying to God
as to a father argues courage, confidence, and boldness. Again the same
spirit of adoption is opposed to the spirit of b^^dage causing fear: and
therefore it must needs be a spirit giving assurance of liberty, and by that
means driving away distrustful fears. And the end, no doubt, why the holy
ghost comes into the heart as a witness of adoption, is, that the truth in this
case hidden and therefore doubtful, might be cleared and made manifest. If God
himself have appointed that a doubtful truth among men shall be confirmed and
put out of doubt by the mouth of two or three witnesses, it is absurd to think
that the testimony of God himself knowing all things and taking upon him to be
a witness, should be coniecturall. S. Bernard had learned better divinity
Bernard. (...). 10^.
when he said, who is just, but he that being loved of God, returns love to
him again* which is not done but by the spirit of God ^^^ke it well.
revealing by faith unto man the eternal purpose of God concerning his
salvation in ti^^ to come: which revelation undoubtedly is nothing else but an
(...) of spiritual grace: by which, whilst the dee^es of the flesh are
mortified, the man is prepared to the kingdom of God, receiving withal that
whereby he may presume that he is loved and love again.

Furthermore that the spirit of God does not only persuade men of their
adoption, but also con^ the same unto them, it is most manifest. Ephesians. 4. 30.
Greeve not the spirit whereby ye are s^aled up to the day of redemption. And
1. v. 13. After ye believed, ye were sealed with the spi-Rit of promise which
is the earnest of our inheritante. 2. Cor. 1. 21. It is God that has sealed v^
and given us the earnest of his spirit in our hearts. Here the words of sealing
and carnest are to be considered. For things that pass too and fro among men,
though they be in question, ye^ when the seal is put too, they are made out of
doubt: and therefore when God by his spirit is said to seal the promise in the
heart of every particular beleuer, it signifies that he gives unto them
evident assurance that the promise of life belongs unto them. And the g^^ing of
earnest is an unfallible token unto him that receives it, that the bargain is
ratified, and that he shall receive the things agreed upon. And it were a great
dishonor unto God to (...) that the earnest of his own spirit given unto us
should be an evidence of eternal life not infallible but coniecturall.

Arg^. (...). The faith of the elect or saving faith is a certain persuasion and
a particular persuasion of remi^ion of sin and life everlasting. Touching the
first of these ^wain, namely that faith is a certain persuasion, yea that
cer^enty is of the nature of faith, it appears by express testimonies of
scripture, Matthew. 14. 31. O thou of little faith, why have thou doubted? and
21. v. 21 If ye have faith and doubt not. Iam. 1. 6. Let him ask in faith, and
wa^er not: for he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea, tossed of the wind,
(...) away. Romans 4. 20. Neither did he doubt of the promise of God through
unbelief, but was strengthenedin faith. I will not stand longer on this point
which is not denied of any.

Touching the second part of my reason, that faith is a particular persuasion
applying things believed: I prove it thus. The property of faith is to
receive the promise, Galat. 3. 14. and the thing promised which is Christ with
his spirit, Ioh. 1. 12. Now Christ is received by a particular application, as
will appear if we do ^t mark the end and use of the ministry of the word
and of the sacraments. For when God gives any blessing to man, it is to be
received by man as God gives it. Now God gives Christ or at the least offers
him not generally to mankind, but to the several and particular members of
the Church. In the Lords supper, as in every sacrament, there is a relation or
analogy between the outward signs and the things signified. The action of the
minister giving the bread and the wine represents Gods action in giving
Christ with his benefits to the particular communicants: again the action of
receiving the bread and wine severally, represents another spiritual action
of the believing heart which applies Christ unto it self for the pardon of
sin and life everlasting. Papists yield not to this yet if they refuse to
maintain this analogy, they ouerturne the sacrament and dissent from
antiquity. Augustine says, The body August. tr^ct. (...). (...) (...).
of Christ is ascended into heaven: some may answer, and say, How shall I hold
him being absent? how shall I reach up mine hand to heaven that I may lay hold
of him ^^ting there? Send up thy faith, and thou have laid hold of him. And
what is more common the^ another saying of his What (...) thou to prepare thy
belly and teeth, Believe and thou have eaten. Again Ephesians. 3. v. 12. Paul says,
By Christ we have boldness and entr^ with confidence by faith in him. In which
words are set down two notable effects and fruits of faith: boldness, and
confidence. Boldness is, when a poor sinner dare come into the presence of
God not being terrified with the threatenings of the law no^ with the
consideration of his own unworthiness, and with the manifold assaults of
the devil* and it is more then certenty of Gods favor. Now whereas Papists
answer that this liberty of boldness in coming unto God proceeds of a
general faith, they are far wide. It is not possible that a general
p^^swasion of the goodness and truth of God and of his mercy in Christ
should breed confidence and boldness in the heart of a guilty (...), and ^o
^ple can be brought hereof. This general faith conc^ (...) ^s of our b^, w^^
no doubt in (...) (...), (...), Judas, yea in the d^ him^; and yet they
despaired and some of them (...) away themselves: and the d^^ill for all his
(...) (...) before God. Wherefore that ^^ith which is the root of these
excellent virtues of boldness and confidence must need^s be a special ^aith,
that i^, (...) (...) and plentiful persuasion of the pardon of (...) man's own
sins and of life everlasting ^gaine Hebr. 11. v. 1. faith is called hypost
(...), that is, a substance or subsistence of things hoped ^o^^ where faith in
the matter of our salvation and other like things, is made to go beyond hopet
for hope waits for things to come till they have a being in the person hoping,
but faith in present gives a subsisting or being unto them. This can not be
that general faith (of Papists termed Catholic) for it comes short of hope,
but it must needs be a special faith that makes us undoubtedly believe our
own election, adoption, justification and salvation by Christ. And to this
purpose have some of the fathers said excellent well Augustine says, I
demand August. de (...) ^ni ser (...). 7.
of thee, O sinner, do thou believe Christ or no? th^^ (...), I believe what
beleevest thou? that ^ee can freely forgive thee all thy sins. Thou have that
which thou have believed. Ambrose says, This is a thing ordained of God that
he which believes in Christ should be Ambros^^ 1. Cor. 1. cap.
saved without any work, by faith alone freely receiving remission of sins.
And with Ambrose I join the testimony of Hesichius upon Leuiticus, who says,
God pitying mankind, when he savve it disabled for the (...) (...).
fulfilling of the works of the law, willed that man should be saved by
grace vvithled the works of the law. And grace proceeding of mercy is
apprehended by faith alone without works. Whereas in both these places,
faith is opposed generally to all works, and is withal said to apprehende
and receive, yea alone to apprehend and receive grace and remission of sins,
they cannot be understood of a general but of a special applying faith.
Bernard has these words, If thou beleevest Bernard. (...). 1. d^ (...). (...).
that thy sins can not be blotted out but by him against whom thou have
sinned, thou ^^est well: but go^ yet further, and believe that he pardons
thy sins. This is the testimony which the Holy Ghost gives in our hearts,
saying, Thy sins are forgiven thee. For so the Apostle thinks that a man is
justified freely by faith. Papists being much choked with this place, make
answer that S. Bernard does not say that we ^ust believe the pardon of our
sins absolutely without respect of works, but that he requires the
condition of our conversion and repentance, as signs whereby this persuasion
is wrought. I answer again that he avouches plainly, the general faith
whereby the points of religion are believed, to be but a beginning or ^udiment
of faith, and therefore not sufficient unless we go further and apply the
grace of God to our selves by faith simply without respect of any condition
performed on man's part. Indeed I grant that the truth of conversion and
other works are by him mentioned afterward, but that was for this end to
show how any man may have a sensible and evident experience by works, as
fruits of the pardon of his own sins and life everlasting, which he
believes.

Argument. 3. S. John penned his first epistle that he might show unto the
Church of God a way how they might ordinarily and fully be assured of the love
of God and of eternal life: and therefore he affords us many pregnant
testimonies for this purpose. 1. Ioh. 2. v. 3. And by this we know that we have
known him, if we keep his commandments. And v. 5. He which keeps his
word, in him is the word of God truly accomplished: by this we know that we
are in him. cap. 3. 10. By this are manifest the children of God and the
children of the devil. And v. 19. By this we know that we are of the truth,
and before him we shall make our hearts confident. cap. 4. 13. By this we
know that we d^^ll in him and he in us, because he has given us of his
spirit. cap. 5. 2. By this we know that we love the sons of God, when we
love god and keep his commandments. verse. 13. I have written these things
unto you which believe in the name of the son of God, that ye may know
that you have life eternal. To these testimonies first of all answer is made
that none of them do necessarily imply a certentie of divine faith; because
we are said to know the things which we lea^e by conjectures. Behold a ^y
and poor shifte. Saint John says, cap. 1. verse. 4. These things we write
unto y^^ that your ^oy may be full. Now it is but an uncerten ^oy that rises
by coniecturall knowledge. Again this knowledge brings forth conscience and
bol^sse even before God. c. 3. v. 19, 21. and therefore it can not but include
an infallible cer^en^y: and to put it out of question that the knowledge here
mentioned is the knowledge of divine faith, or as un^^^^ible as it is or can
be, it is added, cap. 4 16. And we have knovvon and believed the love which
God has toward us. Secondly it is answered, that all these speeches are
general and not concerning particular men: but it is false: for when Saint
John says (we know) he speaks of himself and includes the rest of the
Church in the same condition with himself. Now he himself was fully assured
of his own salvation. For Christ a little before his departure out of the
world, did comfort all his disciples partly by renewing the promise of life
everlasting and of the presence of his spirit unto them, and partly by praying
unto the father for their final preservation: so as they could not but be
fully resolved of their happy estate both in this life and in the life to come.
(...). 4. Abraham's faith (...) a (...)* (...) whereby he applied the promise
unto himself, Romans 4. v. ^1. And this faith of his is an example propounded
unto us according to which we are to believe: and therefore he is called the
father of the faithful ^^r. 16. and P^l having (...) down the (...) ^d
effects of his faith, says, It was, (...) (...) only for him but also for
us which (...). v. 22. It is objected that Abraham's faith was not of salvation
but it concerned his (...) in his old age, as Paul says, Romans 4. v. (...)
Abreham about hope believed that (...) (...) (...) the father of many nations:
according to that which was spoken, so shall thy see^ be. A^svver. We must
distinguish the object of faith, which is either principal or less
principal. Principal, is always Christ with his benefits: less principal
are other less and particular benefits obtained by Christ. As of Abraham's
faith the object less principal was a carnal seed or issue: and the
principal object most of all respected as the foundation of all other
blessings, was the bl^ seed Christ Jesus. G^lat. 3. v. 16. To Abraham and his
seed were the promises made. He says not, And to the seeds, as of many but,
(...) thy ^eed, as of (...), which is Christ. And v. 29. If ye be Christ's,
then Abraham's seed Thu^ it is plain that issue was ^^ither promised nor
desired but with respect to Christ, who could not have descended of Abraham if
he had been wholly without seed.

Having thus alleged some arguments for the truth, I come now to consider the
objections of the Papists. Object. I. Job being a righteous man wanted
certenty of grace in himself. Job. 9. v. 20. If I vvoulde justify my self,
mine evvne mouth shall condem^ (...): if I vvoulde be perfect, he shall judge
me ^ic^ed: though I were perfect, yet my soul shall (...) know it. Again
verse. 28. I am afraid of all my works, knovving that thou vvilt not judge me
innocent. Answer. Bildad in the former chapter had extolled the justice of God:
and Job in this chapter gives assent thereto, saying verse. 2. I know verily
it is so: and he likewise spendes the whole chapter in magnifying the justice
of God: and having propounded this end of his speech, he does not speak of
him self and his own estate Thus Histome understands the chap.
simply, as it is considered (...) it self: bus as he esteemed himself being
compared with God, specially then, when he enters into a straight
examination of his creature. And so must the speech ^e understood, if (...)
(...); my soul should not know it, that is, I will not acknowledge or stand
upon any righteo^ of mine own, when God shall enter into judgment with me. And
thus much the very Efect angels being in possession of heaven, and therefore
having more then assurance thereof, can not but say when they are compared with
God. Again, the words according to the original, are commonly of all and so
may well ^e translated thus, Am I perfect: I know not my soul, I ^^horre my
life: that is, if I think my self perfect, I have no respect of mine own
soul: o^ thus, I am perfect in respect of you, and I know not my soul, and I
abhor my life, namely in respect of mine own vprightnes. And the other place
is thus to be translated, I fear all ^^y sorrows, and not all my works; for
this is flat against the Hebrew text, and Popish transla^s themselves follow it
not.

Object. 2. Eccles. c. 9. Man knows not whether he be worthy of love or
hatred. For all things are kept vncer^e^ till the time to come. Answer. First I
say, the translation is not (...)* the words are thus in the Hebrew and in the
Seven^^e. No man knows love or hatred, all things are before them. As for
these words [all things are (...) uncertain till the time to come] are thrust
into the text by head and shoulders; and Hierome has them not. Secondly I
answer, that the H. Ghost does not deny s^mply the knowledge of Gods love or
h^tred, as though there could be (...)* certain assurance of it in this life. If
we understand the words thus, then the argument of the holy Ghost must be
framed on this manner. If love or hatred were to be known, then it must be
known by the outward blessings of God: but it cannot be known by the outward
blessings of God, for all things come alike to all: therefore love and hatred
cannot be known. The proposition is false. For love may be known other ways
then by outward benefits; and therefore the reason is not meet to be ascribed
to the spirit of truth. Wherefore the true and proper sense of the words is,
that love or hatred cannot be judged or discerned by outward blessings of God.
S. Bernard speaks of this text on this manner, (...). (...). (...). (...) (...)
(...).
that no man knows love or hatred, namely by himself: yet that God gives most
certain testimonies thereof to men upon earth. And se^m. 5. de Dedi^. his words
are these, who knows if he be worthy love or hatred? who knows the mind of
the Lord. Here both faith and truth must needs help us, that that which is
hidden in the heart of the father may be revealed unto us by the spirit: and
his spirit giving testimony persvvades our spirit, that we are the sons of
God; and this persuasion is caused by his calling and justifying us freely by
faith. And S. Hierome (though commonly Hierome on this place.
abused to the contrary) says no more but that men cannot know love or hatred
by the present afflictions which they suffer, because they know not whether
they suffer them for trial or for punishment.

Object. 3. 1. Cor. 4. I judge not my self, I know nothing by my self. Here
Paul as not being privic to his own estate, refuses to give any judgment of
his own righteousness. Answ. It is manifest by the words of this epistle, that
certain in Corinth, boldly more then wisely, censured the Apostles ministry,
and withal disgraced it in respect of the ministry of other teachers.
Therefore Paul in this chapter goes about to make an Apology for himself,
speaking nothing of his own person and the estate thereof before God, but
only of his ministry and the excellency thereof. And this is the judgment
of Theodoret, Aquinas, and Lira upon this text. And when he says, I judge not
my self, his meaning is, I take not upon me to judge of what value and price
my ministry is before God, in respect of the ministry of this or that man:
but I leave all to God. Here then Paul refuses only to give judgment of the
excellency of his own ministry, and in other cases he refused not to judge
him self, as when he said, I have fought a good fight, I have kept the faith,
henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness which the Lord the
righteous judge shall give me, (...). Tim. 4. 8. And Chrysostom on this place
says, that Paul refused to judge himself not simply, but only for this end,
that he might restrain others and teach them modesty. And where Paul says, I
know nothing by my self, the speech is not general, but must be understood
of negligences and offenses in the compass of his ministry. For he was privy
to himself that in simplicity and godly pureness, he had his conversation in
the world, 2. Cor. 1. 12. and he knew this by himself, that nothing should
sever him from the love of God in Christ. Romans 8. 38.

Object. 4. That we may be justified there is somewhat required of us, namely
faith and repentance: and where these are wanting a man cannot be justified.
Now no man can be certain by the certentie of faith, that he repents of his
sins with all his heart, and that he has such a faith, as God requires at
our hands, considering there is no testimony in the word of our faith and
repentance in particular. Therefore no man can be certain by certentie of faith,
that his sins are pardoned. Answer. It is not necessary that any man should
be certain by faith of his faith and repentance; because faith is only of such
things as are absent, where faith and repentance are truly present in all that
truly believe and rep^, it shall be sufficient if a man may any way ^bly certain
that he has them. And though ^ome men falsely persuade themselves that they
believe, yet he that has true faith indeed knows that he has true faith,
even as (...) as he that understands knows that he understands. Paul says to
the Corinthians, (...) your s^es whether ye be in the faith or (...). 2. Cor.
13. 5. hereby giving them to understand that all which believe, have the spirit
of discerning to know certainly that they do believe. Again he says of
himself, 2. Tim. 1. 12. I know ^home I have be^eeued. And Saint John says,
1. ^p. 3. 24. By this we know that he dwells in us by the spirit which he has
given us, making no question of it, but that he which has the spirit knows
that he has the same. And testimonies of men are not wanting in this case.
Augustine. August. (...). de T^^. 13. (...). 1.
Every one sees faith to be in his own heart if he believe: if not, he sees
it to be vvanting. Again, epist. 111.
A believer sees his o^ne faith, by which he answers that he believes
without doubt. And, lib. 8. de T^^. c. (...).
He which leueth his brother, more knows the leave whereby he ^^^eth, then his
brother whom he loves. Again whereas it is said that having faith, yet we
know not whether it be ^^^ficient or no: I answer that faith being without
hypocrifie, is sufficient to salvation though it be imperfect. God more
respects the truth of our faith, then the perfection thereof. And as the hand
of the child or of the palsy man though it be feeble, is able to reach out it
self and receive an alms of a prince; so the faith that is but weak, is able
to apprehend and receive Christ with all his benefits.

Object. 5. Prove. 28. Blessed is the man that fears alvvaies. P^^l. 2. Work
your salvation with fear and trembling. Answer. There is a threefold fear,
one of nature, the second of grace, the third of distrust. Fear of nature is
that whereby the nature of man is troubled with any thing that is hurtful unto
it, and therefore auoideth it. Fear of grace, is that excellent gift which is
called the beginning of wisdom, and it is a certain awe or r^^erence unto
God, in whose presence we do whatsoever we do. Fear of distrust is, when men
tremble at the judgments of God for their sins, because they have no hope of
mercy. Of these three, the first was good by creation, and therefore it was in
our Savior Christ, but since the fall it is defective. The third is a vice
called sl^^ish fear. And the second is that which is commanded in these and
the like places of Scripture; the intent whereof is to make us circumspect and
fearful, least we should offend God by any (...), our own weakness
considered, and the ^^vineible judgments of God. And this kind of fear, as
also the first, may stand with c^r^^ntie of faith. Romans 11. Thou stand by
faith, be not high minded but fear. Psalm. 2. Ser^e the Lord in fear, and
rejoice in trembling.

Object. 6. Where there is no word, there is no faith. For faith and the word
of God be relatiues. But there is no word of God that says to particular men,
Cornelius, or Peter, or John, thy sins are pardoned, excepting (...) few
persons, as M^ Magd^, and the p^ (...), etc. Therefore there is no particular
faith. Ansvv. Though there be no word set down in Scripture touching the
salvation of this or that particular man, yet there is set down that which is
equivale^^ to a particular word, and as much in effect. For the promise of
remission of sins and life everlasting, is given with a comm^undement that
every man Read Ber^^^d. s^^. (...). (...) (...).
apply the promise to himself, as I have before proved: and this is
altogether as much as if every man's particular name had been put in the
promise. I add further that the promises of the Gospel must be considered two
ways, first as they are generally set down in Scripture without application
to any person: secondly as they are ^^^ght and published in the ^^inisterie of
the word, the end whereof is to apply them to the persons of men, partly by
pr^^ching and p^^tly (...) administ^ing the sacraments of baptism and the
Lords supper, which are seals of righteo^^^^s of faith. Now the promise
applied and (as I may say) particularized to the members of the Church, is by
the virtue of Gods ordinance as much as if God himself had given the promise
particularly, and ^dment names unto it. It is further ^nswered that the promise
of remission of sin, is preached not simply but upon condition of (...) faith
and (...), which (...) be (...) known. I answer again (...) I have already
proved) that he which truly believes and rep^th, knows that he does
certainly believe, and repent.

Object. 7. To believe the pardon of a man's own sins, is ^one of the
articles of faith, propounded in any Creed either of the Apostles, or the
Nice^e fathers, or Athanas^^s, or any other Creed. Answer. This faith is
contained under these words. I believe remission of s^es: and I prove it thus.
These words are an article of Christian faith, and therefore they must in sense
contain more then the devil does or can believe: now the devil believes
thus much, that God gives remission of sins to his Church: Christian men
therefore must go one step further, and believe particularly the remission
of their own sins. Otherwise if the Papists will have the Catholic faith
to believe no more in this point, then the damned spirits believe, let them
take it to themselves. But they reply further, that if there were any such
article of faith, then some persons must believe, that they are just though
they willingly commit mortal sin, which is an evident falsehood. Answer. He
that believes the pardon of his own sins by true faith, has the spirit of
God in him, and a constant purpose not to sin against God: and therefore if
he sin, it is against his purpose, and without any full consent of will; and
it is not he that does it, but the sin that dwells in him. But if it so
fall our, that the child of God be overtaken with any actual sin, then his
case stands thus. He has by his fall wounded his conscience, weakened his
faith, bereaved himself of Gods favor as much as in him lies, made himself
guilty of a sin and worthy of damnation: and God for his part accordingly
turns the woonted signs of his savor into signs of anger and displeasure:
and the sin though it be pardoned in the purpose of God, yet is it not
actually pardoned, till the party repent. Things standing thus, we teach not
that men must believe the pardon of their sins while they live and lie in
them; for that were ^^^tly to teach falshoode for truth: but our doctrine is,
that such persons must first of all humble themselves, and say with the
prodigal child, that they have sinned against God, and are not worthy to be
called his children any more: and again renew their decayed faith and
repentance, that they may believe (as before) their perfect reconciliation with
God.

Object. 8. In respect of God, who is truth it self, we are to believe the
promise in particular: yet if we respect our own unworthiness and
indisposition, we are to fear and in some part to doubt. For the promise of
remission of sins is not absolute, but depends upon the condition of our
works. Therefore our certentie is only coniecturall. Answer. I answer first
that in respect of our own unworthiness, we are not to doubt of our salvation,
but to be out of all doubt, yea to despair before the judgment seat of God.
For they which are of the works of the law, are under ^he curse, Gal. 3. 10.
and Paul says of his own works of grace, in this am I not justified, 1 Cor.
4. 4. And David being out of all doubt of his own deserved damnation in regard
of his own unworthiness says freely, Enter not into indgement with thy
servant, O Lord, for no flesh shallbe i^stified in thy sight. Again the
consideration of any unworthiness in our selves, does not hinder a resolution
concerning Gods mercy in Christ. For true faith makes an entrance unto God
with boldness, (I say with boldness) even for those persons that are unworthy in
themselves, Ephesians. 4. 12. And Abraham (whose faith is to be followed of us) did
not upon the consideration of his old decayed body, rest himself with bare
hope upon alikelihood of the accomplishment of Gods promise, but he believed
under hope even against hope, Romans 4. 18. Lastly I answer that the ground of
the former objection is erroneous, namely that the promise of salvation depends
on the condition of our works: because the Scripture says, it is made and
accomplished on man's part freely. I grant indeed that to the promise there is
annexed a condition of faith: yet faith here must not be considered as a work,
but as an instrument apprehending Christ with his benefits: and withal
^epentance with the fruits thereof are on our part required, yet no otherwise
but as they are necessaric consequents of faith, and the signs and documents
thereof.

Object. 9. No man knows all his sins: no man therefore can certainly know
that all his sins are pardoned, and that he is accepted of God. Answer. The
ground of this argument is false: namely that a man cannot be assured of the
pardon of his sins, if some of them be unknown. And to make this manifest, I
will lay down a more certain ground, which shall be this. As the case is in
Repentance, so it is also in faith: but there may be true and sufficient
repentance of unknown sins. God indeed requires a particular repentance for
particular known sins; but if they be hidden and unknown, he accepts a
general repentance: an example whereof we have in David, who knows, says se,
the errors of this life? then purge me from my secret s^es. If this were not
so, neither David nor any man else could be saved. For when David repented
greatly of his murder and adultery, yet we find not that he repented
particularly of his polygamie: which, in all likelihoode, through the swinge
and custom of those times was not the^ reputed to be any sin; specially in
the person of a king: and yet because (as we know) he is saved, this very sin
is pardoned. Therefore when God pardons the known sins of men, whereof they
repent, he does withal pardon the rest that are unknown. And by this it
appears that the ignorance of some hidden sins, after a man with diligence
has searched himself, cannot prejudice an infallible assurance of the pardon
of them all and of his own salvation.

Object. 10. We pray for the pardon of our own sins, and therefore we are
uncertain of pardon: the man which knows that he has pardon, need not pray for
it. I answer first, when we are taught by Christ to pray for the forgiveness of
our debts, we are put in mind not to seek the pardon of al our sins, whether
past or present but specially of our present and daily offenses whereby we make
our selves day by day guilty, till such time as we humble our selves and repent
of them. Secondly by this petition we are taught to ask the increase of our
assurance; because though God bestow endless mercy on us, yet we are s^^nt in
receiving of it: our hearts being like a narrow necked vessel, which being
cast even into the Ocean sea, receives in water ^^^ly drop by drop.

Object. 11. No man can believe his own salvation, as he believes the articles
of faith: therefore no man can believe the pardon of his ^innes and his
salvation by an infallible certe^^ie. I answer, first that every one that
looks for salvation by Christ, is bound in conscience as certainly to believe
his own salvation and adoption by Christ, as he believes the articles of
faith; because to the promise of life there is annexed a commandment to
believe and apply it. Secondly, this faith whereby we are to believe our own
salvation, if we respect the true and proper nature thereof, is as certain as
that faith whereby we believe the articles of faith. Thirdly, as there be
diverse ages in the life of man, so there be diverse degrees and measures of true
faith. There is first of all a beginning or ^^diment of faith, like the smoking
flax and br^isedreede, which Christ will neither quench no^ bruise. Again
there is weak faith, which believes the promise truly, but yet is perplexed
with many doubtings. Lastly, there is strong faith, which has overcome all
doubtings, and is not only for nature certain, but also a large and plentifully
persuasion of Gods mercy in Christ. Examples of this we have in Ab^a^a^, David,
the martyrs, and such like worthy me^. Now by the second faith, men do as
certainly believe their adoption as the articles, but not so (...) and fully.
But by the last, remission of sins is not only as certainly but also as fully
believed as any article of faith.

Object. 12. Ancient fathers the lights of Gods Church, have always condemned
this vn^allible and special certentie of says, which the Protestants hold and
maintain. Answ. Though we build not the doctrine of our religion upon the
indgements of men, yet we refuse not in this and other points to be beied by
the fathers, whose writings well understood, make more for us, then for the
Popish religion. And their test^^onies commonly alleged to con^^te the
certentie of special faith, are much abused. I. Many of them serve to prove,
that a man cannot judge and disce^^e of every particular motion and grace of
his heart, of the increase of these graces, and the contrary decrease: of
special vices and wants, many whereof are hidden from the understanding.
Theodo^et in his comment. 1. Cor. c. 4. I will not (says he) free my self
from sin, but (...) ^n C^r^^t^.
want the sentence of God: for it often falls out that men sin of ignorance,
and think that to be equal and just which the God of all sees to be otherwise.
August. de verbis dei. sermon. 23. Per adu^ture thou finds nothing in thy
conscience: but ^e f^^ds August de verbis d^i se^^. 23.
something that sees better. And upon Psalm. 41. I know that the justice of
my God shall ab^de, but whether mine shall or no I know not: for the saying
of the Apostle terrifieth me, He which thinks he stands, let him take heed
least he fall. Here he speaks of his inward righteousness, and that as it is
considered in it self without the assistance of God. For he adds afterward,
Therefore because there is no stabilitie in me for my self, nor hope in me for
my self, hereupon my soul is troubled for my self. Ch^ysost. homi^. 87. on
John. I am grie^ed least perad^ent^^e Chrysostom. (...). 87. (...) John.
supp^^ing my self to love, (...) not love as before: ^^en I se^^ed constant
and courageous unto my self, I was found but a d^stard. These and a thousand
like restimonies prove nothing. For though a man cannot fully discern his
heart, either in respect of his own sins, or in respect of every grace, yet
this hinders not but that he may have an infallible certentie of his salvation,
and also a sufficient gift to discern his own faith and repentance. II. Other
places must be understood of proud pres^^ption, and of a kind of security, in
which men dream of ease and liberty without trouble or temptation. August. de
correp. and great. c. 13. Who of (...) (...) (...) August. de (...). and Great.
c. 13.
of the faithful as long as he lives in this m^rtall condition, can pre s^
th^^ he is of the (...) of the predestinate? And, De ^ono persev. c. 22. No man
can be secure t^ing (...) all li^^, till this life be ended. Bernard. epist.
107. Having ^ovve received the knowledge of him self in part he may rejoice
in hope, but (...) (...) (...) as (...). Hieron. Dan. 4. Let no man bolaly
promise to another the pardon of his sins. III. Some places avouch that a man
can not be sure of perseverance to the end without falls and decays in grace:
all which we grant. August. de civit. dei. li. 11. c. 12. Although the saints
be mark it (...).
certain of the reward of their perseverance, yet they are found to be uncertain
of the perseverance, it self: for what man can know that he shall
persevere in the practice and increase of righteousness unto the end, except
he be assured of it by some revelation. IV. Some places must be understoode of
experimental certenty, when the event is accomplished. Hieronym. book 2.
against Pelagians. Call^o man blessed before his e^de, for as long as we live
here we are in the fight, and as long as we are in the fight we ha^^ no
(...) victory. V. Some places speaks of the uncertenty of other men's
sal^^^tion, which we grant. The author of the book de v^^ (...). G^ (...)*
clast. says, we ca^ pr^ce of (...) (...) before his end that he shall be in
the glory of the (...). August. lib. (...) Per sever. c. 13. Men are not vv^
any (...) asseveration to (...) that (...) (...) (...) this calling. VI. Some
speak of that (...) which comes by revelation without the word. Greg. lib. 6.
(...). 2^. 10 Gregoria, Whereas you add in your epistles that you will be
earnest with me till I write, that it has been made known unto me that your
s^^nes are forgiven you have required a hard and unprofitable thing. Hard,
because I am unvvorthy to whom a revelation should be made: Unprofitable,
because you must not be made secure touching your sins unless it be in the
last day of your life, for then you should not be able to bewail the same
sins. VII. Some places deny unto man that certentie which is proper to God,
which is, to discern in himself all things to come plainly, as they shall come
to pass without help of testimonies and outward signs. Bernard. sermon. 1. de
Septuages. Who can say, I am of the elect? I am of the predestinate to life?
certainly we have none as yet but the affiance of our hope comfort us.
Confer these words with those that follow. For this cause certain signs
and manifest tokens of salvation are given, that it may be a thing out of doubt
that he is in the number of the elect in whom these signs are.

Thus I have in some part made manifest that an unfallible certenty of pardon
of sin and life everlasting is the property of every renewed conscience. Now
therefore I will proceed further to consider how this certenty is caused and
imprinted in the conscience. The principal agent and beginner thereof is the
Holy ghost, in lightning the mind and conscience with spiritual and divine
light: and the instrument in this action is the ministry of the gospel whereby
the word of life is applied in the name of God to the person of every hearer.
And this certentie is by little and little conceived in a form of reasoning or
practical syllogism framed in the mind by the holy ghost on this manner.
Every one that believes, is the child of God.
But I ^^e believe,
Therefore I am the child of God.


The proposition is made by the minister of the word in the public
congregation: and it is nothing else but the promise of eternal life applied
to the particular hearer. The second part or the assumption is the voice of
conscience regenerate or the voice of Gods spirit in the same. Now Papists
write and avouch that the assumption is false: but the reasons which they use
to prove the same, are of small moment. First they allege, that many are
deceived in their persuasions, thinking they have that which they have not: I
answer again that many do falsely presume of Gods mercy, and imagine they
have that faith which they have not: and in all such the assumption is false:
yet in all them that are chosen to salvation and truly called, it is
infallibly true. For such as have received the gift of true faith, have also
another gift of discerning whereby they see and know their own faith. It is
further objected that Jeremy says, 17. 9. The heart is deceitful and wicked
above all things, who can know it? But the intent of this place is only to
show, that no man can search his heart to the very bottom, to see all and
every want, infirmity, and wicked inclination that is therein. For original
sin wherewith the heart of man is tainted, is a pronenesse or disposition to
all the sins that are or may be. And though men can not discerue all their
sins, yet many of them are certainly known: why may not then many of the
graces of God be certainly known, specially those which be of the principal, as
faith, sanctification, repentance. Again it is alleged, that Peter believed
that he was able to lay down his life for Christ's sake, and yet indeed was
not as the event declared, for when the time came he denied Christ. Ansvv.
Peter at this time was but weak in faith, and he was much carried away with a
confidence of his own strength, which made him speak these words of
presumption: and though he failed in this one particular action, yet failed he
not in the principal, that is, in the persuasion of the pardon of his own
sins and of life everlasting. In a word, it is certain that many persuade
themselves of Gods mercy, and yet are deceived: nevertheless all such as do
truly believe are not deceived. The holy ghost making them to see that in
themselves which by nature they can not discern, as Paul signified, when he
said, I speak the truth, I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness by the
Holy Ghost, Romans 9. v. 1.

Again the same testimony is given otherwise thus; Every child of God has
the pardon of his sins, says Gods word.

But I am Gods child: and therefore have the pardon of my sins, says the
renewed conscience by the direction of Gods spirit. Romans 8. 16. Gal. 4. 6.



After that this testimony is once begun, it is confirmed by the same means,
as also by prayer and the sacraments. Now it may be demanded how a bodily
element, as bread, wine, water, should be able to confirm a persuasion of our
adoption that is in the conscience. Ansvv. The element in the sacrament is an
outward seal or instrument to confirm faith not as a medicine restores and
confirms health, whether we think on it or not, whether we sleep or wake,
and that by his own inherent virtue; but by reasoning in syllogism made by
the good conscience: the ^.
(...) thereof being the outward sign in the sacrament. By means of which
syllogism the Holy Ghost mooues and stirs the mind, yea cherishes and
increases faith, on this manner. He which uses the elements aright shall
receive the promises:
But I do, or I have used the elements aright.
Therefore I shall receive the promises.


Whereas presumption and the illusion of Satan will as well tell a man that he
is the child of God, as the true testimony of regenerate conscience, the way
to put difference between them is this. I. Presumption is natural and from the
very womb, but this testimony of conscience is supernatural. II. Presumption
is in them that make no account of the ordinary means of salvation. This
testimony comes by the reverent and careful hearing of Gods word. III.
Presumption is in them that use not to call on the name of God: but this
testimony of conscience is joined with the spirit of adoption which is the
spirit of prayer. IV. Presumption is joined with looseness of life, this
testimony brings with it always an happy change and alteration. For he which
has a good conscience, has also care to keep good conscience in all things.
V. Presumption is without doubting: whereas the testimony of conscience is
mingled with manifold doubtings. Mar. 9. 24. Luc. 17. 5. yea otherwhiles
ouercharged with them. Psalm. 77. 7, 8. VI. Presumption will give a man the
slip in the time of sickness and in the hour of death, and the testimony of
good conscience sticks by him to the end, and even makes him say, Lord
remember now how I have vvalked before thee in truth, and have done that which
is acceptable in thy sight. Isai. 38. 1.

The duties of conscience regenerate are two: ^
in special manner to give testimony, and to excuse.

The special thing of which conscience gives testimony is, that we are the
children of God predestinate to life everlasting. And that (...) pears by
these reasons. I. Romans 8. 16. The (...) of God witnesses together with our
spirit that we are the sons of God. Now the spirit of man here mentioned is
the mind or conscience renewed and sanctified. To this purpose says John. He
that believes has a witness in himself. 1. Ioh. 5. 10. II. That which gods
spirit does ^y to the conscience, the conscience can again testify to us: but
Gods spirit does ^^s^^^y to the conscience of a man regenerate that he is the
child of God. 1. Cor. 2. 12. Therefore the conscience also does the same. III.
He which is justified has peace of conscience. Romans 5. v. 1. Now there can be
no peace in conscience, till it tell the man which is justified that he is
indeed justified. IV. That which the conscience may know certainly, it may
testify: but conscience may know certainly without revelation, the man's
election, and adoption, as I have before proved: therefore it is able to give
testimony of these.

Again, the regenerate conscience gives testimony of a certain kind of
righteousness being an unseperable companion thereof: and for this cause it is
called of some the righteousness of a good conscience. Now this righteousness
is nothing ^ls but unfeigned, earnest, and constant purpose with endeavor
answerable thereto not to sin in any thing, but in all things whatsoever to
please God and do his will. Heb. 13. 18. Pray for us: for we are assured that
we have good conscience in all things de^^^ing to live honestly. 2. Cor. 1.
12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in s^licitie
and godly p^renesse, and not in f^eshly wisdom we have bad ^^r conversation
in the world. 1. Cor. 4. 4. I know nothing by my self. Isai. 38. 2. Lord
remember no^ how I have walked before thee with an upright heart, and have done
that which is acceptable in thy sight.

I add this clause, in all things, because that obedience which is the sign
or fruit of good conscience of which also it gives testimony is general,
showing it self in all and every commandment of God. Philosophers have said
that Justice is universull, because he which has it has all virtues. But it
is more truly said of this christian righteousness o^ new obedience, that it
is universal, and that he which can perform true obedience in one
commandment can do the same in all. Actcs 23. 1. Men and brethren I have in
all good conscience se^d God till this day. Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall I not be
confounded when I shall have respect to all thy comm^^^dements. Act. 24. 16. In
the mean season I endeavor my self, or, take pains to have a conscience
without offense toward God and ^^^^^des men.

This shows that there is a great number of men professing the Gospel that
want good conscience. For though they show themselves very forward and
willing to obey God in many things, yet in some one thing or other they will
follow the swinge of their own wills. Many are diligent to freque^ the place
of gods worship, to heat the word preached with liking, to receive the
sacraments at times appointed, and to approve of any good thing all this is
very comendable, yet these men ofred when they depart home from the
congregation say in effect on this manner, Religion stay thou here (...) the
Church do^^ till the next Sabba^h. For if (...) look into their priua^^
conuersations, the government of their families, or their d^^lings in their
particular callings, we shall with gre^^e (...) much disorder and little
conscience. It is a common practice of sick men when they make (...) wills on
their death beds, in the very first place to commend their bodies to the grave,
and their souls to God that gave them in hope of a better resurrection: and
all this is well done: but afterward they b^queath their goods gotten by fraud,
oppression, and forged ca^illation to their own friends and children without
making any recompense or satisfaction. But alas this should not be so: for
obedience that goes with good conscience must be performed to all gods
commandments without exception: and if if it be done but to some alone, it is
but counterfeit obed^^ce: and he that is guilty in one is guilty in all.

As regenerate conscience gives testimony of our new obedience: so it does
also by certain sweet motions stir men forward to perform the same Psalm. 16.
7. my reins that is, the mind and conscience enlightened by the spirit of god
teach me in the night season. Isai. 30 22. And thi^^ ^^res shall hear a ^^^d
behind th^^, saying, This is the way, walk ye (...) it when thou (...) to the
right hand, and (...) thou t^rnest to the le^t. Now this word is not only the
voice of ^^s^ors and teachen in the open ministry, but also the voice of r^ed
conscience inwardly by many secret ^^gitations s^ibb^^^ them that are about to
sin. A christian man is not only a priest and a prophet, but also a
spiritual king even in this life: and the Lord in mercy has vouchsafed him
this honor that his conscience ^ed within him shall be his solli^r to put him
in mind of all his (...) and duties which he is to per^ to God yea it is the
controller to see all things kept in order in the heart which is the (...) and
habitation of the holy ghost.

The second office of conscience ^^generate is to excuse that is, to ^eare and
defend a man even before God against all his enemies both bodily and ghostly.
Psalm. 7. 8. Judge thou (...), O Lord, according to my righteousness, and
according to mine i^ie in me. Again 26. 1, 2. Judge me O Lord, for I have
walked in mine (...), etc. Prove me, O Lord, and me me: examine (...) and my
heart. That the conscience can do this, (...) specially appears in the
conflict and combat made by it against the devil on this manner.

The devil begins and disputes thus. Thou, O wretched man art a most grievous
sinner: therefore thou art but a damned wretch. The conscience answers and
says, I know that Christ has made a satisfaction for my sins, and freed me
from damnation. The devil replyeth again thus: Though Christ have freed thee
from death by his death: yet thou art quite barred from heaven because thou
neuerr did^^st fulfill the law. The conscience answers, I know that Christ
is my righteousness and has fulfilled the law for me. Thirdly the devil
replies and says, Christ's benefits belong not to thee, thou art but an
hypocrite and want faith. Now when a man is driven to this straight, it is
neither wit, nor learning, nor favor, nor honor that can repulse this
temptation, but only the poor conscience directed and sanctified by the
spirit of God which boldly and constantly answers, I know that I believe.

And though it be the office of conscience (...) it is once ^d principally to
excuse, yet does it also in part accuse. When David had ^d the people his heart
s^ him. 2 Samuel 24. 10. Job faith in his affliction that God (...) write bitter
things against him and (...) him poss^sse the s^nnes of his youth. Job. 13. 26.
The reason hereof is, because the whole man and the very conscience is only in
part regenerate, and therefore in some part remains still corrupt.

N^^ther must it seem strange that one and the ^ame conscience should both
accuse and excuse: because it does it not in one and the same resp^ I^
excuses, in that it assures a man that his person stands righteous before
God, and that he has an endeavor in the general course of his life to please
God: it accuses him for his particular slippes, and for the wants that be in
his good actions.

If any shall demand why God does not perfectly regenerate the conscience and
cause it only to excuse, the answer is this. God does it for the preventing of
greater mischiefs. When the Israelites came into the land of Canaan, the
Canani^^s were not at the first wholly displaced. Why? Moses renders the
reason; least ^xod (...). ^9.
wild beasts come and inhabit some parts of the land that were dispeopled and
more annoy them then the Cananites. In like manner God renues the conscience,
but so as it shall still accuse when occasion serves for the preventing of
many dangerous sins which like wild beasts would make hauock of the soul.

Thus much of good conscience: Now follows evil conscience: and it is so
called partly (...) 4. Of evil conscience.
because it is defiled and corrupted by original sin, and partly because it
is evil that is troublesome and painful in our sense and feeling, as all
sorrows, calamities, and miseries are, which for this very cause also are
called evils. And though conscience be thus termed evil, yet has it some
respects of general goodness in ^s much as it is an instrument of the execution
of divine justice; because it seems to accuse them before God, which are
justly to be accused.

It has spread it self over mankind as generally as original sin: and
therefore it is to be found in all men that come of Adam by ordinary generation.
The property of it is, with all the power it has to accuse and condemn, and
thereby to make a man afraid of the presence of God, and to cause him to fly
from God as from an enemy. This the Lord signified when he said to Ada^, A^
where art thou? When Peter saw some little glimbring of the power and majesty of
God in the great draught of fish, he fell on his knees and said to Christ,
Lord go from me for I am a sinful man.

Evil conscience is either dead or Stirring. Luke 5. 8.
Dead conscience is that, which though it can do Dead conscience.
nothing but accuse, yet commonly it lye^ quiet, accusing little or nothing at
all.

The causes why conscience lies dead in all men, either more or less, are
many. I. Defect of reason or understanding in crased brains. II. Violence and
strength of affections, which as a cloud do ouercast the mind, etc as a gulf
of water swallow up the judgment and reason: and thereby hinder the conscience
from accusing: for when reason can not do his part, then conscience does
nothing. For example: some one in his rage behaues himself like a mad man, and
willingly commits any mischief without controlment of conscience: but when
choler is down, he begins to be ashamed and troubled in himself, not always
by grace, but even by the force of his natural conscience, which when
affection is calmed begins to stir, as appears in the example of Cain. III.
Ignorance of Gods will and errors in judgment cause the conscience to be
quiet, when it ought to accuse. This we find by experience in the deaths of
obstinate hercukes, which suffer for their damnable opinions without check of
conscience.

Dead conscience has two degrees. The first is the slumbring or the benumbed
conscience; the second is the feared conscience.

The benumbed conscience is that which does Conscience benumed.
not accuse a man for any sin unless it be grievous or capital and not
always for that but only in the time of some grievous sickness or calamity.
Joseph's brethren were not much troubled in conscience for their villainy in
selling their brother, till afterward when they were afflicted with famine and
distressed in Egypt. Geues. 42. 2. This is the conscience that commonly reigns
in the hearts of drousie protestants, of all carnal and lukewarme-gospellers,
and of such as are commonly termed civil honest men, whose apparent
integrity will not free them from guilty consciences.

Such a conscience is to be taken heed of as being most dangerous. It is like
a wild beast, which so long as he lies a sleep seems very ^ame and gentle,
and hurtes no man: but when he is rowzed, he then awakes and flies in a man's
face, and offers to pull out his throat. And so it is the manner of dead
conscience to lie still and quiet even through the course of a man's life: and
hereupon a man would think (as most do) that it were a good conscience indeed:
but when sickness or death approaches, it being awaked by the hand of God,
begins to stand up on his legs, and shows his fierce eyes and offers to
rende out even the very throat of the soul. And heathen poets knowing this
right well, have compared evil conscience to Furies pursuing men with
firebrands.

The seared conscience is that which does Seared conscience.
not accuse for any sin; no not for great sins. It is compared by Paul, 1.
Tim. 4. v. 2. to the part of a man's body which is not only berefe of sense,
life, and motion by the gangrene, but also is burnt with a searing iron: and
therefore must needs be utterly past all feeling.

This kind of conscience is not in all men, but in such persons as are become
obstinate heretics and notorious malefactors. And it is not in the^ by
nature, but by an increase of the corruption of nature; and that by certain
steps and degrees. For naturally every man has in him blindness of mind, and
obstinacy or froward nes of heart; yet so, as with the blindness and ig norance
of mind, are joined some remnants of the light of nature, showing us what is
good and evil. Now the heart of man being exceedingly obstinate and perverse,
carries him to commit sins even against the light of nature and common
conscience: by practice of such sins the light of nature is extinguished: and
then comes the reprobate mi^ (...), which judges evil good, and good evil
after this follows the seared conscience, in which there is no feeling or
remorse: and after this comes an exceeding greedines to all manner of sin.
Ephesians. 4. 18. Romans 1. 28.

Here it may be demanded, how men's consciences shall accuse them in the day of
judgment, if they be thus benumbed and seared in this life. Answer. It is
said, Rev. 20. 12. that at the last judgment all shall be brought before
Christ, and that the books then shall be opened: among these books, no doubt,
conscience is one. Wherefore though a dead conscience in this life be as a
closed or sealed book; because it does either little or nothing accuse, yet
after this life, it shall be as a book laid open: because God shall inlighten
it, and so stir it up by his mighty power, that it shall be able to reveal
and discover all the sins that a man ever committed.

Stirring conscience, is that which does sensibly either accuse or excuse. And
it has sour Stirring conscience.
differences.

The first which accuses a man for doing evil. This must needs be an evil
conscience. Because to accuse is not a property that belongs to it by creation,
but a defect that follows after the fall. And if the conscience which truly
accuses a man for his sins, were a good conscience, then the worst man that
is, might have a good conscience, which cannot be.

When the accusation of the conscience is more forcible and violent, it is
called a wounded or troubled conscience: which though of it self it be not
good nor any grace of God; yet by the goodness of God it serves often to be an
occasion or preparation to grace; as a needle, that draws the threede into the
cloth, is some means whereby the cloth is sowed together.

The second, is that which (...) ^th for doing well. And it is to be found in
them that are given to idolatry and superstition. As in the Church of Rome: in
which, because men's consciences are ensnared and entangled with humane
traditions, many are troubled for doing that which is good in it self, or at
the least a thing indifferent. As for example: let a priest omit to say mass
and to say his canonical hours, his conscience will accuse him therefore:
though the omitting of the canonical hours and the idolatrous mass, be
indeed by Gods word no sin.

The third, is the conscience which excuses for doing that which is evil.
This also is to be found in them that are given to idolatry and superstition.
And there is a particular example hereof, Ioh. 16. 2. Yea, the time shall come
that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God good service. Such is
the conscience of Popish traitors in these days, that are never touched at
all, though they intend and enterprise horrible villainies, and be put to death
therefore.

The fourth, is that which excuses for well doing, at some times, and in some
particular actions of carnal men. When Abim^h had taken Sarai from Abraham,
God said unto him in a dream, I know that thou did (...) this with an
upright mind, Genesis 20. 6. This may be termed (...) (...) sed in (...) (...)
mala.
good conscience, but is indeed otherwise. For though it do truly excuse in
one particular action, yet because the man in whom it is may be unregenerate
and as yet out of Christ, and because it does accuse in many other matters:
therefore it is no good conscience. If all the virtues of natural men are
indeed S^ (...).
beautiful sins, and their righteousness but a carnal righteousness; then the
conscience also of a carnal man, though it excuse him for well doing, is but a
carnal conscience.

CAP. IU. Man's duty touching conscience.
Man's duty concerning conscience is twofold. The first is, if he want 1. Man's
first duty to get good conscience.
good conscience above all things to labor to obtain it: for it is not given
by nature to any man, but comes by grace.

For the obtaining of good conscience, three things must be procured; a
preparation to good conscience, the applying of the remedy, the reformation of
conscience.

In the preparation, four things are required. The first is, the knowledge of
the law, and the particular commandments thereof, whereby we are taught what
is good, what is badde: what may be done, and what may not be done.

The men of our days, that they may have the right knowledge of the law, must
lay aside many erroneous and foolish opinions, which they hold flat against the
true meaning of the law of God: otherwise they can never be able to discern
between sin and no sin. Their especial and common opinions are these: I.
That they can love God with all their hearts, and their neighbors as
themselves; that they fear God above all, and trust in him alone; and that
they ever did so. II. That to rehearse the Lords prayer, the belief, and 10.
commandments, (without understanding of the words, and without affection) is
the true and whole worship of God. III. That a man may seek to wizzards and
soothsayers without offenses because God has provided a salve for every sore.
IV. That to swear by good things and in the way of truth, cannot be a sin.
V. That a man going about his ordinary affairs at home or abroad on the
sabbath day, may as well serve God as they which hear all the sermons in the
world. VI. That religion and the practice thereof, is nothing but an affected
precisenes; that covetousness the root of evil, is nothing but worldlines;
that pride is nothing but a care of honesty and cleanlines, that single
fornication is nothing but the trick of youth; that swearing and blaspheming
argue the courageous mind of a brave gentleman. VII. That a man may do with
his own what he will, and make as much of it as he can. Hence arise all the
frauds and badde practices in traffic between man and man.

The second, is the knowledge of the judicial sentence of the law, which
resolutely pronounces that a curse is due to man for every sin, Gal. 3. 10.
Very few are resolved of the truth of this point, and very few do unfeignedly
believe it, because men's minds are possessed with a contrary opinion, that
though they sin against God, yet they shall escape death and damnation. David
says, The wicked man, [that is, every man naturally] blesses himself, Psalm.
10. 3. and he makes a league with hell and death, Isai. 28. v. 15. This
appears also by experience. Let the ministers of the Gospel reprove sin,
and denounce Gods judgments against it, according to the rule of Gods word,
yet men will not fear: stones will almost as soon move in the walls, and the
pillars of our Churches, as the (...) hearts of men. And the reason hereof is,
because their minds are forest^lled with this absurd conceit, that they are not
in danger of the wrath of God though they o^^end. And the opinion of our common
people is hereunto answerable; who think, that if they have a good meaning,
and do no man hu^^, God will have them excused both in this life and in the
day of judgment.

The third, is a just and serious examination of the conscience by the law,
that we may see what is our estate before God. And this is a duty upon which
the Prophets stand very much, Lam. 3. 40. Man suffers for sin let us
search and try our hearts, and turn again to the Lord. Zeph. 2. 1. Fan
your selves, fan you, O nation, not vvorthie to be loved. In making
examination, we must specially take notice of that which does now lie, or may
hereafter lie upon the conscience. And after (...) examination has been made,
a man comes ^o a knowledge of his sins in particular, and of his wretched and
miserable estate. When one enters into his house at midnight, he finds or sees
nothing out of order: but let him come in the day time when the (...) shines,
and he shall then ^^p^^ many faults in the house, and the very motes that fly
up and down; so let a man search his heart in the ignorance and blindness of
his mind, he will straightway think all is well: but let him once begin to
search himself with the light and lantern of the law, and he shall sinde many
foul corners in his heart and many heaps of sins in his life.

The fourth, is a sorrovv in respect of the punishment of sin, arising of the
three former actions. And though this sorrow be no grace; for it befalls as
well the wicked, as the godly: yet may it be an occasion of grace, because by
the apprehension of Gods anger, we come to the apprehension of his mercy. And
it is better that conscience should prick us and wound us and do his worst
against us in this life while remedy may be had, then after this life, when
remedy is past.

Thus much of preparation: now follows the remedy, and the application of it.
The remedy is nothing else but the blood or the merits of Christ, who
specially in conscience felt the wrath of God, as when he said, my soul is
heavy unto death: and his agony was not so much a pain and torment in body,
as the apprehension of the fear and anger of God in conscience: and when the
holy Ghost says, that he offered unto God prayers with strong cries and was
heard from fear, he directly notes the distress and anguish of his most holy
conscience for our sins. And as the blood of Christ is an all sufficient
remedy, so is it also the alone remedy of all the sores and wounds of
conscience. For nothing can stanch or stay the terrors of conscience, but the
blood of the immaculate lamb of God: nothing can satisfy the judgment of the
conscience, much less the most severe judgment of God; but the only
satisfaction of Christ. In the application of the remedy, two things are
required: the Gospel preached, and says: the Gospel is the hand of God that
offers grace to us, and faith is our hand whereby we receive it.

That we indeed by faith receive Christ with all his benefits, we must put in
practice two lessons. The first, is unfeignedly to humble our selves before God
for all our wants, breaches and wounds in conscience, which being unto us as a
paradise of God, by our default we have made as it were a little hell within
us. This humiliation is the beginning of all grace and religion: pride and good
conscience can never go together: and such as have knowledge in religion and
many other good gifts without humility, are but unbridled, unmortified, and
unreformed persons. This humiliation contains in it two duties, the first is
confession of our sins, especially of those that lie upon our consciences;
wherewith must be joined the accusing and condemning of our selves: for then we
put conscience out of office, and dispatch that labor before our God in this
life, which conscience would perform to our eternal damnation after this
life. The second duty is Deprecation, which is a kind of prayer made with
groans and desires of heart, in which we entreat for nothing but for pardon of
our sins, and that for Christ's sake, till such time as the conscience be
pacified.

To this humiliation standing on these two parts, excellent promises of grace
and life everlasting are made, Prove. 28. 13. He that hides his sins, shall
not prosper: but he that confesses and for saketh the^ shall find mercy. 1.
Ioh. 1. 9. If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Luke 1. 35. He has
filled the ^u^grie with good things, and sent the rich empty away, which are
also verified by experience in sundry examples, 2. Sam. 12. 13. David said to
Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan said to David, The Lord
also has put away thy sin. 2. Chr. 33. 12. When Manasses was in tribulation,
he prayed to the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of
his fathers: and prayed unto him: and God heard his prayer. Luke 23. 43. And
the thief said to Jesus, Lord remember me when thou come to thy kingdom.
Then Jesus said unto him, Verily I say to thee, to day shall thou be with me
in paradise. By these and many other places it appears, that when a man does
truly humble himself before God, he is at that instant reconciled to God, and
has the pardon of his sins in heaven: and shall afterward have the assurance
thereof in his own conscience.

The second lesson is, when we are touched in conscience for our sins, not to
yield to natural doubtings and distrust; but to resist the same, and to
endeavor by gods grace to resolve our selves that the promises of salvation by
Christ, belong to us particularly: because to do thus much, is the very
commandment of God.

The third thing is, the reformation of conscience, Good conscience a fruit of
faith.
which is, when it does cease to accuse and terrify, and begins to excuse and
testify unto us by the holy Ghost, that we are the children of God, and have
the pardon of our sins. And this it will do after that men have seriously
humbled themselves, and prayed earnestly and constantly with sighs and groans
of spirit for reco^ciliation with God in Christ. For then the Lord will send
down his spirit into the conscience by a sweet and heavenly testimony to
assure (...) that we are at peace with God.

Thus we see how good conscience is gotten: and because it is so precious a
jewel, I wish all persons, that as yet never labored to get good conscience,
now to begin. Reasons to induce men thereto may be these: I. You seek day
and night from year to year for honors, riches, and pleasures, which ye must
leave behind you: much more threfore ought you to seek for renewed and
reformed consciences: considering that conscience will be with you in this
life, in death, at the last judgment, and for ever. II. He which wants a
conscience purged in the blood of Christ, can never have any true and lasting
comfort in this life. Suppose a man araied in cloth of tishue, set in a chair
of estate, before him a table furnished with all dainty provision: his
servants, Monarchs, and Princes; his riches the chiefest treasures and
kingdoms of the world: but withal suppose one standing by with a naked sword
to cut his throat, or a wild beast ready ever and anon to pull him in pieces:
now, what can we say of this man's estate, but that all his happiness is nothing
but woe and misery? And such is the estate of all men that abounding with
riches, honors, and pleasures, carry about them an evil conscience, which is
as a sword to ^lay the soul, or as a ravenous beast, ready to suck the blood
of the soul, and to rend it in pieces. III. He which wants good conscience can
do nothing but sin: his very eating and drinking, his sleeping and waking,
and al he does, turns to sin: the conscience must first be good before the
action can be good: if the root be corrupt, the fruits are answerable. IV. An
evil conscience is the greatest enemy a man ca^ have, because it does execute
all the parts of judgment against him. It is the Lords sergeant. God need not
send out process by any of his creatures for man: the conscience within man
will arrest him, and bring him before God. It is the gayler to keep man in
prison in bolts and irons, that he may be forth-comming at the day of
judgment. It is the witness to accuse him, the judge to condemn him, the
hangman to execute him, and the flashings of the fire of hell to torment him.
Again, it makes a man to be an enemy to God: because it accuses him to God,
and makes him fly from God as Adam did when he had sinned. Also it makes a man
to be his own enemy, in that it does cause him to lay violent hands upon
himself, and become his own hangman, or his own cutthroat. And on the
contrary, a good conscience is a man's best friend: when all men entreat him
hardly, it will speak fair and comfort him: it is a continual feast, and a
paradise upon earth. V. The scripture shows that they which never seek for
good co^sci^ce, have terrible ends. For either they die blocks, as Nabal did;
or they die desperate, as Cain, Saul, Achitophel, Judas. VI. We must consider
often the terrible day of judgment, in which every man must receive according
to his doings. And that we may then be absolved, the best way is to seek for a
good conscience: for if our conscience be evil, and condemn us in this life,
God will much more condemn us. And whereas we must pass through three
judgments the judgment of men, the judgment of our conscience, and the last
judgment of God: we shall never be strengthened against them and cleared in
them all, but by the seeking of a good conscience.

After that man has got good conscience, his 2. Man's second duty to keep good
conscience.
second duty is to keep it. And as in governing the ship on the sea, the
pilot holding the helm in his hand, has always an eye to the compass: so we
likewise in the ordering of our lives and conuersations, must always have a
special regard to the conscience.

That we may keep good conscience, we must do two things; avoid the
impediments thereof, and use conuement preservatives.

Impediments of good conscience, are either in us or forth of us. In us, on^
own sins and corruptions. When men's bodies lie dead in the earth, there
breed certain worms in them whereby they are consumed. For of the flesh come
the worms which consume the flesh: but unless we take great heed, out of the
sins and corruptions of our hearts, there will breed a worm a thousand fold
more terrible, even the worm of conscience that never dies, which will in a
lingering manner wast the conscience, the soul, and the whole man, because he
shall be always dying and never dead. These sins are specially three;
Ignorance, unmortified affections, worldly lusts.

Touching the first, namely ignorance, it is a great and usual impediment of
good conscience. For when the mind erreth or misconceiueth, it does mislead
the conscience, and deceive the whole man. The way to avoid this impediment
is, to do our endeavor that we may daily increase in the knowledge of the
word of God, that it may dwell in us plentifully. To this end we must pray
with David, that he would open our eyes, that we might understand the wonders
of his law: and withal we must daily search the scriptures for understanding,
as men use to search the mines of the earth for gold ore, Prove. 2. 4. Lastly,
we must labor for spiritual wisedo^, that we may have the right use of Gods
word in every particular actio^: that being by it directed we may discern what
we may with good conscience do or leave undone.

The second impediment, is vnsta^ed and unmortified affections, which if they
may have their swinge, as wild horses ouerturne the chariot with men and all,
so they ouerturne and over carry the judgment and conscience of man: and
therefore when they bear rule, good conscience takes no place. Now to prevent
the danger that comes hereby, this course must be followed. When we would have
a sword or a knife not to hurt our selves or others, we turn the edge of it.
And so, that we may prevent our affections from hurting and annoying the
conscience, we must turn the course of them, by directing them from our
neighbors to our selves and our own sins, or by inclining them to God and
Christ. (...) example: choler and anger directs it self upon every occasion
against our neighbor, and thereby greatly indamageth the conscience. Now, the
course of it is turned, when we begin to be displeased and to be angry with our
selves for our own sins. Our love set upon the world is hurtful to the
conscience, but when we once begin to set our love on God in Christ, and to
love the blood of Christ above all the world, then contrariwise it is a
furtherance of good conscience.

The third impediment is worldly lusts, that is, the love and exceeding desire
of riches, honors, pleasures. Every man is as Adam, his good conscience is his
paradise; the forbidden fruit is the strong desire of these earthly things;
the serpent is the old e^^my the devil: who is he may be suffered to
entangle us with the love of the world, will straight way put us out of out
paradise, and bar us from all good conscience. The remedy is to learn the
lesson of Paul, Philip. 4. 12. which is, in every estate in which God shall
place us, to be content; esteeming evermore the present condition the best for
us of all. Now that this lesson may be learned we must further labor to be
resolved of Gods special providence toward us in every case and condition of
life: and when we have so well profited in the school of Christ, that we can
see and acknowledge Gods providence and goodness, as well in sickness as in
health, in poverty as in wealth, in hunger as in fulness, in life as in death,
we shall be very well content, whatsoever any way befalls unto us.

The preservatives of good conscience are two. The first is to preserve and
cherish that sa^g faith whereby we are persuaded of our reconciliation with God
in Christ, for this is the root of good conscience as has been showed: now
this faith is cherished and confirmed by the daily exercises of invocation and
repentance, which be, to humble our selves, to bewail and to confess our
sins to God, to condemn our selves for them, to pray for pardon and strength
against sin, to praise God and give him thanks for his daily benefits. Now by
the unfeigned and serious practice of these duties, repentance and faith are
daily renewed and confirmed. The second preservative is the maintaining of the
righteousness of a good conscience: which righteousness (as I have said) is
nothing else but a constant endeavor and desire to obey the will of God in all
things. That this righteousness may be kept to the end, we must practice three
rules. The first is, that we are to carry in our hearts Conse. bo^^ non ^^at
(...) proposi^^ peccandi.
a purpose never to sin against God in any thing: for where a purpose is of
committing any sin wittingly and willingly, there is neither good faith nor
good conscience. The second is to walk with God, as Enoch did, Genes. 5. v.
24. which is, to order the whole course of our lives as in the presence of God,
desiring to approve all our doings even unto him. Now this persuasion that
wheresoever we are, we do stand in the presence of God, is a notable means to
maintain sincerity. Genes. 17. v. 1. I am God all sufficient, walk before
me and be perfect: And the want of this is the occasion of many offenses: as
Abraham said, Because I thought, surely the fear of God is not in this place
they will slay me for my wives sake. Genesis 20. 11. The third rule is, carefully
to walk in our particular callings, doing the duties thereof to the glory of
God, to the good of the common wealth and the edification of the Church;
avoiding therein fraud, covetousness, and ambition, which cause men oftentimes
to set their consciences on the tenters, and make them stretch like cheverill.

Thus we see how good conscience may be preserved. Reasons to induce us
hereunto are many. I. Gods straight commandment. 1. Tim. 1. v. 19. Keep faith
and good conscience. And Prover. 4. 23. Keep thine heart with all dili gence.
II. The good conscience is the most tender part of the soul like to the apple
of the eye; which being pierced by the least pin that may be, is not only
blemished, but also loses his sight. Therefore as God does to the eye, so
must we deal with the conscience. God gives to the eye certain liddes of
flesh, to defend and cover it from outward injuries: and so must we use
means to avoid, whatsoever may offend or annoy conscience. III. Manifold
benefits redound unto us by keeping good conscience. First so long as we have
care to keep it, we keep and enjoy all other gifts of Gods spirit. Good
conscience and the rest of Gods graces are as a pair of turtle dowes, when the
one feeds the other feeds, when the one likes not the other likes not, when
the one dies the other dies: so where good conscience is maintained, there are
many other excellent gifts of God flourishing: and where conscience decays,
they also decay. Again good conscience gives alacrity unto us and boldness in
calling on Gods name. 1. Ioh. 3. 21. If our heart condemn us not, we have
boldness toward God. Thirdly it makes us patient in affliction and comforts
us greatly: and when by reason of the grievousnesse of our affliction, we are
constrained to kneel on both knees and take up our cross, regenerate
conscience as a sweet companion lays too his shoulder, and helps to bear
one end of it. Lastly when none can comfort us, it will be an amiable comforter
and a friend speaking sweetly unto us in the very agony and pang of death. IV.
Not to preserve the conscience without spot is the way to desperation. It is
the policy of the devil to use means to cast the conscience into the sleep
of security, that he may the more easily bring men to his own destruction. For
as diseases, if they be long neglected become incurable: so the conscience much
and often wounded admitts no comfort. Neither will it always boot a man after
many years to say at the last cast, Lord be merciful to me, I have sinned.
Though some be received to mercy in the time of death, yet far more perish in
desperation, that lived in their sins wittingly and willingly against their
own conscience. Pharao, Saul, and Judas cried all peccavi, I have sinned
against God; yet Pharao is hardened more and more and perishes, Saul goes on
in his sins and despaireth, Judas made away himself. And no marvel, for
the multitude of sins oppress the conscience and make the heart to ouerflowe
with such a measure of grief, that it can fasten no affiance in the mercy of
God. Lastly they that shall neglect to keep good conscience, procure many
hurtes, and dangers, and judgments of God to themselves. When a ship is on the
sea, if it be not well governed, or if there be a breach made into it, it
draws water and sinkes: and so both men and wares and all in likelihood are
cast away. Now, we all are as passengers, the world is an huge sea through
which we must pass: our ship is the conscience of every man. 1. Tim. 1. 19.
and 3. 12. the wares are our religion and salvation and all other gifts of
God. Therefore it stands us in hand to be always at the helm, and to carry
our ship with as even a course as possibly we can, to the intended port of
happiness, which is the salvation of our souls. But if so be it we grow
careless, and make breaches into the ship of conscience by suffering it to
dash upon the rocks of sin, it is a thousand to one, that we in the end
shall cast away our selves and all we have. And in the mean season, as
conscience decays, so proportionally all grace and goodness goes from us:
Gods commandments begin to be vile unto us; the knowledge thereof, as also
faith, hope, and the invocation of Gods name decay. Experience shows that men
of excellent gifts through the using of bad conscience, lose them all.

Faults to be amended thus.
Page 4. lin. 11. put in these words. Opinion judges a thing to be probable or
contingent. page 16. l. 12. III. Caution. p. 17. l. 19. the brother. p. 20. l.
21. least. p. 43. l. 25. weak. p. 45. l. 3. for be, read, it. p. 53. l. 19.
Caug^^. p. 127. l. 6. for invincible, read, (...). p. 150. for seems, read,
serves. p. 156. in the margin, (...).


