AN Inuitation unto Prayer, and the practice of Piety, directing the way to
true Happiness.

Wherein is principally to be considered, these four things. 1. What Prayer
unto God is. 2. The necessity of it. 3. The profit we receive by this holy
exercise. 4. The manner and use of it.


London printed by Isaac Iaggard for Robert Bird, and are to be sold at his
shop in Cheapside, at the sign of the Bible, 1624.

To my Honorable and Worthy Friends in Parliament.
ALL good counsel comes from God. Humane consultations are as frail; as
themselves are feeble. Nature has her courses and corruptions in all the
accidents of this world. Man's advice relyng only on it self, is like his
actions, sometimes prosperous, often perilous, and many times pernicious. The
most sure and sase help that we have, comes from the governor of Heaven and
Earth. The defense of his truth is our best buckler, and his service our
chiefest safety. Prayers and Petitions unto God, are the Harbingers, which
prepares a place for our heavenly habitation, and makes firm our earthly
possessions. This small and slender Treatise, which J have now puhlished
concerning Prayer, was first written ahout 27. years since, then penned for
mine own practice: since which time, it has been concealed, and in a manner
cast away, amongst many my other loose Papers, until of late finding it
unlooked for, J showed it to some of my private Friends, whose desires were;
it should be made public. To that J yielded, not for any worth J could
conceive to be in the work, coming from one so weak, but to satisfy those
who J knew would bear with my faults. Of all our actions, the world is as it
were the Theater, our selves the Actors; wherein some play their parts with
skill, others in simplicity, most with errors: the greater part are censurers,
more ready to find fault with others, then to search into themselves:
whatsoever they are, or J am, J see my self subject to censure* This subject
is Prayer, the pathway to happiness: the handling and carriage of rich Roabes
by poor men, makes not the garments mean, but it may be more meanly valewed,
it is that in attire as in Physic; the Materials of the one, and ingredients
of Medicines in the other, being of themselves good, yet not well by the
workers managed, composed, and mixed; makes their show of less esteem; and
indeed their substance of less use. Such may be the state of this Treatise
touching prayers, the subject in it self holy and heavenly; but by me not
well handled; may so fall out to be less valewed, then the dignity of it well
set forth, would show it self to be. Howsoever, I offer this small Widows
Myte into that Treasury where true Christians by Prayer and Piety, makes their
oblations and tribute in the Sanctuary of GOD, unto whose gracious and good
guidance, I commend all your good consultations, with all others that by
faithful prayer and fervent devotion, desire to serve his Divine Majesty.

Yours in him, who can make us all his, and to enjoy all happiness. I. P. Knight.

AN INVITATION to Prayer, and the practice of Piety; directing the way to true
Happiness. With a preparation to the practice thereof.
CHAP. I. What Prayer unto God is.
BEfore we treat of this most precious and inestimable gift and grace of
Prayer; it is convenient to know what Prayer (...) to Go^^^. For of thi^^s not
known what they are, there is little desire to attain unto them, be they
never so excellent in them selves, or profitable unto others. Therefore, to use
a brief definition, or rather description of Prayer unto God: may be said to
be, the Tribute of the soul, pouring out praises unto him for benefits
already received, or making supplications for such things as we stand in need
of, and seek of his Heavenly Majesty. Farther to make a celestial
representation, by terrestrial comparison.

Prayer unto God, may be termed to be as it were, a Bucket, to draw up the
water of Life, from the bottomless Well of Gods infinite grace and mercy. In
the efficacy and effects it may be likened unto a strong Wall or Fortress,
to guard the soul of him that rightly uses it, from the temptation and spoil
of Satan. So is it an Armor against all adversities, and the Souls Medicine
against al maladies that does invade and endanger it. To conclude this, which
brings us to happiness with that, which in Divine contemplation of heavenly
Mysteries, we may somewhat show what Prayer is, as the Divines do declare what
God is, by signifying what he is not, nor cannot be: So it may be said of
Prayer (a principal part of Gods worship) not to be the sport or supine
exercise of humane Wit; nor the practice of sloathfull creatures continuing in
known sins unrepented; but it is an ardent and zealous invocation, and (in
some sort) a Conference with God.

Two parts of Prayer.
There are two parts of Prayer, as has bin already in part pointed out. For by
showing what Prayer is, we show (in some sort) of what it consists, that is;
Petition, and Praise or Thanksgiving unto God. Petition, is an humble suit and
seeking unto God, either for pardon of our sins, for supply of spiritual
graces, or of temporal necessities, such as our wants in both (which are
great) do urge us to ask for assistance from the Almighty. Praise and
Thanksuing, is an ardent and hearty acknowledgment, with a landing of Gods most
glorious name, and mercy.

As there are two parts, Two kinds of Prayer.
so there are two kinds of Prayer: the one, Mental; the other, Vocal. The
Mental prayer is, when our inward conceptions and meditations of the mind,
are fixed on the Majesty of God, by secret and silent recounting, (without
expression of words) the miseries that our sins have brought upon our selves:
also, when we remember and rejoice at the mercies of God, and so do internally
magnify him for the same, and for his wonderful works of Justice, judgment,
providence, and preservation, without uttering of any words.

The other kind of Vocal Prayer, is, when the heart cannot be contained and
satisfied only with contemplation, but strives to set the tongue and voice on
work, either privately alone, or publicly conjoined with congregation and
assembly of Christians, to pray unto God, and to praise him. The first is
profitable, if it be done with zeal, devotion, and understanding: but the
second is commonly more firm and fruitful* For, when the soul is soliciting
on this service of God, yet the exterior senses do many times seduce and
withdraw the inward meditation, which makes them vanish, and often wax vain,
except they be united and bound together with the organs of voice and speech*
so these concurring make an even harmony: A comparison.
that inward as the Heart, which being the seat of the vital spirits, g^ines
quickening spirit to the body; this outward, being as the Lungs which received
from within, and vents outbreath* without which the heart it self cannot long
continue in health; nor the body in life: So are they indeed both (whilst
they have their well-being) like unto Hippocrates twins born, bred, living
and dying together.

It is true, that at al times they cannot be conioined; for sometimes,
Contemplation and Meditation may come, and are invited into the heart by the
good Spirit of GOD, at such times and places; where (...) public nor priu^^^
p^ (...) when strength and ^acul^^ of sp^ech ^aileth, (...) when the Conscience
by contemplation may consider, and secretly confess the frailties and falls
which are then, or has been before by them committed; and yet there is no
opportunity or admittance to express it: there mental Prayer and Meditation
is most proper. But vocal is most powerful, when it may be practiced.

CAP. II. The Necessity of Prayer.
NExt, to the examination and knowledge what Prayer is, there comes to be
considered, what the necessity is of the same: wherein I might well conceive,
there should need no great labor to prove it; nor more then to prove it, is
daylight when the Sun shines: the one being manifest in the works of Nature;
the other as apparent in the effects of Grace. Yet because ignorance needs
information, and curiosity requires confirmation, we will say somewhat, to make
the necessity of prayer to be in our sight (as indeed it is in it self)
perspicuous and plain.

It is evident to all good and well instructed Christians: That as we are all
Creatures of the heavenly Creator; 1. Prayer is needful in respect of Creation.
so to this end, did he cheefely create us; that we being his Worke-manship, we
should worship our great Worke-master, and give him his deserved glory, by
acknowledging this innumerable benefits: in magnifying his Divine Majesty, and
making supplications unto him. Which most necessary Christian duty, we cannot
perform without Prayer. Therefore the necessity of Prayer, is proved in the
cause and end of our Creation.

Next, as we are created only by God; 2. For our Salvation.
so are we only saved by him: and of our selves, through our sins Original
and Actual, we deserve nothing but destruction, death, and damnation.
Therefore, as we stand in (...) of pardon for our sins, and of (...) pacify
Gods indignation for the sin, whom unto do daily and grievously offend so
can be no way so well satisfy him, obtain pardon of them, and salvation of
our souls, as ^y frequent, zeallous, and fervent Prayer* the best procurers of
pardon for our transgressions against God.

Thirdly, as well our temporal preservation, as our Creation and Salvation;
shows the necessity of Prayer. For our youth is accompanied with rashness;
our riper years with dangerous adventures: our elder years, with sickness
and sundry infirmities. In all which seasons of man's life he is so subject, and
so beset with calamities, dangers, and maladies both of mind, and of body,
that without faithful and fervent Prayer unto God, he cannot escape those
miseries wherewith this life, and every part thereof, is environed. And by
acceptable Prayer unto GOD he passes through all these perils.

Therefore, if we consider who is our Creator, what benefits he has
bestowed on us, and to what end he has done this. In acknowledging, that he
has created us, we are bound to confess his power and providence. In
beholding and thankfully receiving his blessings, as life, health, liberty,
peace, wealth, knowledge, maintenance, mutual and comfortable society, we
cannot in duty but agnize his wonderful bounty, clemency, and mercy, which by
no other means, be so performed, as by ardent and devout Prayer unto God.

So then we may see (if sense do not blind reason, or if reason go not too far
in giving rules unto Religion) the necessity of prayer unto God to be so great
that without it we cannot well obtain the things we rightly desire, nor shun
that which is hurtful.

CAP. III. Of the profit of prayer.
THe third thing to be considred, handled, and well weighed, is the benefit and
profit of prayer unto God, which though it cannot be truly valued by any but
those that feel the fruits of it; both inwardly in their comforts and
consciences, and outwardly in their estates; and they only that taste and enjoy
the spiritual consolation they feel and find in this heavenly exercise of
prayer, can tell somewhat what it is: though they are not able to express it,
yet to show some sparkles of the splendour of prayer, (besides that which has
been already spoken of the necesity of it) we will summarily set down, some
examples, what bene^^ts the Children of God have received by the use of holy
and faithful prayer: and next touching the promises which our Savior has made
unto such as shall pray unto God zealously and truly.

If we look into the sacred Scripture and holy Bible; we shall find
sufficient examples, of deliverance from dangers, and the diuerting of Gods
judgments from sinners, by the prayers of holy men, even at the time, when
most eminent perils have presented themselves.

And when there has been no hope or likelihood of help to be delivered by
mortal man; yet the faithful prayer of one man, has delivered many from
destruction. As when the Israelites did fight against the Amalekites: as long
as Aaron and H^z^, held up the hands of Moses to pray, the Israelites did
prevail; when Judas Machabeus, fought against Gorgeas and his army, against
Lysias and his army; he prayed; and by effectual prayer unto God, he
overcame and got the victory. By prayer, Moses freed his Sister from the
Leprosy: and by prayer he pacified Gods displeasure against the people. And by
prayer, Abraham did our Abimelech: all which, and many more examples, might be
alleged, how profitable the prayer of one man has been for the preservation
of many.

Then if we consider the promises, which God (who is able to perform all that
he does promise) has made unto all those that make faithful supplications
unto him; we shall find the same to be so great, as greater cannot come to
man, by any endeavor. For it is said, if two or three be assembled together to
ask any thing lawful in Gods name, he will give it.

And again, the holy Ghost says by the princely Prophet David: Call upon me
in the time of thy need, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall praise me.
Likewise the same Prophet speaking by the same Spirit; Let him call upon me
and I will hear him. I am with him in his trouble, and will bring him to
honor.

But because the sacred Scriptures, are full of these certain promises, for
the obtaining of things faithfully and rightly asked of God in prayer, it shall
be sufficient for confirmation of this point; to add what our Savior
himself has said: Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever you shall ask
for unto the Father in my name it shall be given you.

If then we be commanded by God himself, to pray unto him, we cannot but
clearly see, as in a Crystal glass of Gods holy word, that prayer is most
profitable for us; as well for the fulfilling of Gods heavenly will, as for the
accomplishing of our own godly desires. And also, if we see so many
comfortable and plain patterns of the great safety and salvation, that has
come, and does daily grow unto the servants of God, by hearty and faithful
prayers unto him: then have we no cause to doubt the profit of prayer, or to
defer the doing of it, with our best devotion.

And lastly, if we look into the plain and effectual promises of our
All-powerfull God, for the performance of that which we do effectually pray
for; then there shall be no need of more persuasion of the inestimable benefit
which powerful prayer does bring with it: neither shall there be any necessity
or motive to follow and frequent the same, but willing minds, directed and
assisted by heavenly grace, to be often conversant in this most holy and
heavenly exercise of zealous prayer; which is so profitable unto man, and so
acceptable and sweet a sacrifice unto the Creator of mankind.

CAP. IV. Of the manner of Prayer.
Having as we hope showed what prayer is, and proved the necessity and profit
thereof: next comes to be considered the manner of it, consisting in three
things; that is, the time, place, and words, to be used in prayer.

First, for the time of prayer, it ought not always to be limited, how often,
or how long we should pray; but as often as conveniently we can, and as long
as our faith without fainting, or time without distraction, will give leave.
Neither are the prescribed rules of the Romish Church, in this behalf so
profitable, or so tolerable, as to observe Mattin at such hours, to say so
many Creeds, so many Aue mary's, so many Pater Nosters, and to recite the name
of Jesus, or the like, so many times, or to use such and such prayers, upon
such Beads, unto such Saints, for such men souls. As though God would have
men's devotions practiced more according to the observation of those prescribed
rules and times, then at any other time, or in any other manner; or as if you
were bound to hear them more in these regulated rehearsals, then in any other
sort, when they shall be devoted, to offer up the lncense of Prayer and
Thanksgiving, being sti^ (...) thereto, by the inwar^ good motion of zeal and
devotion, which ought to be in us at all times, as well as at any time
certain. But if the mind be not at al times well prepared to Prayer* yet as
often as we may find time and means, we must endeavor to be exercised
therein, without over stri^t observation of times limited; other then at such
times as we are called thereto by a general assembly of the Church and
Congregation wherein we live.

2 Likewise for the place of Prayer, it cannot be always restrained nor
appointed, no more then the time can be always limited. For although the
Churche^ (where the congregation of the faithful are or ought to be
assembled) be the fittest place^ for Prayers, yet it ought not to be lonely
there, but also elsewhere, because men cannot be alwai^s, or most commonly in
the Church. And if they may not be there, yet every faithful man's he
attri^^^^ time of prayer, is the temple of God. Whether therefore he be alone,
or in company, or to what place soever he be, his faithful prayers shall be
heard, and he is bound to pray: as Christ went alone in the Mountain to pray,
David prayed in his house top, Jonas in the Whales belly, Daniel in the Lions
den, Peter in the pris^ (...) the child (...) so Go^^ might (...) pray in all
places where they come, and as they ca^^, whether it be in the Church, in the
house, in the fields, in the war, and in time of peace, at home, and abroad.

3. Lastly, for the words that shall be used in prayer, it is a matter worthy
of consideration, whith^^ they ought always to be set down ce^taine^ either
in writing or in the memory; before we come unto prayer: Or whether they must
be always left vn^^ every m^ns meditation, and present delivery, as occasion
and his invention shall serve him, or as the Spirit of God shall direct him:
wherein, as they do affirm that prayers ought always to be set down in
certain words, may not have allowance of their opinions, so on the other side,
such as auerre, that the form of prayer should be at no time certain, nor set
down in writing or in the memory, must not be believed, nor their assertions
allowed as true and infallible.

For the first sort, which say, that one form of prayer in the selfsame
words, is always to be used, they tie Gods gifts and grace^ (which are in
every man in some measure or other, there more or less) unto prescription, and
to formal observation, which most commonly begets cold affection in prayer.
For, when a man's devotion and all his meditation are tied unto certain and
usual words; there familiarity of uttering one thing often takes away the
feeling of that which is uttered, so that it becomes ^^it ^ip-labour; and
loses the fervent zeal of an inward devotion, which does best please God in
prayer; and without the f^^uency, prayer is of none effect.

Then touching their opinions who affirm, that there should be no set form
of prayer at any time, or in any place, they do as much err, as the former
(which follow tradition and prescription only in prayer.) For in Churches, in
Congregations, and in Assemblyes, where public Prayer is used, and where many
do frequent to pray together, there no doubt, that a form of prayer is very
profitable, both for unity and universal framing of men's minds and inward
affections, in one sense, and in one saying, and at one time, to lift up both
hands and hearts unto God; which is the sweetest harmony that can be on earth.
And more then that, it is the heavenly harmony, that transporteth our bodies,
our minds and our souls from earth unto heaven. But as this unity and settled
form of prayer is most profitable and needful in the public assemblies; so
in private prayers and inuocations, ought no man to be forbidden the use of
his secret and several Meditations, according as God shall give him grace and
ability to praise him, and to pray unto him. For, although it be not every
man's gift, to deliver in apt words, the secret and particular desires of his
soul in prayers unto God: yet there is no doubt, but the man of meanest
conceit and understanding, having a desire to perform his duty in this
service of God; shall find (by exercise and practice herein) his mind more
apt, This senses more sharp, and his words more ready, with daily and
continual use of prayer.

Therefore, as every man ought not in public places of prayer, to follow his
own form, and separate himself in prayer from the Congregation; so in
private prayer, no man ought to be forbidden that form of prayer, which his
faith and capacity can afford, according to the sense and feeling of his
sins, the longing of his soul, and the necessity of his present estate.

Next unto the time, the place, and words for us to use in prayers, there
follows to be considered, the Faith and feruencie, that should accompany our
prayers, with a most principal and essential part thereof: this ought to be
in feruency of spirit, without fainting* for to pray without zeal, is but to
tempt and mock God. And God will not be worshipped in words only, without ye
inward affection of the heart, which is as well known to God (the searcher of
reins and heart) as the words that are uttered in prayer. Therefore they which
pray without faith and without feruency, perform no more then plants which
grow without feeling. Nay, they do not so much: for the one does perform the
works of nature which it is not taught to do, but the others do forsake, and
not follow the rules of Religion, which by reason, and instruction they are
informed and required to do. It is not then sufficient to say many prayers,
and to continue long in prayer: for as one says, the true effect of prayer
consists not in bare words, nor in the multitude of words that we speak,
but in the cogitations and faithful desires of the heart. And it is not our
words, but our desires that enters into the secret ears of the All-hearing,
Al-giuing, and Al-seeing God. How much then do they wrong the Majesty of God,
and the salvation of their souls, which run to prayers as unto a stage play,
without any preparation, without any Faith, or without any zeal, but heaping
up prayers, and yet scarce thinking what they say, or to whom they do pray.

The Astronomers affirm, that the Moon is Eclipsed, when the earth is
interposed, betwixt her and the Sun: so may it be auerred, that the
meditations which we deliver in prayer, are much eclipsed and darkened, when
earthly cogitations do interpose betwixt the mind of man, and his divine
Meditation, which is the Sun shine and clearest light of his soul. Prayer unto
Gody, is i^ secret conferrence with God: therefore Augustine calls the book
of his prayers and meditations, his Soliloquium, that is, the alone talk or
secret conference of his soul with God. How careful, zealous and humble then
ought we to be in our confer with so great a Lord, and our only God? For
when any men does conserve with his better (especially with one that is far
his superior) as a Nobleman, a Prince, or any great personage, how circumspect
will he be to show all the signs of reverence, and duty in word in gesture,
and countenance; and if he do not use all these observations, which may
testify his humility and obeisance unto his superior, he may fear to be
noted of presumption, and to incur the displeasure of him, with whom he
conferreth. If then such ceremony and reverence be used and required in
conference, betwxit man and man, how much more careful, watchful, and
fearful, ought every man to be in prayer, which is his conference with God.
Therefore he that will pray unto God effectually, ought in the time of prayer,
wholly to exercise his mind and his senses in the constant, faithful, devout,
and fervent calling upon his Creator, having mind on no other matter, then on
his meditations which he does present, nor on any other person then his God, to
whom he does deliver them.

CAP. V. A preparation to prayer.
Having considered, and discussed somewhat the property of prayer to God, and
what it is: the necessity, manner, and profit thereof, it will not be amiss,
or unnecessary, to show something of the preparation that should be made,
before we do enter into this holy exercise. For as before we f^ll into any
actiuity of the body, exercise of the mind, or other action of account, (which
we desire should be acceptable unto them, before whom we present the same)
there is always some time of preparation taken, to the end the same may be the
more exquisitely managed: so is it much more needful, that before this
spiritual, exercise of prayer, a sound preparation of the mind and soul
should still be premised, otherwise it may fall out in this holy exercise as it
does in matters of far loss moment, that (...) that is not well prepared; may
be soon intrapped and distracted. The best rules therefore that my simple
judgment can afford for preparation to prayer are these.

1 First, before we begin our prayers, we should fall into some strict
examination of our selves, touching our sin, and the estate of our life;
wherein we may best consider, what we had most need to crave at Gods hands.

2 Next, we must call to remembance the mercies of God, his justice, his
judgments, and his wonderful works; whereby in our prayers we may learn, and
use (as well as in the rest of our life) to love him for his mercies; to fear
him for his justice, and judgments, as well as to magnify him for his
wonderful works; which cogitations conjoined, may make our following
meditations more perfect and profitable.

3 Thirdly, before we fall unto prayer, we ought to sequester our senses from
all wandering, idle, and vain cogitations, and to cast away all evil thoughts
as Helias did cast his Mantle to the earth, when he ascended to heaven:
resolving fully with the favor of God (whom we purpose then to serve) not to
entertain any worldly thoghts that may with-drawe our devotions from his
divine Majesty, but to banish all passions, pleasures, and perturbations of the
mind, and to recall unto memory, our last and most pressing sins, by an inward
feeling of them, joined with repentance, and a purpose to pray for pardon and
amendment.

Then being thus christianly resolved, we must yet before we begin to pray,
labor to bring with us by faith, a lively and a longing apprehension of Gods
promises and mercies: and an undoubted belief of his most just and heavenly
performance of that which he has graciously promised, and we do faithfully
pray for.

Afterward, when by meditation we have made this passage for prayer, which
requires faithful and watchful progress, if yet we find, as usually we
may find, that any evil or vain thoughts do assalt us, when we are coming
on to this holy exercise, we must seek even at the first feeling thereof, to
resist and reject it, without giving any kind of small entertainment thereto:
considering, that evil cogitations are of two kinds, either immitted or
permitted: they are immitted by the frailty of the flesh, the temptations of
Satan, the weakness of the inner senses, being deluded by the objects which
the exterior senses (especially the sight) does convey unto them: and these
immitted evil cogitations, do hurt the heavenly Meditations of our prayers:
especially, when they are permitted to harbor and to remain within us.
Therefore, as soon as any such temptations come toward us in our prayers, we
must presently pray unto God, to strengthen our Faith, forgive our frailty, and
assist us with his holy Spirit against such temptations.

Also, when we begin, and after we have begun our prayers, we must bring with
us, and keep with us this consideration and resolution, not to seek so much
temporal as spiritual blessings at Gods hands. And if our necessities call
upon us to crave temporal blessings; yet let our desires be so far limited,
always to submit our wills to Gods heavenly will: let us begin to beg of God
things spiritual, before temporal blessings, though both be necessary, and
neither to be neglected.

To all this must be added Charity, in pardoning offenses that are committed
against us, according to the president and precept which our Savior himself
has set down in that form of prayer, which ought to be the rule of all our
prayers; and so reconciling our selves first by charity to our adversaries, we
may come with more clear Consciences, and more acceptable sacrifice, in our
supplications unto God. For if we ask forgiveness of our sins, and do not
forgive others, we can find but little assurance to obtain what we ask.

So then we see, it is not fit nor safe, to run rashly unto prayer, without
preparation, premeditation, faith, repentance, reconciliation, and resistance
of temptations.

CAP. VI. An entrance to Prayer.
Having prepared our minds, and our hearts for Prayer, we may then most
safely make our entrance into it, which consists chiefly of these parts;
Invocation, Confession, La^ding or Thanksgiving, and Supplication, Invocation,
is a calling or appellation on the name of God most high. Which declares and
denounces the attributes belonging to the nature of God, and these do
concern his Justice, Mercy, Power, and his Providence. His Justice, as a most
just God, who by thy Justice do distribute and dispose unto all creatures,
all that belongs, and is most fit for them; who thereby do govern and guide
(...) and men, with all that is in heaven and earth.

His Mercy, as thus: Most merciful and gracious God, whose mercy is above all
thy other wonderful works, in pardoning and preserving from destruction, and
in sending thy Son to save sinners.

The invocation of Gods Power, may be made after this manner. O God, of
unspeakable power and might, which made all things of nothing by thine own
only word and wisdom, and art able at all (...) ^^ing all this again unto
nothing.

The invocation of Gods providence, may be in this wise. O Lord God of
wonderful wisdom, he whose providence all things are preserved, and from whose
wisdom we have all our knowledge and wisdom. These and the like inuocations,
according to the appellation and declaration of Gods attributes uttered in this
or the like sort, may serve as some instruction to the ignorant: so from
Introduction and entrance into their prayer, until by practice they be made
more perfect, as the first part thereof, yet to be altered, amended, and
augmented, as every man's capacity and ability shall afford him means.

Next to Invocation in prayer, Confession has her proper place. For if we have
offended God (as there is no man but daily and hourly does it: then it is most
needful, (...) first we do confess our selves, before we ask any benifits.

This Confession is of two kinds, the one, general; the other, particular.
That general, as when one does declare and deplore his grievous sins, that
he is polluted with the same thoroughout all his parts and faculties: the
latter which is a mention and recital of several sins, such as every man
may find himself to be most burdened with; as those which were last
committed, most fresh in memory; namely, that this day, and of late I have done
these evils in thy sight: I have seduced such persons, I have slandered my
neighbor; I have in this denied or darkened the truth; I have harbored these
evil thoughts of such persons, without just cause given; I have followed this
vain desire, affected this fond invention presented to me by others, or
entertained by my self; I have not withstood such an evil work, when I could
have done it; I have been silent in such a cause, when I might have made the
truth manifest. And so of our several sins either committed, whereof we may
take knowledge; or of necessary duties omitted, which in Christian duty we
ought to have done, when we make faithful confession unto God, joined with
some repentance, and the same accompanied with acknowledgement and Thanksgiving
for mercies received, are the best preparatiues in our prayers.

After this, and the like, both general and particular confessions of our sins
in prayer unto God; a lauding, and a thanksgiving for the blessings imparted
unto us (whereof we ought to be sensible, and not to be silent) comes next in
place. For it were unseemly, inconvenient, and improuident, to ask any new good
turns of any man, before we return any show of thankfulness for what good we
have received: so would it be as unbeseeming, and altogether as unprofitable,
for mortal man to pray unto the immortal God, for any increase of mercies;
before he acknowledge those which have been formerly powered on him. The form
of this praise and thanksgiving may be made after this manner. We praise and
magnify thy Divine Majesty, most glorious God, for thy favor and goodness
extended always on us sinful Creatures since our Creation, for giving us
understanding of thee, and of thy will; for preserving, maintayning, and
protecting us more particularly for etc. Lastly, supplication, or petition is
to be made (especially for the pardoning of our sins, for freeing and keeping
us from falling into the same, or the like again, for the obtaining of
spiritual graces, and of temporal necessities for the pardoning of sins, it
may be in such like sort: Thou that art the God of mercy, show mercy and
compassion on me a most miserable sinner: Lord let thy mercy shine above all
thy other works. Cast not thy loving countenance from me, bewayling my many and
heinous transgressions. Lord God, thou see our wantes and our weakness. I
beseech thee strengthen me in body and in health. Bless me in estate, that I
may be the better able to serve thee, and employ what thou shall afford,
according to thy sacred will and pleasure.

The supplication for spiritual graces may be after this wise: Though we have
deserved no goodness having done so much evil; yet according to thy wonted
goodness, grant us such graces and heavenly gifts, as may make us blessed in thy
sight, and beloved of thy Saints Give me a steadfast faith, an humble and
contrite heart, penitence for all my sins past, watchfulness over my ways
for time to come, zeal of thine honor and glory, a love of thy truth, and of
such as love the same, an understanding heart to discern it, constancy in
following and keeping thy commandments: teach me to examine mine own heart,
to search it strictly, to see if there yet remain any hypocirsie or
hollownesse in it: Take from me the temptations of lust, vainglory, malice,
sensuality, distrust and diffidence of thy power or mercy, that so through thy
only and all-able assistance, I may be made of a sinful soul, though not a
perfect, yet an acceptable worshipper, of thee my Sovereign Lord, and only
Savior.

Short Admonitions concerning the premises.
I Shall desire the charitable viewer of these imperfect rules concerning
prayer, to conceive that they are not set down either to inform the learned,
or any that are well exercised in prayer. But to give some light unto such as
are young, simple, ignorant, or not much used to prayer.

Neither should any of them be tied only to these words or forms here set
down, but it is in their choice to take the sense of the same, so far as
they shall find it to further their good and godly endeavors in prayer. And
if GOD shall indue them with better abilities, they may use them, ought to be
thankful for that heavenly talent they have, and not to hide or to abuse it.

A prayer for devotion in prayer.
SInce all good gifts comes from thee, our gracious God, the author of all
goodness: grant us thy special saving grace of sanctified and fervent prayer,
in frequent and zealous supplications. We have it not of our selves, we seek
it of thee: nether can we seek it, without thou first send the motions
thereof into our hearts and minds: prepare us therefore for this holy duty,
grant us the practice and power of it before we come to it; touch our hearts
with the remembrance of our sins, and repentance for the same. Call to our
memory and meditations, how slow we have been to present our selves to thy
presence by prayer, how cold we are in devotion, how distracted in our
thoughts, and how full of fantasies, and of fond imaginations, which draw our
zeal and devotion from thee, even in the time of prayer, when our thoughts
should be pure, and our hearts only settled upon thy service: so that in stead
of bringing a blessing, we bring just curses to our selves, by these our more
formal then faithful prayers. O Lord, therefore infuse grace into our hearts,
kindle zeal, fortify our faith, let not our secure and sensual service of
thee, increase more of our abounding sins, nor add more to thy deserved
anger; but be thou in the midst of us, by thy assisting holy Spirit. When we
lift up our hands, lift thou up our hearts unto thee: when we speak unto
thee, speak thou peace unto our Consciences: give us words to utter, faith to
believe, feruencie in our prayers, an earnest desire to abandon all evil
affections, and loose carriage of our cogitations, and so closely to settle our
souls unto thy service. When we come to make our supplications before thy
Majesty, let this instant time of prayer, whilst we now speak, be the
beginning of our better service, and so continuing in the same, with humility,
constancy, and favor; thou may have the honor, and we the benefit. To
thee be given all honor and glory, now and all times, Amen.

Morning prayer in a family.
O Lord God, light of lights, thou that give light unto our souls, and to
our bodies; thou that have brought us from the darkness of this night, to see
the comfortable light of this day; bring us from the darkness of ignorance and
of sin, and from the corrupting of our souls, wherein we have lived both
day and night. As thou have raised us from our rests to follow our callings; so
raise us from security, sloth, dullness, distraction, lust, covetousness,
selfe-conceites, pride, and all other corrupt affections, which carry us
headlong after the vain imaginations of our own hearts, and evil affections.
Good Lord, when we go abroad about our worldly affairs, let not our minds be
led altogether from heavenly meditations: but let thy blessed Spirit be our
motioner, to put us in mind of the shortness and uncertainty of our lives,
let us have before our thoughts often, the sins we have committed, the good
we might have done, and have omitted; the time we have misspent, either in
doing no good at all, or in doing that is evil. And this (good Lord) teach us
to tell our selves, and our own souls, not with words, only coming from
the lips, but with inward sighs and groans from the heart: and when through
the assistance of thy holy Spirit thou have made us to search our sins, and to
smite our hearts, then bless thou the works of our hands in all our good
endeauours: and as by the same our store does increase, our thankfulness to thee
may increase: As thy blessings are bestowed, so our prayers and praises may be
rendered and redoubled. At our going out, in our rest, travail, and return,
be thou with us, by the blessing and assistance of thy holy Spirit; let this
day (good Lord) be a beginning and a new birth day of faith, repentance for
our sins, and of reconciliation to thy Majesty; that so thou may receive
us to mercy. Let all the rest of our days be an amendment of our sinful lives
past. Bless (good Lord) thy Church, our King, and his Realms, with faith,
truth, peace, and prosperity; guide the rest of the States of this land in
their several conditions and callings; that both they and we may maintain thy
truth, set forth thy glory, keep a good conscience to our selves, and show
charity one unto another. So we may live in thy fear, dye in thy favor, and
after this mortal life is ended, we may enjoy an immortal life with thee in
heaven, there to magnify, praise, and glorify thy most glorious Name, world
without end, Amen.

A Morning Prayer to be used in private.
THis day (our good God) appearing, and thy mercies appearing by our
deliverance from dangers this night past, and in the ordaining of days, and of
all thy other works: what praises shall we render for thy works of Creation,
and of preservation? If we should not praise thee, yet one day tells another,
and one night certifieth another; but I most sinful soul, have neither
expressed, nor felt what belongs to the visible works of thy invisible
Majesty; neither can I comprehend it in thy works, and made known by thy
revealed word: for thy Majesty is so great, thy Wisdom so unsearchable, and thy
Word so deep, that I am not able to conceive them. It suffices (great God)
unto thee that art all-sufficient in thy self, to express thy self unto us
sinners, in such sort as we are able to apprehend thee. And I, one of the least
and unworthiest servants, do confess my self to be a most grievous sinner,
in thought, word, and deed: I have followed mine own wicked fantasies, I have
broken thy commandments, and betrayed mine own soul; yet my hope is in thy
mercy: and therefore in the beginning of this day, I begin my prayers unto
thee; teach me therefore to pray, that I may this day, and the rest of my life,
call upon thee, and praise thee through the assistance of thy power, which
grant us good Lord.

A Prayer for the Evening in the Family.
MOst gracious God we thank thee for our safe deliverance this day, and the
rest of our life from all dangers. That thou have given us food, health,
raiment, with other things necessary for our sustenance and sustentation. That
thou have not suffered us to be overwhelmed with cares, crosses, and
calamities, whereto we are subject, whilst we lead this transitory life. That
thou have granted us liberty to travel in those affairs, to which our estates
and necessities do call us. These, and many other blessings, have thou bestowed
on us this day, and from day to day until this present time. O Lord, as thou
have powered down thy mercies upon us in great measure, so shower down into
our hearts those thy heavenly graces of thankfulness, faithfulness, favor,
and praises, that they may be like unto Dew coming down from Heaven; which
ascending up thither again, and so returning thence with retribution of
increase, may moisten our dry, hard, and stony hearts, and so bring forth
fruits of Faith and Repentance, which may grow up to the setting forth of thy
glory, and the saving of our own poor sinful souls.

To this end good Lord, settle our hearts this Evening before, and when we go
to bed; as we carry with us our corruptions, still plucking unto our frail
bodies flesh and blood; so yet with the assistance and strength by which we
must walk, or else we can never stand, we may be led to the consideration of
our own mortality and miserable condition, that we are now alive, and may die
ere the next day; that though we have fed plentifully this day, yet it may be
we shall eat no more; and that some of us who hear and see one another now,
shall never hear or see one another hereafter. For neither of us have
assurance to live until the next day, to deliver what we have done this
night. Blessed God therefore, we beseech thee, even at this instant time, begin
to infuse grace into us, to look upon our selves as corruptible, and to look
into our souls as they are full of corruption, to make a true account at the
least, of this days trespasses, committed against thy holy and heavenly
Majesty, to mourn for it as much as we may, before sleep the fore-shewer of
death does seize upon us, to pray unto thee fervently, to ask thee forgiveness;
to give thee thanks for thy mercies, to lift up our hands and hearts unto
thee, and at the least to say, Lord be merciful unto me a miserable sinner.
This repentance, and this continual practice of prayer, of praises, and of
thanksgiving, grant us good Lord, and to all thy chosen children, for thy
Son our Savior Christ Jesus sake.

A private Prayer for one going to bed.
THis day (good Lord) is spent; so do our lives spend: and as our time does
decrease, so do our sins increase. We seek riches and know not who shall
enjoy them: We covet children, wealth, and preferments, and are not assured to
possess them. And I that should know thus much, do not consider what I know,
nor weigh mine own infirmities. I have (good Lord) this day acted my part,
with much frailty, and many faylings. I have forgotten to call upon thee my
Sovereign Lord) this day, and most of the days of my life: my faith is weak,
my understanding is dull in divine things, my memory fails to retain good
things, though they be taught me, my affections deprived and wandering after
vain, worldly, and wicked imaginations, the which carry me from the keeping
of thy Commandments. This (O Lord) I confess, and better I am not able to do
without thy assistance: yet keep me (gracious God) this night, and from
henceforth, from further contagion of body and of soul; let not my polutions
in the works of darkness this night, be added to my former transgressions,
but cleanse me from that is past, and keep me from the like sins from time to
time; change the Old man in me by repentance and renouation, save my soul, and
teach me to set forth thy praise, both day and night.

Certain Meditations, and short eiaculations of Prayers, to be used in the
night.
A Waking out of sleep, let us begin with some short prayers in this or the
like sort.

My God, I am awaked again: awake me out of sin, as thou have done me out
of sleep.

Let my sleep, wherein I had not the use of my senses, teach me not to drive
out my days in slumber, security, and impiety.

When I arise out of my bed, raise me up to newness of life, repentance for
my sins, and amendment of what I have done amiss.

When mine eyes shall close again, keep me in thy protection and safeguard by
thy power.

Now Lord defend me this night, and ever; preserve me from danger, sin, and
death.

Keep me from concupiscence, lust, and vain imaginations.

Knit my heart unto thee.

Let my sleep be moderate and safe, so that I may rise better prepared for thy
service.

A Prayer for deliverance from temptations.
OUR frail Natures, and our pronenesse to fall into all kind of sins, forces
us, O Lord, (if we would do as we should) to fly unto thee for our safety
and salvation, and to call upon thee, who art our stay and our strength, and
who only have power to preserve us: beseeching thee, that thou will be
pleased, either to put us from those temptations which of our selves we are
not able to withstand. Teach us O Lord, to wrestle with sin and with Satan
by prayers and reparations, framed and fitted by the inspiration of thy holy
Spirit: and when these temptations are offered, offer unto us thy ^elping hand,
to stand steadfast in faith, with fear to offend thee. Let us then, when these
temptations come, say unto our selves, Lord, thou see all, and thou will
punish us; Lord help, and Lord deliver us, and for my sinful weak self, save
me from these violent assaults of Satan. I cannot defend my self, he thou
therefore my shield and buckler, my corrupt nature is ready to yield; the
contagions of others, the allurements of the world, and wicked persons are
ready to enthrall me: yet if thou (my merciful God) strengthen me, I shall be
able by thy assistance to stand; If thou (my Savior) stretch out thy shield and
spear of defense, I shall with Peter (being almost sunk) walk safe on the
waters of strife. Help therefore Lord, for vain is the help of man. Put from
us Pride, Presumption, Luxury, Lust, Selfe-conceite, Covetousness, want of
devotion, Malice, Mischief, Unbelief, hardness of heart, and such like
sins, which are the subjects subjects of our temptations: or if any such
assault us, or come near us, let them not take such hold on us to throw us
down, that we be not able to rise any more; but in the coming, or before the
prevailing of our temptations, support, deliver, and save us. So shall we give
thee laud for ever and ever, Amen.

A Prayer for patience, in time of wants and disgraces.
IT is just with thee (O Lord) and I have justly deserved, that thou should
send me some wants and small disgraces, after thou have given me prosperity,
plenty, and sufficiency: when not using thy blessings well, and neglecting the
means thou have affoorded for my maintenance, I am fallen from that I had
(which was sufficient) to want some things for my necessary use. And yet my
wants are not so great as my sins are, or as they have deserved. Since then,
howsoever my estate, or my estimation is in this world, I do beseech thee
grant me patience to bear this, or whatsoever cross it pleases thee to lay
upon me, and to acknowledge that I my self am the cause of it. And so, when
thou have brought me home unto thy self, by the acknowledgement of my self,
and of my sins, comfort me again, according to thy eternal wisdom, that I
be neither dismaide with adversity, or puffed up with prosperity: but if it
be thy good pleasure, that poverty shall still pursue me; prepare me with
patience to bear this cross, though hard for flesh and blood: yet once
obtaining the victory by thy sole strength, over this inward enemy, and my
infirmities sticking closest unto me, I may possess my soul in peace: and
whatsoever becomes of my worldly estate, the spiritual state of my soul may be
safe, and I saved, through thy abundant mercies, Amen.

A Prayer in time of sickness.
MOst gracious Father, we confess and we are driven to confess, we have
deserved plagues, pestilence, and other sicknesses whereto we are subject of
our selves, as well by the natural infection of our bodies, whereby one takes
contagion from another, as by our spiritual pollutions, whereby our sins,
being the inward festring sores, do ascend unto the Tribunal in heaven,
calling and crying for vengeance on the earth, and on the sons of men, the
inhabitants and Rulers of the earth. The effects of this (good Lord) we have
often and visibly seen, though we do not well consider the cause. We feel
the stroke, but do not see the hand that strikes; neither do we well weigh what
moves that hand to be stretched out against us.

Now the sickness thou have sent us, makes us to look somewhat about us, and
to feel that which our flesh can easily find; pain, anguish, aches, and
torments coming from the body, to the mind. But (O Lord) we are not so
sensible of that which concerns the sickness of the soul. Yet in this time
of our visitation, whilst pain and peril does oppress us, teach us to take
this as an information of our infirmities: heal us (good Lord) inwardly in the
diseases of our souls, and keep us from those corruptions of our natural
affections, which draws us unto fond desires, with false and foolish appetites,
the procurers of these our bodily diseases.

O Lord yet cleanse us within from our sins, and then we shall be cured from our
corporal sickness; but if it be thy blessed will to continue this Contagion,
yet comfort and support us during the time of sickness. Make thou (good Lord)
our beds and bodies, such as may make us able to undergo our sickness;
comfort us with the inward consolation of thy holy Spirit, and when cold, heat,
conjunction, or succession of either comes, then O Lord, in the time of
extremity, whilst Na^u^e is distempred, our bodi^s dis^ased, and our minds
distracted, betwixt fear of death, danger of our estate, care of our children,
friends, kindr^d, and family, we may yet receive a sweet repose from the
influence of thy holy Spirit, to rest content with thy good will and pleasure;
with a reference and relying on the same, for resolution of life, or of death.
So may we, by thy assistance, say still and peaceably unto thee, in the
sincerity of our own souls; We are here now (good Lord) at thy disposing, do
with us what thou will. Only make us able to bear our own infirmities, and thy
visitations with faith: help us in the time of this wea^nesse, and danger of
this disease; if thou give life, grant amendment of life*

If thou appoint death, grant us preparation for our dissolution; Repentance
for our sins, and a joyful assurance of thy mercies: the body is weak, the
flesh trem^les, the Spirit is troubled. O thou the giver of life, and the
disposer of death, when sense is dull or distracted, infuse thy Spirit to
temper it, and to turn us unto thee: dispose our hearts so, that whither life
or death do come, they may be alike welcome unto us, and we may entertain
either, according to thy good will and pleasure. Arm us against the fear of
death: if life be granted, grant we may lead a new life, setting forth thy
glory.

If death be designed, let the period of this life be finished in thy praises,
lift up our hearts at the last gasp. And now at this instant, plant in my
heart faith to believe in thy saving health, feruencie to pray for it, courage
to endure the conflicts of sickness, and of sin, and in the end a blessed
death, and a joyful resurrection, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A prayer for knowledge.
THou (O great and gracious God,) who art the light of our lives, and the
Conseruer of all saving knowledge, enlighten our understanding with the true
knowledge of thee, of our selves, and of the ways wherein we should walk. And
although we can never in this world know thee as thou art, being invisible,
and infinite in goodness and in greatness; yet give us such, and so much
knowledge of thee, as our capacities can comprehend, and thy will is to
reveal. Let us attain to so much knowledge, as to see thy wonders in thy
works and thy good pleasure revealed in thy word: if that which thou have not
revealed of thy self, let us be satisfied with what thou have revealed in thy
word.

Of the first, let our natural inquisition of thy supernatural power, weaken
or prejudice our faith: And in that knowledge which thy word delivers, let us
not be content with a weak and mean measure, but covet to come unto that
knowledge which may strengthen our faith, inform our consciences, and reform
our lives. In the knowledge of our selves, teach us to consider and know our
own weakness and wickedness, our frailty and manifold infirmities, our
sins and transgressions against thy holy and heavenly Majesty.

For the knowledge of our own ways, grant us wariness and watchfulnes to see
and find out our faylings in the keeping of thy Commandments: our fear,
plainly to profess thy truth, through doubt of danger, scoff, or loss: the
small account we make of thy good things we leave undone, or do amiss, of the
evil we have committed: And when (good Lord) thou have rightly instructed us
in the knowledge of thee, by thy works and word; of our selves, in finding and
confessing our sins: and of our own ways, by acknowledging them to be
wandering bypaths; then bring us home unto thee, to pray unto thee, and praise
thee in this life, and in the life to come, Amen.

A prayer to be kept from all uncleanness of our Lusts.
O Most eternal and gracious GOD, thou art pure and perfect; but we are most
impure and polluted: all the faculties of our souls are full of corruptions,
and our bodies are fraught with infirmities: those parts of our bodies and of
our minds, which should be the servants of our souls, do draw us to be
slaves to evil affections: Our eyes which are ordained to behold and
contemplate the wonderful workmanship of the world, and of all the creatures
therein contained, do commonly become like unto sluices and floodgates, to
carry and convey lust and Concupiscence unto our hearts; and our hearts which
should be as Clossets to keep thy Commandments, are for the most part, made the
members and instruments of sin and of Satan. This (O Lord) we confess is our
woeful and wretched condition.

Yet thou (O most merciful God) art able to cleanse us from these contagions
of our unclean lusts, purge us (we beseech thee) and we shall be pure: keep
us from inward infections of our own evil imaginations, and from outward
temptations, which lascivious sights and dalliance^, and fleshly prouocations
pull upon us, and that by the assistance of thy holy Spirit, when these
temptations assalt us, pray unto thee, beseeching thee to be our buckler and
our strength in the time of our weakness; our stay when we are ready to fall,
and that by thy power we may resist and repel all the sensual and fleshly
lusts which are in us, and fight against us. We have no help, nor no hope
but in thee: defend us, give us the victory, and take the glory unto thy self:
deliver us from these noisome lusts, and give us grace to give thee praise, to
whom all honor belongs. So be it good Lord, Amen.

A Prayer before the hearing of the Word preached.
THy Word (O Lord) is a light unto our feet, and a Lantern unto our paths.
Thy word preached is the propagation of thy glorious Gospel, it is the seed
that fructifies knowledge and conscience. Let it not therefore be as good seed
sown in barren soil; but first cleanse the weeds and corruptions which grow
in the vnfallowed fields of my heart. And then (most gracious God) when thou
have removed those impediments of faith and feruency: make my heart by hearing
thy holy word, a harbor of sanctity and sincerity. And in this (O Lord)
prepare me to hear, to believe, to receive, retain, and to remember the
lessons that shall be taught out of thy Sacred Word; take away in the hearing
thereof, all drowsinesse, distraction, and coldness of zeal.

In this I pray not only for my self, but for the people in all places
professing thy truth, for their profit, and for thy glory. Send forth
Laborers into thy Vineyard, teach them to plant: make us to be plyant in
hearing, learning, and following. So shall we have sustenance unto our souls;
reap the fruits of those fields that thou have given us: and we shall give
unto thee nothing but what is thine, and belongs to thy Majesty, which is all
honor, glory, praise, and dominion, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and
Savior, Amen.

A Prayer after the hearing of a Sermon.
MOST merciful and mighty gouerner of heaven and of earth, amongst all thy
blessings multiplied upon mankind, there is nothing does more magnify thy
Majesty, or help the infirmities of us miserable Creatures, then the
manifestation of our weakness and wickedness, in the revelation of both, and
reconciliation of thy self (after all our infinite transgressions) through the
suffering of thy Son, his mediation, and the Ministry of the word preached.
Of this (O Lord) we have bin unprofitable hearers and learners. We have heard
with our ears, but yet we have been unprofitable hearers. We have not felt
and followed that we have heard: we have been told, and plainly taught our
sins, but we have not amended them, nor truly repented for our misdeeds. We
have learned somewhat, though but little; have performed and practiced less,
the fault is ours: yet let it not (good Lord) stand in the way of thy grace, to
stop from us good things: but as thou have provided for us the word of life,
and have conveyed it by thy conducter, men like our selves, the Ministers and
Preachers of thy Gospel; so grant that we go not from this exercise of
preaching and publishing thy holy word, like unto empty vessels, which whilst
they are moved and stricken upon yield some sound; but afterward lying still,
afford neither sweetness, savor, nor good liquor. O Lord bless and fructify
our hearing, make us not only hearers, but dooers of thy word: make it a
savor of life unto life, and not of death unto death: teach us thereby to
amend our lives, to increase knowledge and conscience, to yield comfort in
afflictions, strength and support in temptations, and when we shall depart the
world, we may carry with us a testimony of good Consciences, that we have
profited by the word, have thereby learned to love our Brethren, to forsake
sin, to embrace righteousness, to live and to die well, and that by faith in
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer before the receiving of the Lords Supper.
BLessed Lord, we do not presume to present our selves before thee, in the
receiving of this Sacrament, and celebration of thy Sons last Supper, as
believing we are of our selves worthy to be partakers of thy heavenly banquet.
For we acknowledge our great and grievous sins, our manifold mistakings, our
unbelief, uncharitableness, hardness of heart, self-love, pride, and
presumption, with many other transgressions, whereby we are made most unworthy
to come unto thy heavenly Table. Yet, O Lord, as it is thy holy Ordinance,
instruct and help us to do that which may make us more meet partakers of this
spiritual Manna. To this end, take from us our corruptions and carelessness in
thy service: grant us true repentance for our sins past, for the trespasses
that we have committed against thee and those that profess thy truth. Lord,
even now give me thy unworthy servant (being so unable of my self to do
this, or any other spiritual duty) a right and regenerated heart, a sanctified
soul, purged from former pollutions, by thy power, and the grace of thy holy
Spirit; a desire to forgive all men, and to be forgiven of all men, to forsake
sin, to follow thy holy Laws. Suffer not Satan to work in me his will any
more, but that as I now come to receive this Sacrament, so I may be a partaker
of the benefits of our Saviors death and suffering, whereof this is a symbol:
that through his death sin may dye in me, and through his resurrection, I may
rise to newness of life.

A Prayer after the receiving of the holy Communion.
WE bless and praise thy holy name (O heavenly Father) that amongst all thy
innumerable benefits thou have bestowed, this is not the least but greatest
mercy upon mankind, to send thy Son our Savior into the world to suffer
for us sinners, to redeem us from life to death, to lay down his own life to
save us from damnation. This thy mercy, as it is unspeakable and vnualewable,
O Lord we acknowledge it to be so great, that we cannot give thee condign
praises, but do pray thee to accept our weak sacrifices in the Eucharisticall
rejoicing and rendering of laud unto thee, for the suffering of thy Son, to
offer himself unto death, even for them that were become enemies to our
gracious God, breakers of thy Covenants, defilers of thy Sabaths, haters of
truth, truce breakers, laden with sin, and void of grace.

Now most merciful Lord God, that thou have vouchsafed us this favor to
approach unto thy blessed Table, and to renew the seal of the Covenant; grant
likewise for a farther addition of grace, and for the increase of thy glory,
that we may approach nearer and nearer unto thee, by newness of life,
watchfulness over our own ways, firmness in faith, constancy in keeping
thy Commandments, obedience to thy holy word and will, and this through the
help of thee our Lord, which only art able to save those that serve thee, Amen.

A prayer in the time of unseasonable weather.
THe heavens, the earth, and all the Creatures therein contained, thou (O Lord)
have ordained: thou in thy eternal counsel and providence, have appointed
seasons of the year fit to produce and propagate things needful for the
sustenance and use of man, and have usually sent weather fit for those seasons:
but our sins, which only make a separation betwixt thee and us, have caused
some alterations of these seasons, and has sent many times unseasonable
weather, whereby the fruits of the earth have not come to their full ripenes,
the Cattle have not their nourishment, and man by this means wants things
necess^ry. All this, and other thy chastisements, we confess do come from the
demerits of our own sinful lives, which draw on deservedly, thy just
indignation.

Yet (O Lord) since only thy mercy can free us from miseries, first free us
from our sins the causes of them, and then from the punishment they have
procured. Make our hearts clean, so make the weather seasonable, us moderate in
the use of thy creatures, them wholesome to us, and with the amendment of the
weather amend our lives, and forgive our sins. So change us, that thy
chastisement may be taken away, and by this let us learn to consider thy
power, to confess thy mercy, and to set forth thy praise, throughout all
ages, Amen.

A Prayer to be used when dearth and scarsity comes.
O Most gracious Lord God, thou which did permit Joseph's Brethren to sell,
and to send him into Egypt, that he being carried from his father into a
strange Country, might there in time of most want and necessity, after the
ouer-passing of his own afflictions, be able to make provision, not only for
his Fathers Family, but also for his country, from which he was carried: So
we (good Lord) being sold by our own selves unto sin and Satan, thereby
carried into the Egypt of Ignorance and Iniquity, do beseech thee by thine
own mercies, to grant us true repentance, that the scarsity thou have sent,
may be removed. Increase our Faith, zeal, sorrow for our sins, with
amendment of life; and therewith increase our store, the fruits of the earth,
and provision of the Land, that having sufficiency, we may therewith have
content, and thankfulness.

Comfort us in thy mercies and consolations in the continuance of thy love. Let
us not (O Lord) with the prodigal Son, mispend our times, estates, and thy
blessings, but with the penitent Publican, lift up our hearts and hands unto
Heaven, and say still from the heart, God be merciful unto us miserable
sinners. So good Lord, take away this dearth, and our sins, which will bring
us unto death.

A Prayer in time of plague and pestilence.
THe Contagion and corruption of our bodies coming (O Lord) from the sins of
our souls, brings all the diseases of our bodies, and dangers of our lives. So
are we filled with infection, which threatens death unto us, when as we see
others daily die before our eyes. Since then (good Lord) thou give us a
sight, and continual representation of our mortality, give us also a sense and
a true feeling, with a through repentance of all our sins past, the causers of
all our woe, distress, and peril: and as our first parent by his fall, and
our natural parents by their transgressions, have drawn upon themselves and
us, death and destruction, and we our selves by our actual iniquities, have
added more curses to our particular persons, and to the public state wherein
we live: so yet (good Lord) remember thy Covenant of Grace; remember the Son
of thy love, and his sufferings, whom thou have sent into the world, for the
redemption of mankind: let these thy former and long continued mercies, move
thee to continue thy compassion, in remoouing thy judgments from us, in
renewing the graces of thy holy Spirit, in teaching us to repent, and renounce
our former evil lives.

Then let thy Angel and Messenger of good tidings, our Mediator, sprinkle the
posts and doors of our hearts, with the blood of that Paschall Lamb, who
has shed his blood for the sins of the world in such sort, that receiving
grace from thy all-giuing grace, our sins and punishments for the same may
cease, and we may with purified hearts after all our pollutions, learn to
publish thy praise; and having received deliverance for the contagion of soul
and of body, may be made instruments of thy glory, both in this world, and in
the world to come.

A Prayer for increase and continuance of spiritual gifts and graces.
O Almighty God; though we are weak, and not strong of our selves, specially
in the spiritual graces which might make us beutifull corner-stones in thy
Celestial building, yet thou (good Lord) who have created Heaven and Earth,
and do conserve all herein contained, art able by thy wonderful
Workmanship, not only to begin, and to beget, but to increase and to preserve
in our hearts the seeds of humility, penitence, patience, piety, zeal, and
other good saving Graces. We are thy creatures, and thou our Creator: therefore
though we have long dwelt in darkness, yet now send us ye light of thy
countenance, to enlighten our understanding: the seal and testimony of thy
holy Spirit, to assure our hearts and consciences of thy love, and of our
salvation.

To this end, give us fortitude and courage to maintain thy cause, and to
defend the truth; a subduing power to master our own lusts, and to subdue
our sins; wisdom from above, to withstand the assaults of Satan; so of
Captives made Conquerors, and of slaves unto sin and satan, made subduers of
them both. We may by the same thy mercy and power, magnify thy Majesty, hallow
thy name, not only in this world, but in the world to come, through all Ages,
even everlastingly. So be it, and so cause it to be done good Lord, Amen.

A Prayer to be prepared for death.
Our lives good Lord) we see are short, and most uncertain, our souls are full
of sin, our selves are subject to many dangers, we covet possessions and
preferments, but know not how long we shall enjoy them, nor are we assured
who shall have them, when we leave this life. Most merciful God, teach us so
to meditate, and so to measure this spanne, and short space of fading life,
that finding how frail it is, we may pass this our pilgrimage, in a
conscionable course; not mispending time in vain or vicious living, waiting
for the time of our dissolution, awaking our spirits from sin and security,
wherein we have laien as in a slumber, drawing on to death. Good God give us
faith in the blood of thy Son, repentance for our former evil ways,
reconciliation by thy mercies, and the mediation of our Redeemer. Shut up our
exterior senses from those objects of sin, which betrayed our souls; settle
our interior senses to repose: freed by thy favors, from Passion, Anger,
Ambition, Concupiscence, Covetousness, Lust, Uncharitableness, Unbelief, and
all other wickedness which defile and destroy our souls; so being purged from
our polutions, and being guarded and guided by thy good governing Spirit, we
may make this life a meditation of death; the time to come, a cure of former
trespasses; and the conclusion of all, to be thy glory, the good of thy Church,
the maintenance of thy truth, and finally the salvation of our souls, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A prayer to be used when death draws near.
O LORD, this sinful and uncertain life, wc I have led, being now drawn near
amend, I bese^ch thee, that have hitherto prolonged life, and now do dispose
death, purge me from my sins past, by the precious blood, and powerful death
of thy Son our Savior Christ Jesus, in his wounds, and by his sufferings wash
away our sins. In this short season of my time almost all spent, grant me
hearty repentance, for my transgressions a longing desire of a better life, a
change not only from my corruptions, but from all my former failings; and as
natural strength grows weaker, so grant that spiritual Graces in me may grow
stronger.

Help Lord to quicken my sinful senses, to quiet my conscience with assurance
of thy favor and mercy. Be with me, by thy all-assisting aid, as in my life
so at my death; that neither sin, death, nor hell may have the conquest over
me, but so strengthened and saved: commending my spirit and soul unto thy
safeguard, thou that have made it, will vouchsafe to save it: for thy Son,
and for thy own mercies sake. I come Lord, come thou unto me. I faint; Lord
strengthen me. My life departs, yet save my sinful soul. Lord I come, help
me to come unto thee. Lift up mine eyes, my hands, my heart, Lord receive and
save my soul.

Let this last sentence be often said as long as speech does last; and be
inwardly conceived when words cannot be uttered.

FINIS.
The Table.
A Prayer for devotion in prayer. 58 Morning prayer in a Family. 61 A morning
prayer to be used in private. 66 A prayer for the Evening in the Family. 68 A
private prayer for one going to bed. 73 Certain Meditations, and short
eiaculations of prayers, to be used in the night. 75 A prayer for deliverance
from temptations. 77 A prayer for patience in time of wants and d^sgraces. 80 A
prayer in time of sickness. 83 A prayer for knowledge. 89 A prayer to be kept
from all uncleanness of our lusts. 92 A prayer before the hearing of the word
preached. 96 A prayer after the hearing of a Sermon. 99 A prayer before the
receiving of the Lords Supper. 103 A prayer after the receiving of the holy
Communion. 106 A prayer in the time of unseasonable weather. 109 A prayer to be
used when dearth and scarsity comes. 112 A Prayer in time of plague and
pestilence. 115 A Prayer for increase and continuance of spiritual gifts and
graces. 119 A prayer to be prepared for death. 124 A prayer to be said when
death draws near. 127
FINIS.

