A Treatise tending unto a declaration whether a man be in the estate of
damnation or in the estate of grace: and if he be in the first, how he may in
time come out of it: if in the second, how he may discern it, and persevere
in the same to the end.

The points that are handled are set down in the page following.



Give all diligence to make your calling and Election sure: for if ye do these
things ye shall never fall.

2. Pet. 1. ver. 10. Printed at London by R. Robinson, for T. Gubbin, and I.
Porter.

The Contents of the Book.
1 How far a reprobate may go in Christian Religion. 2 The estate of a true
Christian in this life: which also shows how far the Elect being called,
go beyond all Reprobates in Christianity. 3 A Dialogue to the same purpose,
gathered out of the sauorie writings of Master Tindall and Bradford. 4 How a
Reprobate may perform all the religion of the Church of Rome. 5 The conflicts
between Satan and a Christian. 6 How the word of God is to be applied aright
unto the conscience, 7 Consolations for the troubled consciences of weak
Christians
To the right Worshipful and my Christian friend Master Valentine Knightly
Esquire, one of her Majesty's Justices of Peace in Northamptonshire.
SIR, I pray you consider with me an especial point of Gods word carefully to
be waied: it is this. Mat. 25. 1 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. Luke 13.
24. A caveat to all Protestants of what estate or condition soever.
Many professors of Christ, in the day of grace, persuade them selves that
they are in the estate of grace; and so the true Church esteems of the^ too:
yet when the day of grace is past, they contrariwise shall find themselves to
be in the estate of damnation remediless. A doleful case, yet a most
resolute truth, and the reason is plain. Men that live in the Church are
greatly annoyed with a fearful security and deadnes of heart, by which it
comes to pass that they think it enough to make a common protestation of the
faith; not once in all their life times, examining themselves whether they be in
the estate of grace before the eternal God or not. 2. Cor. 13. 5. Psa. 119. 59
And indeed it is a grace peculiar to the man Elect to try himself whether
he be in the estate of grace or not.

The further opening of the truth of this point as also the danger of it, I
have enterprised in this treatise: which I am willing to bestow on you; both
for the profession of the faith, which you make as also for that Christian
friendship, you have showed to me. Accept of it I pray you and use it for your
edification. Act. 20. 32.
Thus I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, that is able to build
you up further and give you an inheritance among them which are sanctified.
From Cambridge this 24. of November. 1589.

Your Worships to command. William Perkins.

To the Christian Reader.
GOod Reader, it is a thing to be considered, that a man may seem both unto
himself and to the Church of God to be a true professor of the Gospel, and
yet indeed be none. All professors that are of this sort, are excellently
described, Luke 8. verse. 13. in these words: And they which are upon the stony
ground are they, which when they shall hear, receive the word with joy: but
having no root, believe for a time, and in the time of temptation go away:
where are to be noted three things. First, their faith, in that they are
said to believe for a season. Secondly, the fruits of that faith, in that they
are said to receive the word preached with joy. Thirdly, their unsoundness, in
that they are compared to stony ground, and in the time of temptation go away.

Concerning their faith, whereas the spirit of God says, that they do
believe, these things are to be considered: first, that they have the
knowledge of the word of God: secondly, that they both can and do give assent
unto the word of God, that it is most true. Thirdly, in more special manner
they give assent unto the covenant of grace made in Christ, that it is most
certain and sure: and they are persuaded in a general and confused manner,
that God will verify the same covenant in the members of his Church. I his is
all their faith; which indeed proceeds from the holy Ghost, but yet it is
not sufficient to make them sound professors. For albeit they do generally
believe Gods promises, yet herein they deceive themselves, that they never
apply and appropriate the same promises to their own souls. An example of
this faith we have, John 2. verse. 24. where it is said: that when our Savior
Christ came to Jerusalem at the feast of Easter, many believed in his name,
and yet he would not commit himself unto them, because he knew them al, and
what was in them.

To come to the second thing, those professors which are indewed with thus
much grace, as to believe in Christ in a confused manner, go yet further: for
this their faith, though it be not sufficient to salvation, yet it shows it
self by certain fruits which it brings forth: for as a tree, or a branch
of a tree that has no deep rooting, but either is covered with a few moules,
or else lies in the water, at the season of the year brings forth leaves and
blossoms, and some fruit too, and that for one or two, or mo years: so one
that is an hearer of the word, may receive the word, and the word as seed, by
this general faith may be somewhat rooted in his heart and settled for a
season, and may bring forth some fruits in his life, peradventure very fair in
his own and other men's eyes: yet indeed neither sound nor lasting, nor
substantial. What these fruits are, it may be gathered forth of these words,
where it is said, that they receive the word with joy, when they hear it: for
here may be gathered: First, 1.
that they do willingly subject themselves to the ministry of the word:
secondly, that 2.
they are as forward as any, and as joyful in frequenting Sermons: thirdly,
that they reverence 3.
the Ministers whom they so joyfully hear: lastly, they condemn them of
impiety, 4.
which will not be hearers, or be negligent hearers of the word. Now, of
these and such like fruits, this may be added: though they are not sound, yet
they are void of hypocrisy. For the minds of those professors Mark, that
there is a true faith, wrought by the holy Ghost, very like saving faith, yet
no saving faith.
are in part enlightened, and their hearts are endued with such a faith, as may
bring forth these fruits for a time: and therefore herein they dissemble not
that faith which they have not: but rather show that which they have. Add
hereunto, that a man being in this estate, may deceive himself and the most
godly in the world, which have the greatest gifts of discerning, how they and
their brethren stand before the Lord: like as the fig tree with green leaves
deceived our Savior Christ as he was man: for when in his hunger he came
unto it to have had some fruit, he found none.

If this be so, it may be then required, how these unsound professors differ
from true professors. I answer, in this they differ, that they have not
sound hearts to cleave unto Christ Jesus for ever. Which appears in that
they are compared to stony ground. Now, stony grounds mingled with some
earth are commonly hot, and therefore have as it were some alacrity and
hastines in them, and the corn as soon as it is cast into this ground it
sprouteth out very speedily, but yet the stones will not suffer the corn to be
rooted deeply beneath, and therefore when Summer comes the blade of the
corn withers with roots and all. So it is with these professors: they have
in their hearts some good motions by the holy Ghost, to that which is good:
they have a kind of zeal to Gods word, they have a liking to good things,
and they are as forward as any other for a time, and they do believe. But
these good motions and graces are not lasting, but like the flame and flashing
of straw and stubble: neither are they sufficient to salvation.

With the true professors it is far otherwise: for they have upright and
honest hearts before the Lord. Luke 8. verse. 15. And they have faith which
works by love. Galath. 5. verse. 6. And that Christian man which loves God,
whatsoever shall befall, yea though it were a thousand deaths, yet his heart
can never be severed from the Lord and from his Savior Christ: as the spowse
speaks unto Christ of her own love, Cant. 8. verse. 6. Set me as a seal on
thy heart, and as a signet upon thy arm: for love is as strong as death:
Jealousy is as cruel as the grave; the coals thereof are fiery coals and a
vehement flame. Much water cannot quench love, neither can the floudes drown
it: if a man should give all the substance of his house for love, they would
greatly contemn it.

Wherefore (good Reader) seeing there is such a similitude and affinity
between the temporary professor of the Gospel, and the true professor of
the same: it is the duty of every Christian to try and examine himself
whether he be in the faith or not. 2. Cor. 13. verse. 5. And whereas it is an
hard thing for a man to search out his own heart, we are to pray unto God
that he would give us his spirit to discern between that which is good and
evil in us. Now, when a man has found out the estate of his heart by
searching it, he is further to observe and keep it with all diligence.
Proverb. 4. verse. 23. that when the hour of death, or the day of trial shall
come. he may stand sure and not be deceived of his hope.

And for this purpose I have described the most of these small treatises which
follow, to minister unto thee some help in this examining and observing of
thine own heart. Read them and accept of them, and by the blessing of God
they shall not be unprofitable unto thee. 1589.

CERTAIN PROPOSITIONS DECLARING HOW far a man may go in the the profession
of the Gospel, and yet be a wicked man and a reprobate.
I
A Reprobate has in his mind a certain To. 1. 21. Psalm. 19. 1. 3.
knowledge of God, of common equity among men, of the difference of good from
bad: and this is partly from nature, partly from the contemplation of Gods
creatures, in which the wisdom, the power, the love, the mercy, the majesty
of God is perceived.

II
This knowledge is only general and imperfect, much like the ruins of a
Princes palace: it is not sufficient to direct him in doing of a good work.
For example, the reprobate knows that there is a God, and that this God must
be worshipped: come to particulars, who God is? what a one he is? how he
must be worshipped? Here his knowledge fails him, and he is altogether
uncertain what to do to please God.

III
By reason of this knowledge, the reprobate does give consent, and in his heart
subscribeth to the equity of Gods law: as may appear by the saying of Medea:
Video meliora, proboque; deteriora sequor. That is, I know what is best to be
done, and like it, yet I do the worst. This approbation in the reprobate
comes from constraint, and is joined with a disliking of the law: in the
elect, To. 7. 15.
being called the approbation of the law, it proceeds from a willing and
ready mind, and is joined with love and liking.

IIII
And by reason of this light of nature, a mere natural man, and a reprobate
may be subject to some temptations, for example, he may be tempted of the
Devil, and of his own corrupt flesh, to believe that there is no God at all.
As Ovid says of himself, Eleg. 3. 8. Solicitor nullos esse putare deos. I am
often tempted to think there is no God.

V
The reprobate for all this knowledge, in his heart may be an Atheist, as David
says: Psalm. 14. 1. Romans 3. 10. 11.
the fool has said in his heart there is no God. And a man may now a days
find houses and towns full of such fools: Nay, this glimering light of
nature; except it be preserved with good bringing up, with diligent
instruction, and with good company, it will be so darkened, that a man shall
know very little, and lead a life like a very beast: as experience tells,
and David knew very well: who says, Psalm. 49. 20.
Man is in honor, and understands not; he is like to beasts that perish.

VI
Wherefore, this knowledge which the reprobate receives from nature, and from
the creatures, albeit it is not sufficient to make him do that which shall
please God: yet before Gods judgment seat, Act. 14. 71. Romans 1. 21.
it cutteth off all excuse, which he might allege: why he should not be
condemned.

VII
Heb. 6. 4. 2. Pet. 2. 23.
Beside this natural knowledge, the reprobate may be made partaker of the
preaching of the word, and be illuminated by the holy Ghost, and so may come to
the knowledge of the revealed will of God in his word.

VIII
Thus, when they hear the preaching of the word, God profereth salvation to
them and calls them: Matt. 22. 14. Luke 13. 34. Prove. 1. ver. 24. John. 9.
41. Luke 14. 6.
yet this calling is not so effectual in them as it is in the elect children
of God. For the reprobate, when he is called, he likes himself in his own
blindness, and therefore neither will he; and if he would, yet could he not
answer, and be obedient to the calling of God. The elect being called, with
speed he answers, and comes to the Lord, and his heart being ready, gives
a strong and a loud echo to the voice of the Lord. This echo we see in
David's heart: Psa 27. 8.
when (says he) thou saidest, seek ye my face: mine heart answered unto thee,
O Lord, I will seek thy face. And God himself speaks the same of his
children, Zacha. 13. 9. They shall call on my name, and I will hear them: I
will say, it is my people, (now mark the echo) and they shall say, the Lord
is my God.

IX
After that he has an understanding of Gods word, He. 10. 26 Act. 1. 16. 17.
he may acknowledge the truth of it, and confess it: and if need require, be a
defender of it. As Judas was, and Julian the Apostata.

X
The reprobate may have a feeling of his sins, and so acknowledge them, and the
punishment due unto them: 1. Sam. 29 21.
as Saul did; who said, I have sinned: come again my son David: for I will
do thee no harm, because my soul was pretiou^ in thy eyes this day: Behold,
I have done foolishly, and have erred exceedingly. Thus did Cain, Gen 4. 13.
when he said, my punishment is greater then I can bear. Eus. li. 8. cap. 17.
18.
Galerius Maximinus, a vile persecutor of Christians, had his bowels rotting
within him: so that an infinite number of worms continually craulled forth of
his body, and such a poisoning stink came from him, that no man could abide
him: being thus plagued with the hand of God, he began to perceive his
wickedness in persecuting Christians, and he confessed his sins to the true God:
and assembling the chief about him, he commanded that all within his
Dominions should cease to trouble Christians, and in all have he made a law
for the peace and liberty, and the public meetings of Christians.

XI
The reprobate has oftentimes fear and terror of conscience: but this is
only, because he considers the wrath and vengeance of God, which is most
terrible. When Paul preached before Foelix, and by the majesty of Gods spirit,
did (as it were) thunder from heaven against his sins, doubtless, he made
his heart to ache, and every joint of him to tremble. Socrat. lib. 3. ca. 11.
Ecebolius a Philosopher of Constantinople, in the days of Constantius,
professed Christian religion, and went beyond all other in zeal for the same
religion: yet afterward under Julian, he fell from that religion unto
Gentilisme. But after Iulians death making means to be received into the
Church again, overwhelmed with the horror of his own conscience for his
wicked reuolting, he cast himself down on the ground before the doors of the
Church crying aloude, Calcate me salem insipidum: trample on me unsavory salt.
And the Devil believes the word of God, and at his own damnation he
trembles. These servile fears, though they harden the heart of the reprobate,
as heat does the iron, after it has been in the furnace: yet these fears in
the children of God, Act 2. 37. Romans 8. 15.
are very good preparations, to make them fit to receive grace: like as we
see the heedle which sows not the cloth, yet it makes a passage and
entrance for the threede, which serves for this use, to sow cloth together.

XII
A reprobate before he commit a sin, is often vexed within himself, and
fears to commit it: not because he hates and disliketh the sin for it
self, but because he can not abide the punishment due unto the sin. Mark. 6.
20. 26
When the daughter of Herodias daunced before Herod, and pleased him: that he
might do her a pleasure, he bad her ask what she would* she asked John
Baptists head in a platter: Herod did grant her request, but yet he had a
grudging in heart, and he was sore grieved at it. Mat. 27. 19. 24.
In like manner Pilate was very much troubled inwardly, before he condemned our
Savior Christ.

XIII
After he has committed a sin, he Mat. 27. 3. Heb. 12. 17
sorroweth and repents: yet this repentance has two wants in it. First he
does not detest his sin, and his former conversation when he repents: he
does bewail the loss of many things which he once enjoyed: he cries out
through very anguish, and through the perplexities which God in his judgment
lays on him: yet for his life, he is not able to leave his filthy sin: and
if he might be delivered, he would sin as before. Genesis 27. 38. and 27. 41.
and 28. 9
Esau wept before his father with great yelling and crying, but after he was
gone from his fathers presence he hated his brother, who had got his blessing,
and in contempt of his father, chose him a wife against his fathers liking.
Pharao, as often as the Lord laid any calamity on him, Exo. 8. 8.
he evermore desired to be delivered from it, yet afterward always he
returned to his old bias again. Foelix trembled before Paul: for all that he
could not leave his covetousness, but even then he sought for a bribe.
Secondly, the repobate, when he repents, he can not come unto God, and seek
unto him: he has no power, no not so much as once to desire to give one little
sobbe for the remission of his sins: Math. 7. 7.
if he would give all the world he cannot so much as give one rappe at Gods
mercy gate, that he may open to him. He is very like a man upon a Rack, who
cries and roreth out for very pain, yet cannot desire his tormentor to ease
him of his pain. Genesis 4. 4. 1. Sa. 31. 4. Mat. 27, 5.
Caine would have been void of his trembling, but he could not ask pardon
of his sin from his heart: neither could Saul, or Judas, or now can the
Devil.

XIIII
The reprobate may humble himself for some sins which he has committed, and
may declare this by fasting and tears. When Eliah reproved Ahab for his
Idolatry, and threatened him from the Lord, it is said, that when he had heard
these words, 1 Re. 21. 27. 29.
he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon him, and fasted, and went softly
in token of mourning: and this humiliation stayed Gods wrath for a time.

XV.
He may confess his sins, even his particular sins before men: but this is
only then, when his soul is tormented for them, and can find no ease. For
then he sticks not to utter his secret filthiness to the hearing of all
men, and to the open shaming of himself. When God smote all that was in the
fields of Egypt with hayle, then Pharao sent, and called for Moses and Aaron,
and said unto them: Ex. 9. 27. Number. 22. 34.
I have now sinned, the Lord is righteous, but I and my people are wicked:
pray ye unto the Lord (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty
thunders, etc. So Judas, when he saw that Christ was condemned, and felt an
hell in his conscience, brake out, and said, I have sinned in betraying the
innocent blood. And the experience of these days gives fearful examples for
the proof of this point.

XVI
He has often a desire to be like the children of God, and to be saved: not
because he has any love to the kingdom of God but because he is afraid of
hell. As Balaa^ ouerpressed with a fear of gods judgment, prayed thus: Oh
that my soul might die the Number. 23. 10.
death of the righteous, and that my last end might be like his.

XVII.
The wicked in their distress may pray to God, and God may hear their
prayers, and grant them their request, Number. 11. 13.
as the Israelites, wickedly murmuring against God, desired flesh in the
wilderness: God heard their cry, and rained Quails among them. But God hears
the wicked after one sort, and them that fear him after an other: the^ that
fear him, he grants their requests of love and mercy: to the other, of
indignation and anger. Number. 11. 33. Psa. 78. 31.
As may appear in the Israelites, who when they were in eating of their
Quayles, and the meat was within their teeth, God in his anger stroke them with
a sore plague. And (which is more strange then this) God has performed that
which he has promised to the unbelievers, though they refused to ask it at
his hands: Isa. 7. 11.
of this thing we have a worthy example in King Achas, who utterly refused to
have a sign of his deliverance, and the confusion of his ene^ies, when God
offered it to him, and yet ^e Lord delivered him.

XVIII.
The reprobate may yet go further in the ^rofession of religion, and may seem
for a ^ime to be planted in the Church: for he does believe the promises of
God made in Christ Jesus, yet so that he cannot apply them to himself. In
this thing the elect and 1
the reprobate differ. The reprobate, Luke 8. 13
generally in a confused manner, believes that Christ is a savior of some men:
and he neither can nor desires to come to the particular applying of Christ.
The Elect believes, that Christ is a savior of him particularly: The 2
reprobates faith may perish in this life, but the faith of the elect cannot.
The reprobate 3
may be persuaded of the mercy and goodness of God toward him for the present
time in the which he ^eeleth it: the elect is not only persuaded of the
mercies he presently inioyeth, but also he is persuaded of his eternal
election before the foundation of the world, and of his everlasting life, which
yet he does not enjoy: Yea, Job. 13. 15
if God would confound him, and he saw nothing but present death, and hell
fire: yet such is his nature, that still he would believe: for faith and hope
are no^ grounded upon sense and feeling; but are the evidence of those things
which were never yet seen or felt. The life of the faithful is hid in Christ,
as the sap in the root of the tree: their life is not in sense and feeling,
but in hoping and believing: which often times, or contrary to man's sense and
feeling, is in David: who says: Create a new heart in me. Psalm. 51.

XIX.
After that he has received a general, and a temporal faith in Gods heavenly
word, and his most merciful promises of everlasting life contained therein, by
the power of the spirit of God, H^b. 6. 4. Math. 13. 20.
he comes to have a taste in his heart of the sweetness of Gods mercies, and a
rejoicing, in consideration of the election, adoption, justification, and
sanctification of Gods children. But what is this taste? I express it thus,
after the meaning of Gods word. Suppose a banquet prepared, in which are many
sweet, and pleasant, and dainty meats: At this banquet, they which are the
bidden guests, they must be set down, they see the meats, they taste them,
they chawe them in their mouths, they digest them, they are nourished, fed,
and strengthened by them: they which are not bidden to this ^east, may see the
meats, handle them, and ^ast of them, to feel how good they are: but ^hey
must not eat and feed of them. The first resemble the elect, which truly
eat, digest, and are nourished by Christ unto euer^asting life, because they
have great abundance of the vital heat of Gods holy spirit in them, and do
feel sensibly his grace and virtue in them, to strengthen them, and guide
them. The second sort truly resemble the reprobates; which never in truth enjoy
Christ, or any of his benefits appertaining to salvation: but only see them,
and have in their hearts a vanishing, but no certain or sound feeling of
them: so that they may be changed, and strengthened, and guided thereby. To use
another similitude. The reprobates have no more feeling, and enjoying of
Christ, and his benefits, than those men have of the Sun, which see only a
glimmering of his light at the dawning of the day, before it rises. 2. Pet. ^.
14. 1. Ioh. ^. ^. Luke 1. (...). Esa. 60. (...).
Contrariwise, the elect, they have the day star, even the son of
righteousness, Jesus Christ, rising in their hearts; the day spring from an high
does visit them, the glory of God does rise upon them: they have their eyes
anointed with the ointment of the spirit, which is the true eye salve, and
do^ plainly behold this son of righteousness they enjoy his presence, they
effectually feel his comfortable heat to quicken an^ revive them.

XX
From this sense and taste of Gods grace proceed many fruits: as first
generally, he may do outwardly all things which true Christians do, and he
may lead such a life here in this world, that although he cannot attain to
salvation, yet his pains in hell shall be less: which appears, in that our
Savior Christ says: it shall be easier for Math. 11. 20. 21. 22. 23.
Tyrus and Sydon, for Sodom and Gomorrah, than for Capernaum, and other Cities
unto which he came, in the day of judgment.

XXI.
Also the reprobate may have a love of God: but this love can be no sincere
love, for it is only because God bestows benefits and prosperity upon him:
As appears in Saul, 1. Sa. 10. 9
Who loved God for his advancement to the kingdom: and here is a difference
between the elect and reprobate: the elect love GOD, as children their
fathers: but reprobates, as hirelings their masters, whom they affect not so
much or themselves, as for their wages.

XXII.
Also, a reprobate has often a rejoicing ^n doing those things which
appertain to ^he service of God, as preaching and prayer. Mark. 6. 20


Herod heard John Baptist preach gladly: Mat. 13. 20.
and the second kind of naughty ground receives the word preached, with joy.

XXIII.
A reprobate often desires them, whom he thinks to be the children of God,
to pray for him Exodus 9. 27.
As Pharao desired Aaron and Moses to pray to God for him. Act. 8. 24.
So did Simon Magus desire Peter to pray that none of the things which he had
spoken against him, should come to pass. But yet they cannot pray them selves,
To. 8. 16. 26
because they want the spirit of Christ.

XXIIII.
He may show liking to Gods Ministers, he may reverence them, and fear to
displease them Act. 8. 13.
. Thus did Simon Magus, who at Phillips preaching believed, wondered at his
miracles, and kept company with him. Mar. 6. 20
And Herod is said to fear John, knowing that he was a just man and holy:
also he gave reverence to him. Antonius the Emperor, called Pius, though he
was n^ Christian, Eusebius. lib. 4.
yet in a general Parliament hel^ at Ephesus, he made an act in the behalf of
Christians: that if any man should trouble o^ accuse a Christian, for being a
Christian: the party accused should go free though he were found to be a
Christian, and the accuse^ should be punished? Plin. lib. 10. epi. 97.
And Plinius Secundus, governor of Spain under Traianus the Emperor, when he
saw an innumerable company of Christians to be executed; being moved with
compassion, he wrote in their behalf, being no Christian, unto Traianus to
spare them that could be charged with no crime: and his letter is yet extant.

XXV
He may be zealous in the religion which he professes, and fall from that
profession, as the Galathians did, Gal. 4. 16.
who, after that they had received Paul as an Angel, and would have plucked
out their eyes to have done him good: yet they fell from the doctrine which he
had taught them to justification by the works of the Law, which flat
overthrows justification by faith alone. 2. Kin. 10. (...).
The same appears in Iehu, who was very zealous for Gods cause, and for the
defacing of Idolatry, and thereupon God blessed him in his children: yet
neuer^helesse, he was a wicked man, and 30. 31.
and followed ^ha vile sins of Jeroboam his father.

XXVI
2. Pet. 2. 20. Hose. 6. 4. 1. Sam. 9. 21.
After that he has sinned, he does in many things in which he is faulty,
amend and reform his life, and does profess great holiness outwardly. Herod,
he did many things which John Baptist in preaching moved him unto. Saul,
when he was to be chosen king, professed great humility. Sam. 9. 21. They may
repress their vices and corruptions, and so moderate themselves that they
break not out: Hest. 5. 9. 10.
as did Haman; of whom it is written: that when he was full of indignation
against Mardocheus, yet he refrained himself. And herein the elect and the
reprobate differ: for 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
the elect are somewhat reformed in every one of their sins. But the
reprobate, though he be amended in many faults: yet some one fault or other,
he cannot abide to have it reformed, and by that, in a vile manner the devil
wholly possesses him. As Herod, who did many things, yet would not leave
his brothers wife. And no doubt, in Judas most of his sins in appearance were
mortified: and yet by covetousness the devil possessed him, and held him fast
chained in bondage vnd^ him. For one sin is sufficient to him, the by it he
may bring a man to damnation.

XXVII
Beside this, he may have the gift of wo^king miracles, of casting* forth
devils, of he^ling, and such like: Math. 7. 22. Mat. 9. 38.
And this power of d^ing strange miracles, shall be used as an e^cuse of some
of the reprobates, in the day ^ judgment.

XXVIII
Ofrentimes, unto him is given the gift of the holy Ghost, to discharge the
mo^ weighty calling that can be in any Common wealth. And this is meant,
when Go^ is said 1. Sam. 10. 9.
to give Saul another heart: that is such virtues as were meet for a King.

XXIX
A reprobate may have the word of Go^ much in his mouth, and also may be a
preacher of the word: Mat. 7. 22
for so prophesying in Christ^ name, shall be used as an excuse of reprobates:
and we know, that among the twelve Apostles, Act. 1. 16. 17. Coloss. 4. 2. Tim.
4. 10.
Judas was a reprobate. And this may be well perceived in the resemblance of
tasting; which the Author to the Hebrews uses. We know, that Cooks
commonly, which are occupied in preparing of banquets, have as much feeling
and seeing of the meat, as any other: and yet there is none that eats less
of it, than they: for their stomachs are cloied with the smell and taste of it:
So, in like manner it may come to pass, that the Minister, which dresseth and
provides the spiritual food, may eat the least of it himself: and so,
laboring to save others, he may be a reprobate.

XXX
When as a reprobate professes thus much of the Gospel, though in deed he be
a Goat; yet he is taken for one of Gods sheep: he is kept in the same
pastures, and is foulded in the same fould with them. Ioh. 2. 23. 24. 25.
He is counted a Christian of the children of God, and so he takes himself to
be; no doubt because through the dulnes of his heart, he cannot try and
examine himself, and therefore truly cannot discern of his estate; whether he
be in Christ or not: and it may be thought, that Satan is ready with some
false persuasion to deceive him. For this is his property, that upon whom God
threatens death, there Satan is bold to pronounce life and salvation: as on
the contrary, to those, to whom God pronounces love and mercy, to those (I
say) he threateneth displeasure and damnation, such malice has he against Gods
children.

XXXI
And hereby it comes to pass, that an hypocrite may be in the visible
Church, and obey it in the word and discipline, and so be taken for a true
member of Christ: The elect may be of the Catholic Church and not of the
visible, and the reprobate may be of the visible and not of the Catho like.
when as a man in deed regenerate may be excommunicate, and end his life
before he be received again: for this is the end of excommunication, 1. Cor.
5. 5.
that the flesh, that is, the part unregenerate, may be destroyed: and the
spirit, that is, the part regenerate, may be kept alive in the day of the
Lord. Now, the man in whom is spirit and flesh, Romans 8. 9. 11.
must needs be the child of God, because this argues that he has the
sanctifying spirit of Christ. Again, Paul when he bids the Corinthians to
comfort the incestious man, 2. Cor. 2. 7. 11.
least through the slight, of Satan he should be overwhelmed of overmuch
heaviness, gives men to understand, that he might have ended his life in great
extremity of sorrow before he had been* visiblie received into the Church
again.

XXXII
Though God will never adopt any reprobate: yet by the adoption of the elect
they may receive profit. For they find ^he blessing of God to be on them, by
reason that they dwell together and have soci^tie with the children of God.
Genesis 7. 1, Genesis 19. 21 and 18. 32. and 39. 3.
For Nohes ^ake every one in his family is saved in the blood. For Lots cause
the men of Zoar are ^reserued from the fire. And God would have spared Sodom,
if there had been but ten good men in it. For Rahabs cause, her family and
kindred are at liberty in Ierico. When Joseph was in Putiphars house, all
things prospered well. 1. Sam. 7. 13.
For Samuels cause the Israelites were delivered from the Philistines: Act. 27,
24.
And for Paul's cause they which were with him in the ship, were preserved. And
again, a reprobate by means of the faith of either of his parents may be
within Gods covenant, and so may be made partaker of Baptism, one of the seals
of the covenant. Forso God made his covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7. 10.
that he would be not only his God, but also the God of his seed after him:
Gal. 3. 8.
which Paul expounds not of a few, but of all nations. Also he says
manifestly that those children, either of whose parents are believers, 1. Cor.
7. 14. Romans 11. 16
or holy: which holiness is not inherent in their persons, but only outward:
and it is a spiritual prerogative granted them of God, in that he vouchsafes
them to be in his covenant: whereby they are distinguished from the wicked and
profane men of the world.

XXXIII
Besides this, reprobates have some prerog^atiues of God: Romans 9. 22. and 2. 4.
5. Gen 6. 3.
as that he is patie^t toward them: that before he will destroy them, he uses
many means to win them: that they commonly spend all the days of their
lives in prosperity: insomuch, *that it is said of them in the Psalm: Psalm.
73. 12.
that they go in continual prosperity unto their death, and pine not away as
the children of God do. 2. Pet. 2. 22. 1. Tim. 1. 4. 2. The 2. 6. Esa. 6. 10.
But after a certain time God in his just judgment hardens their hearts,
blinds the eyes of their minds, he makes their heads giddie with a
spiritual drunkenness, and by the strength of their inward lusts, as also by
the effectual operation of Satan, they fall to open infidelity, and contempt
of Gods word, and so run headlong to their own damnation, and perish finally.
Theodor. lib. 3. Hist. cap. 25. Jacob. Bergom. Chron.
Julian the Apostata was first a man learned and eloquent, and professed the
Religion of Christ, but afterward he fell and wrote a book against the
religion of Christ, answered by Cyrill: and on a time, in a battle against the
Persians, was thrust into ^he bowels with a dart, no man then knew ^ow, which
dart he pulled out with his own ^and, and presently blood followed, which ^s it
gushed out, he took it in his hand, and ^loong it into the air, saying,
Vicisti Galilaee, ^icisti. O thou Galilean (meaning Christ) thou art the
conqueror, thou art the conqueror: thus he ended his days in blaspheming
Christ whom he had professed.

The reason of this Apostasy is evident. Math. 13. 28.
Seed, that is not deeply rooted in the earth, at the beginning of the year,
springs up; it is green and brings forth leaves and flowers, and (it may
be) some kind of fruit too: when the heat of summer comes, it parcheth the
earth, and the corn wanting deep rooting, and therefore wanting moisture,
withers away. Gods word is like seed; which that it may bring forth fruit
unto everlasting life, it must be first received of the ground: secondly, it
must be rooted: the receiving of it, is when it pearceth to the heart, and the
affections take hold of it. This rooting is of two sorts: the first is, when
the word rooteth, but not with the residue of the affections. The second, is a
deep and a lively kind of rooting of the word, when the word is received into
the mind and into the heart. The first kind of rooting of the word, befalls
to a reprobate, who understands, and rejoices in the promises of salvation,
yet he does not put any confidence in them: he cannot rest in them, he does
not rejoice that his name is written in the book of life, he does not work
out his salvation with fear and trembling. In a word, his heart is in part
softened to rejoice at the preaching of the word of God: Act. 16. 15 Psa. 119.
32
yet his heart is not opened, as Lydias was: nor enlarged (as David says) to
embrace the truth: but the elect, he receives the word. not only into his
mind, least it should be only an imagination, but also it is deeply rooted in
his heart. For

1 In full confidence he rests himself on Gods promise. Romans 8. 38. Hebr.
10. 22. 2 He hops and longs to see the accomplishment of it. 1 Thessalonians. 1.
10. 3 He heartily loves God, for making such a promise to him in Christ. 1.
Ioh. 4. 10. 4 He reioiceth in it, and therefore does meditate on it
continually. Luke 10. 20. Romans 5. 2. 5 He hates all doctrines which are
against it. 6 He is grieved when he does any thing that may hinder the
accomplishment of it. Math. 26. 75. 7 He uses the means to come to salua^ion,
but with fear and trembling. Phil. 2. 12. 8 He burns with zeal of the
spirit etc. And so the rest of the affections are exercised about the promises
of God in Christ, and by this means, is the deep rooting of the word in the
heart.
Thus it comes to pass, that the reprobate falls away from faith in the
day of trial and temptation, but the elect can not be changed.

By this which has been said, the professors of Christian religion are
admonished of two things. First, Phil. 2. 12. 1 Pet. 1. 17 Romans 11. 20.
that they use most painful diligence in working their salvation, in
attaining to faith, in dying to sin, in living to newnes of life: and that
their hearts be never at rest, till such time as they go beyond all reprobates
in the profession of Christ Jesus: See thou how far a reprobate may go?
press on the strait gate with maine and might: with all violence lay hold on
the kingdom of heaven. Shall Herod fear and reverence John Baptist, and
hear him gladly? and will thou neglect the Ministers, and the preaching of the
word? shall Pharao confess his sin, nay shall Satan believe and tremble?
and wilt not thou bewail and lament thy sins, and thy wicked conversation?
it behooves thee to fear and take heed, least wicked men, and the devil
himself rise in judgment and condemn thy life. For if thou shall come short
of the duties of a reprobate, and do not go beyond him in the profession of
the Gospel, sure it is, thou must look for the reward of a reprobate. The
second thing is, that the professor of the Gospel, 1. Cor. 11 31. Psalm. 19.
12. and 119. ver. 59.
diligently try and examine himself, whether he is in the state of damnation,
or in the state of grace: whether he yet bear the yoke of Satan, or is the
adopted child of God. Thou will say, this need not, thou professest the
Gospel, and art taken for a Christian: Yet mark and consider, that this often
befalls reprobates to be esteemed Christians: and they are often so like
them, Math. 25. 32. 33.
that none but Christ can discern the sheep from the Goats, true Christians
from apparent Christians. Wherefore it behooves all men that show themselves
to be Christians, to lay aside all pride, and all selfeloue, and with
singlenes of heart to put themselves into the balance of Gods word, and to
make just trial, whether in them repentance, faith, mortification,
sanctification, etc. give weight answerable to their outward profession: which
if they do, let them praise God: if not, let them with all speed use the means
that they may be borne a new to the Lord, and may be inwardly guided by his
holy spirit, to give obedience to his will, least in the day of Gods trial,
they start aside from him like a broken bow, and fall again to their first
uncleanness. To conclude, let the most zealous Papist that is, try him and his A
cau^at to them that are of the church of Rome.
whole estate with a single heart, as in the presence of Gods majesty, and he
shall find, that for all his profession, he does come short of a reprobate, or
at the least not go beyond him in these points before named: God open their
eyes that they may see it.

Amen.
The estate of a Christian man in this life, which also shows how far the
Elect may go beyond the Reprobate, in Christi-anity, and that by many degrees.
I
THe Ephesians. 1. verse 4. 5. 6 7.
Elect are they whom Election.
God of the good pleasure of his will has decreed in himself to choose to
eternal life, for the praise of the glory of his grace. For this cause the
Elect only are said to have their names written in Apoc. 20 verse 12.
the book of life.

II
Whom God electeth them he calls Vocation.
in the time appointed for the same purpose. This calling of the Elect is
nothing else but 2 Thessalonians. 2 verse 13. 14
a singling and a seuering of them out of this vile world, and the customs
thereof, to Ephesians. 2. 19
be Citizens of the kingdom of heaven, to be of Gods household, to 1 Pet. 2.
verse 5.
be living stones in the spiritual Temple, which is the Church of God Gal. 4.
verse 26.
the company of predestinate to eternal life. And this separation must be
made before the end of this life. For this is the order which God takes, he
will have all them to be in his kingdom in this life, that shall be in the
kingdom of heaven after this life. And the time of their calling is termed in
scriptures, 2 Cor. 6. verse 2. Luke 19. verse 42.
the day of visitation, the day of salvation, the time of grace.

III
This Colloss. 2. verse 7. John 15. verse 19.
seuering and choosing of the elect out of the world, is then performed, when
God by his holy spirit indueth them with true saving faith: a wonderful gift
peculiar to the elect. For the better knowing of it, there is to be considered:
First, what faith is: Secondly, how God does work it in the hearts of the
Elect: Thirdly, what degrees there be of faith: Fourthly, what are the fruits
and benefits of faith.

IIII
Faith is a wonderful grace of God, by What faith is.
which the Elect do apprehende and apply Christ and all his benefits unto
themselves particularly.

Here first it is to be considered that the very nature of faith stands in
a certain power of apprehending and applying Christ.

This is declared by Paul when he says Coloss. 2. verse 12.
ye are buried with him through Baptism, by whom ye are also risen again
with him by the faith of the power of God, who raised him from the dead. Where
it appears that faith is made a means to communicate Christ himself, his
death and burial, and so all other benefits to the believer. Again to
believe in Christ and to John 1. verse 12. Romans 5. verse 17.
receive or to lay hold on Christ are put one for an other by S. John: which
declares that there is a special applying of Christ. even as we see, when a
man has any thing given him, he reaches out his hand, and pulls it to
himself and so makes it his own. Moreover faith is called Gal. 3. verse 27.
the putting on of Christ, Which cannot be unless Christ's righteousness be
specially applied to the heart, as the garment to the back, when it is put on.
Lastly this may appear, in that faith is called John 6. verse 35.
the eating and drinking of Christ, for there is no eating of meat, that
nourishes, but first it must be tasted, and chawed in the mouth, then it must
be conveyed into the stomach: and there digested Lastly it is to be applied to
the parts of the body that are to be nourished. And Paul prays for the
Ephesians: that Christ Ephesians. 3. verse 17.
man dwell in their hearts by faith, which plainly imports, this apprehending
and applying of Christ.

I add further that faith is a wonderful grace of God, which may appear:
First, in that Paul calls it Col. 2. 1^.
the faith of Gods power, because the power of God is especially seen in the
begetting of faith. Secondly, experience shows it to be a wonderful gift of
God: when a man neither sees, nor feels his sins, then to say he believes
in Gods mercy, it is an easy matter; but when a man shall feel his heart
pressed down with the weight of his sins, and the anger of God for them:
then to apply Gods free mercy to his own soul, it is a most hard matter,
for then it is the property of the cursed nature of man, to blaspheme God, and
to despair of mercy. Judas who (no doubt) often preached mercy and redemption
by Christ in the security of his heart, when Gods hand was upon him, and the
Lord made him see the vileness of his treachery: he could not comfort
himself in Christ, if one would have given him ten thousand worlds, but in an
hellish horror of conscience hanged him self desperately; which shows what a
wonderful hard thing it is at the same instant when a man is touched for his
sins, then to apply Gods mercy to himself. Yet a true Christian by the
power of faith can do this, as it may appear in David, Psalm. 77. verse 2. 3.
In the day of my trouble (says he) I sought the Lord: my sore ran and
ceased not, in the night: my soul refused comfort: I did think upon God and
was troubled: I prayed and my spirit was full of anguish, and he adds the
word Selah, a note of some wonderful thing. Psalm. 103 verse 1.
Again he being almost in the gulfes of hell, even then cried to the Lord for
help. Job says, Job. 13. verse 15.
If God should destroy him, yet he would for all that believe in him still.
Undoubtedly, strange is the ba^d of faith knitting Christ and his members
together, that the anguish of spirit cannot, and the strokes of Gods hand do
not unloose.

V.
This apprehending of Christ is not done by any corporal touching of him, but
spirituallie by assurance, which is, when the Elect are persuaded in their
hearts by the holy ghost, of the forgiveness of their own sins, and of Gods
infinite mercy toward them in Jesus Christ. According to that of 1. Cor. 2.
verse 12.
Paul, Now we have received, not the spirit of the word, but the spirit which
is of God, that we might know the things which are given us of God. The things
which the spirit of GOD makes known to the faithful particularly, are their
justification, adoption, sanctification, eternal life: And thus when any are
persuaded of these things concerning themselves, they do in their hearts
distinctlie apply, and appropriate Christ, and his benefits to them selves.

VI.
The manner that God uses in the begetting How God works in the heart.
of faith is this. First he prepares the heart that it may be capable of
faith. Secondly he causes faith by little and little to spring and to breed
in the heart. The preparation of the heart is by humbling and softening of it:
and to the doing of this there are four things requisite. The first of them
Knowledge
is the knowledge of the word of God, both of the law and of the Gospel,
without the which there can be no faith; according to that saying of Esaiah.
Esai. 53. verse. 11.
By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many. And that of John,
Ioh. 17. 3.
This is eternal life that they know thee to be the only very God, and
whom thou haste sent Jesus Christ. The Job. 33. 23 To. 10. 14.
only ordinary means to attain faith by, is the word preached: which must
be heard, remembered, practiced, and continually hid in the heart. The least
measure of knowledge, without which a man cannot have faith, is the knowledge
of Elements or the fundamental doctrines of a Christian religion. A
fundamental doctrine is that, which being once denied, all religion, and all
obtaining of salvation is overthrown. This knowledge has a general faith
going with it, which is an assent of the heart to the known truth of Gods
word: This faith when it is grown up to some great measure, it is called (...)
the Coloss. 2. ver. 2. Romans 14. 14
full assurance of understanding, and it is to be seen in the Martyrs who
maintained Gods truth against the persecutions of the false Church, unto death.

VII
Although both elect and reprobate may be enlightened to know the word of God:
yet the elect in this thing go far beyond all reprobates: for it is
specially said of the^, Ioh 6. 25 Eze. 11. 19. Esaias. 50. 5. Psalm. 40. 6. Psa.
119. 18 Apo. 3. 18. ^, Ioh. 2. 27.
that God is their schole-master, that he softeneth their stony hearts, and
makes them pliable, that he draws them, that he opens their senses,
hearts, ears, understandings: that the holy Ghost is their anoyntment, and
their eye-salue, to clear the eyes of their mind, to contain the mysteries
of Gods word. And the difference of illumination in them is threefolde.

1. First the knowledge which the reprobate has concerning the kingdom of
heaven, is only a general and confused knowledge: but the knowledge of the
elect, is pure, certain, sure, distinct, and particular: for Phil. 1. 9.
it is joined with a feeling and inward experience of the thing known: though
indeed the mind of man is able to conceive more than any Christian heart can
feel: and this is to be seen in Gal. ^. 17 cum Romans 7. 23. and To. 3. cum
To. 8. 38.
Paul, who uses not only to deliver the points of Gods word in general
manner, but also sets them down specially in his own experience. So that
the enlightening of the reprobate may be compared to the sight of Mar. 8. 24. 25.
the blind man, who saw men walking like unto trees, that is in motion like
men, but inform like trees: and the elect are like the same blind man, who
afterward saw men a far off clearly.

2. Secondly, the knowledge of the wicked 1. Cor. 8. 2. and 14. 23.
puffs them up, but the knowledge of the godly humbles them.

3. Lastly, the Elect, besides the knowledge of Gods word, have Psa. 4. 2.
Tim. ^ Tit. 1. 1^.
a free and frank heart to perform it in their lives and conuersations, which
no reprobate can have: for their illumination is not joined with true and
sincere obedience. By this it is easy to discern of the illumination of
Anabaptists, or familistes, and many other, which brag of the spirit.

VIII
The second is the sight of sin arising of the knowledge of the law. To this
Jeremy 2 Sight of sin.
exhorts the Jews of his time, saying Ier. 3. 13.
know thine iniquity, for thou have rebelled against the Lord thy God. etc.
The chief cause of the sight of sin is Christ by his holy spirit, Luke 2.
25 Ioh. 16. 8.
who detecteth the thoughts of many hearts and judges the world of sin. The
manner of seeing our sins, must be to know them particularly: for the
vilest wretch in the world can generally and confusedly say, he is a sinner:
but that the sight of sin may be effectual to salvation, it must be more
special and distinct even in particular sins: so that a man may say with
David Ps. 40. 12.
my sins have taken such hold of me that I am not able to look up: they are
more in number, then the hairs of mine head: therefore my heart has failed
me. Again a man must not barely see his particular sins, but he must also see
the circumstances of them, as namely the fearful curses and judgments of God,
which accompany every sin: for the consciences of many tell them of their
sins in particular, yet they cannot be humbled for them, and leave them:
because they have not seen that ugly tail of the curse of God, that every
sin draws after it.

IX.
The means to attain to the sight of sin, is by a diligent examination of a
man's own self; This was the practice of the children of Israel in affliction.
James 3. verse 40.
Let us try (say they) and search our ways, and turn again to the Lord. And
David gives the same counsel to Saules Courtiers. Psalm. 4. verse 4.
Tremble and sin not, examine your own heart on your bed, and be still.
This examination must be made by the commandments of the law, but specially
by the tenth, which ransacketh the heart to the very quick: and was the
means of Paul's conversion. For he being a proud Pharisee, Romans 7. verse 7.
10.
this commandment showed him some sins, which otherwise he had not known,
and it killed him, that is, it humbled him. If so be it that after examination
a man cannot find out his sins (as no man shall find out all his sins,
for Iere. 17. verse 9.
the heart of man is a vast gulf of sin, without either bottom or bank, and
has infinite hidden corruptions in it) then he must in a godly jealousy,
suspect himself of his unknown sins. As David did saying, Psalm. 19. verse
12.
Who can understand his faults? cleanse me from my secret faults. And as
Paul did 1. Cor. 4. verse 4.
I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified. And good reason it
is why men should suspect themselves of those sins which as yet they never
saw in themselves Luke 16. verse 15.
for that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight
of God: and the very Job 4. verse 18.
Angels are not clean in his sight.

X
The third is a sorrow for sin, which is 3 Sorrow for sin.
a pain and pricking in the heart arising of the feeling of the displeasure of
God, and of the just damnation which follows after sin. This was in the
Act. 2. 37.
Jews after Peter's first sermon: and in Habba. 3. verse 16.
Habacucke at the hearing of Gods judgments: When I heard (says he) my belly
trembled: my lips shook at the voice: rottennes entered into my bones: and I
trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day of trouble. This sorrow is
called the Rom 8. verse 15.
spirit of bondage to fear: because when the spirit has made a man see his
sins, he sees further the curse of the law, and so he finds himself to be in
bondage under Satan, hell, death, damnation: at which most terrible sight his
heart is smitten with fear and trembling, through the consideration of his
hellish and damnable estate.

This sorrow if it continue and increase to some great measure, has certain
Symptoms in the body Job. 30. verse 30.
as burning heat Lame. 1. 20. and 2. 11. Osea. 11. 8.
rolling of the intrals, Psalm. 32. verse 4.
a pining and fainting of the solid parts.

XI
In the feeling of this sorrow, three things are to be observed. The first: all
men must look that it be seriously and soundly wrought in their hearts: for
look as men use to break hard stones into many small pieces and into dust: so
must this feeling of Gods anger for sin bruise the heart of a poor sinner and
bring it to nothing. And that this may so be, sorrow is not to be felt for a
brunt, but very often before the end of a man's life. The Godly man Psalm. 88
verse 15.
from his youth suffers the terrors of God. Jacob wrestling with the Angel
gets the victory of him, Genesis 32 verse 25.
but yet he is feign to go halting to his grave, and trale one of his loins
after him continually. Exo. 12. 8 Zach. 12. 10
The paschal Lamb was never eaten without sour herbs, to signify that they
which will be free from the wrath of God by Jesus Christ, must feel
continually the smart of their own sins. The second: all men must take
heed, least when they are touched for their sins, they besnare their own
consciences, for if the sorrow be somewhat over sharp, they shall see
themselves even brought to the gates of hell, and to feel the pangues of
death. And when a man is in this perplexity, he shall find it a most hard
matter to be freed from it, without the marvelous power and strength of Christ
Jesus, who only is able to help him and comfort him: yea many when they are
once plunged in this distress, and anguish of soul shall never escape it, as
may appear in Caine, Saul, Achitophel, Judas, and now of late in John
Hoffmeister a monk, and Latomus, who for the space of certain days never
left crying that he was damned, because that he had wilfully persecuted the
Gospel of Christ, and so he ended his life. Therefore most worthy is Paul's
counsel for the moderating of this sorrow: 2 Cor. 2. verse 6. 7.
It is sufficient (says he) unto the incestuous man that he was rebuked of
many, so that now contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him and comfort him,
lest he should be swallowed up of overmuch heaviness. And further he gives
another reason, which follows, lest Satan should circumuent us: for we are
not ignorant of his enterprises. And indeed common experience shows the same,
that when any man is most weak, then Satan most of all bestirreth himself to
work his confusion. The third is, that all me^ which are 3
humbled have not like measure of sorrow, but some more, some less. Job felt
the hand of God in exceeding great measure, when he cried, Job. 6. verse 3.
O that my grief were well weied, and my miseries were laid together in the
balance, for it would be now heavier then the sand of the sea, therefore my
words are now swallowed up, for the arrows of the Almighty are in me, and the
venom thereof does drink up my spirit, and the terrors of God fight against
me. The same did Ezechia, when on his death bed he said, Esai. 38. verse 13. 14.
he brake al my bones like a Lion, and like a Crane or a swallow, so did I
chatter, I did mourn like a dove etc. Contrariwise the thief upon the cross,
and Lydia in her conversion never felt any such measure of grief, for it is
said of her, that God Act. 16. verse 14.
opened her heart to be attentive to that which Paul spoke, and presently
after she entertained Paul and Silas cheerfully in her house, which she could
not have done, if she had been pressed down with any great measure of
sorrow: neither are any to dislike themselves, because they are not so much
humbled, as they see some others; for God in great wisdom gives to every one
which are to be saved, that which is convenient for their estate. And it is
often seen in a festred sore that the corruption is let out as well with the
pricking of a small pin, as with the wide lance of a Raser.

XII
The fourth thing in true humiliation is 4 Holy despair.
an holy desperation: which is when a man is wholly out of all hope ever to
attain salvation by any strength or goodness of his own: speaking and thinking
more vilely of himself then any other can do; and heartily acknowledging
himself to have deserved not one only but even ten thousand damnations in
hell fire with the devil and all his Angels. This was in Paul, when he said
of himself that he was the 1. Tim. 1. verse 15.
chief of all sinners. This was in Daniell, when in the name of the people of
Israel he prayed and said, Dan. 9. verse 7.
O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee and to us open shame, as appears
this day etc. Lastly the same was in the prodigal child: who said, Luke 15.
cerse 19.
Father, I have sinned against heaven and against thee, and I am no more
worthy to be called thy son.

XIII.
Many are of opinion that this sorrow for sin is nothing else but a
Melancholic passion: Sorrow for sin Melancholy.
but in truth the thing is far otherwise: as may appear in the example of
David: who by all conjectures was least troubled 1. Sam. 16. ver. 12.
with Melancholy, and yet never any tasted more deeply of the sorrow and
feeling of Gods anger for sin then he did, as the book of Psalms
declares. And if any desire to know the difference, they are to be
discerned thus. Sorrow for sin 1.
may be where health, reason, senses, memory and all are sound: but
Melancholic passions are where the body is unsound and the reason, senses,
memory, dulled and troubled. Secondly, sorrow for sin is not cured 2.
by any Physic, but only by the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ:
Melancholic passions are removed by Physic, diet, music and such like.
Thirdly, Sorrow 3.
for sin rises of the anger of God, that wounds and pearceth the
conscience: but Melancholic passions rise only of mere imaginations
strongly conceived in the brain. Lastly these passions are 4.
long in breeding and come by little and little: but the sorrow for sin
usually comes on a sudden as lightning into a house. And yet howsoever they
are differing, it must be acknowledged that they may both concur together: so
that the same man which is troubled with Melancholy, may feel also the anger
of God for sin.

XIIII.
Thus it appears how God makes the heart fit to receive faith: in the next
place it is to be considered how the Lord causes faith to spring and to breed
in the humbled heart. For the effecting of this so blessed a 1 Consideration of
gods mercy.
work, God works four things in the heart. First when a man is seriously
humbled under the burden of his sin, the Lord by his spirit makes him lift up
himself to consider and to ponder most diligently the great mercy of God
offered unto him in Christ Jesus. After the consideration of Gods 2 Feeling of
the want of Christ.
mercy in Christ: he commes in the second place, to see, feel, and from his
heart to acknowledge himself to stand in need of Christ and to stand in
need of every drop of his most precious blood. Thirdly the 3 Desire.
Lord stirs up in his heart a vehement desire and longing after Christ and
his merits: this desire is compared to Reu. 21. verse 6. Isay 55. 1. Luke 1.
53.
thirst: which is not only the feeling of the drines of the stomach, but
also a vehement appetite after drink, and David fitly expresses it when he
says, I stretched forth my Psa. 143. ver. 6. 4 Prayer for the pardon of sin.
hands unto thee: my soul desires after thee as the thirsty land. Lastly,
after this desire he begins to pray, not for any worldly benefit, but
only for the forgiveness of his sins, crying with the poor publican, O
God be merciful to me a sinner. Now this prayer, it is made, not for one day
only, but continually from day to day: not with the lips, but with
greater sighs and groans of the heart then that they can be expressed with
the tongue. Now, after these desires and prayers for Gods mercy, arises in
the A lively assurance.
heart a lively assurance of the forgiveness of sin. For GOD, who cannot
lie, has made his promise Math. 7 Esaias. 65. 24.
Knock it shall be opened: and again: Before they call I will answer, and
while they speak I will hear. Therefore when an humbled sinner commes crying
and knocking at his mercy gate for the forgiveness of sin, either then or
shortly after the Lord works in his heart a lively assurance thereof. And
Re. 21. 6. ^oh. 4. 14.
whereas he thirsted in his heart, being scorched with the heat of gods
displeasure beating upon his conscience, Christ Jesus gives him to drink of
the well of the water of life freely: and having dronken thereof, he shall
never be more a thirst, but shall have in him a fountain of water springing up
into everlasting life.

XV
For the better understanding of this that God works, sowing faith in the
heart of man after this manner; it must be observed that a sinner is compared
Luke 4. 18 Math. 9. 11 12.
to a sick man often in the scriptures. And therefore that the curing of a
disease fitly resembles the curing of sin. A man that has a disease or sore
in his body before he can be cured of it, he must see it, feel pain of
it, and be in a fear lest it bring him into danger of death: after this, he
shall see himself to stand in need of Physic, and he longs till he be
with the Physician: when he is once come to him, he desires him of all loves
to help him and to show the best skill he can: he will not spare for any cost:
then he yeeldes himself into the Physicians hands, persuading himself, that
by Gods blessing, he both can and will help him: after this he comes to his
former health again. On the same manner, every man is wounded with the deadly
wound of sin at the very heart: and he that would be saved and escape
damnation, must see his sin, be sorrowful for it, and utterly despair of
his own strength to attain salvation thereby: furthermore he must see
himself to stand in need of Christ, the good Physician of his soul, and
long after him, and cry unto him with deep sighs and groans for mercy:
after this Christ Jesus will temper him a plaster, of his own heart blood,
which being applied, he shall find himself revived, and shall come to the
assurance of the forgiveness of all his sins. So it was in David, when he
repented of his adultery and murder. First God made him see his sins, for
he says, Psalm. 51. verse 3.
I know mine iniquities, and my sins are ever before me. Secondly, he felt
Gods anger for his sins, verse 8.
make me (says he) to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice. Thirdly he utterly dispaired of his own strength, in that
he said, verse 12.
stablish me with thy free spirit; signifying thereby, unless the Lord would
stay him with his glorious power, he should run headlo^g to his own co^fusio^.
Fourthly he comes to see himself stand in great need of Gods favor: verse 1.
one mercy will not content him: he prays for the whole innumerable
multitude of his mercies, to be bestowed on him, to do away his iniquities.
Fifthly, his desire and his prayer for the forgiveness of his sin, are set down
in the whole Psalm. And in his prayer he gathers some comfort, and
assurance of Gods mercy toward himself, in that he says, the sacrifices of
God are a contrite spirit: verse 17.
a contrite and broken heart O God, thou will not despise.

XVI.
There are diverse degrees and measures Degrees of faith.
of this unfeigned faith, according as there be diverse degrees of Christians:
some Revel. 12 verse 2. Gal. 4. verse 19.
are yet in the womb, and have their mother the church traueling of them: some
1. Cor. 3. verse 2.
are newborn babes feeding on the milk of the word: some are Ephesians. 4. verse 13.
perfect men in Christ, come to the measure of the age of the fulness of Christ.

XVII.
The least measure of faith that any Christian The least measure of faith.
can have, is compared to the Math. 17. 20.
grain of mustard seed, the least of all seeds: and to flax Esai. 43. 2
that has fire in it, but so weak that it can neither give heat, nor light,
but only makes a smoke, and is called by the name of a Math. 8. 25.
little faith: and it may be thus described, when a man of an humble heart does
not yet feel the assurance of the forgiveness of his own sins, and yet he
is persuaded they are pardonable, desiring that they might be pardoned. And
therefore prays to God, that he would pardon them, and give him strength to
leave them.

XVIII.
A little faith may more plainly be known by considering these four points:
first that it is only in his heart, who is humbled for sin: Esai. 51. verse
17.
for the Lord dwells with him, that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to
receive the spirit of the humble* and to give life to them that are of a
contrite heart. Secondly, it is in a man especially at the time of his
conversion, and calling to Christ, after which he is to grow from faith to
faith. Thirdly, this faith though it be in the heart, yet it is not so much felt
in the heart: this was in David at some times, Psalm. 2^. verse 1.
my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, says he. The first words my God,
my God, are speeches of faith: yet the latter, why have thou forsaken me, show
that then he had no feeling of Gods mercy. A little faith then is in the heart
of a man, as in the spring time the fruit is in the bud, which yet appears
not, but only has his nature and substance in the bud. Lastly, the beginnings
and seeds of this faith are three.

The first is a persuasion, that a man's own 1 A persuasion that sin is
pardonable.
sins are pardonable: this persuasion though it be not faith, yet it is a good
preparation to faith: For the wicked cut themselves of quite from Gods mercy,
in that with Cain 4. Genesis 3 2 A desire of grace.
they say, their sins are greater, then that they can be forgiven. The second
is a desire of the favor and mercy of God in Christ, and of the means to
attain to that favor. Math. 56 Luke 1. 53. Psalm. 145. 19. Psalm. 10. 17. and
38. 9. Number. 23. 9.
This desire is a special grace of God, and it has the promise of blessedness;
and it must be distinguished from that desire which wicked men have: who though
they desire life eternal, as Balam did, yet they cannot desire the means, as
faith, repentance, mortification, etc. The third is, prayer for nothing in this
3 Prayer for pardon
world, but only for the forgiveness of their sins: with great sighs and
groans, from the bottom of the heart, which they are not able to express, as
they feel them. Now this hearty praying and desire for the pardon of sin
can never come from the flesh but only from the spirit, who To. 8. 25.
stirs up these heavenly motions of longing, desiring, sighing after
remission of sin, and all other graces of God, which he bestows upon his
children. And where the spirit of Christ dwells there must needs be faith,
for Ephesians. 3. 17
Christ dwells in the hearts of the faith full by faith. Therefore as Rebecca,
Ge. 25. 22
when she felt the Twins strive in her womb, though it pained her, yet she
knew, both that she had conceived, and that the children were quick in her:
so they who have these motions, and holy affections in them before mentioned
may assure themselves, that the spirit of God dwells in them, and
consequently that they have faith though a weak faith.

XIX.
Examples of this small faith are evident in the Apostles, who though Math. 16
they believed that Christ was the savior of the world, yet they Math. 17. 23.
Luke 9. 45.
were ignorant of his death and resurrection, which are the chief means of
salvation. After his resurrection they were ignorant of his ascension, and of
his spiritual kingdom, for they dreamed Act. 1. 6.
of an earthly kingdom; and at his death they all fled from him, and Peter
fearfully denied him. They being in this estate are not said to have no
faith, but to be of Mat. 8. 29
little faith. Another example we have in David, who having continued a long
space in his two great sins, adultery and murder, was admonished thereof by
Nathan the Prophet: being admonished he confessed his sins, and strait way
Nathan declared unto him from the Lord the forgiveness of the^. Yet afterward
David humbles himself, as it appears in the 51. Psalm, and prays most
earnestly for the forgiveness of those and all other his sins* even as though it
had not been true, that they were forgiven, as Nathan told him: The reason
is: howsoever they were remitted before God, yet David at his first repenting
of them, felt none assurance in his heart of the forgiveness of them, only he
had a persuasion, that they might be pardoned. And therefore he vehemently
desired and prayed to the Lord, to remitte them, and to sanctify him anewe.
This then being the least measure of faith, it must be remembered, that he who
has not attained to it, has as yet no saving faith at all.

XX
The greatest measure of faith is a full persuasion The greatest measure of
of the mercy of God. For it is the strength and ripenes of faith. Romans 4.
verse 20. 21. Abraham not weak in faith but being strengthened in the faith,
was fully persuaded, that he who had promised was able to do it: This full
assurance is when a man can say with Paul, I Romans 8. 38
am persuaded that neither life nor death, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And lest any should think: this saying is peculiar
to Paul, the whole Church, in the ca^ticles, uses the same in effect: saying,
Cant. 8. verse 6. 7.
Love is strong as death, jealousy is as cruel as the grave, the coals
thereof are fiery coals, and a vehement flame. Much water cannot quench love,
neither can the floods drown it: if a man should give all the substance of his
house for love, they would contemn it.

XXI
No Christian attaineth to this full assurance at the first, but in some
continuance of time, after that for a long space he has kept a good
conscience before God and before men: and has had diverse experiences of Gods
love and favor toward him in Christ. This Paul declares to the Romans: Romans
5. verse 45.
in afflictions God sheds abroad his love in their hearts, by the holy Ghost,
which is given to them: hence arises patience, from patience comes
experience, from experience hope, and hope never makes ashamed, or
disappointeth him of eternal life* This is evident in David's practice: Psalm.
23. verse 6.
Doubtless, says he, kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my
life, and I shall live a long season in the house of the Lord. Mark this his
resolute persuasion: and consider how he came unto it: namely by experience
of Gods favor at sundry times, and after sundry manners. For before he set
down this resolution, he numbered up diverse benefits received of the Lord: that
Psalm. 23. 2. 3. 4.
he fed him in green pastures, and led him by the refreshing waters of Gods
word. That he restores him and leads him in the paths of righteousness. That
he strengthens him in great dangers, even of death, and preserves him, that
in despite of his enemies, he enriched him with many benefits. By means of
all these mercies of God bestowed on him he came to be persuaded of the
continuance of the favor of God toward him. Again David said before king
Saul, 1, Sam. 17. 32.
let no man's heart fail him because of Goliath: Thy servant will go and fight
with the Philistine. And Saul said Ver. 33.
to David: Thou art not able to go against this Philistine to fight with him:
for thou art but a boy, and he is a man of war from his youth. David answered,
he was able to fight with, and to slaie the uncircumcised Philistine. And the
ground of his persuasion was taken from experience: for thus he said: Ver. 34.
Thy servant kept his fathers sheep, and there came a Lion, and likewise a
bear and took a sheep out of the flock. And Ver. 35.
I went out after him and smote him, and took it out of his mouth, and when he
arose against me, I caught him by the beard, and smote him and slew him. Ver.
36.
So thy servant slew both the Lion and the Bear: Therefore this uncircumcised
Philistine shall be as one of the^, seeing he has railed on the host of the
living God. The like proceeding must be in matters concerning eternal life.
Little David resembles every Christian: Goliath and the army of the Philistines
resembles Satan and his power. He therefore that will be resolved, that he
shall be able to overcome the gates of hell, and attain to life everlasting,
must long keep watch and ward over his own heart, and he must fight against his
own rebellious flesh, and crucify it: yea he must have experie^ces of Gods
power stre^gthning him in many te^ptatio^s, before he shall be assured of his
attaining to the kingdom of heaven.

XXII.
Thus much concerning faith it self: now follow the fruits and benefits of
faith. By means of this special faith, the elect are truly Ephesians. 3. 17 Vnio^
with Christ.
joined unto Christ, and have an heavenly communion and fellowshippe with him,
and therefore do Ephesians. 3. 20 Ephesians. 1. 19. 1. Cor. 13. 16.
in some measure inwardly feel his holy spirit moving and stirring in them,
as Rebecca felt the Twins to stir in her womb. Christ is as Ephesians. 1. 22 23.
the head in the body: every believer as a member of the same body: now as
the head Communion with Christ.
gives sense and motion to the members, and the members feel themselves to
have sense, and to move by means of the head, so does Christ Jesus receive and
quicken every true believer, and by his heavenly power makes him to do the
good which he does. Romans 6. 4. 5. Ioh. 15. 1. 2. Ephe. 4. 13. 16.
And as from the stock sap is derived to the graft, that it may live and
grow, and bring forth fruit in his kind: so do all the faithful that are
grafted into Christ the true Vine. And as the graft loses his wild nature,
and is changed into the nature of the stock, and brings forth good fruit,
so in like manner it is with them that are in Christ, who by little and little
are wholly renewed Act. 15. 9.
from evil to good.

XXIII
The elect being thus joined unto Christ, receive three wonderful benefits
from him, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification. Justification is, when the
elect being in themselves rebellious sinners, and therefore firebrandes of hell
fire, and Gods own enemies, 1. Cor. 1. 30. 2 Cor. 5. 21
yet by Christ they are accepted of the Lord as perfectly pure and righteous
before him.

XXIIII
This Justification is wrought in this manner. Justification.
Sin is that which makes a man unrighteous, and the child of wrath and
vengeance. In sin, there are three things which are hurtful to man: the
first is Condemnation, which comes of sin: the second is, the disobedience
of the law in sin: the third is, the root and fountain of sin, original
corruption. These are three deadly wounds, and three running sores in the
hearts and consciences of all sinners. Luke 1. 35 Coloss. 2. 9. Ioh. 4. 14.
Mar. 2. 17.
Now Christ Jesus is perfectly righteous, and in him a sinner may find three
inestimable benefits answerable to the three former evils. First, the
suffringes of Christ upon the Cross, sufficient for all men's sins. Secondly,
the obedience of Christ in fulfilling the law. Thirdly, the perfect holiness of
the humane nature of Christ: these are three sovereign medicines to heal all
wounded consciences: and they are as three running streams of living water to
bathe and to supple the bruised and contrite heart. Coloss. 2. 14. Gal. 3. 13.
Ephe. 1. 7.
Now comes faith, and first lays hold of the sufferinges of Christ, and so
a sinner is freed from the punishment and guilt of sin, and from eternal
damnation, and thus the first deadly wound is cured Romans 4. 18. 19. Mat. 3.
15. Phil. 2. 8. Esa. 53. 11.
Again, faith lays hold of the perfect obedience of Christ, in fulfilling
the law, and thus the second wound is cured. Romans 8. 1. 2. 3. Ioh. 27. 19.
Thirdly, faith applies the holiness of Christ's humane nature to the sinner,
and then his nature is accepted of God as perfectly sanctified, and so his
third deadly wound is cured. Thus a sinner is made righteous by the
righteousness of Christ imputed to him.

XXV.
From true justification, proceed Romans 5. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6 1 Reconsiliation.
many other benefits, and they are either outward, or inward. Outward
benefits are three. The 2. Cor. 5. 18.
first is Reconciliation, by which a man justified is perfectly reconciled to
God; because his sin is done away, and he is arrayed with the perfect
righteousness of Christ. The 2. Cor. 6. 9. Heb. 12. 6. 2. Sa. 7. 14. 2. Sam. 12.
13. 14. 2 Afflictions only chastisments.
second is, that afflictions Romans 5. 10. 11.
to the faithful are no punishments for sin, but only fatherly and loving
chastisements. For the guilt and punishment of sin was borne of Christ. Now
therefore, if a Christian be afflicted, it is no punishment: for then God
should punish one fault twice, once in Christ, and the second time upon the
Christian: which thing does not agree with his justice: it remains therefore
that afflictions are only corrections in the faithful. The third benefit is,
that the man justified 3 Merit in Christ.
does Mat. 19. 28. 29. Apoc. 22. 12. and 21. 6.
deserve and merit at Gods hands the kingdom of heaven. For being made
perfectly righteous in Christ, he must needs merit eternal life in and by
Christ. And therefore Paul called it the justification of life. Romans 5. 18.

XXVI.
Inward benefits proceeding from justification, are those which are inwardly
felt in the heart, and serve for the better assurance of justification, and they
are principally Peace of conscience.
five. The first is, Peace and quietness of conscience. As al men naturally in
Adam are corrupt, so all men naturally have corrupt and defiled consciences,
accusing them and arraigning them before Gods judgment for their sins: in
such wise that every suspicion of death and fear of imminent danger makes a
natural man stand aghast at his wits end, knowing not what to do: Heb. 10. 22.
Romans 5. 1. To. 15. 16.
but by faith in Christ, the Christian is persuaded of remission of his sins,
and so the disquietnes of his conscience is appeased, and he has an inward
peace in all extremities, which cannot be taken from him.

XXVII.
The slumbring and dead conscience is much like to the good conscience
pacified, and many A difference between a dead conscience and a quiet
conscience.
through ignorance take the one for the other. But they may be severed and
discerned thus. First, let the believing Christian examine himself, whether
his conscience was afflicted with the sense of Gods judgments, and pressed
down with the burden of his sin before he came to that quietness: for then
he may be in good hope, that it was the Spirit of God who brought that peace,
because God has promised Ioh 7. 37. Esaias. 57. 15
That he will dwell with the humble and contrite, to revive and quicken them.
But if he have always had that peace from the beginning of his days, he may
easily deceive himself, by taking the numnesse and security of a defiled
conscience for true peace of conscience. Secondly, let him search from whence
this 2
peace of his conscience proceeds. Romans 5. 1 Heb. 9. 14.
For if it come from any thing else but from the certainty of the remission
of sin, it is no true peace: as many, flattering themselves in sin, and
dreaming of a pardon, are thereupon quieted, and the Devil is ready enough to
put this into their minds: but this can be no true peace. Thirdly, let him
examine himself, if he have a care to keep a good conscience: which if he
have, he has also reciued from the Lord a good and a quiet conscience. Act.
23. 1. and 24. 16.
For if God bestow upon any man a gift concerning his salvation, he gives
him also a care to keep it.

XXVIII
The second inward benefit is Ephesians. 3. 12. Romans 5. 2. 2 Entrance with boldness
into God presence.
An entrance 2
into Gods favor, and a perseverance in it, which is indeed a wonderful
benefit. When a man comes into favor with his Prince, then he is bold to
come unto his Prince, and he may have free access unto his presence, and he
may sue to his Prince for any benefit or preferment whereof he stands in
need, and may obtain it before any other: so they which are in Gods favor,
by reason that they are freely pardoned, and justified in Christ, do boldly
approach into Gods presence, and they are ready to ask, and sure to obtain
any benefit that is for their good. Romans 5. 3 and 14. 17. 3 Joy.
The 3
third is a spiritual joy in their hearts, even then when they are afflicted:
because they look certainly to obtain the kingdom of heaven. The fourth is
Romans 5. 5.
that the love of GOD is 4
^hed in the hearts of the faithful by the holy 4 Feeling of Gods love.
Ghost: that is, that the holy Ghost does make the faithful very evidently
to feel ^he love of God toward them, and does as it were, fill their hearts
with it.

XXIX
The second maine benefit is Ioh. 1. 12 Gal. 3. 26.
Adoption, whereby they which are justified, are also accepted of God as his
own children. From Adoption proceed many other benefits. First 1
Heb. 2. 11. 12.
the elect child of God hereby is made a brother to Christ. Secondly, he is a
King, and the 2
kingdom of heaven is his inheritance. Thirdly, 1. Pet. 2. 9.
3
he is Lord over all creatures, save Angels. Heb. 6. 7. 8.
Fourthly, the holy Angels minister unto him 4
for his good: they guard him and watch about 1 Cor. 3. 22 Heb. 1. 14.
him. Fiftlie, all things, yea grievous 5
afflictions and sin it self, turn to his good; Romans 8. 28. 2. Cor. 12. 7
though in his own nature it be never so hurtful: Heb. 2. 15 1. Cor. 15. 54.
and threfore death (which is most terrible) unto him is no entrance into hell,
but a narow gate to let him into everlasting life. Lastly, being thus adopted,
he may look 6
for comfort at Gods hand answerable to the Romans 5. 5. 1. Cor. 10. 10.
measure of his affliction: as God has promised.

XXX.
The inward assurance of Adoption is by Assurance of adoption
two witnesses. The first is our spirit, that is, an heart and conscience
sanctified, by the sprinckling of the blood of Christ. Now, because it comes
to pass that the testimony of our spirit is feeble and weak, God of his
goodness has given his own spirit to be a fellow witness with our spirit: for
the elect have in themselves the spirit of Jesus The spirit of Adoption.
Christ, testifying unto them and persuading them that they are the adopted
children of God. To. 8. 16. Gal. 4. 6. 1. Pet. 3. 21.
For this cause the holy Ghost is called the spirit of adoption, because it
works in us the assurance of our adoption: 2. Cor. 1. 21.
and it is called a pawn or earnest. For as in a bargain, when part of the
price is paid in earnest, then assurance is made, that men will pay the whole:
so when the child of God has received thus much from the holy ghost to be
persuaded that he is adopted and chosen in Christ, he may be in good hope, and
he is already put in good assurance, fully to enjoy eternal life in the
kingdom of heaven.

To. 8. 23 1. Ioh. 3. 2. Coloss. 3. 3. 1. Cor. 3. 1. Ephe. 4. 14.
Indeed this testimony is weak in most men, and can scarce be perceived:
because most Christians, though they may be old in respect of yers, yet they
are babes in Christ, and not yet come to a perfect grouth: and may find in
themselves great strength of sin, and the graces of God to be in small measure
in the^. And again, the children of God being most distressed, as in time of
trial, and in the hour of death, then the inward working of the holy ghost is
felt most evidently. But a reprobate cannot have this testimony at al: though
in deed a man flattereth himself, and the Devil imitating the Spirit of God,
does usually persuade carnal men and hypocrites that they shall be saved.
But that deuilish illusion, and the testimony of the Spirit may be discerned
by two notes. The first is hearty and fervent prayer to God in the name of
Christ. For the same spirit that testifies to us that we are the adopted
children of God, does also make us cry, that is, fervently with groans and
sighs filling heaven and earth, pray to God. Labor in prayer: for it is the
proper mark of the spirit of adoption: and in prayer we shall most of all
feel the spirit of adoption
Now, this hearty, fervent and loud crying in the ears of God, can the Devil
give to no hypocrite: for it is the special mark of the Spirit of God. The
other note is, that they which have the special testimony from the Spirit of
God, have also in their hearts the same affections to God which children have to
their father: namely, love, fear, reverence, obedience, thankefulnes, for
they call not upon God, as upon a terrible Judge, but they cry Father, Father.
And these affections they have not, whom Satan illudeth with a fantastical
imagination of their salvation, for it may be, that through hypocrisy, or
through custom, they may call God Father, but in truth they cannot do it.

XXXI
The elect being thus assured of their adoption Hope.
and justification, are endued with hope: Romans 8. 25. and 5. 5. 2. Cor. 5. 6.
7. Hebr. 11. 1.
by which they look patiently for the accomplishing of all good things which
God has begun in them. And therefore they can undergo all Crosses and
afflictions with a quiet and contented mind: because they know that the time
will come when they shall have full redemption from all evils. This was 1 Thessalonians. 1 3. Romans 8. 38.
the pat^ence of Paul's hope, when he said, that nothing in the world could
sever him from the love of God in Christ. And like to this was the patience of
Policarpe, and of Ignatius, who when he was condemned and judged to be thrown
to wild beasts, and now heard the Lions roaring, he boldly and yet patiently
said; I am the wheat of Christ, I shall be ground with the teeth of wild beasts,
that I may be found good bread. Also the same was the patience of the blessed
Martyr saint Laurence, who like a meek Lamb suffered himself to be tormented
on a fiery gridiron: and when he had been pressed down with fire pikes for a
great space, in the mighty spirit of God, spoke unto the Emperor that caused
him thus to be tormented, on this wise

This side is now roasted enough,
turn up O tyrant great.
Assay, whether roasted or raw
thou think the better meat.
XXXII
The third maine benefit, is Act. 15. 9 Psalm 103. 5. Eze. 11. 19. Psa. 51. 12.
inward Sanctification: by which a Christian in his mind, Sanctification.
in his will, and in his affections is freed from the bondage and tyranny of
sin and satan, and is by little and little enabled through the spirit of Christ
to desire and approve that which is good, and to walk in it. And it has two
parts. Gal. 5, 24 Col. 3. 5.
The first is Mortification, when the power of sin is continually weakened,
consumed, and diminished. Ephesians. 1. 1. 1, Cor. 15. 45.
The second is Vi^ificatio^ by which inherent righteousness is really put into
the^, and afterward is continually increased.

XXXIII
This sanctification is wrought in all Christians after this manner. After that
they are Mortification.
joined to Christ, and made misticallie bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh, Christ works in them effectually by his holy spirit, and his works
are principally three. First, To. 6. 3. 4. Col. 2. 12. and 3. 3. 5.
he causes his own death to work effectually the death of all sin, and to
kill the power of the flesh. For it is as a Corrasiue, which being applied to
the part affected, eats out the venime and corruption: and so the death of
Christ by faith applied, fretteth out and consumes the concupiscence and the
corruption of the whole man. Viuificatio^ in the first resurrection.
Secondly, the burial of Christ is the burial of sin, as it were in a
grave. Phi. 3. 10. Romans 6. 4.
Thirdly, his Resurrection sends a quickening power into them, and to make
them rise out of their sin, in which they were dead and buried, to work
righteousness, and to live in holiness of life. Lazarus body lay four days,
and stancke in the grave, yet Christ raised it and gave him life again, and
made him do the same works that living me^ do: so also Christ deals with the
souls of the faithful: they rotte and stincke in their sins, and would
perish in them, if they were left alone: but Christ puts a heavenly life
into them, and makes them active and lively to do the will of God in the
works of Christianity, and in the works of their callings. And this
sanctification is throughout the whole man: in the spirit, soul, and mind. 1.
These. 5. 23. And here the spirit signifies the mind and memory, the soul,
the will and affections.

XXXIIII
The sanctification of the mind is the enlightening of it with the true
knowledge of Gods word. It is of two sorts either sprituall understanding or
spiritual wisdom. Spiritual understanding is a general conceiving of
every thing that is to be done, or not to be done, out of Gods word.
Spiritual wisdom is a worthy grace of God, by which a man is able to
understand out of Gods word, what is to be done, or not to be done in any
particular thing, or action, according to the circumstances of person, time,
place etc. Both these are in every Christian, otherwise Paul would never have
prayed for the Colossians Col. 1. 9.
That they might be fulfilled with knowledge of Gods will, in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding. In both these excelled David, who testified of
himself that Gods Psalm. 119. 105.
word was a lantern to his feet, and a light to his path: and that Verse. 98.
99.
God by his commandments had made him wiser then his enemies: that he had more
understanding then all his teachers: because Gods testimonies were his
meditations, 100.
that he understood more then the ancient, because he kept Gods precepts.
The properties of the mind enlightened are specially two. The first is, that
by it a Christian sees his own blindness, ignorance, vanity, as appears in
David who being a prophet of God, yet prayed: 18,
open mine eyes (O Lord) that I may see the wonders of thy law. And hence it is
that the godly so much bewailes the blindness of the minds. Contrariwise the
wicked Ioh. 9. 41.
man in the midst of his blindness, thinks himself to see. The second is
that it runs and is occupied in a continual meditation of Gods word. So
David says the Psalm. 1. 2.
righteous ma^s delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law does he
meditate day and night.

XXXV.
The memory also is sanctified in that it Sanctification of the memory.
can both keep and remember that which is good and agreeable to Gods will:
whereas naturally it best remembers lewdnes, and wickedness, and vanity. This
holy memory was in David: Psalm. 119. ver. 11.
I have hid thy promises in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee. And
Marie Luke 2. 19.
Kept all the sayings of Christ and pondered the^ in her heart. And to the
exercise of this memory, Solomon has a good lesson: My son hearken unto my
words, incline thine ears unto my sayings: Pro. 2. 1.
let them not depart from thine eyes, but keep them in the midst of thine heart.

XXXVI
Furthermore the will of a Christian is renewed Sanctification of the will.
and purified by Christ: which appears in that it is so far forth freed from
sin, that it can will and choose that which is good and acceptable to God, and
refuse that which is evil, according to that of Paul, Phi. 2. 13
It is God, which works in you the will and the deed even of his good
pleasure. Now if a man be considered naturally, he can neither will, nor
perform that which is good, but only that which is evil, Job. 15. 16 Ephe.
2. 2. Luke 11. 21.
for he is sold under sin, as the Ox or the Ass, and commits iniquity,
as the fish draws in water, yea he is in bondage under satan, who inspireth
his mind with vile motions, and boweth his will, affections, and the members
of his body to his cursed will: so that for his life, he is not able to do
any thing, but sin and rebel against God. And it must be remembered, that
although the christian man's will be freed from the bondage of sin in this
life, yet it shall not be free from the power of sin until the life to come,
for y To. 7. 14.
Paul that worthy saint says of himself being regenerat, that he was carnal
and sold under sin.

XXXVII
Sanctified affections are known by this Sanctifications of the affections.
that they To. 12. 9.
are moved and inclined to that which is good, to embrace it: and are not
co^monlie affected and stirred with that which is evil, unless it be to
eschew it. Examples hereof are these which follow To. 12. 15
To rejoice with the^ that rejoice. And to weep with the^ that weep: Luke 10.
20.
To rejoice, because a man's name is written in heaven Ps. 143. 6.
To desire Gods presence and favor, as the dry land desires water Esa. 66. 2.
To fear and tremble at Gods word Psa. 48. 2.
To long and to faint after the places where God is worshipped: 2. Pet. 2. 8
Ps. 119. 136
To be vexed in soul from day to day in seeing and hearing the unlawful
deeds of men: and to shed rivers of tears because men break Gods
commandments. To. 12. 11
In feruencie of spirit to serve the Lord. Coloss. 3. 12.
To put on the bowels of compassion toward the miseries of men. Ephesians. 4. 26
To be angry and sin not. 2. Cor. 7. 11.
To sorrow for the displeasing of God. 1. Ioh. 3. 14
To love the brethren in Christ. Psalm. 119. 128.
To admire at the word of God. verse. 127.
To love Gods commandments above gold. Mat. 8. 10
To admire at the graces of God in others. Psa. 2. 11.
In fear to serve God, and to rejoice in trembling. Act. 9. 31.
To walk in the fear of God, and to be filled with the joy of the holy
ghost. 1. Pet. 1. 6
To be heavy through manifold temptations. 1. Pe. 4. 13
To rejoice in being partaker of the sufferings of Christ. Psalm. 33. 20. 21.
To wait on the Lord, to rejoice in him, and to trust in his holy name. To.
8. 23.
To wait for the full redemption. 2. Cor. 5. ver. 2.
To sigh desiring to enioie eternal life. Psalm. 86. 8
To love the habitation of gods house and the place, where his honor dwells.
Phil. 3. 8.
To esteem al things as loss and dong in respect of Christ.

XXXVIII
But among al these sanctified affections, Zeal for Gods glory.
there are four specially to be marked. The first is a zeal for Gods glory:
by which a Christian is thus affected, that rather then God shall loose his
glory, he is content to have his own soul damned, As it was with Moses, who
feared, least God should loose his glory, if he did utterly destroy the
Israelits for their Idolatry: whom he had chosen to be his people, and
therefore in this respect prayed unto the Lord. Exo. 32. ^2.
Therefore now if thou pardon their sin, thy mercy shall appear, but if
thou will not, I pray thee, raze me out of the book which thou have written.
Romans 9. 3
And Paul could have wished with all his heart to be cut off from all
fellowship with Christ, and to be given up to eternal destruction, for his
country men the Jews, and for Gods glory specially. Some may say this
affection is not common to all, but particular to such as are led with such an
affection, as these holy men were led, and which have their hearts so pierced
and kindled with divine love, and so ravished with the same, out of themselves,
that they forget al other things, yea themselves, having nothing before their
eyes but God, and his glory. To this I answer that this affection is common
to al, though the measure of it be diverse, in some more, in some less. which
appears in that our savior Christ teaches every one* in his prayer which
he made before he crave any other thing, either concerning God, or himself,
to pray that Gods name may be sanctified. For by this all Christians are taught
that they are to ouerpasse all considerations of themselves, their own
pleasure and profit; their salvation or damnation: and with an hearty
affection, to seek after the glory of God in all their doings, that as Gods
glory is most dear unto himself, so it may appear also that it is most
dear unto them. If any think it strange that Moses, Paul, or any other
should be content to fall into misery, to loose their lives, and to be cast
into eternal perdition, in hell fire, with reprobate and damned spirits,
rather then Gods honor should be turned into dishonor and blasphemy: let
them consider that wonderful is the power of true love, 1. Cor. 13 ver. 7.
which makes all things easy: Cant 8. ver. 6. 7.
which is as strong as the grave, that ouercomes all, and was never yet
overcome: which is as a flaming fire, that a whole sea of waters cannot quench.
And the love which these men had to God did so ravish them, that they felt no
fear of hell fire.

XXXIX
The second affection is the fear of God, The fear of God.
a most excellent and wonderful grace of God. Solomon Eccle. 12 14.
matcheth it, yea and prefers it too, before al things in this world, making
it the end of all. Without it a man cannot be wise, it is the first step to
wisdom, Prou. 14. 26.
in it is assured strength: also it is a welspring of life to eschew the
snares of death. The Churches of Iudaea being in peace, were edified, and
walked in the Act. 9. 31
fear of God, and were abundantly filled with the comfort of the holy Ghost.
In this fear of God there be two parts: The first is a persuasion in the
heart, that a man is in Gods presence, and when any by infirmity forgets God,
a drawing of himself into Gods presence. As it was in David, Psalm. 26. 8
I have (says he) set the Lord always before me. For he is at my right
hand, therefore I shall not slide. And this his being in the presence of God,
he sets down most excellently in the 139. Psalm. Genesis 5. 22.
Enoch walked with God. Ge. 17. 1.
Abraham is commanded to walk before God, and to be upright. The second part
of the fear of God is, in Gods presence to stand in awe of him; which is when
a man takes heed to his ways lest he offend God. This advise David gives to
Saul Counselors. Psalm. 4. 4.
Stand in awe and sin not. Pharao commanded the Midwiues of Egypt to kill
all the male children of the Israelites at the birth: they did it not, because
Exo. 1. 17
they stood in awe of God, fearing to displease him. And hence it is that the
Esaias 66. 3
godly hear Gods word with fear and trembling.

XL
The third is, the hatred and detestation Hatred of sin.
of sin, specially of a man's own corruptions: wherewith a Christian is so
turmoiled, that in regard of them and for no other cause, he most heartily
desires to be forth of this most miserable world, that he may be
disburdened of his sin, and leave off to displease God. Paul feels in
himself a huge mass of deadly corruption, it makes him deem himself most
miserable, and to mourn because he was not delivered from it, saying, To. 7. 24.
Oh miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of Death.
Again it is sin that makes the Church co^plain that Cant. 1. 4
she is black, that the sun has looked upon her, and therefore she cries,
Revel. 22. 20.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

XLI.
The fourth is, joy of heart, in consideration of the nearenes or presence of
the terrible day of judgment. The Luke 21. 27.
reprobate either trembles at the consideration of the day of judgment, or
else in the security of his heart he regards it not. And when he shall see
the signs of the coming of Christ 2. Tim. 4. 8. 2. Cor. 5. 6 7.
his heart shall fail him for very fear, and he shall Luke 21. 26.
call the hills to fall upon him: but contrariwise, the faithful love the
second coming of Christ, and therefore wait and long for it: and when they
shall see the signs of it, they shall Luke 21. 28.
lift up their heads, because the full accomplishment of their redemption is at
hand.

XLII.
The sanctification of the body is when Sanctification of the body.
Romans 6. ver. 19.
all the members of it are carefully preserved from being means to execute any
sin: and are made the instruments of righteousness and holiness. So Paul prayed
for the Thessalonians These. 4. ver. 4.
that they might know how to possess their vessels in holiness, and in
honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles do which know
not God. And Job Job. 31. ver. 1.
made a covenant with his eyes not to look on a woman. In whose example it
appears how every member is to be kept pure and holy.

XLIII.
If any humbled Christian find not this A consolation.
measure of sanctification in himself, yet let him not be discouraged. For if
any man have a Romans 8. 5. ver. 1.
willingness, and a desire to obey Gods commandments, he has the spirit, and
he who has the spirit is in Christ, and he who is in Christ shall never see
damnation. And though he fail greatly in the action of obedience, yet God will
accept his affection to obey, as obedience acceptable to him. God will approve
of thee for his own work which he has wrought in thee, and not reject thee
for thine.

XLIIII.
From sanctification arises repentance. Repentance.
For a man cannot hate his own sins before he be sanctified: and he cannot
truly repent for them before he hate them. Repentance is when a man Act 26.
20.
turns to God, and brings forth fruits worthy amendment of life. This
turning unto God has two parts: The first a purpose and resolution of heart
never to sin any more, but to lead a new life. This was in David, Psalm. 119.
57.
who fully purposed to keep Gods commandments and Psalm. 112 6.
applied his heart to fulfill his statutes unto the end. And unto this did
Barnabas exhort the brethren at Antioch Act. 11. 23.
that with full purpose of heart, they would cleave unto the Lord. The second
part is an holy labor in man's life and conversation to purify and cleanse
himself from sin: of this speaks John 1 Ioh. 3. ver. 3.
And every one that has this hope in him, purges himself even as he is
pure. This did David practice, as may appear in that he said: Psalm. 73. 13.
Certainly, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in
innocence. If any marvel how repentance follows sanctification,
considering it is the first thing of all, that the Prophets, Apostles, and
Ministers of God preach unto the people whom they would win to Christ: I
answer, that all other graces are more hidden in the heart, whereas repentance
is open, and sooner appears to a man's own self, and to the eyes of the
world. It is like the budde in the tree, which appears before the leaf, the
blossom, the fruit: and yet in nature, it is the last, for a man must be
renewed, and come to an utter disliking of his own sins, before he will turn
from them, and leave them.

XLV
By this it may appear, that there is one manner of sinning in the godly, and
another in the ungodly, though they fall both into one sin. A wicked man,
when he sins in his heart he gives full consent to the sin: but the godly
though they fall into the same sins with the wicked, yet they never give full
consent, for they are in their minds, wills, and affections partly regenerate,
and partly unregenerate, and therefore their wills will partly abhor that
which is evil: according as saint Paul says of himself To. 7. 22.
I delight in the law of God according to the inner man, but I see an other
law in my members rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me
captive, etc. And that the godly man never gives full consent to sin: it is
evident by three tokens. First, before he comes to do the sin, he has
no purpose nor desire to do it: but his purpose and desire is to do the will
of God contrary to that sin. Secondly, in the act or doing of the sin, his
heart rises against it, yet by the strength of temptation, and by the mighty
violence of his flesh, he is haled and pulled on to do wickedness. Paul
says of himself, that he was sold under sin, that is, he was like a
slave, who desires to escape out of his Masters hands, and yet is feign in
great misery to serve him. Thirdly, after he has sinned he is sore
displeased with himself for it, and truly repents. As Math. 26. 69. 70.
71. 72.
Peter before the denying of his Master, had no purpose to do it, but rather
to die in his cause. In the act he had a striving with himself, as appears
by this that first he answered faintly, I know not what thou say: and yet
after when the assault of Satan more prevailed, he fell to swearing, cursing
and banning. After his fall he repented himself and wept bitterly for it. All
was contrary in Judas, who went to betra^e his master with full intent and
purpose: for the devil long tempting him unto it, entered into him, that is,
made him, yield, and resolve himself to do it. John 12. 2. 27.
Afterward when Christ was betrayed and condemned, Judas was not sorrowful for
his sin with a godly sorrow, but in despair of mercy hanged himself.

XLVI
Fruits worthy of amendment of life are Fruits of repentance.
such fruits as the Esai. 61. 3
trees of righteousness bear, namely, good works: for the doing of a good
work there be three things requisite: First it must proceed from justifying
faith. For the work cannot please God except the person please him, and the
person cannot please him without this faith. Secondly, it is to be done in
obedience unto Gods revealed word. 1. Sam. 15. 22.
to obeie is better then sacrifice, and to hearken is better then the fat of
Rams. Thirdly, it is to be referred to Gods glory. 1. Cor. 10 31.
Whether ye eat or drink says Paul, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God. The special works of Christians, which they and none but they
truly perform, are these five which follow.

XLVII.
The first is the good hearing of the Hearing of the word.
word, John. 10. 27. John 8. 47.
my sheep (says Christ) hear my voice and follow me. And again: he which
is of God hears his voice. And this was one note of the faithful in the
primative Church to assemble to hear the word. This good hearing of the word
is the saving hearing that brings life eternal. In this action, Christians
are usually thus disposed. Before they come to hear the word of God they make
themselves ready to hear it, as the men of Berea did, Act. 17. 11
who received the word with all readiness. This preparation stands in two
points: First, they disburden themselves of all impedimentes, that like unto
runners in a race, they may Iam. 1. 18 Psalm. 26. 67
be swift to hear: these impedimentes are sin and troubled affections, and
they come with humble hearts 1. Cor. 3. 18.
as fools, that they may become wise. Secondly, they quicken up themselves,
and come unto the assemblies, hungring and thirsting after the word of God, as
men do after meat and drink. When they are in hearing Gods word, their
minds are fixed and attentive only to that which is spoken, as Act. 16. 14.
Lydias was. Thirdly, they truly believe the word of God, and carefully apply
it to their own souls. Fourthly, they feel the lively power of it in
themselves. It is as Mark 9. 4^.
salt in them, to draw out their inward corruption; it is to them the Ephesians. 6.
17.
sword of the spirit, and as a Romans 15. 16.
sacrifising knife in the hand of Gods Minister, by which their flesh is
killed, and they are offered up in a living sacrifice to God: it is Ioh. 6. 63.
spirit and life to quicken and revive their souls that are dead in sin: And
the reason of this is plain: The word of God preached is as a cup of wine:
the true Christian, is the Lords guest, but he has sauce of his own: He
brings his sugar with him, namely, his true faith, which Hebr. 4. 2
he tempereth and mingleth with Gods word, and so it becomes unto him as a
cup of sweet wine, and as water of life. Now the hypocrite, because he
brings no faith with him, drinks of the same, but thinks the wine to be
sour and tarte, and void of relishe, and in truth it is unto him as a cup
of rank poison. Again, Act. 10. 33 Esaias. 66. 3.
they hear the word of God as in Gods presence, and therefore their hearts
are full of fear and trembling, And they receive the word, not These. 2. 13.
as from man, but as from Christ Jesus the only Math. 17 5. 1. Pet. 5. 4.
Doctor of the Church: And they regard not so much the Ambassador, or his
ability, as the Embassage of reconciliation sent from the king of Heaven.
After they have heard the word, they are bettered in knowledge and in
affection, and they Psalm. 119. 11.
remember it, and meditate upon it continually, that they may frame all their
doings by it. Worldly men use to buie books of statutes, and to have them in
their houses to read on, that they may know how to avoid danger of law.
And so the faithful do always set before them Gods word, and in all their
dooinges it is their Psalm. 119. 24.
Counselor, lest they should come into danger of Gods displeasure.

XLVIII.
The second work is, the receiving of Receiving of the Saecrament.
the Sacraments; of Baptism once only, when a man is admitted into the
Church: and of the Lords Supper often. The first, seals up to the heart of a
Christian, that he is united unto Christ, and has true fellowshippe with him
in being fully justified before God, and inwardly sanctified. The second
serves to seal up in the heart of a Christian the continual growing and
increasing of the same graces. This thing every true believer shall have often
experience of, either in or after the receiving of the Sacrament: and yet it
shall not be so always, for sometimes the Church being Cant. 2. 5
brought into Christ's wine-celler, shall fall into a sound, and not feel any
refreshing there. Yet the believer is not to be dismayed, if he feel not
always comfort presently after the Sacrament. A sick man feels no comfort
or nourishment, when he eats meat, and yet it preserves his life: So the
weak Christian though he feel himself not nourishe at the Sacrament by
Christ's body and blood, yet he shall see in time that his soul shall be
preserved thereby unto everlasting life. Furthermore when a Christian feels
no comfort by the Sacrament, let him then humble himself before the Lord
more heartily then ever before, confessing his sins and praying for increase
of grace, and then he shall feel the fruit of the Sacrament.

XLIX
The third work is, a relieuing of the Relief of the poor.
poor brethren in Christ, proceeding of a brotherly kindness toward them.
This is a special work not to be done to all men alike, as saint Paul
says, Gal. 6. 11
Do good to all men, but especially to them of the household of faith.
Directions for this matter are the faithful of Jerusalem, Act. 2. 44.
who were all in one place, and had all things common: Act. 4. 32.
namely in use. And they sold their possessions and goods and parted them to
all men: as every one had need. Also the brethren at Corinth in their
extreme poverty 2. Cor. 8. 23.
relieved the Churches of Macedonia liberally, not only according to their
power, but also straining themselves beyond their power. Yea this relief must
go further, even to the bestowing of a man's life, if need so require. (As
saint John says) 1 John 3. 16.
Hereby we have perceived Love, that he laid down his life for us:
therefore we ought also to lay down our lives for the brethren.

L
The fourth work is, true prayer: and Prayer.
saint Luke sets out the faithful, and the children of God, by this
description: Act. 9. 14
That they call on the name of the Lord. As on the contrary it is said of
the wicked: Psalm. 14. 4
That they call not upon GOD. Psalm. 145 18.
The true Christian calls on the Lord in truth. For the Romans 8. 16.
spirit of adoption, which is the Zach. 2.
spirit of Prayer is his Schoolemaister to teach him to do it.

In Prayer he is thus disposed: First, before he prays, Eccle. 5. 1 Dan. 9.
4.
he is stricken with some fear and reverence in regard of GODS Majesty, for
he considers that prayer is a familiar talking with God.

Secondly, he is inwardly Dan. 9. 4. 16.
touched with a lively feeling of his own wants, but especially he is vexed
and grieved at his own sin and rebellion: and this sense of his misery is
as a spur to quicken his benumbed heart.

Thirdly he humbles himself before his God, and lays 1. Sam 1. 15.
open his heart before the Lord, showing a fervent and longing desire to
obtain those things of which he finds an extreme want in himself, as the
Prophet David did whose Psalm. 143. 6. and 42. 12.
desire was like the yawning of the dry ground; and this proceeds from Romans
8. 26.
the spirit of God, which stirs up groaninges in the heart, which a man
oftentimes for his life cannot express.

Fourthlie, when he makes his request, Mark 11. 24.
he doubts not, but by faith he believes that God will grant his
requests, which he makes according to his word. The ground of this
persuasion is double: First, To. 8. 32.
Christ Jesus, by whose merits as he has obtained remission of sins, so he
looks to obtain all things else: The 1. John 5. 14. 15.
other ground is, the comfortable promises of God, which he has made, that he
will hear them who truly call upon him.

Fifthlie, he prays not for a brunt or two, but he continues in prayer:
And although God seem not to hear him at the first, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
yet he patiently waits on the Lord, and still calls upon him.

LI
The first work is, to walk in some A lawful calling.
lawful calling with painfulness, and uprightness, so that in performing
all the duties of it, a 24 Act. 16
man may keep a good conscience before God and men. Thus David determined to
walk in the government of his house and kingdom. Psa. 101. 2.
I will do wisely (says he) in the perfect way till thou come to me, I
will walk in the uprightness of mine heart, in the midst of mine house: I
will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of them that fall
away: it shall not cleave unto me. This sincerity of David's behavior in his
calling made him bold to offer himself to be tried not only by men, but much
more by the Lord God himself, and to be punished accordingly. Psalm. 26 1. 2.
Psalm. 119. 23. Psalm. 18. 22. 24.
Judge me O Lord (says he) for I have walked in mine innocence, prove
me, O Lord, and try me, examine my reins and mine heart: So upright and
clear was he in all his doings.

LII.
Thus much of faith and the benefits Spiritual exercise in temptations.
that come by faith: Now follows the spiritual exercise of a Christian in
his manifold temptations, which are in this life inseparable companions of
grace. The reason is, because the devil hates Christ with a deadly hatred,
and shows this hatred in a continual persecution of his members: (as saint
John says) Revel. 12 17.
the Dragon was wroth with the Woman and went and made war with the remnant
of her seed, which kept the commandementes of God, and have the testimony of
Jesus Christ. Now therefore as soon as Christ Jesus begins to show any
token of his love to any man, the Devil contrariwise shows forth his
enmity, and stirs up his fellow champions the flesh and the world to war
against him for his confusion. And furthermore the Lord in great wisdom
permits temptations to the last end of a Christian man's life, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. 3.
2. Cor. 16. 12. 18.
to try his faith, to purge him of sin, to humble him, and to make him
depend of his majesty, to quicken and revive the graces of his spirit, which
otherwise would be dead and decay.

LIII
The temptations of a Christian are specially Inward motions of the flesh.
six. The first is when inwardly in his heart. Iam. 1. 14
he is drawn away and entised by his own concupiscence unto any sin. The
Christians exercise in temptation is Gal. 5. 17
fight and battle betwixt the flesh and the spirit. And this fighting stands
in four things: First the flesh stirs up evil thoughts and desires, as a
burning furnace continually ^endeth up smoke and sparks of fire; and it ^ggeth
a man forward to evil words and deeeds, according to that of Saint Mark,
Mar. 7. 21
For, from within, even from the heart of man proceed evil thoughts,
adulteries, fornications, murders, theftes, covetousness, wickedness, deceit,
uncleanness, a wicked eye, backbiting, pride, folishnes.

2 The flesh hinders and choketh the good motions and desires of the heart, as
Paul says. To. 7. 23.
I see an other law in my members rebelling against the law of my mind, and
leading me captive to the law of sin which is in my members. Again the same
flesh mingleth every good motion and desire with some corruptions: so that the
godly mislike the best thing they do, Esaias says of his own and the peoples
righteousness, that it is but as a Esa. 64. 6
menstruous cloute Reu. 8. 3. 4.
The prayers of the saints must be performed with sweet odours, before they
can ascend up sweet and sauorie into the nostrilles of God. And Paul said of
himself, he did that which he disliked: not that he was overtaken with gross
sins: but because when he was to do his duty the flesh hindered him, that he
could Romans 7. 15
not do that which he did exactly and soundly according to his will and desire:
even as a man who has a journey to go, his mind is to dispatch it in all have,
yet when he is in his travel he goes but slowly, by reason of a lamenesse in
his ioints.

3 The spirit, on the contrary, kindles in the heart good motions and desires,
and puts a man forward to good words and deeds, as it was in David. Gal. 5. 24
Psalm 16. 8.
I will praise the Lord (says he) who has given me counsel: my reins also
teach me in the night season.

4 The spirit rebuks a man for his evil intents and desires, and represseth the
face of them, and as it were nips them in the head. Thus Esaias describes the
inward motions of the spirit, Esa. 30. 21
And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying this is the way walk
ye in it, when thou turnest to the right hand and when thou turnest to the
left. And Saint John says: The spirit Ioh. 36. 8.
judges the world of sin. This was in David who when he did any evil, his
heart smote him. 2. Sam. 24. 10. Out of this doctrine issues a notable
difference betwixt the wicked and the godly: In the godly when they are tempred
to sin, there is a fight between the heart and the heart: that is, between the
heart and it self: In the wicked also there is a fight, when they are tempted to
sin: but Romans 2. 14. 15.
this fight is only between the heart and the conscience. The wicked man
whatsoever he is, has some knowledge of good and evil: and therefore when
he is in doing any evil, his conscience accuses, checketh and controuleth
him, and he feels it stirring in him, as if it were some living thing that
crauled in his body, and gnawed upon his heart, and thereupon he is very often
grieved for his sins, yet for all that he likes his sins very well, and
loves them, and could find in his 1. Pet. 4. 3. 4
heart to continue in them for ever: so that indeed, when he sins, he has
in his heart a striving and a conflict, but that is only between himself and
his conscience; But the godly have an other kind of battle and conflict, for
not only their consciences prick them and reprove them for sin, but also
their hearts are so renewed, Psalm. 97. 10 Psalm. 119. 104. 118. Romans 7. 15.
that they rise in hatred and detestation of sin; and when they are tempted
to evil by their flesh and Satan, they feel a lust and desire to do that
which is good,

LIIII
The second temptation is a quietness in Little feeling.
the heart of a Christian, because he cannot according to his desire, have
fellowshippe with Christ Jesus, he is exercised in this temptation on this
manner.

1 Cant 62.
Christ let him see his excellency and how he is affected toward him, 22.


2 verse. 3.
Then the Christian considering this desires Christ and his righteousness.

3 He delights himself in Christ, and has some inioying of his benefits.

4 verse. 4.
Then he comes into the assembly of the Church, as into Gods wine-celler, that
in the word and sacraments, he may feel a greater measure of the love of
Christ.

5 But he ver. 5.
falls love sick: that is he becomes troubled in spirit, because he cannot
eioy the presence of Christ in the said manner, as he would.

6 ver. 6. 7.
In this his spiritual sickness he first feels the power of Christ supporting
him, that the spirit be not quenched; and he ver. 8.
hears Christ as it were whispering in his heart, as a man speaks to his
friend when he is coming toward him a far off.

7 ver. 9.
After this Christ comes nearer, but the Christian can no otherwise enjoy him,
then a man enioyes the company of his friend, who is on the other side of a
wall, looking at him through the grate or lattesse.

8 Then his eyes are opened, to see the causes, why Christ so withdrawes
himself, to be his 10. 11. 12. 13. 14, 15.
own security and negligence in seeking to Christ, his slacknes in spiritual
exercises, as in prayer and thanksgiving, the deceiptfulnesse and malice of
false teachers.

9 ver. 17.
Then he comes to feel more lively his fellowship with Christ.

10 Lastly, he prays that Christ would continue with him to the end.

LV
The third temptation is, trouble of mind, No feling.
because there is no feeling of Christ at all, who seems to be departed for a
time. The exercise of a christian in this tentatio^ is this.

1 The poor soul lying as a man desolate Cant. c. 3. ver. 1.
in the night without comfort, seeks for Christ by private prayer and
meditation, but it will not prevail. 2 ver. 2.
He uses the help, counsel, and prayer of godly brethren yet Christ cannot
be found. 3 ver. 3.
Then he seeks to godly ministers, to receive some comfort by them, by their
means he can feel none. 4 ver. 4.
After that all means have been thus used, and none will prevail, then by
Gods great mercy, when he has least hope, he finds Christ, and feels him
come again. 5 Presently his faith reuiueth, and lays faster hold on Christ.
6 And he has an earnest fellowshipp^ with Christ in his heart, as before. 7
ver. 5.
Then comes again the joy of the holy ghost: and the peace of conscience as
a sweet sleep falls upon him. 8 ver. 9.
Then his heart arises up into heaven by holy affections and prayers, which
do as pillars of smoke mount upward, sweet as myrrh and incense. 9 ver. 8. 9.
10.
Also he is ravished there with the meditation of the glorious estate of the
kingdom of heaven. 10 verse. 11.
He labors to bring others to consisider the glory of Christ and his
kingdom. 11 cap. 4. ver. 1. to the 15.
After all this Christ reueiles to his servant, what his blessed estate is both
in this life, and in the life to come, more clearly the^ ever before, and
makes him see those graces which he has bestowed on him. 12 ver. 16.
Then the Christian prays that Christ would breath on him by his holy
spirit, that he may bring forth the fruits of those graces which are in him.
13 Lastly, Christ grants him this ver. 1. c. 5.
his request.
LVI.
The fourth temptation is security of heart, 4 A spiritual slumber in worldly
pleasures. Cant. 5.
rising of overmuch delight in the pleasures of the world. The exercise of a
Christian in this temptation is this.

1 He slumbers and is half a sleep in the pleasures of this world. 2 Christ
by his word and spirit labors to withdraw him from his pleasures, and ver. 2.
to make him more heartily receive his beloved. 3 But he ver. 3.
delayeth to do it being loath to leave his ease and sweet delights. 4 ver. 4.
Then Christ awakes him and stirs up his heart: by making him to see the
vanity of his pleasures. 5 He then begins to be more earnestly affected
toward Christ. 6 ver. 5.
With sorrow he settes his heart to have fellowship with Christ after his
old manner: and this he expresses by bringing forth sweet fruits of
righteousness. 7 ver. 6.
Then he feels that Christ has withdrawn his spirit. 8 He almost dispaires
for this. 9 Yet by private prayer seeks for Christ. 10 ver. 7.
When that will not help, he resorts to the ministers of the word, at whose
hands he finds no comfort, but discomfort. 11 ver. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13 14.
15. 16.
Not recovering his first estate, through impatience of the love of Christ, he
makes his misery known to strangers, to see if they can comfort him, and he
somewhat comforts himself in describing Christ's excellency to them. 12 ver.
17.
They then are ravished with him to seek Christ, and require then to know
where to find him. 13 Cap. 6. ver. 1.
Answer is made in the assemblies of the Church. 14 ver. 2.
After this communication the Christians faith and feeling reuiueth, Christ
returning to him again. 15 ver. 3. to the 7. ver. of cap. 7.
The^ Christ assures him in his heart, of his love and liking toward him. 16
Giving further assurance to him that he shall grow up and be made fruitful in
every good grace. 17 m After this the Christian comes in such a high measure
to love Christ, that nothing shall be able to sever him from Christ.
LVII 5 A fall into some sin.

The first temptation is a fall into some great sin, as Noah into drunkenness,
David into adultery and murder, Peter into the denial of Christ. The exercise
of a Christian in this temptation is this:

1 At the first his heart is usually dulled and made secure with sin. 2 Yet
after a while there arises in his heart a godly sorrow: which is when he is
grieved for the only cause, that by his sin he has displeased God, who has
been to him so loving and merciful a father, whose favor he would be content
to purchasse, (so he might have it and obtain it, even with the damnation of
his own soul. 3 2. Cor. 7. 11.
The^ he begins to repent himself of his sins renewing a fresh his former
repentance. 4 u This repentance he shows by 7. signs
1 A care to leave that sin into which he is fallen. As they which crucified
our savior Christ, when they were pricked in their hearts at Peter's Sermon, they
showed this care in saiing, Act. 2. 37
men and brethren what shall we do to be saved. 2 An Apology, which is when a
man in the heaviness of his heart, shall not excuse or defend his sin, but
confess it to the lord and utter ly condemn himself for it: acknowledging
withal yt there is no way to escape yt wrath of god, but by having gods fre
pardon in christ.

3 Indignation which is an inward anger and fretting against his own self,
because he was so careless, in looking to his own ways. Peter when he had
denied his master, he wept and that bitterly which shows yt with sorrow, he
had also an anger against himself. p Math. 26. 75.


4 A fear rising not so much from the judgments of God, as from this lest he
should hereafter fall into the same sin again, and by so doing more greeuouslie
displease God. 5 A desire ever after more carefully to plese god. 6 Zeal in
the service of God.

7 Revenge upon himself for his former offenses: for example if a man sin in
surfeiting and dronkennes, if he ever repent, he will bring under his corrupt
nature by sparing and moderating himself

LVIII
The sixth temptation is outward afflictions. 6 Outward affections.
which the godly in this life must suffer. Math. 16 24.
If any will go after Christ, he must deny himself, take up his own cross
and follow him. 1. Pet. 4. 17.
And S. Peter says, that judgment begins at Gods house: Act. 14. 22.
And Paul that we must enter into the kingdom of heaven through manifold
temptations. The exercise of a Christian in afflictions is this.

1 Heb. 12. 11.
At the first they are very heuie and bitter. 2 He suffers the^ with great
lenity and patience, submitting himself under the hand of God. Yet Job. 3.
if they be in any great Job. 6. 2. 3.
measure, they will drive him to impatience. 3 If they continue he shall feel
(according to his own judgment) the wrath and displeasure of his heart. 4 Job.
13. 26.
His old sins will come a fresh into his remembrance, and trouble him. He is
sleepie, 1. Reg. 19. 4. 5. 7. Job. 7. 14.
and in his sleep he has visions, and dreams and anxietie of spirit. 5 Job.
13. 15
In this misery God supports his faith, that it fail not, and he then forsake
Christ. 6 Romans 5. 4
He feling thus gods power to strengthen him, has experience of it in
himself. 7 From experience proceeds hope, that the grace of God shall never
be wanting unto him in any afflictions to come: and as he hops, so it comes
to pass. 8 With this hope is joined Job. 42. 5. 6.
a serious humiliation before the Lord Heb. 12. 11.
with the fruit of peace and righteousness.
If the afflictions be for Christ's cause unto death then he in more special
manner is filled with the joy of the holy ghost, and he is then stablished with
the greatest measure of the strength of Christ, that no torment is able to
foil him, and to bring him from Christ, though the Christian should die a
thousand times for it. According to that of Paul, Phil. 1. 29
To you it is given for Christ, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer
for his sake. And this is grounded upon the promise of God, Esa. 43. 2
When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, and through the
floods that they do not ouerflow thee: when thou walk through the very fire,
thou not be burnt: neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.

LIX.
Hence arises a notable difference, between the godly and the wicked, in the
suffering of afflictions. A reprobate the more the Lord lays his hand on him,
the more he Exodus 8.
murmureth and rebelleth against God: it is contrary with the true christian:
None feels more the power and rebellion of sin then he: none is more assalted
by satan then he, and often times it comes to pass that God withdraws the
signs of his favor from him, and lets him feel his wrath. And this is the
greatest temptation of all other, when a man shall see the Lord to be his
enemy, and to his thinking to arm himself against him to his destruction. As
Esa. 38.
Ezechias did, who Job. 6. 34.
says that the Lord did crash his bones like a Lion: Or as Job says, that the
arrows of the almighty were in him, and the venime thereof drunk up his
spirit, and the terrors of god did fight against him. Yet the true Christian
when the world, the flesh, and the devil, and God himself too are against him,
does even then most of al rest in the Lord, and by faith cleue to him Job. 13.
1.
Though God should destroy me, yet would I trust in him (says Job. 15 Psalm. 22.
And David says, my God, my God why have thou forsaken me. When he says that
God had forsaken him, it may seem to be the complaint of a desperate man, not
having so much as one spark of faith: yet then he says: my God, my God: which
words contain a confession proceeding from true faith: so yt in David it
appears, that the faithful when they feel themselves forlorn, and utterly
rejected of god, according to ye sense and judge meant of ye flesh, yet by faith
they can apprehend his hidden mercy, and behold it a far off in the glass of
his promise. And so they do often show contrary affections in their prayers as
David does. Genesis 32. 28.
Jacob when he wrastled with the Angel for life and death, never gave over: and
when he was foild, he would not cease before the Lord had blessed him. This his
wrestling is a type of the co^flicts which the faithful are to have with ye
lord himself, who uses to bring his own children (as it were) to the field:
and he assaileth the^ with the one hand, and with the other he holds them up
that so he may prove and exercise their faith. And for this cause the Church
Psa. 130.
is called Israel by the name of Jacob. An example may be had in the woman of
Canaan. Math. 15. 22. 25. 24. 25. 26. 27.
First our savior Christ gave her faith, and by yt faith she was moved to seek
to him: But when she^ was once come to him, he gave her three repulses. First
by saying nothing. Secondly by denying her: thirdly by calling her dog. Thus
Christ in apperance made show, as though he would never have granted her
request. But she at every repulse was more instant, crying more earnestly unto
him: and she plainly opposed her self to him, and would take no denial: for such
is the nature of true faith. Wherefore, the faithful when they feel
themselves overwhelmed with sin, turmoiled with co^flicts of satan, when they
feel ye anger of god offended with the^, yet they can even the^ lift up their
eye lids, and give a glimps at the brase^ Serpent Jesus Christ, and can fling
themselves into the arms of gods mercy, and catch hold of the hand of god
buffetting the^, and kiss it.

XL.
By these te^tatio^s it coms to pas that a Christian Dangerous falls of a
Christian.
though he cannot fall finally from Christ, yet he may fall very dangerously
from his former estate. First the graces of god may be by his defalt lessned in
him: else Paul would not have given out these exhortatio^s 1 Thessalonians. 5 19.
quench not the spirit. Ephesians. 4. 30*
Grieve not the holy spirit of God, by who^ ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption. Secondly the graces of God may be buried in him and covered for a
time, so that he may be like a man in a traunse, who both by his own sense and
by the judgment of the physician is taken for dead. This was the estate of
Peter, who though he confessed that Christ was the son of the living Lord Mat.
16. 16. 26. 70.
yet he denied him and forswore him at the voice of a Damsel. Thirdly he may
fall again into the same sin after repentance. Indeed this is a dangerous fall,
yet it may befall a true christian. Otherwise when as the Israelits gods people
had fallen away from him by their sins, and idolatries, he would not still have
offered the^ mercy Esa. 14. 18.
as he does by his prophets: And 2. Cor. 5. 20.
Paul prays the Corinthians in Christ's stead that they would be reconciled to
God: who nevertheless had once before been reconciled to God. Fourthly, he may
commit a sin of presumption, which is a fearful sin, being done
wittinglie of knowledge and willingly, and with some wilfulness. Therefore
David prayed Ps. 19. 13.
keep thy servant presumptuous sin: and to show himself to be in danger of
it, he prays further, let them not have dominion over me. Lastly, he may
fall into despair of Gods mercy for a time, and this is a dangerous sin.
For he which dispaires, makes all the promises of God to be false: and this
sin of all other is most contrary to true saving faith. In this estate was
David, when being in trouble, he said, Psalm. 77. 11.
this is my death. And Paul shows that the incestuous man might have fallen
into desperation, 2. Cor. 2. 2.
when he says: Comfort him, least he be swallowed up of overmuch
heaviness. And it must be remembered that the Church of Rome erreth in this,
that she teaches desperation to be a sin against the holy Ghost; This
sin against the holy Ghost is a blasphemy spoken against the known truth
of Gods word, of a wilful and obstinate malice. But desperation may arise
through ignorance of a man's own estate: through horror of conscience for
sin: through an often relapse into some sin: through the ouerdeepe
consideration of a man's own unworthiness: Lastly by abiuration of the truth,
through compulsion and fear. This befell Frances Spira, who after his
Apostasy dispaired. Yet they are much ouerseene that write of him as of a
damned creature. For first who can tell whether he dispaired finally or not.
Secondly in the very midst of his desperation, he complained of the hardness
of his heart, which made him that he could not pray: no doubt then he felt his
hardness of heart: and the feeling of corruption in the heart is by some
contrary grace, so that he was not quite bereft of al goodness: though he
neither felt it then nor showed it to the beholder.

LXI.
The cause why a Christian cannot fall away Corroboration.
from grace, is this: after that he is sanctified, he receives from god
another special grace, which may be called Corroboratio^. For he has in him
not only the sanctifying, but also the strengthening power of Christ. Therefore
Paul prays for the Ephesia^s, Ephesians. 3. 16.
that they may be strengthened in the inner man: for the Collossia^s, Colloss.
1. 9.
that they might be strengthened with the glorious power of Christ. And of
himself he says Phil. 4. 13
that he is able to do al things through the power of Christ that stre^gthen
him Psalm. 105 5.
David says, that God renueth the^ that fear him, as the Eagle renueth her
decayed strength. Job. 33. 25.
And Job shows worthily that they, which by preaching of the word are
reconciled unto God, are restored again and gather new strength, so that their
flesh becomes as the flesh of young children. From hence as from a special cause
arises patience and perseverance unto the end: for when a man is supported by
the power of Christ, he may be able to bear many crosses patie^tly with a
co^^ented mind Patience. Perseue. rance.
and persevere in bearing of it how long so ever the cross endures. Thus much
of the estate of a Christian in this life. Now I will ad A persuasion to
Christianity.
some reasons in the way of persuasion to all me^ but especially to worldlings,
and to loose professors of the Gospel, that they would utterly deenie
themselves 2 Cor. 5. 17.
and use all means to become true Christians by being made new creatures in
Christ, and Tit. 2. 10.
by leading such a life as may adorn the Gospel of Christ.

My first reason is this, the man that lives in this world nor being a true
Christian, is far more vile then the basest creature of all, even the Dog,
or Toade: For first he is nothing else but a filthy dunghill of all abomination
and uncleanness, the To. 8. 20.
stink whereof has infected heaven and earth, and no perfumes could ever
delaie it in the nostrils of God, but only the suffering of Christ being Ephesians.
5. 2.
a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God. We make it very dainty to
come nere a lazar man that is full of botches, blaines and sores; but much more
are those men to be abhorred, which have lien many years stark Ephesians. 2. 1.
dead in sins and trespasses: and therefore now do nothing else but rot and
stink in the^ like ugly loathsome carrions.

Secondly, he which is no Christian is under the power of darkness having Satan
for his Prince 2. Cor. 4.
and God, and giving unto him in token of homage his best parts, even his
mind and conscience Luke 11. 24.
to be his dwelling place: and his whole conversation is nothing else but a
perperuall obedience to Satan. If Atheists, and worldlings and carnal
gospelers were persuaded of the truth of this (as it is most true) it would
make them howl and cry, though now they live at ease without feeling any prick
of conscience for sin. And if they had but the least sense of it in the
world, it would make their flintie hearts to bleed, and it would make them
shed rivers of tears. But how long shall they continue in this vile estate?
Truly, until they come to Christ: awake therefore thou that sleep, and
stand up from the dead and Christ shall give thee light: Open thine heart to
receive Christ, and then he will come and bind the strong man Satan, and
cast him out, and dwell in thee himself.

Thirdly, he which is no Christian is in danger of all the judgments of God,
so that every moment some of them may befall him. He may perish suddenly by
water with the old world, he may be consumed with fire and brimstone with
Sodom and Gomorrha, he may be swallowed up of the earth with Core, Dathan,
and Abyram, he may hang himself with Judas, he may have his brains dashed
against the ground and be eaten up of dogs with Iesabell, he may die in the
hardness of heart with Pharao, he may despair with Caine and Judas, he may be
stricken with sudden death with Ananias and Saphira his wife, he may be eaten
of worms with Herod, he may be smitten with trembling that he cannot hear
Gods word with Foelix, he may void his guts at the stool with Arius, he may
cry at his death that he is damned with Latomus, he may be left unto himself
to mock, blaspheme, and renounce Christ with Julian: and he may suffer many
more fearful judgments, whereof the Lord has Deuteronomy. 32. 34.
great store and all tend to the confounding of them which will not be humbled
under his hand. Contrariwise the true Christian is so far out of the reach of
Gods judgments that they cannot hurt him: Esal. 4. 6.
Christ is a covering and a cloud against the heat and tempest of Gods
judgments Exo. 12. 22.
when a man's heart is sprinkled with the blood of this immaculate Lamb, all
the plagues of God pass over him.

In the destruction of Jerusalem the Ezec. 9. 4
righteous bear a mark in their foreheads and are saved. Therefore let him
that has regard to his own safety become a Christian.

Thirdly; the man which is no Christian is in danger of eternal death and
damnation in hell fire. and they which fall into this estate it had been ten
thousand fold better for them if they had never been borne, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
for they are quite separated from the presence of God and from his glory: all the company they have is with the Devil and his Angels. Their bodies and
souls are tormented with infinite horror and anguish arising of the feeling
of the whole wrath of God, in which as into a bottomless sea, they are plunged.

Thus they are always dying, and yet are never dead: Furthermore the length
of this torment must be considered which greatly aggrauates the pain. If a
man might be delivered from the panges of hell when he had suffered them so
many years as there be drops in the sea or little sands in the whole earth,
it were some comfort: but after that those years be expired there shall come
no release, but the damned shall continue in shriking, yelling and gnashing of
teeth, enduring the consuming heat of Gods wrath without any end for ever and
ever. Yea to go further, a wicked man carries an hell about him in this life,
namely, an evil conscience, which if it be never so little touched with any of
Gods anger, a man shall feel himself to have even the panges of hell in his
heart. Now therefore all they that would escape out of this hellish and
damnable estate, while they have time let them pray for the pardon of their
sins in Christ, and walk according to the spirit in newnes of life, and
then they may assure themselves, that there is no condemnation can belong to
them. And it must be always remembered that he which would live, when he is
dead, must die while he is alive, namely to sin. And again he which would
rise to eternal life in the day of judgment, must rise from sin before he
die, unto newnes of life.

The fourth reason: God has appointed unto every man that lives in the
Church a certain time of repentance, and of coming to Christ. And he which
mispendeth that time and is not made a Christian then, can never be saved.
This made our Savior Christ weep for Jerusalem and say. Luke 19. 42
O if thou had known at the least in this thy day, those things which
belong to thy peace, but now are they hidden from thine eyes. And further
signifies the destruction of Jerusalem ver. 44.
because she knew not the time of her visitation. Again, the neglecting of
this time is one cause, why not one or two, but many Luke 13. ver. 24.
shall seek to enter into the kingdom of heaven, and yet shall not be able. It
is a maruailous thing, that they which seek to be saved should perish, but the
fault is theirs which seek when it is too late. Now therefore thou secure
worldling, thy conscience tells thee that thou have not yet repented and that
thou art not as yet a lively member of Jesus Christ. And thou know further,
that howsoever thou art alive at this time, yet thou have no lease of thy life.
God may call thee forth of this world the next year, the next week, the
next hour: Yea he may strike thee with sudden death at this very present. And
in very truth, if thou go forth of this world being no Christian, thou
go damned to hell. Wherefore delaie not one minute of an hour longer, but
with all speed repent and turn unto God, and bring forth fruits worthy of
amendment of life, that all thy sins may be done away, when the day of death,
or the day of judgment shall be. And do not think with thy self that it
shall be sufficient to differ thy turning unto God till the last end. For
late repentance is seldom true repentance. And he which continues long in any
sin is in a dangerous case. If a man lie long in any disease he will scarce
recover his former health: and he which is grown in the custom of any sin,
and the sin is become ripe in him, it is a thousand to one, he is never
saved; according to that of saint James, Iam. 1. 13
sin being perfected brings forth death.

The fifth reason. Eternal life is a thing desired of all men: yet none shall
be made partakers of it, but the true Christian, and the glorious estate of
this life would move any man to be a Christian. First of all, they which have
eternal life are freed from all pains, sickenesses, infirmities, hunger,
thirst, cold, wearines; from all sin, as anger, forgetfulness, ignorance; from
hell, death, damnation, Satan, and from every thing that causes misery:
according to that of saint John, And Reue^* 21. 4.
God will wipe away all tears from their eyes: and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain*
for the first things are passed. Secondly the faithful shall be in the presence
of Gods Majesty in heaven there to behold his face, that is, his glory, as our
Savior Christ says, Father Ioh. 17. 24.
I will that they which thou have given me, be with me even where I am, that
they may behold my glory which thou have given me. And David says. In Psalm.
16. 11. Revel. 22. 4.
thy presence is fulness of joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for
evermore. Thirdly, they 1. Cor. 15 28.
shall have such an excellent communion with God, that he shall be unto them all
in all. For in the end of the world, when the whole number of the elect is
accomplished Christ shall present them to his father, and as he is mediator he
shall cease to be a King, a Priest, a Prophet, as Paul says 1. Cor. 15 24.
then shall be the end, when he has delivered up the kingdom to God: even
the Father, when he has put down all rule, al^ authority and power. Again,
among the elect there shall not be king and subject, father, mother, child,
master, servant, noble, ignoble, rich, poor, living, dead. Some will say,
what then shall there be? I answer, one glorious and everlasting God, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, shall be in all the elect, all that
heart can wish and desire. Men shall not be in darkness, neither shall they
need the light of the Sun, Moon, or Stars, God himself immediately shall
be their light Revel. 2^ 23.
as John says. And the City has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon
to shine in it for the glory of God does light it, and the Lamb is the light
of it. Men shall not then need meat, drink, clothing, sleep, recreation,
fire, shade, respiration, or any other such like, but God himself immediately
shall be their life and all things concerning life by Christ. Which John
signifies, when he says that he Revel. 22. 1. 2.
saw a pure river of water of life, clear as Crystal proceeding out of the
throne of God and of the Lamb; there being by either side of it the tree of
life which bare two manner of fruits, and gave fruit every month. And
whereas God is continually to be worshipped in heaven: they need no other
tabernacle or temple thereunto, but God himself shall be their temple: as John
says, Revel. 21. 22.
I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God almighty and the Lamb are the
temple of it. Fourthly, from this glorious communion which is between God and
Christ as he is man, and all the saints which are his members, there arises an
unspeakable joy and gladness wherewith they are filled. David says, Psalm. 36.
that Gods children shall be satisfied with the fatnes of his house, and that
he shall give them drink out of the rivers of his pleasures. This joy
undoubtedly is infinite, and the Saints are not only replenished with it
but they are also swallowed up of it as with an huge and infinite sea of
waters, as may appear in Peter, who at the transfiguration of Christ, was so
ravished out of measure with joy at the sight of it that he quite forgot
himself, saying Mat. 17. 4
to Christ, Master it is good being here: let us make three tabernacles here,
one for thee, one for Moses, and an other for Elias. Lastly, out of this
communion arises a perfect love of God whereby the Saints love God with all
their hearts, with all their souls, and strength, and this love shows it
self in that they are eternally occupied in Revel. 8. ver. 11. 12.
worshipping God by singing of songs of praise and thanks giving unto him.
Now the^ seeing the kingdom of heaven is so glorious, and none can have it but
the true Christian, let all men account the best things in this world Phil.
3. 8.
as dross and dung, so that they may obtain Christ and his righteousness.

The last reason is the endless love of Jesus Christ showed in his death and
passion. Thou art by nature the child of wrath and vengeance. Satan has
wounded thee with many a deadly wound of sin: thou lie bleeding at the
heart and and art like to die eternally. Thou being in this estate there is no
Man on earth, no no Saint in heaven, no Angel, no creature at all is able to
help thee; Christ only was able; he therefore came down from heaven and
became man, for this cause, to work thy deliverance. Furthermore in the curing
of the wound of sin, no herb, no water, no plaster, no Physic, can do
thee any good: only the body and blood of Christ is sovereign for this
matter, being stieped in the wrath of GOD. He therefore subjected himself to
the death, even the death of the Cross upon which he suffered the wrath of
God due to the sin of mankind: and of his own heart blood he tempered for
thee a sovereign medicine to heal all thy wounds and sores.

Now therefore despise not this mercy; seek unto Christ, lay open all thy
sores, pray him, that he would vouchsafe thee if it be but one drop of his
blood: then he will come unto thee by his holy spirit, he will wash and
supple thy wounds in his blood and bind them up. He is the Revel. 22. 3.
tree of life the leaves whereof heal the nations. If thou get but one leaf
of him thou art well, it will heal thee and restore thy dead soul that thou
may live eternally in the kingdom of heaven. If this reason will not move
thee to be a Christian, thy case is desperate. It is the best reason that Paul
could use to this purpose. As obedient children (says he) fashion not your
selves unto the former lusts of your ignorance, 1. Pet. 1. ver. 14. 15.
but as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation. His reason follows. ver. 18. 19.
Knowing that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things as silver and
gold from your vain conversation received by the tradition of the Fathers,
but with the precious blood of Christ, as a Lamb undefiled and without spotte.

Thus much have I spoken to the worldling who in his heart makes no more
account of Christ then of his old shoes: and who had rather be without
Christ, Math. 8.
then be without his pigges, with the Gaderenes. Now for the true Christians I
have nothing to say but this. The Lord increase the number of them. And
Colloss. 1 ver. 9. 10. 11.
the Lord fulfill them with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom, and
spiritual understanding, that they may walk worthy of him, and please him in
all things, being fruitful in all good works and increasing in the
knowledge of God. And whereas they are at continual war against the flesh,
the world, and the Devil: Lord Jesus strengthen them with all might through thy
glorious power, unto all patience and long suffering with ioyfulnes. And dear
father of all mercy plant that government in thy Church every where which
thou have revealed in thy word. That thy Saints may worship thee in o those
means, in that order and comelines, which thou have appointed, abounding in
righteousness, peace of conscience, and joy of the holy Ghost, Amen,

Amen.
A Dialogue of the state of a Christian man, between Eusebius a perfect
Christian, and Timotheus a wise Christian, and the most of it was gathered here
and there out of the sweet and sauorie writings of Master Tindalland Master
Bradford.
TImotheus. Because of our ancient acquaintance and familiarity (dear
friend Eusebius) I will make bold with you to ask such questions as may be
for my edification and comfort, and of no other matters but even of religion,
whereof I see you are an old professor. And first of all, let me be bold to
ask this question of you, how it pleased God to make you a true Christian, and
a member of Christ Jesus whom I see you serve continually with a fervent zeal.


Eusebius. For that old acquaintance that was between us, and for that you
are desirous to live a godly life in Christ Jesus, I will not conceal the good
work of my God in me: therefore I pray you mark a little what I shall say,
and I will declare unto you the truth even forth of the feeling of mine own
conscience. The fall of Adam did make me the heir of vengeance and wrath of
God, and heir of eternal damnation, and did bring me into captivity and
bondage under the Devil: And the Devil was my Lord and my ruler, my head,
my governor, and my prince, yea, and my god. And my will was locked and knit
faster unto the will of the Devil, then could an hundred thousand chains
bind a man unto a post. Unto the Devils will did I consent with all my heart,
with all my mind, with all my might, power, strength, will and life: so that
the law and will of the Devil, was written as well in my heart, as in my
members, and I ran headlong after the Devil with full soul, and the whole
swing of all the power I had: as a stone cast up into the air comes down
naturally of it self with all the violent swing of his own weight. O with what
deadly and venomous heart did I hate mine enemies? with how great malice of
mind inwardly did I sley and murder? With what violence and rage, yea with
what seruent lust committed I adultery, fornication, and such like uncleanness?
With what pleasure and delectation like a glutton served I my belly? With what
diligence deceived I? How busily sought I the things of the world? whatsoever
I did work, imagine or speak, was abominable in the sight of God, for I could
refer nothing unto the honor of GOD: neither was his law or will written in
my members or in my heart, neither was there any more power in me to follow
the will of GOD then in a stone to ascend upward of it self. And besides that
I was a sleep in so deep blindness that I could neither see nor feel in
what misery, thraldom, and wretchedness I was, till Moses came and awaked me
and published the law. When I heard the law truly preached how that I ought
to love and honor God with all my strength and might from the low bottom of
the heart, because he did create me lord over it, and my neighbor, yea mine
enemies as my self inwardly from the ground of my heart, because God has
made them after the likeness of his own Image, and they are his sons as
well as I, and Christ has bought them with his blood, and made them heirs of
everlasting life as well as I: and how I ought to do whatsoever God bids
and to abstain from whatsoever God forbids, with all love and meekness,
with a fervent and burning lust from the entire of the heart. Then began my
conscience to rage against the law and against God. No sea, be it never so
great a tempest was so unquiet, for it was not possible for me a natural man
to consent to the law that it should be good, or that God should be righteous
which made the law: in as much as it was contrary unto my nature, and damned
me and all that I could do, and never showed me where to fetch help, nor
preached any mercy Romans 4.
: but only set me at variance with God, and provoked and stirred me to
rail on God, and to blaspheme him as a cruel tyrant. And indeed it was not
possible to do otherwise, to think that God made me of so poisoned a nature,
and gave me an impossible law to perform: I being not borne again by the
spirit, and my wit, reason, and will being so fast glewed, yea nailed and
cheined unto the will of the Devil. This was the captivity and bondage whence
Christ delivered me, redeemed and loosed me. His blood, his death, his
patience in suffering rebukes and wrongs and the full wrath of God, his
prayers and fastings, his meekenes and fulfilling the uttermost points of the
law, appeased the wrath of God, brought the favor of God to me again,
obtained that God should love me first, and be my father, and that a merciful
father that would consider my infirmity and weakness, and would give me his
spirit again which he had taken away in Adam, to rule, govern, and
strengthen me, and to break the bands of Satan wherein I was so straight
bound. When Christ was on this wise preached, and the promises rehearsed which
are contained in the book of God, (which preaching is called the gospel or
glad-tidings,) and I had deeply considered the same: then my heart began to
wax soft and melt at the bounteous mercy of God and kindness showed of
Christ. For when the gospel was preached, the spirit of God (me thought)
entered into my heart, and opened my in ward eyes, and wrought a lively faith
in me, and made my woeful conscience feel and taste how sweet a thing the
bitter death of Christ is, and how merciful and loving God is through Christ's
purchasing and merits, and made me begin to love again, and to consent to
the law of God how that it is good and ought so to be, and that GOD is
righteous that made it: lastly it wrought in me a desire to be whole, and to
hunger and thirst after more righteousness and more strength to fulfill the law
more perfectly: and in all that I do or leave undone to seek Gods honor and
his will with meekness evermore condemning the imperfectnes of my deeds by the
law.

Now then this good work of God to my salvation stands in two points, the
working of the law, and the working of the gospel: the preaching of the law
was a key that bound and damned my conscience, the preaching of the gospel was
an other key that loosed me again. These two salues (I mean the law and the
gospel) used God and his preacher to heal and cure me a wretched sinner
withal. The law did drive out my disease and made it appear, and was a
sharp salve and fretting corasiue, and killed the dead flesh, and losed and
drew the sore out by the root, and all corruption. It pulled from me all
trust and confidence I had in my self, and in mine own works, merits,
deseruings, and ceremonies, and robbed me of all my righteousness, and made me
poor. It killed me in sending me down to hell, and bringing me almost to
utter desperation, and prepared the way of the Lord, as it is written of John
Baptist. For it was not possible that Christ should come unto me as long as I
trusted in my self or in any worldly thing, or had any righteousness of mine
own, or riches of holy works. Then afterward came the Gospel a more gentle
plaster, which ^oupled and swaged my wounds of my conscience and brought me
health: It brought the spirit of God, which loosed the bands of Satan, and
coupled me to God and his will through a strong faith and fervent love. Which
bands were to strong for the Devil, the world, or any creature to loose. And
I a poor and wretched sinner felt so great mercy that in my self I was most
sure that God would not forsake me, or ever withdraw his mercy and love from
me,. And I boldly cried out with Romans 8.
Paul, saying. Who shall separate me from the love of GOD, etc. Finally, as
before when I was bound to the Devil and his will, I wrought all manner of
wickedness, for I could do no otherwise, it was my nature: even so now since
I am coupled to God by Christ's blood, I do good freely, because of the spirit
and this my nature. And thus I trust I have satified your first demand.


Timoth. Yea, but me thinks you do too much condemn your self in respect of
sin. For I can remember that from your childhood your were of a good and
gentle nature, and your behauior was always honest and civil, and you could
never abide the company of them which were roisters and ruffians, and
swearers, and blasphemers and contemners of Gods word, and drunkards, which
now are termed good fellows. And your dealing with all men has been ever
commended for good, faithful and just. What mean you then to make your self
so abominable and accursed, and to say, you were so wholly addicted unto
wickedness, and your will so fearfully and miserably in captivity unto the
will of the Devil.


Eusebius. Brother Timoth. I know what I say, God give me grace to speak it with
more lively feeling of my weakness, and with a more bitter detestation of my
sin. By nature through the fall of Adam am I the child of wrath, heir of
the vengeance of God by birth: yea and so from my first conception: And I had
my fellowshippe with the damned devils under the power of darkness and rule of
Satan, while I was yet in my mothers womb: and although I showed not the
fruits of sin as soon as I was born nor long after: yet was I full of the
natural poison, from whence all wicked deeds do spring, and cannot but sin
outwardly, as soon as I am able to work (be I never so young) if occasion be
given: for my nature is to sin as is the nature of a serpent to sting: and as
a Serpent yet young, or yet vnbrought forth is full of poison and cannot
afterward (when time and occasion is given,) but bring forth the fruits
thereof. And as an Adder, a Toad, or a Snake is hated of man, not for the evil
it has done, but for the poison that is in it, and hurt which it cannot but
do: so am I hated of God, for that natural poison which is concieued and
borne with me before I do any outward evil. And as the evil which a
venomous worm does, makes it not a serpent, but because it is a venomous
worm therefore does it evil, and poysoneth: even so do not our evil deeds
make us evil first, but because we are of nature evil, therefore do we
evil, and think evil, to eternal damnation by the law, and are contrary
to the will of God in our will, and in all things consent unto the will of the
fiend.


Timoth. As yet I never had such a feeling of my sin as you have had: and
although I would be loath to commit any sin, yet the law was never so
terrible unto me, condemning me, pronouncing the sentence of death against me,
and stinging my conscience with fear of everlasting pain, as I perceive it
has been unto you: therefore I fear oftentimes least my profession of
religion should be only in truth mere hypocrisy, I pray you let me hear
your mind.


Eusebius. A true saying it is that the right way to go unto heaven, is to sail
by hell, and there is no man living that feels the power and virtue of the
blood of Christ, which first has not felt the strange pains of hell. But yet
in these pains there is a difference: and it is the will of God that his
children in their conversion shall some of them feel more and some less.
Ezechias Esai 33.
on his death bed complains that the Lord breaks his bones like a Lion,
that he could not speak by reason of pain, but chattered in his throat like a
Crane, and mourned like a Dove. Job says, that God is Job. 6. 4. Job. 13.
his enemy and has set him up as a mark to shoot at, and that the arrows
of the almighty are upon him, and that the poison of them has drunk up his
spirit. David Psalm. 130.
bewaileth his estate in many Psalms, but especially in the 130. Psalm,
where he begins on this manner: Out of the deep places have I called unto
thee O Lord, which is as though he should say; O my poor soul fall not
flat down, vex not thy self out of measure: the burden of thy sins
press thee sore indeed but be not for all that quite overwhelmed: thou art
thrust down so low into the depth of deepes that thou had need cry aloude
to be heard of him which dwells in the highest heightes: and the
euerburning hell fire is not far from that lake whither thine iniquities have
plu^ged thee, ^o that thou may perceive as it were the Echo of their cries
and desperate how^nges which be there cast out of all hope of ever coming
forth. But the Lord which brings forth even to the borders of hell his best
beloved when they forget them selves, knows also how well to bring them back
again. Go no further then downwarde, but li^t up thy heart together with
thine eye, and seek unto the Lord, to reach unto thee his merciful and
helping hand. Again in the scriptures we find examples of men converted unto
the Lord without any vehement sorrow of their sins. What anguish of
conscience had the thief upon the cross for his former life in his present
conversion at the hour of death? How was Lidia dismayed and cast down in
respect of her wickedness, like as David was or Job, whose heart God only is
said to have opened to give attendance to the preaching of Paul and Silas, who
also even presently after was ready to entertain them, and to make them a
feast in her house, which she could not have done if she had been in the
perplexities of Ezechias or David. The same may be spoken of the Iailer, and of
them which heard Peter's Sermon at Jerusalem, who for all that they had murdered
our Savior Christ, yet in their conversion, their hearts were only for the time
pricked. So then God in preparing us, which in truth are nothing but fleshly
and stinking doung-hils of sin, nay very uncleanness and pollution it
self, I say, in preparing us to be the temples of his holy spirit to dwell
in, and the storehouses to horde up his heavenly graces in, does
otherwhilesvse a mild and gentle remedy, and makes the law to look upon us,
though with no loving and gentle, yet with no fearful countenance, and
otherwhiles in some he sets a sharp edge upon the law, and makes it to
wound the heart very deep, and as a strong corasiue to torment them, and to
frette and gnawe upon their consciences. And we see by experience that a botch
or a bile in a man's body, is as well eased of the corruption that is in it by
the pricking of the point of a small needle as by the launcing of a great
raser. Wherefore if God by his spirit have wrought in you sorrow for sin in
any small measure, though not in as great measure as you desire, you have no
cause to complain: and in that you are grieved and sorrowful for your sins,
it is a good token of the grace of God in you.


Timoth. Surely this is a great comfort ^ou give me, God make me thankful
^or it. And I pray you more plainly show me the state of your life till this
hour, that I and all other may take warning by it.


Eusebius. That which may do good unto other men I will never conceal though it
be to my perpetual shame. As I was conceived and born in sin, so my Parents
brought me up in ignorance and never showed me my shame and misery by Gods
law: and I lived a long time, even as a man in a dead sleep or trance, and in
truth I lived as though there were neither heaven nor hell, neither God nor
Devil. And the Devil himself (as now I perceive) did often persuade my secure
conscience that I was the child of God, and should be saved as well as the
best man in the world: and I yielded to this persuasion, and did verily think
it: so that when the preacher for wickedness and security denounced Gods
judgments and hell fire, I have said unto my neighbors that I hoped I
should be saved, and he should go to hell: and when I was asked whether I
could keep all the commandments of the law I said that I could, and being
asked whether I never sinned: I said I thought that otherwhiles I did, marry
for them which were but few, I hoped God would have mercy, and have me
excused. And all my neighbors were glad of my company, they spoke well of me,
and I was taken for an honest man, when as indeed, before God I was a vile
beast, and the child of wrath, inspired with the spirit of the Devil
continually. Well; afterward I heard the law preached and I saw and remembered
many fearful judgments of GOD upon men whom I in reason thought were as
good men as I, then I began to consider mine own estate, and to perceive my
sins, and my cursednesse, and upon a time above all other, the curse of the
law made me inwardly afraid, and my flesh then began to tremble and
quake: then I could not sleep in the night season, I was afraid of every
thing. If I were in my house, I thought the house would fall on my head; if
abroad, I thought every crannie of the earth would open it self wider and
swallow me. I started at every straw, and at the moving of a fly: my meat
was loathsome unto me, and I thought I was not worthy of so good a creature of
God, and that God might justly turn it to my bane: the grief of my heart for
my life past made me shed abundance of tears: and upon that I remembered (that I
had heard read in the Church, in David's Psalms, that his tears were his
drink, and that he did wette his bed with tears. And now the Devil changed
both his coat and his note, and in fearful manner cried in my ears, that I
was a reprobate, his child: that none of Gods children were as I am, that this
grief of my soul was the beginning of hell. And the greater was my pain,
because I durst not open my mind unto any for fear they should have mocked
me, and have made a jest of it. Wherefore I was feign to go to a godly
learned Preacher: I showed mine estate unto him? after I had continued with him
the space of two or three days. I received comfort both by the promises of
mercy, which he showed me in the book of God, and by his fervent godly and
effectual prayers: and I thank God ever since I have had some assurance (in
spite of the Devil) that I do apperteine to the kingdom of heaven, and am
now a member of Jesus Christ, and shall so continue for ever.


Timoth. How know you that God has forgiven your sin?


Eusebius. Because I am a sinner and he is both able and willing to forgive me.


Timoth. I grant that he is able to forgive you, but how know you that he
will? you know your sins are very great.


Eusebius. I grant: but Christ's passion is far greater: and although my sins
were as red as scarlet and as purple, yet they shall be as white as snow, and
as soft as wool.


Timoth. Oh but you have sinned very often.


Eusebius. Tell me not I pray you what I have done, but what I will do.


Timoth. What will you do?


Eusebius. By Gods grace it is my full purpose, and my earnest prayer to God is,
hereafter to take better heed, and to amend my former life.


Timoth. Is that enough think you?


Eusebius. What lacks?


Timoth. The favor and mercy of God, that may clean forsake you.


Eusebius. Nay that I will never grant: for I am certainly persuaded of the
favor and mercy of God even to the salvation of my soul.


Timoth. Oh show me that, that is the thing I earnestly desire, to be
assured of Gods special goodness, even by your feeling.


Eusebius. According as God has given me to feel the same so will I show it
you. And first of all the dealing of God toward me is a good argument to me.
In the first commandment, God has commanded me to take him to be my God,
and in the Lords prayer he teaches me to call him father: he has created the
world generally and every creature particularly for man and so for me, to
serve for my commodity, necessity, and admonition. Also he has made me after
his own image, having a reasonable soul, body, shape, where he might have
made me a Toad, a Serpent, a Swine, deformed, frantic. Moreover, he has
wo^derfullie preserved me in my infancy, childhood, youth, middle age hitherto
from manifold dangers and perils: all which do confirm in me a persuasion of
Gods fatherly love: and that I should not doubt hereof: where I might have
been borne of Turks, lo it was the will of God that I should be borne of
Christian Parents, and be brought into Gods Church by Baptism, which is the
Sacrament of adoption, and requires faith, as well of the remission of my sins
as of sanctification and holiness to be wrought of God in me by his grace and
holy spirit: where I might have been borne in an ignorant time and region,
God would that I should be borne in these days and in this country where is
more knowledge revealed then ever was here or in many places else is. Where I
might have been of a corrupt judgment and entangled with many errors of
Papistrie, and of the family of love, and of that hypocritical Brown, by Gods
goodness my judgment is reformed, and he has lightened mine eyes to see and my
heart to embrace his sincere truth. By all which things I do confirm my faith
of this that God always has been, is, and will be for ever my father, and at
my departing forth of this world will give me the crown of everlasting glory.
Secondly when as man is evermore doubting of the promises of God be they never
so certain, God of his infinite mercy to prevent all occasions of doubting,
promises to give his own spirit as a pledge, pawn, or earnest penny unto
his children of their adoption and election to salvation. Now since it pleased
God to call me from hypocrisy to be a member of his Church, I feel that in my
self which I never felt or heard of before. In times past, I came to prayers
and to the preaching of Gods word even as a Bear comes to the stake, now the
word of God is meat and drink to me, and prayer is no burden unto me, but my
ordinary exercise. If I rise in the morning I am not well till I have prayed
and given thanks to God, if I do any thing it comes into my mind to pray.
In my prayers I find great joy and comfort and the exceeding favor of God, I
never think I can well take my rest, or do any thing else except first I ask
it at Gods hand in Christ. Lastly, when my mind and heart is wholly
occupied in worldly matters, I am stirred up, and as it were drawn to pray
unto God for the remission of my sins, and the assurance of my salvation, and
in prayer I have had those groans which for their greatness cannot be
expressed. Now from whence comes all this? From the Devil? No. In these
actions I have found him my enemy, and a continual hinderer of them. For he
by his craft when I have been heavy and weak, has assailed to provoke me to
some sins whereunto my cursed nature was most given. and I having yielded to
him, have been so hardened and blinded by those sins, that for a time I have
made light account of the word of God and prayer. Well then, peradventure this
came from mine own self? No neither. This cursed nature of mine has been
more pleased and delighted with sin, and with the pleasures of the world,
then with such exercises, from which it draws me and presses me down as
lead. I cannot think that such a poisoning Cockatrice can lay such good eggs,
or that wild crabbe trees (such as all men are in Adam) can bring forth sweet
fruits according to the will of God, except God pluck them forth of Adam,
and plant them in the garden of his mercy, and stock them, and graft the
spirit of Christ in them. Wherefore these are the works of Gods spirit, and
my conscience is thereby certified that God has given me the spirit of
adoption, and therefore that his favor and mercy shall continue toward me
for ever. For the gifts of God are without repentance, and whom God once
loves, him he loves for ever. Thirdly, there be certain fruits of Gods
children which I find in me, by which I am confirmed in Gods favor. Saint
John in his first epistle says, that hereby we know that we are translated
from death to life because we love the brethren. Truly ^ feel in my heart a
burning love toward them which are good Christians though I never knew them
nor saw them, and I am very desirous to do any good for them: and if drops
of my heart blood would do them good they should have them. Moreover I hate
all sin and wickedness with a bitter hatred, and I long to see the coming
of my savior Christ to judgment, I am grieved and disquieted because I cannot
fulfill the law of God as I ought, all which I have learned forth of Gods word
to be tokens of Gods children. And thus you see what evidence I have to show
that I am a true member of the Church militant and in the favor of God.


Timoth. Have you a steadfast faith in Christ (as these arguments seem to
prove) without all wavering, doubting, and distrusting of Gods mercy?


Eusebius. No, no. This my faith which I have in Christ is even fought against
with doubting, and ever assailed with desperation, not when I sin only but
also in tentations of adversity, into which God brings me to nurture me and
to show me mine own heart, the hypocrisy and false thoughts that there lie
hid, my almost no faith at al, and as little love, even then happily when I
thought my self most perfect of all; for when tentations come I cannot stand,
when I have sinned faith is feeble, when wrong is done unto me I cannot
forgive, in sickness, in loss of goods, in all tribulation I am impatient, when
my neighbor needs my help that I must depart with him of mine own, then
love is cold. And thus I learn and feel that there is no power to do good but
of God only. And in all such tentations my faith perishes not utterly, neither
my love and consent to the law of God: but they be weak, sick, wounded and
not clean dead. As I dealt with my parents being a child, so now deal I
toward God my loving father. When I was a child my father and mother taught me
nurture and wisdom, I loved my father and all his commandments, and
perceived the goodness he showed me, that my father loved me, and all his
precepts are unto my wealth and profit, and that my father commands nothing
for any need he has thereof, but seeks my profit only, and therefore I
have a good faith unto all my fathers promises, and love all his commandments
and do them with good will, and with good will go every day to the school:
And by ^he way happily I saw company play, and with the sight was taken
and ravished of my memory, and forgot my self, and stood, and beheld, and
fell to play also forgetting father and mother and all their kindness, all
their laws, and mine own profit also. How beit the knowledge of my fathers
kindness, the faith of his promises, and the love that I had again unto my
father, and the obedient mind were not utterly quenched, but lay hid, as all
things do when a man sleeps or lies in a trance. And as soon as I had
played out all my listes, or else by some had been warned, in the mean season,
I came again to my old profession. Notwithstanding many temptations went
over my heart, and the law as a right hangman tormented my conscience, and
went nie to persuade me that my father would thrust me away, and hang me if
he catched me, so that I was like a great while to run away, rather then to
return to my father again. Fear and dread of rebuke, and of loss of my
fathers love and of punishment, wrastled with the trust which I had in my
fathers goodness, and as it were gave my faith a fall. But I rose again as
soon as the rage of the first brunt was past and my mind was more quiet. And
the goodness of my father and his old kindness came unto my remembrance either
by mine own courage or by the comfort of another. And I believed that my
father would not put me away or destroy me: and he hoped that I would do no
more so. And upon that I got me home again, dismayed but not altogether
faithless: the old kindness would not let me despair, how beit all the world
could not set mine heart at rest, until the pain had been past and until I
had heard the voice of my father, that all is forgotten.


Timoth. Seeing that you have thus plainly and truly showed the weakness of
yours, and consequently of all men's faith, show me I pray you how by the
weakness of faith a Christian is not rather discomforted then comforted and
assured of his salvation.


Eusebius. God does not so much regard the quantity of his graces as the truth
of them, he approoueth a little faith if it be a Math. 20.
true faith: yea, if faith in us were no more but a grain of mustard seed
(which is the least of al other seeds) it should be effectual, and God would
have respect unto it. The poor diseased beggar with a lame hand, having the
palsy also, is able nevertheless to reach out the same and receive an alms
of a king: and so in like manner a weak and languishing faith is sufficiently
able to reach out it self and to apprehende the infinite mercies of our
heavenly king offered unto us in Christ. Faith in the 3. of John, is compared
unto the eye of the Israelite, which although it were of dim sight, or looked
a squint, yet if it could never so little behold the brazen Serpent, it was
sufficient to cure the stings of the fiery serpe^ts, and to save life.


Timoth. Seeing that you satisfy me in every point so fully, show me I pray
you, whether a man may be wicked and have faith, and whether faith entering
expels wickedness. For I have heard some say, that a man might believe the
word of God; and yet be never the better in his life, or holier the^ before he
was.


Eusebius. Many there are which when they hear or read of faith at once they
consent thereunto and have a certain imagination and opinion of faith: as when
a man tells a story or a thing done in a strange land that pertains not to
the^ at al: which yet they believe and tell as a true thing, and this
imagination o^ opinion they call faith, Therefore as soon as they have this
imagination or opinion in their hearts, they say, verily, this doctrine
seems true, I believe it even so: the^ they think that the right faith is
there, but afterward when they feel in themselves no manner of working of the
spirit, neither the terrible sentence of the law, and the horrible captivity
under Satan, neither can perceive any alteration in themselves and that any
good works follow, but find they are altogether as before, and abide in their
old state, the^ think they yt faith is not sufficient, but that works must be
joined with faith to justification: but true faith is only the gift of God, and
is mighty in operation, ever working, being full of virtue: it renueth man,
and begets him a fresh, altreth him, changes him, and turns him
altogether into a new creature and conversation: so that a man shall feel his
heart clean changed, and far otherwise disposed then before, and has power to
love yt which before he could not but hate, and delights in that which before
he abhorred, and hates yt which before he could not but love. And it sets
the soul at liberty and makes her free to follow the will of god, and is to the
soul as health to ye body after yt a man is pined with long sick^es: the legs
cannot bear him, he cannot lift up his hands to help him, his taste is corrupt,
sugar is better in his mouth, his stomach longs after slubbersauce and
swash, at which a whole stomach is ready to cast his gorge: when health
comes she changes and alters him clean, gives him strength in all his
members, lust and will to do of his own accord that which before he could
not do, neither could suffer that any man should exhort him to do, and has
now lust in wholesome things, and his members are free and at liberty, and have
power to do all things of his own accord which belong to a sound and whole
man to do. And faith works in the same manner as a tree bringes forth
fruit, of his own accord; and as a man need not bid a tree bring forth
fruit, so is there no law put to him that believes and is justified through
faith, neither is it needful. For the law is written and graven in his heart
his pleasure is daily therein, and as without commandment even of his own
nature he eats, drinks, sees, hears, talks, goes: even so of his own
nature without any compulsion of the law brings forth good works: and as
an whole man when he is a thirst tarrieth but for drink, and when he hungreth
abides but for meat, and then drinks and eats naturally. Even so is the
faithful ever a thirst, and an hungered after the will of God, and tarrieth but
for an occasion: and whenever an occasion is given he works naturally the
will of God. For this blessing is given them that trust in Christ's blood, that
they thirst and hunger to do Gods will. He that has not this faith is but an
unprofitable babbler of faith, and works, and neither works what he bableth,
nor whereunto his words pretend. For he feels not the power of faith nor the
working of the spirit in his heart, but interprets the scriptures which
speak of faith and works after his own blind reason, and foolish fantasies,
not having any experience in himself.


Timoth. Every member of Christ's congregation is a sinner and sins daily
some more, and some less, for it is written, 1. Ioh. 1. If we say we have no
sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. And Paul, Romans 7. That
good which I would, that do I not; but that evil which I would not, that do
I. So it is not I that do it (says he) but sin that dwells in me. So
the Christian man is both a sinner and no sinner, which how it can be show it
me by your experience.


Eusebius. I being one man in substance and two men in quality, flesh and
spirit, which in me so fight perpetually the one against the other, that I
must go either backward or forward, and cannot stand long in one state. If
the spirit overcome in tentations, then is she stronger and the flesh weaker.
But if the flesh get a custom, then is the spirit none otherwise oppressed of
the flesh then as though she had a mountain on her back, and as we sometime
in our dreams think we bear heavier then a millstone on our breasts: or when
we dream now and then that we would run away for fear of some thing, our
legs seem heavier then lead: Even so is the spirit oppressed and ouerladen
of the flesh through custom, that she strugleth and strives to get up and
to break loose in vain, until the God of mercy which hears my groan
through Jesus Christ come and lose her with his power, and put something on the
back of the flesh to keep her down to minish her strength and to mortify
her. So then no sinner I am if you regard the spirit, the profession of my
heart toward the law of God, my repentance and sorrow that I have both
because I have sinned and am yet full of sin, and look unto the promises of
mercy in our Savior Christ, and unto my faith. A sinner am I if you look to
the frailty of my flesh which is a remnant of the old Adam, and as it were the
state of the wild olive tree, ever and anon when occasion is given, shooting
forth his branches, leaves, bud, blossom, and fruit also: which also is as
the weakness of one that is newly recovered out of a great disease, by the
reason whereof all my deeds are imperfect, and when occasions be great I fall
into horrible deeds, and the fruit of the sin which remains in my members
breaks out. Notwithstanding the spirit leaves me not but rebukes me and
brings me home again unto my profession, so that I never cast of the yoke
of God from of my neck, neither yield up my self unto sin to serve it, but
fight a fresh, and begin a new battle. And I had rather you should
understand this forth of the Scriptures, by the example of Jonas and the
Apostles. Jonas was the friend of God, and a chosen servant of GOD, to
testify his will unto the world. He was sent from the Land of Israel,
where he was a Prophet to go amongst an Heathen people and the greatest city
of the world, then called Niniuie to preach that within forty days they
should be destroyed for their sins: which message the free will of Jonas
had as much power to do as the weakest hearted woman in the world had power,
if she were commanded to leap into a tubbe of living snakes and Adders: as
happily if God had commanded Sara to sacrifice her son Isaac, as he did
Abraham, she would have disputed with God ere she had done it, or though she
were strong enough. Well Jonas hartned by his own imagination, and reasoning
after this manner; I am here a prophet unto Gods people the Israelits: which
though they have gods word testified unto them daily, yet despise and
worship God under the likeness of Calves and after all manner of fashions
save after his own word, and therefore are of all nations the worst and most
worthy of punishment. And yet God for love of a few that are among them, and
for his names sake spares and defends them: how then shall God take so cruel
vengeance on so great a multitude of the^ to who^ his name was never preached,
and therefore are not the tenth part so evil as these. If I therefore shall
go preach, I shall lie and shame my self, and God too, and make them the more
to despise God. Upon this imagination he fled from the presence of GOD, and
from the country where God is worshipped. When Jonas entered into the ship, he
laid him down to sleep: for his conscience was tossed between the
commandment of God which sent him to Niniuie, and his fleshly wisdom which
dissuaded and counseled him to the contrary, and at last prevailed against
the commandment, and carried him an otherway as a ship caught between two
streams as the Poets feign the mother of Meleager to be between diverse
affections? while to adventure her brothers death she sought to sley her own
son: whereupon for very pain and tediousness she lay down to sleep to
put the commandment out of mind, which did so gnawe and fret her conscience:
as the nature of all the wicked is, when they have sinned in earnest, to ^eeke
all means with riote, revel, and pa^time to drive the remembrance of sin
^oorth of their hearts, as Adam did to co^er his wickedness with apperns of
figge^eaues. But God awoke him out of his ^reame, and set his sins before his
face: for when the lot had caught Jonas, the^ be sure that his sin came to
remembrance again, and that his conscience raged no less the^ the waters of
the sea. And then he thought he only was a sinner, and thought also that as
verily as he had fled from God, as verily God had cast him away: for the
sight of the rod makes the natural child not only to see and acknowledge his
fault, but also to forget all his fathers old mercy and goodness. And then he
confessed his sin openly, and of very desperation to have lived any longer
he had cast himself into the Sea betimes except they would be lost also,
for all this God provided a fish to swallow Jonas. When Jonas had been in the
fishes belly a space, the rage of his conscience was somewhat quieted, and he
came to himself again, and had received a little hope: and the qualmes and
panges of desperation which went over his heart were half overcome, then he
prayed to God, and gave thanks unto him. When Jonas was cast upon the land
again then his will was free, and he had power to go whether God sent him, and
to what God commanded him, his own imagination laid apart: for he had been at a
new schole and in a furnace where he was purged of much refue and dross of
fleshly wisdom which resisted ye wisdom of God. For as far as we be blind in
Adam we cannot but seek and will our own profit, pleasure and glory: and as
far as we be taught in the spirit, we cannot but seek and will the pleasure of
God only. Then Jonas preached to Niniuie, and they repented: the^ Jonas showed
again his corrupt nature for all his trying in the Whales belly. He was so
displeased because the Niniuits perished not, he was weary of his life and
wished death for very sorrow, that he had lost the glory of his prophesying in
yt his prophecy came not to pass, but he was rebuked of God, as in his
prophecy you may read. The apostles Christ taught the^ ever to be meek and to
humble themselves: yet often they striued among themselves who should be
greatest: the sons of Zebede would sit one on ye right hand of Christ, the
other on the left. They would pray that fire might descend from heaven and
consume the Samaritans. When Christ asked, who say men that I am? Peter
answered Thou art the son of the living God, as though Peter had been as
perfect as an Angel. But imediatlie after when Christ preached unto them of
his death and passion, Peter was angry and rebuked Christ, and thought
earnestly that he had raued, and not wist what he had said, as at another
time when Christ was so fervently busied in healing the people, that he had no
leisure to eat, they went out to hold him, supposing that he had been
beside himself. And one that cast forth Diuelles in Christ's name they
forbadde, because he waited not on the^, so glorious were they yet. And though
Christ taught always to forgive, yet Peter after long going to schole, asked
whether men should forgive seven times, thinking that eight times had been
too much. And at the last supper, Peter would have died with Christ, but yet
within few hours after he denied him both cowardly and shamefullie* And after
the same manner, though he had so long heard that no man must avenge himself,
but rather turn the other cheek to the smiter again, yet when Christ was in
taking, Peter asked whether it were lawful to smite with the sword, and
tarried no answer, but laid on rashly. So that although we be once
reconciled to God, yet at the first we be but children and young scholars, weak
and feeble, and must have leisure to grow in the spirit, i^ knowledge, love,
and deeds thereof, as young children must have time to grow in their bodies:
and so in like manner the sting of the serpent is not pulled out at once, but
the poison of our nature is minished by little and little, and cannot before
the hour of death be wholly taken away.


Timoth. I perceive by your godly discourse, the manifold conflictes between
the flesh and the spirit, and that the flesh is like to a mighty Giant, such
a one as was Goliath, strong, lusty, stirring, enemy to God, confederate with
the Devil: and the spirit; like to a little child, such a one as was little
David, newborn, weak and feeble, not always stirring: now then what means
do you use to weaken the flesh, and strengthen the spirit.


Eusebius. I use to tame my flesh with prayer and fasting, watching, deeds of
mercy, holy meditations and reading the scriptures, and in bodily labor,
and in withdrawing all manner of pleasures from the flesh, and with exercises
contrary to the vices which I find in my body most inclined to, and with
absteining from all things that encourage the flesh against the spirit: as
reading of toys and wanton books, seeing of plays and enterluds, wanton
communication, foolish jesting, and effeminate thoughts and talking of
covetousness, which Paul forbids Ephesians. 5. magnifying of worldly promotions. If
these will not mortify my flesh, then God sends me some troubles, and so
makes me to grow and wax perfect, and fineth and tries me as gold in the
fire of tentations and tribulations. Thus very often he makes me to take up
my cross and naileth my flesh unto it, for the mortifying thereof. Mark this
if God send thee to the sea, and promise to go with thee, he will raise up a
tempest against thee, to prove whether thou will abide by his word, and that
thou may feel thy faith and weakness and perceive his goodness: for if it
were always fair weather and thou never brought into such ieopardie, whence
his mercy only delivers thee, thy faith should be only a presumption,
and thou should be ever unthankful to God, and merciles unto thy
neighbor. If God promise riches, the way thereunto is poverty: whom he
loves him he chasteneth: whom he exalts, he casts down: whom he saves
he first damneth: he brings no man to heaven, except he send him to hell
first: if he promis^ life he slays first: when he builds he casts down
all first: he is no patcher, he cannot abide another man's foundation: he will
not work till all be past remedy, and brought to such a case that me^ may
see how that his hand, his power, his mercy, his goodness, his truth has
wrought altogether: he will let no man be partaker with him of his praise and
glory: his works are wonderful and contrary to man's works* who ever save he
delivered his own son, his only son, his dear son, his darling unto the
death, and for his enemies, to win his enemies, to overcome the^ with love,
that he might see love and love again, and of love likewise to do to other
men, and to overcome them with well doing. Joseph saw the Sun and the Moon,
and seven stars worshipping him, nevertheless ere that came to pass, God
laid him where he could see neither sun, nor moon neither any star of the
sky, and that many years, and also undeserved, to nurture him, to make him
humble and meek, and to teach him Gods ways, and to make him apt and meet
for yt room and honor: again he came to it, that he might be strong in the
spirit to minister it well. God promised the children of Israel a land with
rivers of milk and honey. yet he brought them forth the space of forty
years into a land where in rivers of milk and honey were, but where so much
as a drop of water was not, to nurture and teach them as a father does his
son, and to do them good at the latter end, to seduce their cankred nature,
to make them strong in the spirit to use his benefits aright. Lastly God
promised David a kingdom, and immediately stirred up Saul against him to
persecute him, and to hunt him as men do hayres with gray-houndes and to
ferret him out of every hole, and that for the space of many years, to turn
him, to make him to mortify his lusts, to make him feel his own diseases: in
fine to make him a good man, and a good King.


Timoth. But how if it come to pass that you be tempted to any great sin,
and the flesh overcome the spirit, in what case are you then?


Eusebius. There is no body here but you and I, and I take you to be a Christian
and a faithful friend: therefore I will show a little of my exhortation. The
last year by reason of the dearth, I and my family were put to great pinches,
and most commonly we had nothing but bread and water: here upon I bethought me
how I might get somewhat to releive my family: It came into my mind that in
our Town a rich man had a great flock of sheep, and that I might take one of
them without any hurt of him. I was very loath at the first: but because there
was such great stealing of sheep, and I was in extremity, in the night I went
among his sheep and took a lamb, and told my family that it was given me: I
presently killed it, the skin and the entralles I burned on my backeside, the
flesh we dressed by quarters, and did eat it with thanksgiving (as my manner
is) but surely very coldlie, and me thought my prayer was abominable in Gods
sight. After I had thus done, we fared well for the space of two days, but I
felt my heart hardened, and my lips were almost locked up, that I could not as I
was wont praise the Lord. The third night after, I went with a quiet conscience
(me thought) to my bed, and then I slept soundly till three of the clock
in the morning, but I dreamed that one came to carry me to prison, upon that
on a sudden I awaked and being afraid looked about me and fell to consider
why I should be afraid, and I remembered that I had sinned against God by
robbing my neighbor: o then my fear increased, and I thought that hell gaped
to devour me, and the law looked upon me with such a terrible countenance,
and so thundered in mine ears, that I durst not abide in my bed, but up and to
go. Then the Devil assailed me on every side, to persuade that God had cast
me away: saying, they that be Gods, have power to keep his law, thou have
not, but breakest them: Therefore thou art a cast-awaie and a damned creature,
and hell gapeth and sets open his mouth to devour thee. And I thought with
my self that I had been always a rank hypocrite, for as the clouds of the
air do cover the sun, so that sometimes a man cannot tell by any sense
that there is any Sun, the clouds and winds hiding it from our sight: even so
my cecitie and blindness, and corrupt affections, and the rage of my
conscience did so ouershadow the sight of Gods seed in me, and so ouerwhelme
his spirit as though I ha^ been a plain reprobate. And thus i^ came to pass
that David making his prayer to GOD according to his own sens^ and feeling,
but not according to the truth, desired of God to give him again his spirit.
Which thing GOD never does indeed: although he made me to think so for a
time: for always he holds his hand under his children in their falls,
that they lie not still as other do which are not regenerate. I being thus
turmoiled and stong with the conscience of sin and the cockatrice of my
poisoned nature, having beheld hirselfe in the glass of the righteous law of
God there was no other salve or remedy but to run to the brazen Serpent
Christ Jesus which shed his blood, hanging upon the cross, and to his
everlasting testament and merciful promise, that it was shed for me for the
remission of my sins, therefore I got me speedily into a close corner in my
house, and there upon my face groueling, I confessed my sin and prayed after
this manner in effect. Father, what an horrible monster am I? What taytor? what
rascal and villain? thy mercy is wonderful that hell has not devoured me
having deserved a thousand damnations. I have sinned, I have sinned against thy
godly, holy and righteous law and against my brother by robbing him, whom I
ought to love for thy sake as dearly as my self, forgive me father for thy
son Christ his sake according to thy most merciful promises and testament:
forget not good Lord thy old mercies showed upon me, let them not at this
time in me be quite removed. On this manner praiing I continued five hours,
and GOD which is near to all them that call upon him, heard me, eased my
pain, and assured me of the remission of my sin. After presently, for the
more easing of my conscience I went to my neighbor, and between him and me
upon my knees confessed my fault with tears, desiring him to forgive me, and I
would (as Gods law requires,) restore that which I stole four fold: he (I
thank him) was contented and took pity on me, and ever since has been by
Gods mercy my good friend. So by little and little God restored me to my
first estate, but (me thinks) I have not that feeling which I had before, and
have been worse ever since* God of his mercy amend me, and increase his
graces in me.


Timoth. Praised be God that we fell into this communicatio^; for I had thought
that no man had been in such a case but I, for I from my heart detest that
babbling which in time past I have used and I have vowed with my self to use
it no more, and God has given me strength and will to pay my vows and to
keep them half a year or tweluemonth together, and then falling into a
company of the honester sort of good fellows, I take otherwhiles a cup of
Nimis, for which afterward I am so touched in my conscience and so grieved
inwardly: that often I have no delight in my meat: and then I use prayer and
reading and meditating of the scriptures, and do receive much comfort. But I
pray you what think you, will not God condemn his children if they sin?


Eusebius. No, for the groundwork of our salvation is laid in Gods eternal
election, and a thousand sins, nay all the sins in the world, nay all the
Deuilles in hell cannot overthrow Gods election. And it may be that sins do
harden our hearts, weaken our faith, make sad the spirit of God in us: but
take away faith, or altogether quench the spirit, they cannot. God condemns
no man for his sins, if he be adopted in Christ. For then Joseph, Abraham,
David, Peter, Marie Magdalene, should be condemned. God is like a father: and
a father if his child be sick, and therefore be froward, and refuse and cast
away his meat, and having eaten it spew it up again, and in his fit be
impacient, and rave, and speak evil of his father, yet I say the father will
not cast him forth of his doors, but pittieth him, and provides such things as
may restore him to health, and when he is whole remembers not his disordered
behauior in his sickness.


Timoth. What means do you find most effectual to strengthen your faith, to
increase Gods graces in you, and to raise you up again when you are fallen?


Eusebius. Surely I have very great comfort by the sacrament of the Lords Supper:
for whereas I am spirituallye diseased, and am prone and ready to fall, and am
most cruelly oftentimes invaded of the feend, the flesh, and the law, when I
have sinned: and am put to flight, and made to run away from God my father:
therefore has God of all mercy and of his infinite pity and bottomless
compassion set up his sacrament as a sign upon a hie hill, whence it may be
seen on every side far and near to call again them that be run away. And
with this sacrament he (as it were) clocketh to them, as a hen does for her
chickens, to gather them under the wings of his mercy* and has commanded his
sacrament to be had in continual use, to put us in mind of his continual
mercy laid up for us in Christ's blood, and to witness and testify it unto
them, and to be the seal thereof. For the sacrament does much more lively
print the faith, and make it sincke down into the heart then do bare words
only. Now when the words of the testament and promises are spoken over the
bread (this is my body that was broken for you: this is my blood that was shed
for you) they confirm the faith; but much more when the sacrament is seen
with the eyes, and the bread broken, the wine powered out and looked on: and yet
more when I taste it and smell it, As you see when a man makes a promise unto
another with light words between themselves and so they departed, he to whom
the promis is made begins to doubt whether the other spoke earnestlye or
mocked, and doubts whether he will remember his promise, to abide by it or
no. But when any man speaks with aduisement, the words are more credible: and
if he swear, it confirms the thing more and yet the more if he strike hands,
if he give earnest, if he call record, if he give handwriting and seal it:
so is the more and more believed, for the heart gathers: ^o, he spoke with
aduisement, deliberation, and good sadness, he clapped hands, called record,
and put to his hand and seal: the man cannot be so faint without the fear
of God as to deny all this: shame shall make him abide his promise, though he
were such a man as I could not compel him, if he would deny it. And thus we
dispute, God sent his son in our nature, and made him feel our infirmities
that move us to sin and named his name Jesus, that is a Savior, because he
should save his people from their sins, and after his death he sent his
Apostles to preach these glad-tydings, to thrust them in at the ears of us,
and set up a sacrament of them to testify them and to seal them, and to
thrust them in, not at the ears only by rehearsing the promises of the
testament over it: neither at our eyes only in beholding it, but beat them in
through our feeling, tasting and smelling also, and to be repeated daily and
to be ministered to us. He would not (think we) make half so much a do with us if
he loved us not, and would not have his Sacrament to be a witness and testimony
between him and us, to confirm the faith of his promises that we should not
doubt in them, when we look on the seals of his obligations wherewith he has
bound himself: and this to keep the promises and covenants better in mind,
and to make them the more deeply to sink into our hearts, and be more
earnestly regarded.


Timoth. Considering that this which you say is too plain, great shame it is
that there is such neglect of the Sacrament as there is, and that it is so
seldom used: but surely want of faith, and the security which ouerspreadeth
this our Country is the cause of it, the Lord if it be his will remove the
same. Now let me hear a little how you lead your life, and have your
conversation among men.


Eusebius. I have my conversation among men as sincere as I can in righteousness
and holiness which is after Gods commandments: our Savior says, Let your
light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in heaven.


Timoth. It is but a dim light which we can carry before men, and small are
our good works and to be esteemed of no value. If we were preachers, or rich
men, or noble men, then we might save souls, give good counsel, help many by
our alms, but you and I are poor men, of base birth, and of low degree, how
can we then do any good works.


Eusebius. As touching good works by that measure of knowledge that God has given
me, I think that all works are good which are done according to the obedience
of Gods law in faith and with thanksgiving to God, and with a mind desirous of
his glory alone, and I think that I or any man else in doing the^, please God,
whatsoever I do within the law of god, as when I make water. And trust me if
either wind or water were stopped, I should feel what a precious thing it were
to do either of both, and what thanks ought to be given God therefore. Moreover
I put no difference between works, but whatsoever comes into my hands that
I do as time, place, and occasion gives, and according to my degree. For as
touching to please God there is no work better then other: God looks not
first on my works, as the world does, or as though he had need of them: but
God looks first on my heart what faith I have to his word, how I believe him,
trust him, and how I love him, for his mercy that he has showed me, he
looks with what heart I work, and not what I work, how I accept the degree
he has put me in, not of what degree I am. Let us take an example. You are a
Minister and preach the word, I am a kitchen boy, and wash my masters dishes.
Of the ministry hark what the Apostle says: if I preach I have naught to
rejoice in, for necessity is put upon me: if I preach not the gospel, as who
should say, God has made me so, woe is to me if I preach not. If I do it
willingly (says he) then I have my reward; that is, then am I sure that Gods
spirit is in me, and that I am elect to eternal life. If I do it against my
will, the office is committed to me, that is, if I do it not of love to God but
to get a living thereby, and for a worldly purpose and had rather otherwise
live: then do I that office which God has put upon me, but do not please God.
So then if you preached not, or in preaching had not your heart aright you
minister the office and they that have the spirit of God hear his word, yea,
though it were spoken by an Ass, and the woe belongs to you: but and if you
preach wil^ingly with a true heart and conscience to God, then shall you feel the
earnest of eternal life and the working of the spirit of God in you. And your
preaching is a good work in you. Now I that minister in the kitchen, and am but
a kitchen boy, receive all things at the hand of God, know that God has put
me in such an office, submit my self to his will, and serve my Master, not as
a man but as Christ himself, with a pure heart, according as Paul teaches me,
putting my trust in God and of him seek my reward. Moreover there is not a
good deed done, but mine heart reioiseth therein, yea, when I hear that the
word of God is preached by you, and see the people turn unto God: I consent to
this deed, my heart breaks out in me, yea it springs and leapeth in my
breast that God is honored, and in my heart I do the same that you do with
the like delectatio^ and feruency of spirit. Now he that receives a Prophet in
the name of a Prophet, receives a Prophets reward, that is, he that consents
to the deed of a Prophet and maintains it, the same has the same spirit
and earnest of everlasting life which the Prophet has, and is elect as the
Prophet is. Now if we compare work to work, there is a difference betwixt
washin^ of dishes, and preaching the word of God but as touching to please God
none at all* For neither that nor this pleases God, bu^ as far forth as God
has chosen a man, and has put his spirit in him, and purified his heart by
faith and trust in Christ. As the Scriptures call him carnal which is not
renewed by the spirit and borne again in Christ's flesh, and al his works like,
even the very motions of his heart and mind, as his learning, doctrine, and
contemplation of hie things, his preaching, teaching, and study in the
Scripture, building of Churches, founding of Colleges, giving of alms, and
whatsoever he does, though they seem spiritual, and after the law of God
never so much: So contrariwise he is spiritual which is renewed in Christ, and
all his works which spring from faith seem they never so gross, as the
washing of the disciples feet done by our Savior Christ, and Peter's fishing
after the resurrection, yea deeds of matrimony are pure spiritual if they
proceed of faith, and whatsoever is done within the laws of God though it be
wrought by the body, as the very wiping of shoes and such like, howsoever
gross they appear outwardly, yet are sanctified.


Timoth. What be the special things in which you lead your conversation?


Eusebius. One thing is the reading of the Scripture.


Timoth. It is dangerous to read the scriptures, you that have no learning may
easily fall into errors and heresies.


Eusebius. As he which knows his letters perfectly, and can spell, cannot but
read if he be diligent: and as he which has clear eyes without impediment or
let, and walks thereto in the light, and open day, cannot but see, if he
attend and take heed: even so I having the profession of my Baptism only
written in my heart, and feeling it sealed up in my conscience by the holy
Ghost cannot but understand the Scripture, because I exercise my self therein,
and compare one place with another and mark the manner of speech, and ask
here and there the meaning of a sentence of them that be better exercised then
I. for I feel in my heart and have a sensible experience of that inwardly,
which the spirit of God has delivered in the Scriptures. So that I find mine
own feeling as a good co^mentarie unto me.


Timoth. We are all baptized, belike the^ we shall all understand the
Scriptures.


Eusebius. But alas very few there be that are taught and feel their ingrafting
into Christ, their justification, their inward dying unto sin and living unto
righteousness, which is the meaning of their Baptism. And therefore we remain
all blind generally, as well the great Rabbis which brag of their learning,
as the poor unlearned lay man. And the Scripture is become so dark unto
the^, that they grope for the door and can find no way in, and it is become a
maze unto the^ in which they wa^der as in a mist or (as we say) led by Robin
goodfellow. And their darkness can not comprehend the light of the Scriptures
but they read them as me^ do tales of Robin hood, as riddles, or as old
priests read their Ladies mattins, which they understand not. And until a man
be taught his baptism, that his heart feel the sweetness of it, the Scriptures
are shut up from him, and so dark that he could not understand it, though
Peter, Paul, or Christ himself did expound it unto him, no more then a man
stark blind can see though thou set a candle before him, or show him the Sun,
or point with thy finger unto that thou would have him look upon. As for
heresy there is no danger if a man come to the Scripture with a meek spirit
seeking there to fashion himself like unto Christ according to the profession
and vow of his Baptism: but contrariwise he shall there find the mighty
power of GOD to alter and change him in the inner man by little and little til
in process he be full shapen after the image of our Savior in knowledge and
love of all truth, and power to work thereafter. Heresies spring not of
Scripture, no more then darkness of the Sun, but are dark clouds which
spring out of the blind hearts of hypocrites given to pride and singularity,
and do cover the face of the Scripture and blind their eyes that they cannot
behold the bright beams of the Scripture.


Timoth. By this I also can gather that the Papists which cannot read the
Scriptures except they fall into errors have not the spirit of Christ working
in them, and teaching them, but the lying spirit of Antichrist the Devil, and
that if God would give them any true feeling, and open their eyes they would
quite change their minds. But what other exercises have you?


Eusebius. Prayer and thanksgiving to God. For God has promised very
bountifully unto them which pray in truth, and it is one of the greatest
comforts I have at all times. Again, God which commands me not to steal,
commands me also to pray, and his will is, that one commandment should be as
well kept as an other: and therefore I am persuaded that condemnation will
befall me as well for the one as for the other. And that prayer ought to be
continually even in every thing a man does, me thinks it most agreeable to
Gods will. For if I should come into my neighbors house and take his goods,
and use them, not borrowing them or asking any leave, they would lay hands
on me, and make me a thief. The world and all the things in the world are
the Lords, not mine: so then if I shall daily use them, never seeking to the
Lord by prayer for the use of them, before God I am an usurper, nay a rank
thief, and therefore I desire of God heartily that I may use all his good
creatures with fear and reverence, and that I may sanctify his name in the^,
which Paul shows me to be done by the word of God and prayer, the word
showing me the lawful use of his creatures: prayer obtaining at Gods hands,
that I may use them aright. If this practice were used of men in their
professions and callings, I am persuaded there would be a thousand vices ^ut
off which are in every man most aboun^ant and are committed without shame.

Timoth. I think the rest of your Christi^n exercises be the practicing of
the commandments of the law.


Eusebius. Yea they are indeed.


Timoth. Me thinks it is an hard point of the law for a man to love his enemy.


Eusebius. It is indeed: yet in the faithful it will be so: for they have in their
hearts a persuasion, that whereas they are damned in themselves, yet in Christ
the mercy of God is most plentiful to their salvation, and all this God
confirms and seals unto them by his holy spirit, and therefore they
cannot but love God again, and that with a fervent love even above al things in
the world, and so they love all Gods creatures, and even their enemies, because
they bear the image of God whom they love: like as if I have a friend and love
him, I love all of his name, all his kindred, and all that appertain unto him.
And by the way, here is a good way to know whether we have faith or not
Though faith only justify and make the marriage between our Soul and
Christ and is properly the marriage garment, yea and the sign Tau, that
defends us from the smiting and power of evil Angels, an^ is also the rock
on which Christ's Church is built, and stands against all weather o^ wind and
tempest: yet is faith never seu^ red from hope and charity: then if a man will
be sure that his faith is perfect, let him examine himself whether he love the
law, and in like manner if he will know whether he love the law, that is,
love God and his neighbor, then let him examine himself whether he believe in
Christ only for the remission of sin, and obtaining the promises made in the
scripture. And even so let him compare his hope of the life to come with faith,
and love, and to the hatred of sin in his life, which hatred the love of the
law ingendreth in him. And if they accompany not one another all three
together, then let him be sure all is but hypocrisy.


Timoth. Yet by your leave faith cannot make a man just before God without hope
and charity: then they also with faith have some stroke in justification.


Eusebius. I answer, though they be inseparable, yet I praise God I do conceive
how these three have three separable and sundry offices. Faith only is an
undoubted and sure ^oue in Christ, and in the father through him ^ertifieth the
conscience* that the sin is forgiven and the damnation of the law taken away.
And with such persuasions mollifieth the ^art and makes it love God again and
his law. And as often as we sin, faith only keeps that we forsake not our
profession and that love utterly quench not, and hope fail, and only makes
the peace again: for a true believer trusts in Christ alone and not in his
own works nor ought else for the remission of sins. The office of love is to
power out again the same goodness that it has received of God upon her
neighbor, to be to him as it feels Christ to be to it self. The office of
love is only to have compassion, and to bear with her neighbor the burden
of his infirmities. 1. Pet. 4. Love covers the multitude of sins: (that is to
say) co^sidereth the infirmities and interprets al to the best, and takes
for no sin at al a thousand things of which the least were enough (if a man
loved not) to go to law for, and to trouble and disquiet an whole Town, and
sometime a whole Realm too. The office of hope is to comfort in adversity,
and to make patient that we faint not, nor fall down under the Cross, or cast
it of our backs. Thus these three inseparable have separable offices and
effects, as heat, and drynes, being inseparable in the fire have yet their
separable operations, for drynes only expels the moistnes of all that is
consumed by fire, and hea^ only destroieth the coldness. And it is not Fides
sola non est sola.
all one to say, the drynes only, and the drynes that is alone, neither is
it all one to say, faith only, and faith that is alone.


Timoth. You are to be commended, you are so perfect in these high points of
religion, but I know you speak of experience, for in you faith and hope
toward God and charity toward your neighbor are inseparable.


Eusebius. I require no commendations: shame and confusion befall me eternally,
that all glory may be unto God.


Timoth. But let us talk on further of our duties which we must perform if
we will live Christian like among men. And I pray you tell me what do you
mean that you give so much unto the poor, considering you are so poor your
self, I speak my conscience, if you had ability you would do more the^ an
hundred of those rich men do.


Eusebius. God knows my heart, it is a hell unto me to see my brother for whom
Christ shed his blood to want if I have any thing in the world to give him.
Among Christian men love makes all things common: every man is others debtor,
and every man is bound to minister to his neighbor, and to supply his
neighbors lack of that wherewith God has endued him. Christ is Lord over
all, and every Christian is heir annexed with Christ, and therefore Lord over
all, and every one is Lord of whatsoever another has: if then my brother or
neighbor need, I have to help him: and if I show not mercy but withdraw my
hands from him, then rob I him of his own, and am a thief. A Christian man
has Christ's spirit, now Christ is merciful, if I shall not be merciful, I
have Romans 8.
not Christ's spirit: if I have not Christ's spirit the^ am I none of his. And
though I show mercy unto my brother, yet if I do it not with such burning
love as Christ did unto me, I must knowledge my sin and desire mercy in
Christ.


Timoth. If a man must be frank and free, then a man must give of his own
stock to the poor and diminish his own substance.


Eusebius. Yea indeed we are made stewards of those goods which God has given us,
and shall a steward take all unto himself without reproof. I am sure that they
which were covetous Act. 2.
at Peter's first Sermon after Christ's ascension, diminished their substance
when they sold them and gave them to the poor. I am sure that the Churches
which were in 2 Cor. 8.
Macedonia which sent relief unto their Churches even above their ability,
they being in extreme poverty did dimisse their possessions: and God grant
our conuersations may be like theirs. And that we should be like the^, their
examples of great compassion are recorded in the Scriptures.


Tim. Many of us have our selves, wife, children, father, mother, and kinsfolk
to relieve, so yt it will be hard to deal after this manner.


Eusebius. Had not these men I named, so? yea I warrant you had they. And the want
of love which you deem of the Gospel of Christ, knows not yt a man should
begin at himself and the^ desce^d I wot not by what steps. Love 2 Cor. 12.
seeks not her own profit, but makes a ma to forget himself, and turn this
profit to another man, as Christ sought not himself or his own profit but ours.
This term (my self) is not in the gospel, neither yet father, mother sister,
brother, kinsma^, yt one should in love be preferred before another. The love
that springs out of Christ excludes no man, neither puts difference
between one and other. In Christ we are all of one degree without respect of
persons. Notwithstanding though a Christian man's heart be open to all men and
receives all men, yet because his ability of goods extends not so far,
this provision is made that every man should care for his own household, as
father, mother, thine elders that have helped thee, wife, children and
servants. When a man has done his duty to his household, and yet has further
abundance of the blessing of God, that he owes to the poor that cannot
labor and cannot get work, and ar^ destitute of friends, to the poor I
mean which he knows, and to them of his own parish. For that provision
ought to be had in the Church, that every parish provide for the poor. If his
neighbors which he knows be served, then is he debtor to the brethren a
thousand miles off, if he hear of their necessity, and have himself any
plenty: yea, to the very Infidels he is a debtor if they need, as far forth
as he does not maintain them against Christ. Thus is every man that needs
my help, my father, mother, sister, and brother in Christ: even as every man
that does the will of the father, is father, mother, sister, and brother unto
Christ.


Timoth. Now ye somewhat persuade me of that which me thought at the first
blush, was against common sense.


Eusebius. By Gods grace I will persuade you more yet. How if our savior Christ
Jesus should, now dwell upon the earth in poverty and want, could you not be
contented, to bestow half your goods on him?


Timoth. Half my goods? Nay truly all: and my heart blood: for I know if I
should loose my life for him, I should save it.


Eusebius. Very well. Christ is all in all. Every Christian man to another is
Christ himself, and whatsoever is done to the poor, is done to Christ
himself and therefore your neighbors need has as good right in your goods
as has Christ himself which is heir and Lord over all. And look what you
owe to Christ that you owe to your neighbors need: to your neighbor owe you
your heart and life and whatsoever you have or can do.


Timoth. We need not give our relief except the poor require it.


Eusebius. Ask or not, if they want you are bound to relieve them, As Christ
loved you, so love them. Christ loved you being his enemy, when I am sure of
it you never asked remission of sins.


Timoth. We need not relieve them often, need we?


Eusebius. Yes, as long as you are able, and as often as they want. If Christ should
forgive us but once, we should come short of heaven.


Timoth. The world is full of naughtines, and lewd people take pleasure in
doing wrong, and in slandering, and in hindering their brethren: how can you
live among them in quietness, do you use to give like for like?


Eusebius. No, you must understand that there be two states or regiments in the
world: the kingdom of heaven which is the regiment of the Gospel: and the
regiment of the world, which is the temporal kingdom. In the first state
there is neither father nor mother, neither master, mistres, maid, nor
servant, nor husband, nor wife, nor Lord, nor subject, nor inferior woman, but
Christ is all, and each to other is Christ himself, there is none better then
other, but all alike good, all brethren, and Christ only is Lord over all,
neither is there any other thing to do, or other law, save to love one another
as Christ loved (...): In the temporal regiment, is husband, wife, father,
mother, son, daughter, mistres, maid, manseruant, subject, Lord? Now every
person is a double person, and under two regime^ts: in the first regiment I am
a person of mine own self under Christ and his doctrine, and may neither
hate nor be angry, and much less fight or revenge: but must after the
example of Christ, humble my self, forsake and deny my self, and hate my
self, and cast my self away, and be meek and patient, and let every man
go over me and tread me underfoot, and do me wrong: and yet I am to
love them, and pray for them as Christ did for his crucifiers: for love is
all, and whatsoever is not of love, is damnable, and cast forth of that
kingdom. In the temporal regiment thou art a person in respect of an other,
thou art husband, father, mother, daughter, wife, lord, subject, and there thou
must do according to thine office. If thou be a father thou must do the
office of a father and rule, or else thou damnest thy self: thou must bring
all under obedience, whether by fair means or by foul: thou must have
obediencc of thy wife, of thy servants, and of thy subjects, if they will not
obey in love, thou must chide, fight, and correct, as far as the law of GOD
and the law of the land will suffer thee: Now to the purpose: whether a man
may resist violence, and defend or revenge himhimselfe: I say naie, in the
first state where thou art a person for thy self alone, and Christ's disciple,
there thou must love and of love do, study and enforce: yea and suffer all
things (as Christ did to make peace, that the blessing of God may come upon
thee, Which says, blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be the children
of God. If thou suffer and keep peace in thy self only, thy blessing is the
possession of this world: but if thou so love the peace of thy brother that
thou leave nothing undone or vnsuffered to further it, thou shall possess
heaven. But in this worldly state where thou art no private man, but a person
in respect of other, thou must and art bound under pain of damnation to
execute thine office. Of thy servants thou must exact obedience, and must not
suffer thy self to be despised. If thou art a ruler, thou must take,
imprison, and sley to, not of malice and hate to revenge thy self, but to
defend thy subjects and to maintain thine office: the ruler must not
oppress his subjects with rentes, fines and customs, at all, neither pill
them with taxes, and such like to maintain his own lusts: but be loving and
kind unto them as Christ was to him: for they be the price of his blood. I
will show my mind more plainly by one example. You are in your fathers
house among your brethren and sisters, there if one fight with another, or if
any do you wrong, you may not revenge or smite, for that pertains to the
father only. But if your Father give you authority in his absence and
command you to smite, if they will not be ruled but abuse you, then you are
another person. Notwithstanding yet you have not put off the first person, but
are a brother still, and must ever love and prove all things to rule with
love: but if love will not serve, then you must use the office of an other
person, or sin against your father. Even so when you are a temporal person
you put not of the spiritual: therefore you must ever love, but when love will
not help, you must with love execute the office of the temporal person. You
must love your neighbor in your heart, because he is your brother in the first
state, yet you must obeie your ruler who has power over you, and when need
requires at his commandment you must go with the constable or like officer
and break open your neighbors door, if he will not open it in the kings
name: yea if he will not yield in the kings name, you may smite him to the
ground till he be subdued, and look what harm he gets, that be upon his
own head.


Timoth. I understand you well. As I am a member of the spiritual body of
Christ I must in all my conversation follow him with patience, meekenes, and
long suffering, ouercomming other men's evils with weldoing: yet if the hurt be
greater then I can bear, I must take a new person on me, and if I be a ruler,
with love seek amendment, if a subject, then in the fear of God, complain to
my ruler. But further I pray you soil me this doubt. If I shall be taken for a
soldier, me thinks that I should then shake off all love and meekenes, and then
I could not practice this Christian rule.


Eusebius. Yes, if our Queen (God save her grace) should send you on warfare into
another country, you must obeie at Gods commandment, and go and avenge your
Princes quarrel, which you know not but that it is right. When you come
thither, remember the two stats in which you are: and know that in the first
state, that is, the regiment spiritual, you must love them with whom you
fight, and that they are your brethren bought with Christ's blood, as well as
you, and for Christ's sake hate them not, yet as you are in the second state a
Souldior at your Princes commandment, you must fight against them, and
maintain your Princes quarrel, and bring them under her power: and
therewithal be content with your Princes wages, neither desire your
adversaries life or goods, save to advantage your Prince. So then a Souldior
need not cast away meekenes, for he may fight with his enemy and slaye him,
and yet love him.


Timoth. Another thing I would know of you, which now comes to my mind, I
have a Landlord, he seems to be a very good man, he countenanceth all the
good prechers in our country, and he rides usually ten miles to hear sermons:
I hold of him an house and a little land, not scarce enough to find my poor
family: my lease is come out and I have taken a new lease, but I have paid
such a great fine, and my yearly rents are so racked, that I fear I and all my
household are like to beg our bread, this is it disquieteth me, and almost
makes me at my wits end, what is your counsel and advise?


Eusebius. Surely it makes my heart to bleed to see how many men brag of
the Gospel, and yet what little fruit the gospel has in them, and what
little love they show, even they which abound in rents and lands. My poor
advise is this, that you would with patience depend upon Gods providence. It
is said, blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the earth, Then let all
the world study to do you wrong, yea let them study to bring you to
extreme misery, and do it too: yet if you be meek, you shall have food
and raiment enough for you and yours: And no doubt, God (who is always true of
his promise) shall raise up some to help you. And my counsel is that you give
your landlorde now and then a Capon, now a pigge, now a Goose, and if you be
able a lamb or a Calfe, and let your wife visit your Land-ladie now and then
with spiced cakes, with apples, pears cheries and such like: and be you
ready with your Oxen, or horses, five or six times in the year, to fetch
home their wood, to plowe their land, then no doubt God may soften their
hearts and move them to have some pity and compassion on your ^oore estate.


Timoth. I have done all this. Naie (may ^t be spoken between you and me) I
am at commandment, and am as a drudge to the^, ^o do their business, and to
leave my own ^ndone, and yet have neither meat, drink, ^or money.


Eusebius. More is the pity. But remember that they which cannot come to see men
^eale uprightly in the world, yet do in their ^arts hunger and thirst after
this righteous^es, are pronounced blessed. Matthew. 5.



Timoth. To let this pass: show me one ^ule how I might generally in all
matters ^e have my self among men: and then for ^his time I will cease to
trouble you.


Eusebius. Ask your own conscience what ^ou may or ought to do. Would you men
^id so with you? then do you it. Would ^ou not be so dealt with? then do it
not. ^^ou would not that men should do you ^rong and oppress you. You would
not ^^at men should do you shame and rebuke, ^e on you, kill you, have your
house from you, ^tice your servant away, or take against ^ur will ought that is
yours. You would not ^at me^ should sell you false ware, when you put the^ in
trust to make it ready, or to lay it out for you: and you would not that men
should deceive you with great oaths, swearing that to be good which is indeed
very naught: you would not that men should sell you ware that is naught, and
too dear, to undo you: do no such thing then unto your neighbors, but as
loath as you would be to buie false ware, and too dear, for undoing your
self: so loath be you to sell false ware, or too dear, for undoing your
neighbor. And in all cases how glad would you be to be helped, so glad be to
help your neighbor. So in all things ask your conscience what is to be done
between your neighbor and you, and she will teach you. But because you are
weary of reasoning I will also end. Desiring God to increase in us his
heavenly graces, as faith and repentance, and love according to his good
pleasure.


Amen.
The Assertion.
A Reprobate may in truth be made partaker of all that is contained in the
Religion of the Church of Rome: and a Papist by his Religion cannot go beyong
a Reprobate.

The first Argument.
HE which may in truth be made partaker of the chief points of the Popish
religion, may be made partaker of all: but a reprobate may be made partaker of
the chief points of the Popish religion: therefore a reprobate may be made
partaker of all.

The proof of the Argument.
THE proposition is plain, and every Papist will grant it: all the
controversy is of the assumption: wherefore I prove (...) thus:

The Sacrament of Penance (as they all it) is one of the chief things in the
^ligion of the Church of Rome: for it is such a sacrament, Catech. Romans Page
424.
that by the power and efficacy of it, the blood of Christ is delivered to
us, to wash away our sins: and they say Ibid. page 419. Tho. 4. did. 14.
quest. 5. art. 1. Canis. and pec. exp.
it has such virtue that the kingdom of heaven is promised to it in the
scriptures, and that it is not regeneration, but an healing of a man
regeneration, but an healing of a man regenerate, and that it pardons sin, as
Baptism. And as touching Contrition, Papists write, Catech. Romans page 447.
Lumb. lib. 4. did. 17.
it has power to do away sin, and to obtein pardon at Gods hand: the same
they speak o^ Confession, which they say delivers from death, opens
Paradise, and gives hop^ of salvation: and hereby it may appear that Penance
is one of the greatest point of the popish religion.

But a reprobate may be truly made partaker of the popish sacrament of
Penance, and indeed perform all in it. There be three parts of Penance,
Contrition of the heart Confession of the mouth, Satisfaction in the deed. All
these three Judas performed: fir^ he had Contrition: for when he saw that o^
Savior Christ was condemned, Math. 27 ver. 3.
then he saw his own sin, and was stricken with grief for his own
treachery, and repente^ and presently after he Ver. 4.
confessed his sin^ openly unto the chief Priests and Elder Also he made
Satisfaction, when he brought again the thirty pieces of silver which he
took to betraie his master.

Again, Contrition of the heart is the ground of Penance: and Papists say, it
is not an act of the holy ghost Carec. Romans page 437.
but an act of man's freewil proceeding from it: and therefore a reprobate may
have it. And as for Satisfaction, if a reprobate cannot do it by himself, yet
he may perform it by another: for so they say Tho. li. 4. did. 2. qu. 1.
art. 1.
that one may satisfy by an other: wherefore, for any thing I ca^ see, a
reprobate may have all that is contained in the popish sacrament of penance.

Faith is an other of the chiefest points, that is, the religion of the Church
of Rome, for Trid. consil. sess. 6. cap. 8. Rhem. Te* Romans
they say, it is the foundation and groundwork of Justification. But reprobats
may have that faith which they mean. For they say, that it is nothing else, but
Canis* Oper. Ca. pa.
a gift of God, and a certain light of the mind, wherewith a man be ing
enlightened gives sure and certain assent to ye revealed word of god. And the
Rhemists The. Test. 2. Cor. 13. 5 And. lib. 6. page 543.
say, it is only an act of the understanding: and Andradius says, that Faith
is only in general actions, and can not come to the particular applying of
any thing: now all this reprobates may have, Heb. 6. 4. Luke 8. 13. Iam. 2.
19.
for their minds are englightened to know the truth, and to be persuaded of
it, and therefore they have this act of the understanding: and this general
faith: yea the Devil himself can do thus much, who believes and trembles.
And the implicit faith which saves the lay man, what reprobate cannot have
it? for there is nothing else required, but to believe as the Church believes,
though he know not how the Church believes. And the Papists themselves say
as much: for their Trid. Co^. sess 6. cap. 9 Andr. lib. 3 Page 200.
Councels hold, that a wicked man and an heretic may have confidence in
Christ, and that an heathen man, by the natural knowledge of God, and by the
works of creation, might have faith, and in a general manner believe in Christ.

The second Argument.
THat religion whose precepts are no directions to attain peace of conscience,
leaves a max^still in a damnable case: but the precepts of the religion of the
church of Rome, are no directions to attain peace of conscience, therefore it
leaves a man in a damnable case: which if it be true, a reprobate may be as
sound a professor of it as any other.

The proof.
THe proposition is certain: because, as long as any man has his conscience
to accuse him of sin before God, he is in state of damnation, 1. Ioh. 3. 20.
as S. John says: If our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and
knows all things. And this is peculiar and proper to the elect children of
God, Romans 5. 1.
to receive these gifts and graces from God, Heb. 10. 22.
the enjoying of which, brings peace of conscience. True it is indeed, that
reprobates receive many graces and gifts at Gods hand, but they are no other
then such as may be joined with the trembling of the conscience, as the devil
is said to believe, but withal to tremble.

The Assumption (namely, that the religion of the Church of Rome cannot pacify
the conscience) may be easily proved on this wise.

A man whose conscience must be truly 1
quieted, must first of all be truly humbled Math. 11. 28.
Come unto me (says our Savior Christ) all ye which are wearied and
burdened, and I will ease you. Whereby it appears, that they who are to have
their consciences refreshed in Christ, must first of all be afflicted with the
sense of Gods judgment: yea they must be pressed down to helward with the
weight and burden of their sins, that they may see it, and from their hearts
confess it, that in themselves there is no way to escape damnation. Mat. 9. 12
Mat. 15. 24. Esa. 44. 11. 1. Cor. 11. 31.
The good Physician Christ Jesus cannot heal us before he has la^ched our
wounds to the very bottom: he never can find any of his sheep before they be
quite lost: he never powers into us the living waters of his spirit, before
we be barren and dry ground void of all moisture: and that man must condemn
himself, that would not have Christ to pronounce sentence of da^natio^ against
him.

Now this true humiliation of a sinner ca^ not be wrought in any man's heart by
the religion of the Church of Rome. True and sound humiliation is wrought by
two means: first by making a man to see the greatness of his sin and
wickedness: secondly, by making him to acknowledge, that he is destitute, and
quite bereft of all goodness. For if a man either see not the greatness of his
sin, or have confidence of any thing in himself, he cannot be humbled: but
neither of these 2. things are performed in the Church of Rome. As touching the
first, the Romish religion is so far from amplifying and enlarging the
greatness of men's sins* that it does extenuate the^, and lessen them out of
measure, for it makes some sins to be venial Gal. 3. 13
when as the least sin that can be against Gods law, deserves damnation,
Canis. Open Cat. page 491.
it teaches that lesser sins are done away by an humble accusation of a
man's self, by saying the Lords prayer, by knocking upon the breast, and by such
like: that greater sins may be done away by alms deeds, and such like
satisfactions. But how can any sin be great, that may be done away with
such easy and sleighr means. Furthermore it teaches, that evil thoughts and
desires, and motions of the heart without consent are no sins: and this
opinion cutteth off all true humiliation: for Romans 7. 9. 10.
Paul never repented, before he understood the meaning of the last
commandment, and perceived thereby, that the desires and lusts of his heart, to
which he did not yield his consent, were sins damnable before God, and
knowing this, he then saw himself to be most miserable, and renou^cing his own
righteousness, he sought for righteousness in Christ. Lastly Conc. Colon. page
46. 54.
it teaches, that original sin is done away in Baptism, and that is the
least sin of all other. What is this but to extenuate ma^s corruption, for
when the root of corruption is taken away, and it is made so little a sin,
actual sins cannot be taken for such heinous matters.

And for the second point, the Church of Rome does too too much extol the
power of man, and his natural strength. Andr. li. 3 Trid. Con. sess. 6. ca. 7.
It says, that all actions of men unregenerate are not sins, and that
original sin needs no repentance, Trid. Co^. sess. 6. ca. 1.
that a man has some free will to do spiritual things, that Gabr. Biel. 3.
sen. did. 27
a man by mere naturales may love God above all things, fear God, believe in
Christ, if we respect the very act of the work, Andr. lib. 3. pa 292.
that the Gentiles might gather out of Philosophy knowledge sufficient for
salvation, Andr. lib. 3. p. 280.
that a man without the help of the holy Ghost, may perform things acceptable
to God, Catech. Romans in prim.
that the mind of man understands of it self many things which be
spiritual and heavenly, Trid. Co^. sess. 6. c. 18.
that a man regenerate, may fulfill the whole law of God: that a man may
prepare himself to receive grace, and to merit grace at Gods hands: that he may
do works of Supererogation, etc. By this it appears yt the church of Rome
ascribes to much to the nature of man Genesis 6. Ephesians. 2. 1. 2.
which is only and altogether evil, dead in sin, chained up in miserable
bondage under Satan the prince of darkness: and therefore it is evident, that
all the preaching that is used in that Church, will not humble a sinner, and
make him deny himself, and therefore their preaching may peradventure benumme
a corrupt conscience and make it secure, but it cannot pacify the troubled
conscience, nor disquiet it by the threatenings of the law, that by the promises
of the Gospel it may be quieted.

Again Trid. Con. sess. 6 cap. 9.
this religion teaches, that a 11.
man must doubt of his salvation as long as he is in this life: behold a Rack
or Gibbet erected by the church of Rome, for the tormenting of tender
consciences, for when a man doubts of his salvation, he also doubts of Gods
love and mercy to him: and he which doubts of Gods love, cannot love God
again: for how can any man love him of whose good will he doubts: and when a
man has not the love of God in him, he has no grace in him, and therefore his
conscience must needs be defiled, and void of true peace, yea, he must needs
be a wicked man, and that Pro. 28. 1
saying of Solomon must needs agree to him: The wicked flies when no man
pursues (by reason of the guiltines of his conscience) but the godly is bold
as a Lion.

Again, Psa. 32. 1
Blessed is the man* (says David) whose sins are pardoned: where he makes
remission of sins to be true felicity: now there is no true felicity but
that which is inioied, and felicity cannot be inioied, unless it be felt,
and it cannot be felt, unless a man know himself to be in possession of it,
and a man cannot know himself to be in possession of it, if he doubt whether
he has it or not: and therefore this doubting of the remission of sins is
contrary to true felicity, and is nothing else but a torment of the
conscience. For a man cannot doubt whether his sins be pardoned or not, but
strait way (if his conscience be not seared with an hot iron) the very
thought of his sin will strike a great fear into him: for the fear of
eternal death, and the horror of Gods judgments will come to his remembrance,
the consideration of which is most terrible. Undoubtedly, this religion must
needs be comfortless. Alas poor men as we are, we are no better then Heb. 6.
10. 19.
passengers in this world, our way it is in the middle of the Sea, where we
can have no sure footing at all, and which way so ever we cast our eyes, we
see nothing but water, even opening it self to devour us quick: the Devil
and our rebellious flesh raise up against us infinite thousands of tempests
and storms to overthrow us: but behold, God of his great and endless mercy
has brought us to Christ, as to a sure Ancker hold: he bibddeth us to undo
our Gables, and fling up our Anckers within the veil, and fasten them in
Christ: we do it as we are commanded, but a Sister of ours (I mean the Church
of Rome) Cant. 1. 5.
passing in the Ship with us (as it seems) who has long taken upon her to
rule the healme, deals too too vnkindelie with us: she vnlooseth our
Anckers, and cutteth in pieces our Gables, she tells us that we may not
presume to fasten our Ancker on the rock: she will have us freely to roue in
the middle of the Sea in the greatest fogges, and the fearefullest tempests
that be: if we shall follow her advise, we must needs look for a
Shippewracke, for the least flawe of wind shall ouerturne us, and our poor
souls shall be plunged in the gulphs of hell.

Lastly, Justification by works causes trouble 111.
and disquietnes to the conscience. No ma^s conscience can be appeased, before
Gods wrath be appeased: and Gods wrath cannot be appeased by any works: for
the best works the regenerate can do, are imperfect, and are stained with some
blemish of corruption, as Esa. 64. 6 Romans 7. 14. 15. 16.
may appear both in the Prophet Esai, and in Paul, both which had a great
misliking of that good which they did, because it was mingled with sin. And
again, every man is bound by duty to keep the whole law, so that if a man
could keep it perfectly, he should do no more then that he is by duty
inioined to do: and therefore he which looks to merit eternal life at Gods
hand by keeping the law, trusts but to a broken staff, and is like the
Bankrupt, that will pay one debt by another: for by his sin, every man is
indebted to the Lord, and is bound to answer to the Lord the full punishment
of all his sins: this debt, the Papist says we may discharge by obedience
to the law, that is by a new debt, which we are as well bound to pay to our
God, as the former.

To end this point, let a man look to be saved by works, and therefore let a
man imploie himself to do the best works he can, yet he shall never come to
know when he has done sufficient to satisfy Gods wrath: and this
uncertainty, all his life, but especially in the hour of death, must needs
disquiet him. And truly, when a man shall have done many thousand works,
yet his heart can never be at quiet, as it appears in the young man, who
though he had labored all his life to fulfill the law, thereby to be saved,
yet distrusting all his doings, he Mar. 10. 17.
asks further of our Savior Christ what he might do to be saved.

Furthermore, it is the doctrine of the Conc. Trid. sess. 5.
Church of Rome, that there is nothing in the regenerate that God can hate: and
that they are inwardly pure, and without spot. A doctrine that will make any
Christian conscience despair: For if a man shall fall to examine himself, he
shall find Romans 7. 14.
that he is sold under sin, Heb. 12. 1
compassed about of sin, Psa. 40. 12
he shall see his particular sins to be as the heirs of his head: at the
sight and feeling of which, he shall find that there is much matter in him
worthy of hatred and damnation too. He being in this case, will begin to
doubt whether he be the child of God or not: and perseuering in this doubting,
he shall be driven to despair of Gods love toward him, considering that he
cannot find any such pureness in himself as the doctrine of the Church of
Rome requires. Lastly, experience it self teaches that the Romish religion
can bring no peace to the conscience: in that some for the maintaining of it
have dispaired. As Frau^ces Spira, who against his own conscience having
abiured the truth; and subscribed to the doctrine of the Romish Church, most
fearefullie dispaired of his salvation. Which could not have been if that
doctrine had been agreeable to Gods word which is spirit and life to the
receiver. For the same Illirias de Fide. Epist Se^ar. de morte Diazij.
cause Latomus a doctor of Louane dispaired, crying that he was damned because
he had opposed himself to the known truth. This also befell Gardner at his
death, as the book of Acts and Monuments declares.

The third Argument.
THat religion which agrees to the corruption of man's nature, a Reprobate may
truly profess it^ the religion of the Church of Rome agrees to the
corruption of man's nature: therefore a Reprobate may truly profess it.

The proof.
I Need not stand to prove the proposition, the Assumption is rather to be
confirmed: which first I will prove by induction of particulars. 1. That a man
should be justified by works, is an opinion settled in nature, as may appear
in them that crucified our Savior Christ: for when they were pricked in their
hearts at Peter's Sermon, Acts. 2. 37 Ioh. 6. 28. Mat. 10. 17
they said, Men and brethren what shall we do to be saved, and this said
the young man before named, not what should I believe, but what should I do to
be saved: for that in them it appears, that it is a natural opinion of all
men to think that they must be saved by doing of somewhat. A Papist will
say, though this be natural thus to think, yet it may be good: for there
is some goodness in nature.

I answer, that the wisdom of the flesh is enmity to Gods wisdom, Romans 8.
7. and all men by nature are nothing but flesh, for naturally they are the
children of wrath. 2. The worshipping of God in Images, is a great matter in
the Church of Rome: but this manner of worshipping is nothing but a work of the
flesh, which thus I prove: Gal. 5. ^0
Idolatry is natural, and a work of the flesh, but to worship God in Images,
is Idolatry. The children of Israel when they erected the golden Calfe, they
did commit Idolatry, and yet they did not worship the Calfe it self, but God
in the Calfe. For when the Calfe was made, they Exo. 32. 5
proclaimed an Holidaie, not to the Calfe, but to the Lord. And Baal, that
detestable Idol, was nothing* but the Image of God, as appears in Hosea the
Prophet. At that day, says the Hos. 2. 16.
the Lord thou shall call me no mo^ Baal.

It remains therefore, that to serve Go^ in an Image, is a work of the flesh,
and altogether agrees to the vile corruption ^ nature. 3. Mat. 20. 2
Pride, and a desire to be adua^ced above other, is a natural corruption:
(...) this agrees the Popes Primacie, his do^ble Sword, and triple Crown: yea
the ou^ ragious pomp of that seat is as a pair o^ bellows to kindle the
concupiscence, and to make the hidden sparks of pride to break out into a
great flame. 4. Doubting of Gods providence and mercy, is ^ natural
corruption in all men: to this agrees, and from hence issues that foolis^ and
vain opinion, concerning doubting ^ our salvation, and of the remission of
sin 5. Selfeloue, and selfeliking or natural co^ruptions: to this agrees
that doctrine ^ the Papists, not overmuch to abase ou^ selves, but to
maintain free will by nature, and to think that we have so much goodness, that
we are able to prepare our selves to receive and in some sort to merit grace.
6. Idleness and riotousnes is a corruption natural, and to it very fitly
answers the great number of feasts, of holidaies, of half holidaies which
the church of Rome uses. ^. Covetousness is a natural corruption, and ^o the
feeding of this vice serves Purgato^ie, a fire of great gain, which in very
truth, ^f it had not burned very hot, the fire in the Popes kitchen had burned
very cold: hi^herto serve Pilgrimages, saying of Masses, and selling of
Pardons for money. 8. To be ^t liberty is the desire of nature: answerable ^o
this is that opinion, that the Spiritualitie is ^o be exempted from subjection
to Magistrates. 9. To commit adultery is natural: to this agrees the Stews,
and the permission of simple fornication. 10. Ignorance is a filthy corruption
in nature: this the Church of Rome makes the mother of devotion, and it is
inioined the lay man as a means of his salvation: for he must believe as the
Church believes, he is not bound to know. 11. Infidelity is natural, and to
this agrees that they call upon Saints and Angels, the Lord having commanded
them to call upon him in the name of Christ, what argues this else, but hearts
distrusting God^ goodness, and guilty consciences. 12. Images in the Church of
Rome came from infidelity, because men in reason could no^ persuade
themselves that God was present unless that were made manifest by some sign
and Image. Which thing the Israelites Exodus 32. 1.
declared, when they said to Aaron (...) the wilderness in Moses absence, Make
(...) gods to go before us. 13. Satisfactions for sin are natural: for Mich.
6. 7 I say. 58. 4. 5
wicked men when they have offended God, they have alwai^^ used some ceremonies
to pacify God with which when they have performed, the^ they think they have
done enough. 14. The Church of Rome says, that the Scripture^ are dark and
obscure: the blind man fin^ death fault with the darkness of the Sunne^ if the
Scriptures appear to any to be obscure, the fault is not in the Scriptures,
bu^ in the blindness of the mind of him which reads and hears them. 15.
Lastly pardons, they open a gappe to all licentiou^* nes: therefore they agree
to man's corrup^ nature: for who almost will not sin, when he may get a
pardon for his sins, for a li^ tle piece of money, as twenty shillings, or
four Nobles.

It is natural to a man to serve God in certain ceremonies, without the power
of godliness: and this service is prescribed by the Fox Act^ in begin.
religion of the Church of Rome, which stands only in outward and corporal
ceremonies, as the outward succession of Bishops, garments, vestures,
gestures, colors, choice of meat, difference of days, times, and places,
hearing, seeing, saying, touching, tasting, numbering of Beads, gilding and
worshipping of Images, building Monasteries, rising at midnight, silence in
Cloisters, abstaining fr^ flesh and whitmeat. Fasting in Lent, keeping
Imberdaies, hearing Mass and divine service, seeing and adoring the body in
form of bread, receiving holy water, and holy bread, creeping to the
Cross, carrying Palms, taking Ashes, bearing Candles, Pilgrimage going,
censing, kneeling, knocking, al^ers, superalters, candlestickes, pardons: In
orders Crossing, anointing, shauing, for swearing ma^^i^ge; in Baptism,
salting, crossing, spatling, ex^^^i^^ng, washing of hands: at Easter,
confession* (...) ^irge, satisfaction, and in receiving with (...) ^ew shaven,
to imagine a body where they (...) and though he were there present to be
seen (...) ^he outward seeing and touching of him of (...) without faith
conduces no more then it did (...) Jews. At Rogation days to carry banners,
to follow the Cross, to walk about the fields; after Pentecost to go about
with Corpus Christi play. At Hallowmas to watch in the Church, to say a dirge
or commendation, and to ring for all souls, to pa^^ tithes truly, to give to
the high Altar. And if a man will be a Priest to sa^e Mass and Mattens, to
serve the Saint of that day, and to lif^ well over the head. In sickness to
be anneled, to take his Rites, after his death, t^ have Funeral, and Obites
said for him, an^ to be rong for at his Funeral Months mind* and Year
mind: This is the sum o^ the Catholic Religion, standing in bodily
Actions, not in any motion or work o^ the holy GHOST woorking in the heart.

The Moral Law containing perfect 11.
righteousness, is flat opposite to man's corrupt Nature: therefore
whatsoeue^ Religion shall repeal and make of none effect the commandments of
the Moral Law, that same Religion must neede^ join hands with the
corruption of Nature, and stand for the maintenance of it* This does the
Religion of the Church o^ Rome: it may be, it does not plaineli^ repeal
them, yet in effect it does: Mat. 15. 3
an^ if it shall frustrate but any one point of any one commandment, the
whole commandment, yea, the whole law thereby is made in vain. 1 The first
commandment requires, that we have the true Iehoua for our only God: the
church of Rome makes other gods beside this true God: it makes the body of
Christ to be God, because they hold, it may be in many places, in heaven, in
earth, at the same time, which thing is only proper to God. It makes every
Saint departed to be God, because it holds, that Saints do hear us now
being upon the earth, and that they know our thoughts when we pray to them,
which none but the true GOD can do. It makes the Pope to be God, and that in
plain words. Dec. did. 69. satis euidenter.
Pope Nicholas says, Constat, summum Pontificem a pio principe Constantino
Deum appellari. It is well known, that the Pope of the godly Prince
Constantine was called GOD. Again, in Extraua. Ioh. 22. cu^ inter. in glossa.
the extrauagants of the same Cannon law it is written, Dominus Deus noster
Papa, Our Lord GOD the Pope. And again, Council. later. sess. 4
Christopher Marcellus said to the Pope, Tu es alter deus in ^erris, Thou art
another God upon earth: and the Pope took it to himself. As the Pope in plain
words is made God, so the power given to him declares the same. Extrau. de
mayor. and obed^dientia.
He can make holy that which is unholy, and justify the wicked and pardon
sins: Did. 34. can. lect. in gloss. did. 82. can. Presb.
he may dispense contrary to the saying of an Apostle: he can change the
nature of things, and of nothing make somewhat. What is all this, but to place
the Pope in Gods room, and to rob the Lord of his majesty.

Again, the Church of Rome, makes Marie the Mother of Jesus to be as God. In
the Breuiarie reformed and published at the commandment of Pius, In officio
par. beatae Mariae. ad matut.
she is called A Gods, in express words: and she is further termed the
Queen of heaven, the Queen of the world, the gate of heaven, the mother of
grace and mercy: Yea she is far exalted above Christ, and he in regard of
her is made but a poor underling in heaven: for Papists in their service unto
her they pray on this manner saying: Show thy self to be a mother: and cause
thy son to receive our prayers: set free the captives and give light to the
blind. Breuiar. refor. infesto Exalt. Crucis.
Lastly the very Cross is made as a God. For they salute it, by the name of
their only hope, and pray it to increase justice to the godly, and to give
sinners pardon. Wherefore the Church of Rome beside the one true God
distinguished into three persons, the father, the son, the holy Ghost, makes
also many other, and so in truth has repealed this first commandment.

And they have very plainly repealed the second commandment in that they
teach it lawful to make images of the true God, and to worship him in them.
For the flat contrary is the very scope of this commandment: namely that no
image must be made of the true Iehoua: nor any worship be performed unto him in
an image: which appears thus. In Deutronomie Moses makes a large
commentary of this commandment, and this very point he Deuteronomy. 4. 15. 16.
sets down expresselie, saying, take heed to your selves: for ye saw no
image in the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of
the fire: that ye corrupt not your selves, and make you a graven image or
representation of any figure, etc. His argument I set down thus. As God
appeared in mount Horeb, so he is to be conceived and represented: but he
appeared in no image in mount Horeb, only his voice was hard: therefore he is
not to be conceived or represented in any image: but men are to be content,
if they may hear his voice. Again, that sin to which the people of Israel
were specially given even that does the Lord especially forbid: but to this
were the people of Israel specially given, not so much to make Images of
false Gods, as to make Images of the true God, and to worship him in them:
which I prove thus.

In the book of Judges it is said that Judge. 2. 11.
the children of Israel did wickedlye in the sight of the Lord, and served
Baalim. Now these Baalim, what are they? Surely Idols resembling the true God,
as the prophet Hosea declares, and at that day says the Lord thou shall call
me Ishai, and shall call Hos. 2. 10.
me no more Baali. Here it appears that the Israelites meaning was not to
worship a false God, but the true God in Baalim. And Aaron when he made the
golden Calfe proclaimed Exodus 32. 5
that the next day should be holy day, not of any false God but of the
Lord that brought them out of Egypt. The prophet Esaie after that he had set
forth Gods majesty very worthelye, he comes in with Esa. 40. 18.
this conclusion: To whom then will ye liken GOD? or what similitude will ye
set up of him? which declares that the Jews after the manner of the Gentiles,
ran a whoring after Idols, that is Images not only of false Gods, but also of
the true God. I conclude therefore as I began, that the Church of Rome, by
maintaining Images, has repealed this commandment.

Neither does it show less favor to the third commandment: which also is
repealed. First in that they teach men to 1. Cor. 15. 28
give the glory which is proper to GOD, to some thing else: it is proper to
GOD after the day of Judgment to be all in all: this they give to Marie,
saying that she is all in all.

It is proper to Christ in respect of other creatures to be a light lightning
all that come into the world, yet they pray to Marie to give light to the
blind. It is John. 10. 9.
proper to Christ to be the redeemer of mankind, and this work of
redemption, is ascribed to Marie, whom Papists call their hope, their joy,
their mediatresse, a medecin for the diseased, a defense from the enemy, a
friend in the hour of death. Again they make Saint Martin A Priest according
to the order of Melchisedecke, which is proper to Christ.

Secondly they hold that the people is to be barred from the reading of the
scriptures, unless it be in an unknown tongue, and so they maintain
ignorance and the profaning of Gods name. For the free preching of the word,
and therefore also the hearing, learning, reading, searching of it, is the
glorifiyng of the word, and so the glorifying 2. These. 3. 1.
of Gods name.

The fourth commandment is repealed in that they require that their feast
days should be kept as solemnlie as the Lords sabbath Con. Mogunt, c. 36. 37.
Matiscan* 2. c. 1. 2.
day. For they must be kept in all honor and comlines: and men must rest from
all their labors, from morning to evening, as on the Sabbath: whereas
contrariwise, the Lord has given permission to his servants to labor the six
days, sobeit, on the seventh they will rest from the works of their callings,
and do the works of the spirit.

They repeal the fifth commandment in that they teach that their clergy
has an immunitie, and therefore is not bound to perform obedience to
Magistrates, for so Matisc. Council. ca. 7. 9. 8
they have decreed, that Clerks are to be judged only of Bishops: and that
they are only to reskue them from injuries. Again that the Bishop must not
be judged of the secular power: and that the Pope himself owes no subjection
to Kings, Princes, Emperors, but has power to make them, and to put them down
at his pleasure. But S. Paul for the maintening of the fifth commandment, bids
every soul be subject to the higher powers: and therefore the pope with his
clergy (as Chrysostom has expounded it) must be subject to civil
Magistrates, unless they will exclude themselves out of the number of men, for
Paul speaks to all.

Against the sixte commandment they Matisc. 2. ca. 8.
have decreed asyles for murderers, plainly permitting them which fear
authority to have safety in the lap of their mother the Church. Thus they
annihillat Gods commandment, yea and more then this, whether tends all that
they teach but the very murdering of souls? For example, salvation by works
of grace, is one of their chief ^oints. But that man that is persuaded that he
must be saved by his works, must also ^ut his trust in them, and he which
trusts ^o his works is accursed before God. For ^ursed is that man that
trusts in man, whether Ier. 17. 5
^t be himself or other.

The seventh commandment is re^ealed diverse ways. First in that they
maintain the occasions of adultery and fornication: namely, the vow of
single life both in men and women, when as they have not received the gift from
God to be continent: which gift when they want, and yet are bound to single
life, they must needs break out into much looseness. This sin Elog. 5. Lib.
4. 5. 9.
made Mantuan, Palingenius, and Petrarch to cry out against the Church of
Rome. Again some Papists defend the tolleration of the Stews in Rome, for
the avoiding of greater evils. And in the Council of Trent chastity and
Priests marriage are Sect. 24. c. 9
made opposite, so that marriage with the^ is a filthy thing, although God
has ordained it for the avoiding of fornication in all. Furthermore that which
is most abominable and proves the Church of Rome to be an Antichristian
Church: they maintain marriages within the degrees forbidden both by the law
of nature, and of gods word. For in the table of consanguinitie they which are
placed in the transuerse unequal line cannot marry, because they are as
Parents and children: yet if they be distant four degrees on diverse sids from
the common stock they may marry together by the Cannon law. As for example,
the graund uncle may marry his Sisters Greg. ca. 9. de co^sang. aunculus
maximus Abneptis.
nephews niece, a thing very filthy in nature considering that a man cannot
marry with any honesty his sisters child. To go further, by gods word they
which are dista^t 4. degrees in the transuerse equal line may marry together,
as Cousin germans. Thus the daughters of Zelophehad were married Numb. 36. 11.
to t^eir fathers brothers sons: this example I take it is warrant of the
lawfulness of this marriage else where: Yet the Cannon law condemns this
marriage of Cousin germans, and the marriage of their children after them
though they be eight degrees distant. Thus the Church of Rome does ouerwhart
the Lord: where he gives liberrie they restrain it, and when he restrai^eth
men, then they give liberty.

They repeal the eight commandment by their spiritual Merchandise in which
they sell those things which are not to be sold, as Crosses to dead men,
images, prayers, the sound of belles, remission of sins and the merits by
which men may come to the kingdom of heaven: their shaueling Priests will do
no duty without they be feed with money, hence comes the ^rouerbe, No penny
no pater noster.

They teach men to bear false witness, and so to sin against the ninth
commandment, in that they hold that Marie is Revel. 7. 11 and. 5. 10.
the Queen of heaven: whereas indeed she is no queen, but does continually
cast down her crown before Christ with the rest of the saints. And a man may
as well bear false witness in speaking too much as in speaking too little.

In the tenth commandment the first motions that go before consent are
forbidden: otherwise there shall be no difference between it and the rest, For
they also are spiritual, and forbid inward motions: but the difference is that
they forbid only the motions that go with consent. Now, the Papists say
that these motion are no sin properly unless consent follow: and therefore
they in express words repeal this commandment. For if concupi^cence and the
first motions be no sins properly then there need no prohibition of them.

The fourth Argument.
THat religion which is contrary to it self* only a mere invention of man:
the religion^ the Church of Rome is quite contrary to it self therefore it is
only an inuenti on of man: which if ^t be true, as well a reprobate as any
other may perform the things required in it.

The proof.
THe proposition is most true, because it is a privilege of Gods word, and so
of ^he true religion gathered forth of it, to be consonant to it self in all
points: which pro^erly no doctrines nor writings beside can ^aue. The
Assumption may be made ma^ifest by an induction of particular exam^les.

1 The Church of Rome says, that men ^re saved by grace: and again it says,
that men are saved by works. A flat contradicti^n. For Paul says, if election
be of grace, it Romans 11. 6.
^s no more of works: or else were grace no more grace, but if it be of
works, it is no more grace: for else were work no more work. Answer is made.
Yt in this place Paul Rhem. Test. upon Romans 11. 6.
speaks of works of nature, which indeed ^re contrary to grace: but not of
works of regeneration which are not contrary to grace. This answer is false:
for Paul in a like ^lace unto this opposes grace and works of regeneration.
Ye are saved by grace (says he) through faith, and that not of your selves,
for it is the gift of God: not of works, Ephesians. 2. 8. 9.
least any should boast himself. For we are his workmanship created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, that we should walk in them. Now let the Church of
Rome speak what are the works of which a man may^ most of all boast? And what
are the work^ for the doing of which we must be fashioned a new in Christ
Jesus? Assuredly the^ must be the works of regeneration, dipped and died in the
blood of Christ (as they speak* wherefore it is evident, that Paul's meanin^ is
to conclude, that if we be saved by grace we cannot be saved by works of
regeneration*

2 The Church of Rome confuteth an^ condemns in Councels, and derideth thi^
doctrine that we teach, that men are to b^ justified by the imputation of the
righteou^nes of Christ: which righteousness is not i^ us but in Christ. And the
Rhemists call it Rhem. Test. Romans 2. 23.
fantastical justice, a new no justice: B^^ herein that Church is contrary to
it self: for it defends works of supererogation an^ works of satisfaction of
one man for an other The. Test. Coloss. 2. verse. 24.
and their ground is, because the faithful (...) all members of one body, and
have fellowshi^ one with an other, and therefore one may satisfy for an other.
Hereby it is plain, that the Church of Rome most of all defends that
imputation of righteousness, which most of all it has oppugned. For when one
man satisfies for an other, the work of one man is imputed to another. But
what? shall one man satisfy for an other, and shall not Christ by his
righteousness satisfy for us? shall God accept the work of one man for an
other, and not acept the righteousness of Christ for us: Truly there is greater
fellowship and conjunction between the head and the members, than of the
members among themselves: because they are joined together by means of the
head.

3 It holds that the guilt and fault of sin may be remitted by Christ: and
yet the temporal punishment of sin be vnremitted: but these are quite
contrary. Paul says, there Romans 8. 1.
is now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Yet if a man were
punished for his sin after he were in Christ, and had the fault of sin
remitted, some condemnation should now remain him. And David Psalm. 32. ^.
says, Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin: therefore he to
whom the Lord imputes no sin, has not only the guilt of sin, but also the
punishment of his sin remitted: otherwise he could not be blessed but
miserable. And this agrees not with gods justice, when the fault is quite
pardoned, and a man is guilty of no sin, that then any punishment should be
laid August. de verb. Dom Ser. 37.
on him. And S. Augustine says, that Christ by taking upon him the punishment
of sin, and not taking upon him the fault, took away both the punishment and
the fault. Wherefore this opinion, that Christ has taken away the guilt of
sin, overthrows al Satisfactions and Purgatory, because the fault and
guilt being taken away, all punishment for sin is also taken away.

4 Transubstantiation is a monster standing on manifold contradictions. First,
it makes Christ's body to be in many places: an evident contradiction. For
it is of the nature and essence of a body to be in one place only: which I
prove thus. A body is a magnitude, a magnitude is a continued quantity, a
continued quantity cannot be but in one place: therefore a body cannot be but
in one place. In this argument the doubt is only of the last part: which
undoubted is most true. For it is called a continued quantity, because his
parts are continued and knit together the one with an other by a common term
or bond, as a line by a point, a plane and his parts by a line, a solid by a
superficies or plane. Now, these points ca^ in no wise be continued, unless
every one of the^ keep one only special place. For examples sake: supose the
plane a, b, c, d, to be divided into 3. parts, l, k, l, by two lines, e, g, f,
h, which do both divide the three parts and continue the^ the one with the
other. Now I say, that every one of the parts may be continued with his next
fellow, it is necessary, that every one of them should have one special and
distinct place. That the first place of the plane, I, may be continued with,
k, it must be situated only there where it is, and no where else: for if it
shall be situate elsewhere, as in the place m, then it cannot be continued with
k. Now then, if the parts must of necessity have their own particular place
only, then the whole figure a, b, c, d, must also be only in one place. And
this is that which the prince of Philosophers teaches, that every magnitude
has his parts sited in some one place, one by an other, so that a man may
Arist. Categ. cap. de quant.
say of them, here it is, and there it is not. To conclude, therefore this
must need, agree to a body and to the parts of it to be in one only place
alone. So that the Church of Rome when it says that Christ's body is in many
places: in effect they say, that Christ's body is no body: for if it be a
body, it is only in one place: and if it be in many places, it is no body.
They object that God is omnipotent. True indeed: but there be some things,
the doing of which agreth not with gods power, as to make contradicentia things
contradictorie to be both true: of which sort these are. For, that Christ's
body is a true body, and that it is in many places at once, are flat
contrary: because (as has been showed) it is essential to all magnituds to be
in one place, and therefore to a body. And God cannot take away that which is
essential to a thing, the essence remaining whole. 2. Again,
transubstantiation makes the Accidents of Bread and Wine to remain without
the substance. Here also is another contradiction as impossible as the former:
for it is a common saying in schools, Accidentis esse, est inesse. It is of the
essence of an accident to be in the substance. Now therefore, if the accidents
be, there is also the Bread and Wine: and if there be no substance of Bread or
Wine, neither can there be any accidents. 3. It holds, that Bread is turned
into the body of Christ, and therefore it must needs hold, that Christ's body
is made of Bakers bread, and yet it holds and teaches that Christ's body is
only made of the seed of Mary, quite overthrowing the former
Transubstantiation.

5 It teaches, that a man must always doubt of his salvation: and likewise it
teaches, that in praying we are to call God Father, which are things quite
contrary. For who can truly call God Father, unless he have the spirit of
adoption, and be assured that he is the child of God. For if a Romans 8. 16.
man shall call God Father, and yet in his heart doubt whether he be his
Father or not, he plaieth the dissembling hypocrite: wherefore, to doubt of
salvation, and to say Can. Tres sant. de pen^. did. 1. Lumb. lib. 4. did. 16*
Can. de quotis. d^ de poenit did. 3.
Our Father, etc. in truth are contrary.

6 The Church of Rome makes prayer to be one of the chief means to satisfy
for sins. But prayer indeed is an asking of pardon for sin: Now asking of
pardon and satisfaction for sin are contrary: therefore by the judgment of
the Papists, prayer which is a satisfaction is no satisfaction. And in deed,
let us consider what madness is contained in this popish divinity: the poor
beggar comes very hungry to the rich man's door to crave his alms: and
straightwaies by his begging he will merit and deserve it. The same does the
Papist, he prays very poorly for the thing which he wants, yet he looks
very proudly to merit no less than the kindome of heaven by it.

7 Doubting of salvation and hope cannot Romans 5. 5.
agree together, for hope makes a man not to be ashamed, that is, it never
disappointeth him of the thing which he looks for. And therefore it is called
the anchor of the soul Hebr. 6. 19.
both sure and steadfast, which enters into that which is within the veil. So
that true hope and the certain assurance of salvation go together.

8 True prayer and justification by works cannot stand together. For he which
prays truly must be touched inwardly with a lively feeling of his own
misery, and of the want of that grace, whereof he stands in need. Now this
cannot be in the heart of ^^at man that looks to merit the king^ome of
heaven by his works: for he that ^^n do this, may justly conceive some^hat
of his own excellency.

9 Papists teach, that it is great boldness (...) come immediately unto GOD
without ^^e intercession of Saints: and therefore ^^ey use to Breuiar, and
Missali refor. vbique
pray to Marie, that she would ^raie to Christ to help them: yet on the
^ontrarie, when they have so done, they ^ray to God immediately, that he would
re^eiue the intercession of Marie for them. And thus they are become
intercessors be^eene Marie and God. Yea when they ^ffer up Christ, praying GOD
to accept their gifts and sacrifices, the humble priest that will not pray to
GOD, but by the ^editation of Saints, is then a mediator ^etweene Christ Jesus
and God his Father.

10 It holds, that in the Mass, the Priest ^ffereth up Christ to his Father
an unbloody ^acrifice. This is a thing impossible: for if Christ in the Mass
be sacrificed for sin, the^ ^e must die and his blood must be shed Heb. 9 (...)
2. And in the Scriptures these two sayings (...) Christ is dead, Christ is
offered up in sacri^ice) are all one. So then, the Papist when he ^upposeth
that there may be an unbloody sacrifice, in effect he says thus much, ther^
is a sacrifice, which is no Sacrifice.

8 In the Canon of the Mass the church of Rome prays on this wise. We
humbly beseech thee most merciful father, by Jesus Christ, thy son and our
Lord, yt thou would accept these gifts and oblations and these holy
Sacrifices, which we thy Church offe^ to thee, etc. where first they offer up
Christ to God the Father in the name of Christ, and so they make Christ to be
his own mediator. Again, they desire God to bless and to accept his own*
Son: for they offer up Christ. If they say he needs now the blessing of his
Father, they make Christ a weak and imperfect Christ: if he need not the
blessing of his Father, their prayer is needelesse. Also they desire GOD to
accept not one gift or one sacrifice, but in the plural number, these gifts
and sacrifices: whereas they hold that Christ's body is one only body, and
therefore but one sacrifice. And thus they are at variance with themselves.

9 Papists, in word they say that they believe and put their trust in God: yet
whereas they look to be saved by their works, they set the confidence of their
hearts in truth upon their own doings.

10. They put such holiness in Matrimo^ie, that they make it one of their 7.
Sacra^e^ts, which Rhem. Test. page 523.
confer grace to the partakers ^f them: yet they forbid their Clergy to
^arrie, Pap^. Syric. us. Decret. epist. Sess. 24. c. 9
because to live in marriage is to ^ue according to the flesh, and the Coun^el
of Trent opposes marriage and chastity.

11. It teaches, that souls kept in Pur^atorie, may be redeemed by
Sacrifices and Suffrages. Against this, is a Canon of their law taken out of
Saint Hieromes Can. in present. 11. 13. q. 3.
We ^nowe that in this life we may help one another, either by Prayers, or
by good ^ounsell: but when we shall come before the judgment seat of Christ,
neither Job, nor Daniel, nor Noe, may entreat ^or any; but every man to
bear his own burden. And according to another Canon going under the name of
Gelasius Can. legatur. 4. q. 1.
Bishop of Rome, Either there is no Purgatory, or the souls which go
thither, shall never return.

12. And to conclude, the most points of their religion are contrary to their
Canons, as by searching, may appear in these examples.

1. The dead cannot hear the prayers of 1 Con. fat^ndum 13* q. 2.
them which call upon them. 2. Peter and Paul were two of the chie^ 2 C.
Beati. 2. q. 7.
Apostles, and it is hard to say, which was above the other. 3. Leo the fourth
living in the year 846^ 3 C. de Capitulis did. 10.
acknowledged Lotharius the Emperor for his Prince. 4. No Bishop may be
called universal* 4 C. nullus. did. 99. 5 C. legimus. di. 93.
5. The Church of Rome has no more authority over other Churches, than other
Churches over it. 6 A Priest and a Bishop were in time^ 6 C. legimus. di. 93.
C. Olim. did. 95. 7 C. verbum 6. magna. C. Conuertimini de penit. did. 1. 8
C. quod dicit. di. 41 9 C. luminosa. 18. q. 2.
past all one. 7 The Pope has no power to give o^ sell Pardons. 8. There can
be no merit by fasting, o^ abstinence from flesh. 9. The Mass is nothing but
the form of divine sacrifice.
By this which has been said, it does in part appear, that the religion of
the Church of Rome is repugnant to it self, and it could not so be, if it were
from the word of God.

A Corollarie gathered out of the former assertion.
1. A man being endued with no more grace then that which he may obtain by
the religion of the Church of Rome, is still in the state of damnation.

A Dialogue containing the conflictes between Satan and the Christian.
Satan. OVile helhound, thou art my slave, and my vassal, why then shakest
thou off my yoke.


Christian. By nature I was thy vasal, but Christ has redeemed me.


Satan. Christ redeemeth no Reprobates, such as thou art.


Christian. I am no Reprobate.


Satan. Thou art a Reprobate, for thou ^halt be condemned.


Christian. Lucifer, to pronounce dam^ation, belongs to God alone: thou art
no Judge, it is sufficient for thee to be an accuser.


Satan. Though I cannot condemn thee, yet I know God will condemn thee.


Christian. Yea, but God will not condemn me.


Satan. Go too, let us try the matter. Is not God a Lord, and a King over
thee and may he not therefore give thee a law to keep, and punish thee with
hell fire, if thou break it?


Christian. Yes.


Satan. And have thou kept the law o^ this thy Lord and King?


Christian. No.


Satan. Let us proceed further? Is not the same Lord also a most righteous
judge, and therefore a most sharp revenger of sin?


Christian. Yes truly.


Satan. Why then will thou flatter thy self thou hypocrite: God cannot wink
a^ thy sins, except he should be unjust. Wher^fore there is no remedy, thou
art sure to b^ damned: hell was provided for thee, and now it gapeth to devour
thee.


Christian. There is remedy enough to deliver me from condemnation. For God i^
not only (as thou affirmest) a Lord and Judge, but also a saving, and a most
merciful Father.


Satan. But thou fire brande of hell fire, and child of perdition, look for
no mercy at Gods hands, because thou art a most grievous sinner: for,

1. Original sin runs wholly over thee, as a loathsome botch or leprosy.
2. Thy mind knows not the things that be of God: 3. In the law of God thou
art stark blind, saving that thou have a few principles of it to make thee
inexcusable. 4. The Gospel is foolishnes and madness unto thee: thou make no
better account of it then of thine own dream. 5. Thy conscience is corrupt,
because* it flattereth thee, and excuses thy sin. 6. Thy memory keeps and
remembers nothing, but that which is against Gods word; but things
abominable and wicked, it keeps long. 7. Thy will has no inclination to
that which is good, but only to sin and wickedness. 8. Thy affections are
set only on wickedness: they are as mighty Giants and Princes in thee, they
have thee at commandment. Remember, that for very anger thou ^ast been
sick: that the lust of thy flesh has driven thee to madness: forget not thy
Atheism, thy contempt of Gods word, thy inward pride, thy envy, hatred,
malice, thy covetousness, and infinite other wicked desires, which have led thee
captive, and made thee outrageous in all kind of naughtines. 10. Thy actual
sins committed partly in secret, partly in public, are most filthy and
most infinite. Remember how in such a place, at such a time, thou did commit
fornication: in another place thou did steal, etc. God saw this I warrant
thee^ yea, all thy sins are written in his booke^ wherefore thou cursed
wretch, all hope of mercy is cut off from thee.



Christian. But Gods mercy far exceeds all these my sins: and I cannot
be so Isai. 1. 18. Acts. 1. 23. 38. 1. Tim. 1. 15 Psalm. 103. 11. 12. 13.
infinite in sinning, as God is infinite in mercy and pardoning.


Satan. Dare thou presume to think of Gods mercy? why, the least of thy
sins deserves damnation.


Christian. None of my sins can fear Isai. 53. 2. 3 4. 5.
me, or dismaie me. Christ has borne the full wrath and vengeance of his
Father upon the Cross, even for me, that I might be* delivered from
condemnation, which was due unto me.


Satan. If Gods purpose were not to condemn thee, persuade thy self, he
would never lay so many afflictions and crosses on thee, as he does. What is
this want of good name? this weakness and sickness of the body? these terrors
of thy mind? this dullness and frowardnes of thy heart? what are all these (I
say) and many other evils, but the beginnings, and certain flashings of the
fire of Hell.


Christian. Nay, rather my afflictions are ^liuelie testimonies of my
salvation. For god as a loving Father, partly by them, as with Heb. 12. 6. 9.
10. 1. Pet. 2. 21. Genesis 42. 21
^courges chastneth my disobedience, and brings me into order: partly
conformeth me unto my Savior Christ, and so by little and little, lays open
to me mine own 1. Cor. 11. 12. Romans 8. 26.
sins, that I may dislike my self and hate them: and makes me to renounce
the ^or^de, thy eldest son, and stirs me up to call upon him, and to pray
earnestly with ^grones and sighs, which I am not able to express with any
words, as I feel them.


Satan. Thy afflictions are heavy, and ^omfortlesse, therefore they can not
be arguments of Gods favor.


Christian. Indeed their nature is to bring grief and heaviness to the soul,
but I have had joy in the midst of my afflictions, and Romans 5. 2. 3. 4.
strength sufficient to bear them, and after them have been many ways
bettered, which befalls to none of the wicked: and for that Romans 8. 28. Psa.
119. 71.
cause, it is a great persuasion to me, that ^ shall not be damned with the
wicked world, but in spite of all thy power, pass from death to everlasting
life.


Satan. After these thy manifold afflictions, thou must suffer death, which is
mo^^ terrible, and a very entrance to Hell.


Christian. Death has lost his sting b^ Christ's death: and unto me it shall
be nothing else but a passage unto everlasting life*


Satan. Admit thou shall be deliuere^ from hell by Christ, what will this
auail^ thee, considering that thou shall never com^ to the kingdom of heaven?
for Christian death only delivers thee from death eternal, it can not advance
thee to euerlastin^ life.


Christian. I am now at this time a member of Christ's kingdom, and after this
lif^ shall reign with him for ever in his everlasting kingdom. Romans 5. ver.
8. 3. 4.



Satan Thou never did fulfill the law^ therefore thou can not come into
the kingdom of heaven.


Christian Christ has perfectly fulfilled every part of the law for me:
and by this his obedience imputed unto me, I my self do keep the law.


Satan Be it so, for all this, thou art far enough from the kingdom of
heaven, into which no unclean thing shall ever enter: thou, although that
Christ has suffered death, and fulfilled the law for thee, yet thou art in
part unclean: thy cursed nature and the seeds of sin are yet remaining in
thee. Romans 2. 3. Ioh. 17. 19.



Christian. Christ in the virgins womb was perfectly sanctified by the holy
ghost: and this perfect holiness of his humane nature is imputed to me: even as
Jacob put on Esaus garments, to get his Fathers blessing: so I have put on the
righteousness of Christ, as a long white robe covering my sins, and making me
appear perfectly righteous, even before Gods judgment seat.


Satan Indeed, God has made promise John. 3. 14. 15.
unto mankind in all these mercies and benefits in Christ: but the condition
of this promise is faith, which thou want, and therefore can not make any
account, that Christ's sufferings, Christ's fulfilling of the law, Christ's
perfect holiness, can do thee any good.


Christian. I have true saving faith.


The conflicts of Satan with the strong Christian.
Satan. THou say that thou have true faith, but I shall sift thee, and
disprove thee.


Christian. The gates of Hell shall never prevail against my faith, do what
thou can.


Satan. Tell me then, do thou think that all the world shall be saved?


Christian. No.


Satan. What, shall some be saved, and some condemned?


Christiam. So says the word of God.


Satan. Thou then are peswaded that God is true even in his merciful
promises, and that he will save some men, as Peter and Paul, and David, etc.
and this is the only be leefe, by which thou will be saved.


Christian. Naie, this I believe, and more too, that I particularly am in the
number of those men which shall be saved: and this is the belief that saves
me.


Satan. It may be thou art persuaded, that God is able to save thee, but that
God will save thee, that is, that he has determined to advance this thy body,
and this thy soul into his kingdom, and that he is most willing to perform
it in his good time: herein thou wauerest and doubtest.


Christian. Nay Satan, I in mine own heart am fully persuaded, that I shall
be saved, Ioh. 1. 12. 13. Ioh. 6. 35. 54. Mark. 9. 23
and that Christ is specially my redeemer: and (O Lord) for Christ's sake,
help thou my doubting and unbelief.


Satan. This thy full persuasion is only a fantasy, and a strong
imagination of thine own head: it goes not with thee as thou think.


Satan. It is no imagination, but truth which I speak. For me thinks, I am
as certain of my salvation, as though my name 2. Cor. 1. 2^ Ephe. 1. 14. Romans
8. 18
were registered in the Scriptures (as David's and Paul's are) to be an elect
vessel of God: and this is the testimony of the holy spirit of Jesus Christ,
assuring me inwardly of my adoption, and making me with boldness and
confidence in Christ, to pray unto God the father.


Satan. Still thou dreamest and imaginest, thou love and likest thy self,
and therefore thou think the best of thy self.


Christian. Yea, but God of his goodness Act. 13. 9. 1. These. 1. 3
has brought forth such tokens of faith in me, that I cannot be deceived.

1. I am displeased with my self for my manifold sins, in which sometime I
have delighted and bathed my self. Romans 7. 15. 24. 2. I purpose never to commit
them again, if God give me strength, as I trust he will. 3. I have a very
great desire to be doing those things which God commands. 4. Those that be
the children of God. If I do but hear of them, I love them with my heart, and
wish unto them as to my self. 1. John. 3. 14. 5. My heart leapeth for
gladness, when I hear of the preaching of the word. 6. I long to see the
coming of Christ Jesus, that an end may be made of sinning, and of displeasing
God. Apoc. 22. 20. 7. I feel in my heart the fruits of the spirit, joy, love,
peace, gentleness, meekenes, patience, temperance: the works of the flesh I
abhor them, fornication, adultery, uncleanness, wantonness, Idolatry,
strife, envy, anger, drunkenness, bibbing and quaffing, and all such like.
Galathians. 5. 19. 20. 22.


All these, they cannot proceed from thee Satan, or from my flesh, but
only from faith which is wrought in me by gods holy spirit.


Satan. If this were so, God would never suffer thee to sin, as thou do.


Christian. I shall sin as long as I live in this world, I am sure of it;
because I am Romans 7. 15. Mat. 26. 69. 72. 74. 75.
taught to ask remission of my sins continually. But the manner of my
sinning now is otherways than it has been in times past. I have sinned
heretofore with full purpose and consent of will; but now doubtless, I do not.
Before I commit any sin, I do not go to the practicing of it with
deliberation, as the carnal man does, who takes care to fulfill the lusts of
the flesh: but if I do it, it is flat beside my mind and purpose: To. 13. 14.
In the doing of any sin, I would not do it, my heart is against it, and I
hate it, and yet, by the tyranny of my flesh being overcome, I do it:
afterwardc, when it is committed, I am grieved and displeased at my self, and
do earnestly with tears ask at Gods hands forgiveness of the same sin.


Satan. Indeed, this is very true in the children of God: but thou art sold
under sin, and with great pleasure do commit sin, and love it with thy
whole heart: otherwise, thou would not fall to sin again after
repentance, and commit even one and the same sin, so often as thou do.
Thou hypocrite, this thy behavior turns all the favor of God from thee.


Christian. Nay, it is the order of the Prophets, Isay. 1. v. 8. Iere. 2. v. 1.
to call men to repentance, which have fallen from the fear of God, and from
the repentance, which they professed: and God in thus calling him, puts them
in hope of obtaining mercy. And the law had sacrifices offered every day, for
the sins of all the people, and for particular men, both for their
ignorances, and their voluntary sins: which signifies, that God is ready
to forgive the sins of his children: yea if they sin daily. Abraham twice
lied and swore that Sara was not his wife. Joseph Genesis 12, 14 15 Genesis 20. 2. 3.
Genesis 42. 25 16.
swore twice by the life of Pharao. David committed adultery often, because he
took unto him Bathsheba, Vriahs wife, and also kept six wives, and ten
concubines. Gods will is, that me^ forgive till seventy seven times: and
therefore he will show much more mercy. And for my part, so often as I shall
fall into the same sin, so often I shall have Christ my advocate and intercessour
to the father for me, who will not damn me for the infirmity which he finds
in me. I will abstain from external iniquity, and I will not make my members
servants unto sin: and so 1. Ioh. ^ ^* Dan. 9 ^^*
long I trust my imperfections shall have no power to damn me: for Christ's
perfection is reputed to be mine, by faith which I have in his blood: God is
not displeased, if my body be sick and subject to diseases: no more is he
displeased at the disease and sickness of the soul. A natural father will
Romans 8. 28.
^ot slay the body of his child, when he is sick, and abhors comfortable
meats: and my heavenly father will not condemn my soul, although through the
infirmity of faith, and the weakness of the spirit: I commit sin, and
often loath his heauen^y word, the food of my soul. Nay, (which ^s a strange
thing) I know it by experience, that God has turned my filthy sins to my
great profit, and to the amendment of my life: like as the good Physician, of
rank ^oison is able to make a sovereign medicine to preserve life.


Satan. Well, be it, that now thou art in the state of grace, yet thou shall
not continue so: but shall before death depart from Christ.


Christian. I know I am a member of Christ's mystical body: I feel in my
self the heavenly power, and virtue of my head Christ Jesus: and for this
cause I cannot perish, but shall continue for ever, and reign in Heaven after
this life with him.


The conflicts of Satan with the weak Christian.
Satan. THy mind is full of ignorance and blindness, thy heart is full of
obstinacy, rebellion, and frowardnes against God: thou art wholly unfit for
any good work: wherefore, thou have no faith, neither can thou be justified,
and accepted before God.


Christian. If I have but one drop of the grace of God, and if my faith be no
more than a little grain of mustard seed, it is sufficient Mat. 27. 20
for me: God requires not perfect faith, but true faith.


Satan. Yea, but thou have no faith at all


Christian. I have had faith.


Satan. Thou never had true faith: for in time past, when according to thine
own opinion thou did believe, then thou had nothing but a shadow of faith,
and a foolish imagination, which all hypocrites have.


Christian. I will put my trust in god for ever, Psalm. 77. 5.
and his former mercies showed me heretofore strengthen me now in this my
weakness.

1. He created me when I was nothing. 2. He created me a man, when he might
have made me an ugly Toade. 3. He made me of comely body, and of good
discretion: whereas he might have made me ugly, and deformed, frantic, and
mad. 4. I was borne in the days of knowledge, when I might have been borne in
the time of ignorance and superstition. 5. I was borne of Christian parents,
but God might have given me either Turks or Jews, or some other savage people
for my parents. 6. I might have perished in my mothers womb, but he has
preserved me, and provided for me by his providence, even unto this hour. 7.
Soon after my birth, God might have cast me into hell, but contrariwise, I was
baptized, and so received the seal of his blessed covenant. 8 I have had by
Gods goodness some sorrow for my sins past, and have called on him, in hope
and confidence that he^ would hear me. 9 God might have concealed his wor^
from me, but I have heard the plentifu^ preaching of it: I understand it, and
hau^ received comfort by it. 10 Lastly, at this time God might pow^^ his full
wrath on me: which he does no^ but mercifully makes me to feel mi^ own
wants, that I might be humbled, a^ give all glory unto him for his blessing^
Wherefore, there is no cause why I shou^^ be disquieted: but I will trust
still in t^^ Lord, and depend on him, as I have done*



Satan. Thou feel no grace of the h^ lie Ghost in thee, nor any true
tokens (...) faith, but thou have a lively sense of the r^bellion of thy heart,
and of thy lewd a^^ wretched conversation: therefore the can not put any
confidence in Christ^ death and sufferings.


Christian. Yet I will hope against all hop^ and although, according to mine
ow^ Psalm. 32. 1. 2. Cor. 5. 21
sense and feeling, I want faith: yet I will b^ leeue in Jesus Christ, and
trust to be sau^ by him.


Satan. Though the children of GOD have been in many perplexities, yet never
any of them have bin in this case, in which thou art at this present.


Christian. Herein thou prouest thy self to be a lying spirit: for the
Prophet David ^aith of himself, that he was foolish, and as Psalm. 73. 22 2^
Romans 7. 19. 24.
a beast before God: and yet he even then trusted in God. And Paul was so led
cap^iue of sin, that he was not able to do the good he would, but did the
evil which he ^ated: and so in great pensiuenes of heart, desired to be
delivered from this world, that ^ee might be disburdened of his corrupt ^^esh.


Satan. Thou miserable wretch, do ^^ou feel thy self graceless, and will thou ^eare the face of a Christian? and by thy ^ypocrisie offend God? as thou
art, so show ^^y self to the world.


Christian. Avoid Satan, Christ has anquished, and overcome thee for my
^ause, that I might also triumph over thee. ^ am no hypocrite: for whereas I
have had ^eeretofore some testimony of my faith, at his time I am less
moved, though faith ^^eme to be absent: like as a man may seem (...) be
dead, both in his own sense, and by the judgment of the Physician, and yet
may have life in him: so faith may be, though always it do not appear.


Satan. But thou art a man stark dead in sin, God has now quite forsaken
thee: he has left thee unto me to be ruled: he has given me power over
thee, to bring thee to damnation: he will not have thee to trust in him any
longer.


Christian. Strengthen me good Lord; remember thy merciful promises, that thou
Isai. 57. 15.
wilt revive the humble, and give life to them that are of a contrite heart.


Satan. These promises concern not thee, which have no humble and contrite,
but a froward, and a rebellious heart.


Christian. Good Lord forget not thy former mercies: give an issue to these
temptations of mine enemy Satan. And you my brethren, which know my estate,
pray for me, that God would turn his favorable countenance toward me: for
this I know, that the ptaier of the righteous avails Ia^. 5. 16.
much, if it be fervent.


How a man should apply aright the word of God to his own soul.
I
Every Christian contains in himself two natures, flat contrary the one to
the other, the flesh and the spirit: and that he may become a perfect man in
Christ Jesus, his earnest endeavor must be, to tame, and subdue the flesh, and
to strengthen and confirm the spirit.

II
Answerable to these two natures, are the two parts of Gods word. First, the
Law, because it is the ministry of death, it fitly serves for the taming
and maistering of the rebellious flesh: and the Gospel, containing the
bountiful promises of God in Christ, is as oil, to power into our wounds, and
as the water of life, to quench our thirsty souls: and it fitly serves for
the strengthening of the Spirit.

III
Well then, art thou secure? Art thou prone to evil? Feel thou that thy
rebellious flesh carries thee captive unto sin? Look now only upon the
law of God, apply it to thy self, examine thy thoughts, thy words, thy deeds
by it: pray unto God, that he would give thee the Spirit of fear, that the law
may in some measure humble and terrify thee: for (as Solomon says) blessed
is Romans 8. 16. Pro. 28. 14.
the man that fears always, but cursed is he that hardens his heart.

IIII
In the Law, these are most effectual meditations to humble and bridle the
flesh, which follow. First, meditate on the greatness 1
of thy sins, and of their infinite number: and if it may be, gather them
into a Catalogue, set it before thee: and look unto it, that thou think no
sin to be a small sin, no not the bare thoughts and motions of thy heart.
Often with diligence consider 2
the strange judgments of God upon men, for their sins, which thou shall
find, partly in the Scriptures, partly by daily experience. Doubtless, thou
must think, that every judgment of God, is a sermon of repentance. Think
often on the fearful curse 3
of the law due unto thee, if thou should sin never but once in all thy life,
and that never so little. Remember, that whenever 4
thou committest a sin; God is present, and Dan. 7. 1^. Iere. 17. 1. Deuteronomy. 32.
31.
his holy Angels, and that he is an eye witness, that he takes a note of thy
sin, and registreth it in a book. Think daily of thy end: and 5
know that God may strike thee with sudden death every moment: and that, if
then thou have not repented before that time, there is no hope of salvation.
Think on the sudden 6
coming of our Savior Christ to judgment, let it move thee continually to
watch and pray. If these will not move thee, think 7
on this, that no creature in heaven or in earth, was able to pacify the wrath
of God for thy sins: but his own Son must come down from heaven, out of his
Fathers bosom, and must bear the curse of the law, even the full wrath of
his Father, for thee.

V
When by these means thou art feared, and thy mind is disquieted in respect
of Gods judgment for thy sin: have recourse ^o the promises of mercy
contained in the ^ld and new Testament. Is thy conscience stung with sin? And
does the law make the^ feel it? With all speed run to the brase^ Serpent
Christ Jesus, look on him with the Ioh. 3. 14.
eye of faith, and presently thou shall be healed of thy sting or wound.

VI
When thou do meditate on the promises of the Gospel: diligently conside^
these benefits, which thou enioiest by Christ. Through Adam, thou art
condemned 1
to hell: by Christ, thou art deliuere^ from it. Through Adam, thou have
transgre^sed 2
the whole law: in Christ thou have fulfilled it. Through Adam, thou art before
Go^ 3
a vile, and a loathsome sinner, through Christ thou do appear glorious in
his eyes. B^ Adam, every little cross is the punishmen^ 4
of thy sin, and a token of Gods wrath: by Christ, the greatest crosses are
easy, profitable, and tokens of Gods mercy. By Adam 5
thou did loose all things: in Christ a^ things are restored to thee
again. By Adam 6
thou art dead, by Christ, thou art quickne^ and made alive again. By Adam,
thou art 7
slave of the Devil, and the child of wrat^ but by Christ, thou art the child
of God. (...) 8
Adam, thou art worse than a Toade, and mo^ detestable before God: but by
Christ, tho^ art above the Angels. For thou art joined unto him, and made bone
of his bone, misticallie. Through Adam, sin and Satan 9
have ruled in thee, and led thee captive: by Christ, the spirit of God
dwells in thee plenteouslie, By Adam, came death to thee, 10
and it is an entrance to hell: by Christ, though death remain, yet it is only
a passage unto life. Lastly, in Adam, thou art poor, and 11
blind, and miserable: In Christ, thou art rich and glorious, thou art the
King of heaven and earth, fellow heir with him, and shall as sure be partaker
of it, as he is even now. Adam, when he must needs taste of the fruit, which God
had forbidden him, he has made us all to rue it, even till this day: but here
thou see the fruits that grow, not in Apoc. ^2. 2
the earthly Paradise, but on the tree of life, which is within the heavenly
Jerusalem. Fear no danger, be bold in Christ to eat of the fruit, as God has
commanded thee: it will quicken thee, and revive thee being dead: thou can not
do Satan a worse displeasure, tha^ to feed on the godly fruit of this tree,
and to smell on the sweet leaves, which it bears co^tinuallie, that give
such a refreshing savor.

VII
Most men now a days, are secure and cold in the profession of the Gospel,
though they have the plentiful preaching of it. And the reason is, because they
feel not in themselves the virtue and mighty operation of Gods word, to renew
them: and they cannot feel it, because they do not apply the word aright unto
their own souls. Plasters, except they be applied in order and time, and be
laid upon the wound, though they be never so good, yet they cannot heal: and
so it is with the word of God, and the parts of it, which except they be used
in order and time convenient, will not humble and revive us, as their virtue is.

VIII
The common Christian every where is faulty in this thing. Whereas he loves
himself, and wishes al good that may be to himself, he does usually
apply unto his own soul the Gospel alone, never regarding the law, or
searching out his sins by it. Tell him what ye will, his song is this: God is
merciful, God is merciful. By this means it comes to pass, that he leads
a secure life, and makes no conscience of covetousness, of usury, of deceit in
his trade, of lying, of swearing, of fornication, wantonness, int^mpera^cie in
bibbing and quaffing, etc. But he plaieth the unskillful Chirurgio^, he uses
healing plasters, before his poisoned and cankred nature have felt the power
and pain of a Corasiue. And it will never be well with him, until he take a
new course.

IX
On the contrary part, many good Christians leave to apply the comfort of the
gospel to themselves, and only have regard to their own sins, and Gods
infinite vengeance. And even when Satan accuses them, they will not stick to
give ear to Satan, and also accuse themselves: and so they are brought into
fearful terrors, and often draw near to desperation.

X
There is a third sort called sectaries, who addict themselves to the opinion
of some man. These commonly never apply the law or the Gospel to themselves,
but their whole meditation, is chiefly in the opinions of him whom they
follow. As they that follow Luther, few of them follow his Christian life, they
regard not that: but about consubstantiation and vbiquity, about Images and
such like trumperie, they infinitely trouble themselves, and all Europe too.

And in England there is a scismaticall and indiscreet company, that would
seem to cry out for discipline, their whole talk is of it, and yet they
neither know it, nor will be reformed by it, and yet they are enemies to it:
as for the law of God, and the promises of the Gospel, they little regard:
they maintain vile sins in refusing to hear the reading or the preaching of
the word: and this is great contempt of Gods benefits and unthankfulness to
him. They are full of pride, thinking themselves to be full, when they are
empty: to have all knowledge, when they are ignorant, and had need to be
catechized: the poison of Aspes is under their lips; they refuse not to
speak evil of the blessed servants of God. Well, do they above al things
seek the kingdom of God? then let them be sincere seekers of it: which they
shall do, if in seeking Christ's kingdom they seek the righteousness thereof:
unto which they can never come but by the applying of the threatninges of the
law, and the comforts of the Gospel to their own consciences. But whereas
they seek the one and not the other, they give all men to understand with what
spirit they speak.

Consolations for the troubled consciences of repentant Sinners.
Sinner. GOod sir, I know Esaias. 50. c* 4.
the Lord has given you the tongue of the learned, to be able to minister a
word in time to him that is weary: therefore I pray you help me in my
misery.


Minister. Ah my good brother what is the matter with you? and what aile you?


Sinner. I lived a long time, the Lord he knows it, after the manner of the
world, in all the lusts of my filthy flesh, and then I was never troubled;
but it has pleased* God of his mercy to touch my heart, and to send his own
son that good shepherd Jesus Christ, to fetch me home to his own fold, even
upon his own neck: and since that time it is a wonder to see how my poor
heart has been troubled: my corruption so boiles in me, and Satan will never
let me alone.


Minister. Your case is a blessed case: for not to be troubled of Satan, is to
be possessed of him: that is: to be held captive under Colloss. 1. c. 13.
the power of darkness, and to be a slave and vassal of Satan: for Luke 11. c.
24.
as long as the strong man keeps the hold, all things are in peace:
Contrariwise he that has received any sparkle of true faith, shall see Mat.
16. c. 18.
the gates of hell, that is, the Devil and all his Angels in their full
strength, to stand up against him, and to fight with an endless hatred for his
final confusion.


Christian. But this my trouble of mind, has made me oftentimes fear lest
God would reject me, and utterly deprive me of the kingdom of heaven.


Minister. But there is no cause why it should so do. For how should heaven
be your resting place, if on earth you were not troubled? how could God wipe
away your tears from your eyes in heaven, if on earth Bradford.
you shead them not? You would be free from miseries, you look for heaven
upon earth. But if you will go to heaven, the right way is to sail by hell. If
you will sit at Christ's table in his kingdom; you must be with him in his
temptations. You are as Gods corn, you must therefore go under the flaile,
the fan, the millstone, and the oven, before you can be Gods bread. You are
one of Christ's lambs, look therefore ^o be fleeced, and to have the bloody
knife ^t your throat all the day long. If you were ^ mark sheep bought to
be sold: you should be stalled and kept in a fat pasture: ^ut you are for
gods own occupying, therefor you must pasture on the bare common, ^biding
storms, tempests, Satan's snat^hes, the worlds wounds, contempt of
^onscience and frettes of the flesh. But in ^his your misery I will be a
Simon unto you ^o help you to carry your cross, so be it ^ou will reveal
your mind unto me.


Christian. I will do it willingly, my temp^ations are either against my faith
in Christ ^r against repentance for my sins.


Minister. What is your temptation as ^ouching faith?


Christian. Ah, woe is me, I am much ^fraide least I have no faith in Christ
my Savior.


Minister. What causes this fear.


Christian. Diverse things.


Minister. What is one?


Christian. I am troubled with many doubtings of my salvation: and so it comes
unto my mind to think, that by my incredulity I should quite cut off my
self from the favor of God.


Minister. But you must know this one thing, that he that never doubted of
his salvation never believed, and that he which believes in truth feels
many doubtings and wauerings, even as the ^ound man feels many grudgings of
diseases which if he had not health he could not feel.


Christian. But you never knew any that having true faith doubted of their
salvation.


Minister. What will you then say of the man that said Mar. 9. 24.
Lord I believe, Lord help my unbelief. And of David who made his moan
after this manner: Is his mercy clean gone for ever? Does his promise fail
for evermore, Psalm. 77. ve. 8. 9. 10.
Has GOD forgotten to be merciful? Has he shutt up his tender mercy in
displeasure? Yea he goes on further, as a man in despair. 11.
And I said, this is my death. Hereby it is manifest that a man endued with
true faith may have not only assaults of doubting, but of desperation. This
further appears in that he says in another place. Psalm. 92. 11.
Why art thou cast down my soul? Why art thou disquieted within me? Wait on
God for I will yet give thanks, he is my present help and my God. And in
very truth you may persuade your self that they are but 2. These. 3. 2.
unreasonable men, that say they have long believed in Christ without any
doubting of their salvation.


Christian. But David had more in him then I have, for me thinks there is
nothing in this wicked heart of mine, but rebellion against God, nothing but
doubting of his mercy.


Minister. Let me know but one thing of you: these doubtinges which you feel,
do you like them? or do you take any pleasure in them? and do you cherish
them?


Christian. Naie, naie, they appear very vilde in mine eyes, and I do
abhor them from my heart: and I would feign believe?


Minister. In man we must consider his To. 7. ca. 5.
estate by nature, and his estate by grace. In the first he and his flesh are
all one, for they are as man and wife: therefore one is necessary to the
doings of the other. When the flesh strives the man also strives that is in
subjection to the flesh, yea when the flesh perishes, the man likewise
perishes being in this estate, with the flesh: a loving couple they are, they
live and die together. But in the estate of grace, though a man have the flesh
in him, yet he and his flesh are divorced a sunder. This diuorcement is made,
when a man begins to dislike and to hate his flesh, and the evil fruits of
it: this separation being made, they are no Romans 7. 17 Romans 8. 1.
more one, but twain, and the one has nothing to do with the other. In this
case though the flesh beget sin and perish therefore, yet the Christian man
shall not incu^ damnation for it, To come more near the matter; you say the
flesh begettes in you wauerings, doubtinges, and distrustinges* what then? it
troubles you: but fear not, remember your estate; you are divorced from the
flesh, and you are new married unto Christ: if these sins be laid at you^
door, account them not as your children* but renounce them as Bastards, say
with Paul, I doubt indeed, but I hate my doubtings, and I am no cause of
these, but the the flesh in me which shall perish when I shall be saved by
Christ.


Christian. This which you have said does in part content me: one thing more
I pray you show me concerning this point: namely how I may be able to
overcome these doubtings.


Minister For the suppressing of doubtings, you are to use three meditations.

The first, that it is Gods commandment 1. Ioh* 3. 23.
that you should believe in Christ: So saint John says, This is his
commandment that we believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ. Thou Ioh.
3. 16.
shall not steal, is Gods commandment, and you are loath to break it, least
you should displease God and pull his curse upon your head. This also is Gods
commandment, Thou shall believe in Christ, and therefore you must take heed
of the breach of it: ^east by doubting and wavering you bring ^he curse upon
you. Secondly, you must ^onsider that the promises of salvation in Christ are
general, or at the least indefinite ^xcluding no particular man: as in one for
^ll may appear. God so loved the world that ^e gave his only begotten
son, that whosoever ^eleeueth in him should not perish but have euerla^^ing
life. Now then so often as you shall ^oubt of Gods mercy whereas he
exclu^eth you not: And as when a Prince gives ^ pardon to all thieves, every
one can ap^lie the same unto himself, though his ^ame be not set down in the
pardon: So ^^e king of kings has given a general par^on for free remission of
sins to them that ^ill receive it. Believe therefore that God (...) true in
his promise, doubt not of your ^wne salvation, challenge the pardon to your
self. In deed your name is not set down, or written in the promise of grace,
yet let not any illusion of Satan, or the consideration of your own
unworthiness exclude you from this general and free*mercie of God: which he
also has offered to you particularly, first in Baptism, then after in the
Lords supper: and therefore you are not to waver in the applying of it to your
self. Thirdly you are to consider that by doubting and dispairing you offend
god as much almost as by any other sin. Yo^ do not above hope believe under
hope as you should do.

Secondly you robb God of his glory, is that you make his infinite mercy to
be Romans 4. 18.
less then your sins. Thirdly you make him a lier who has made such a
promise unto you. And to these three meditations add this practice. When your
To. 10. 12.
heart is toiled with unbelief and doubtings, then in all have draw your self
into some secret place, humble your self before God power out your heart
before him: desire hi^ of his endless mercy to work faith, and t^ suppress
your unbelief, and you shall see That the Lord over all is rich unto all that
call upon his name.


Christian. The Lord reward you for your kindness: I will hereafter do my
endeavor to practice this your counsel. Now I will make bold to show another
that makes me to fear least I have no faith. And it is, because I do not
feel the assurance of the forgiveness of my sins.


Minister. Faith stands not in the feeling Heb. 11. 1. Romans 8. 23.
of Gods mercy, but in the apprehending of it, which apprehending may be
when there is no feeling, for faith is of invisible things, and when a man once
comes to enjoy the thing believed, then he cease to believe. And this
appears in Jobs example, when he says, Lo though he sleie me, yet will I
trust in him, and I will reprove my ways in his sight: he shall be my salvation
also: for Job. 13. 15. 16.
the hypocrite shall not come before him, he declares his faith: yet when he
says presently afterward, Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and take me for
thine enemy? he declares the want of that feeling which you speak off.


Christian. Yet every true believer feels the assurance of faith: otherwise
Paul would not have said, Prove your selves whether you are in the faith or not.


Minister. Indeed sometimes he does, but at some other times he does not: as
namely at that same time when God first calls him: and in the time of
temptation.


Christian. What a case am I in then? I never felt this assurance: only this
I feel that I am a most rebellious wretch abounding even with a whole sea of
iniquities: me thinks I am more ugly in the sight of God, then any toade can
be in my sight. O then what shall I do? Let me hear some word of comfort
from thy mouth thou man of God.


Minister. Tell me one thing plainly, you say you feel no assurance of Gods
mercy?


Christian. No in deed.


Minister. But do you desire with all your heart to feel it?


Christian. I do indeed.


Minister. Then doubt not, you shall feel it.


Christian. O blessed be the Lord, if this be true.


Minister. Why, it is most true. For the Wish and have.
man that would have any grace of God tending to salvation, if he do truly
desire it, he shall have it: for so Christ has promised, I will give to him
that is a thirst of the well of the water of life freely. Whereby I gather Reu.
2. 6.
that if any want the water of life, having an appetite after it, he shall
have enough of it: And therefore fear you not, only use the means which God
has appointed to attain faith by, as earnest prayer, reverent hearing of Gods
word, and receiving of the Sacraments: and then you shall see this thing
verifyed in your self.


Christian. All this which you say I find in my self by the mercy of God:
my heart longs after that grace of God which I want. I know I do hunger
after the kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof: and further though I
want the feeling of Gods mercy: yet I can pray for it, from the very root of
my heart.


Minister Be careful to give honor to god for that you have received
already. For these thing are the motions of the spirit of Phil. 1. 6.
God dwelling in you. And I am persuaded of this same thing, that God which
has begone this good work in you will perfect the same unto the day of Jesus
Christ.


Christian. The third thing that troubles me, is this. I have long prayed for
many graces of God, and yet I have not received them, whereby it comes often to
my mind, that God loves me not: that I am none of his child: and therefore
that I have no faith.


Minister. You are in no other case then David himself, who made the same
complaint: I am weary of crying, my throat is dri^* Psalm. 69. 4.
mine eyes fail, whiles I wait for my God.


Christian. But David never prayed so many years without receiving an answer
as I have done.


Minister. Good Zachary waited longer on the Lord, before he granted his
request, then ever you did, Its like he prayed for a child in his younger
years, yet his prayer was not heard before he was old. And further Luke 1. 7. 13
you must note, that the Lord may hear the prayers of his servants, and yet
they be altogether ignorant of it: For the manner that God uses in granting
their requests is not always known: as may appear in the example of our
Savior Christ. Who in the days of his flesh, did offer up prayers and
supplications with strong crying and tears, unto him Heb. 5. 7.
that was able to save him from death, and was also heard in that which he
feared. And yet we know he was not freed from that cursed death, but must
needs suffer it. How then was he heard? On this manner; he was strengthened
to bear the death: he had an Angel to comfort him, he was afterward freed
from the sorrows of death. And so it is with the rest of Christ's body, as it
was with the head. Some being in want pray for temporal blessings: God keeps
them in this want, and yet he hears their prayers, in giving them patience
and strength to abide that want. Some being in wealth and abundance pray for
the continuing of it, if it be the will of God. The Lord dinges them into a
perpetual misery, and yet he hears their prayers, by giving the^
blessedness in the life to come. You pray for the increase of faith and
repentance, and such like graces: you feel no increase after long prayer: yet
the merciful God has no doubt heard your prayer, in that by delaying to
perform your request, he has stirred up in you the spirit of prayer, he
has humbled you and made you feel your own wants, the better to depend on
his mercy, for the beginning and increasing of every spiritual grace.


Christian. The fourth thing that troubles me, is that I cannot feel faith
purify my heart, and to work by love in bringing forth lively fruits.


Minister If this be so continually, that faith bring forth fruit, it is
very dangerous and argues a plain want of faith, yet for a certain time it
may be so, Faith has not only a spring time and a summer season, but also a
winter when it bears no fruit. And Cant. 2. 11
there is many a true Christian like the bruised reed, that is ouerturned with
every blast Esaias 42. 2.
of wind: and like the flax that has fire in it, which by reason of weakness,
give neither heat nor light, but only a smoke.


Christian Thus much shall suffice for my first temptation, wherein I take my
self satisfied, now if you please, I will be glad to rehearse the second.


Minister. I am content, let us hear it.


Christian. I am afraid least I have not truly repented, and therefore that
all my profession is only in hypocrisy.


Minister. What moves you to think so.


Christian. Two causes especially, the first is, they which repent, leave off
to sin: But I am miserable sinner, I am laden with great burdens of sin, I
do continually displease God by my evil thoughts, words and deeds.


Minister. You need not fear, To. 5. 20.
For where sin abounds (that is the knowledge and feeling of sin) there
grace abounds much more.


Christian. I find not this in my self.


Minister But yet you find thus much in your self: those corruptions which
you feel, and those sins that you commit, you hate the^, you are displeased
with your self for them, and you endeavor your self to leave them.


Christian. Yea that I do with all my heart.


Minister. Then how miserable so ever you feel your self by reason of the
mas^e of your sin: yet you are not subject to Romans 8. 5. cum 8. 1.
condemnation, but shall most certainly escape the same. Take this for a most
certain truth, that the man that hates and dislikes his sins, both before and
after he has done them, shall never be damned for them.


Christian. I am even heart sick of my manifold sins and infirmities, and
these good words which you speak are as flagons of wine, Cant. 2. 5.
to refresh my weary, laden, and weltting soul. I have begun to flee sin,
and to detest it long ago. I have been often dipleased with mine infirmities
and corruptions: when I offend God, my heart is grieved, I desire to leave
sin, I flee the occasions of sin: I would feign fashion my life to Gods
word: and I pray unto God that he would give me grace so to do: and yet
(which is the grief) by the strength of the flesh, by the sleights and power
of Satan I am often overtaken and fall maruellouslie, both by speech and by
deed.


Minister. Have courage my good brother, for whereas you have an affection to
do the things that are acceptable unto God, it argues plainly that you are
a member of Christ: according to that of Paul. Romans 8. 5.
They which are of the spirit, favor the things of the spirit. Well then if
Satan ever object any of your sins to your, make answer thus, that you
have forsaken the first husband the flesh, and have espoused your self to
Christ Jesus, who as your head and husband has taken upon him to answer your
debts, and therefore if he urge you for them, refer him over unto Christ. For
there is no suit in law against the wife the husband living: yea I add
further, if you be over carried with Satan's temptations, and so fall into any
sin, you shall not answer for it but Satan, it shall surely be rekoned on
his score at the day of judgment for he was the author of it: if you fall by
the frailty of your flesh, it shall perish therefore: but you shall still have
Christ you advocate.


Christian. Indeed as you say I have in me an affection to please God, but
when I come to perform my obedience, there I fail.


Minister. Therefore mark this further. As long as the children of God are in
this life, Genesis 22. 12* Malac. 3. 17.
God regards more the affection to obeie, then the obedience it self: And
they shall be unto me says the Lord of hosts, in that day that I shall
do this, for a flock, and I will spare them, as a man spares his own son
that serves him. The Father when he shall set his child to do any business,
though he do it never so vntowardlie, yet if he show his good will to do the
best he can, his father will be pleased: and so it is with the Lord toward
his children you look to have some perfection in your self; but in this life
you shall receive no Romans 8. 23.
more but the first fruits of the spirit, which are but as a handful of
corn, in respect of the whole corn field; and as for the accomplishment of
your redemption, you must wait for it til after this life: you would be kissed
with the kisses of Christ's mouth, but here in this world you must be content,
if you may with Marie Magdalen kiss his feet. For the perfection of a
Christian man's life, stands in the feeling and confessing of his
imperfections. And as Ambrose.
Ambrose says, obedience due to God, stands more Affectu magis qua^ effectu.
in the affection then in the work.


Christian. But why will God have those whom he has sanctified labor still
under their infirmities?


Minister. The causes are diverse. First, hereby he teaches his servant, to
see in what great need they stand of the righteousness of Christ, that they
may more carefully seek after it. Secondly, he subdueth the pride of men's
hearts, and humbles them by counteruailing the graces which they have
received, with the like measure of infirmities. Thirdly, by this means the
godly are exercised in a continual fight against sin, and are daily
occupied in purifieng themselves.


Christian. But to go on forward in this matter: there is another cause that
makes me fear, lest I have no true repentance.


Minister. What is that?


Christian I often times find my self like a very timberlog, void of all
grace and goodness, froward, and rebellious to any good work* so that I fear
lest Christ have quite forsaken me.


Minister. As it is in the strait seas, the water ebbes and flows, so is it in
the godly: in them as long as they live in this world according to their own
feeling, there is an access and recesse of the spirit. Otherwhiles they be
troubled with deadnes and dulnes of heart, as David was, who prayed Psal^ ^8.
to the Lord, to quicken him according to his loving kindness, that he may
keep the testimonies of his mouth, and in another place he says, that Gods
promises quickened him. Which could Psal^
not be, unless he had been troubled with great dulnes of heart. Again,
sometimes the spirit of God quite withdraws it self to their feeling: as it
was in David. In the dai^ Psalm. 77* ^3 ^. 8.
of my trouble (says he) I sought the Lord, and my soul refused comfort. I
did think upon God and was troubled, I prayed and my spirit was full of
anguish. Again, will the Lord absent himself for ever? and will he show no
more favor? has God forgotten to be merciful? etc. The Church in ^h^ ^a^^.
3. 1. (...) 5. 4. 5 6.
Canticles complains of this. In my bedd^ ^ sought him by night whom my soul
loved: I sought him, but I found him not. And again, my well-beloved put in his
hand by the hole of the door, and (...) heart was affectioned toward him: I
rose (...) pen to my well-beloved, and my hands did (...) myrrh, my fingers
power myrrh upon ^dles of the bar, I opened to my well-beloved* (...) my
well-beloved was gone and past, mine heart was gone when he did speak. I sought
him, but I could not find him, I called, but he answered me not.
Contrariwise, God at some other times sheds abroad Romans 5.
his love most abundantly in the hearts of the faithful; and Christ lies
between tho Cant. 1. 13.
breasts of his Church, as a posie of myrrh giving a strong smell.


Christian. But how can he be a Christian that feels no grace nor goodness in
himself.


Minister. The child which as yet can use no reason, is for all that a
reasonable creature: and the man in a soune feels no power of life, and yet he
is not dead. The Christian man has many quaumes come over his heart, and he
falls into many a soune, that none almost would look for any more of the
life of Christ in him, yet for all that he may be a true Christian. This was the
estate of Peter when he denied our savior Christ with cursing and banning, his
faith only Luke 22. 31
fainted for a time, it failed not.


Christian. I have now opened unto you the chief things that trouble me: and
your comfortable answers have much refreshed my troubled mind. The God of all
mercy, and consolation requite you accordingly.


Minister. I have spoken that which God out of his holy word has opened unto
me if you find any help thereby, give God the praise therefore, and carry
this with you for ever, that by many afflictions both in the body Acts. 24. 22
and the mind you must enter into the kingdom of heaven. Raw flesh is noisome
to the stomach, and is no good nourishment before it be sodden: and
unmortified men and women Hooper.
be no creatures fit for God: and therefore they are to be soaked and boiled in
afflictions, that the fulsumnes and rancknes of their corruption may be
delaied, and they may have in them some relish acceptable unto God. And to
conclude, for the avoiding of all these temptations, use this sweet prayer
following which that godly saint, Master Bradford made.

Oh Lord God and dear Father, what shall I say that feel all things to be
(in manner) with me as in the wicked? Blind is my mind, crooked is my will,
and perverse concupiscence is in me, as a spring of stinking puddle. O how
faint is faith in me? how little is my love to thee or thy people? how great
is my self* love? how hard is my heart? by reason whereof I am moved to doubt
of thy goodness toward me, whether thou art my merciful father, and whether I
be thy child or no, indeed worthily might I doubt, if that the having of
these were the cause, and not the fruit rather of thy children. The cause why
thou art my father, is thy merciful goodness grace and truth in Christ Jesus,
which cannot but remain for ever. In respect whereof thou have borne me this
good will to bring me into thy Church by Baptism and to accept me into the
number of thy children, that I might be holy, faithful, obedient and
innocent: and to call me diverse times by the ministry of thy word into thy
kingdom: besides the innumerable other benefits always hitherto powered upon
me. All which thou have done of this thy good will which thou of thine own
mercy barest to me in Christ before the world was made. The which thing as
thou requirest straightly that I should believe without doubting, so would
thou that I in all my deeds should come unto thee as to a father, and make my
moan without mistrust of being heard in thy good time, as most shall make to my
comfort. Lo therefore to thee dear father I come through thy son our Lord,
our mediator, and Advocate Jesus Christ, who sits on thy right hand making
intercession for me; I pray thee of thy great goodness and mercy in Christ to
be merciful to me a sinner, that I may indeed feel thy sweet mercy as thy
child: the time (oh dear father) I appoint not, but I pray thee that I may
with hope still expect and look for thy help. I hope that as for a little
while thou have left me, so thou will come and visit me, and that in thy great
mercy, whereof I have great need by reason of my great misery. Thou art wont
for a little season in thine anger, to hide thy face from them whom thou
love: but surely (O Redeemer) in eternal mercies thou will show thy
compassions. For when thou leauest us, Oh Lord, thou do not leave us very
long, neither do thou leave us to our loss, but to our lucre and advantage:
even that thy holy spirit with bigger portion of thy power and virtue may
lighten and cheer us: that the want of feeling of our sorrow may be
recompensed plentifully with the lively sent of having thee to our eternal
joy: and therefore thou swearest that in thine everlasting mercy thou will
have compassion on us, Of which thing, to the end we might be most assured,
thine oath is to be marked, for thou say: as I have sworn, that I will never
bring any more the waters to drown the world: so have I sworn that I will
never more be angry with thee, nor reprove thee. The mountains shall remove,
and the hills shall fall down, but thy loving kindness shall not move, and the
bond of thy peace shall not fail thee: thus say thou the Lord our
merciful Redeemer. Dear father therefore, I pray thee remember even for
thine own truth and mercies sake the promise and everlasting covenant, which
in thy good time I pray thee to write in my heart, that I may know thee to
be the only true GOD, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: that I may
love thee with all my heart for ever: that I may love thy people for thy sake:
that I may be holy in thy sight through Christ: that I may always not
only strive against sin, but also overcome the same daily more and more as
thy children do: above all things desiring the sanctification of thy name, the
coming of thy kingdom, the doing of thy will on earth as it is in heaven,
etc. through Jesus Christ our Redeemer, Mediator, and Advocate, Amen.


FINIS.
Faults to be corrected,
Page 12. lin. 8. for or read, are. Pa. 15. l. 28. Autonius, Antonius. Pa. 21.
l. 27. or, are. Pa. 32. l. 27. word, world. Pa. 46. l. 6. sowing, saving. Pa.
87. l. 24. first, fifth. P. 90. l. 17. performed, perfumed. p. 91. l. 8. face,
force. p. 92. l. 22. quietness disquietnes. p. 97. l. 22. first, fifth. p. 121.
l. 4. wise, weak. p. 122. l. 25. soul, sail p. 124. l. 10. entire, center.
p. 149. l. 12. works, wotteth. p. 160. 8. seduce, subdue. p. 160. l. 26.
exhortation, experience. p. 161. l. 13. burned, buried. p. 165. l. 3. babbling,
bibbing. p. 182. l. 25. ^^uetous, converted. p. 183. l. 3. dimisse, diminish.


