THE CHVRCHES Plea for her Right. OR A REPLY to an Answer, MADE OF MR. JOHN
PAGET, Against WILLIAM BEST and others. WHEREIN The maine points of our present
differences are handled: And the principal causes of our troubles declared.
Published by WILLIAM BEST.

I. These. 5.21. Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.

Psalm. 119.128. I esteem all thy precepts, concerning all things, to be right;
and I hate every false way.

At AMSTERDAM, Printed in the Year M. DC. XXXV.

A Fore-Speach To the Christian Reader.
IT was a seasonable saying of Nichodemus, Ioh. 7.51.
(standing in our Lords defense) Does our Law judge any man, before it hear
him, and know what he does? I make no question ( Wellaffectioned Reader) but
thou have before this time, perused Mr. Pagets Book, and have there seen many
words tending to his own justification, and our condemnation. Now the thing
that I shall desireously request of thee, is, that thou will have the patience,
to read over this my Answer to it: And when thou have seriously studied,
pondered and examined, by the unerring rule of Gods Word, all that both parties
have said in the whole caraige of this business; judge then, as God shall give
thee understanding. Wishing thee by the way to remember, what folly and shame
it is for any, (as Solomon Prove. 18.13.
says) to answer) (or give sentence of) a matter before he hear it.

There are some things, which I think necessary first of all, to inform thee
off; and that is touching the reasons, why I have set forth this Treatise:
Also, why in the manner it is.

For the first, to let pass the many insultations and exclamations, which I
have suffered at some particular men's hands, since his writing came forth, as
if every thing were true that he has set down against me. I am often by name
particularly called upon, and singled out to defend our Just Complaint made
against him. Besides accused of committing many untruths, slanders, lies, with
other crimes, little less then blasphemy: and this not against himself alone,
but Magistrates, Ministers, yea all Reformed Churches. If I should therefore
under these heavy charges, say nothing; would not most men hence conclude,
that I am guilty. And so through my silence, I should (which I dare not do)
dishonor God, betray the truth, and let go my own innocence.

Moreover I conceive that it lay upon me (though the meanest of my Brethren) to
reply; considering that the Book of Complaints was set forth chiefly by my
means. Now my conscience for my part bears me witness, that I did the thing,
out of love toward God, his truth and people; and not (as is falsely
suggested) of contention and a peevish mind. And I was thereto moved the
sooner; 1. because the same was in many men's hands already, and so rather
public then private. 2. We had waited almost a quarter of a year for answer,
but could not obtain it, although Mr. Paget was spoken unto, many times about
it. 3. It was given out, that he had written 12 or 15 sheets of paper against
us, and intended shortly to acquaint the world therewith: when this report was
brought unto me, I thought it requisite (having the copies by me) immediately
to publish them: that so (seeing he would publicly write in confutation
thereof) men might truly understand, what our particular grieveances were. And
these causes of great and good regard, led me to do, what I did. Of which more
is spoken in another place. Lastly whereas I have had occasion, to sit many
times in our Consistory. Hence I have taken a more full and certain knowledge
of our common Ecclesiastical affairs. I mean, observed the unfreenes of our
Congregation, and her subjection to the power of the Classis, and in this
regard, as I know my self, the better able to give testimony of the truth in
the matters betwixt us: so I think my self the more called to speak what I
truly may, in the just defense of my self and others.

For the manner of this writing: Whosoever shall consider, either the subject
here treated off; or the persons whom it chiefly respects, will (I think)
confess, that there lay a necessity upon me, to use the best means I could,
to have it done unto some effectual purpose.

But for my part, I must confess, (and so I would have all men, in all places
to know) that I am not in my self of the ability, to compose a work of this
nature. And therefore through my entreatie and desire, others (more able) have
taken some pains for me herein: both in seeking out learned Authors, as also
setting them down in the places as they stand: On whose fidelity, skill and
care I have presumed the publishing of them to the world: having this
confidence in the person, or persons, that they will stand to justify all the
allegations, according to the end and use here produced. And if just occasion
be offered, it may be they will add some thing more thereunto.

As for the truth of the matter, this I own under my own hand. And to use
here Mr. Pagets words, for the testimony of this truth, I am not ashamed to
suffer that reproach, which some lay upon me. Though I have already been
smiten on the right check, Preface.
yet I am ready to turn the other also, rather then to forsake this truth,
which I judge to be of great importance. Yea if I were cast upon my deathbed,
ready to deliver up my soul in the hands of the Lord, I should among my last
words, profess before men and Angels, that the things here pleaded for by me,
are the holy precepts of the eternal God.

The reason why I have not followed him, step by step throughout his Book,
but have principally insisted upon two points, viz. promiscuous Baptism, and
the due power of the Church, is, because on these depend all our differences:
For if it be true (as it is here prooved, to be most true) that it is unlawful
to baptize any infants, whose Parents (one at least) are not members of any
visible Church. And that every particular Congregation, is independent, and
may, yea ought to practice Ecclesiastical Government, and all other Gods
spiritual ordinances, in, and of it self immediately from Christ: Then it will
follow, that our former protest is certainly true against him: And so much (the
premises granted) is by himself acknowledged; for thus he says: If this
Church be deprived of that liberty and power, which Christ has given it, etc.
Preface.
If the Elders be deprived of their power in Government; for the good of the
Church: If I have subjected, the Church under the undue power of the Classis,
etc. If these, and the like assertions in their Book he true, then is there
cause to complain of the miserable slavery and bondage of this Church, and of
Tyrannical government. Then is there cause, to commend and prefer the
liberty and freedom, if the Brownists, which are not subject unto the power of
any Classis or Synod, etc.

Not to trouble then the Reader, with unnecessary discourses; I am well
contented, in this to join issue with him, that so all wise and judicious
Readers, studious of the truth, by this means, may the sooner perceive where
the fault is, and censure it accordingly.

Touching Mr. Pagets person, I hope all men shall see, by the care which I have
had, to avoid all bitterness, and unreverend speeches, (howbeit often provoked
to it) that I bear no ill will against him; truly I do not: For the Lord is
a witnnes to my conscience, I ly not, that I wish his good, many ways, and
shall be glad to hear that the Lord, before his changing, do give him
repentance for the evils, which he has committed against the Congregation;
and other good Servants of God. Howsoever, my hope is, that his sin herein
has been of ignorance, and so God for his Sons sake will pardon it to him.

So for the Classis, they are men whom I much reverence, and worship God with
my soul, for the gifts and graces, which appear in them: Notwithstanding for
their assuming unto themselves authority over our Congregation: This my mind
gives me, is their failing, and it cannot by Gods Word be justified. Besides
we are a people of another Nation, whose language they know not, at least most
of them; and therefore to me it seems strange, that they should undertake the
care and charge of us; being in this regard most unfit for it. I am persuaded,
put aside this last age, there will not be found an example of the like
practice anywhere, since the Apostles days.

To draw unto a conclusion, the thing that I chiefly aim at, is, that the
Churches of God hereafter, may keep and practice the ordinances of Jesus
Christ, and not under a pretense to have things better, then the Lords own
institutions, to give place unto the sinful devises of men. Let us consider
Moses words: Ye shall observe to do as the Lord your God has commanded you:
Deuteronomy. 5.32.
You shall not turn aside, to the right hand, or to the left. When worldly
Princes make any statutes; their subjects are careful strictly to do them,
without putting thereto, ought of their own. How much more, etc.

And as for any answer that shall be made unto this Treatise; this I shall
desire in it, 1. that all by-matters be laid aside, and the truth followed in
love, without gibes, reproaches, bitterness, etc. things unbeseeming the Saints
of God. Esa. 8.20.
2. That Scripture-proofes be brought, for the matters in co^troversy betwixt
us. To the Law, and to the testimony. All Scripture (says Paul) is given by
inspiration of God, 2. Ti. 3.16.
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction
in righteousness. 3. I do wish that whatsoever shall be written, may be done to
the glory of God, as of sincerity, and for the truths sake.

In short, I suppose, few will take it amiss, that I have now answered for my
self, considering how often he has called upon me for it; Where is his
warrant? where is his proof? etc. And seldom am I named, but am charged with
lying, slaundering, and the like. Besides it is given out, that he professes
a marvelous desire, to see his Book answered before he dies. Now as he shall
have his content herein, so God grant, that he make that good use of it, as
he ought; and I wish he may.

WILL. BEST.

The CHVRCHES plea for her right, OR A Reply to an Answer, made of M. JOHN
PAGET, against WILLIAM BEST and others.
Wherein the said WILLIAM BEST cleares himself of the imputations laid upon
him, and makes it evident unto all men, that the cause and ground of our
present troubles, has chiefly proceeded through Mr. PAGETS unjust dealing with
his people.
SECTION I.
THat Mr. PAGET might the easier persuade the Reader to be on his side, Answer
to the Preface.
and to think his case right and good: he seeks in the Preface of his
Book, to disgrace exceedingly the publisher of the just complaint, against his
unjust doings. And this he does two ways: First in affirming that he sought
help of the Brownists. Secondly that he is a simple person, one of the least
understanding among the Subscribers.

ANSWER.

1. IT is untrue that I sought any help of them: For I never spoke to any of
them about the thing, but only to the Printer: And it was nothing but this,
viz. that he should make a title Page answerable to the copy: whereas
therefore he insinuates that the Brownists were chief agents in the work;
and encouraged me and others against him. This is not so: For to my knowledge,
not any of them, were made acquainted with the thing, until I brought it to
the press. And the reason why I made use of him, it was not because of his
Religion, but because he was an English Printer, and therefore the more fit
(as I thought) to be employed.

But indeed a simple man may easily guess, for what end, and use he names
these men; he does it (much like Sanballats devise against Nehemiah) to have
matter for an evil report, Neb. 6.13.
and that he might reproach me. He knew well, these people are hated of the
world, and spoken in many places badly off; and therefore doubted not, but most
men would give sentence wholly on his side, when they should hear that his
opposites sought help of them. And that which I here say, I say it on good
ground; For whenever in his harsh and passionate writing, he goes about (as
often he does) to make us vile in the eyes of all men, he compares us with
the Brownists, not prooving against us any sin, but concludes we do evil,
whenever in any thing we accord with them. Many instances I could give for
proof hereof; as for example in page 6. seeking to discredit many of us, about
the Lords Supper, he tells us our plausible speeches and pretenses of
reverence to it, are such as the Brownists will say. So in another place,
charging us with pretended reverence to the Classes and Synods. He says the
Brownists themselves will seem to give as much. Page 84.
Again to reproach some of the Brethren for certain exercises which they used
privately in their families; we are told that the thing is worse, then that
which the Brownists do. Page 105.
When we complain against him for depriving us of much heavenly means of
edification; He answers that the same may be found in such as Mr. Ainsworth,
Mr. Johnson, Mr. Robinson and Mr. Jacob. Page 121.
Now is not this fine reasoning, and well beseeming a Teacher in Israel The
like doughty reasons he gave to Mr. Daven. to persuade him to be of his
judgment in page 40.41.
: in truth as very a Simplician as he makes me to be; yet I suppose I would
not write, to so small a purpose: For in my understanding he reasons to this
effect: The Jesuits and other Popish Priests teach sundry untruths; Mr. Paget
teaches many things as they do: therefore Mr. Paget teaches many untruths.
If this argument will not pass in Schools, then certainly a great part of Mr.
Pagets Book, wants, as truth, so art too.

2. For his reputing me to have the least understanding among the complainants:
I little esteem thereof; for indeed I know my Talent this way is very small,
yet I praise God for it; and do desire to improove the same unto his glory;
and wish from my heart, that as Mr. Paget has received a greater measure of
good gifts, so he would hereafter labor to put them to a better use; and not
seek by his wit and learning, to discountenance the truth, and countenance
error, to the dishonor of Gods great Name, the general grief of many good
people, and to the hardening of sinners in their perverse and crooked ways.
Luke 12.48
He knows well enough were it is written, Unto whomsoever much is given, of
him shall be much required.

3. It does not well become a man of Mr. Pagets place and profession, to
upbraid any with their simplicity, 1 Cor. 1.27 Act. 4.13. Mat. 18.19. Judge.
6.15.
and meannesse gifts; considering how the Lord many times chooses the foolish
things of the world, to bring great things thereby to pass. And truly for
mine own part, as weak as I am, yet I trust through Christ to be able to
defend our just case undertaken against him, Phil. 4.13.
howsoever I know my self in diverse respects many ways inferior unto him.
And therefore I do entreat him to lay boasting aside; and not glory in the
flesh; but to follow the truth in love, 1 Kings 20 12.
without calumniations and evil speeches, that so our controversy may the
better and sooner be ended.

4. But if I am so ignorant, as he reports me to be, how came it then to
pass, that he and others made an Officer of me? the Scriptures forbid that
one of the least understanding should be made a Deacon in any Church of God.
Act. 6.3. 1. Ti. 3.8.9 Romans 12.8.
Certainly therefore when I was elected, either you Mr. Paget dealt not well
with the Congregation, in not dehorting them from the action; by showing unto
them my great unfitnes; or otherwise you have now out of some ill will, taken
up this thing of purpose against me, in hope by the disabling of me, to honor
the more your self, and your own baddoings by it.

5. Such as will impartially read your Book, may plainly perceive, that there
is in you a very ill property: that is, in not-carying your self more meekely,
and gently, toward him, whom you judge to be the weakest of many. Paul's
practice was otherwise, he never showed himself (that we can read) froward,
violent and bitter in speeches unto weak and simple men. It was not his manner
to gibe, 2 Cor. 11.29. 2 Timothy 2.24.25. Ephesians. 6.4. Gal. 6.1.
scoff and gird at them, and to publish abroad unto others their infirmities,
of set purpose to exasperate them, and to make them contemptible. The more
infirm any member is, in our natural bodies, the more softly we handle it.
But have you Mr. Paget dealt so with me? (speak out.) You say, I am simple; I
pray what means have you used to make me wiser? Have you hitherto taken any
particular course for my bettering? Saveing of late indeed, you have sent forth
into the world many untruths against me. If your simple and weak people shall
find such hard dealing at your hands, what may be stronger and wiser exspect.
Well may I say in another man's words, Is this the long suffering spirit of
meeknes, in seeking to recover the lost. Pol. Virg.


6. If Mr. Paget dare take my testimony, I do assure him, there are many that
wonder at his great oversight; how he could without blushing, mention the
Brownists in this thing; as thinking to advantage his case any way by it.
Considering what a chief agent he has been unto some, which were some times
of them: not only to set their discontented humors upon scandalous
enterprises; but to gather up himself, all the personal failing which he
could find out among them, and afterward under other men's names, to publish it
in print, whereby to make them odious. Oh me thinks seeing he knew himself
faulty this way, he should have been therewith so deeply affected, as (in the
words of another) said; As I have done, so has God requited me. Indeed we
read in Scripture, Judge. 1.7.
that the Lord many times punishes men in the same kind and manner wherein
they have offended Exodus 22.23.24.1. Sam. 15.35. Eccl. 7.21.22. Est. 7.10.
Frov. 5.22 Psalm. 7.16.
But I perceive Mr. Paget looks upon others, otherwise then on himself, and
thinks his neighbors may not take the liberty, to return that back unto
him, which he sends abroad.

But to leave him in the midst of his own thoughts; I do desire thee (good
Reader) to take notice, how greatly he has abused thee, and many others, by a
false report, in saying that the Brownists were special Actours in the work,
chief agents, setters of us at work, encouragers of us against him. Whereas (I
speak it in all good conscience) that not one of them, to my knowledge, did
ever meddle with our matters, or helped us at any time, either by word or
writing. Indeed when I brought the copies to the press, I entreated the
Printer (as I said before) to set it out in a good order, and no other
assistance was there sought, either from him, or any other of them.

Mr. Paget promises his Readers in the first page of his Preface, to give some
light unto them, for the better decerning and judging of the differences
between us. Now truly if this be his best light, I hope the Godly wise will
take heed how to follow it. For in truth the light which he here sets up, is
much like unto a false latterne, which ill disposed people hang out on some
cleft or high place, of purpose to cause the Mariners to miss the haven, and
to run their Vessels on the rocks. Much better therefore he had done, if
he had followed the Apostles precept; that is, To. 14.13.
Not have put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his brothers way.
For such a practice displeases God, and brings always at last sorrow and
shame unto the doer of it.

SECTION II.
TOuching the matter contained in his Book, my answer to it (if God will)
shall be thus: First I will show how injuriously he has dealt with me in
particular. Secondly prove, that the things which he maintains against us,
are unlawful.

In the 92 page of his Book he proclames me to be a man that have given great
offense, and am become an evil example unto many, by the open violation of the
Sabbath in mine own house, and by resorting unto the assembly of the
Remonstrants, and have been admonished by him in the name of the Eldership, and
have justly deserved farther Censure.

ANSWER.

1. IT is a note (as God notes it by Ezechiel) of an unfaithful sheapheard,
that he seeks not that which was lost: How directly this note appears in
Mr. Paget, may be seen here, and else where in writing. For howbeit he has
set me, and others forth before all men, for heinous offenders, most sinful
walkers, Chapter 33.4.
deservers of Church Censures, etc. notwithstanding to this day he has not
performed a brothers duty, Mat. 18.15 16. Lev. 19.17 Prove. 25.9.
much less a Pastors toward any of us, in using meek and Christian means,
to bring us, if we go astray, in to the right way again. If an earthly
father should tell openly his childrens faults abroad, but never at home
mention them unto them, he would be (and justly too) greatly condemned for it.
Then how much more is Mr. Paget to be discommended, that did not endeavor to
make his people to see their faults, until they did see them out in print
under his hand. He can teach us, that it is our duty to advertise him of his
defects and neglects in private; but it seems he takes not the care which he
should, Page 94.
to practice his own doctrine. The which thing makes his case the worse, for
to him that knows to do good, Iam. 4. ult.
and does it not, to him it is sin. That is, his offense is the greater, and
answerable to it (without true repentance) will his punishment be. Luke 12.47
Our dealing with him has been otherwise; for we brought nothing forth
publicly against him, before we had used other means for his recovery: Yea
till we found the wound incurable, Mich. 1.9.
and he in his courses incorrigible, so far I say from giving us any hope of
amendment, as that he deprived us quite of all power to meddle any further
with him, and answered us, not much unlike the old Jews, Ier. 2.25.
I have loved strangers, and after them I will go.

I know in page 15. he bears the Reader in hand, as if we had not showed
his sins unto him out of the Word of God; and hence abuses a saying in Job.
But many can testify the contrary, to wit, that his sins have been showed to
him out of the word of God (I say) many times, and by many persons, and not
Brethren only, but our Elders too, privately and openly; as is to be seen in
the Records of our Church, where they do protest both against his doeings and
the Classis also. But says he, I am not convinced of my error. So may any
offender say, although his lies and vanities should be never so soundly
refuted. It is reported of one Anaxagoras, that he affirmed, that the snow was
black; and when it was alleged, that the sense, the eye, the sight, judged it
to be white: he answered, it did not as much as seem white to him, Cic. in
Lucull. Aca. Quaest. l. 4.
because he knew that the water of which it was concealed is black. Men might
say what they list against him, but they could not satisfy him, nor solve his
reason. If Mr. Paget were not overmuch conceited touching his opinions in
question, I am persuaded he would leave them: For sufficient has been said
for his conviction therein.

2. For my gooing to the Assembly of the Remonstrants, It is true, I have been
there; and Mr. Paget afterward had a little speech with me about it: But no
word of God, to my remembrance, did he then allege, to convince Act. 18. ult.
2 Timothy 3.16.17.
my conscience of the unlawfullnes of the thing. Moreover he should have done
well, to have told his Readers, what my answer was at the same time unto him. I
spoke (as he knows) to this effect: If I go astroy, it is through your
occasion, in casting stumbling blocks Mat. 18.6.
daily in my way, so many and great, that my spirits is even broken within me:
For your caraiges are so evil against us, in seeking to hinder us from the
benefit of good Ministers, that I cannot live under yours with any comfort.
What relief my poor distressed soul then had of him, I shall never forget:
For I may say (and that truly) as Job did in the like case; he was a
miserable comforter, a Physician of no value. Job 16.2.5.
The mooving of his lips was so far from asswaging my grief, that on the
contrary, he heaped up words against me to increase mine affliction. In the
reading of this accusation, it comes to my mind, what I have sometimes seen in
the Country where I lived, viz. many poor sheep, even forced to run into
deserts, hedges, briars, through the impatience and rage of some feirce and
froward Shepherds; either in setting their dogs on them, or running in
themselves furiously amongst them: the which folly and indiscretion had they
not showed, none of their flock would have gone astray. The application of
this, I refer to Mr. Paget. Let him consider of it, take advise, and speak
his mind; and if he please compare with it Ierem. 23.1.

3. If to resort to the Assembly of the Remonstrants be so heinous an offense
before the Lord, that it deserves as he says the Censure of the Church; how
then comes it to pass, that he deals in this thing so badly with others? He
is a member of the Classis, and has therein (according to his own doctrine)
equal authority with the rest over the Dutch Church here in Amsterdam. Now it
is well known to him, and such as sit with him, that many of the Dutch
members do resort frequently unto the Assembly of the Remonstrants.
Notwithstanding does Mr. Paget tell them of their great wickedness* exhort his
fellow Presbyters to admonish them for it, and to cut them of from the Church,
except they repent. The truth is, as far as I can understand, he is quite
dumb this way, and stirs not at all in it, and therefore it is certain,
that that which he here brings in against me, is either done out of some
disaffection unto my person, or else he shows great impartiality, to say the
best of it. But it seems he is not careful to have his ministry like a
glass, in which all may behold their sports; but rather to the spiders web,
which holds the lesser Flies, but lets the greater pass through at their
pleasure. And here I may well return back unto him, Arrow against separ. page
323. liu. 31
his own words: (having taxed Mr. Ainsworth for partiality) Let all men of
conscience judge what sincerity there is in your course. Thus he can take
occasion to blame another: and yet fall fouler himself into the same fault.

4. Whereas he intimates that he in the name of the Eldership has
admonished me for the open violation of the Sabbath. I desire the Reader to
take knowledge, that no such thing was ever done by him; neither did I know,
that either he, or the Elders, had any such thing against me, till I saw the
accusation out in print. And what I here say, Mr. Paget knows it to be true,
although with his pen he has written otherwise. He complains against Mr.
Davenport in page 42. for want of sincere and plain dealing. And why? because
the other without his knowledge did write his words. But what cause have I to
complain against him, for want of plain and sincere dealing, for publishing
against me many untruths. Notwithstanding I will not bid him, as he does me,
to awaken his frozen and benumbed conscience, (for I have better learned
Christ, 1 Pet. 3.9.
then to render evil for evil) only in all singleness of heart, as before
the Lord, I do entreat him, to take more heed hereafter unto his words, and
that the Law of truth See Mal. 2.6.
may be in his mouth, and that he will speak it from the heart. He promised
the Reader to stand on his watch, and not to do the least wroung to his
opposites, Preface.
for the greatest which they had done unto him. Thus indeed he spoke; but has
he done so? not in the least. For I may truly say, as the Prophet says, He
has spoken and done evil things as he could. Ier. 3.5.
Of which we shall have just occasion to speak more hereafter.

5. Howsoever he has charged me with open violation of the Sabbath, yet to
prove the thing so, ^ee will never be able to do it, though he strive till
his heart ache. And therefore (Christian Reader) thou may see, how far he
is from taking good ways to restore me, if I am fallen, as on the contrary he
seeks by blotting my name, to keep me onward still in an uneven walking. But
to answer him directly; if Mr. Paget had been as foreward, to have made
inquiry for the truth of the thing, as too foreward to publish an untruth
about it, he should have heard with his ears, and seen with his eyes, that I
am so far from offending this way, that my care and labor to the contrary
has been an occasion of some difference in my family as also of many jests
and reproaches from my neighbors about me. And here let it again be observed,
the great partiality of this man: he taxes me for Sabbath breaking Now if he
think, as he speaks, that it is a sin to buy and sell on that day. Oh how
negligent then is he in the work of the Lord, in not being more Z alously
earnest, to have the same reformed. He cannot possibly be ignorant, that under
his Ecclesiastical Gouvernment (as he takes it) there are many scoores,
constantly breakers of the day; I say many ways: notwithstanding he suffers
them alone, and never admonishes them thereof. But how he will be able to
answer this unto God, let he himself look well to it. It may be he thinks
to help himself with that devise, which he talks off in page 97. viz. a
quarter watching; but for my part I verily think, that the Lord will require a
strict account Matt. 25.24.
of him, for every soul, whither English or Dutch, that he has undertaken to
be a watch man unto them; and if he have taken upon him a greater charge, then
he is able to look unto: Let him consider, whither he may not justly fear,
that the Lord will punish him, for his presumption and omission too.

Lastly whereas he adds the word, open, to have the Reader think, that my
offense this way is notorious. I answer, that never to my knowledge was there
any door or window in my Shop opened on the Lords day, to make outwardly any
show, whereby to draw people into the same. In a word that which has been
delivered to any, has been for the most part physical things, for the present
use of sick people.

SECTION III.
BEcause the fowler will be sure to kill the bird if he can: He therefore
charge his piece with many shots; that so, if one do miss, yet another may
strike her dead. Mr. Paget in this place comes out against me, Page 153. 154.
much like such a gunner, seeking at one shot to shute all terrible bullets
into my sids. But I shall endeavor (the Lord assisting me) to avoid them all,
by making it clear and evident (to every indifferent Reader) that I am not
injurious in any one of the particulars, wherewith he most injuriously
accuses me.

First he says, I am injurious to Mr. Davenport in printing that which he
wrote without his consent.

ANSWER.

1. HOwsoever Mr. Davenport knew not of it, yet for ought I knew he was not
unwilling to have it published.

2. Though he wrote it, yet the matter jointly concerned us all; therefore it
was necessary (as I thought) that it should not ly hid in the hands of a few
men; seeing (most probably) by the publishing of it, God would be glorified,
the truth cleared, error confuted, and many good Christians comforted.

3. Howsoever Mr. Paget here finds fault with me; notwithstanding the same
thing has been sometime his own practice. I pray, who gave him leave to set
forth Mr. Ainsworth writings; or what consent had he of Mr. Robinson, when he
printed certain letters of his, sent privately to D. Ames. I do not mention
his doings, to justify my own thereby; but only to show his great partialty,
in judging that to be evil in another, which himself notwithstanding is most
forward to do. Is not Paul's saying here worthy of remembrance, Romans 2.21.
Thou which teach another, teach thou not thy self.

The second injury which I have done is to some of my fellow-complaynanss, who
profess themselves (as he says) highly offended at the printing thereof.

Answ. If they be offended, the question is, whether it be not an offense
taken, but none given. As for Mr. Paget, he has not yet prooved (nor I think
ever will) that I have transgressed in it; and therefore he begs only the
question, not being able to bring any word of God to convince me of sin: for
suppose I should here reason thus; If some of my fellow complaynants, do
profess themselves to be highly offended with Mr. Paget, for his bad caraiges,
unchristian speeches, and diverse great abuses offered unto many good men: Then
has Mr. Paget been injurious unto them. But some of my fellow complaynants do
profess thus: Therefore etc. Now let me see what defense he can make for
himself, which will not serve to clear me every way as well.

A third pretended injury is, because a Brownist did print it, with a
schismatic addition in the end.

Answ. I do deny that addition to be schismatic; but contrary wise holy and
good, even a duty commanded in Scripture, practiced in the best and purest
Churches, justified by the most judicious Divines, ancient and modern; as I
shall hereafter largely prove. But no marvaill that Mr. Paget is offended at
it, seeing the Godly are there encouraged to stand fast in that freedom and
liberty, which Christ has purchased for them with his own blood. This he
cannot endure; this he cannot read with patience; against this he proclames
open war, gibes often at it, and reproacheth every one that sincerely
embraces the same. But let him take heed, least for calling good, evil; Chap.
5.20.
God bring not the woe in Esai upon his head.

As for the unreverend term it self, which he gives unto Christ's instuution:
we weigh it not, neither are we any more discouraged, from the holding of it
fast, then were our fathers of elder time, discouraged from embracing the
Gospel, Act. 28.22. and 24.5. 1 Cor. 1.23 Act. 24.14
because the enemies of it, called it schism, faction, folishnes, heresy,
etc. It is reported of one Theodotius, having denied Christ, that he might not
be blamed for it, taught that Christ was mere man and not God: So Mr. Paget in
the case of Church gouvernment, that his own and other men's faults may not be
seen, in not using or submitting to it, does labor what he can to discredit
the same. But whether the power which we stand for, be schismatic, or his
Apostaticall, I hope by this Treatise, the Reader shall be able to judge.

4. He says, I have been injurious unto him, in spreading ab^oad so many
untruths against him, as are before noted.

Answ. 1. I had a just cause to do, what I did; both for the truth sake, and
his own too: For first if every good subject be bound (to his power to
maintain the temporal rights and Laws of Princes, whether it be by
discovering of treason, suppressing rebellion, or the like: Then much more
ought all Christ's subjects to do what they can, Rev. 2.25.
to preserve the good estate of his spiritual Kingdom. Again, who will not
draw his brother out of a deep pit or well, if he see any way or means for
it. The truth is, Mr. Paget through Satan and his own lust, is fallen into
many great sins; and therefore out of Christian compassion to his soul, I
published the book; being confident, if there be any farther course, to be
taken by me for his recovery, this is it; because now (questionles) he shall
see (if he will be contended to open his eyes) his errors soundly and
effectually refuted.

2. Whereas he says our writings are untruths. I say he speaks untruely in
it; for there is nothing set down there, but will be prooved; as in part I
shall do in this treatise; and more, I understand, is shortly to come forth.
Besides I doubt not, but Mr. Davenport will do the like, so far as the thing
concerns him.

3. Howsoever he has made a large discourse, in his own justification,
notwithstanding he has not cleared himself at all, in the maine things laid
to his charge, viz. promiscuous Baptism, and the authority of the Classis. Yet
he knows until he prove these two points to be lawful, our whole writing
stands firmly, and effectually against him. As for the many sw^ll^ng (...)
used (throughout his book) in his own praise: In my understanding it had
been better, Prove. 27.2.
if some other had done it, and not his own mouth. In the Olympicks games men
did not put garlands and Crowns on their own heads, but waited till others
did it. In truth self praise is very unseemely. Hence in derision they say: He
dwelt by bad neighbors: Besides such persons usually are least credited Ioh.
8.13.
: and good reason too, for the greatest boasters, are commonly the worst
dooers. 1 Samuel 15 13. Revel. 3.15. etc.
As the emptiest vessels make the loudest sound, driest things the greatest
flame; so those which proclaim, as with sound of trumpet, their own goodness,
have most times least of it. That I may be the less offensive in my words, I
will here speak to Mr. Paget in his own: Page 61.
Certainly it was a want of modesty and prudency in him, to make such disputes
in his own commendation. For he has vainly praised himself, and wrounged
us. 7. Page 10.
Yea in stead of clearing himself, he is more polluted. His own tongue
defiles him. And therefore his glorying is not good.

The fifth thing wherein I am injurious (in his conceit) is to our whole
Congregation, to blot the same with report of infamous contention, faction, etc.

Answ. 1. As they that stir up war and strife, Judge. 11.13. 1 King. 18.18.
impute the cause unto others, which lies on themselves; so deals Mr. Paget
with me: For who has been the cause and author to blot our Congregation with
report of infamous contention, faction, etc. but he chiefly: For had he
contained himself within his own bounds, not played the Diotrephes; suffered
the Church to have exercised her own due power; not brought in men's devises
amongst us, we had not seen and felt the shame and misery which now we do.
And that all may see, whatsoever infamy our Church lies under; that it is come
principally by his means. I desire these things may be taken into
consideration. 1: The abuses from time to time done to our Elders, that which
they jointly do; if it fall not in his line, he terms it an unrighteous
law, a bone of contention, a rock of offense, In his Letter given into the
Consistory 11. Mar. 1632.
injurious to the Magristrate, destroyers of the liberty of the Church,
ringleaders to faction, etc. If they in opinion differ from him, then he makes
them parties: and so disableth them from judging in the case; yea professes
he will not tolerate the thing. I do let pass to speak of his taxing them
for insufficiency of his procureing the Classes to censure them; Page 18.63.
how he rejects their advise and counceill: For of all these things we shall
have a fitter place hereafter. This only by the way I say; how slightly
soever he thinks of Ruling Elders, notwithstanding they have a great place in
the Church of Christ; such power and authority as (taking the consent of the
Church with them) they may call the Pastor to give them an account of his
doing. Yea and to depose him from his ministry. If there be just cause,
although Classes and Synods take his part. Let no man think that this is a new
doctrine; for our chief Divines teach it. If any one Protestat. Kings supr.
page 15. Offer. Confer. page 2.
of the Ecclesiastical Officers themselves shall sin, he is as subject to
the Censures of the rest, as any other member in the Congregation. If they
shall all sin scandalously, either in the execution of their office, Repl. to
D. Downames defen. l. 2. part. 2 page 109. Discourse of Troub. at Franck page
162. art. 65
or in any other ordinary manner, then the Congregation, that chose them
freely, has as free power to depose them, and to place others in their room.
And no marvaill, if Protestants write thus: For the Papists ingeniously say as
much: The Ferus in Act. Apost. cap. 11.
Church may not only exact an account of her Ministers, but depose them and
reject them altogether, if they be not fit. Hence then we see, when a
Congregation is injured by any of her Officers, she wants not power in her self
immediately from Christ to redress it; and therefore if she suffer continual
misery, it is her own fault, and so deserves the less pity. But to proceed.

2. He has made our Church to lie down in her shame, by his invective
writing, against many members thereof; matching them many times with the vilest
enemies that ever God had, as Corah, Page 2.3.
and the Rebels with him, the Apostates Israelites, the murderers of Christ,
the persecurors of the Saints; and other most notorious Heretics and
blasphemers. But himself unto meek Moses, to the good Prophets, yea to the
Lord and Christ, and to John Hus the Bohemian, that faithful Martyr of Christ.
Again to say nothing of the contemptible terms which he uses. Prove. 8.8.
; nor of his aggravations, in seeking to set Magistrates Page 29.30.
and Ministers Page 73.
, and all at variance with us; truly his mocking 72.100.102.103.122.151. Arrow
p. 52.65. 354.
is intolerable: In this he is far from that gravity which should be in a
Minister of God, specially in a man of his years; sober dealing would better
become him; for as Paul says, such things are not seemly. But in truth I find
this to be his constant practice in all his writings: I would he did once see
it, and consider the dishonor which he causes unto the Church by it. The
Preacher Eccles. 12.10.
sought to find out acceptable words, and that which was written was upright,
even words of truth.

3. To come more particularly to his accusation; why does he term, that which
we have done, infamous contention, etc. so in page 4. a faction in the Church.
I take it he speaks this, because we have opposed his courses; if this be
his meaning, then I answer: 1. Diotrephes might have framed the like objection,
when the brethren withstood him. 3. Ioh. and on as good ground too. 2. We know
that the Saints are commanded to contend Jude 3. Prove. 28.4.
for the faith; and to hold fast every ordinance of the Lord. If subjects,
freemen, scholars, etc. will not loose the previleidges of their Country,
Cities, Houses; much less should the sons of God, let go any of their
rights, which they have in Christ. 3. As for keeping peace, either with him or
others, it must be done Iam. 3.17 Heb. 12.14 Romans 15.5.
with holiness, purity, and according to Jesus Christ. True it is, we may
accord with him; but how? If we will make our selves the servants of men, and
yield unto that, which our consciences persuade us, is most unlawful. It is
said of Nahash the Ammonite, that he would not be at peace with the men of
Iabesh Gilead, 1 Samuel 11.2
unless he might thrust out all their right eyes. An unreasonable condition:
Notwithstanding I shall make it appear unto all men, in all places,
wheresoever this Book shall come, that Mr. Pagets Terms, propounded for
reconciliation with us, are worse a great deal. For either we must make our
selves spiritually blind, in things necessary to salvation, and cast off some
of Christ's Ordinances and practice, in the place thereof human devises;
otherwise for the present there is no hope to be at union with him.

But as it is in the Proverb, a man may buy gould to dear; even so for my
part, howsoever I desire from my heart to accord with him, nevertheless my
care must be so to have it, as that I may accord with God, and have peace of
conscience. Now to the next supposed injury.

The sixth is to the Classis, in defaming their gouvernment and proceedings.

Answ. 1. If Mr. Paget had the ability to prove his bold affirmations, with
inevitable reasons, as a special faculty, to disgrace men by untrue reports,
he would be a Disputer, one of a thousand. What have we said about the
Classis, that he has any where in his Book refuted. Indeed much windy take
he uses in the thing; that the Classis is ancient; Page 71.72.
other Churches stand in as much subjection to it as his: This order was in
these Countries before his coming over. 18.66.25.
The Synods have agreed that some things shall not be proceeded with, without
the advice of the Classis. The Classical Assembly did judge thus: and a great
deal more he writes just to this purpose. But the Reader shall find grapes on
thorns, and figgs on thistles, as soon as one sound argument in his Book, to
justify that power and authority, which there is now exercised. Notwithstanding
whosoever shall read understandingly his Book, will say that he has not left
this point unprooved, out of forgetfullnes; but rather of mere poverty, as not
having any authentical records of the holy Ghost, under the shadow whereof he
could find any shelter, to shroud his Classical function as a Divine Ordinance.

2. But to come nearer the matter; whatsoever we have said of the Classis, we
stand strictly to it, and are well able to prove it. Two things we have
affirmed; 1. That we believe, that gouvernment, which they exercise over such
Congregations, unto which they stand not properly Ministers, is an undue power.
2. That we have found very hard dealing at their hands. For the first, I shall
refer the Reader to Sect. 7.8. I ouching the later, if need be, I think our
Elders They affirm that the resolution of the Classis deprived the Church of
her due power. 12. Nov. 1631 Answ 2. to the Classis.
will be witnesses for me. Howsoever sure I am, Mr. Hookers case cleares it
sufficiently; they having made an Act altogether against the liking of our
Elders and Congregation, that he should not be admitted to the Pulpit of the
English Church, for any edification So are the words of their Act.
thereof. There went hereupon 40 Brethren or more to the Consistory, and there
showed their great discontent against that which the Classis had done, and
earnestly desired their assistance: Upon this two Elders two Deacons and two
Brethren were sent unto the Classis, to entreat them to revoake and cancill the
former Act, as being demanded, and given out of all due order, yea before our
Church had propounded him unto them, or desired their consent in the thing.
Further it was showed, that no man without the consent of the most of the
Consistory, has power to ask the question, Not because we approved of their
authority; but because we knew it was in vain to present him to them.
whether he be fit to be our Minister or not: Besides we told them, that we
had not been with the Magistrates, and therefore as yet the matter belonged not
to them; in a word it was promised, that unless Mr. Hooker would acknowledge
their authority Ier. 2.14.
, he should not be presented to them at all: Many other persuasions by words,
as a so by writing, were delivered in Dutch: Notwithstanding for all this, they
would not revoake their sentence; but confirmed it a new. Is Israel a servant,
is he home borne? why is he spoiled.

But to the point, this record (to use Mr. Pagets Page 49.
words in the like case) is an authentic witness, not liable to exception; for
what I have here said, is recorded in the Acts of our Consistory October. 12.
1631.
And that this was to hard a dealing with us, I prove it thus. 1. There ought
to b^ nothing (as Beza Epist 83.
says) imposed on a people against their wills. Now imagen that our own
Elde^ship should decree a thing, either to be done or not; yet could they not
enjoyne us (by any Law of God) to obey them in it; further then we our selves
do see the same to be lawful, and so voluntarily assent unto it. And if it be
so; then by what authority can Officers of other Congregations, require us to
stand to their acts; specially when we neither like them, nor judge them good.
It seems Zwinglius was against such doings; Ad Valent. Compar.
for he says, Whosoever with a Council of Bishops, shall impose on Christian
people any Law, or observation at their own liking (he means without the
peoples consent) he invadeth the Churches right by a violent command. Artic.
64.
In another place: Such Elders as without the Churches consent, decree things
at their own pleasure, are in name Elders, but indeed Tyrants. Cyprian Cypria.
l. 4 Ep. 21.34.46.26.32. and 14.31.
in sundry places writes, that all matters ought to be determined by the
Bishops, Elders, and the people present and consenting: Otherwise (says he)
matters are not firm and sure. For this very case Chemnitius Exa. Conc. Trid
part. 1 page 3.
condemns the Council of Trent; viz. because they set down their decrees
(as it were) uncontroulably, and not under the examination of the Churches. D.
Bilson Cont. Ap. p. 9^.
says, that no Council can bind a whole Church; except there be a general
consent. 2. Seeing the authority of particular Congregations, is (as Mr. Parker
Polit. Eccl. l. 3. c. 13. p. 130.
says and largely prooveth it) above all Synodes. I cannot see what reason a
few men have, to take upon them the subjecting of a whole Congregation to their
decrees; yea and to Yet thus dealt the Claswith our Eld. because they admitted
Mr. Hooker to the Pulpit, contrary to their act. De To. Pont. pract page 2.
Censure the Eldership, if they (though with the Churches liking) do contrary
to it. It was not the manner of Bishops (says D. Whitaker) in the primitive
times, to assume unto themselves jurisdiction and gouvernment over others. 3.
If it be right See Park-Pol. Eccl. l. 3 c. 12. p. 88.
that the common desire of a particular Congregation, in things lawfulll should
take place, before one man's opposition to it, then I take it, the matter was
not well carried, when Mr. Paget prevailed against the Eldership and Church too.
4. This practice is contrary to the old rule, generally received among the
learned. That Amb. lib. de dig. Sacerd. 3.
which concerns all, ought of all to be approoved. But some may say, how is
this to be done? I answer in the words of D. Fulke Learned Discourse of Eccles.
disci. p. 86.
, That the Elders (says he) may have their sentence to be the sentence of the
Church, they must (when they have travailed in examining of cases) propound
them to the whole multitude, that it may be confirmed by their consent. Observe
here, how according to this man's opinion, the Classis should first have
propounded the thing to our Congregation, and if we jointly had approoved
thereof, then might they have concluded, that it was a Church Act, otherwise
not.

5. Howsoever the Classes have joined with Mr. Paget against us, and they
together deprived us of Mr. Hooker, and Mr. Davenport, notwithstanding hitherto
we have not seen them, to warrant their proceedings by the Scriptures; and
therefore in this respect we also take it, that they have dealt too hardly
with us: For who knows not, that in all questions of this nature, no other
testimony or argument can strike the stroke to persuade the conscience, but
the word of God; for as one Chrisost* in Psalm. 95. ad finem.
well says: If any thing be spoken without Scripture, the mind of the hears
halteth; now sticking at it, sometimes turning from it as frivolous, sometimes
turning to it as probable: But when the testimony of the speaker comes from
Divine Scripture, it confirms both the speech of the speaker, and mind of the
hearer. But as for the Classis, all that we have yet heard or seen from them,
for the justification of their Acts against us, has been either the order This
is the reason they give in their act against Mr. Hooker, why he should not
preach, it was against the order of the Churches in these Countries.
of the Church, or custom, or tradition. Now what says God by Jeremy Cha. 10.3
, The customs of the people are vain. Whatsoever savoreth against the truth,
is Heresy, even old custom, said Tertullian De veland. Virg.
. Custom, says Cypr. Ep. 74. ad Pomp.
another, without truth, is the mother of error. And in another place In l. 2.
Ep. 3. ad Cicil.
: We must not follow the custom of men, but the truth of God. To the same
purpose speaks Beza In Luc. 23.27.
, and others. As for orders, we are so far to be ordered by them, as they
accord with the order of the Gospel. Touching Traditions, we know well
enought, what they say against them, when they deal with the Papists.

Besides does not Mr. Page. tell us (and that Page 37.
truly) that many worthy Divines are sometimes mistaken. Why then may not they
be mistaken in our differences? In truth we have the more reason so to think,
considering they bring us no proof for their doings herein, saving bare
authority.

And here by the way I think good, to observe a little of Mr. Pagets talk in
page 25. having set down a great part of the Acts and sentences, which the
Classical Assembly made against Mr. Hooker: also what the Deputies of the
Synod did in like manner judge of the thing: He immediately begins to hold up
his head, and to look so big upon us, as if there were no remedy, but we
must needs run away, and veeld him the cause. Had these complaynants (says
he) been wise and considerate persons, they would rather have sought to bury
the memory of these things, then by their importunate complaints compel me,
in my own defense, to write these things, which otherwise I should not have
done. But (good Sir) wherein lies the weight of this terrible matter? what, is
it because they say Mr. Paget has proceeded in every respect of this busnes,
with a good conscience? If so, then I answer: Howsoever they thought it, yet
absolutely so to conclude, was beyond their calling; my reason is, because it
belongs only unto God Ier. 17.10 2. Sa. 17.7.
, to judge infallibly of men's consciences. Again, or does the weight of it,
consist in this, viz. because they say he was unfit to be admitted to the
Ministry, etc. If so, then in Augustins In his 48 Epistle to Vincent.
words, I say, instead of all these learned Fathers, or rather above them all,
Paul the Apostle comes to my mind, to him I run, to him I appeal, from all
Writers that think otherwise. And that the opinions held by Mr. Hooker
(howbeit condemned by the Classical Assembly and Deputies of the Synods) are
justifiable by the word of God, it shall be manifested hereafter. In the mean
time I will here give the Reader a full sight of all this great matter,
wherewith he thinks to affright us; and thus it may be laid down. Such
persons whom the Classical Assembly and the Deputies of the Synod, shall judge
unfit to be admitted to the Ministry of the English Church at Amsterdam, they
may not be admitted: But so they judged Mr. Hooker; Therefore, etc. To answer
this argument; I reason thus. If as many and more, and every way as learned,
wise, judicious, godly, etc. as the Classical Assembly, and the Deputies of
the Synod, do judge Mr. Hooker fit, to be admitted to the English Church at
Amsterdam; then he may lawfully be admitted: But the first is true; Therefore
the second. Had Mr. Paget been wise and considerate, he would rather have
sought to bury the memory of these things, then by his unnecessarie mentioning
of them, to compel me in my own defense to write these things, which
otherwise I should not have done.

But let it be granted for reasoning sake, that the truth is on their side,
notwithstanding I cannot see, how they can lawfully require us to demit our
selves to their Acts and sentences, till they do lay down, as their decrees,
so the word of God, for the confirmation of them; specially in points known
unto them to be much doubted of and questioned, both by our Elders and many
more. We are men that do profess Religion, and desire to do Gods whole
will, and therefore cannot choose but grieve and complain, when those, which
take upon them to be our Guides and Teachers, will injoyne us to leave this
thing, or do that; and yet bring us nothing from the Scriptures to persuade
our consciences to it. D. Whitaker says Cont. 4. and 8. p. 883.
Ecclesiastical Officers, if they will take heed to their flock, as they
ought, must do things, not by force, but by arguments and persuasions. And
there is good reason for it; for we well know, that the word of God contains
all things needful to be done, or not done; as may be seen in the places
Josh. 18. Deuteronomy. 5.32. Act. 20.30 2 Timothy 3.15.16. Ioh. 4.25. and 5.39. and
15.17. and 16.13. Rom 15.4. Act. 26.22 23. Mar. 12.24
here quoted. And to this do all our best Divines subscribe old and new; as
Athanasius Cont. Gent.
, Isychius In Levit. c. 16. l. 5.
, Hillarie Lib. 6. de Trin.
, Epiphanius Lib. 3. Her. 75.
, Augustine Epist. 198. ad Fortun.
, Chrysostom In Mat. Hom. 19.
, Cyrill l. 12. c. 68 in Ioh. 16.
, Lyra In Prove. c. 31.
, Bruno In Gal. c. 1
, Bruno In 1 Epist. Pet. c. 5.
, Pareus In Romans 11.26.
, Alstedius Praecog. Theol. l. 2. p 127.
, Musculus In Mat. 11.3. p. 103
, Mollerus In Ps. 19.8. Ps. 130.
and others. To end now the point, as Iotham said to the men of Schechem, so
will I say to the Classis; if ye have dealt truly and sincerely with our
Elders and Church, then rejoice ye in Mr. Paget, and let him rejoice in you.

The 7 injury is to the Magistrate, in publishing an unjust complaint against
that which was done by them.

Answ. Solomon Pr. 12.18 Ch 26.22. Ps. 140.4. Prove. 27.4.
says, There is that speaks like the peircing of a sword. And the words of a
tale bearer, go down into the utmost part of the belly. How well all this
agrees with Mr. Paget, may be seen in this particular, to wit, in seeking to
provoake the Magistrates against us. Truly his dealing this way is most
cruel; for in page 29.30. he perverteth our words, and seeks to make such
conclusions from them, as tend to our undoing many ways; as if we should
count the Magistrates Tyrants, Church-robbers, Sacriledgious persons, etc.
accusations of such nature, as indeed the thinking of them, makes me tremble.
Deliver me, O Lord, from the violent man, who has purposed to overthrow my
going. But who can stand before envy.

Now for answer to it: 1. So long as I have been in these Countries, my care
has been to walk dutifully toward the Higher Powers; not willing at any time,
to think of them, look on them, speak of them, or to them; but with much
reverence. For sure I am, their authority is from God; and therefore I have,
and still do, make conscience to obey their Laws, pay them tribute, pray for
them, and give God thanks for them, Eccl. 10.20 Romans 13.2. Tit. 3.1. Mat.
22.21 1 Ti 2.1.2 Psalm. 20.1.
as knowing it to be a singular mercy of God toward us, that we do enjoy
them.

2. I am so far from having the thoughts which he suggesteth, as I do
believe (God knows I lie not) that there is not a people on earth, this day,
better gouverned then we are; here are wholesome Laws established, good men
cherished, evill-doers punished, and the poor comfortably provided for; by
which means we lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godlynes and honesty.

3. I marvaill by what rule Mr. Paget went, when he made this threshing
instrument of iron out of our writing. Amos 1.3.
I suppose his Book learning, will never bear him out in it; but rather it
will be generally thought (of the godly wise) that he followed the council of
some reasonles passion, then any commendable plat-forme of art and science. But
I pray (Sir) are you in good earnest, that a man cannot abuse his interest in
the Magistrates, as we said and meant, but it must follow necessarily, that
they are Tyrants, Church-robbers, etc. this you say: But I deny that any such
thing can be rightly gathered from the place. For 1. we never thought, nor can
think, that the Magistrates deprive us of that liberty and power, which Christ
has given to his Church; because we know that they do not take upon them to
elect and ordain Ministers, but give approbation unto such as by the Elders
and people shall be chosen. 2. Our words have nothing in them, tending that
way, whereto you stretch them; we say (and this is the most) that the
Magistrates will have us to take one that can speak Dutch, and one in this
Country: Now may not they require so much, and we do it; and yet we keep
still our power. If Mr. Paget had but read our words charitably, he should
have seen that which he infers from them, to be directly in them
contradicted: For mark, all Readers that have sense, we say the Magistrates
will have us to take one, etc. does it not then follow, that we confess they
permit us to use the liberty and power which Christ has given us, yea
encourage us to it: yet so, as we choose a man to their liking. For conclusion
then. I shall exspect in his next Book, that he either blot out this
slander, or make acknowledgement of his fault herein, and to induce him the
more unto it: I wish him to read the Wise-mans saying: Devise not evil against
thy Neighbor, Prove. 3.29.
seeing he dwells securely by thee.

Lastly let it be noted, how unprofitable he is unto the peace of this City,
in that he seeks by untrue reports, to set debate between the Rulers and
people. The Scripture says, In the multitude of people is the Kings honor. As
it is a fathers glory to have a large posterity; a shepherds praise a great
flock: so it is a Gouvernours dignity and credit, to exercise authority over
many faithful subjects. But certain it is, Mr. Paget has been an occasion,
not only to drive some families hence, but also a principal hinderer of many
(and those very rich in the world) from coming hither: the which thing tends
unto the great hurt, both of Church and Commonwealth; and what I here speak,
I can make it good by many faithful and honest witnesses.

The 8 injury is to all the Reformed Churches, in publishing complaints against
such lawful authority, as is exercised by them.

Answ. 1. When M. Paget by the Scriptures has prooved the matters in
controversy between us lawful; viz. the power of the Classis, and his
riffrafe Baptism; then I will (by Gods grace) acknowledge my fault herein;
till then, I shall always profess, that he has borne false witness against
his neighbor: A thing in his writings too common with him.

2. Observe here, how Mr. Paget professes plain Brownisme, and condemns the
Church of England, and that he does so; I prove it thus: All Reformed
Churches use a Classical gouvernment; (so says he) But the English Church
uses no such: Therefore it is no Reformed Church, and so consequently false.
What Apology he can make, to vindicate his reputation, I yet know not; but
it may be we shall see something of it in his next book.

The 9 injury that he taxes me with, is to all that seek Reformation, and
desire the same Discipline, that is practiced in these Churches: this their
Book being a stumbling block in the way.

Answ. 1. I suppose by the seekers here after his Discipline, he means the
English, non-conformists. Now in this he abuses them, and his Readers too;
for howsoever they would willingly shake off the Prelates yoke, notwithstanding
it is not to come under his Classical authority, but rather to erect that
single uncompounded Policy (which he seems to gibe at) whereby particular
Congregations are made to be independent: Not standing under any other
Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves. And that this is so, I can prove
it by many testimonies. In a certain book set out, under the name of all the
unconformable Ministers in the Realm, they write thus: We confine Protestat.
King. suprem. page 12.13.
and bind all Ecclesiastical power, within the limits only of one particular
Congregation; Holding that the greatest Ecclesiastical power ought not to
streitch beyond the same, and that it is an arrogating of Princely supremacy
Mark this.
, for any Ecclesiastical person, or persons, to take upon themselves
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over many Churches. And a little after: We hold
that those Ecclesiastical persons, that make claim to greater power and
authority then this, especially that make claim Iure Divino This Mr. Paget
does.
of power, and Jurisdiction to meddle with other Churches then that one
Congregation, of which they are, or ought to be members, do usurp upon the
supremacy of the civil Magistrate, etc. The Refuter of D. Downames Sermon,
handles this point largely, and prooveth from the Scriptures, and best
writers, that every particular Congregation, Repl 1. l. 3. p. 185. l. 1. part.
2. p. 22 23.68.
ought to have absolute gouvernment in it self; and that no Officer (by virtue
of his office) may meddle with the affairs and matters of any Church, except
his own.

To these we will add D. Fulke, a man famous and of rare learning, in his
Learned Discourse of Ecclestasticall Gouvernment, he says, There ought to be
in every Church an Elde ship, Page 84.
which ought to have the hearing, examination and determining of all Note this.
matters, pertaining to the Discipline and Gouvernment of that Congregation. I
could name many more, but it needs not; specially because I shall have occasion
to speak again of the thing in another place. Yet this may not be forgotten.
Whereas there are many hundreds of our Countrymen in New England, they have
not erected there any Classical Gouvernment, but every particular Church
exercises her own, I say, within her self wholly; which is a sure argument to
prove, that the foreward professors in England approove not of this kind of
gouvernment here pleaded for; although he would feign have his Reader to
think so.

2. Whereas he says that our Book is a stumbling block, laid in the way of
Reformation. I suppose it will appear so far otherwise, as that he himself
will be found chiefly in fault this way. And therefore I wish him, to be well
advised, what he writes hereafter, least the reasons, which he lays down
for his gouverning of many Churches, be applied by the Popes men unto the
Hierarchy, and to as good purpose too. And truly I cannot see, but this may
well be so, considering that both their Disciplines tend unto the taking away
of the Churches Right, the difference is; In the Hierarchy one does it: In the
Classes more; notwithstanding in this they join together; viz. in depriving
Churches of their due and lawful power.

Tenthly he says I am injurious to all that are grieved for the offense
arising by this fact, he being the cause of their grief.

Answ. 1. If any grieve to see error discovered, the truth cleared, good men
justified, unjust doers reprooved; it is their fault and sin: But the
writings published by me, serve for this end and use. 2. If any have given
occasion unto others of sorrow, it is principally himself, in that he has, by
unlawful means, keept from us the profitable preaching of the mord, whereby
we should have been much furthered in the way to life and glory. If a father
should withhold from his children seasonable and wholesome food; were it not a
sufficient cause of weeping and mourning? For our parts, we cannot judge
otherwise of his caraige toward us; howsoever he blesses himself in it.

The 11 and last injury is to all that take pleasure in these offenses, he
being a means to harden them in sin.

Answ. This is only a begging again of the question, and therefore it is
answered before: For conclusion then, here I may in his own words say; Page 32.
Such reproaches are quickly broched, but the guilt of them is not so quickly
and easily taken away. Besides these, I find many other untruths and
reproaches laid upon me in his Book, unto all which I shall give answer in
time. But as for the writer of them, I will say no more, but that which the
Reader shall find by experience. Pro. 25.28.
That as abattered city without walls, so is he that cannot rule his
affections; for his eger desire to fasten upon us, he cared not what, has
left his writings naked, without all reasonable and honest defense.

SECTION IV.
IN this Section my purpose is, to examen Mr. Pagets answers, unto certain
Scriptures, alleged by us and Mr. Davenport, in our writings. First to prove
that Christ has given full power unto every particular Congregation to choose
freely their own Ministers, we mentioned Act. 6.3. and 14.23.

Mr. Paget to refute us; devises 8 Answers, Page 18.19.20.21.22.
amongst which there is not one, that answers to the thing at all, nor serves
his turn in the least for which he brings it. It is not necessary that I
should here write down all his words; I will therefore only take the
substance of them, which is thus: 1. We accuse other Ministers besides
himself. 2. The order against which we complain, has been formerlie observed
in our Church. 3. We are partial, because we disliked not the thing sooner.
4. He tells us what order the Synods have devised about the calling of
Ministers. 5. We are taught (a thing never doubted of) that the Elders ought
to go before the people in all the public actions of the Church. 6. If this
be not so great absurdity will follow. 7. If we were apart well examined, he
assures himself that few of us would be found to agree with one another,
touching the due order of elections. 8. It is an heinous crime no less then
sacrilege, to deprive the Church of her lawful power. But is this to answer,
or rather in truth to play the Trifler. For what are these 8 Replies, but so
many shifts and windings, even miserable starting holes, and scope doors, for
him to fly out at; does he not here turn his back upon the case, as not
willing to stand to it.

I wish he would once again read our Scriptures, and his answer to them, and
to persuade him hereto; I will presume (though I look to be requited with
shrewd words for my labor) to propose it to his view in this manner. If the
complaint made by William Best, and the Subscribers with him, be against Mr.
Paget and others: If the order against which they complain be ancient: If they
have done ill in not blaming the thing till now: If the Synods have prescribed
and order of calling Ministers: If the Elders ought to go before the Church in
all public actions: If hurt will follow otherwise: If the Complaynants cannot
agree among themselves, touching the due order of elections: In short, if it be
a great sin to deprive the Church of her due power: Then do not these
Scriptures Act. 6.3. and 14.23. prove, that Christ has given full power to
his Church, to choose freely their own Ministers: But the first is true:
Therefore the second.

Mr. Paget needs not to take it amiss, that I have syllogistically framed this
argument for him: For believe it, unless it go this way; a man may say of his
reasoning here, as of them in the Proverb, He asked for hooks, and they say
they have no mattocks. Notwithstanding I do not impute this, to his
insufficiency; but to the badnes of his case. He perceiving (in likelihood)
that these Scriptures made for us, and against him; thought of a course how to
put them by, and save his own credit too, and that was by holding his Reader
in a long talk. For will not many think, when they shall read 7 or 8 scoore
lines written to confute 3 or 4. But the thing is soundly done.

2. For the matter in page 20. I would willingly know, why he has written a
whole side to prove that the Gouvernours of the Church ought to go before,
etc. has this thing ever been in question? Knows he not, that our
difference is not about our own Eldership: But whither Officers of other
Churches, have ought to do (as by power) with the administrations of our
Congregation. This indeed we deny, but nothing else. Why therefore does he
spend time, in unncecessary talk? If his heart be upright, and he think his
case good, let him speak out plainly and directly in it. We affirm, that
the election and ordination of all Ecclesiastical Officers, ought necessarily
to be made by the free chose of the Congregation, wherein they are to
administer: and none else have a calling to meddle therewith. For this we
bring the word of God, Act. 6.3. and 14.23. Not wrested to serve our Turn, but
understood in that sense, which the learned expound it, as Cartwright Refut.
Rbem. on. Act. 14.23.
, Bates Page 66.
, Vdal Demonst. discip. page 24.25.
, Danaeus In 1 Timothy c. 5. p. 350.
, Fenner Sacr. Theol. l. 7. c. 10. page 106.
, Polanus Syntag. l. 7. c. 16. p. 543
, Piscator In Act. 6. Observe. 2.
, Beza Annot. in Act. 14.23.
, the Authors of the admonition to the Parliament Lib. 1. p. 3
, Church gouvernment Page 40.
, Necessity of Discipline Page 28.
, Defense of Ecclesiastical Discipline Page 40.
, and many others.

But Mr. Pagets profession and practice is otherwise: He says Preface.
, that particular Congregations are not independent: but stand under other
Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves. And to have his Reader to be of
the same mind with him; he tells him in page 19. and 66. that the Synods in
these Countries have agreed to have it so. If he had told us and prooved it,
that Christ or his Apostles had so commanded, we would have embraced it
forthwith; but not the sooner, because men have done it. Our reasons are these;
1. It does not belong unto Synods (as the Learned Beza de Eccles c. 5. p. 125.
Piscat. These. Theolog. loc. 23. p. 372. Iusti. Mart. n Dial. cum i Tripho.
affirm) to make new Articles of Religion, nor to bring any thing into Gods
house, which he has not commanded in his word. Ministers (says one D.
Whita. cont. 4. quoe. 7. p. 884. Deu. 16.21 Col. 2.23. Exo. 20.24.
) are stewards, whose duty is not to prescribe new Laws unto the family, but
faithfully to keep the Laws of the householder, and to do every thing
according to his commandment. 2. All such inventions of men, as are devised
for any service of God, are abhorred by the Lord: He likes nothing but what
he appoints himself. 3. God promises his presence only in his own
ordinances; and therefore we cannot exspect that he will either accept, or
bless See Mr. Dod upon 2 Comm. Elton on Colos. p. 308 Per. idol. last times p.
674. etc.
that thing, which is not done accordingto his revealed will. 4. Herein we
obey the Lord Esa. 8.20. 1 The. 5.21. 1 Ioh. 3.1. Act. 17.11
, and walk in the stepts of the faithful. 5. In this we take no more
liberty, then others have formerly done. Luther in the Preface of the Assertion
of the Articles, condemned by the Bull of Leo X. He says: I call them to
record of this my protestation, that I will be urged to yield by no man's
authority; though he be never so holy a Father, but as far as he shall be
approoved by the judgment of the divine Scriptures. And here I will conclude
this point in the words of Augustine: We weigh not the writings of all men, be
they never so worthy, as we weigh the Canonical Scriptures: but that, Ad
Fortun. Epist. 111.
saving the reverence that is due unto them, we may mislike and refuse somewhat
in their writings, if we find that they have taught otherwise then the
Scriptures will bear.

Let it here be observed, that Mr. Paget pleads for his Discipline, as the
Papists do for theirs: They say Sculting. Hier. Anar. 1. page 15.19.25.
, Church gouvernment is not to be taken only from the Scriptures, but from the
wholesome precepts of the Fathers, and institutions of old Canons.

I suppose he dares not affirm, that unto the lawful calling of a Minister,
God requires every particular Church, to seek the allowance of the Classis;
and that they shall not proceed in the thing without their advise.
Notwithstanding he does what he can, to subject us unto this human
ordinance, and will not suffer us otherwise to go on, and therefore (as I
said) he and they have taken up one devise, to bring all Churches (if they
could) into miserable bondage. But let him remember the words of Solomon Prove.
22.28.
, Remoove not the ancient limit, which thy fathers have set. This is a great
sin in all places Job 24.2.
, but greatest in the Churches of the Saints.

Mr. Davenport judgeing it wholly unlawful, to baptize any infant, whose
Parents one at least are no members of any particular Congregation; alleged
for it certain Scriptures, Page 133, 134. etc.
unto which Mr. Paget has answered: But whether effectually, we are now to
inquire.

The first is Act. 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the
flock, over the which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, etc.

To this Mr. Paget (as before) makes 8 Replies; most of which, I take them to
be so impertinent, as not capable indeed of any answer. Leaving the first to
Mr. Davenport, because it concerns his own person; we come to the second,
where he writes thus: Suppose Paul in the place alleged, had required no
more of the Pastors of Ephesus, yet might a further duty have been laid upon
them in some other place of Scripture. It is no good kind of disputing, to
argue thus, No more is required of Ministers in such and such a place,
therefore in no other place at all.

Answ. 1. Be it here noted, that these words tend unto the upholding of the
vilest errors that can be: For from the ground which he has here laid down,
what Divine truth is there, but may be coulorably gaine-said and resisted. For
example, If a man to prove that there are three persons in the Godhead, no
more; should allege for it 1. Ioh. 5.7. There are three that bear record in
Heaven, etc. Might not a Heathen take up his words, and say: O Sir, it is no
good kind of disputing, to argue thus, No more are mentioned in such, and such
a place, therefore in no other place at all. I marvaill how Mr. Paget would be
able to stop such an adversaries mouth. In his next writing I shall exspect
to see some thing about it. In the mean time I do advertise him to beware of
these rash and inconsiderate sayings: He cannot be ignorant, what a most
dangerous work he has set forth once already. Seeking by it (as one Mr.
Ains. Advertism. to the Read. at the end of the 5. Books of Moses, published
in England by authority against him.
truly charge him) to strike at the very text, and to weaken our common
faith. For which thing he lies to this day, under the just Censure, and
sharp reproof of many Godly and Learned men. It would be good therefore for
him, in Jobs Cha. 40.5. and 42.6.
words to say, Once have I spoken, but I will not answer, yea twice, but I will
proceed no further: Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

2. Whereas he answers with If, or might be: this shows that (being not
able to avoid the force of the Scripture, yet unwilling to ascent unto it) he
loves to be contentious, and to seek a knot in a rish: If there be any place
of Scripture, to his knowledge, that does require the Pastors of Ephesus, to
baptize such infants whose Parents are without: it had been his duty to have
named it. But if he know no such thing, (as I am sure he does not) then let
him know, that his reasoning is fruitless and deceitful too. If a man will be
perverse, it is no mastery to have a distinction, and to say some thing, though
without brane or sense. But what says Vives Lib. 1. de Cause. art. corrupt.
They are base wits, that are so affected: For ingenious minds and natures well
given, will rather seek how true that is, which they hold, then how they may
defend it, making greater price of verity then victory.

3. To answer the thing more fully; the ordinary examples of the Godly in
Scripture, are set down for our imitation; yea and we are exhorted to follow
the same: Phil. 4.8.9.10. 2 Ti. 3.10. 1 Cor. 4.17 and 10.11. Heb. 13.15 Iam.
5.17. Luke 4.25.26.27.
These things (says Paul) which ye have heard and seen in me, do. Hence it
is, that the Apostle, having spoken of the virtues of many true believers, Heb.
11. likeneth them in chap. 12.1. unto the Cloud, which the Israelites had in
the desert, by which they were guided unto the Land of Canaan.

And in particular, the intent of the holy Ghost, in causing the Acts of the
Apostles to be recorded; was that the same should be as a Cloud, to direct us
in the way to heaven. Now then to apply Act. 20.28. to the matter in hand;
whereas Paul appoints the Ephesian Elders, unto the care and charge only of
their own particular Congregation, and no further; it follows necessarily,
(this being written for our imitation) that every Minister under the Gospel, is
to contain himself altogether, within the bounds and circuit of his own
Church; and not to exercise any act of his ministry otherwhere: For to do
it, is merely intrusion, and a taking of to much upon him. 1. Cor. 7.24.
Therefore Let every man wherein he is called, therein abide with God. Else
others will be injured, good order broken, scandalls raised, and the doer
severely punished, for his irregular walking.

Observe again, how Mr. Paget makes use of the Papists argument; for thus
writes Scultingius: The Calvinists (says he) object that the authority of
Bishops and Archbishops, is not from the Apostles, Hierarch. l. 10. p. 79.
because Act. 15. the controversy there was not confirmed by them, but by the
whole Church. Now mark how prittily he answers to it: This will not follow,
for the authority of Bishops and Archbishops might be exercised at other times,
in the Apostles days, although then it were not. Thus he draws out
Antichrist sword against us, only he puts a new scabbard upon it.

His third answer is, that Pastors and Teachers are bound to exercise some
acts of their ministry, toward those who are no members of their Church. And
why so? Because they ought to invite and call others, even those that are
without, Prove. 9.3.4.5. Mat. 28.19.20.

Answ. 1. I would willingly know of him, whither his office be so with him, and
always about him, that he cannot perform some good actions, but they must
needs be actions of his Ministry. I and others, are otherwise minded; our
reason is, because we are told, that as a man and wife, a father and child; so
a Pastor and a Flock, are relatives. Now in my understanding, as I am a
father, I exercise no proper acts of a father, but toward my own children;
what good soever I do to others, it cannot properly be said to be the act of a
father, but rather of a friend, a neighbor, a Christian, etc. Now let him make
further application of it.

2. For his two Scriptures; 1. Mat. 28.19.20. is very unskilfully quoted; for
howsoever the Apostles exercised some Acts of their ministry toward men
without; yet this prooves not, that ordinary Ministers may do so too; but
only a thing so conceited of him. The other place is answered before.

4. He says, that a Pastor may administer the Sacraments, both of Baptism
and the Lords Supper, in neighbor Churches; and this (he says) he has
prooved against Mr. Ainsworth in Arr. page 17.18. and again from page 109. to
114.

Answ. 1. As Parents love their own children, because they begat them, how
ill-favored and black soever they are. So Mr. Paget in this place, applaudeth
his old writings, because they are the inventions of his own head. I have 3 or
4 times read the places over; and I do assure thee (Reader) I find not any
thing there prooved, of which he here so vainly boasts. For either he
takes that granted, which he is not able to prove; to wit, that the Elders,
Deacons and widows of one Church, may administer in another, by virtue of
office; or else, like the unwise man's building, his whole discourse is without
foundation. He tells us, that the Eldership of the separated company of Leiden
did help Mr. Ainsworth in his Controversy with Mr. Johnson. What then? must
it follow that they exercised some acts of their Ministry in another
Congregation? For sooth so he concludes; but how truly, I will here manifest
in this argument. If the Magistrates of Amsterdam perform sometime a work of
mercy to the people at Harlem; then they exercise there some acts of their
Magistracy; but the first is true: Therefore the second. If Mr. Paget will
compare his manner of reasoning with this; he shall see, that blood is not
more like to blood, then these two one the other.

But I guess what causes him to err herein; He thinks that Officers of a
Church, cannot be helpful in some causes unto other people, but they exercise
acts of their Ministry: But the thing is not so; for whatsoever they do in
such cases, they do it not as Officers, but as Christians, neither can they
now do more, (though Ministers in other Churches) then any other Brother may
do, being endued with the like gifts.

One thing here I cannot let pass, and that is touching his unsound reasoning
in page 110. He tells Mr. Ainsworth that his similitude from a Husband, is
against himself. The reason he gives for it, is, because a Husband,
notwithstanding his relation and bond unto his own wife, may yet become a
protector, and guide of the poor widow, that wants a Husband, to perform
these duties. If Mr. Paget will stand to justify the true proportion of his
argument, as it must necessarily hold, or else it is mere vanity: I will hence
prove from his writing, that adultery is lawful; for thus I reason: That
which is the peculiar duty of husbands, to be performed toward their wives,
is to give them due benevolence: But husbands notwithstanding the relation and
bonds unto their own wives, may perform the peculiar duties of husbands to
poor widows: Therefore husbands, notwithstanding the relation and bond unto
their own wives, may have the use of the bodies of poor widows. If he do
not grant this, he reasons without reason. For I hope he will not deny, but
a man that is no husband, may perform many kind offices to poor widows; yea
I think he will confess, that a man unmaried, may do as many good turns to
poor widows, as any husband: If so, then of a certainty, either he must
maintain whoordome, as I said before; or confess that which he writes here,
is most impertinent; and that the comparison holds no further but thus; viz.
that any man out of office, may in other Congregations perform as much duty;
as those which are not Ministers there.

I hope his sin here was of ignorance, rather then of wilfullnes, and that
he had a devotion to serve God a right, though he took not (in this) the
right way, wherein he will be served. And thus much is sufficient to confute
whatsoever he has there said: Let us therefore proceed to the next.

For his 5 answer, I can better understand his meaning, then make either sense,
or good English of it. To prove that a Pastor is bound to exercise his
Ministry, in some acts thereof, toward those, who are no members of his
Church; he brings the example of Classes and Synods, where many Ministers do
meet together, for the administration of Discipline in them, and to determine
and decide by a joint authority, the cases and controversies of sundry
Congregations; and this he says is to be seen in Act. 15.1.2.

Answ. Who sees not that this plea, is none other, then a mere begging of the
question; he brings in the Classes and Synods for his proof, whereas he
should first have prooved, that the power, which they assume over many
Churches, is lawful. Before I come to lay down my particular answers to it, I
shall entreat him in his next Book, to resolve me these few Questions. 1.
VVhither the Assembly, mentioned in Act. 15. were a Synod or Classis. 2. How it
can be manifested from that place, that both are divine institutions, as here
is affirmed. 3. How he can naturally from thence raise this doctrine; viz.
excommunications and elections of Ministers, are actions belonging unto Classes
and Synods. 4. VVhither it be Iure Divino, that Ecclesiastical Officers of
many Churches, are necessarily bound, to determine by joint authority, the
cases of many particular Congregations; or whither it be a thing arbitrary and
left unto every man's liberty. 5. Whither all such cases and controversies, as
are decided by many Ministers, combined into Classes and Synods; must so stand,
as that particular Congregations may not (if they think fit) reject the same,
and practice otherwise, then has been there determined by joint authority.

I have the more hope, that Mr. Paget will give a direct answer to these
questions: Page 39.
Seeing a good conscience (he says) suffers not a man to be neutrall, nor to
suspend his judgment, when it is desireously desired; but forces him to bear
witness unto the truth, etc.

To the point now: I do deny that this place Act. 15. prooveth any such thing,
for which it is alleged. For 1. here was no combination of many Ministers of
diverse Churches; but only a few messengers sent from Antiochia unto the
Congregation at Jerusalem, about a controversy there specifyed. Hence it is
affirmed, by many learned men D. Bridge. page 1224.
, that as, this was an assembly of one only particular Church; so it binds D.
Whita. De conc. Q 2 p. 6. and p. 67.
only but in a special, or particular meeting.

2. As Mr. Cartwright Refut. Rhemist. on the place.
says, Paul and Barnabas went not up to Jerusalem, to submit their judgment
to the judgment of the Apostles; for that had diminished the authority of
their doctrine, then which there was no greater in the Word: they being both
infallablie directed by the Holy Ghost. Only they went up, to confer with
them, and for countenance of the truth, in respect of men, and for the stopping
of the mouths of such deceivers, as pretended they were sent Verse. 24.
by the Apostles. In a word that no suspicion might remain in the minds of the
people, as if Paul in doctrine differed from the rest.

3. If Jerusalem lay northward 200 miles from Antioch, as I read Itiner. Novi
Testo fol. 96.
it did: Surely then, he has small reason to bring this Scripture, as the
ground and foundation of the Classical Assembly; yea and to tell us Page 88.
, that it is a remarkable place of Scripture, to warrant the exercise of that
power, which we deny. And a little after, This one allegation is sufficient to
evince the falsehood of their assertion. But before you make such hasty
conclusions; have a little patience to hear us, to speak for our selves. I
pray how can you prove that the officers of these two Churches, being two
hundred miles asunder, were combined, and met ordinarily together (as the
Classes do) to determine the cases of many Churches. Or how do you prove
that there was any Officer at all of Antioch, in Jerusalem at this time?
Briefly, or how do you prove, that the Brethren sent from Antioch, exercised
authority in the Church at Jerusalem; yet all this you must make good,
otherwise you are guilty of abusing and perverting the Scripture, in affirming
that the power, which the Classis exercises, was practiced at Antioch and
Jerusalem, and by Apostolical direction. This you have spoken: but it is
untrue. Notwithstanding had you rested in Stev. Ofw. testimony, your fault had
been small, in comparison what it is now, through your great presumtion; to
take God for your witness, Ier. 23.31.
in a thing which he never spoke. Behold says the Lord, I am against the
Prophets that use their tongues, and say: He says it.

4. It is certain, Verse. 12.22 De Conc. Q 8. c. 3. and Qu. 3. c. 3. p. 96.97.
that at Jerusalem not only the Apostles and Elders met together; but as Luke
expresses it, the Church also; being interested in the thing: And therefore
gave sentence with the rest, to the decree then made. Observe what D. Whitaker
replies unto Bellarmine, denying the multitude to be called: It was always
(says he) the practice of the Apostles in common cases, to call the whole
Church together: and no doubt but they did so here. Now there was no need to
have it mentioned, seeing it had been their constant custom formerlie so to
do. Mr. Parker Polit. Eccl. l. 3. c. 12. page 108.126.334.
affirms the same: So the Authors of the Cent. Cent. 1. l. 2 c. 9. p. 547.548.
.And it seems in Cyprians Lib. 4. Epist. 16.
time, the Church was not deprived of her right herein; howsoever the Papists
Bellarm. de Conc and Ecc. l. 1. c. 16. page 39.
in those days teach otherwise, and Mr. Paget and others, do otherwise
practice.

5. Howsoever the Church at Antioch, sent some Brethren, with Paul and
Barnabas, unto the Church at Jerusalem: notwithstanding (and let it be well
observed) they did not this as being a dependent body, and standing under
another Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves. For as Mr. Parker Polit.
Eccl. l. 3. c. 20. p. 301. and 314.
excellently prooves it, the Church at Antioch at this time, had absolute power
in, and for her self, to have ended the controversy; and might have done it: I
say, in respect of authority, without acquainting therewith any other
Congregation at all. To the same purpose another says D. Whita. Conc. Qu. 1.
c. 1.
, The Church of Antioch sent not to Jerusalem, as being bound in duty thereto:
But in regard it was the chief place of Religion, therefore they made choose
freely of that Congregation, as knowing them to be best able, to resolve the
controversy.

True it is, the Hierarchy D. Whit. g. T. C. 3.
deny this: of whose opinion Mr. Paget must either be; or else the Classes, (as
they now rule) must fall to the ground; for any relief that this Scripture Act.
15. will yield unto them.

6. When the Hierarchy allege Act. 15. to prove their Diocesan and
Provincial Synods lawful, mark how they are answered by the Reformists, The
particular acts of the Apostles, in cases alike, Park. Polit. Eccl. l. 3. c.
20. p. 315. 316.
must alike be observed. If this reason be effectual (as indeed it is) against
them; then it is no less effectual against the Classes: Now I have in part
already showed, how quite contrary their doings are, unto the example in Act.
15. unto which this further may be added: that the matter carried from Antioch
to Jerusalem, was agreed upon by the whole Church; Page 338.
and sent thither by their mutual desire and consent: And hence our Divines
teach, that the power of bringing things from one Congregation to another,
belongs not to any one officer, but to the whole Church. If this be true, by
what word of God then, does Mr. Paget, by his Thus he is accused by our
Elders, in the records of our Church. Oct. 6. 1631.
own authority, and without the consent of the Consistory, or any one of
them, carry matters to the Classis, and there he and they together, undo all
that, which the Elders, with the Churches consent, had before jointly concluded.

In page 82. after many bitter reproaches, he asks, Where is the warrant of
Will. Be. and the rest, how prove they, that I destroy the power of the Church?

We are not to seek of good proof, for that which we have spoken; for
seeing he most unlawfully carries our busnesses away, to be determined, by the
Officers of other Churches, in this respect he goes about to spoil us
utterly. A little after he demands, What is to be done, if the Elders be in
error, whither the matter should be brought to the body of the Congregation?
Why not? came the word only from the Classical Assembly, are they the
people, Job 12.2.
and must wisdom die with them; are the Brethren all Simplicians, all
novices; is there not a wise man among them, to judge of cases. Indeed it is
the manner of those, which enclose in their own hands the common rights of
Churches so to upbraid them, and in scorn to tax them with lightness, rudnes,
pride, contention, etc. But the Spirit of God gives a better testimony of them
Act. 24. to 42. Phil. 16.7. 1 Th. 3.5.6 1 Pet. 1.7.
, and counts them meet Lev. 8.23 Deuteronomy. 1.13. Act. 11.12 1 The. 5.21 1 Ioh.
3.1.
, both to hear and determine of matters.

But this says he, the Brownists do: Would he have his Readers think,
that none but they, have ever done it. If his intent be so, then I must tell
him, that he goes about to deceive them; for (as I shall show in another
place) this was the constant practice of the primitive Churches; viz. to have
matters debated and discussed openly, before the whole multitude of the Church.
And that he may have something in the mean time to look upon: He may (if
he please) look on a Book, entitled: A discourse of the troubles in the
English Church at Franck ford, where he shall find, among other Articles
agreed upon, by the whole Congregation, these: Art. 62. If all the Ministers
and Seniors (which have authority to hear and determine, etc.) be suspected or
found parties; If any appeal be made from them, that then such appeal be made
to the body Mark this Mr. Paget.
of the Congregation, the Ministers, Seniors, and parties accepted: and that
the body of the Congregation may appoine so many of the Congregation, to hear
and determine the said matter, or matters, as it shall seem good to the
Congregation. Again Art. 67. If any controversy be upon the doubtful meaning
of any word, or words in the Discipline; that first it be referred to the
Ministers or Seniors: And if they cannot agree thereupon, then the thing be
brought and referred to the whole Congregation. What says Mr. Paget to this? I
hope he will not say, they were Brownists: Notwithstanding it was their
practice, to have matters brought unto the body of the Congregation, howsoever
he speaks contemptuously of it.

7. The thing then and there concluded, was divine Scripture, imposed upon all
other Churches of the Gentiles, although they had no delegates there. v. 22.28.
chapter 16.4.

8. It is observeable, how Mr. Paget stumbleth at the same stone, and
misapplyeth the very same place of Scripture Act. 15. as they Papists Rhemist.
on the place Ioh Barn. in Act. 15. v. 3. Casp. Vlenberg. 16. cause c. 16. p. 527.
have done before: For thus they write; Paul and Barnabas condescended to
refer the whole controversy, and the determination thereof, to the Apostles
and Ancients at Jerusalem, that is to say, to commit the matter to be tried by
the Heads and Bishops, and their determination in Council. And indeed such
application of it, better serves the turn of Jesuits and Priests, that seek
to set up the Popes supremacy, and a Tyrannical Hierarchy, then those that
desire to stand for the Rights and Previledges, which Christ has given unto
his Church.

When I begun to read his 6 Answer, I thought to have found some great matter
in it; because he promised to come nearer unto the place Act. 20.28. but
having well perused it, my exspectation was frustrated; for he is so far
here, from coming nearer the point, that in my understanding he runns quite
from it. All that he says is to this effect: Men do attend to their flock,
when they labor that the same may be increased.

Answ. 1. It is true: But how must this enlargement be made? surely, not by
opening the door of the fould, to take in Lions, wolves, foxes, etc. but such
only, as by their fruits appear (outwardly at least) to be the sheep Esa.
35.8. Zach 14.21. Rev. 21.27 Joel 3.17.
of Christ: whereas therefore Mr. Pager bringes into the Church the children of
a stranger Ezech. 44.7.
, (so I am told are the words in the text) my meaning is, refuses not to
baptize bastards: the seed of the adulterer, and the whore, when they are
brought unto him: He needs not glory in his number; for it is not the increase
of God Col. 2.19. Ezech. 16.26.
; but as the Prophet says, of whoordomes against him. And I wish, he would
well consider, when Christ shall appear in the brightness of his glory, and
shall sit as a just Judge, at his second coming, to ask a strict account of
all his actions, what he will say then, for this thing; seeing he is not able
to allege one precept, or example for it, in the whole Scripture.

2. Seeing he increases his flock by baptising such infants, whose parents
are without: How comes it to pass, that he takes not more care afterward
of them; some say Chrisoft. Tom. 1. p. 324.
, that children by Baptism are made members of the visible Church; and of this
opinion Mr. Paget by his writing Orels I know not for what end he writes it.
here, seems to be; if so; me thinks then, it is hard dealing in a
shepherd, to take sheep one day into his fould, and presently after to cast
them off; take no further charge of them, neither acknowledge them more for
his, then those which never were of his flock at all.

For that which is in his 7 Answer: It is only a piece of false coin, twice
or trise told over; he conceiteth, that a Minister can not do a thing in
another Congregation, but it must follow necessarily to be an act of his
Ministry: 1. Cor. 14.24.
Now he should do better, to prove well once the point, then to beg it so
continually. Besides to convince erroneous persons in the Church, this is not
always a Ministerial duty; as he unadvisedly affirms: For men out of
office, may do this, as the word of God testifyeth, and the learned teach Beza
annot in 1. Co. 14. Pet. Mart. in 1. Cor. 14 29.31. Paraeus in 1. Cor. 14.29.
D. Ames de conse. l. 4. c. 25. p. 215 Zwinglad Valent. compar. and Antibol.
avert. Kinser. Iac. Acont. Strat. Sat. Sudek. cont. Turr. Soph. p. 67.68. Calv.
Inst. 4 1.12. Harm. Syno. Belg. page 21.22. Mr. Bates page 134. Defen. Disc.
ag. Bridge. (...) 129. Erast.
. True it is Mr. Paget has been a deadly enemy always to it: Notwithstanding
never was he able (besides gibes and reproaches) to bring any thing, to prove
the unlawfullnes of it. 3. The Churches of God at first had no Officers,
notwithstanding he will not say, but the Learned and able Brethren among them,
might convince erroneous persons, if there were just occasion for it. Again
suppose a Church, whose Pastors are taken away: cannot get the assistance of a
neighbor Minister, to convince erroneous persons; then it seems, after his
kind of disputing, they must either all hold their peace; what abilities soever
they have; or if any one speak, he performs a Ministerial duty, or
otherwise his talk here is quite besides the matter, or just nothing; which of
these he will own (for one he must) I leave it to his own chose. Lastly for
these Scriptures Tit. 1.9.10.11. 1. Timot. 5.20. they do not prove any such
thing for which he brings them. I grant indeed to refute erroneous persons, is
sometimes a Ministerial duty, and so is prayer, reading the Scriptures,
expounding them, etc. Notwithstanding it will not follow, when a Pastor does
these things in another Congregation, that he performs a Ministerial duty;
or that Brethren out of office, may not do them also. Yet this he must
prove, otherwise his talk, is like a tedious Musician, ever turning, never
playing.

The 8 and last answer, he divides into 5 heads or branches: Touching the 1,
2, 3 and 5 of them, I except against, in that they say nothing in the
controversy between us; and therefore they must stand aside. In the 4 he
writes, that members of the Catholic, or Universal Church, may have their
infants baptized, though they be not joined to any particular visible Church.

To this I answer; that he neither speaks skillfully, nor conscionably; For
1. by the Catholic Church our Protestant Divines Piscator. Aphorism. loc. 19.
p. 102. Perk. Expos. Jude. p. 484. Vrsin. Cat. part. 2. page 347. Pet. Mart.
Loc. Com. Class. 2 p. 435. Polan. Syntag. l. 7. c. 4. p. 520. Alsted. The.
Polem. part. 4. p. 329.
, understand the company of Gods elect and chosen, and hence name it D. Whita.
cont. 4. Qu. 1. p. 78. Park. Eccl. Polit. l. 3. p. 210. D. Reinol. praef. 6.
Conclus. p. 667.
invisible, spiritual, mystical. Yea some Beza in Praef. Nov. Test. printed
1561. D. Humphr. in the life of Jewel. D. Sutclif Chaleng. l. 1.
do dislike the term it self, and call it a vain and fruitles word. And well
they may; for the Scripture has it not, neither is the author of it known;
but supposed Sanford. de Descend. Dom. Nost. ad in fer. lib. 4. p. 28. and 30.
to be a Papist. But to the matter in hand: If no infants out of particular
visible Churches, ought to be baptized; but them, whose Parents are known to
be members of the Catholic Church; then it will certainly follow, that no
infants, whose Parents are not members of any visible Church, may be baptized,
because the others are known to God only. Observe here, how he confutes
himself, and brings one argument forth against his own case: And indeed it is
just with God, that those which contradict the truth, should contradict
themselves most grossly too.

2. Unconscionably; to affirm a thing of such weight and consequence, without
showing any word of God for confirmation of it; does he think that we owe
him such obedience, as to believe things, because he says them: If he do,
he is greatly mistaken; for to speak in another man's words; We are not bound
to Mr. Pagets writings, we esteem them not as Canonical; but we examen them
by the Canonical: and what in them agrees with the authority of Divine
Scripture, we receive with his praise: What accords not therewith, we
refuse with his leave.

Besides he knows well enought, that men's sayings are of no force and value
in matters of Religion, without warrant from the Scriptures. So say the
Prophets Deuteronomy. 13.1.2.3. Ezech. 13.2. Mich. 7.13. Ier. 23.31. Ezech. 14.9.
, so says Christ Mat. 15.9. Job. 5.39.
, and his Apostles 1. Cor. 3.21. Gal. 1.8. Iam. 2.1. Romans 16.17.18.
, and thus write the Learned, Tertullian In Apol.
, Ignatius Epist. ad Hier.
, Hierome In Psalm. 86
, Basil Sermon. ad Adol.
, Ambrose L. 3. de incar. Dom.
, Augustine Epist. 198. ad Fortun.
, Chrysostom In Gal. c. 1.
, Aquinas Lib. 9. art. ult.
, Calvin Instit. l. 1. c. 10. sect. 8.
, Melancton Loc. Theo. p. 627.628
, Bucanus Lec. Com. p. 532.
, B. Jewel Repl. art. 1. Div. 29. Defen. Apol. p. 604.
Chassauio Loc. Com. p. 98.
, Vrsinus In Iesai. c. 14. p. 450.
, and others. In his writing against us, he is always calling for testimony;
Where is their warrant, where is their authority, etc. notwithstanding who
more forward then himself, to send things out into the world without proof.

Before I end this point, there are a few questions, which I think very
needful to propound unto him. Touching his Catholic or Universal Church. 1.
By what Scriptures the name and nature of it, is warranted. 2. VVhither all
Parents with their infants (Jews, Turks and Pagans excepted) be members
thereof, or not. 3. What are the notes of it. 4. VVhither we are to judge all
the members of this large Church, to be true believers. 5. If this universal
Church be visible, then I would know of him, why there ought not to be
(proportionable to it) a universal Ministry and gouvernment. I suppose, he
will be willing, to give a direct answer unto these things, because he
professes, to have a great desire to inform his opposite Brethren in the
truth. Pref.

The next Scripture is Coloss. 4.17. And say to Archippus, take heed to the
Ministry, which thou have received of the Lord, that thou full fill it.

To this he says nothing; but refers the Reader to the answer, made to the
former allegation; only he gathers some observations from the place. Now
for me, to answer his nothing, with some thing, it were worth nothing.
Therefore I will pass this Scripture over: notwithstanding, I think fit
(taking an example from him) to set down some notes also.

1. If the Ministry ought to be fullfilled; then must not Ministers, mar
their doctrine, with passion, girding, spightfull speeches, wilful
oppositio^, cross teaching etc. of purpose to discountenance the truth, and to
hinder the growth of knowledge and sincerity.

2. They ought not offensively to publish unto the world, the personal and
secret fealings of Brethren; but in the spirit of meekenes, privately seek to
restore them.

3. In their writings, they should not set down untruths and slanders,
continual begging of the question, many words for that which was never doubted
of; and not a word to prove the points in question; but contrariwise by the
Scriptures soundly convince the gaine-sayer. Act. 18. ult.


4. They ought not to bring men's devises into the Congregation, and there to
set them up, as part of Gods worship.

5. If the people must say to Archippus take heed, etc. then must not
Ministers, when they are admonished for their unsound doctrines, and bad
gouvernment, reject the authority of the Church, and shroud them selves under
the arm of flesh, of purpose to continue in their evil courses.

Lastly, if they must fulfill their Ministry; then should they not in their
old age, be worse in life and doctrine, then they were in former time.

As Mr. Paget thought it needful, that his Collections should be observed; so
let every godly Minister, consider whither it be not meet, that each of these
things should be duly regarded of them.

The third Scripture is taken from 1. Pet. 5.2. Feed the Elock of God, which is
among you, taking the oversight thereof, etc. To this he first answers; that
sheepheards for the defense and benefit of their Flocks, etc. have reason to
combine themselves together, for the performance of some works of their
calling, toward the endangered sheep of other flocks: as appears Esa. 34.1.
Luke 2.8. Genesis 29.2.8.

Answ. He wrappeth his own feet in the snare, he lays for another: for the
similitude, as he here applies it, makes against himself altogether. For 1.
Sheepheards are not simply tied to combine themselves together. 2. Neither do
they it, but on some special occasion. 3. For the combination it self, it is
not to exercise authority over each others Flock; but jointly to help one
another in common cases. To make now the comparison hold in proportion:
Ministers of sundry Congregations, are not absolutely bound, to combine
themselves together, neither may they so do; but upon some occasion: And
touching the combination it self, it must not be, to exercise any power over
each others Congregation; but either for mutual assistance, to resist the
common adversary, or to discuss and consider of matters, for their better
going foreward in piety and godlynes.

And this which I say is the judgment of our best Divines. We do (says D.
Whitaker) confidently affirm, that at the first, Churches were gouverned only
by their own Ministers, Conir 4. Quaest. 1. cap. 1. p. 14.
and were not subjected to other Churches or Ministers: not Colosse to Ephesus;
not Philippi to Thessalonica: not these to Rome; nor Rome to any other: but
they had all equal power in themselves, that is, independent jurisdiction and
gouvernment. Neither did they seek authority otherwhere, either from Praelate
or Pope.

Two things our of these words may be gathered: 1. That the primitive Churches
were all independent bodies, not subjected to any other superior
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, then unto that which was within themselves. 2. It
was not the manner of members, to carry matters away from their own Church,
unto men of other Churches; under a pretense, that they had authority above
their own Eldership and Congregation: Notwithstanding contrary to the first of
these, is Mr. Pagets profession; to the later his practice: but how able he
is, either to refute Mr. Whitaker herein, or to justify himself, we shall
hear hereafter; for hitherto he has been silent in it.

To his second answer: That the word translated feeding, does also signify to
rule and gouverne. I grant it. Again where he says: If this kind of feeding
be restrained unto one Congregation, then is all the authority and gouvernment
of Churches, by Classes and Synods, overthrown thereby. This I grant too. And
further, that it is unlawful for Assemblies of Ministers to exercise any act
of power, in any Congregation besides their own. What does now follow in his
opinion: Then Ministers (says he) may not give their voices for the decision
of controversies in any Congregation besides their own: contrary to the use
of this word of feeding, applied to such in Israel, as exercised some acts of
their Ministry, for the help and benefit of diverse Congregations, as Ezekiel.
34.2. etc.

Answ. 1. Does not Mr. Paget see any difference, between a Ministers giving of
his voice, for the decision of a controversy, and exercising an act of power in
another Congregation besides his own; indeed it seems, that he does not: and
therefore most confusedly has here joined them together. But other men, can
see otherwise; and teach otherwise too: they can put a plain distinction,
between a Ministers giving advise, and council in the matters of other
Churches; and exercising authority and power over them. Touching this point,
learnedly writes Basil Epist. 48. and 52.
Cirill Epist. 18. ad Celestin.
, Socrates Lib. 1. c. 2.14.21.30.
Athanius Apolog. 2.
Theodoret Lib. 2. c. 8
Sozomen L. 3. c. 10.
, Mr. Parker Polit. Eccl. l. 3. p. 335.
, also affirms, that when a Congregation seeks unto others for assistance;
it is not for office to determine, but for their gifts and estimation: not to
receive precepts, but only for their consent, council, and approbation. And
for confirmation of this, he names B. Jewel, D. Rainolds and others, which
have written the same.

Here let it be observed, that when we used the like speech in our
Protestation; viz. that we do reverentlie esteem of the Classis, for
council and advise, in all difficult matters, etc. Mr. Paget very angerly tells
us, that this is but a lame, halting and half reverence: no more then that Mr.
Jacob, and his company did give to Classes and Synods: Yea the Brownists
themselves do seem to give as much: Not to speak any thing of his gibing;
we say, this is as much as God requires of us; and therefore we may not give
more unto them. I know Mr. Paget will take this ill, for he loves not to be so
straight lased; as to have his authority confined within in one Congregation;
but let him remember, though Adam found more room when he was cast out of
Paradise, then within: yet his condition, I suppose was never the more
comfortable for that.

2. For the place in Ezekiel. 34. it speaks not any thing, of the thing for
which he brings it.

3. Howsoever the Israelites met in sundry places, notwithstanding they were
all but one Congregation; for their Synagogues were not entyre Churches of
themselves; but parts or members of the national Church. And therefore the
Priests and Levites, wheresoever they were, exercised not some acts of their
Ministry, unto some, that were not members of their Congregation, as he
injudiciously affirms.

4. He does not well, to compare the national sheepheards in Israel, unto the
Ministers now under the Gospel, who are bound unto particular Congregations; In
page 66. he seeks to strengthen the authority of Classes and Synods, by the
Jewish polity and gouvernment: Now the Papists to establish the Sea of Rome,
use the same argument. And the truth is, if Mr. Paget intend to dispute this
way, they will carry it, quite away from him. But I think he will hereafter be
more considerate, and speak no further of that manner, and form of Church
gouvernment: seeing he knows, the most learned on our side, do condemn the
Papists for it; viz. Iunius Animad. v. Con. 1. l. 3. c. 4.
, Calvin Inst. l. 4. c. 6. Sect. 2.
, Cartwright Ag. Whitg. l. 2. p. 614.
, D. Whitaker Cont. 4. Qu. 1.
and others.

It is likely Mr. Paget would take it amiss, if I should silently pass over
one thing, which here, and before in page 134. he advertiseth the Reader to
take notice of; and that is: that Mr. Ainsworth has formerly brought against
him these Scriptures, viz. Act. 20.28. 1. Pet. 5.2. But have none saving the
Separatists, alleged them, to the like purpose as Mr. Davenport here does;
indeed so he insinuates: Now whither he speak this, as he is persuaded, or
of purpose to deceive, I will not determine, neither will I press him for
resolution, unless he please. But this I say, the learned do bring these
allegations, to the like purpose as Mr. Davenport here uses them; that is, to
prove, that ordinary Bishops Repl. to D. Down. Defen. l. 2. part. 2. page 141.
and Elders, are restrained and tied to the oversight of one only
Congregation. Peter (says Mr. Cartwrith Ag. Whitg. ^.1. page 67.1. Pet. 5.2.
Act. 20.28
) wills the Pastors of the Churches, that they should feed the Flocks. What
Flocks? Not every one, but those which are committed to their faith and
trust; or which depends upon them. And so Paul, speaking to the Ministers, or
Bishops of Ephesus, wills them, that they should take heed unto the Flock,
over which the Holy Ghost had made them overseers: where he restrains as
Peter did, their oversight and watch to their own particular Flock. Eccl.
Gouv. p. 31. Defe. of Discipl. ag. D. Br. page 46.
A Pastor (says another *) must be limited to one only Congregation: And as
he is ordained, to the attendance and service thereof, so must he there
exercise, and execute that office unto which he is appointed. He that
desires further satisfaction; let him read Cartwrith Grounds of Relig. chap.
52. page 305, Polan. Syntag. l. 7. cap. 11. page 535. D. Whitaker de Romans Pont.
cont. 4. Quaest. 1. page 11.12.13. Necessity of Discipl. page 38. Refutat.
Doctor Downames lib. 2. Sermon. part. 2. page 26.70.79.

Mr. Paget grants, that Pastors are required in Act. 20.28. and 1. Pet. 5.2.
to exercise their Ministry in their own Congregation: Notwithstanding (says
he) this prooves not, but they may do the like in other neighbor Churches. I
have already in part, showed the daungerousnes of this kind of reasoning; in
truth it does not only unclaspe the arguments, which our Divines have alleged
against Heretics; but also it is a notable ground devised, for Atheists and
blasphemers, to gather a number of most wicked positions by it. For example; to
prove that we must direct our prayers to God only, our Writers Perk. 3 vo.
p. 121. Smith Essex Deue p. 15. Wischart page 16.
allege Mat. 6.9. When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. But what may Papists
reply hereunto? If they will take their lesson out of Mr. Pagets Book, thus:
That we are to direct our prayers to God, we grant: Howbeit this place
prooves not; but we may pray also, to Angels in Heaven, to Saints departed, to
any Image of wood and stone whatsoever.

Again to refute their fiction of purgatory, the Learned Pola. Synt. l. 7. c.
24. p. 551. and his Symp. Cath. c. 29. th. 1.2 Gerha. Har. Hist. p. 183 Chem.
Har. Hist. c. 122. p. 1750. Pet. Mart. Loc. com. Class. 7. c. 9. p. 619.
Alsted. The. Polem. pa. 4 page 369. Perk. 3. Vol. p. 227. on Mat. 7.12.
cite Luke 16.22.23. and 23.43. Mat. 7.13. where we find mention made of a
Heaven, a Hell, a streaght-gate, a narrow-gate. But if his doctrine be sound,
they may easily put this by, and say; we grant, that these Scriptures prove,
there is a Heaven, and a Hell, etc. notwithstanding there may be a third place
too (as we hold) for ought is here said to the contrary. To be short; we read
in Genesis, that God in the beginning made the world; Adam married Eve, etc. now
let this be granted, yet according to his manner of disputing, that may be true
too, which the Jews fable; to wit, that many lesser worlds were made before;
that Adam had another wife besides Eve, named Lillith Bran. Spiegel printed at
Craconia 1597. Ben Sirach Quaest. 60.
, from whom he was divorsed for her pride. I could multiply instances in this
kind, to show, that there is not an error so gross and vile, but it may be
justified this same way (and as well too) which he has here devised, to
maintain, that Pastors may exercise, all acts of their Ministry, in any
Congregation besides their own. He tells us in page 89. that by our speeches
we do exceedingly gratify many sorts of Libertines, Arrians, Socinians and
other Heretics. But the truth is, if he look well, on his own writing, he
shall see the thing charged upon us, most true in himself; for besides the
former instances; mark how the Papists argue, Caes. Baron. Tom. 1. p. 137.
just as he does: Although there be mention made in Scripture, but of 3 Church
Officers, that is, Bishops, Elders, and Deacons, yet there were more, etc.

Object. But what, if need require, that a Pastor should administer the
Sacraments, Page 134.
both of Baptism and the Lords Supper, in neighbor Churches, that are
destitute, and he is desired thereunto.

Answ. 1. There is no precept, nor example in the Scriptures, to prove that
such a thing should be desired: Good minds must use good means also, otherwise
they please not God. Obedience is better then sacrifice.

2. I reason thus; Whosoever rightly administreth the Sacraments: must do it
by virtue of a Ministerial calling: But no man can administer the Sacraments
by virtue of a Ministerial calling, saving in his own Congregation: Therefore
no Pastor can rightly administer the Sacraments, but in his own Congregation.

The last of this argument, which only may be doubted of, I prove thus: That
which is a proper work of an Apostle; is not to be done by any ordinary
Minister: To administer officiallie in more Congregations then one, is a proper
work of an Apostle. Therefore, etc.

The proposition is certain; the assumption is taught generally by learned men:
For in this very thing, they do distinguish ordinary Ministers from Apostles,
the first being tied to one only Flock. The later having power and liberty to
exercise their Ministry any where. Plainly to this purpose writes D.
Whitaker, The Apostles (says he) received the kees from Christ, and power of
teaching, and remitting sins, as common Bishops of the whole World: but all
others of their own Churches. In these things therefore, which the Apostles
had extraordinarily, Bishops succeed them not, that is, in that power, which is
truly and properly Apostolical. Mark, what he counts Apostolical; namely
to be a common Bishop, that is to exercise a power in more Churches then one.

Here I will pass over Romans 14.5.23. because I find nothing in his answer,
which concerns the matter in controversy between us. The Scriptures
following are these; viz. Act. 11.21.26. Genesis 17.10. Romans 4.11. Act. 2.39. But
before he comes, to answer those Scriptures in particular; he makes a great
complaint, unto the Reader, against Mr. Davenport, and his opposite Brethren;
for some unjust doing in the question between them; and their trespass is,
because they have said promiscuous baptizing of all infants without difference,
Hence he rayseth this observation. A man that reads their writings, might
easily be brought to doubt, whither Turks or Jews, Mahometists or Heathens,
or infidelles, of what Nation or sect soever, did sometime present their
children to baptism, and that it was the custom of the Dutch Church, to
baptize such being presented.

Answ. I will not contend with him, whither it may be possible, that any should
be such Simplicians, as to make so groundles an inference: But this I say, and
will prove it also, that Mr. Paget goes about to deceive his Readers, in that
he would have them to conceive, that it is not their manner, to baptize all
infants brought to them; but they make a distinction; admit some, others not.
And whither this be so, I appeal to his own conscience, are not Bastards
received constantly to Baptism. If the Parents are known to be drunkards,
swearers, blasphemers, excommunicates, Heretics, etc. notwithstanding their
children are still baptized, if they are brought to the Congregation. Yea more
then this: If the Parents come not at all, to nod the head, (of which thing we
shall speak hereafter) yet this hinders not the infants baptising; for it is
enought if a girrle of 16 or 17 years, do bring it, and there bow with the
rest to some questions propounded to them.

Now then let all judicious Readers judge; If we had not just cause to name
it, a promiscuous baptising: Seeing (as I said) those which are not members of
any Congregation; nor worship God in any Congregation; but live rather without
God in the world, make a mock of sin, and count it their grace, that they are
graceles, even those vile varlets; when they will, may have their seed
baptized. I say as freely and ordinarily, as those which are members, and men
known to fear God.

As for his mentioning of Turks, Jews, etc. it is vainly done; for all know,
that such do not present their children to our baptism; and therefore I wish
him hereafter, rather in sincerity to seek the truth; then with shifts,
cavills, and evasions, the maintenance of his case and credit. Notwithstanding
this I must tell him, I am verily persuaded, that it would require all the wit
and skill Mr. Paget has; to prove that such Parents, whose children he and
others sometime baptize, are not a great deal worse in life and conversation,
then many Jews, Turks and Heathens.

The next thing undertaken by Mr. Paget, is to prove, that men may be reputed
in the Covenant by testification of their faith and repentance, though it were
by a word or gesture of the body, witnessing their consent thereunto, so far
as to procure the admission of their infants to have the seal of circumcision
or Baptism, as appears from the holy records.

Answ. 1. He lays down here a manifest untruth; (to speak the best of it)
in affirming, that the Jews under the Law, might lawfully admit infants to the
seal of circumcision; before the Parents of them, were joined actual members
to that visible Church. For this I gather to be his meaning, from these words:
So far as to procure the admission of their infants, to have the seal of
Circumcision. Besides it must either thus be understood, or he understood not
his own saying: For our question respects only, such infants, whose Parents
are not joined to any Church. And therefore this must needs hold a just
proportion with it. Now whither this be not a great presumption in him? let all
judge, that are wise to sobriety; for to affirm a thing, against the express
commandment of God, and continual practice of the Saints; of purpose to
uphold by it, and unlawful and sinful practice. He that fears the Lord and
his righteous judgments, as he ought, will take heed not to devise such
unsounds tenets.

2. For the 20 Scriptures, or more, which he has here quoted; the truth is,
Page 152.
not one of them, either hurts our case, or helps his. For 1. I would know of
him, whither to say Yea, Amen, so be it, (whereby an external profession of
faith, love, and thankfullnes is showed toward God) his meaning be, that this
consists in the pronunciation of the letters, syllables, or words. Again
whither by nodding with the head, he intends simply the gesture, without any
respect to the fitnes of the doer of it. If he say, he means nothing, saving
bare speaking, and bare bowing. Then I say, it is a blasphemous saying; for it
is possible, that a bird, or a beast, may do so much. But on the contrary, if
he say, he respects the qualification and condition of the speakers, and
nodders, then his whole matter falls to the ground: because the speakerss and
nodders, in question, are altogether (for the present) unfit and incapable, to
perform any Religious work; for (as I said) they are known, to deny God in
works, Psalm. 50.
and hate to be reformed: what then have such to do, to take Gods word into
their mouth; or if they would, yet what calling has Mr. Paget, to put such a
thing upon them. Briefly, though he will do it; yet what reason have we to
repute them, for all this in the Covenant; seeing we find in Scripture no
warrant to justify the action.

2. Be it granted, that the Church and people of God, in some cases, have
declared their consent, by saying, Yea, Amen, so be it, or by a gesture of the
body; notwithstanding it will not hence follow, that men and women, not joined
to any Congregation, neither intending so to do: Moreover known to be
idolaters, adulterers and most prophaine persons, may be reputed in the
covenant, by saying Amen, or nodding with the head, unto a few questions read
out of a book unto them; and so lawfully procure the admission of their
infants unto the seal of Baptism. Notwithstanding either this he must
prove; or otherwise he is guilty of abusing, and mis-applying all these
Scriptures Mat. 5.37. and 9.28. and 13.51. Ioh. 21.15. Rev. 22.20 Ps. 106.48 1
Co. 14.16 Eccl. 19.8. and 24.3.4. Deuteronomy. 27.14.15. and 29.1.10.15. Romans 1.45.
etc. Ioh. 13.24. Luke 1.22.62. and 5.7. Act. 18.20. 2. Cor. 8. and 4.31. 1.
Chro. 29.20. and 2. Chron. 20.28.
here heaped together.

And that the Reader may be better perceive, the loosenes of his reasoning; I
do entreat him, to observe what we say; and what he says unto it: Whereas
it is the custom of the Dutch Church, to baptize many infans, whose Parents
are not members of any Church; when they answer Yea at the Leiturgy of Baptism
publickely, or by nodding the head. This practice, says Mr. Davenport, and we
too, is unlawful. Mr. Paget to justify it, stepts in, and tells us, that in
Moses time, in Christ's time, and after in the Apostles days; many godly
people; members of the Church, have in some cases, signified their meaning, and
their wills, by short speeches, and external gestures: And this is all the
answer, that he makes to it. So that he makes a show of remooving the
objection; but in truth leaves it altogether untouched.

But by his leave, seeing he slides away from the point; I must entreat him,
to come back again to it; and plainly to prove unto us these 3 things, which
he very cunningly takes for granted. 1. By what authority he publickely
propounds certain questions, unto people, that are not members of any
particular Congregation; and will have them, to answer, with Yea, or nodding
the head, or the like. 2. How it can appear, that such, are to be counted
Christians, in the sense of the Scriptures, which are visibly wicked men;
manifest no fruit of faith and repentance, but when some questions are moved
to them; and then all that they do, is to say; Amen, or to nod with the head,
at the afore-sayd questions.

3. Seeing it is the judgment of the Learned D. Cha. ser. on Romans 12 p. 53.
Chrisost in Mat. Hom. 38 in Act. Hom. 19. Whitak. ag. Du. l. 1. de Scri. Defen.
godly Minist. ag. Br. p. 98.
, that the Canonical Scripture ought only to be read in the Congregation; and
no writing besides it. Yea and diverse Councills Conc. Hippon. cap. 38. Laod. c.
59.
have so concluded. I would know then, what warrant men have, to read a
Leiturgie of Baptism publickely. I suppose Mr. Paget is not ignorant, that
until he have cleared these things, all that he has yet said, is frivolous
and impertinent.

Lastly, let it be again observed, that the Papists Bellarm. de Ecc. Mil. c. 2
See Sutclif. Chal. c. 10. page 40. Perk. 3. Vol. page 536.
and he join here together; and both against the truth; for they teach (as
he does) Let a man be whatsoever he will: if he profess the faith, it is
sufficient to make him a member of the Catholic Church. Again Stevar^^us
Comment. in 1 Thessalonians. 3 8. p. 115.
, It is enought, to baptism, if a man have the knowledge of the Creed, the ten
commandments, and Sacraments. Would not one think that he had been, an
apprintise to them, in setting up the same trade or craft that they do.

Now to the places of Scriptures. The first is Act. 11. 21-26. A great number
believed, and turned unto the Lord, etc. and the Disciples were called
Christians.

To this he says: It cannot be specified by what words, or signs, more or
less, they professed their conversion unto God.

Answ. 1. This allegation was not brought, to show, by what words or signs the
faith full professed their conversion unto God; but to prove, that men must
first believe, and be joined to some visible Church; before they can be counted
Christians, in that sense, as to procure (to use his words) the admission of
their infants, to have the seal of Baptism. But to this he says nothing;
but takes up a matter, which he needed not; and passes by, what he should
have spoken.

2. Be it granted, that it cannot be specified by what words, etc. yet it can
be manifested, that they showed, such faith and repentance, as the grace of God
appeared in them. verse. 23. Now suppose Mr. Paget were to make a Sermon, on the
doctrine of faith, or repentance: I do think, when he should come to set
down the evidences of these graces; he would not affirm, that Atheists,
Heretics, thieves, murderers, etc. have them; notwithstanding the Parents of
those children, for whose Baptism he here pleads, are (I say many of them)
such vile wretches, as he well knows.

3. It is to be inquired; whither his meaning be, to compare, those Disciples,
and Christians, Act. 11.21.26. with the Churchles people in question: If so?
Then I must be bold to tell him, that as he dishonors the primitive Saints;
so himself much more. On the otherside, if he say, he intends no such
thing, then he might have spared much labor, saved charge, and spent his time
more profitably, then to write many words, and all just nothing.

4. I marvel, what was in his mind, when he wrote this answer. He asks,
How it can be prooved from hence, that such as consented unto the doctrine of
the Gospel, propounded unto them, by answering Yea, or bowing their heads,
might not thereupon, he admitted unto Baptism, they and their Infants.

Answ. 1. I do not yet understand, how he rayseth this observation; viz. that
the believers in Act. 11. consented to the doctrine of the Gospel, by answering
Yea to it, or bowing their bodies, in testimony of their liking thereof. I
perceive it is an easy thing, to conquest; if begging may procure one that. But
I mind not to give the case so away: Therefore I do deny, that ever these
embraced the truth in so absurd a sort; And seeing this is an assertion of his
own head; it lies him now upon, to justify it. Tertullian In his book of
prescript. ag Heret.
says, It is not lawful for men to flatter themselves, with any thing of
their own opinion and judgment, nor choose that which comes in their own
brain: We have the Apostles for example, who taught nothing after their own
pleasure, but faithfully the doctrines, which they received of Christ.

2. If by pronouncing the doctrine of the Gospel, he mean a reading, or
saying over of a Litu^gie; as is the matter in controversy: then I do again
deny, that there was in the Apostles days, any such thing practiced.

3. If it should be granted (which he cannot prove) that those Christians at
Antioch, consenied to the doctrine of the Gospel, by answering, Yea to it; or
bowing their heads, in testimony of their approbation of it. Yet this helps
not his case at all; unless he can prove, 1. That they were not members of
any visible Church. 2. That their conversation was irreligious. 3. That they
presented their infants to the Minister in the Congregation, and after saying
Yea, or nodding the head, to some questions propounded, had them baptized. Thus
are his answers very wind, and no more savor in them, then in the white of an
egg, eaten without salt.

The next allegation is Genesis 17.10. This is my Covenant, which ye shall keep,
between me and you, and thy seed after thee: Every man child among you shall
be circumcised.

Mr. Paget to this answers: It can not hence be showed that more questions
were propounded to the Parents, which brought their children to be circumcised,
then are now in the administration of Baptism, etc. Or that such had
circumcision denied unto their children, which showed a willingness to embrace
the Covenant, by such brief answers and gestures we speak off.

Answ. Here are words; but in truth not a word, concerning the matter, for
which he brings them. This Scripture Genesis 17.10. was alleged to show, that
such are to be counted Christians children, (and so consequently to have right
unto Baptism) whose Parents (at least one of them,) in external profession,
are within the Covenant. Thus writes Mr. Davenport. Now if a man read the
others reply: he must needs confess, unless he will confess himself to be
a Simplician, and ignorant in Logic and Religion, that it is as indisgested a
thing, as ever was broched by a man of learning: much better therefore it had
been, if he had left, this loose kind of reasoning; and either disprooved,
some part of the others proof, according to the rules of reason; or yielded to
the conclusion, which follows by force of argument.

But to make a short answer to his speech; although it look not unto the
thing, for which he devised it. 1. How does he know, that there was a
Leiturgie of Circumcision in the Church of God under the Law? and that it was
propounded to those Parents, which brought their children to be circumcised.
This I lay up on him, as another invention of his own: for it is most
certain, never was there such a thing practiced, by the Fathers, in old time;
neither have the Jews in these days any humane form among them: Besides, if
their writings Syntag. In. c. 2. p. 80. Drus. praet. (...). 7. Purchase Pil. l.
2. c. 14. sect. 4. p. 204.205.
be searched, which treat of the manner of circumcision, there will be found no
such thing in them, whereof he speaks.

Among many other good properties, which he himself says, he has; one is,
that Page 104.
he is no inventer of new conceits and opinions. But surely, if the rest
there, be not truer then this, he will be found an untrue speaker in them all.

Further I would know of him, what he intends by embracing the Covenant:
(for I perceive he seeks advantage by double construction of words) Is it
his meaning, that those, which were no Jews, nor members of the Jewish Church;
yer brought notwithstanding their infants unto the Priests; and when they had
answered to some questions, either by saying Yea, or nodding with the head;
they had them immediately circumcised, although themselves, remained still, out
of the communion and fellowship of the Church. If this be his meaning (as it
must needs be, unless his meaning were to write just nothing) then I do
affirm, that in this, he has spoken irreligiously, injuriously and untruely.
1. Irreligiously, to have the seal of the righteousness of faith, to be made an
unholy thing. 2. Injuriously to accuse Gods chosen of finne, causelessly. 3.
Untruly; and thus I prove it. None might eat of the Passover, unless they
were members of the Jewish Church, Exodus 12.6.45. But all circumcised among
them, might eat of the Passover, verse. 44. Therefore all the circumcised among
them, were members of the Church.

If the Reader desire, to know further about this thing; let him him peruse Mr.
Ainsworths Annotations on Genes. 17. and Exodus 12. and there he shall see,
what the Jews write of it; viz. that none are to communicate with the Church,
in the ordinances of circumcision, and the Passover, but such as are members
thereof.

The next Scripture is Romans 4.11. And he received the sign of circumcision, a
seal of the righteousness of says, which he had yet being uncircumcised.

Mr. Pagets answer to this allegation may be cast into 3 heads, or branches. 1.
Abraham is called the father of all that believe, whither members of a
particular Church or not. 2. There might be some believers in Abraham's time,
not members of his family, nor under the gouvernment of any particular Church.
3. If a son, or bond servant of Ephron, the Hittite were then brought to the
knowledge of the true God, etc. why might not the infant of such a one have
been circumcised, though not living in a visible Church.

Answ. I will not say, that Mr. Paget has read Antonies precept in Tully De
Orat. l. 2.
, who wishes men, if they be troubred about a hard question, to say nothing to
it. But this I can say of him by experience; he fol owes that rule closely.
For as before, so here again, he uses many words; but answers not at all
to the point in hand.

This Scripture (as may be seen in the place Just Comp. page 5.
) was brought to prove, that as Abraham received circumcision, when he was a
member of a visible Church; so consequently baptism, which comes in the room
thereof, belongs peculiarly to such, as are joined to some particular
Congregation. Mr. Paget perceiving (as it is probable) the strenght of the
argument, cunningly withdrawes himself from it; and that the Reader might not
see it, he sets down 2 or 3 conceited fancies of his own, unto which briefly
thus I answer.

1. Imagen, I should deny that there were in Abraham's time any believers, out
of his family; or contrariwise, say I grant there were, what would he hence
infer? for my part I know not; nor yet he himfelf, I am persuaded.

2. Concerning his why not, I ask of him for his why so. Is it the manner of
Disputers, to propound a case, and then ask of the standers by, (Sirs) why may
it not be thus. If there be any Divine pattern for such a practice, it now
concerns you Mr. Paget to show it: If you cannot (as I am sure you cannot)
then I wish you in such cases hereafter to shurt your lips Pr. 17.28
, and so you shall be esteemed a man of the better understand.

But to deliver you (if it may be) from your vain conjectures and doubts: As
for circumcision, it was not commanded to the Gentles at all; neither was it a
seal of the Covenant of grace to Noe and his seed: But was commanded to
Abraham, and his seed, and household, and such only as would be of that
Church, and partake of the Passover. Therefore it not being commanded to Noes
sons, such as abode in his faith, (howbeit scattered afar of) were doubles
in the Covenant of grace still, and saved as well as we: I say without
circumcision, for the same was not imposed on them. And this is the judgment
of learned men; viz. Paraeus Comment. in Romans 3.1. and 9.4.
, D. Willet Comment. Romans chapter 3. Q. 1. p. 146
, Galatine Lib. 11. c. 7. page 581.
, and the Hebrew writers Maimony in Misneth: Treat. of Kings chapter 10 sect. 7.
and Treat. circums. chapter 1. sect. 3.6.
say as much.

The next Scripture is Act. 2.39. For the promise is unto you; and to your
children, and to all that are afar off; Even as many, as the Lord our God
shall call.

His whole answer hereto is this: Though the promise be made unto such as are
called, yet who can show, that such are not to be counted outwardly called,
and in some measure within the privilege of the Covenant, who being themselves
already baptized, and withdrawing themselves from other sects and Churches,
do bring their infants unto the true Church to be baptized, being there also
ready to make a public profession of their faith before the Congregation.
Thus he.

Answ. 1. For his phrase here, to count men outwardly called, I see no warrant
for it in all the Scriptures: For whomsoever in the judgment of charity, we
can judge to be outwardly called, them (I take it) are by us to be judged
inwardly called also. Philip. 1.7. 1. Cor. 13.
I confess indeed, if we have respect unto God, then it may be said, that
some are only outwardly called: But who these (some) are, we cannot tell;
and therefore we may not give sentence in it. To. 14.14.
If he say, that he intended both; then I answer; 1. He should have done
well, to have spoken out plainly so. 2. Then it must follow, that all such
Parents, whose infants he and others baptize; be their conversation never so
bad, are notwithstanding in his opinion the elect and chosen of God. 3. He
ought not to keep back one of them, from his Congregation; if they desire to
be members thereof. Again, But if he say, he judges them not to be inwardly
called; then by his own confession, it must follow, that they want true faith
and repentance: and so he gives (and that of knowledge) holy things to the
unworthy, and to persons wholly incapable thereof.

2. I cannot tell what he intends, by the privilege of the Covenant; if he
mean Baptism, then I answer: This ordinance is given to the Church, and no
person lawfully may be admitted to it, unless he be a member thereof See the
two next Sections.
. If he have any other meaning, when I know it, I shall be ready to give a
further answer to it.

3. For what reason does he add these words, viz. and withdrawing themselves
from other sects and Churches. Is it not, because (as I said before) he would
have people think, that it is not their practice, to baptize all infants
brought unto them. Me thinks if his heart persuades him, that his case is
good, he should not seek thus closely, to withdraw the Reader from the
question; but speak out clearly in it, and to this purpose; say: It is the
custom of the Dutch Church, and my practice also: that what infants soever are
brought unto us, for Baptism, to baptize them; be the Parents of them, holy or
unholie members of any particular Church, or not. Yea howsoever we know that
the children presented unto us, are Bastards; yet if the Parents, or in their
absence some other, do show a consent unto certain questions, either by
nodding with the head, or saying Yea, Amen, or so be it: we put them not
back, neither ought we; but give them the holy seal of remission and pardon
of finne.

Indeed this had been plain dealing, and nothing but the truth. And therefore
whereas he tells us, of men outwardly called, withdrawing themselves from
other sects. And again Page 145.
, of having more knowledge of the truth, etc. then some of those that are
members of the Church. What is this, but mere dawbing; for what use serves it,
but like the rough garment to deceive. He knows, and we know it too: If
infants be brought in the manner aforesaid, all is well: it matters not whose
children they be; viz. whither English, Dutch, French, etc. nor how vile and
wicked the Parents of them have formerly always been, to that hour and time.
I would not speak so often of this thing, but that he constrains me to it,
in regard he labors to hide from the Readers, the true knowledge of the
point in question. But hence let it be considered, whither in this he give not
cause of just suspicion unto them to think, that he is ashamed to appear a
Defendant. So he calls himself in page 146.
in the case, as it stands simply and nakedly between us.

The last Scripture is 1. Cor. 5.12. For what have I to do, to judge them also
that are without, do not ye judge them that are within.

To this first Mr. Paget answers: It is not plainly discribed, how Mr.
Davenport applies this sentence, to the question in hand; it had been good, if
he had showed, how he had drawn his argument from hence.

Answ. Mr. Paget among many Disputers, had the least reason, to make a
complaint this way; for he in his writing, not only leaves the maine points
in controversy untouched; but also, for the unnecessary matters, which he
brings in, they are such oracles, or rather riddles; as to understand them, a
man had need he were either another Oedipus, or had he himself present to
expound them. Notwithstanding he should have remembered, that he being the
doer of the things in this controversy, the burden of prooving lay directly on
his shoulders: And therefore it had been his part plainly to have demonstrated
from the Scripture, that which he affirms, touching the Classis and
Baptism; for one testimony or argument rightly drawn from the Apostolical
writings, to justify these assertions, will easily draw us to acknowledge them.
But till then; though he write ten volumes more, and each of them, ten times
greater then this; yet never shall he be able to convince the conscience, of
any indifferent Reader, in the points which he has undertaken to be a
Defendant; to wit, 1. that particular Congregations are to be dependent bodies:
and to stand under other Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves. 2. That
infants may be baptized, whose Parents are not joined to any particular visible
Church. But to the point.

This Scripture fitly serves, to prove the point in hand; for the scope and
drift of the Apostle there, is to show, that members of visible Churches, have
only right unto the public ordinances administered therein. As for others,
they are not to be judged; that is, in those public things the Church has no
relation to them; nor may (I say in this respect) have communion with them. And
hence I reason thus: If the infants in question are without, then may they not
be admitted unto Church communion; and so consequently not to baptism. But
they are without; Therefore, etc. The proposition is manifest by this Scripture
1. Corint. 5.12. The assumption is evident, and needs no proof.

After this he tells us, of 3 sorts of persons, which may be said to be
without. 1. Members of a visible Church, wanting true faith. 2. Infidells and
Heathens. 3. Those that for the present live not under the Discipline and
Gouvernment of some particular Church, and yet make profession of the same
Religion, with the true visible Churches, etc. This later practice some
imperfect communion with them: and therefore in some sense may be said to be of
such Churches.

Answ. 1. Howsoever the Lord knows who are his; yet cannot Mr. Paget, nor any
man else, judge men to be without true faith, and so no members of the
invisible Church: specially they standing members of some particular
Congregation; and therefore his talk here, is altogether fruitles, and nothing
concerns the place 1. Cor. 5.12. which he pretends to answer.

2. The difference which he puts between men without; is without warrant of
Scripture. Paul (as Paraeus Comment. on 1. Cor. c. 5. v. 12. p. 272.
well observes on this place) divides all men into two ranckes: the first and
greater without; the later and lesser within. And howsoever the, for personal
gifts and graces are not alike; notwithstanding, as they stand in relation to a
visible Church State; they differ not: But are all alike excluded from actual
communion in the public ordinances thereof: As we see in a desert, or
willdernes, diversity of trees; some good, some bad; some are thorns and
brambles; others are vines and fig trees: nevertheles in respect of a Vineard,
or Orchard, they are quite out of the same a like.

3. For his imperfect communion, it is a perfect invention of his own head;
for the word of God teaches no such thing. Again, where he says, they are
members of the Church in some sense, and not in another: this likewise is
another of his fictions. And observe here how he pleads for the prophaine
multitude; just as do the Papists for their Pope; in one respect he is a man,
in another respect he is more then a man. Jew. Defen. Apol. 6. part. c. 20.
Divis. 3. p. 784.
One way he may err, another way he cannot err. But not minding to spend
much time about the thing; (for the naming of it, is a sufficient resutation)
this I say, a man must either be, a member of a particular Church formally:
otherwise he cannot be reputed a visible member of it, in any sense or respect
at all. If he can prove the contrary by the word of God, it lies him now
upon it to do it.

In the mean time, let the discreet Reader judge, whither he be not guilty of
venting new conceits and opinions of his own. And whither, by these his new
conceits and opinions, he do not gratify the Valentinians, Marcionites, and
Gnostikes: Who (as Irenaeus Advers. Haer. 8.3. c. 7. and l. 1. c. 1
reports) did seek to bring into the Church men's devises. And whither he
do not gratify the Trent-Councell Conc. Trid. Sess. 4. dec. 1
Fathers, and the Papists: yea moreover the Cabala, or Talmud 4. Esd. 14.26.48.
of the Rabbis, and the Montanists Tertul. de praeser. adve. Haer. c. 52.
For the sin, for which these chiefly are condemned, is, because they have
broched many lies and beastly vanities; as if all things concerning faith and
manners, were not contained in the Scriptures.

Thus we have examined Mr. Pagets Answers, to the allegations of Scriptures,
brought by Mr. Davenport. Now least he should complain against me, for some
partiality: I think it not amiss to write a few words touching that
Scripture, which he mentions in page 44. namely Mat. 3.

If he cannot find a better ground then this, to lay his unlimited Baptism
upon, surely then the same will never prove to be lawful. For 1. the persons
there specifyed, through John's doctrine, powerfully carried home to their
consciences: had their hearts deeply wounded Paraeus Comment. in Mat. c. 3. v.
6. p. 29.
with the sense of sin; and thereupon made open confession thereof. 2. That
which they did, was done freely Aret. in Mat. 3. page 119.
, and voluntarily. 3. The same was accompanied with a desire Muscul. in Mat. 3.
p. 24.
, and purpose of amendment of life. 4. They were members of a visible Church.
5. The Baptiser, was no ordinary Minister: Now then how can Mr. Paget hence
prove, that men, not humbled by the word preached; not manifesting any sorrow
for sin, not showing any desire of reformation of life; not members of any
particular Congregation; may nevertheless have their infants, lawfully
baptized, by a Pastor or Teacher, they saying Yea, or nodding with the head to
some questions imposed upon them, or having others to do it, in their behalf.

I do not think it strange, that he could not prevail (as he says) with
Mr. Davenport by such conference in the point: for in truth, as this
allegation, so is the rest there of his talk a rope of sand, as an overblowne
bladder that will burst of it self, and vent the wind thereof without pricking.
And thus much for this Section.

SECTION V.
WHereas Mr. Paget has so often called upon me by name, to prove the
Protestation published against him; to wit, that he has been many ways
injurious to our Congregation. My purpose is (by the Lords assistance) in this,
and the following Sections; to set down the same. And because all our
troubles, have proceeded (as it were) from two causes; viz. the Baptism of
Non-members, and the denying of the Churches power. I shall therefore speak of
these two things, the more fully. And first of the Baptism: Now the reasons
which I have against it, are these.

ARGUMENT I.
To break that sacred order, which God has set in his visible Church, for all
his Saints, to keep and walk by, is a great sin.

But to baptize infants, whose Parents are not members of any particular
Congregation, is to break that order, etc.

Therefore it is a great sin to do it.

The proposition is evident by these Scriptures, 1. Cor. 14.33. ult. 1. Cor.
5.13. Number. 23.9.10.11.21. and 24.5.6. 1. King. 14.1.17. Son. 6.4. The
assumption is as clear. For let it be observed, that unto all Church-actions,
as there is Faith, so order also necessarily required: And hence is the
difference only, between Christian-communion, and Church Communion: to
practice Christian-communion, there needs nothing but visible Christianity;
but to the other, as there must be visible Christianity, so likewise a
foregoing joining, of faithful people together, in a spiritual outward
society, or body politic. And unless this thing be strictly observed, there
will follow many absurdities, and great confusion.

This may be further illustrated by a similitude, taken from a Corporation,
Ephesians. 2.
to which the Church of God is sometimes compared. We know that many, who are
no members thereof; are men, of good lives, peaceable, quiet, profitable,
worthy and fit enough to be of the company: Notwithstanding they partake not in
the privileges of the freedom; until themselves, by due order, are become
freemen.

ARGUMENT II.
To use those ways and inventions, in worshipping God, which are not
commanded of God, in his word, is unlawful.

But God has not commanded in his word, that any Pastor or Teacher, should
baptize such infants, whose Parents are without.

Therefore it is unlawful to do it.

The first part of this reason is certain by the whole course of the
Scriptures, Psalm. 119.113. Deuteronomy. 12.8. 1. Sam. 15.22.23. Hos. 6.6. Lev. 10.1.2.
Mich. 7.18. Ier. 5.31. 2. Chr. 26.17.18.19.21. Number. 3.4. Mar. 7.8.9. Col 2.8.9.
Mat. 15.2. to 12. Besides this is the constant sentence of all the ancient
Fathers (as they are termed) and our later best Divines; to wit, that nothing
is to be received, or approoved in Religion, which cannot be prooved and
confirmed by the word of God. And therefore all Traditions, administrations,
good intents, and devises of men, without approbation, this way (as vain,
hurtful, and superstitious things) are to be rejected. Thus writes Tertullian
Lib. 4. con. Mar.
, Origin Hom. 3. in Ler.
, Cyprian L. 2. Ep. 3.
, Basil Moral. Sum. c. 14.
, Augustine Epist. 59. ad Paulin.
, Chrisostom Hom. 39. in Act.
, Hillarie In Mat. cap. 12.
, Eusaebeus Li. 5. c. 10.
, Theophilact In 1. Cor. cap. 7.
, Luther L. de Bab. capt.
, Erasmus Annot. in Mat. 11.
, Zanchy In praec. 4
, Simler De duab. not. Christ. p. 42.
, D. Whitaker Cont. 4. Qu. 5.
, Mr. Brinsley True watch. p. 28.
, and others.

The second part of this reason is as clear as the Sun at noonday, and cannot
with any modest face be denied. For we do not read, any where throughout all
Gods book, that there was ever any such thing imposed, on the Churches of the
Apostolic Constitution; or that it was at any time practiced in them.

ARGUMENT III.
If Baptism in the new Testament, succeeds in the room of Circumcision,
then ought no infants to be baptized, but such whose Parents are (one at least)
members of the visible Church.

But the first is true: Therefore the second.

The Major is without exception Col 2.11.
, granted of all, both Papists Ferus in Mat. 28. v. 19.
, and Protestants Aret. Com. in Col. 2.11 Pet. Mart. Loc. Com. Class. 2. c. 6.
p. 400. D. Willet. com. Romans 6. Cont. 6. page 303. See before page 53.
. The Minor is prooved by proportion or paritie, thus: As the Jews in old
time, could not lawfully circumcise any one, except he were a member visibly
of their Church; so now under the Gospel, Baptism administered in the Churches
of Christ, is to be administered only unto the members thereof.

ARGUMENT IV.
That which God has set a part, to be a special sign of difference, to
distinguish the children of the Church from them without: ought to be given
unto them only, unto none else.

But God has set Baptism apart for such an end.

Therefore, etc.

The Proposition is without all controversy. The assumption is evident, by
these Scriptures, genesis 17.7.8. with Col. 2.11.12. Romans 9.4. Act. 2.38.39. and
16.15.33. Mat. 28.19. Moreover this is acknowledged for a sound truth by many
writers; viz. Polanus Synta. li. 6. c. 51.
, D. Ames De consc. l. 4. c. 27. page 232.
, Guilliandus Comm. in Romans 4. v. 4.
, Mr. Bifeild Col. 2. v. 12. p. 57.
, the Doway Translaters Annot. on Genesis 17. and Exodus 15.
, and others. And in special excellently Paraeus: Baptism (says he Comm. in
1. Cor. 7. 14.
) is a worthy privilege of the Church, and the children thereof: Whereby they
are decerned from the children of unbeleevers, because they are reputed from
the womb in the holis Covenant with their Parents; and therefore is Baptism,
the sign of the Covenant given them.

ARGUMENT. V.
What act soever God promises, not to bless, that may not be done:

But he promises not to bless the promiscuous Baptizing in question.

Therefore it may not be done.

The second part, is only controversall, which I manifest thus;

If there be no precept, nor example for it, in holy records; then there is no
promise of blessing made to it.

But the first is true. Therefore the second.

The premises of both parts, are so evident, as that (to use another man's Mr.
Brad. 12. Arg.
words) he has no blood of shame running in his veins, that will deny them.

Unto the former reasons, these further may be added. 1. Though, I believe as
Augustine Epist. 28. ad Ierem.
, Cyprian Epist. ad Hid.
, Cirill Comment. in Lev. c. 8.
, Origin Comm. on Romans
, Nazianzene In Orat. in S. Lava.
, Ambrose L. 2. de Abrah. c. 11
, and many others of the Fathers affirm, that the Church has received the
Baptism of infants from the Apostles; notwithstand this kind in question, from
the beginning was not so; but an invention lately taken up. Some say Boniface
IV. in the year 606. brought it on foot. Others think it is not so ancient.

2. Whereunto tends it; but to induce the ignorant, to conceive (with the
Papists) an absolute necessity of Baptism Rhem. on Romans 6.5.14.
, that the work done pleases God Id. Act. 22.5.1.
; puts away original sin Aqui. 2. Sen. did. 3.
: makes the infant a Christian, and a member bellar. de Eccl. mil. l. 3. c. 3.
p. 139.
of the Church: justifyeth him Rhem. in Romans 6. Sect. 1. Pererius in Romans 6.
Disp. 2. annot. 9.
; and that if he die without it, he cannot be saved Duraeus lib. 8. de Paradox.


3. This custom hinders many Parents from embracing the way and order of the
Gospel, and causes them (as Mr. Davenport Just. Compl. page 6.
truly said) to live and die Libertines.

4. By this means Gods name is taken in vain Fenner princip. Relig. p. 96.
and 106.
, 5. and the holy Sacrament greatly abused. Mal. 1.7.12. Heb. 10.29.

6. The. Church of God defiled, Hag. 2.14.15. Ezech. 44.7. Necs. disc. p. 95.
Plain Declarat. of Eccl. Discip. p. 172.
.

7. The Minister a breaker of his Covenant, Mal. 2.8. Lastly, Divine wrath
hence justly may be feared. I say again, those that offend this way, may
justly fear Gods punishment; because he does not manifest more displeasure
against any sin, then the profanation of his ordinances; nor threatens to
inflict soorer punishments upon any, then offenders herein Levit. 10.2.4.
Chron. 13.10.
: And this is the judgment of sundry of our best Divines; viz. Iunius Anal.
expl. Levit. c. 10 p. 27.
, Brentius Comment. in Am. c. 4. v. 4.6.
, Piscator Observe. 3. in Levit. 10.
, Paraeus In Am. 2.12.
, Cartwright Catech. page 102.
, and others.

SECTION VI.
HOwsoever I could be well contended, in these our differences, to deal with
Mr. Paget by the Scriptures alone, as the book of all truth; knowing (as
Augustine De Doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 9.
says) that all things, concerning faith and manners, are contained in them.
Notwithstanding in regard he Page 15.
vainly boasts, to be carried away with the stream of the Learned, who
concur in judgment with him, etc. I have thought good to make inquiry about
the opinions of men, in this matter, betwixt us; as being loath, he should
oppress the truth, and make all men afraid of it; by making them believe, that
is desolate, and forsaken of all friends.

Beginning therefore with our writers: I judge it meet and convenient, to
allege in the foremost place the mature sentence of Master Cartwright; In
his Reply to D. Whitgift Page 172. l. 1.
, he writes thus: I do see that Master Doctor does make of the Holy
Sacrament of Baptism (which is an entry into the house of God, and whereby the
family of God must only Note that.
enter) a common passage, whereby he will have clean, and unclean, Holy, and
profane; as well those that are without the Covenant, as those that are within
to pass by; and so makes the Church no Household, but an Inn to receive
whosoever comes Just so does Mr. Paget.
I will answer therefore all most in as many words, as the questions be asked,
If one of the Parents, be neither drunkard, nor adulterer, the child is holy,
by virtue of the Covenant, for one of the Parents sake. If they be both, and
yet not obstinate in their sin, whereby the Church has not proceeded to
excommunication (themselves yet being of the Church Note.
) their child cannot, nor ought not to be refused. Again a few lines after,
speaking of Papists and other ungodly men: He affirms absolutely, that their
children ought not to be baptized.

In the next place we will consider the Author of a certain Book, Page
111.112.
entitled: The Covenant between God and man; he there maintains this
point, which we here profess: Baptism (says he) is to be administered to
them only, that are in the Covenant, and that the Reader might understand,
whom he means to be in the Covenant: He adds immediately; They are such
as profess the faith, join themselves together in a fellowship, crave to have
their names enrouled, and registered in the Church, and so partake of the
manifould graces of God, which are distributed therein.

To these we will add Master Viret Ground. Reli. p. 230.
, a rare light of the Gospel; and partner with Mr. Farell, in planting the
Church at Geneva, before Calvin came there. None (says he) are to be
baptized, but the children of the faithful and believers: all except these,
are to be instructed in the doctrine, before they be admitted thereunto.

Piscator likewise is as plain as can be. They only (says he) are to be
baptized, which belong to the Church: On Mat. chapter 28. Obse. in v. 19.
For as in old time they circumcised the children of the Jews, because they
belonged to the Church, and covenant, so now, etc. Mr. Fenner Doct. of the
Sacra.
says the very same, so Paraeus In Mat. 3.5.
, Erastus De excom. p. 18.24.
, Melancton. Loc. Com. page 383.
Keckerman System. Theol. l. 3. p. 453.
speaking of the lawfullnes of the baptising of infants; gives this as the
reason of it; viz. because they are members of the Church. The like saying we
find in a Book, named a general confession of Christian Churches. Because God
receives into his Church, the children with the fathers: We say by the
authority of Christ, infants begotten of faithful Parents, ought to be
baptized. Also Beza In 1. Cor. 7.14.
says, Such as do permit, all children to be baptized, do a thing unheard
off, in the primitive Church. Neither may Tertullians testimony be omitted,
speaking (as Iunius interprets him) of such children as were strangers from the
Covenant of God. Let them come when they are grown to years: Let them come
when they have learned, and are taught wherefore they come; Let them then be
made Christians, when they can know Christ.

Moreover this is the unanimous confession of all the Reformed Churches, to
wit, that Baptism appertains to such infants, as are in the Church, and
borne of believers. And for this reason (they say) they administer unto them
the seal of the Covenant; viz. because with their Parents, they are received
into the Church. Thus write the Churches of Saxony Harm. Conf. Art. 18.
, Bohemia Chapt. 12.
, France Art. 35.
, Scotland Harm. Conf. p. 24.
, Helvetia Art. 20.21
, and Belgcik Art. 34.


Object. 1. But this thing has been in these Countries, a long time practiced;
and therefore it is not meet, that so ancient a custom, should be laid down.

Answ. 1. When the truth is known (says Augustine L. 2. Ep. ad. Gaudent.
) let custom give place unto it. For Ambr. l. 4. Virg.
we must not always imitate whatsoever our Elders have allowed, but try by
the Scriptures, whither the things are good, which they allowed. And thus do
these Churches A general Confess. of Christ. Church.
in their writings profess to the world; that they judge it of small force in
controversy of Religion, to be urged with the bare sentenoes of Fathers, or
with the Decrees of Councills, much less with received custom, or with
continuance of time; For we admit (they say) no other judge, in matter of
faith, then God himself, pronounced in his Word.

2. By this custom, they give the Anabaptists great advantage; and nihilate
the best argument, which our Divines use against them, for the lawfullnes of
baptising of infants. And that this is so, let it be observed; that the Reason,
which they, in this point, do stick most too, is this, namely, that children
of Christians, by the same warrant Calv. in Mat. 18. v. 10. Gerhard. Harm.
Euang. c. 12. page 352. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. p. 355. D. Willet on Romans 6. p.
303. Cartwr. Christ. Rel. c. 37. p. 223.
, are now to be baptized, that the infants under the Law were circumcised. Now
I have prooved before; that no infant under the Law, was to be circumcised,
except he were a member of that visible Church; seeing therefore they leave
this pattern; it must follow (as I said) that they make the argument void, and
of no effect; and so refute their own writings, and destroy again the things,
which they have builded.

3. Seeing (by comparing their practice, with their profession) they are not so
true to their own grounds as they ought, this custom becomes the greater blot
and dishonor unto them. That they are not true to their grounds, I have
manifested before. To which this further may be added. In a Synod held at Dort
Anno 1578. it was there agreed, that all Parents before they brought their
children to be baptized, should got unto the Ministers or Elders, that so they
might give notice unto the Church, whose child it was, that should be baptized.
Now for what end, should the Parents be enjoined, to acquaint the Church
Officers with this thing; unless their meaning was, that none but members
children, should be baptized. If they had intended, that things should be, as
they are now: (baptize all brought to the Congregation) then truly (with
reverence be it spoken) they made a very unnecessary article; for what need is
there, of telling the Church, whose children they are, if all brought there
must be baptized. Lastly, let it be considered, whither the unsound doctrine,
of the Papists, get not countenance by this custom, who teach Aegid. Topiar.
in Epist. and Euang. p. 293.
that Gods commandments, must sometime, give place unto men's traditions.

Object. 2. Compassion toward infants, mooveth many Ministers to baptize them.

Answ. We may not do any thing against the express will of God, under a
pretense to show mercy unto others 1. King. 20.42.
; that pity, which the godly are to manifest, must be rightly-bowelled 1. Pet.
3.8
, that is, commanded of God, both for the matter and manner of it. It is well
known, that Origin August. de Civit. Dei lib. 21. c. 17
, through to much compassion of the wicked, thought that the Devils themselves
should be saved at lenght; unless men therefore, are careful to set bounds
unto their affections; their affections will lead them bejond their bounds.

To conclude this point; my hearts desire is, that every godly Minister, would
be pleased, duly to regard these things. It was no dishonor unto Job, that
he took the council of his handmaid. Neither did it darken Apollos
reputation, that he learned some thing of Aquila and Priscilla. A wise
General of a field, dispiseth not the advice of the meanest soldier, in
matters of greatest weight. We are told of a Papist Picus Mirand. an Papa sit
supra Council.
, that we ought to believe a simple plain Husband man, etc. if he speak the
truth. For my part, I should not presume to commend, what I have said, to their
judicious consideration, unless I had by diligent inquiry first; seen the
same to be a truth; and so settled my conscience in the certainty of it.

SECTION VII.
TO let his scoffs alone, which he merrily puts forth in page 71. 72. I will
here give him a direct answer, unto the thing which he there demands; that
is: What that due power is, by which we would have the Church to be gouverned,
and unto which we would willingly be subjected. It is that
Polity-Ecclesiasticall, which the Lord Jesus, the King of his Church, has
ordained in the New Testament; and given unto all the Churches of his Saints;
whereby they are to choose, and call into office, such as are fit, and exercise
all other spiritual ordinances, in, and among themselves, immediately from
him. This gouvernment we hold, to be the perfection of all, as comprehending
in it, whatsoever is excellent in all other bodies political; As man being the
perfection of all creatures, comprehends in his nature, what is excellent in
them all: Having being with the elements; life with the plants; sense with
beasts, and with the Angels reason.

Those which have written, about the Politic gouvernment of commonwealths; as
Aristotle L. 5. Pol. c. 1. and l. 3. c. 11.
, Herbertus L. 1. Hist. Pol.
, Tolosanus Lib. 4. c. 5.
, Bodin L. 2. c. 7. and l. 6. c. 74.
, Iunius Par. 1. Qu. Pol. Qu. 4.
, Danaeus L. 4. Pol. c. 5.
, Richterus Dict. axim. 63.
, Althusius C. 32. Pol.
, Contarinus Hist. Venet.
, and others do mention, three kinds, as lawful and good. Monarchical,
Aristocraticall, and Democraticall. Now all these three forms, (as the Learned
D. Whita. cont. 4. Q. 1 page 14. Refut. D. Down. Sermon. l. 2. par. 2. page 106.
Pet. Mart. loc. com. Clas. 4. c. 5. page 783. Keckerm. System. S.S. Theol. lib.
3. p. 400.
judiciously observe) have their places in the Church of Christ. In respect of
him the head, it is a Monarchy, in respect of the Eldership, an Aristocracy, in
respect of the body, a popular state.

Further I do affirm; that this Ecclesiastical gouvernment, is unchangeable,
ordinary, best, and perpetual; common to all true Churches, and unto which all
estates must be subject, as brethren; so every officer likewise: And good
reason too, for it is a matter of faith; a point of the Gospel, yea of the
substance of it; and necessary to salvation, so far I mean, as other of Gods
ordinances. But not to speak any more of the necessity, and excellency of this
Church Gouvernment, (there being in print many learned Treatises of it) I will
here lay down my reasons to prove the former Assertion; viz. that every
particular visible Church, has from Christ absolute and intyre power, to
exercise, in, and of herself, every ordinance of God; and so is an independent
body, not standing under any other Ecclesiastical authority out of it self.
And this I will do, if God permit.

ARGUMENT I.
If those Churches, planted by the Apostolic institution, had power fully in
themselves immediately from Christ, to practice all his ordinances: Then have
all Churches the like power now.

But the first is true: Therefore the second.

The proposition is clear and certain, by these Scriptures, 1. Cor. 5.2.3.
Act. 14.23. 2. Cor. 16.2. Col. 2.5. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.

The assumption is acknowledged by sundry of our best Divines. That first
gouvernment of the Church ( says Mr. Brightman On Revel. chap. 2 p. 65 edit. 3.
) is common to all times, and places; and that it is not to be permitted to be
at the arbitrament of men, to follow what way they list, but that always in
reforming a Church, we must have recourse, unto the first beginnings, to the
which, as our only rule, we must call back whatsoever strayeth from it, and
that they are not to be turned and tuned according to the crookednes, and
jarring sound of the succeeding Churches. Mr. Parker Polit. Eccl. l. 1. c. 23.
page 59. and l. 3. p. 95. and 300.
has in effect the very same speech; so Mr. Cartwright Repl. to Whitg. l. 1.
p. 25. 26.
, and B. Bilson Perpet. Gouvernm. page 3. Eccl. Polit. l. 4. p. 148.
likewise. Hooker gives a reason for it; namely, because the first state of
things was best, etc. and therefore it must needs follow, that customs, Laws,
and Ordinances, dev^sed since, are not so good for the Church of Christ; but
the best way is to cut off later inventions, and to reduce things unto the
ancient state, wherein at the first they were. And this agrees with Tertullians
Cont. Mar. l. 4. c. 5.
saying of old: That is truest which is first, that is first which is from the
beginning, that is from the beginning, which is from the Apostles.

ARGUMENT II.
If Christ in Mat. 18.17. where he says, Tell the Church; does mean a
particular Congregation: Then has every particular Congregation, an intyre
power, in, and of it self, to exercise Ecclesiastical gouvernment, and all
other Gods spiritual ordinances.

But the first is true: Therefore the second.

The proposition is clear, and certain, maintained by the most judicious
Divines; viz. Vrsinus Explica p. 2. p. 534.
, Zwinglius Explan. Act. 8.
, D. Andrews Tort. tort. page 42.
, Chemnitius In Mat. 18.17.
, Aretius Idem.
, Pelargius Idem.
, Hunnius Idem.
, Vatablus Idem.
, Munster Idem.
, Beza De Eccl. l. 1. ca. 13.
, Erasmus Paraph. in Mat. 18.
, D. Whitaker De Romans Pont. cont. 4. Q 1. p 86
, Cartwrith Confut. Rhem. in Mat. 18.
, D. Fulke Idem.
, Parker Polit. Eccl. l. 3. p. 79.
, and others.

The Assumption is prooved thus: That Church, which Christ intends in Mat.
18. has absolute power in, and of it self to perform all Gods ordinances,
but Christ intends in Mat. 18. a particular Congregation: Therefore every
particular Congregation has absolute power, in, and of it self, to perform
all Gods Ordinances.

Moreover let it be observed; that this Church in Mat. 18. is given as a
plat-forme, or example unto all Churches, to walk by. As Moses was to make
the Arc in every respect proportionable unto the pattern, which he saw in
the Mount; even so, etc.

ARGUMENT III.
Whatsoever was commanded to the 7 Churches to be practiced by each of them,
apart, in, and for themselves; that no Church of God must now omit.

But Ecclesiastical gouvernment, was commanded to the 7 Churches to be
practiced by each of them, apart, in, and for themselves.

Therefore no Churches of God must omit the practice of Ecclesiastical
gouvernment, apart, in, and for themselves.

The proposition cannot be doubted off. For as Chytraeus In Rev. c. 1. p. 29.
54.
, Artopeus In cap. 1. p. 11.
, Bullinger In Rev. 2. Hom. 8.
, Brightman In Rev. 1.2 and 3. chapter
and others write. All Churches from these, ought to learn, what gouvernment
to exercise; what doctrines to teach; what persons to excommunicate; who to
receive, and to comfort, and the like.

The assumption is prooved clearly in chap. 2. ver. 2.14.20. etc. Moreover Mr.
Perkins Expos. upon chapter 2. v. 20. and chapter 3. v. 7.
(speaking of those Churches) says: God gave to every of them, power and
authority to preach the Word, administer the Sacraments, repress evil men,
decerne false Prophets, and to exclude all obstinate sinners from all
spiritual privileges among them.

ARGUMENT IV.
If the Church of Corinth, had power and authority within her self; to
exercise Ecclesiastical gouvernment; Yea and did it, I mean the Ministry,
and the rest of the Church there: Then ought not particular Congregations now,
to stand under any other Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves.

But the first is true: Therefore the second.

The first part is unquestionably certain; and of this judgment was D. Willet
Cont. 9. Cent. 1.
, D. Fulke Answ. to the Rhem. 1. Cor. 5.4.
, Zanehy In praecep 4. c. 19. p. 688
, Bucer De Regn. Chr. l. 1. c. 9
, Piscator In 1. Cor. 5. Obser. 1.
, D. Andrews Tort. tor. page 42.
, Pet. Martyr 1. Cor. 5.
, Polanus Synt. Theo. l. 7. c. 19.
, D. Field Of the Church. l. 1. c. 5.
, Paraeus In 1. Co 5 de Eccom.
, Zwinglius Epichir. de Can. Missae, and ad Valent. comp.
, and others.

Again whereas the Papists, and Hierarchy do say ( much after Mr. Pagets new
doctrine) that the Church of Corinth had not sole and alone authority, in it
self, to exercise Ecclesiastical gouvernment; our writers viz. Mr. Cartwright
Refutat. Rhem. 1. Cor. 5.4.
, Mr. Parker Pol. Eccl. l. 3. c. 4. p. 1. 7. 18. etc.
and others, do soundly refute them, and prove the contrary by many reasons.

The latter part is prooved before, in the Minors, of the 1. and 3 arguments.

ARGUMENT. V.
Such actions the Church may lawfully do, wherein no Law of God is broken.

But there is no Law of God broken, when particular Congregations do, in, and
among themselves exercise all Gods ordinances.

Therefore they may lawfully do it.

The proof of the proposition, does arise from the definition of sin; which
as Augustine Cont. Fau. l. 22. c. 27.
and Ambrose Lib de Paridis c. 8
truly define it; is either a deed, or word, or thought, against some Divine
Law. Lombard Lib. 2. and 35.
, Aquinas Th. 12. Qu. 71.
and other Schoolmen (as they are called) agree hereto.

The assumption is manifested in our first Argument, the first part of it.

ARGUMENT VI.
If the Apostle gave commandment unto the Eldership of Ephesus, for the whole
administration of all ordinances in that Church. Then may the Eldership of
every particular Congregation, administer among themselves all Gods ordinances.

But the first is true: Therefore the second.

The Major is prooved two ways. 1. By Scripture Act. 28. verse. 17.28. 2. By
the testimony of the learned Whitaker Romans Pont. Cont. 4. Qu. 1. c. 1. p. 12
Cont. 2. Qu. 5. c. 6. page 281. 284.
.

The Minor is undeniable: For as Mr. Brightman On the Apoc. chapter 12 page 505.
says, there was one form of gouvernment in all Churches, namely, that that
is delivered us in the acts of the Apostles, and the rest of their writings.
There are extant at this present diverse Treatises See Park. Pol. Eccl. l. 2 c.
40. p. 324.325. etc. Defen. of godly Min. agai. Bridge. slaund. p. 133.134. etc.
, to prove that Christ has instituted but one only form of Church
gouvernment, common to all Churches, ordinary, perpetual, and best.

Thus we have prooved the affirmative part of our assertion, to wit, that
every particular Congregation has power in, and for it self, immediately from
Christ, to exercise Ecclesiastical Gouvernment, and all other Religious
ordinances; we will now speak a little of the other part; that is, prove
that particular Congregations do not stand under any other Ecclesiastical
authority, out of themselves; viz. Classes and Synods.

ARGUMENT VII.
Such Offices and callings, without which the Church of God is complete, and
perfect, for Gonvernment, are superfluous and humane.

But the Church of God may be complete, and perfect, for Gouvernment, without
Classical and Synodicall Offices and callings.

Therefore, these Offices and callings, are superfluous and humane.

This argument the Protestants have used against the Pope; and the Reformists
against Bishops, Archbishops, Chancellours, etc. Now the same is every-way as
firm and good, against Synods and Classes; for without them, the Church of
God, is fully brought to complete perfection and unity. D. Fulke Learn. Disc.
Eccl. Gouv. page 10.11.
confidently affirms so much. That which D. Whitaker De Conc. Qu. 1. p. 22.23.
writes of general Councills, is by Mr. Parker Polit. Eccl. l. 3. p. 133.
applied, (and rightly) unto particular Synods. The Church of God (says he)
can well subsist without them, for she was sometimes without them: besides we
are not bound by any special commandment of God to have them.

ARGUMENT. VIII.
Whatsoever Gouvernment cannot be found commanded in the written Word of God;
ought not to have any place in the Church of God.

But the Gouvernment of Classes and Synods, over many partioular Congregations,
cannot be found commanded in the written Word of God.

Therefore it ought not to have any place in the house of God.

The first part is grounded upon these Scriptures, Esa. 8.20. Mat. 2.8. ult. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Gal. 5.1. 2. Tim. 1.13. Likewise this is the judgment of many
learned men. Athanasius Epist. in prae. ad Orthod.
says, The Ecclesiastical Canons, come from the Apostles. Cyprian Diaco. etc.
quae Athan. Apo. 2. inseritur.
says, From the Scriptures do spring, and thither do return, whatsoever the
Ecclesiastical Discipline does require. Julius Repleo D. Whitg. l. 1. p. 25.
says, Not show of eloquence, but Apostolical Canons are required. Mr.
Cartwright says, Nothing should be placed in the Church, but what God in his
Word has commanded. The like Theodoret 1. Cor. 11.
, Ambrose In 1. Co. 7
, Ignatius Epist. 2. ad Smyrn.
, Augustine Epist. 119
, Cyrill In Ioh. 1.
, and others.

The second part is also as manifest; for if we once grant (as all Learned
have granted) that the Churches of the Apostolic constitution, were
independent bodies, and exercised Ecclesiastical gouvernment, in, and of
themselves; then it must follow, that Classical Assemblies, etc. have their
rise wholly, from the pleasure and will of man.

ARGUMENT IX.
That Gouvernment, which merely tends unto the taking away, from particular
congregations, their due power is unlawful.

But the Gouvernment of Classes and Synods (as they now are) does merely tend
unto the taking away from particular congregations their due power.

Therefore that Gouvernment is unlawful.

The Major of this argument, may easily be prooved by sundry places of
Scriptures; viz. 1. Thessal. 4.6. 3. Ioh. 9. Prove. 22.28. Deuteronomy. 19.^4. Gal.
5.1. Also, it is grounded upon the definition of justice; which is, as Tully L.
3. Offic.
, Justinian Instit. l. 1. tit. 1. p. 2.
, and others say, to give every one his own. And so much imports the word
according to the Etymology, or precise signification of it; both in Greek
(...) Arist. l. 5. Ethic. c. 7.
, and Laten Im a jure. Funger. Ety. Triling. p. 4050.
.

The Minor is as manifest: 1. by Mr. Pagets own testimony in page 66. where
he confesses, that they have concluded among themselves in their Synods, that
no particular Congregation, without the leave and consent of the Classis, shall
proceed to the election of Ministers, excommunication of offenders, and the
like. As they have gone in this act, far bejond their calling; (for as Mr.
Barlow Expos. on 2. Tim. 1. v. 13. doct. 6 page 357.
says: No man under the degree of a Prophet, or an Apostle, may prescribe Gods
Church and children patterns:) so by it: is the whole power of Churches (in a
manner) taken quite away. For instance; say the Classes and Synods, will not
permit, that a Congregation shall reject some convicted Heretics; then they
must (if they will believe Mr. Paget) let them alone in their communion,
against Gods express commandment; and so obey men rather then God. Tit. 3.10.
Again put case, some Churches do want Ministers, yet notwithstand, if the
Classes and Synods will not give them leave, to choose any, except unfit and
insufficient persons; then it seems by this Synodall Canon, they must take
such, or remain destitute still.

Again, this is clear by their practice likewise; for albeit they are no
members of our Church; notwithstanding they take authority over us, and over
our Eldership too; yea in truth, so much authority, as any Lord can do over
his servant; for so long as he does what his master will have him do; he is
left alone; but if he meddle with things against the others liking, he is
immediately commanded to cease, and so must not proceed further. Now what is
our case otherwise? so long as we do that, which contenteth Mr. Paget and
them, we are suffered; otherwise though we do jointly conclude an action
yet; it must not stand: for we are told, it does not belong unto us So says
Mr. Paget in his answ. to a certain writing, given in the Consist. Mar. 12.
1632.
, and therefore must give it over. So that in the words of the Prophet Ier.
4.13. See before page 16.17.18.
, we may justly complain; Woe unto us we are spoiled.

ARGUMENT X.
It is a sin against God, to add any thing, to that form and manner of
ordering Churches, which Christ our heavenly Prophet, has set forth unto us in
the New Testament.

To subject particular Congregations, under any other Ecclesiastical
authority, out of themselves, is to add unto that form and manner of ordering
Churches, which etc.

Therefore it is a sin to do it.

The proposition cannot be excepted against; for the Scriptures herein are
evident, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Josh. 1.7. Prove. 30.6. Gal. 3.15. Rev. 22.18.19. If it be a
capital crime, to adulterate the Kings coin: How much more, etc. And of this
judgment are many learned men; viz. Augustine L. 30. c. 18. cont. Faust.
, Basil Moral. c. 14.
, Chrysostom In Agg. c. 1
, Cyrill In Levit. l. 9.
, Bid In 1. Pet. 5
, Cope In Prove. 30.6.
, D. Abbots Agai. Hill. page 15.
, Brentius In Exodus 35. p. 168.
, Mr. Cartwright In Prove. 30.6.
, Melancton Upon Col. 2 23. p. 381.
, Elton, and others.

The Assumption cannot for shame be denied; only because the weight of the
controversy leans upon it, I will speak further of it, in the next Section.

There are yet other reasons to prove our Assertion; the which I will here lay
down more briefly.

1. If every Eldership have alike and equal power, as Hierome Ep. ad Ena.
, Cyprian L. de unit^ Eccles.
, Bucer De B^g^ Chr. l. 1. c. 15.
, and others affirm; then may not the Officers of one Congregation, seek by
authority to suppress the acts and decrees concluded in another.

2. It is against sense, that a Minister should undertake the care of more
Churches then one only: who reads in Scriptute of a steward over many
families, a shepherd over diverse Flocks, etc. Nature has ordained (says
Aristotle Lib. 1. c. 2
) one unto one.

3. Is it alike thing, that the Classical power, should be of Gods approoving;
and yet he never mention it in his word. This argument the Hierarchy Jew.
Defe. Apol. 2. par. c. 3. divis. 5.
use against Popish Offices; and the Reformists D. Laten. Syons Plea p. 9.
against theirs. Now let the discreet Reader judge, if it prove not the point
in hands as well. Here I may not omit Zwinglius Zwingl. Art. 8. expl.
speech, speaking of Synods: We willingly believe (says he) that you are a
representative Church; for a true Church you are not. But I pray you show us,
whence you fetch this name? Who has given you this name? who has given you
power to make Canons, impose things on men's shouldiers, grieve their
consciences, etc. And a little after he says: Of this representative Church,
I find nothing in the Holy Scriptures, out of men's devises any may faigne what
they list; we rest in the Holy Scripture, against which thou may not attempt
any thing, if thou be a Christian.

4. Whosoever shall deny our aforesaid assertion, must of necessity hold, two
distinct forms of Church gouvernment to be lawful; one where particular
Congregations do in, and of themselves, exercise all Gods ordinances; the
other where they stand under another Ecclesiastical authority out of
themselves. Now to hold this, is directly all one, as to hold two ways to
heaven; distinct and opposite in themselves, which is very scandalous in
Religion, and that which cannot stand with truth.

5. Let it be observed, that for this reason (among others) the Learned D.
Whita. cont. 4. qu. 4 Chamier. l. 6. conject. 2.
say, the Pope is Antichrist; viz. because he will have men to appeal from
their own Churches unto him; and to stand unto his sentence and decree. And
do not, the Classical Assemblyes and Synods, take upon them, an authority
much like to it, in subjecting many Congregations to them, requiring appeals
to be made to them, and that the Iudicatory (as Mr. Pagets In his Letter given
into the Consistory.
phrase is) belongs to them; as if their power were above all Churches.

6. What more meet, and reasonable; then that every man's case be there heard,
and determined, where the fault was committed; so says Cyprian Cypr. lib. 1
Epist. 3.
, It is not fit that they, over whom the Holy Ghost has made us overseers,
should go too and fro. He speaks of carrying matters away from their own
Church, unto others See page 35.36.
.

7. Note, the effect, if it should be otherwise; which is, that every
particular Congregation must hence necessarily loose her own proper right in
gouvernment, and so of a Mistres become a servant: in stead of being superior,
wilfully vassal and enslave her self, which thing is contrary to Gods will,
revealed in his word Gal. 5.1. 1. Co. 7.23 2. Ti. 1.13 Heb. 4.14. Revel 2.25
.

8. Seeing the Apostles, wheresoever they constituted any Church, with
doctrine, immediately established in it, Ecclesiastical gouvernment Park Pol.
Eccl l. 1 20
; for without this (as D. Ames De consc. l. 4. c. 24. page 214.
says) there could have been no conbling of the parts and members together.
It must needs follow, that the Primitive Churches were independent bodies, and
stood not under any other Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves. Now how
Mr. Paget will be able to prove a change of this gouvernment, I do not yet
see: especially, considering that the Learned (as I showed before Page 72.
) do hold, that there is but one certain, necessary, and perpetual form,
and manner of ordering Churches. And this also is the judgment of Calvin Calv.
ad Sad.
, P. Martyr In Romans 3.21.
, D. Bilson Perp. Gov. 338. etc.
, yea the Confession of the Churches of France Harm. conf. art. 29
, of the Low Countries Harm. art. 30.
, and Scotland Treat of the Discipl. of that Church.
, in a word to this the Papists Sander. visib. Mon. l. 1. c. 6.
ascent.

9. By the titles given to all particular Congregations, it appears evidently;
that Ecclesiastical authority is (or at least ought to be) in every one of
them, distinctly, wholly, intyrely; viz. a Kingdom Mat. 3.2.
, Family Ephesians. 2.19.
, a Body 1. Cor. 12.20.
, a Queen Psalm. 45.
, etc. For what more senceles, then to say, a Kingdom, or family, standing
under another Political, or Oeconomicall gouvernment out of themselves; a body
having all parts and members, and yet may neither receive in, nor put out
without another leave and consent; many such absurdities See Park. Pol. Eccl.
3. p. 23. and 321.322. Iun. Eccl. l. 1. c. 4. D. Whitak. cont. 4. Qu. 1. p. 38.
follows Mr. Pagets lately-devised Tenets.

10. The acts of the Apostolic Churches prove directly our assertion: For it
is without all contradiction, that they elected their own Ministers,
excommunicated offenders, sent messengers, and performed all other Church
matters among themselves.

Lastly, let it be observed, that Mr. Paget in this, accords with the Papists
Bellar. de Eccl. l. 5. c. 5
, and Hierarchy D. Downa. D. Bridges, and others.
; for they say (as he does) that particular Churches are not independent
bodies, but stand under another Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves.
The which thing our writers deny, and prove the contrary.

By this time I suppose the indifferent Reader perceives, that the Scriptures,
are every way for us, and against Mr. Paget, in this controversy betwixt us.
Now he should do well, seeing we dispute about a matter of faith,
appertaining to life and salvation; to rest in them, as the only touching for
trial of all truth.

Notwithstanding considering he makes so much a do, about the multitude of
learned and Godly Ministers, being of the same judgment and practice with him.
Page 73.
(according as Festus knowing Paul to have appealed unto Caesar, did reasonably
resolve, saying, Unto Caesar shall thou go, so) I am well contented to hear
what reverend and judicious Authors do say herein: And if Mr. Paget will stand
unto their Testimonies, I doubt not, but to make it manifest, that (as the
Scriptures so) they are also with us; and so much shall be declared in the next
Section.

SECTION VIII.
THe allegations of the Learned, which I purpose here to set down, shall be
taken, 1. From Papists. 2. Lutherans. 3. Calvinists. 4. English Conformists. 5.
The Non-Conformists. 6. Ancient Writers: And lastly the Confession of Reformed
Churches.

Howsoever Romes-Champions Bellarm. de verb. Dei l. 3. c. 5. Rhem. in Mat.
18.17. and 1. Cor. 5.2. Aegid. Topi. Conc. in Ep. and Euangel. p. 280. Stapl.
de auth. Eccl. cont Whita. c. 1. c. 1. Sect. 5.
will have none now, to meddle with Church-Gouvernment, but Priests, Bishops,
Prelates, etc. yet they do acknowledge, that in the primitive Church,
according to the precept of Christ in Mat. 18. offenders, after the first and
second admonition, were brought to the whole Congregation: met in one place
together: that is, the Christians with their Bishop, or Pastor; and there, if
they continued impenitent, by the consent and approbation of all, they were
excommunicated by the Minister Sculting. Hier. Anar. l. 11. p. 134
. Mark (I pray thee Reader) the marvelous efficacy of the truth, which forces
a testimony thereof, even from them, that are to it, the greatest enemies. It
is here acknowledged (as the truth is) the right of Ecclesiastical
Gouvernment, at first was in the body of every particular Congregation; there
lay the due power: I do not say chiefly, but wholly; so that what spiritual
power is now assumed above this: whither it be Papal, or Episcopal, whither
it be Classical, or Synodall, they are, humane ordinances, and apparent
violation, of a divine institution.

Others of them speak Saravia cont. Bez. page 62. Schol. Paris. in Pol p. 6.
as plain: All Ecclesiastical authority, primarily, properly, and
essentiallie belongs to the Church, to the Officers instrumentallie
Ministerially, and so far only, as it respects the execution of it. Here
is nothing said to justify Ministers, in taking more authority, to themselves,
then they grant their congregations; but a testimony to the contrary; For what
they do, is only Ministerially; as the servants of the Church; and therefore
a most unseemelie thing (without the Churches fore knowledge, liking and
consent) to make acts or decrees; but more, to bind men to the keeping thereof,
whither they will or no.

To these we will add Alphonsus L. 2. c. 24. de inst. Har.
de Costro and Franciscus Victoria In relect. de potest. Eccl. Qu. 2.
, the Master of Canus; both these affirm, that all Bishops do receive
jurisdiction and power immediately from God. If so, then one needs not to seek
another authority; for every one in his own Church, may lawfully administer
all Gods ordinances, whither others, otherwhere do like or not. Thus God, who
brought light out of darkcnes; ordered these men's tongues, to give witness unto
his truth.

Neither may Cusanus De concor. Cathol. l. 1. c. 11. etc. 14.15.16.
words be unremembred; who speaking on this place, To thee will I give the
kees, says, this promise of Christ, must be referred unto the whole Church.
Sanders De visib. Mon. l. 1. c 6.
, Scultingius Hierarch. Anarch. l. 4. page 103.
and others of them, give the same exposition; viz. that, when Christ promised
Peter the kees, he in person presented the body of the Church. According to
these men's writing, the power of binding, and loosing, election of Ministers,
deposition, and the like, is in the body of the Congregation; if so, then
Classes and Synods have it not. I mean of right.

John Ferus a Friar of S. Francis Order; but godlier then the Such as Bucanan
describes in his Franciscanus.
common sort; entreating (in his Commentaries written on the Acts) of the
example of Peter, how he was required to render a reason of that, which he
had done; makes this note upon it: Peter the Apostle, and chief of the
Apostles, is constrained to give an account to the Church, neither does he
disdain it; because he knew himself not to be a Lord, but a Minister of the
Church. The Church is the Spouse of Christ, and Lady of the House: Peter a
Servant and Minister; wherefore the Church may not only exact an account of
her Ministers, but also depose them, and reject them altogether, if they be not
fit. So did they in old time very often: But wicked Bishops now will not be
reprooved, no not of the Church, nor be ordered by it; as though they were
Lords, not Mlnisters Fer. in Act. 11.
What can be more for us then this? For he absolutely grants us the thing,
which we stand for: that is; that the Church is above her Officers, and
therefore may require, when there is just occasion, a strict account of their
actions. Yea more, if she find them unfaithful, (whether it be in carrying
themselves more like Lords then servants, or in stead of executing the degrees,
and sentences of the Church, devise Laws against her; or in stead of
maintaining her right, freedom and privileges, seek to bring her into
bondage,) she may put them down, and place better in their room.

But it seems by Mr. Pagets question in page 82. if he had been in Peter's
place, he would not have had his matter debated and discussed openly before
the whole multitude of the Church; notwithstanding I cannot see, how he could
have avoided it, seeing there was then no Classes for him, to have made his
appeal unto.

I could here produce others of them; viz. Gratian Cause. 11. p. 3. 6.
Gregory Lib. 4. Epist. 8.2.
, P. Aeneas Silvias De gest. Conc. Basil. lib. 1.
, Pope Anacletus Did. 21. c. in nov. Test.
, Sixtus Senensis Bib. San. l. 8. annot. 171.
, Thomas of Aquine In 4 sent. did. 2.4. qu. 3. art. 2.
, Alexander of Ales Sum. Theo. part. 4 qu. 20. me. 5.6.
, John Scott In Magist. sent. l. 4. did. 19. art. 1.
, etc. some affirming that the greatest authority is in the Church, that the
kees were given to all the Apostles; others that all Bishops are equal in
power, and the like. But we will leave these men, and come to more authenticke
witnesses.

It is affirmed by the Centuries of Meydenburg, that from Christ's ascension,
unto Trajans Cent. 1. c. 4. Cent. 6.7. Col. 591.
time, which is about a 100 years, every particular Church was gouverned by
the Bishops, Elders, and Deacons of the same. Moreover describing the state of
Christian Churches, from Trajans Cent. 2. c. 7. p. 134. 135.
reign unto Severus, (that is, from the year of Christ 100 to 195) thus they
write: If any read the approoved Authors, of this age, he shall see that the
order of Gouvernment was popular; for all Churches had equal power of teaching
purelie the Word of God, administration of the Sacraments, excommunication of
Heretics, and wicked persons, loosing the penetent; the election and
ordination of Ministers, and the deposition of them again for just cause.

Mr. Brightman On Rev. chapter 12. page 505. 506.
comes Lower down, even unto Constantines time, and is of opinion, that the
primitive purity of Church Gouvernment, was not yet defloured, with the
dregs of man's invention: Neither had Satan brought in Prelaticall pride into
the sheep fould of the Lord: but the Pastors looked every one, to the health
of his own Flock. Hence it appears, that for the space of 200 or 300 years,
after Chrlst See Mr. Jacob necess. Reform. page 57. etc.
; every visible Church, had power, to exercise Ecclesiastical Gouvernment, and
all other Gods spiritual ordinances (the means of salvation) in, and for it
self, immediately from Christ. And this is a thing so certainly true, as I
think Mr. Paget himself, will not have the face to deny it.

What authority then (to use another B. Bilson agai. Semin. p. 221.
speech) had others after the Apostles death, to change the Apostolic
Gouvernment? But seeing they have done it; what must we do? Thus? leave their
inventions, and return back, to the Churches of the Apostolic institution;
and from them, take our pattern and platform, to walk by, and thus God
teaches Eze. 20.18 Exodus 23.2. Mat. 15.24. etc.
us to do: and learned men also; viz. Arnobius Lib. 2. con. Gent.
, Ignatius, Epist. ad Philadil.
, Iulianus De Bapt. Heret.
, B. Jewel Defe. Apol. 6. pa. c. 16. div. 2. page 762.
, D. Rainolds Confer. 195.459.
. and others. But to go foreward with our witnesses.

From these, let us ascend to the very first worthies, who have brought us a
great part of the light of the Gospel in this later age, Zwinglius He was no
Lutheran.
and Luther: The first says thus Ad Valen. Comp.
: Excommunication is not in the Bishops, gathered together in a Synod, but the
right and power thereof, is in the Congregation: And therefore according to
Christ's commandment in Mat. 18. Offenders ought to be brought to the Church,
whereof they are members Art. 31. Explat. Epichirisis de Canon. Miss.
, and being obstinate by the Church, the Pastor pronouncing the sentence, are
to be cut off. Again concerning calling to the Ministry, he says
Ecclesiastes.
, The right of election is in the whole Church.

Mr. Luther, another excellent witness of Christ, affirms Tom. 2. page 374.
, that the Church has the right and power to judge of any doctrine, also of
calling the Ministers of the Gospel, or, if they cease to be faithful, to
depose them. But is not this contrary to Mr. Pagets new opinion? yea
altogether: For though a Congregation should have just cause to put down some
Officers; notwithstanding (by his grounds) if they appeal unto Ministers of
other Churches, and they judge them fit to continue in their places, then must
they be left alone, how vile soever they are; so that to speak the truth, the
power which he allows unto particular Congregations; is just nothing.

Chemnitius, another famous man, and of rare learning among the followers of
Luther, is herein with us likewise; for he testifyeth, that election Exam.
par. page 226. 227. 228. Harm. in Mat. 18.17
, excommunication, examination of sentences Exa. Con. Trid. part. 1. p. 3.
etc. belong unto the whole Church. Again observe what he attributes in
another place to the Congregation; what to the guides thereof: To the first
power Exam. c. 6.
, to the later the administration of it. Melancton Loc. com. tit. de reg.
Christ.
has the like distinction. I could here mention many others of them, which
consent, with us fully; as Sarcerius In Mat. 18.
Brentius Exeges. in Ioh. 12.23.
, D. Rungius In 1. Cor. 5.3.4.
, Hunnius In Mat. 16.
, Osiander Harm. in Mat. 18.17.
, Salneccer In Act. 6.
, Pelargus In Act. 6. and 14.
, D. Mylius In 1. Cor 5
, Hegendorphin In Act. 14.
, etc. none of these hold (as Mr. Paget) that particular visible Churches, are
noun-adjectives, cannot stand without Classes and Synods; but on the other
side, they grant them (I mean to the Eldership and Brethren) right and power,
to practice in, and among themselves all Gods ordinances.

For those now, whom (for distinction sake) we name Calvinists; these men (I
take it) are the multitude of Godly and learned Ministers, which do (as he
says) agree in judgment and practice, with him.

Now before I come to lay down their particular allegations, touching our
point in controversy: This I desire may be observed; that it cannot be
manifested, (as I am persuaded) that there is, among them all, one Author,
which has in his Commentaries on the Scriptures, taught the doctrine
maintained by Mr. Paget here against us. It is true, some of them, grant to the
Eldership greatest authority; others to the body of the Congregation:
Notwithstanding, none have been so erroneous, as to say, that the whole Church
(I mean Officers and Brethren) wants authority to perform in, and for it
self, all Church-services. Now for the Authors.

Peter Martyr Class. chapter 5. sect. 9.
in his common places, making the Church a Monarchy, in respect of Christ, an
Aristocracy in respect of the Elders; adds also, that because there are
matters of great weight, and importance, referred unto the people, as
excommunication, absolution, choosing of Ministers, and the like; it has also
a consideration of a popular gouvernment. Of the same judgment was Iunius
Eccl. l. 3. c. 1.
, The whole Church (says he) ought to choose, that is, the body consisting of
the Eldership and people, by equal and common voices. This is the right manner
of choosing Ministers.

With them joins Musculus Com. Pl. elect. Mini.
, Viret Groung. Relg. l. 3. chapter 1.
, Bullinger Decat. 5.4.
, Danaeus In Tim. 5.22.
, Gualter Hom. in Act. 13.2. and 13.22.
, Sybrandus Respons. ad Hug. p. 159
, D. Mornaeus Hist pa. 542. etc.
, Morell Tom. 4. fol. 534.
, Tilenus Respons. ad Com. La Vat. Qu. 8. and Epist. 14
, etc. all these, I say, do directly affirm the same thing; viz. that all
particular visible Churches, have full power to ordain and choose among
themselves fit Ministers. Neither can it be gathered (to my knowledge) anywhere
in their writing, that unto a full and complete calling of Church Officers; any
more Ecclesiastical authority and power is required, then that, which Christ
has set in every Congregation, distinctly and apart.

To the same purpose they write, about excommunication, and the absolution, or
the reconciliation of the excommunicate; those are actions (they say) common to
the whole Church, and not of any private person, or persons.

Bastingius Catechism. Quaest. 85.
speaking of the difference, between the two kees, that of preaching, and the
other of discipline; places it in this: that the former, which is the
preaching of the Gospel, is committed to the Ministers; the other because it
appertains to the Discipline of excommunication, is permitted to the whole
Church.

To him we will add Ursinus Catech. p. 799.800. print. at Oxford An. 1587.
, who teaches thus: Christ in these words Mat. 18.17. If he refuse to hear
the Church, etc. expressly commands all, whosoever (being after this sort
admonished by the Church) will not repent, to be, by the common consent of the
Church excommunicated, until they repent. And whosoever are excommunicated,
they again professing, and showing in their actions amendment, are altogether
in like sort, received into the Church, as they were exiled from it: Namely by
the judgment of the Elders, by the consent of the Church, and the authority
of Christ, and the Scripture. And that denuntiation, whereby one is
excommunicated, is not in the power of the Minister of the Church, but in the
power of the Church, and is done in the name of the Church, because this
commandment, was given by Christ unto the Church. For he says expreslie:
Tell the Church. And of this judgment is Piscator In 1. Cor. 5. Obs. 1.
, Calvin Inst. 4.1.15.
, Paraeus In 1. Cor. 5.5.
, Keckerman System. Theol. l. 3.
, Hermingius In 1. Cor. 5
, Tossanus Comm. in 1. Cor. 5.
, Polanus Synt. Theo. l. 7. c. 18.
, Hyperius Comm. in 1. Cor. 5.
, Praedirius In 1. Cor. 5.
, Munster In Mat. 18.17.
, Danaeus In Mat. 18.
, Oecolampadius In Mat. 18.
, Beza Annot. in 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
, and others.

And now Mr. Paget what think you of these men? were they not learned and
Godly Ministers; Reverend and judicious Divines? Are they not authenticke
witnesses? If you confess it; then mark what follows; viz. your position
that particular Congregations must stand under other Ecclesiastical authority
out of themselves; is hence condemned, by a jurie of more then 24 men, of your
own choosing; for an error and untruth: The reason is; because these affirm
(I say all of them) that every particular Eldership, with the Churches consent,
may lawfully proceed among themselves to the excommunicating of offenders,
whenever there is necessary and just cause. Neither do they say a word; that
it is a Divine institution, that the Ministers of one Congregation, must first
ask the leave and consent of other Ministers, before they can lawfully
administer this ordinance of God.

And therefore I make some question, whither you have not wronged this
multitude of learned and Godly Ministers; in reporting things, of them to the
world, which they hold not.

And I have the more reason thus to think, considering what Mr. Bucer In Mat.
16.19.
, and P. Martyr In 1. Cor. 16.3.15.
write; (two great lights that shined sometime in England) to wit, that
Ecclesiastical power and government is in the whole Church; but the authority
only of administration thereof, is the Presbytery and Bishops: So as in old
time at Rome the power was in the people; direction in the Senate. But of this
sort of testimonies enought is spoken, we come therefore now to the next.

Touching the English Conformists, the formablest of them, are for us, in this
point. B. Whitgift In his defenc. ag. T.C. p. 180 182.
confesses, that in the Apostles time, the state of the Church was popular.
And two pages after, I call it popular (says he) because the Church had
interest almost in every thing. With him D. Bilson Perpet. Gouvernm. c. 15 p.
361
agrees, and writes thus: In the primitive Church, the people did propose
name, elect, and decree, as well as the Clergy, and though the Presbyterers
had more skill to judge; Yet the people had as much right, to choose their
Pastor: and if they most of them did agree, they did carry it away from the
other. Again chap. 7. page 90.
, Mark well (says he) the ordaining of the first Deacons, they were chosen
by the people.

Mr. Paget in page 22. does acknowledge, that Christ has appointed but one
order, for the choose both of Pastor and Deacon. As he speaks there, the
truth: so by it, he quite overthrowes his own cause; for if Pastors must be
chosen the same way, that Deacons are; and they (if the Apostles precept be
kept) chosen by the free consent of the Congregation, wherein they are to
administer; then how comes it to pass, that Classes and Synods, should have
more authority then the people; and may (if they will) disanull, whatsoever the
others do herein.

I know what the Papists and Hierarchy say, to justify their taking away, from
particular Congregations, their due power; and setting up a superior one in
the room thereof: The first gives this for a reason Sculting. Hierarch. Anacr.
l. 11 page 134.
: The unrulines of the people deserved afterward to have their liberty taken
away. The others say thus: Why do ye call us back to the primitive Church? As
if we are to be tied to the first beginnings of things, as if ye would bind
little infants in their blankets, with swalding bonds? And as if it were not
lawful for us, to change those primitive rudiments, which were not then so
proffitable in their first original, as they seem to be pernicious at this
day. Again Apolog. for Church Gouvernm. page 81.
, There was some thing ordained by the Apostles, that is no less hurtful for
our Churches, then it was behoofull, for those, to whom it was appointed.

Which of these two arguments he will make use off, I yet know not: One of
them I suppose he will and must. For to say, that this superior power of
Classes and Synods, is Iure Divino, I think he will not any more do it:
There being in the Scriptures, no proof (yea I may boldly say) nor show of any
proof for it.

But because I know not, what his answer shall be, I will therefore say no more
for this time; only I think it good, to put him in mind of what Gerson De
Vit. spirit.
writes the authority of the primitive Church, is above all Churches, and
therefore it is not in the power of Pope, Council, or Church, to change the
Doctrines and Traditions, delivered by the Apostles. And so I proceed.

To these we will add 4 more conformable Doctors of England; viz. Whitaker,
Bell, Willer, and Tailor. The first affirms, De Conc. qu. 5. p. 178
that Ecclesiastical authority, principally, primarilie, and essencially,
belongs to the whole Church; unto Bishops only accidentally, and
secondarily. So again De Romans Pont. cont. 4 qu. 4. c. 3. page 562.
, The chief judgment in all criminal cases, is the Churches.

Bell says Regiment of the Church. chapter 2 sect. 4.
, Excommunication precisely and chiefly, pertains to the Church; and that
she has authority, to commit the execution thereof to some special persons,
for that purpose; and chosen for that end.

To the same effect Willet Synops. cont. 4. qu. 4 p. 2.
. And Tailor Comm. on Tit. chapter 3. v. 10. p. 712.
says, that excommunication is the common action of the Church, and not of any
private person, or persons.

What more obvious and clear, by these men's testimonies, then that every
particular Congregation has power, fully in it self, to perform all Gods
ordinances. But has not Mr. Paget in the mean time, just cause to blush, who
denies to the Churches of God, that due power, which the Learned of all
professions do grant unto her.

For the Non-conformists, I have already showed, that they consent fully with
us. Page 23.
Notwithstanding some thing more, I will here speak of them; and the rather,
because time was, when Mr. Paget did esteem them, to be a multitude of Godly
and learned Ministers; and was (or at least made a show he was) of their
judgment and practice.

He that reads the controversy between Downame and the Replyer, shall there
see this very point* betwixt Mr. Paget and us, largely handled. The Doctor
stoutly maintains Mr. Paget position; viz. that particular Churches are
dependent, and stand under another Ecclesiastical authority out of
themselves. The other says otherwise, and often affirms Li. 2. par. 2. p.
104.
, that the administration of all Church Matters, at first was in every
congregation, the right in the Church: the execution in the Presbytery
thereof. For this purpose he instanceth Cenchrea Li. 1. part. 2. p. 22.23.
; howsoever it was the port of Corinth, and not far from it, as Radcliffe or
lime House to London, yet it was, a distinct Church, from that of Corinth, and
alike endued with full power Note.
of Ecclesiastical gouvernment.

Mr. Parker speaks down right in this thing, and prooves by Text of
Scriptures; judgment of ancient Fathers, Confession of Protestant Divines, and
many unanswereable reasons: that Pol. Eccl. l. 3. c. 6.
all Ecclesiastical power is always in the whole congregation, from hence it
flows, as from the fountain, and to the same it returns as to the sea.

And here by the way, I do demand of you Mr. Paget, seeing every Minister (as
the Learned Par. in 1. Cor. 3.2 Park. Pol. Eccl. l. 3. c. 12. Tilen. Specu.
Antichri. p. 14. D. Whitak. de con. qu. 5. p. 118.
rightly say) is the Churches servant, and under her authority, and
administreth for her. What warrant then, you and others have, to make any
decree or sentence, against the mind and liking of a whole Church; and to
require them to submit thereto. Me thinks such doing, becomes not servants:
And whither this be not, to be Lords over Gods Heritage, (contrary to Peter's
charge) I desire the humble and Godly to consider.

In Title page.
Unto these we will add the Author of the English Puritanisme; a Book (as
the Publisher reports) containing the maine opinions of the rigidest sort of
those that are called Puritaines He means the foreward professors, which
stand out against the Ceremonies.
, in the Realm of England; among other truths.

1. They hold and maintain that every company, Congregation, or Assembly of
men, ordinarily joining together in the true worship of God, is a true visible
Church of Christ, and that the same title is improperly attributed, unto any
other convocations, Synods, Societies, combinations, or Assemblies whatsoever.

2. They hold that all such Churches or Congregations, communicating after that
manner together, in Divine worship, are in all Ecclesiastical matters equal,
and of the same power and authority, and that by the word and will of God, they
ought to have the same spiritual Privileges, Prerogatives, Officers,
Administrations, Orders, and forms of Divine worship.

3. They hold that Christ Jesus has not subjected any Church or Congregation
of his, note this.
to any other superior Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, then unto that which is
within it self: so that if a whole Church, or Congregation, shall err in any
matter of faith or Religion, no other Church or spiritual Church Officers,
have (by any warrant from the Word of God) power to censure, punish or
control the same; But are only to advise them: and so to leave their souls
to the immediate judgment of Christ, and their bodies to the sword of the
civil Magistrate, etc.

4. They hold that every established Church, ought (as a special prerogive,
wherewith she is endued by Christ) to have power and liberty, to choose their
own spiritual and Ecclesiastical Officers, etc.

5. They hold that if in this choice any particular Churches shall err, that
none upon earth, but the Civil Magistrate, has power to control, or correct
them for it, etc.

6. They hold that the Ecclesiastical Officers and Ministers of one Church,
ought not to bear any Ecclesiastical office in another, but ought to be tied
unto that Congregation, of which they are members, and by which they are
elected into office, etc.

There is nothing here said, but many others of our learned Countrymen, have
said the like, as D. Ames Casconsc. l. 4. c. 29.
, Mr. Banes Dioces. Trial. conclus. 4.
, Mr. Bates Page 66.
, Mr. Fenner Against Bridge page 15.16.
, Mr. Vdall Demonst. Discipl. page 24.25.
, etc.

In the English Church at Franckford in Queen Mary's days, it was agreed
upon, that Discourse of troub. Frank. page 115.
the Ministers and Seniours, severally and jointly shall have no authority, to
make any manner of Decrees, or Ordinances, to bind the Congregation, or any
member thereof: But shall execute such ordinances, as shall be made by the
Congregation, and to them delivered. Again, None shall be excommunicated,
until the matter be first heared by the whole Church. That the Ministers and
Seniours, and every of them; be subject to Ecclesiastical discipline, as other
private members of the Church be.

Neither shall Mr. Hookers In his answer to Mr. Pagets 20. quest. Answ. 11.
Testimony be unremembred; who affirms, that a particular Congregation, may
lawfully and without sin, call a Minister, without or against the approbation
of the Classis. And he gives this reason for it: They which had complete and
perfect Ministers before any Classis; had power, fully to call them: But a
particular Congregation, had perfect and complete Ministers, perfectly and
completely called, before any Classis. Ergo, etc.

Thus Reader thou may perceive, that Mr. Paget has left the way of
Non-conformitie, yea and shows himself to it, a great adversary. Indeed so
sore a one, that in his own words I may truly say; As Herod to kill one
infant, Page 73.
spared not to kill a multitude of other infants: so he, that he might
undermine us, and blow us up, into the air, he cared not, nor spared not with
the gunpowder of his fiery contention and reproaches, to blow up with us, a
multitude of Godly and learned Ministers, being of the same judgment.

Howsoever I have mentioned already some testimonies of the most ancient times,
after the Apostles downward, even while any soundnes of the Gospel did show it
self in the world. Notwithstanding, that this right and due power of the
Church, for which we stand; may not be thought a Noveltie, (as Mr. Paget
jestingly intimates) and so unbeseeming Christians to embrace it. I have
thought it convenient, to write some thing further herein; that is, to show
that the best approoved Authors, after the Apostles, are directly with us, in
this thing also: affirming, that every particular visible Church of Christ,
has power to exercise Ecclesiastical gouvernment, and all other Gods
spiritual ordinances, in and for it self immediately from Christ. And this
(God willing I will do) in order, according to the times in which they lived.

To begin first with Ignatius, (who was, as some think, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 22.
Pastor of the Church at Antioch) in his writings we find it manifested, that
it was then Anno 90.
the manner of visible Churches, to come together in one place Ad Philadelp. ad
Magnes. a Trall.
, to worship God, having Bishops, Elders and Deacons unto their Officers, whom
the people freely choose by voices, or lifting up of hands. Is it not hence
apparent, that Congregations in this age, were free, and could exercise among
themselves, all Gods ordinances.

Tertullian relating the manner of Christian Assemblies in his time Anno 200
, says, Tertull. Apol. c. 29.
They came together into one Congregation, for to pray unto God, for to rehearse
the Divine Scriptures, and with holy Words to nourish faith, stir up hope,
and fasten confidence. And they used exhortations, reproves and divine Censure.

Origin In Iosu. Hom. 7. Anno 225.
writes much to the same purpose: Such as were brought in the third place, for
sin unto the Congregation: if they stood obstinate, by the judgment of the
whole Church were excommunicated from the body, the Elders of the Church
pronouncing the sentence. Observe here, he says not, that the matter was
carried to a Classis, and there first determined, etc. but names only the
Congregation, and Elders thereof; notwithstanding had there been any such
superior judicatorie Assembly, is it likely he would have omitted it, and
mentioned a subordinate and inferior one.

Cyprian Bishop of Carthage Anno 225 Cypr. l. 3. Epist. 14. and 10.
shows how causes were not handled, before the Elders, but the whole
multitude, without whose consent also no thing was done. And speaking of
calling to the Ministry, he says Li. 1. Ep. 4
, the people have power principally to choose worthy Ministers, and refuse
unworthy ones. What can be more full and absolute to our purpose then this?

Eusebius Anno 305
testifyeth that the Churches of the most famous Cities, were in their
constitution first; but one ordinary constant Congregation, as Jerusalem Eus.
l. 3.11.
, Ephesus L. 3.28.
, Alexandria 3.13.
, Hierapolis 4.1.
, Corinth 3.32.
, Sardis 4.22.
, etc. This being so, then it follows, that primitively they were independent;
and stood not under any other Ecclesiastical authority; out of themselves.

Athanasius often says, that Anno 330 Epist. in pers ad Orthodox. and Eist ad
Soli. vit. dege. and Epist. con^. Nicae. c. 9. Eccl. Hist.
elections, excommunications, etc. according to the Apostles precept, ought to
be done in the public Congregation by the Ministers, they taking first the
peoples voice or consent.

To these we will add Epiphanius, Jerome, Ambrose, Cyrill, Hillarie and Greg.
Nazienzen; writers in one age Anno 380
. Touching Ecclesiastical Gouvernment, these to this purpose speak:
Particular Churches may lawfully ordain their own Bishops without other
Presbyters assisting them Epiph conc. Haer. 73.
; and among themselves excommunicate offenders Id. l. 1. Haeres. 30. To. 2.
haer. 5
. In every Congregation there ought to be a Senate or Assembly of Elders Ieron.
ad Gal. qu. 10.
. The power of choosing them, is in the people Ad Rustic. Hill. ad Constable. Augu.
Ciril in Ioh. 20.21.
, these with spiritual bridles order men Amb. Off. l. 1. c. 1. Nazia^z. in
Orat. f^r. de patr.
, etc.

What more certain, then that the thing, for which we stand, is here
justified by all these Ancients. They have not written dishonorably of the
Churches of God; sought to disable them, from practicing Christ's ordinances;
subjected them to other Ecclesiastical authority, out of themselves: But
contrary wise acknowledged (as the truth is) that every particular
Congregation, has an intyre jurisdiction, within it self, and so power and
liberty to choose her own Officers, excommunicate offenders, and the like: I
say without the approbation of Classis, yea against it; if there be just cause.

There are others besides, which bear witness to this truth; viz. Augustine Li.
1. c. 17 de doct. Chr.
, Chrysostom De Sacerd. l 3. c. 4.
, Basil In Constit. Monach. l. 4.14. and 6.2. and 7. c. 35.
, Socrates Lib. de Offic.
Isidorus Ad Eugen.
, Bernard Conci Cart. 3. Can. 22. Nicen. Conc. 330. Council. Constantinop. Anno
682.
, etc. Moreover some Counsels have granted so much; and Christian Emperors
Distinct. 61. cap. Sacror. Codex de Episco. l. 38. and 29.
by their Laws confirmed it. Of all which it may be, another time we shall
have occasion, to speak more fully.

Touching Reformed Churches; If we may take the Confession of their faith, for
testimony, then surely we have their consent also with us. The Confession of
the Bohemian Churches Harm. Conf. chapter 14
has these words, The keys (that is Ecclesiastical Gouvernment) are given in
trust, and granted to the Pastors, and to each several Ecclesiastical
Society, (that is, ordinary Congregation) whither they be small or great. To
this the Churches under the Palsgrave Public Catechism. in the end of part. 2.
likewise consented.

For election of Ministers, the Helvetian Art. 16.17.
Confession says, It is right when it is done by the Churches voice giving,
and the laying on of hands of the Minister. The Confession of the French Art.
30.
Churches is the same; so Auspurge Art. 14.
Also the public order set forth in these Low Countries Art. 31.
, accords therewith. The Synod of Middelburgh 1581.
has these words, Let the election of Ministers, be in the power of the
Church, and let it be done by voices publickely in the Temple. The Synod of
Tilleburgh in Nasovia, determined the like, as Zepperus Polit. Eccl. in fine.
writes.

There is extant a public order, published in Middelburgh Anno 1602. agreeing
with all the former; viz. Ministers-must be chosen with the free consent of the
Elders, and the whole Congregation. By the like authority as they were
elected, they may be deposed: But nothing herein must be attempted, without the
determination of the whole Church.

What those Synods were, of whom Mr. Paget speaks in page 66. who decreed
that particular Congregations should not practice among themselves, all Gods
ordinances; I do not yet know; but this I know, that no Reformed Church has
made this an Article of their faith. And therefore it is certain, if such a
thing be it was only the invention of some particular men.

For Conclusion now of this Section: Howsoever I have alleidged the opinions of
many learned men: Notwithstanding it is the word of God, which I appeal unto,
for to have the matter in controversy betwixt us, only tried by. and herein I
do no more, then others do, which know, they have the truth on their side;
namely, to call their opposites unto the Scriptures, and to require of them, to
stand unto the undeceiveable sentence and judgment thereof.

Thus the Protestants D. Whita. de cont. qu. 3 c. 3. D. Morton Apolo. Cath. p.
2. l. 1. c. 32. Sutclif. def. Pont. Romans l. 2. c. 9. p. 132. B. Jew. Apo. par.
2. c. 5. D. 1.
do with the Papists: And the Reformists Par. Pol. Eccl. l. 1. c. 24. c Dever.
Eccl. Refor. rat.
again with them. And for this purpose has Zanchy a worthy speech in his
writing unto D. Knols: All things touching worship and Discipline, ought to be
examined, not by the uncertain rule, of humans judgment, but by the
touchstone of Divine Scripture.

SECTION IX.
THat those, who have read Mr. Pagets Book, may not think that I have
purposely omitted any thing (his jests, slanders, and unchristian terms
excepted) which carries with it, the show of any matter, touching the maine
points in question. I have thought good in this Section, to set down some
brief answers unto certain colorable (or rather carnal) pretenses, which he
uses in the defense of himself and cause.

His first reason is this: If particular Preface.
Congregations should not stand under any other Ecclesiastical authority out
of themselves, manifold disorders, confusion and dissipation of Churches would
follow.

Answ. 1. When God has established an order for the administration of his
own house, what presumption of man dares change it? Thinks he, that he is
wiser, then the Almighty; and can by his foolish way, and devise, bring more
peace and profit to Gods house, then the way of the all wise God? But what will
not dust and ashes presume to do, against his maker? And that with show of
convenience, and to correct and reform that, which they conceive to be
imperfect in his doings? But it seems in the mean time, that these little
consider, how straightly the Lord has forbidden such practices; and what
dreadful plagues he threatens against men for it. As Mr. Paget therefore
wishes others, to take heed what new forms of Churches, and
Church-gouvernment, Preface.
they frame unto themselves, or command unto others: So I desire that he
himself will make a proffitable use of his own counsel.

2. Be it well considered, that God always abhors all good intentes of men,
that are contrary to the good pleasure of his will, revealed in his word. The
Church (says Whitaker De Romans Pont. cont. 4. qu. 1. p. 16.
) must not be gouverned as the wit of man thinks fit; but as Christ the Lord
and King thereof will have it.

3. This objection taken here up by Mr. Paget, is the very same which the
Papists, and those that way affected use, for to have Ecclesiastical
Gouvernment, by Presbyters rejected, and their own Popish Hierarchy,
everywhere received and practiced; viz. because the putting by of the later,
tends Sarav. de Tripli. Epis. in Prolog. Sand. de visibl. Monar. l. 5. c. 4.
Sculting. Hier. Anarc. l. 10. c. 20. l. 11.119.137 etc.
unto all mischief, and the establishing of the former Whitg. Tract. 3. c. 4
div. 4. and divis. 8. page 169. Lo compl. Chu. p. 164
, causes uproares in the Church, dissipateth it, and overthrowes all good
order therein.

4. If particular Congregations must loose their right and power, because of
the offenses, which some men have committed in the exercise thereof. Then
surely by the same reason, (if, Mr. Pagets reasoning be worth any thing) ought
Classes and Synods, to lay down that superior authority, which they have
taken over many Churches; because they in many things, many times have
offended, in, and about the execution. And this I am sure, no good Christian
will deny, I could give diverse instances for it; but it needs not: Only it is
not amiss to set down Nazianzens Epist. 42. ad Proc.
words; who was an Elder, or Bishop: I am minded (says he) to shun all
assemblies of Bishops, because I never saw any good event in any Council, that
did not rather increase, then diminish our evils: Their contention and
ambition passes my speech. VVhither things are better carried now, then they
were in his time, I will not, nor am able to judge.

5. If the infirmities of the people, be a good reason to take away their
liberty, in practicing among themselves all Gods ordinances: then the contrary
virtues, which oftentimes have been found in them, (as instaying the rage of
the Scribes and Pharisees Mat. 21.26. Act. 3.26.
; in preferring, sincere Christians before Arrians Zezo. l. 7. c. 7.
; and being themselves sound in the faith Theod l. 2. cap. 7.
; when their Ministers have been Heretics:) is a good reason to maintain
their liberty still.

Another thing which he talks much off, Page 72.
is, that the power which the Classis exercises, is ancient; and hence names
it, the old beaten path, Page 105.
etc.

Answ. 1. Sundry errors are as ancient as the Apostles time, yea began before
the most famous Churches in the world were planted. Therefore as Cyprian Epist.
63.
says, We must not regard what any others did before us, or thought fit to be
done, but what Christ did, who was before all.

2. Howsoever Mr. Paget, for the credit of his cause, names it, the old and
ancient Discipline; yet sure I am, to prove it so, he never will, nor can.
There are many (and I think he knows it) which do affirm, that the
Ecclesiastical Gouvernment, by Classes and Synods, is a weed that grew many
years after the Apostles. A late devise Bilson perp. gouver. c. 16. p. 387
, and that in all antiquity, there does not appear any one stepped thereof
Sutclif. Discipl. c. 8. p. 138.
; Also that at Geneva, subjecting of Churches to this order first begun
Brancroft surv. c. 22. p. 353. Comp. Chapter p. 91. 93. 94.
. And before Calvin came there, every Congregation was free in it self Hook.
Ecc. Polit. Pref.
.

Touching these Assertions: I cannot see how Mr. Paget, or any other is able to
disproove them. It is acknowledged, on all sides, that in the first hundred
years after the Apostles, Ministers and Brethren of sundry Congregations, met
sometimes; to confer mutually together of common Church-affaires; yet so, as
every particular Congregation, had always (as the Centuries Cent. l. 2. c. 4.
p. 391.
write) power and authority in themselves, to choose their Officers, reject
Heretics, excommunicate offenders, and the like.

So again, for a hundred years next after; we read in Eusaebeus L. 3. c. 22.
L. 5. c. 16. L. 3. c. 19.
, Iraeneus L. 3. c. 1.2.3.
, Nicephorus L. 4. c. 23.
, and others, that neighbor Ministers came often together, when there was any
dangerous error broched, or weighty points to be determined, serving for
general good: but this they did of liberty, not of duty; partly to preserve
mutual society; (as Zipperus L. 3. c. 7.
says) and partly that they might hereby be the more able, to resist
adversaries, as Mr. Parker Eccl. Pol. p. 329. 330
says.

This ancient combination, we hold to be lawful and necessary, that is; when
there is just occasion: that then Ecclesiastical Officers and others, do come
together, to confer of things; yea and conclude (if they can) what they judge
meet and good: Notwithstanding whatsoever they do in such cases, the same is
of no force at all, (I mean as to be counted a Church-act, or sentence;)
unless the Church first know it, and give their free consent unto it; the
reason is, because the power and authority, to make Church-acts, is in the body
of the Congregation, as we have before showed. As for any other kind of
combinations, of many Ministers together, otherwise then we have here related;
as the word of God, shows it not, neither does antiquity; If by antiquity the
first and best ages of Christian Churches be understood.

I will not here dispute how things went, about Constantines time, because as
the Learned say; viz. Casaubon Ad Card. Peron. Obs. 4. p. 30. 31
, D. Whitaker De Romans Pont. cont. 4 page 5.
, Mornaeus Hist. Pap. page 37. 38.
, Brightman In Apoc. ch 2 p. 67.
, and others; that men began then to devise a new order and manner of
Gouverning Churches, according as they thought fittest, to agree with the
times. And so much we find testified by Cyprian De Lapsis. Epist. l. 4. c. 4.
, Eusaebius Lib. 8. cap. 1.
, and Ambrose In 1. Tim. 5.
. For the change it self, This new created Discipline, was not Classical, but
rather Episcopal, so that howsoever they are, both children of the earth,
notwithstanding this I do affirm, that of the two, the Hierarchy is the
oldest.

And howsoever Mr. Beza is very streyt to the people; hardly granting the
liberty which the very Jesuits Maldon. upon Mat. 18.
do: yet he is constreyned to confess, that the first Deacons were chosen by
them, but (says he In respons. ad Tract. de Ministr. Euang. de grad c. 22.
fol. 154.155.
this manner of election was neither essential, nor perpetual. For after when
experience taught that confusion and ambition (rising by the occasion of the
multitude increasing) was to be prevented: The Synod of Laodicea prudently
took order by their 13 Canon, that the election of such, as were chosen to the
sacred Ministry, should not be permitted to the multitude or people.

My purpose is not to say any thing now of that Synod: how, of the 59 Canons,
mentioned by Gratian Distinct. 16.
, some are false; others foolish; and many very superstitious. This only I
desire the Reader to note, whereas it is here objected, that this Synod,
prohibited the body of the Congregation, from using that liberty and power,
which they before always had in Ecclesiastical gouvernment; and gave it (as
he says a little after) to assembly of Pastors: By this testimony then, that
which I said, but now is further confirmed; namely, that the Classical
authority is neither divine nor ancient; for this Synod of Laodicea was held
after the death of Iovinian the Emperor: Anno 370. or thereabout.

Thirdly he pretends that the Discipline, which he stands for, is a
sanctuary against Tyranny Pref.
and if men had not liberty to appeal unto Classes, they should have cause to
bewail their slaverie and bondage Page 83.
.

Answ. 1. It is a strange course, when there arises a controversy touching two
contrary opinions, which of them is true, and to be embraced; to draw the
resolution hereof, to the consideration of the usefullnes of the opinions, or
practices questioned. As if, because a thing is useful, therefore it is to be
concluded it is true: And not rather in case, it be found to be true, yea the
very truth of God, the rule whereof is Gods word, therefore we ought to
conclude, it is useful, and be careful to make such use of it, as we are
commanded: But what more common now a days, then for me, to obtrude their
own devises upon people, upon a bare pretense of the usefullnes of them in
man's judgment: But in the mean time do not those which take such courses,
for the maintenance of their way, manifest hereby, that their cause is
desperate, and that it seems, they have no grounds, for their opinions out of
the word of God I say, when they run out, unto such divinations as these, for
the supporting of their laboring and wavering cause.

As for example, if the Scriptures do directly teach: That every particular
Congregation has power to exercise Ecclesiastical Gouvernment, and all Gods
other spiritual ordinances, in, and for it self, immediately from Christ;
shall we not embrace this for a truth, unles it appear in our fantasy more
useful then the contrary.

2. Let it again be observed, that the Papists and Hierarchy, for their
Discipline, give the very same reason; viz. to preserve the unity and peace of
the Church Duaran. Did. 8.
, for the avoiding of sehismes and faction; D. White of the Church l. 3. p.
157.158
that there may be no Tyranny and oppression among Brethren Sand. de visib.
Mon. l. 5 c. 4.
etc. yea the corrupting at first of Church-gouvernment, was done to prevent
evil Hieron. ad Engr.
; but as one says D. Whita. cont. 4 pref. p. 3.
the remedy was worse then the desease. And truly, so we may say of all
devises of men, brought into the worship of God; although the Authors do it
to prevent this, or that evil: notwithstanding the invention it self, prooves
(and we have seen it by experience) more hurtful, then the thing pretended
against.

3. I do deny that this Gouvernment by Classes and Synods, serves better for
the Churches wellfaire, then that, which the Apostles instituted; and the
primitive Churches first practiced. Wise Politicians in their institutions of
Gouvernment, do hold for an infallible maxim, that to reform corruptions and
abuses in states, a better course cannot be taken, then to reduce things to
their primitive original. Hereto agrees D. VVhites Of the Church l. 2. page 49.
, saying: The first in any kind or sort of things, is truest and best.

4. If it should be granted, that particular Congregations, by this kind of
gouvernment, shall have peace, profit, credit and other worldly respects: yet
this is no sufficient reason to induce them to embrace it. For 1. we must
seek peace by lawful means. 2. Outward quietness, is not always necessary
for the Church; the Truth is like unto Camomill, the more you press it down,
the faster it grows, and spreads further, and smells sweeter. 3. Religion
can subsist, without external peace: I say, safely in the midst of
contentions. 4. It is better to want this freedom, of which he speaks,
holding fast the truth; then in sin to have it, and perish for it. 5. It is a
rule among Lawers Bartol. Distinct. page 2.
, that public profit, must not take place against Law; this holds firm, in
all cases of Religion. To conclude then, in Nazianzens De Moderat. in
disceptat. Servand.
words: Let no man be wiser then is meet; not more just then the Law, more
bright then the sun, streaghter then the rule, nor pretend more obedience then
God requires, etc. This he speaks of Discipline.

Another of his reasons, is this: Page 72.153*
The power for which he stands, has been determined, limited and agreed
upon, in many National Synods. And all Reformed Churches use it.

Answ. 1. It is a received opinion among the Learned, that Councills may err;
yea, and often have; as I could show in many particulars. Besides who knows
not, that almost all the Fathers (as they are called) were infected with the
error of Millenaries. And almost all the Greek writers and Latin, with the
doctrine of free will, merits, invocation on the Saints, and the like. And
therefore as one well says Sibrand. Lubbert. de princ. Christ. l. 7. c. 10. p.
694.
, We must not conclude a thing to be Apostolical, because the Church
observes it. And to the same effect write some Papists Tho Aqui in quod l. 9.
Art. ult. Abb. Panor. de elect. c. significat.
.

2. These testimonies are all human; and therefore it is enought if we say,
with our Lord Mat. 19.8.
From the beginning it was not so; Or as he said once: Woman what have I to
do with thee. So in matters of faith, what have we to do with men. Away with
men's writings, (says Augustine) let the voice of God sound unto us: Let the
Book of God, come amongst us; Let us hear what Christ says, and what the
truth speaks. For our judgments and expositions without these witnesses,
have no credit, says Origin.

3. This reason, is the same, which the Papists use; viz. the Decrees Whitak.
cont. 4. Qu. 5. c. 10. Sarav. de Tripl. Episc. in Prolog. Io. Ainsw. Large
writing. 2.
of Synods, the opinions of the Fathers, the custom of men, and practice of
the Church. But mark what answer our Protestant Divines make to it: No D.
Rain. Confer. p. 195.257.459. D. Bilson to the Semina. part. 4. page
360.300.301.299. D. More. Apol. p. 2. c. 14. Casaub. Epi. ad Per. Car. p. 32.33.
human proof is sure in Divinity, truth is not to be tried by consent of
Fathers: Never shall they persuade us any thing in matter of Religion, which
they cannot prove by Moses and the Prophets. Make us good proofs out of
Scriptures; Otherwise if ye cite, not only 9, but 9 skore Fathers, we regard
it not. Now this answer will serve me as well; seeing Mr. Paget and they, do
use one and the same reasoning.

Another objection which he has against us; is: Because we have not framed
our accusation and protestation against him, before this present; seeing the
practice has continued among us many years, etc.

Answ. Formy part, I never knew, that our Congregation was in such deep
bondage; until Mr. Hookers troubles began; but thought verily, that our own
Eldership, with the Brethren jointly together, had full power among themselves,
to practice every ordinance of God. And the thing specially, which induced me
so to think, was his own words Ar^ow against sep. page 116.
, written to Mr. Ainsworth; reporting how he was first made our Minister, he
says: The Dutch Eldership in this City being desired, has for their counsel
and help in his ordination; deputed three of their Brethren, to assist us in
this business, etc. this they did not, as assuming authority Note.
to themselves over us: but in our name, and by our request. Being now
established, when as of late another Minister was called unto our Congregation,
we used not their help herein as before; but his ordination was performed by
our own Ministry and Eldership without them.

If the Classis assumed not then, any authority unto themselves over us, how
comes it to pass, that they do it now? Or how will it hang together, that
their power is ancient; and yet 20 or 30 years past, they used it not. This to
me seems gross contradiction; and that he eats his own words, as Saturn
did his children.

But I guess what has caused him, to tell two contrary tales; namely, the
difference of the people against whom he has written. The first were
Separatists; and therefore no marvel though against them he pleaded for a
free Congregation: for he well knew that unless he went this way to work;
he should fall with dishonor in the controversy between them. The other are
the oppressed and burdened members of the English Church in Amsterdam. Now to
keep these under their burden and oppression, he sees that he must let go
his former hold; and on the contrary say, we are not a free Congregation, but
stand under another Ecclesiastical authority out of our selves.

Thus a good wit will serve a disputant in good stead: for by it (if he list)
he can as the Poets fable of their Proteus, turn himself into all shapes.
Like him, who having made an excellent speech in the commendation of justice,
afterward spoke as wittily to the contrary: showing that there was no justice
at all in the world. Or like a Gentleman, of whom I have heard, that in an
Assembly of States, such as we call Parliaments, was absolutely the best
speaker; yet nothing respected; and that for a most sufficient reason; which
was this: They knew full well, he could speak as well, and as moovingly to
that which was quite contrary.

And I willingly profess, that Mr. Paget has a rare faculty this way, to
turn a thing, which way he will; and make it say, either I or no, or both
when he pleases. Notwithstanding this I must tell him, the very thing which
he speaks off, touching Mr. Robinsons Book, is now true, concerning his own
former writing: It is sick of King Iehorams incurable desease, Arrow page 59.
the guts of it fall out day by day; Yea he openly pluckes out, some of
bowels thereof, with his own hands.

There are some other objections, of the like nature, which he uses against
us; partly to disgrace our persons; partly our cause; as that we do not agree
among our selves, touching the due power of the Church: That the practice which
we stand for is Brownisme, etc.

Answ. Such cavillations the Celsus page 802. Lactant. l. 4. c. ult. Isod.
Pelus. Epist. 90.
Heathens have used sometimes against Christian Religion; so Papists Bellar. de
not. Eccl.
against Protestants; and the like, they Brone. Sermon. page 103.104. Casend.
Answ. to Abstract. p. 210. etc. Whitg. p. 888. Lo comp. cha. p. 47. D. Bridge.
l. p. 134.
against Reformists. Now I will not stand to make any particular answer hereto,
because the folly and vanity of it, is sufficiently showed by others Jew. Def.
Apol. p. 3.8.2.1. Whitak. cont. 4. qu. 5. c. 8. Sutclift. de Eccl. p. 109. D.
Mort. Apol* 1. l. 2.
; who have had occasion hereto-fore to reply unto such idle objections.

This only for conclusion, I desire, may be noted; that whereas he seeks to
disgrace Christ's Gouvernment, and to have his own honored and embraced; in
this he does, as one said in Tully of Hortensis, when he immoderately praised
eloquence, that he would have lift her up to heaven, that he himself might
have gone up with her. So I perceive Mr. Paget would feign have, the Classical
Discipline advanced, that he by it, might have worldly credit also.

Ioh. 13.17. If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
For were read where page 3. l. 13. For failing read faylings p. 4. l. 22. For
partialty read partiality p. 10. l. 33. For contended read contented p. 12. l.
15. For take read talk p. 15. l. 26. For word read world p. 33. l. 27. For
conquest read conquer p. 51. l. 22. For notwithstand read notwithstanding p.
74. l. 15. For touching read touchstone p. 77. l. 25.

