TWO TREATISES. I. Of the nature and practice of repentance. II. Of the combat
of the flesh and spirit.


Printed by JOHN LEGATE Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1593. And are
to be sold at the sign of the Sun in Paul's Churchyard in London.

TO THE READER whosoever.
GOD has bestowedon us great prosperity and peace with plenty of all
temporal blessings that heart can wish for many years in this land.

Prosperity abused has bin the occasion of many grievous sins against the
first and secondtable: specially of Atheism, neglect of Gods worship, contempt
of the word, profanation of the Sabbath, abuse of the Sacraments, etc.

These and such like sins have long called down for judgments from heaven
upon us: and the rather, because the preaching of the word has little
prevailed to bring us to any amendment of life.

Whereupon God has now begun to cause his judgments to seize upon us,
specially by plague and pestilence: and that even in the very principal part
of this land: whereby he him self does (as Job says) round us in the ear,
Job. 36. 15.
and preach repentance to us.

Wherefore it stands us now in hand if ever, to look about us: and if we have
not repented to begin to repent: if we have in former time repented, to do it
more earnestly.

If so be that we shall harden our hearts both against his word and judgments,
and put far from us the evil day: undoubtedly we must needs look for
judgments far more terrible then ever we felt as yet; if not eternal
destruction. Let us be advised by the old world, who made light of Noah's
warning, and were drowned in the flood: by Lots sons in law, who Genesis 19. 14.
took their fathers counsel for mockage and were burnt with fire and
brimstone from heaven: by the foolish virgins, who were sleeping when they
should have been furnishing their lamps, and were shut from the marriage of the
lamb.

And to direct thee somewhat in the practice of repentance, I have penned this
small treatise: use it for thy benefit, and see thou be a doer of it: unless
thou will be a wilful murderer and shed the blood of thine own soul.

And whereas there have bin published here to fore in English two sermons of
Repentance, one by M. Bradford Martyr, the other by M. Arthur Dent: sermons
indeed which have done much good: my meaning is not to add thereunto, or to
teach any other doctrine, but only to renew and revive the memory of that which
they have taught.

Neither let it trouble thee that the principal divines of this age, whom in
this treatise I follow, may seem to be at difference in treating of
repentance. For some make it a fruit of faith containing two parts,
mortification, and vivification: some make faith a part of it, by deviding it
into contrition, faith, new obedience. The difference is not in the substance
of doctrine, but in the logical manner of handling it. And the difference of
handling arises of the diverse acception of repentance. It is taken two ways
generally and particularly. Generally for the whole conversion of a sinner, and
so it may contain contrition, faith, and new obedience under it. It is taken
particularly for the renovation of the life and behavicur: and so it is a
fruit of faith. And this only sense do I follovv in this treatise.

I have added hereto a fevv lines of the combat between the flesh and the
spirit: because repentance and this combat are joined together, and the one is
not practiced without the other, as appears by resolving Psalm 51.

Spirit. Have mercy on me, O God, according verse. 1.
to thy loving kindness.


Flesh. Yea, but this thine adultery comprehends infinite sins: therefore
look for no pardon.


Spirit. According to the multitude of thy compassions put away mine iniquities.


Flesh. This sin has taken such deep place in thee: that it will be hardly
pardoned.


Spirit. Wash me thoroughly from mine verse. 2.
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.


Flesh. Thy special trespass is against man.


Spirit. Against thee, against thee, only have verse. 4.
I sinned, etc.


Flesh. Except this one sin, thy life is unblameable.


Spirit. Behold I was borne in iniquity, etc. verse. 5.



Yea, the best man that is, in the practice of godliness often appears to be
unlike himself: the cause is this spiritual combat. The flesh other whiles
makes him wail and mourn and go drooping: presently after the spirit puts
into him (as we say) the heart of grass, and makes him triumph against the
flesh, the devil the world. Moses was courageous at the Exodus 14. 13. Number. 20.
11, 12. Job. 1. 21. and 3. 1. Psalm, 6. 1, 8. and 10. 17. and 41. 9, 10, 11.
red sea; but he failed at the waters of strife. Job first praises God, and
after blasphemeth. David is often fainting in misery, yet by and by revived.
Wherefore there is good cause why the consideration of repentance and the
combat should go together: that no man, after he has begun to repent, might
dream of ease to his flesh; as though we should go to heaven in beds of
down: but rather that we might be resolved, that when we begin to do any
thing pleasing unto God, then we must look for nothing but continual
molestations from our vile and wicked natures.

Written Anno 1593. the 17. of November, which is the Coronation day of our
dread Sovereign Queen ELIZABETH; whose reign God long continue. William
Perkins.

Faults amended.
Page 73. lin. 16. for, this first, read, this sense. p. 75. l. 3. speak. p.
83. in marg. place Zach. 7. 11. with Ephesians. 4. 19. p. 87. l. 23. for, and yet,
read, and the.

CAP. I. WHAT REPENtance is.
REpentance is a work of grace arising of a godly sorrow: whereby a man turns
from all his sins unto God, and brings forth fruits worthy amendment of
life.

I call repentance a work: because it seems not to be a quality, or virtue,
or habit: but an action of a repentant sinner. which appears by the ser mons
of the Prophets and Apostles, which run in this tenor, Repent, turn to God,
amend your lives, etc. Whereby they intimate, that repentance is a work to be
done.

Again, Repentance is not every kind of work, but a work of grace. because
it can not be practiced of any, but of such as be in the estate of grace.
Reasons are these. I. No man can repent, unless he first hate sin, and love
righteousness; and none can hate sin, unless he be sanctified; and he that is
sanctified is justified: and he that is justified must needs have that faith
which unites him to Christ, and makes him bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh. Wherefore he that repentes is justified and sanctified, and made a
member of Christ by faith. II. He that turns to God must first of all be
turned of God: and after that we are turned, then we repent. Surely Ierem. 31.
19.
after I was converted I repented: and after that I was instructed I smote upon
my thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach
of my youth.

Some may object, that repentance goes before all grace, because it is first
preached. The first sermon that ever was made was of repentance preached by God
himself in paradise to our first parents. And ever since the sermons of all the
prophets and Apostles and of all faithful ministers have had repentance for
their beginning and scope. The answer hereto may be this. If we respect the
order of nature, there be other graces of God which go before repentance*
because a man's conscience must in some part be settled touching his
reconciliatio^ with God jn Christ, before he can begin to repent. wherefore
justification and sanctification in order of nature go before repentance. But
if we respect time, grace and repentance are both togi there. So soon as there
is fire so soon it is hot: and so soon as a man is regenerate, so soon he
repents. If we respect the outward manifestation of these twain, repentance
goes before all other graces: because it first of all appears outwardly.
Regeneration is like the sap of the tree that lies hid within the bark:
repentance is like the bud that speedily shows itself, before either blossom,
leaf, or fruit appear: yea, all other graces of the heart which are needful
to salvation, are made manifest by repentance. And for this cause Repentance
(as I take it) is first preached.

I add further, that repentance rises of a godly sorrow in the heart, as Paul
teaches. Godly sorrow 2. Cor. 7. 10.
causes repentance unto salvation never to be repented of. It is called a
godly sorrow, or a sorrow according to God, that it may be distinguished from
worldly sorrow: which is a grief arising of the apprehension of the wrath of
God and other miseries; as fear of men, loss of good name, calamities in
goods and other things, which in this life follow as punishments of sin:
whereas the godly sorrow causes grief for sin, because it is sin. And it
makes any man, in whom it is, to be of this disposition and mind, that if
there were no conscience to accuse, no devil to terrify, no judge to arraigne
and condemn, no hell to torment, yet he would be humbled and brought on his
knees for his sins, because he has offended a loving, merciful, and long
suffering God.

Further I say, that repentance stands in turning again to God. Man at the
first was made a goodly creature in the image of God having fellowshippe with
him, whereby he dwelt in God and God in him. By sin there is a partition
made between God and man: who is alienated Isa. 59. 2. ephesians. 4. 18.
and estraunged from God, and is become the child of wrath, a firebrand of
hell, the prodigal child going from his father into a far country, the
straying nay the lost sheep. Now when men have grace to repent, then they
begin to renew this fellowship, and turn again to God. And the very essence
or nature of repentance consistes in this turning. Which Paul does seem to
intimate, when he says, That he showed both to Jew and Gentile, Acts. 26. 20
that they should repent and turn to God, and do works worthy amendment of
life. In which words he sets down unto us a full description of repentance.

Again I say, that repentance is a turning from sin, because it does not
abolish or change the substance of body or soul, or any of the faculties
thereof either in whole or part: but only rectify and amend them by
remooving the corruption. It turns the sadness of melancholy to godly sorrow,
choler to good zeal, softness of nature to meekness of spirit, madness
and lightness to christian mirth: it reformes every man according to his
natural constitution, not abolishing it but redressing the faults of it.

Further I put down, that repentance is a turning from all sin to God, that
I may exclude many false turnings. The first, when a man turns from God to
sin* as when one of a protestant becomes a papist, an Arrian, a Familist. The
second, when a man turns from one sin to another. As when the riotous person
leaves his prodigality, and gives himself to the practice of covetousness:
this can be no repentance: because it is a going from one extreme to another,
whereas repentance is to leave the extremes and keep the mean. The third is,
not when a man turns from sin, but sin turns from him and leaves him. As
when the drunkard leaves drunkenness because his stomach is decayed: the
fornicatour his uncleanness, because the strength of nature fails him: the
quareller his fighting, because he is maimed on leg or arm. The last is,
when men turn from many sins, but will not turn from all. As Herod did many
things at the advertisement of John baptist, but could not be brought to leave
incest, in having his brother Philips wife. This repentance is nothing. For as
he which is truly regenerate, is wholly in body, soul, and spirit regenerate:
so he which truly repents, turns from all sin, and turns wholly to God.

Neither is this to trouble any, that they can not know all their sins: for
sound repentance for one special sin brings with it repentance of all sin.
And as God requires particular repentance for known sins, so he accepts a
general repentance for such as be unknown.

To proceed further, the conversion of a sinner in repentance, has three
parts. The first, a purpose and resolution in the mind: the second, an
inclination in the will and affections: the third, an endeavor in life and
conversation, to abandon and leave all his former sins, and to employ
himself in obedience to Gods commandments.

Lastly, this repentance must bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life:
because it can not be known to be sincere, unless it bring forth fruit.
Repentant sinners are trees Isa. 61. 3.
of righteousness of Gods own planting: and they grow by the waters that flow
out of the Ezee. 47. 12.
sanctuary, and therefore they must bear fruit that may serve for meat, and
leaf for Mat. 3. 10.
medecin: otherwise the axe of Gods judgment is laid to there roots to
stock them up.

CAP. II. Of the causes of Repentance.
THe principal cause of Repentance is the Spirit of God, as Paul says,
Instructing 2. Tim. 2. 25.
them with meekness that are contrary minded, prooving if God at any time
will give them repentance. And Jeremy, Convert thou me, Ier. 31. 18.
and I shall be converted.

The instrument of the holy ghost in working repentance, is the ministry of
the Gospel only, and not the Law. Reasons hereof are these. I. Faith is
engendered by the preaching not of the Law, but of the Gospel, as Paul says,
The gospel is the power of God to Romans 1. 18.
salvation to all that believe from faith to faith: therefore repentance which
follows faith as a fruit thereof, must needs come by the preaching of the
gospel only. II. The Law is the ministry of death and damnation: 2. Cor. 3.
7.
because it shows a man his wretched estate; but shows him no remedy:
therefore it can not be an isntrumental cause of that repentance which is
effectual to salvation. III. The doctrine of repentance is a part of the
gospel: which appears in this, that the preaching Luc. 9. 6. cum Marc. 6. 12.
of repentance, and the preaching of the gospel are put one for another. And
our Savior Christ divides the gospel into two parts: the preaching of
repentance, and remission Luc. 24. 47.
of sins in his name. IIII. That part of the word which works repentance,
must reveal the nature of it, and set out the promise of life which belongs
unto it. But the law neither reveals faith nor repentance: this is a proper
work of the gospel. If it be said, that the law is a schoolmaster to bring
us to Christ, the answer is, it brings men to Christ a vrge^do non allicie^do.
not by teaching the way, or by alluring them: but by forcing and urging them.

Neither do we abolish the law, in ascribing the work of repentance to the
gospel only: for though it be no cause, yet is it an occasion of true
repentance. Because it represents unto the eye of the soul our damnable
estate, and smites the conscience with doleful terrors and fears, which
though they be no tokens of grace (for they are in their own nature the very
gates and the downe-fall to the pit of hell) yet they are certain occasions of
receiving grace. The Physician is otherwhiles constrained to recover the health
of his patient by casting him into some fits of an ague. So man, because he is
deadly sick of the disease of sin, he must be cast into some fittes of
Legal terrors by the ministry of the law, that he may recover his former
estate, and come to life everlasting.

Repentance also is furthered by calamities. Joseph's brethren, when they were
in distress in Egypt said one to another, We have verily Genesis 42. 21.
sinned against our brother in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he
be sought us and we would not hear him, therefore is this trouble come upon
us. And the Lord says in Oseah, I will go and return to my place till Ose.
5. 15.
they acknowledge their fault and seek me; in their affliction will they seek
me diligently. And, The Israelites say, my soul had them Iam. 3. 20.
(namely afflictions) in remembrance, and is humbled in me. Example of
Manasses. And when he was in tribulation he prayed to the 2. Chr. 33. 12.
Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly. And David says, It is good for me
that I have Psalm. 119. 71.
ben afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes.

CAP. III. Of the parts of Repentance.
REpentance has two parts: Mortification, and Rising to newness of life.

Mortification is the first part of repentance which concerns turning from
sin.

Men turn from sin, when they do not only abstain from actual sin, but
also use all means whereby they may both weaken and suppress the corruption of
nature. Surgeons, when they must cut of any part of the body, use to lay plai
sters to it, to mortify it, that being without sense and feeling, it may be
cut off with less pain. In the same manner, we are to use all helps and
remedies prescribed in the word, which serve to weaken or kill sin, that in
death it may be abolished.

And it must not seem strange that I say we must use means to mortify our
own sins. For, howsoever by nature we can not do ane thing acceptable to
God, yet' being Actia gimus.
quickened and moved by the holy ghost, we stir and moove our selves to do
that which is truly good. And therefore repentant sinners have grace in them,
whereby they mortify their own sins. Paul says, I be at down my body and
bring it in subjection. And, 1. Cor. 9. 27. Gal. 5. 24.
They which are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and the
lusts thereof. And, Mortify therefore your earthly members, fornication,
uncleanness, the inordinate Col. 3. 5.
affection, evil concupiscence and covetousness. And, If any man purge
himself from 2. Tim. 2. 21.
these, he shall be a vessel unto honor. And S. John says, Everyone which
has this hope in 1. Ioh. 3. 3
him, purges himself, even as he is pure. And, He which is begotten of God
preserves cap.. 5. verse. 18
himself, and the wicked one touches him not.

Mortification has three parts. A purpose in mind, an inclination in will,
and an endeavor in life and conversation to leave all sin.

Rising to newness of life, is the second part of repentance concerning
sincere obedience to God.

And it has also three parts. The two first are a resolution in the mind,
and an inclination or lust in the will to obey God in all things. Barnabas
exhorts them of Antiochia, That with purpose of heart they would cleave Acts
11. 23.
unto the Lord. Examples of both these are many in scriptures. Of Joshua. If it
seem Josh. 24. 15.
evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve,
whether the gods which your fathers served, or the gods of the Amorites, etc.
but I and my household will serve the Lord. Of David, O Lord Psalm. 119. 57.
thou art my portion, I have determined to keep thy commandments. And, I have
v. 106.
sworn, and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments.
And, When thou said, Seek ye my face, mine heart answered Psalm. 27 8.
Psalm. 119. 112.
unto thee, O Lord I will seek thy face. And, I have applyedmine heart to
fulfill thy statutes always even to the end.

The third part, is an endeavor in life and conversation to obey God. Example
of Paul.

And herein I take pains to have always a Acts 24. 16.
clear conscience toward God and toward men. Of David, I have respect unto
all thy Psalm. 119. 6. v. 30.
commandments. And, I have chosen the way of truth, and thy judgments have I
laid before me. And, I have cleaved to thy testimonies. 31
And, Direct me in the path of thy commandments: 35.
for therein is my delight.

No man must here think, that a repentant sinner fulfilles the law in his
obedience: for their best works are faulty before God. And whereas the
faithful in scriptures are said to be perfect: we must know that there be two
degrees of perfection: perfection in substance, and perfection in the highest
degree. Perfection in substance is, when a man does sincerely endeavor to
perform perfect obedience to God not in some but in all his commandments.
And this is the only perfection that any man can have in this life. A Christian
man's perfection is to bewail his imperfection: his obediencee more consistes
in the goodwill then in the work, and is more to be measured by the affection,
then by the effect.

CAP. IIII. Of the degrees of repentance.
REpentance has two degrees. It is either ordinary or extraordinary.

Ordinary repentance is that which every christian is to per form every day:
for as men fall daily either more or less: so the graces of God are
proportionally weakened day by day. wherefore the continual reparation thereof
must be made by a daily renewing of repentance. A christian man is the temple
and house of Gods spirit: he must therefore once a day sweep it, that it may
be sit to entertain so worthy a ghest.

Extraordinary repentance is the same in nature with the former: it differs
only from it in degree and measure of grace.

And this is to be put in practice, when men fall into any enormous, capital,
or grievous offenses, whereby they do very grievously wound their own
consciences, and give great offense to the Church. Of this sort was the
repentance of Peter when he went forth and wept bitterly: and David's
repentance, after that he had committed adultery and murdered Vriah.

CAP. V. Of the persons which must repent.
MEn be of two sorts: the natural man, and the regenerate. Repentance is
needful for both. For the natural man, that he may be brought from his
sins, and the Image of God renewed in him. Some may say, that many natural
men live civilly, absteining from all outrageous behavior, and therefore need
no repentance. I grant indeed, they do so: yet repentance must go withal.
For civil life without grace in Christ, is nothing else in Gods sight, but a
beautiful abomination. The Pharisees were civil, yet Christ says of them,
Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall not see the kingdom of heaven. Repentance is also required
in the regenerate: because they have many known and privy corruptions in
them, which must be mortified: and otherwhiles they fall greevously: and
therefore that they may rise again, they must be daily practiced in the
spiritual exercises of repentance.

CAP. VI. Of the practice of Repentance
IN the practice of Repentance four special duties are required. The first is
a diligent and serious examination of the conscience by the Laws and
commandementes of God, for all manner of sins both original and actual.
Example of the Lam. 3 39. 40.
children of Israel. Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? man suffers for
his sin: let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. Of
David. I considered Psalm. 119. 59.
my ways, and turned my feet to thy testimonies.

Touching Original sin, this must be well remembered, that one man has not
one part only of original sin, and another man an other: one man this
corruption, another that: but every man as he received from Adam the whole
nature of man: so also he received original sin wholly. And therefore every
man, (not one excepted, saving Christ who was extraordinarily sanctified by the
holy ghost in the womb of the virgin) has in him from his parents the
corruption and seed of all sin, which is a natural disposition and pronesse
to commit any sin whatsoever. Take a view and consider all the horrible
sins that be practiced in any part of the world, either against the first or
second table: whatsoever they are, the spawne and seed of them all is even in
that man that is thought to be best disposed by nature. Some may say, that
experience shows the contrary; because among men that want all manner of
religion some are more civil and orderly: some again more lewdly disposed. I
answer, that this comes to pass, not because some men are by nature less
wicked then others: but because God, by his providence does limit and restrain
men's corruption more or less, which he does for the good of mankind. For if
men might be wholly left to themselves, corruption would so exceedingly break
out into all manner of sins, that there should be no living in the world.

Touching actual sins, they shall be found by examination to be innumerable as
the hairs of a man's head, and as the sands by the sea shore: if any will but
search themselves a little by the ten commandments of the Decalogue, for all
their sinful thoughts, words, and deeds against God and man.

A DIRECTION FOR EXAmination of the conscience.
I. COM. Thou shall have none other gods, etc.
He breaks this commandment,

THat knows not the true God, Ier. 4. 22. That denies God in his heart, by
denying his presence, justice, mercy, etc. Ps. 14. 1. That hates God, and
shows it by disobedience. Exodus 20. 5. Romans 1. 30. That do not fear God and
stand in awe of him. That fear men or other creatures more then God. Matthew.
10. 31. Apoc. 21. 8. That live in open sins securely, not fearing Gods word
or judgments. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 6, 7. That is sorrowful for his sins only in
respect of the punishment. 2. Cor. 7. 10. That fears God by men's traditions.
Isa. 29. 13. That do not believe Gods word but call the Canonical scripture
in question. That despaires of Gods mercy. That has a dead faith without
works. Iam. 2. That puts faith in the devil and his works, as seekers to
wisardes do. That loves the creatures, as riches and honor, and his own
filthy pleasures more then God. Ephesians. 5. 5. That puts confidence in his
strength, wisdom, riches, physicians. 2. Chron. 16. 9, 11. That is impatient
under the cross. Mat. 10. 38. That temptes God. Matthew. 4. 7. That seeks for
the things of this life, more then for Gods kingdom. Matthew. 6. 33. That
murmures against God. 1. Cor. 10. 10. That disputes and holds there is no God.
That holds and maintains opinions against the ancient faith set down in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles. As did the Maniches, Donatistes,
Arrians, Anabaptists, etc. That so holds one religion, as he is ready to
follow another. 1. King. 18. 21. That is full of presumption of Gods mercy.
Isa. 7. 12. That falls away from the known truth. 2. Pet. 2. 20. That adds
to Canonical scripture. Deuteronomy. 12. last ver.
II. COM. Thou shall make to thy self no graven Image. etc.
He breaks this commandment,

THat represents God in an image. Exodus 32. 6, 8. That worships God in or at
images, as crucifixes, and such like, 2. King. 18. 4. That kneles down before
an image. That is bodily present at Mass keeping his heart to God, 1. Cor. 8.
9. That reteines the monuments of idolatry. Exodus 23. 13. That marries with
infidels or such like. Genesis 6. 2. That makes leagues of amity with such. 2.
Chron. 19. 1. That worships God according to his own fantasy. Col. 2. 23.
That worships God with lip-service. Isa. 29. 13 That has the power of
godliness but denies the force of it, 2. Tim. 3. 5. That gives Gods worship
to creatures, as Saints and Angels. Psalm. 115. 8. That refuses to hear the
preaching of the Gospel. Luke 14. 19. That negligently worships God. Rev. 3.
16. That omits invocation of Gods name. Isai. 64. 7. That hears sermons but
when he is reprooved, railes, and rages, and profits nothing, Amos. 5. 10. That
changes the worship of God in whole or in part. Deuteronomy. 12. 32. That makes either
open or secret league with the devil, Psalm. 58 That uses witchcraft, sorcery,
or enchantments, Deuteronomy. 18. 11. Lev. 19. 26. That consults with wisards. Lev.
20. 6. That wears Amulets or Characters about his neck, and puts confidence
in them. That hinders schools of religion and good learning. That seeks not
(within the compass of his calling) the good estate of Gods Church: but seeks
his own things. Psalm. 132. 3, 4.
III. COM. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord, etc.
He breaks this commandment,

THat does unreuerently use Gods titles in his talk. Phil. 2. 10. That swears
to do a thing lawful and good, and yet does it not. Mat. 5. 23. That swears
rashly. Ierem. 4. 2. That uses customable swearing in his common talk. Matt.
5. 37. That blasphemes the name of God. Levit. 24. 16. That swears falsely.
Ioh. 8. 44. That swears against piety and honesty. That uses cursing and
banning. That finds fault with the creatures of God, 1. Cor. 10. 3. That
swears by the creatures. Mat. 5. 34, 35. That uses lots in sporting. Pro. 16.
33. and 18. 18. That makes and uses charms of herbs and other things. Deuteronomy,
18. 11. That makes iestes of the sentences and phrases of scripture. Isa. 66.
2. That uses figure casting. Isa. 47. 13. That does lightly regard Gods
judgments. Heb. 3. 16. That living dissolutely in religion, makes Gods name
evil spoken of. 2. Sam. 12. 13. 1. Pet. 3. 15. That makes a vow of
continency or of any thing not in his power. That makes a lawful vow and
keeps it not. Deuteronomy. 23. 21. That receives blessings from God, and is not
thankful. Luc. 17. 8. That teaches the truth but does not practice it. Mat.
23. 2.
IIII. COM. Remember the Sabbath day to etc.
He breaks this commandment,

THat labors in the servile works of his ordinary calling. Nehem. 13. 15.
That travels abroad on his ordinary business, Exodus 16. 24. That keeps faires
and markets on this day. Nehe. 13. 15. That works harvest work on this day.
Exodus 34. 21. That uses sportes and recreations causing distraction. 1. Cor.
10. 7. That spendes the day in idleness. Isa. 58. 13. That keeps the Sabbath
only in outward fashion. Isa. 1. 13. That prophanes it by gluttony and
drunkenness. That gives servants liberty to do what they list. That brings
not his family to the congregation to hear Gods word, and to receive the
sacraments. That sanctifies not the Sabbath in his family privately.
V. COM. Honor thy fathtr, etc.
He breaks this commandment,

THat mockes or reviles, or beats his superiors, Genesis 9. 22. That disobeyes
their lawful commandments, Romans ^* 30* That is unthankefull to parents, and
will not ^elieve them if need be. 2. Tim. 3. 3. That disobeyes God to obey
them. Act. 4. 19. That exaltes him self above the magistrate. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
That serves his master with eye-service. Coloss. 3, 22. That governes his
family and those which are under him negligently. 1. Tim. 3. 4. That is slack
in punishing faults. 1. Sam. 2. 22. That is too rigorous in speeches and
punishments. Ephesians. 6. 9. That marieth without parents consent. That chooses his
calling without parents consent. Number. 30. That thinks better of himself then
of others, Romans 12. 10. That despises aged persons. Lev. 19. 23.
VI. COM. Thou shall not kill.
He breaks this commandment,

THat bears malice to another. 1. Ioh. 3. 15. That is given to hastiness.
Mat. 5. 22. That uses inward fretting and grudging. Iam. 3. 14. That is
froward of nature, hard to please, Romans 1. 31. That is full of rancour and
bitterness. Ephesians. 4. 31 That derides and scorns others, Genes. 21. 9. Gal.
4. 29. That uses bitter words and railings, Prover. 12. 18. That uses
contending by words or deeds, Gal. 5. 20. That uses chiding and crying out.
Ephesians. 4. 31. That is given to make complaints of his neighbor in all places,
Iam. 5. 9. That is a fighter. Iam. 4. 1. That hurtes or maines his neighbors
body. Exodus 21. 24. That will not forgive an offense. Matthew. 5. 23. That will
forgive but not forget. That does fare well him self, but gives not alms to
relieve the poor. Luc. 16. 19. That uses cruelty in punishing malefactors.
Deuteronomy. 22. 6. That denies the servants or laborers wages, Iam. 5. 24. That
holds back the pledge. Ezech. 18. 7. That sels by diverse weights and
measures. That remooves the land mark. Prove. 22. 18. That gives his goods upon
usurie: which is simply to bind a man to return both the principal and the
increase. Ezech. 18. 8. That by his looseness of life is an occasion why other
sin. That mooves contention and debate. Romans 1. 29. That being a minister
teaches erroneously. That teaches slackly. Ierem. 48. 10. That teaches not
at all. 1. Tim. 3. 2. That hinders men's salvation any way. Matt. 23. 13. That
seeks private revenge.
VII. COM. Thou shall not commit, etc.
He breaks this commandment,

THat looks on a woman to lust after her. Mat. 5. 28. That commits incest.
Levit. 18. 22. That commits Sodomie. 1. Cor. 6. 9. That commits fornication
with married or single, or contracted folks. Deuteronomy. 22. 22. That uses marriage
bed intemperately. That lies with a menstruous woman, Ezech. 18. 6. That uses
wantonness. 1. Cor. 6. 9. That uses occasions and provocations to lust. Gal. 5.
9. That is given to idleness. That wears wanton and light attire. 1. Tim. 2.
9. 1. Pet. 3. 3. That uses light talk and reading of louebookes. 1. Cor. 15.
35. That frequents lascivious places. Ephesians. 5. 3. That delights in wanton
pictures. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. That uses the mixed dansing of men and women, Mar.
6. 22. That keeps company with light and suspected persons. Pro. 7. 22. That
neglectes to dispose his children in marriage in convenient time. 1. Cor. 7.
37. That makes marriages of young children. That punishes adultery with small
punishments. That marieth more wives then one at once. Genesis 2. 24. That loves
his pleasures more then God. 2. Tim. 3. 4. That takes care to fulfill the
lusts of the flesh. Romans t3. 14. That maintains and frequents stews. Deuteronomy.
23. 17. That is given to drunkenness and surfeiting, Ephesians. 5. 18. That gives
himself to wine, sleep, and ease. Prove. 20. 13. That for the avoiding of
fornications mary's not. 1. Cor. 7. 2. That puts away his wife for other causes
then for fornication, Mat. 19. 9.
VIII. COM. Thou shall not steal.
He breaks this commandment,

THat lives in no calling. 1 Thessalonians 3. 11. That neglects his calling. Ierem.
48. 10. That spends his wealth in riot, and provides not for his family. 1.
Tim. 5. 8. That is not content with his estate, but seeks to be rich. 1. Tim.
6. 10. That selles the goods of the Church, or buys them. Mal. 3. 8. That
selles such things as are means to further idolatry, or any other sin. That
uses powdering, starching, blowing, dark shops to set a gloss on his wares
and make them more saleable. That conceales the fault of his wares. That uses
false weightes and measures. Levit. 19. 35. That uses words of deceit, Prove.
20. 14, That takes more for his wares then the just price. Matthew. 7. 12. That
oppresses his tenants by racking his rents. Habac. 2. 11. That uses
engrossing of wares. That raises the price, only in consideration of a day of
payment. That either gives or takes bribes. Isa. 1. 33. Psalm. 82. That writes
letters of affection in wrong suits. That holds back things borrowed. Ezech.
18. 7. That holds back things found or pawned. Levit. 6. 3. That being lusty
lives by begging. That releeveth such. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. That for gain defendes
bad causes. That lays burden on the people without measure. Isa. 1. 23. Ezech.
22. 27. That spends the Church goods in riot. 1. Tim. 6. 9. That makes
merchandise of Gods word and sacrament. Mich. 3. 11. 2. Cor. 2. last. That gets
goods by gaming. That gets his living by casting of figures and by plays, Ephesians.
4. 28. That is rash in surety-ship. Prove. 11. 15. and 17. 18. That steals men's
children to dispose them in marriage. 1. Tim. 1. 10. That takes by stealth the
least pin, though it be for the best end. That is a receiver of things stolen,
and gives consent to the fact any way. Romans 1. 29. That uses deceit in
bargaining. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. That restores not things evil gotten. Ezech. 33.
15. That keeps back goods given to the Church. Acts 5. 3. That waits for a
dearth, to sell his things dearer. Amos. 8. 5.
IX. COM. Thou shall not bear, etc.
He breaks this commandment,

THat envies at the prosperity of his neighbor. 1. Tim. 6. 4. That seeks only
his own good report. That is suspicious. 1. Cor. 13. 5. That gives rash or
hard sentence against others. Matthew. 7. 1. That takes men's sayings and doings
in worse part. Matthew. 26. 60. That accuses one salsly. 1. King. 21. That
makes or reports tales openly or in a whispering manner. Levit. 19. 16. That
receives tales, Exodus 23. 1. That speaks the truth of malice. Psalm. 52. 1, 2.
That blazeth abroad men's infirmities. Matthew. 18. 17. That uses quipping and
taunting. Ephesians. 5. 4. That uses flattery, Prove. 26. 19. That lies though it be
for never so good an end Zach. 13. 3. That defends an evil cause and impugnes
the contrary. That writes or spreds libels.
X. COM. Thou shall not lust.
He breaks this commandment,

That thinks an evil thought against his neighbor though he mean not to do
it. That conceives some inward delight in some evil motion, though he give not
consent to practice it.
SINS DIRECTLY Against the Gospel.
He sins against the Gospel,

That denies either directly or by consequent that Christ is come in the flesh.
1. Ioh. 4. 3, 8 That treads under foot the blood of Christ. Hebr. 10. 29. That
believes not the remission of his own sins and acceptance to life
everlasting. 1. Ioh. 3. 23. That repents not but hardens himself in all his
bad ways. Romans 2. 4. 5. Ierem. 8. 6.


Thus much of examination: now follows the second duty, which is confession of
sin unto God, which is very necessary. For the right way to have our sins
covered before God is, to uncover and acknowledge them unto him. For he will
justify us if we condemn our selves, he will pardon us, if we, as being our
own enemies, accuse our selves: he forgets our sins if we remember them:
when we are vile in our own eyes, we are precious in his: and when we are
lost to our selves, we are found of him.

That confession may be rightly performed, a notable duty is to be put in
practice in it: namely, the arraignment of a repentant sinner, whereby he
judges himself that he may 1. Cor. 11. 31.
not be judged of the Lord.

This arraignment has three special points in it. For first of all, he must
bring himself forth to the bar of Gods judgment. which thing he does when
he sets himself in the presence of God, as though even now the day of
judgment were. As Saint Hierome did, who always thought with himself that
he heard this voice sounding in his ears, Rise ye dead and come to judgment.

Secondly, he must put up an indictment against himself: by accusing himself
before God, by acknowledging his known sins particularly and his unknowen
generally, without any excuse, or extenuatio^, or defense, or hiding of the
least of them. Example of David. I know mine iniquity and my sin is Psalm. 51
3, 4, 5.
ever before me: against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and done this
evil in thy sight, etc. behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my
mother conceived me. And, 1. Chr. 21. 8.
I have sinned greatly, because I have done this thing: but now, I beseech
thee, remoove the iniquity of thy servant: for I have done very foolishly. Of
Ezra, O my God, I am ashamed and Ezra. 9. 6.
confounded to lift up mine eyes unto thee, my God: for our iniquities are
increased over our heads, and our trespass is grown up unto heaven.

Thirdly, he must with heaviness of heart give sentence against himself,
acknowledging that he is worthy of everlasting hell, death, and damnation. As
the prodigal child, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and against thee,
and am not worthy to be called thy child, And Daniel, We have sinned and
committed Dan* 9. 7.
iniquity, and have done wickedly: yea, we have rebelled and have departed
from thy precepts, and from thy judgments, etc. O Lord, righteousness
belongs unto thee, and unto us open shame. Of Job, Behold, I am vile, Job.
39. 36. and 42. 6
what shall I answer thee. I will lay my hand upon my mouth. And, I abhor
my self, and I repent in dust and ashes. Of the Publicane, Luke 18. 13.
Who standing a far off, would not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven,
but smote his breast saying, Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

As for confession of sin to men, it is not to be used but in two cases.
First, when some ^ ^4. Mat. 5. Iam. 5. 16.
offense is done to our neighbor: secondly, when ease and comfort is sought
for, in trouble of conscience.

The third duty in the practice of repentance is Deprecation, whereby we pray
to God for the pardon of the sins which have been confessed with contrition
of heart, with earnestness and constancy, as for the weightiest matter in the
world. And here we must remember to behave our selves to God as the poor
prisoner does at the bar, who when the judge is about to give sentence, cries
unto him for favor as for life and death. And we must do as the cripple or
lazar man in the way: sit down, vnlappe our legs and arms and show the
sores of our sins; crying to God continually as they do, (Look with your
eye, and pity with your heart:) that we may find mercy at Gods hands, as
they get alms at the hands of passengers. Thus Oseah Ose. 14. 2.
instructs the people, O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God: for thou have
fallen by thine iniquity: take unto you words, and turn unto the Lord, and
say unto him, Take away all iniquity and receive us graciously: so we will
render thee the calves of our lips. Of Daniel, Dan. 9 18. 19.
We do not present our supplications before thee for our own righteousness,
but for thy great tender mercies. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord consider
and do it: defer not for thine own names sake, O my God. Of David, Have
Psalm. 51. 1.
mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness: according to the
multitude of thy compassions put away mine iniquities.

The last duty is to pray to God for grace and strength, whereby we may be
enabled to walk in newness of life. Of David, Behold, I Psalm. 119. 40
desire thy commandments, quicken me in thy righteousness. And, Teach me to
do thy will, Psalm. 143. 10.
for thou art my God: let thy good spirit lead me into the land of righteousness.

CAP. VII. Of legal motives to repentance.
MOtives to repentance are either Legal or Evangelicall. Legal are such as
are borrowed from the law: and they are 3. especially.

The first is, the misery and cursed estate of every impenitent sinner in this
life by reason of his sins.

His misery (that I may express it to the conceit of the simplest) is
sevenfold. 1. within him. 2. before him. 3. behind him. 4. on his right hand.
5. on his left hand. 6. over his head. 7. under his feet.


His misery within him is twofold. The first is a guilty conscience: which is
a very hell unto the ungodly man. For he is like a silly prisoner, and the
conscience like a Iayler which follows him at the heels, and dogs him
whither soever he goes, to the end he may see and observe all his sayings and
doings. It is like a register, that sits always with the pen in his hand, to
record and inrole all his wickedness for everlasting memory. It is a little
judge, that sittes in the middle of a man even in his very heart, to arraigne
him in this life for his sins as he shall be arraigned at the last judgment.
Therefore the pangs, terrors, and fears of all impenitent persons, are as it
were, certain flashings of the flames of hell fire. The guilty conscience
makes a man like him, which lies on a bed that is too strait and the Isa. 28.
20.
covering too short: who would with all his heart sleep, but can not.
Belshazzar when he Dan. 5 6.
was in the midst of his mirth, seeing the handwriting on the wall, was
smitten with great fear, so as his countenance changed, and his knees smote
together.

The second evil within man, is, the fearful slaverie and bondage under the
power of Satan the Prince of darkness: in that his mind, will, and affections
are so knit and glued to the will of the devil, that he can do nothing but
obey him, and rebel against God. And hence Satan is called the prince of this
2. Cor. 4.
world: which keeps the hold of the heart as an armed Captain keeps a sconse
or a castle with watch and ward.

The misery before man, is a dangerous snare which the devil lays for the
destruction of the soul. I say it is dangerous: because he 2. Tim. 2. 25.
is in setting of it twenty or forty years, before he strikes; when as (God
knows) men do little think of it. It is made of three cords: with the first,
he brings men into his snare: and that he does by covering the misery and the
poison of sin; and by painting out to the eye of the mind, the deceitful
profits and pleasures thereof. With the second, he hopples and insnares them:
for after that a man is drawn into this or that sin, the devil has so
sugered it over with fine delights, that he can not but needs must live and
lie in it. By the third, he draws the snare and indevours with all his might
to break the neck of the soul. For when he sees a fit opportunity,
especially in grievous calamities; and in the hour of death, he takes away the
vizar of sin, and she weth the face of it in the true form, as ouglie as
him self: then withal he begins (as we say) to show his horns: then he
rages in terrifying and accusing, that the soul of man may be swallowed up of
the gulf of final despair.

The misery behind him, is the sins past. The Lord says to Cain, If thou
do not well, Genesis 4. 7.
sin lies at the door. Where sin is compared to a wild beast, which
follows a man whither soever he goes, and lies lurking at his heels. And
though for a time it may seem to be hurtlesse, because it lies asleep: yet
at length, unless men repent, it will rise up, sease on them, and rent out the
very throtes of their souls. Job in his afffliction says, Thou writest Job.
13. 26.
bitter things against me, and make me possess the sins of my youth. And
David prays, Ps. 25. 7.
Forgive me the sins of my youth. If the memory of sins past be a trouble
to the godly man, oh what a rack? what a gibbet will it be to the heart of him
that wants grace?

The misery on the right hand is prosperity and ease: which by reason of man's
sin is an occasion of many judgments. In it men Ezec. 16. 49.
practiced the horrible sins of Sodom: it puffes up the heart with divelish
pride, so as men shall think themselves to be as God him self, as Senacherib,
Nebuchad-nezzar, Antiochus, Alexander, Herod, Domitian did. It steals away
man's heart from God, and quenches the sparks of grace. As the Lord complains
of the Israelites. I spoke unto thee when Iere. 22. 21.
thou wast in prosperity: but thou saydest, I will not hear: this has been
thy manner from thy youth. It is like the Ivy that embraces the tree and
winds round about it, but yet draws out the juice and life of it. Hence is
it that many turn it to an occasion of their destruction. Solomon says,
Prosperity of fools destroys them. When the milt swelles, the Prove. 1. 32.
rest of the body pines away: and when the heart is puffed with pride, the whole
man is in danger of destruction. The sheep that goes in the best pasture,
soonest comes to the slaughterhouse; and the ungodly man fattes himself with
continual prosperity, that he may Romans 9. 22.
the sooner come to his own damnation.

The misery on the left hand is Adversity, which stands in all manner of
losses and calamities, in goods, friends, good name, and such like. Of this
read at large. Deuteronomy. 28.

The misery over his head is, the wrath of God, which he testifies in all
manner of judgments from heaven, in danger of which every impenitent sinner is
every hour. And the danger is very great. The scripture says. It is Hebr. 10.
31. Deuteronomy. 32. 34. Ezec. 7. 6.
a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. He has
storehouses full of all manner of judgments: and they watch for secure sinners
that they can not escape. Gods wrath is ^s a fire making havocke and bringing to
naught whatsoever it lights on: yea, because he is slow to anger, therefore
more terrible: as a man therefore stays his hand for a time, that he may lift
it higher and fetch a deeper blow. When the dumb creatures melt as wax and
vanish away at his presence, when he Nah. 1. 4, 5, 6. Psalm. 97.
is angry, as the huge mountains and rocks do, frail man must never look
to stand. If the roaring of a lion make men afraid, and the voice of thunder be
terrible: oh, how exceedingly should all be astonished at the threatenings of
God.

The misery under his feet is, Hell fire: for every man till he repent, is in
as great danger of damnation as the traitor apprehended, of hanging, drawing,
and quartering. A man walking in his way falls into a deep dungeon that is
full of vggely serpents and noisome beasts: in his fall he catches hold of a
twigge of a tree that grows at the mouth of the dungeon, and hangs by it:
afterward there comes a beast both lean and hungerbitten, which having cropped
the whole tree, is ever and anon knapping at the twigge on which he hanges.
Now, what is the danger of this man? surely he is like to fall into the pit,
over which he hangs. well, this man is every impenitent sinner: the pit is
hell, prepared for the devil and his angels: the twig is the brickle and
frail life of man: the hungerbitten beast is death, that is ready every hour
to knap our life asunder: the danger is fearful: for man hanging as it were
over the mouth of hell, when life is ended, unless he use good means before he
die, he then falls to the very bottom of it.

If this be the misery wherewith the careless man is sieged and compassed about
every way, and that for his sins, why do men lie in the dead sleep of
security? o! it stands them in hand to take up the voice of bitter lamentation,
and for their offenses to howl after the manner of dragons. If men could weep
nothing but tears of blood for their sins, if they could dye a 1000 times in
one day for very grief, they could never be grieved enough for their sins.

The second motive to draw men to repentance, is the consideration of the
wretched estate of an impenitent sinner in his death, (...)
which is nothing but the wages and allowance that he receives for his sin:
and it is the very Romans 6. 23.
suburbs, or rather the gates of hell. S. Paul compares death to a scorpion, who
carries a sting in his tail, which is sin. Now then when impenitent 1. Cor.
15. 55, 56.
and profane persons die, then comes this scorpion and gripes them with her
legs, and stabs them at the heart with her sting. Wherefore the best thing is
before death come, to use means to pull out the sting of death. And nothing
will do it, but the blood of Christ: let me^ therefore break off their sins by
repe^ta^ce: let the^ come to the throne of grace, and cry: yea let them fill
heaven and earth with cries for mercy. oh! pray, pray, pray for the pardon of
thy sins. If thou obtain but one drop of Gods special mercy in Christ, all
danger is past. For death has lost his sting: and then a man without danger
may put an ougly serpent in his bosom.

The third motive, is the consideration of his estate after death. When the day
of the last judgment shall be, he must be brought and set before the tribunal
seat of christ: he shall not be able to escape or hide himself: then the books
shall be brought out, and all his sins shall be discovered before Gods saints and
angels: the devil and his own conscience shall accuse him: none shall be
advocate to plead his cause: he himself shall be speechless; he shall at
length hear the dreadful sentence of damnation, Go ye cursed into hell
prepared for the devil and his augels. This thing might moove the vilest
Athiest in the world to leave his wicked ways and come to amendment of life.
We see the strongest thief that is, when he is led in the way from the
prison to the bar, leaves his theeving and behaues himself orderly. And
indeed if he would then cut a purse, it were high time that he were hanged.
All men by nature are traitors and malefactors against God: whiles we live in
this world, we are in the way going to the bar of Gods judgment. The
wheel of the heavens turns one bout every day, and winds up somewhat of the
thread of our life: whether we sleep or wake we are always coming nearer
our end: wherefore let all men daily humble themselves for their sins, and
pray unto God that he would be reconciled unto them in Christ: and let them
endeavor themselves in obedience to all Gods commandments, both in their
lives and callings.

Again, after the last judgment there remains death eternal appointed for
him: which stands in these three things. I. A separation from all joy and
comfort of the presence of God. II. Eternal fellowship with the devil and all
his angels. III. The feeling of the horrible wrath of God, which shall seize
upon body, soul, and conscience, and shall feed on them as fire does on pitch
and brimstone: and torment them as a worm crawling in the body and gnawing on
the heart: they shall always be dying, and never dead: always in woe, and
never in ease. And this death is the more grievous, because it is everlasting.
Suppose the whole world to be a mountain of sand, and that a bird must
carry from it a mouthfull of sand every thousand years: many innumerable
thousands of years will be expired before she will have carried away the whole
mountain: well, if a man should stay ^n torment so long and then have an end
of his woe, it were some comfort: but when the bird shall have carried away the
mountain a thousand times: alas, alas, a man shall be as far from the end of
his anguish and torment as ever he was. This consideration may serve as an iron
scourge to drive men from their wicked lives. Chrysostom would have men in
their meetings in tavernes and feasts, to talk of hell, that by often thinking
on it, they might avoyde it. A grave and chaste matrone, being moved to commit
folly with a lewd ruffian; after long discourse, she called for a pan of
burning coals, requesting him for her sake to hold his finger in them but one
hour; he answered, that it was an unkind request: to whom she replied, that
seeing he would not hold so much as one finger in a few coals for one small
hour, she could not yield to do the thing, for which she should be tormented
body and soul in hell fire for ever. And so should all men reason against
themselves. None will be brought to do a thing, that may make so much as their
finger or tooth to ache: therefore we ought to have great care to leave our
sins, whereby we bring endless torment to body and soul in hell.

CAP. VIII. Of motives Evangelicall.
EVangelicall Motives are two especially. The first is taken from the
consideration of man's redemption. He that redeemed mankind is God him self. As
Paul says, that God was in Christ, reconciling 2. Cor. 5. 19.
the world to him self. Man's sin is so vile and heinous in the eyes of God,
that no Angel nor creature was able to appease the wrath of God for the least
offense. But the Son of God himself must come down from heaven, and take
man's nature on him: and not only that, but he must also suffer the most
accursed death of the cross, and shed his most precious heart blood to
satisfy the justice of his Father in our behalf. If a Father should be sick
of such a disease, that nothing would heal but the heart blood of his own
child, he would presently judge his own case to be dangerous; and would also
vow if ever he recovered, to use all means whereby he might avoid that
disease. So likewise, seeing nothing could cure the deadly wound of our sin
but a plaster made of the heart blood of Christ: it must make us acknowledge
our pitiful case, and the heinousness of the least of our sins, and stir
us up to newness of life.

Again, considering the end of the redemption wrought by Christ, was to
deliver us from our evil conversation in sin and unrighteousness, we are
not to continue and as it were lie bathing our selves in sin; for that were,
as if a prisoner, after that he had bin ransomed and had his boltes taken of,
and were put out of the prison to go whither he would, should return again,
and desire to lie in the dungeon still.

The second motive is, that God has made a promise to such as truly repent. I.
Of remission of sins. Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your
works from before Isa. 1. 16. 18.
mine eyes: cease to do evil, etc. though your sins were as crimsin, they
shall be made a^ white as snow: though they were red like scarlet, they shall be
as wool. And, Seek the Lord Isa. 55. 6. 7.
while he may be found, call upon him while he is near. Let the wicked for
sake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and return unto the
Lord, and he will have mercy on him, for he is very plentiful in forgiving.
II. Of life everlasting. I will not the Ezech 18.
death of a sinner, but rather that he repent and live. And, Thus says the
Lord unto the house of Israel, Seek ye me, and ye shall Amos. 5. 4.
live. III. Of mitigating or remooving temporal calamities. Stand in the
court of the Lords house and speak unto all the cities Ierem. 26. 3.
of Judah, etc. If so be they will hearken and turn every man from his evil
way, that* I may repent me of the plague which I have determined to bring upon
them, because of the wickedness of their works.

As God has made these merciful promises to penitent sinners, so he has
faithfully performed them, so soon as they have but begun to repent. Example
of David, Then David 2. Sam. 12. 12.
said to Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan said to David, thy
sin is forgiven thee. Of Manasses. When he was in tribulation he prayed unto
the Lord his God, 2. Chr. 33. 12.
and humbled him self greatly before the Lord God of his fathers, and prayed
unto him: an^ God was entreated of him, and heard his prayer Of the Publicane.
The Publicane etc. smot^ Luke 18. 13.
his breast, saying, O God be merciful to me sinner: I tell you, this man
departed justified t^ his house, rather then the other. Of the thief* He said
unto Jesus, Lord, remember me, when Luke 23. 42. 43.
thou come to thy kingdom. Then Jesus sai^ unto him, verily I say unto
thee, to day shall thou be with me in paradise.

Having such notable promises made to Repentance, no man is to draw back from
the practice of it, because of the multitude o^ his sins: but rather to do
it. The Pharise^ said to Christ's disciples, why eats your master Matt. 9. 12.
with Publicanes and sinners. When Jesus heard it, he said unto them, the whole
need no^ the Physician, but they that are sick. And I am come not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. Matt. 21. 31.
And Verily I say unto you, that Publicanes and harlots shall go before you
into the kingdom of God.

CAP. IX. Of the time of Repentance.
THe time of repentance is the time present, without any delay at all: as the
holy Ghost says, To day if ye will hear his voice. And, Heb. 3. 7, 13.
Exhort one another daily, while it is called to day; lest any of you be
hardened through the deceitfullnesse of sin. Reasons hereof are these. I.
Life is uncerten: for no man knows at what hour or moment, and after what
manner he shall go forth of this world. Be ye also prepared therefore, Luke
12. 40.
for the son of man will come at an hour when ye think not. This one thing
should make a man to hasten his repentance; and the rather, because many are
dead, who purposed with them selves to repent in time to come; but were
prevented by death, and shall never repent. II. The longer a man lives in any
sin, the greater danger: because by practice sin gets heart and strength.
Custom is of such force, that that which men use to do in their life time, the
same they do and speak when they are dying. One had three pounds owing to him
to be paid three several years: when he was dying, nothing could be got of
him, but three years, three pounds. Again, by deferring repentance, men
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath. As if a malefactor for his
punishment, should be appointed to carry every day a stick of wood to an heap,
to burn him twenty years after. III. The more the time is prolonged, the
harder it is to repent: the longer a man goes in his sickness without
physic, the harder is the recoverie. And where the devil dwells long, he
will hardly be remooved. The best way to kill a serpent, is, to cruse it in the
head when it is young. IIII. It is as meat and drink to the devil to see men
live in their sins deferring repentance: as on the contrary, there is great
joy among the angels of god in heaven, when a sinner does repent. V. Late
repentance is seldom or never true repentance. For if a man repent when he
cannot sin as in former time, as namely in death: then he leaves not sin
but sin leaves him: wherefore the repentance which men frame to them selves
when they are dying, it is to be feared least it die with them. And it is very
just, that he should be contemned of God in his death, who contemned God in
his life. Chrysostom says, that the wicked man has this punishment on him,
that in dying he should forget himself, who when he was living did forget
God. VI. We are with Abel to give unto God in sacrifice even the fat of our
flock: now they which defer repentance to the end do the contrary. Late
repenters offer the flower of their youth to the devil: and they bring the
lame and broken sacrifice of their old age to God.

CAP. X. OF CERTAIN CASES in Repentance.
I. Case of a revolt.
WHether a man that has professed Christ and his religion, yet afterward in
persecution denies Christ, and forsweares the religion, may repent and be
saved. Answer. It is a grievous estate: yet a man may come to repentance
afterward. Manasses fell away to idolatry and witchcraft: and yet was received
to mercy. So did wise Solomon: 2. Chr. 33.
and yet no doubt recovered and is received to life everlasting. My reason is,
because God vouchsafed him to be a penman of some parts of holy scripture. And
the sctiptures were written not by such as were men of God only, but by such as
were holy men of God. Peter denied Christ of knowledge against his 2. Pet. 1.
^1.
own conscience, and that with cursing and banning: and yet came to repentance
afterward, as appears by the testimony of Christ, I have prayed for thee that
thy faith fail not; Luke 22. 32.
therefore when thou art converted strengthen thy brethren.

Object. I. Matthew, 10. 33. Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I
deny before my father which is in heaven. Answer. The place is only to be
understood of such a denial of Christ which is final.

Object. II. Hebr. 6. 4. It is impossible that they which were once lightened:
and have tasted of the heavenly gift etc. if they fall away should be renewed
by repentance. And Heb. 10. 26. If we sin willingly after that we have
received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for
sin. Answer. These places must be understood of the sin which is to death:
in which men of desperate malice against Christ, universally and wholly fall
away from religion. For the holy ghost says not, if they fall, but a (...).
if they fall away. and it is added, that they crucify the son of God, and
make a mock of him, that Heb. 6. 6.
they trample under foot the son of God, that they account the blood of the
new testament Hebr. 10. 29.
an unholy thing; that they despise the spirit of God. And the word translated
a (...).
Willingly, imports somewhat more, namely, to sin because a man will, that
is, wilfully.

II. Case of Recidivation.
WHether the child of God, after repentance for some grievous sin, do fall into
the same again, and come to repentance the second time. Answer. The case is
dangerous as we may see by comparison in the body. If one fall into the
relapse of an ague or any other strong disease, it may cost him his life: and
the recovery will be very hard. Christ said to the man that had been sick 38
years, after that he had healed him. Behold, thou art whole, sin no more,
John. 5. 14. Luke 11. 26.
lest a worse thing befall thee. And the unclean spirit returning takes to him
other seven spirits worse then himself. Indeed we find no particular example
of recovery after a relapse, in the scriptures: yet no doubt a recovery may be.
Reasons are these. I. Promise is made of remission of sins in Christ without
any term of time: without any limitation to any number or kinds of sin:
save only the blasphemy against the holy Ghost. Therefore Acts. 10. 43.
there may be repentance and salvation after a relapse. II. Christ tells Peter
that he must forgive not till seven times only (which peradventure he thought
to be very much) but seventy seven times, and that in one day, Luke 17. 4.
if one return seventie times and say, it repents me. Now if we must do
this, which have not so much as a drop of mercy in us in comparison of God: he
will no doubt often forgive, even for one sin, if men will return and say,
it repents me: considering that with Psalm. 130. 7. Isa. 56. 7.
him is plentiful redemption, and he is much in sparing.

III. Case Of Restitution.
WHether he that repents is to make restitution if he have taken any thing
wrongfully from his neighbor. Answer. Yea: Zacheus, when he repented and
received Christ, gave half of his goods to the poor, and if he had taken any
thing by forged cavillation, he restored it four Luke 19. 8.
fold. It is but a badde practice when a man on his death-bedde will very
devoutly bequeath his soul to God, and his goods evil gotten (as his
conscience will often cry in his ear) to his children and friends, without
either restitution or amends making. Question. But what if a man be not able to
restore. Answer. Let him acknowledge the fault, and God will accept the will
for the deed. As Paul says in the like case If there be a willing mind, it is
accepted 2. Cor. 8. 12.
according to that which a man has and not according to that he has not.
Question. When a man by restoring shall discredit him self: how shall he both
restore and keep his credit. Answer. Let him (if the thing to be restored be
of small moment) make choice of some faithful and honest friend: who may
deliver the thing in the behalf of the party, concealing his name.

IIII. Case of Tears.
WHether does repentance always go with tears or not. Answer. No: For very
pride and hypocrisy will draw forth tears, for some there are, that can
weep for their sins in the presence of others: whereas being alone, they
neither will nor can. Some again are of that constitution of body, that they
have tears at command. And a godly man with dry cheeks may mourn to God
for his sins, and entreat for pardon, and receive it. Yet in all occasions of
deeper grief for sin, tears will follow: unless men have stony and flinty
hearts. And yet again, though the greatest cause of sorrow be offered, the
softest heart that is, sheds not tears at the first: but afterward it will.
When the body receives a deep wound, at the first ye shall see nothing but a
white line or dint made in the flesh, without any blood: stay but a while, then
comes blood from the wound in great abundance. So at the first the mind is
astonished and gives no tears: but after some respit and consideration, tears
follow.

V. Case of death.
WHether the repentant sinner can always shevve himself comfortable, on his
death bed. Answer. Though the comfort of Gods spirit shall never be
abolished from his heart: yet he can not always testify it. For he may die
of a burning ague: and by reason of the extremity of his fits, be troubled
with idleness of head, and break out into raving speeches and blasphemies.
Likewise he may die of sickness in the brain, and be troubled with grievous
convulsions: so as his mouth shall be writhen to his ears, his neck turned
behind him: and the very place where he lies shall shake through his trembling,
as daily experience will testify. Neither is any to think this strange. For
Solomon says, All things (in outward matters) come alike to all and the same
Eccle. 9. 2.
condition is to the just and to the wicked: to the good and to the pure, and
to the polluted, and to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not.

CAP. XI. Of the contraries to Repentance.
Contrary to Repentance is Impenitencie: whereby men continue in one estate,
neither sorowing for sin, nor turning from it.

It is one of the most grievous judgments that is if it be final. For as a
sick man, then is most sick, when he feels the lest sickness, and says he
is well: so miserable man is in most misery when he feels no misery, and
thinks himself in good estate.

This sin befalls them that judge themselves righteous, needing no repentance.
As the Pharisees in the days of Christ, the Catharists in the Primative Church,
and the Anabaptists in our age. Add unto these, such as have hardened their
hearts: so as they can not discern between good and evil; nor tremble at Gods
judgments, but rather fret and rage against them: till God in his wrath either
destroy them or cast them to final despair. As it befell Julian the Apostata,
who died blaspheming, and casting his own blood into the air.

Between the two extremes Repentance and Impenitencie, is placed counterfeit
repentance. For the wicked nature of man can dissemble and counterfeit Gods
grace. As the Lord complains of the Jews. Her rebellious sister Judah, has
not returned unto me with her whole heart, but fainedly says the Lord. Ierem.
3. 10.

Counterfeit repentance is either Ceremonial or Desperate.

Ceremonial, when men repent in outward show, but not in the truth of heart. As
Saul. Then said Saul to Samuel, I have sinned: for I 1. Sam. 15. 24, 30.
have transgressed the commandments of the Lord, and thy words: because I
feared the people and obeyed their voice. Now therefore I pray thee take away my
sin, and turn again with me, that I may worship the Lord etc. Again, I have
sinned, but honor me I pray thee before the el^ers of my people. Of Ahab. When
Ahab heard these words ^e rent his clothes and put on sackcloath, 1. Kin. 21.
27, 29.
and fasted, and went softly. And the word of the Lord came to Elijah saying,
see thou how Ahab is humbled before me.

Dissembled repentance may be discerned because men after a time return to
their old byas again. Pharao king of Egypt said unto Moses and Aaron, Pray
unto the Lord that he Exodus 8. 8.
may take away the frogs from me and from my people. And, when Egypt was
smitte^ with hail he said: I have now sinned: and the Lord is righteous: but
I and my people are wicked: pray ye unto the Lord, that there be no more mighty
Exodus 9. 27.
thunders and bail. Again, troubled with grasshoppers, he said, I have sinned
against the Lord your God, and against you, and now forgive Exodus 10. 16.
me my sin only this once, etc. Now mark the issue of all: when Pharao saw
that he had rest given him, he hardened his heart. and harkened not unto them,
as the Lord had Exodus 8. 15.
said. This is the ordinary and common repentance that most men practice in the
world.

Desperate repentance is, when a man having only gods judgments before his
eyes, is smitten with horror of conscience: and wanting assurance of Gods
mercy despaires finally. This was Judas Repentance, who when he had brought
again the 30. pieces of silver confessed Matt. 27. 3.
his fault, and went and hanged himself.

CAP. XII. Of corruptions in the doctrine of Repentance.
THe Church of Rome at this day has corrupted the ancient doctrine of
repentance being one of the special points of religion. The corruptions are
specially six.

The first, that they make repentance or penance to be a sacrament, which can
not be: because it wants an outward sign. And though some say, that the words,
which the priest rehearses in absolution, are the sign: yet that can not be:
because the sign must be not only audible, but also visible.

The second, that a sinner has in him a natural disposition, which being
stirred-up by Gods preventing grace, he may and can work together with Gods
spirit in his own repentance. But indeed all our repentance is to be ascribed
to Gods grace wholly. The soul of man is not weak but stark dead in sin:
and Ephesians. 1. ^.
therefore it can no more prepare it self to repentance, then the body being
dead in the grave can dispose it self to the last resurrection.

The third corruption, that contrition in repentance must be sufficient. A
thing impossible. For sin does so greatly offend Gods majesty, that no man
can ever mourn enough for it.

The fourth, that contrition does merit remission of sin. An opinion that
does derogate much from the all-sufficient merits of Christ.

The fifth that he that repents must confess all the sins, that he can
remember with all their circumstances to his own priest, or one in his stead,
if he will receive pardon. This kind of confession is a mere forgery of man's
brain. I. There is neither precept nor example of it in the Scriptures. II.
David and others have repented Psalm. 32. 3. 2. Sam. 12. 1^.
and have received remission of their sins without confessing of their sins
in particular to any man.

The last, that the sinner by his works and sufferings must make satisfaction
to God for the temporal punishment of his sins. A flat blasphemy. The
scriptures mention no other 1. Ioh. 1. 7. and 2. 1.
satisfaction but Christ's; and if his be sufficient, ours is needless: if ours
needful, his imperfect. Papists write that both may stand together. Christ's
satisfaction (they say) is as a plaster in a box unapplyed: man's satisfaction
as a means to apply it: because it prepares us to receive it. Ah, good
divinity: for even in common sense the satisfaction of Christ must first be
applied to the person of man that it may please God: before the works (which
they term satisfactions) can any way be acceptable to God.

To conclude, the Romish doctrine of repentance, is the right way to hell. For
when a sinner shall be taught that he must have sufficient sorrow for his sin:
and withal that he must not believe the remission of his own sins
particularly: when sorrow comes upon him and he wants sound comfort in Gods
mercy, he must needs fall into desperation without recovery. Therefore the
papists in the hour of death, (as we have experience) are glad to leave the
trumpery of humane satisfactions, and to rest only, for their justification, on
the obedience of Christ.

LAVS DEO.
THE COMBAT OF THE FLESH AND SPIRIT.
Gal. 5. 17. For the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh; and these are contrary one to another, so that ye can not do the
things which ye would.
THe Apostle Paul from the beginning of this chapter to the 13. verse exhorts
the Galatians to maintain their christian liberty: and from thence to the end
of the chapter he persuades the^ to other special duties of godliness. In the
13. verse he stirs them up to be serviceable one to another by love: in the 15.
verse he disswades them from contentions and doing of injuries. In the 16.
verse he shows the remedy of the former sins, which is to walk according to
the spirit. In this seventeenth verse he renders a reason of the remedy, the
force whereof is this. The flesh and the spirit are contrary: wherefore if ye
walk according to the spirit, it will hinder the flesh, that it shall not
carry you forward to do injuries and live in contentions, as otherwise it would.

In this verse we have to observe 5. points. The first that there is a combat
between the flesh and the spirit in these words, The flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. The second is the manner of this
combat, which stands in the contrary lusting of the flesh and the spirit. The
third is the cause of the combat in these words, and these are contrary. The
fourth is the subject or person in who^ this: combat is, noted in these words,
So that ye, the Galatians. The last is the effect of the co^bat, in the last
words, that they cannot do, etc.

Touching the combat it self, diverse points are to be considered. The first,
what these two, which make combat, namely, the flesh and the spirit, are. They
have diverse significations. First of all, the spirit is taken for the soul,
and the flesh for the body. But so they are not taken in this place. For there
is no such combat between the body and the soul: both which agree together to
make the person of one man. Secondly, the spirit signifies natural reason, and
the flesh the natural appetite or concupiscence. But they cannot be so
understood in this place. For the spirit here mentioned does fight even against
natural reason: which though it serve to make a man without excuse, yet is it
an enemy to the spirit. Thirdly, the spirit signifies the godhead of Christ,
and the flesh the manhood: but it must not be so taken here. For then every man
regenerate should be deified. Lastly, the spirit signifies a created quality of
holiness, which by the holy ghost is wrought in the mind, will, and affections
of man: and the flesh, the natural corruption or inclination of the mind,
will, and affections to that which is against the law. In this first these
twain are taken in this place.

Secondly it is to be considered how these twain, the flesh and the spirit can
fight together, being but mere qualities. And we must know, that they are not
severed asunder, as though the flesh were placed in one part of the soul, and
the spirit in another: but they are joined and mingled together in all the
faculties of the soul. The mind or understanding part, is not one part flesh,
and an other spirit, but the whole mind is flesh and the whole mind is spirit;
partly one and partly the other. The whole will is partly flesh and partly
spirit: the flesh and the spirit that is grace and corruption, not severed in
place but distinguished. As the air in the dawning of the day is not wholly
light or wholly dark as at midnight and at nooneday: neither is it in one part
light, in another part dark: but the whole air is partly light, and partly
dark throughout. In a vessel of lukewarm water, the water it self is not
only hot or only cold; or in one part hot and in another part cold: but heat
and cold are mixed together in every part of the water. So is the flesh and the
spirit mingled together in the soul of man: and this is the cause why these
two contrary qualities fight together.

Thirdly in this combat we are to consider what equality there is between
these two combaters, the flesh and the spirit. And we must know, that the flesh
usually, is more in measure then the spirit. The flesh is like the mighty giant
Goliath: and the spirit is little and small like young David. Hence it is, that
Paul calls the Corinthians which were men justified and sanctified, carnal. I
could not (says he) 1. Cor. 3. 1.
breethren spkake unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, as unto
babes in Christ. And none can come to be tall men in Christ according Ephesians. 4.
to the age of the fullness of Christ, till after this life. And the speech
which is used of some divines, that the man regenerate has but the relics of
sin in him, must be understood warily, else it may admit an untruth. As for the
measure of grace, it can be but small in respect, whereas we do receive but the
first fruits of Romans 8. 23.
the spirit in this life; and must wait for the accomplishment of our
redemption till the life to come. For all this, the power and efficacy of the
spirit is such, that it is able to prevail ordinarily against the flesh. For
the flesh receives his deadly wound at the first instant of a man's conversion,
and continually dies after by little and little: and therefore it fights but as a
maimed soldier. And the spirit is continually confirmed and increased hy the
holy ghost: also it is lively and stirring and the virtue of it is like musk;
one grain whereof will give a stronger smell, the^ many unces of other perfumes.
Some may say, that the godly man does more feel the flesh then the spirit: and
therefore that the flesh is every way more then the spirit. I answer, that we
must not measure our estate by feeling which may easily deceive us. A man shall
feel a pain which is but in the top of his finger more sensibly then the
health of his whole body: yet the health of the body is more the^ the pain of a
fingar. Secondly we feel corruption not by corruption but by grace: and
therefore men, the more they feel their inward corruptions, the more grace they
have.

Thus much of the combat it self: now let us come to the manner of this fight.

It is fought by Lusting. To lust in this place signifies to bring forth and to
stir up motions and inclinations in the heart, either to good or evil.

Lusting is twofold: the lusting of the flesh, and the lusting of the spirit.

The lusting of the flesh has two actions: the first is, to engender evil
motions and passions of self-love, envy, pride, unbelief, anger, etc. S.
James says, that men are enticed and Iam. 1. 14.
drawn away by their own concupisce^ce. Now this enticing is only by the
suggestion of bad cogitations and desires. This action of the flesh made Paul
say that he was carnal sold under Romans 7. 14.
sin.

The second action of the flesh is to hinder, and quench, and overwhelm all the
good motions of the spirit. Paul found this in himself, when he said, I see
another law in my members rebelling against the law of the mind, and leading
Romans 7. 23.
me captive to the law of sin. By reason of this action of the flesh, the man
regenerate is like to one in a slumber troubled with the disease called
Ephialtes or the mare: who thinks that he feels something lying on his breast
as heavy as a mountain: and would feign have it away, whereupon he strives and
labors by hands and voice to remove it, but for his life can not do it.

On the contrary, the lusting of the spirit contains two other actions. The
first is to beget good motions, inclinations, and desires in the mind, will,
and affections. Of this David speaks, Psalm. 16. 8.
Myreines teach me in the night season. That is, my mind, affection, and will,
and my whole soul being sanctified and guided by the spirit of God, do
minister unto me consideratio^s of the way in which I ought towalk. Isaias
prophesying of the Church of the new testament, says, When a man goes to the
right Isa. 30. 22.
hand or to the left, he shall he are a voice, saying, here is the way walk ye
in it. Which voice is not only the outward preaching of the ministers, but also
the inward voice of the spirit.

The second action of the spirit is to hinder and suppress the bad motions and
suggestions of the flesh. S. John says, he that is borne of God sins not,
because his seed remains 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
in him, that is, grace wrought in the heart by the holy ghost, which resists
the rebellious desires of the flesh.

That the manner of this fight may more clearly appear, we must examine it
more particularly. In the soul of man there be two special parts, the mind
and the will.

In the mind there is a double combat. The first is between knowledge of the
word of God, and natural ignorance or blindness. For seeing we do in this life
know but in part: therefore knowledge of the truth must needs be joined with
ignorance in all that are enlightened: and one of these being contrary to an
other, they strive to ouershadow and ouercast each other.

Hence we may learn the cause why excellent divines do vary in diverse points of
religion: and it is, because in this co^bat, natural blindness yet remaining,
prevails more or less. Men that are dim sighted and cannot discern without
spectacles, if they should be set to discry a thing a far off, the most of them
would be of diverse opinions of it. And men enlightened and regenerate in this
life do but see as in a glass darkly. 1. Cor. 13.
Again, this must teach all stude^ts of divinity often to suspect themselves in
their opinions and defenses: seeing in them that are of soundest judgment the
light of their understanding is mixed with darkness of ignorance. And they can
in many points see but as the man in the Gospel, who when our Savior Christ
had in part opened his eyes, saw men walking, not as men, but in the form of
trees. Also this must teach all that read the scriptures to invocate and call
upon the name of God, that he would inlighten the^ by his spirit, and abolish
the mist of natural blindness. The prophet David was worcester thily enlightened with
the knowledge of Gods word, so as he excelled the ancient and his own teachers
in wisdom: yet being privy to himself touching his own blindness, often
prays in the Psalms, Inlighten my eyes that I may understand the wonders of
thy law.

By reason of this fight, when natural blindness prevails, the child of God
truly enlightened with knowledge to life everlasting, may err not only in
lighter points, but even in the very foundation of religion, as the Corinthians
and the Galathians did. And as one man may err, so an hundred men may also:
yea a whole particular Church: and as one Church may err, so an 100. more may.
For in respect of this combat, the estate and condition of all men is alike.
Whence it appears that the Church militant upon earth is subject to error. But
yet as the diseases of the body be of two sorts: some curable, and some
incurable which are to death; so likewise errors are. And the Church though it
be subject to sundry falls, yet it can not err in foundation to death: the
errors of Gods children be curable. Some may here say, If all men and Churches
be subject to error, then it shall not be good to join with any of them, but
to separate from them all. I answer, though they may and do err, yet we must
not separate from them, so long as they do not separate from Christ.

The second combat in the mind is, between faith and unbelief. For faith is
imperfect, and mixed with the contrary unbelief, presuming, doubting, etc. As
the man in the Gospel says, Lord I believe, help mine unbelief.

By reason of this fight, when unbelief preuailes, the very child of God may
fall into fits and pangs of despair: as Job and David in their temptations did.
For David once considering the prosperity of the wicked, brake out into this
speech, Certainly I have cleansed mine heart in Psalm. 73. 13.
vain, and washed mine hands in innocence. yea, this despair may be so
extreme, that it shall weake^ the body and consume it, more then any sickness. No
man is to think this strange in the child of God. For though he despair of his
election and salvation in Christ, yet his desperatio^ is neither total nor
final. It is not total, because he does not despair with his whole heart,
faith even at that instant lusting against despair. It is not final, because
he shall recover before the last end of his life.

To proceed, the combat in the will is this. The will partly wills and partly
nilleth that which is good at the same instant: and so likewise it wills and
nilleth that which is evil: because it is partly regenerate and partly
unregenerate. The affections likewise, which are placed in the will, partly
embrace and partly eschew their objects: as love partly loves and partly does
not love God and things to be loved: fear is mixed and not pure (as schooleme^
have dremed) but partly fili^l partly servil, causing the child of God to stand
in awe of god not only for his mercies, but also for his judgments and
punishments. The will of a man regenerate is like him that has one leg sound,
the other lame: who in every step which he makes, does not wholly halt or
wholly go upright, but partly go upright and partly halt. Or like a man in a
boat on the water: who goes upward because he is carried upward by the
vessel: and at the same time goes downward, because he walks downward in the
same vessel at the same instant. If any shall say that contraries ca^ not be
in the same subject. The answer is, that they ca^ not, if one of them be in his
full strength in the highest degree: but if the force of them In gradibus
remissis non in summis.
both be delaied and weakened, they may be joined together.

By reason of this co^bat, when corruption prevails against grace in the will
and affections, there arises in the godly a certain deadnes or hardness of
heart, which is nothing else but a want of sense or feeling. Some may say, that
this is a fearful judgment: but the answer is, that there be 2. kinds of
hardness of heart: one which possesses the heart, and is never felt: this is in
them, who have their consciences seared with an hot Ephesians. 4. 19.
iron, who by reason of custom in sin are past all feeling, who likewise
despise the means of softning their hearts. And indeed this is a fearful
judgment. There is another hardness of heart Zach. 7. 11.
which is felt: and this is not so dangerous as the former: for as we feel our
sickness by contrary life and health: so hardness of heart when it is felt argues
quicknes of grace and softnes of heart. Of this David often complained in the
Psalms: of this the children of Israel speak when they say, Isai. 65. 17.
Why have thou hardened our hearts from thy ways.

Thus much of the manner of the c^mbate in particular: before we proceed any
further, let us mark the issue of it, which is this.

The spirit prevails against the flesh at two times: in the course of a man's
life, and at his end; but yet with some foiles received.

I say the spirit prevails not in one instant, but in the whole course of a man's
life. So S. John says, He which is begotten of God sins not: 1. Ioh. 5. 19.
for he preserves himself: the grace of God in his heart ordinarily
prevailing in him. And Paul makes it the property of the regenerate man to walk
according to the spirit, which is Romans 8. 1.
not now and then to make a step forward, but to keep his ordinary course in
the way of godliness. As in going from Barwick to London, it may be a man now
and then will go amiss: but he speedily returns to the way again, and his
course generally shall be right.

Again, the spirit prevails in the end of a ma^s life. For then the flesh is
utterly abolished and sanctification accomplished: because no unclean thing
can enter into the kingdom of heaven.

This further must be conceived, that when the spirit prevails, it is not
without resistance and striving. As Paul testisieth, I do not the good which I
would, but the evil which I would not that do I. which place is not to be
understood only of thoughts and inward motions (as some would have it) nor of
particular offenses: but of the general practice of his duty or calling,
through the whole course of his life. And it is like the practice of a sickman,
who having recovered of some grievous disease, walks a turn or twain about his
chamber, saying, ah, I would fain walk up and down but I cannot: meaning not
that he can not walk at all, but signifying that he cannot walk as he would,
being soon wearied through faintness.

I added further, that this prevailing is with foyles. A foil is, when the
flesh for the time vanquisheth and subdueth the spirit. In this case, the man
regenerate is like a soldier, that with a blow has his brain-pan cracked, so
as he lies groueling astonished not able to fight: or like him that has a fit
of the falling sickness, who for a time lies like a dead man. Hence the question
may be moved, whether the flesh prevailing does not extinguish the spirit, and
so cut off a man from Christ, till such time as he be ingrafted again. The
answer is this. There be two sorts of christians: one who does only in show and
name profess Christ: and such an one is no otherwise a member of Christ's
mystical body, then a wooden leg set to the body is a member of the body. The
second is he that in name and deed is a lively part and member of Christ. If
the first fall, he cannot be said to be cut off, because he was never
ingrafted. If the second fall, he may be and is cut off from Christ. But mark
how: he is not wholly cut of but in some part, namely in respect of the inward
fellowship and communion with Christ, but not in respect of coniunctio^ with
him. A man's arm taken with the dead palsy, hangs by and receives no heat,
life, or sense from the rest of the members, or from the head, yet for all
this, it remains still united and coupled to the body, and may again be
recovered by plasters and physic: so after agrievous fall the child of God
feels no inward peace and comfort but is smitten in conscience with tbe
trembling of a spiritual palsy for his offense: and yet indeed remains
before God a member of Christ which shall be restored to his former estate
after serious repentance.

And God permits these foiles for weighty causes: first that men might be
abashed and confounded in themselves with the consideration of their vile
natures and learn not to swell with pride, because of Gods grace. Paul says
that after he had bin rapt into the third heaven, the angel Satan was sent to
buffet him, and (as we said) to beat him black and blew, that he might not be
exalted out of measure. The second, that we may learn to deny our selves and
cleave unto the Lord from the bottom of our hearts. Paul says that he was sick
to death, that he might 2. Cor. 1. 9.
not trust in him self, but in God who raises the dead.

Thus much of the manner of the combat: now follows the cause of it.

The cause is the contrariety that is between the flesh and the spirit. As Paul
says, The wisdom Romans 8. 5.
of the flesh is enmity to God.

Hence we are taught, that since the fall, there is no free will in man, in
spiritual matters concerning either the worship of God or life everlasting. For
flesh is nothing else but our natural disposition: and man is nothing else but
flesh by nature: for the spirit comes afterward by grace: and yet flesh is flat
contrary to the spirit which makes us do that which is pleasing unto God.
wherefore the will naturally is a flat bo^dslaue unto sin.

Again, hence we may learn: that it is not an easy matter to practice
religion: which is to live according to the spirit, to which our natural
disposition is as contrary as fire to water* wherefore if we will obey God, we
must learn to force our natures to the duties of godliness: yea, even sweat and
take pains therein.

Lastly here we may learn the nature of sin. The spirit is not a substance but
a quality: and therefore the flesh which is nothing else but original sin, and
is contrary to the spirit, must also be a quality: for such as the nature of
one contrary is, such is the other. There is in every man the substance of body
and soul, this cannot be sin, for then the spirit also should be the substance
of man. There is also in the substance the faculties of body and soul: and
they can not be sin, for then every man should have lost the faculties of his
soul by Adams fall. Lastly in the faculties there is a contagion or corruption
which carries them against the law: and that is properly sin and the flesh,
which is contrary to the spirit.

The fourth point is touching the persons in whom this combat is. Paul shows
who they are, when he says, So that ye can not, etc. where it appears that
such as have this co^bat in them must be as the Galatians, men justified and
sanctified: And yet not all such, but only they that be of years: for the
infants of the faithful, how soever we must repute them to belong to the
kingdom of heaven, and therefore to be justified and sanctified: yet because
they do not commit actual sin, they want this co^bat of the flesh and spirit,
which sta^ds in actio^. As for those which be unregenerate, they never felt
this fight. If any say that the worst man in the world, when he is about to
commit any sin, has a strife and fight in him. It is true indeed: but that
is another kind of co^bat, which is between the conscienceand the heart. The
conscience on the one part terrifying the man from sin: the will and the
affections haling and pulling him thereunto: the will and the affections wishing
and desiring that sin were no sin, and Gods commandment abolished: whereas
contrariwise the conscience with a shril voice proclaims sin to be sin. This
fight was in Pilat, who by the force of his conscience feared to condemn
Christ: and yet was willing, and yielded to condemn him that he might please
the people.

Furthermore, this co^bat is in the regenerate but during the time of this
life* for they which are perfitly sanctified feel no strifte. If any shall say,
that this co^bat was in Christ when he said, Father, if it be thy will let this
cup pass from me, yet not my will but thine be done. Indeed here is a co^bat,
but of another sort: namely the fight of two diverse desires: the one was a
desire to do his fathers will in suffering the death of the cross: the other a
natural desire (which was no sin but a mere infirmity of humane nature)
whereby he in his manhood desires (as the manner of nature is to seek the
preservation of it self) to have the cursed death of the cross removed from
him.

The fifth point is the effect of this combat, which is to make the man
regenerate, that he can not do the things which he would: and this must be
understood in things both good and ill.

And first he can not do the evil which he would for two causes. First because
he cannot commit sin at what time soever he would. S. John says, He that is
borne of God sins not, 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
neither can he sin, because he is borne of God, that is, he can not sin at his
pleasure or when he will. Joseph when he was assaulted by Putiphars wife to
adultery; because the grace of God abounded in him, whereby he answered her,
saying, Shall I do this, and sin against God, he could not then sin. Lot,
because his righteous heart was grieved in seeing and hearing the abominations
of Sodom, could not then sin as they of Sodom did. Hence it appears, that such
persons as live in the daily practice of sin against their own consciences,
(though they be professors of the true religion of Christ) have no soundnes of
grace in them.

Secondly, the man regenerate can not sin in what manner he would: And there be
two reasons thereof. First, he can not sin with full consent, of will or with
all his heart: because the will so far forth as it is regenerate, resists and
draws back: yea, even then when a man is carried headlong by the passions of
the flesh, he feels some contrary motions of a regenerate conscience. It is a
true rule that sin does not reign in the regenerate. For so much grace as is
wrought in the mind, will, affections: so much is abated proportionally of the
strength of the flesh, wherefore when he co^mits any sin, he does it partly
willingly, and partly against his will. As the mariners in the tempest, cast
Jonas into the sea willingly: for otherwise they had not done it: and yet
against their wills too: which appears because they prayed, and cast their
goods out of the ship, and labored in rowing against the tempest, and that
very long before they cast him out. And herein lies the difference between
two men committing one and the same sin, the one of them being regenerate,
the other unregenerate. For the latter sins with all his heart and with full
consent, and so does not the first. Secondly, though he fall into any sin, yet
he does not lie long in it, but speedily recouers himself, by reason of grace
in his heart.

Hence it is manifest, that sins of infirmity are committed only of such as
are regenerate. As for the man unregenerate he cannot sin of infirmity
whatsoever some falsely think. For he is not weak but stark dead in sin. And
sins of infirmity are such only as rise of constraint, fear, hastines, and
such like sudden passions in the regenerate. Aed though they sin of weakness
often by reason of this spiritual combat, yet they do not always: for they
may sin against knowledge and conscience of presumption.

To come to the second point: the regenerate man cannot do the good which he
would: because he cannot do it perfitly and soundly according to Gods will as
he would. Paul says, To will is Romans 7. 18.
present with me, but I find no means ((...)) perfitly to do that which I
would. In this point the godly man is like a prisoner that is gotten forth of
the gayle, and that he might escape the hand of the keeper, desires and strives
with all his heart to run an 100 miles in a day: but because he has strait and
weighty boults on his legs, cannot for his life creep past a mile or twain, and
that with chafing his flesh and tormenting himself. So the servants of God do
heartily desire, and endeavor to obey God in all his comma^dements: as it is
said of king Josias, That he turned to God with all his heart, with 2. king.
23. 25.
all his soul, with all his might, according to all the laws of Moses, etc.
yet because they are clogged with the boltes of the flesh, they perform
obedience both slowly and weakly, with diverse slips and falls.

Thus much of the combat: now let us see what use may be made of it.

First of all by it we learn what is the estate of a christian man in this
life. A christian is not one that is free from al evil cogitations, from
rebellious inclinations and motions of will and affections, from all manner of
slips in his life and co^versation: for such an one is a mere devise of man's
brain and not to be found upon earth. But indeed he is the sound christian that
feeling himself laden with the corruptions of his vile and rebellious nature,
bewailes them from his heart, and with might and main fights against them by the
grace of gods spirit. Again here is ouerthrown the popish opinion of merit and
justification by works of grace, on this manner. Such as the cause of works
is, such are works themselves. The cause of works in man, is the mind, will,
and affections sanctified: in which, the flesh and the spirit are mixed
together, as has bin showed before. Therefore works of grace, even the best of
them are mixed works, partly holy and partly sinful. whereby it is evident to a
man that has but common sense, that they are not answerable to the
righteousness of the law: and that therefore, they can neither merit life, or any
way justify a man before God. If any reply, that good works are the works of
Gods spirit, and for that cause perfitly righteous: I answer, it is true
indeed, they come from the holy ghost that can not sin, but not only or
immediately. For they come also from the corrupt mind and will of man, and in
that respect become sinful, as sweet water issuing out of a pure fountain,
is by a filthy channel made corrupt.

Thirdly, we do hence learn that concupisce^ce or original sin is properly and
indeed sin after baptism, though it please the council of Trent to decree
otherwise. For after baptism it is flat contrary to the spirit, and rebels
against it. Papists object that it is taken away by baptism. Ans. Original sin
or the flesh is taken away in the regenerate thus. In it there be 3. things,
the guilt, the punishment, the corruption: the first 2. are quite abolished by
the merit of Christ's death in baptism: the third that is the corruption
remains still: but mark in what manner: it remains weakened, it remains not
imputed to the person of the believer.

Lastly hereby we are taught to be watchful in prayer. Watch and pray (says
Christ, etc. for the spirit is ready but the flesh is weak. Rebecca, when 2.
twins strove in her womb was troubled and said, why am I so? wherefore she
went to ask the Lord, namely by some prophet. So when we feel this inward
fight, the best thing is to have recourse to God by prayer, and to his word,
that the spirit may be strengthened against the flesh. As the children of
Israel by compassing the city of Ierico 7. days, and by sounding rams horns
overturned the walls thereof: so by serious invocation of Gods name the
spirit is confirmed, and the turrets and towers of the rebellious flesh
battered.

The voice of a man
1. Carnal of Evil. I do that which is evil and I will do it. Good. I do
not that which is good and I will not do it.
2. Regenerate of Evil. I do the evil, which I would not. Good. I do not
do the good which I would.
3. Glorified of Evil. I do not that which is evil, and I will not do it.
Good. I do that which is good and I will do it.

LAVS DEO.

