FOUR GREAT LIARS, Striving who shall win the silver WHETSTONE. ALSO, A
RESOLVTION to the countri-man, proving it utterly unlawful to buy or use our
yearly Prognostications.

Written by W. P.

ESAIAS. 47. verse. 12, 13, 14. Stand now among thine inchaunters, and in the
multitude of sothsayers, (with whom thou have wearied thy self from thy youth)
if so be thou may have profit, or if so be thou may have strength. Thou art
wearied in the multitude of thy counsels: let now the Astrologers, the
Star-gazers, and Prognosticators stand up, and save thee from these things that
shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as stubble: the fire shall burn them,
they shall not deliver their own lives from the power of the flame: there
shall be no coals to warm at, nor light to sit by.

AT LONDON; Printed by Robert Walde-graue.

Four great liars, striving who shall win the Silver whet-stone.
January.
First day.
B Cold and moist weather. F Hard underfoot. T Temperate weather.
2
B Rain and windy weather. F Dry underfoot. T Cloudy, rain and slatter.
7
B Lowering weather. F Hoarie frostes. T Rain or hayle.
11
B Windy and foul weather. F Fair winter weather. T Warm air.
14
B Cloudie and shewerie. F Fair and frostie. T Moist.
16
B Raw cold. F Seasonable for the time. T Temperate.
17
B Inclined to frost. F Raynish weather. T Temperate air.
21.
B Foul and windy. F Inclined to moisture. T Rain or snow. D Great winds
and blustering air.
30
B Temperate for the time. F Cold rainish weather. T Inclined to snow or
sleete.
February.
1
B Rain, cold and dark air. F Windy frost. T Fair.
2
B Uariable close weather. F Calm and clean. T Indifferent warm.
4
B Sharp weather thick and dark air. F Cloudie and moist weather T Frost
with snow or hayle.
7
B Uariable* F Thick air disposed to snow D Blustering winds.
8
B Uariable. F Rain and snow. T Temperate. D Blustering winds.
13
B Small rain and close air. F A goodly winters day. T Black frost*
17
B Cloudy and lowering. F Frostie and clear* T Rain.
19
B Rain, cold inclined to snow or sleete* F Seasonable weather* T Rain.
23
B Wind and storms. F A dull day, but dry over head. T Cold wind, freeze
with hail or snow* D Blustering winds.
March*
5
B Temperate. F Hard and frostie. T Windy.
15
B Cold with wind and some rain. F Fair warm weather T Windy.
19
B Calm but inconstant. F Close weather. T Rain.
21
B Lowering mingled with some showers. F Fair clear and calm, but windy. T
Fair Sun shine,
23
B Like to thunder. F Cold and raynie. T Cold blastes. D UUindes and blustering
air.
29
B Rain or other moisture. F UUindy, frost with clouds. T Clear sun shine.
30
B Disposed to rain or moisture. F Fair and windy. T Small showers.
April.
1
B Close wether disposed to rain F Uery fair weather. T Dispersed clouds.
4
B Some showers the wind variable. F UUindie and perchance mizling withal. T A
dark cloudie sky.
5
B Close, and mingled with small rain. F Seasonable wether. T Dark cloudy sky.
7
B Hot and moist. F More warm then before. T Thunder and lightning.
8
B Uariable wether. F Hot and dry. D Red Elements and flashing metors to be
seen.
12
B Cloudie, inclining to rain. F Uerie hot. T Clear sky, and fair wether
14
B Fresh air and variable. F Uery hot for the time. T Sweet smelling shewers.
15
B Cloudy with wind and some showers or else thunder and rain F A close air
which April showers* T Sweet showers.
16
B Warm weather like to thu^der. F Close air with showers. T Fair weather.
17
B Fresh air variable winds, some rain. F Fair and kind weather. T Fair
sun shine.
21
B Close with clouds threatening rain. F Troublesome and distemperate weather.
T Warm sun shine.
30
B Warm inclined to moisture F Pleasant and dry. T Some showers.
May.
1
B Fresh air somewhat lowering F Fair and windy. T Some showers.
5
B Cold clouds inclining to moisture. F Azzured sky. T Fair. D Red
elements flashing metors to be seen.
9
B Rain and windy. F Somewhat sharp weather. T Fair.
15
B Temperate weather. F Dull and dark with rainie clouds. T Fair and clear
air.
22
B Fair and warm weather. F Uariable weather. T Lightning and thunder.
June.
3
B Wind with rain like to thunder. F Dull and cloudie. T A gille heat some
thunder and lightning. D Red elements flashing metors to be seen.
8
B Somewhat mild wether. F Calm but cloudie and dark. T Lightning and thunder.
D Store of rain.
13
B Rain and wind. F Fair wether* T Temperate wether. D Thunder and
lightnings.
20
B Temperate wether F Unsteedie wether. T Air ouercast.
28
B Close and lowering. F Indifferent clear and calm. T Fair.
July.
1
B Fresh wether. F Fair. T Cloudie.
4
B UUarme. F windy wether. T A pempline wind. D Red elements and Flashing
metors to be seen.
5
B Some rain, like to thunder, F Fair weather. T A fertile of Saturn and
Mercury.
6
B Thunder F Pleasant showers. D Rain
10
B Hot wether. F Troublesome or tempestuous weather. T Cloudie sky.
11
B Fresh winds and cloudines. F Tempestuous weather. T Warm weather.
13
B Unkindly wether for the time F Fair, but somewhat cloudie with lightning. T
Moist weather.
14
B Likely to thunder with some rain. F Some kind of tempestuous weather. T
Uery hot. D Fearful lighteninges and thunder.
20
B Lowering and variable wether. F Tempestuous thunder, and lightning. T Some
warm showers. D Blustering winds.
21
B Lightning thunder and rain. F Temperate and seasonable. T A conjunction of
Jupiter and Mars. D Blustering winds.
23
B Temperate and warm. F Seasonable weather. T Moist weather. D Great store of
rain.
25
B Some rayn and close air. F Diverse colored clouds. D Thunder and
lightninges.
27
B Ouercast and some rain. F Inclined to thundering, T A sextile of Jupiter
and Venus.
28
B Rain and variable weather. F Seasonable and d^y wether. T Cold and dry
air.
29
B Fair and hot* F Seasonable weather. T Cold and dry weather.
31
B Pleasant weather. F Somewhat windy. T Clear sky.
August.
1
B Foul weather. F Fair weather. T Moist weather.
2
B Foul for the time. F Uerie hot. T Moist. D Fearful thundering and
lightninges.
4
B Warm weather. F Dry but windy. T A fair sky.
6
B Uariable. F Misling rain. T Somewhat cold.
8
B Lowering and hot weather. F Foul weather. T The Moon with the tail of the
Dragon. D Fearful thunder and lightninges.
10
B Close cloudy air full of scattering rain. F Good weather for the season. T
A true aspect of Saturn and Mercury.
11
B Uariable and somewhat fresh weather. F Good weather for the season. T Rainie
weather.
14
B Some dashing showers. F Pleasant and hot. T Cold weather.
15
B Lowering and warm weather. F Disposed to thunder and lightning. T Cold. D
Fearful thunder and lightning
16
B Lowering and warm weather. F Waueringe and uncertain weather. T Inclining
to heat.
21
B Showrie and hot. F Close glomie weather. T Moist weather
22
B Showrie and hot. F Glommie weather somewhat wyndie. T Fair weather.
24
B Wind and some rain. F A pleasant seasonable day. T Cloudie weather.
25
B Some misling rain. F A pleasant day. T Cloudie weather.
September.
2.
B Wind and sum small rain. F Fair weather. T Cloudie.
4
B Uariable and mislinge unto moisture. F Change of wether T Cold and sharp
air D Red elements and flashing metors.
6
B Sudden shows. F Fair and dry. T Moist dewes
8
B Cold and windy. F Cloudie and variable. T Cold and moist weather.
12
B Cold* close air, yet dry. F Raw cold and rain. T Fair weather.
15
B Inconstant weather. F Fair somewhat windy with whitish clouds. T Some
rain. D Great store of rain.
17
B Somewhat cold. F UUarme and moist. T Clearing up.
19
B Temperate for the season. F Close weather. T Fair weather.
20
B Temperate. F Disposed to mislinges. T A quarti^e of Mars and Venus. D Great
winds and blustering winds.
26
B Raw cold and variable wether. F Seasonable weather. D UUinde with great
store of rain.
24
B Cold. F Seasonable weather. T Warm.
25
B Fair for the time. F Windy. T A raw fog or myste. D Great store of rain.
27
B Windy and variable. F Fair. T UUarme. D Great store of rain.
October.
1
B Fair. F UUindie with rain. T UUarme.
5
B Sudden showers. F Somewhat windy. T Fair.
8
B UUindie. F Misling. T Cold frost.
12
B Close air. F Mutable. T Hoare frost.
17
B Inclined to frost. F Snow or sleete. T Cold.
27
B Wind, rain or sleet. F Fair clear day. T Cold dry frost.
30
B Cold and variable clouds. F Loud and boisterous strong winds. T A fair
sky.
31
B Moist weather. F Temperate weather. T Cold foggy mystes.
November.
6
B Raw cold, and lowering. F Windy and dry. T Warm.
8
B Wind and rain. F Fair. T Cold and moist.
12
B Driving rain. F Cold from the North. T Fair.
16
B Cloudie. F Frost. T Reasonable fair.
18
B Bent to snow. F Fair. T Rain or sleete.
20
B Showrie and cold. F Fair over head. T Rain or sleete.
23
B Rainie weather. F Subject to diverse changes. T Cold like to freeze.
24
B Seasonable weather. F Diverse changes. T Cold frost.
28
B Rain or other moisture. F Clear weather. T Mistes or foggy weather.
29
B Fair and comfortable. F Somewhat windy. T Mystie and foggie.
30
B Temperate weather. F Rainie weather. T Fair and dry.
December.
2
B Cold wind and raw weather. F UUarme air. T Frost snow, and hayle.
3
B Showers and windy blastes. F A black day. T A frost with some snow or
hayle.
4
B UUindie blastes. F A black day. T A quartile aspect of the Sun and Mars.
7
B Temperate weather. F Cold and rainie. T Mystes. D Great winds and blustering
air.
9
B Uerie cold weather. F Indifferent good weather. T Fair. D Great winds and
blustering air.
11
B Disposed to frostes. F Fair weather. T Store of snow.
12
B Disposed to frostes, but not like to hold. F Fair weather. T Great store of
snow,
13
B Uariable winds, and cold raw weather. F Cloudie. T Fair thaw.
14
B Cold raw weather. F Strong winds and rain. T An opposition of Jupiter and
the Sun.
15
B Stormy weather. F Calm. T A clear starrie sky.
16
B Some showers. F Loud winds. T Warm thaw. D Great winds and blustering
air.
17
B Fair and temperate weather. F Lowering. T Warm thaw.
18
B Seasonable. F Fair weather for ye greatest part. T UUarme thaw.
19
B Misling rain. F Fair weather. T A sextile of Saturn and Venus.
20
B Misling rain and raw cold. F Seasonable weather for the greatest part. T
Cold and dry.
21
B Boystrous wind, and some driving showers. F A black frost in the morning,
afterward loud and unconstant, weather. T Opposition of Jupiter and the
Sun.
22
B Boystrous wind and some driving showers. F Calm weather. T The Moon with
the head of the Dragon.
23
B Windy and foul weather. F Somewhat moist. T A pimpling wind.
24
B UUauering weather. F Fair. T Moist. D Great store of rain.
25
B Thick air and windy weather. F Fair enough for the season. T Moist. D
Great winds and blustering air.
26
B Thick air and windy weather. F Frostie. T Moist. D Blustering winds.
30
B Lowering close and somewhat windy. F Snow. T Slatter.
31
B UUindie weather. F A windy frost in the morning. T Snow and slatter.
Not convenient to have Prognostications Reasons: 1 Concerning the byer. 1
Immoderate care, joined with distrust in God. 2 Contempt of the providence of
God, in not reverently regarding it.
2 Concerning the maker 1 His inability in Prognosticating, proved 1 By the
true end of the heavens. 2 By want of good experience. 3 By ignorance of
particular causes.
2 His manifold untruths. 3 His impieties and profane speeches, and actions,
not seeming a Christian. 4 His tricks of deceit.



A RESOLVTIon to the Countryman, prouyng it unlawful for him to bye or use
our yearly Prognostications.
GOOD Reader, I have thought it convenient (for some special causes) in this
short treatise, to disclose a part of my mind unto thee, concerning the making
of Prognostications, and if it might be, to persuade thee, not to spend thy
money in buying any of them. I have long studied this Art, and was never quiet
until I had seen all the secrets of the same: but at ye length, it pleased
God to lay before me, ye prophanenes of it, nay, I dare boldly say, Idolatry,
although it be covered with fair and golden shows. Wherefore, that which I
will speak with grief, the same I would desire thee to mark with some
attention. My reason shall partly concern thee, partly ye Prognosticatour
himself. First on thy behalf, I reason thus.

The first Reason, immoderate care.
1 AS a man does see the blessings of God upon him, so he must also labor
with a careful diligence to maintain the state of this life. But because the
affection of man is carried headlong unto a greedy covetousness: this desire of
overmuch carpyng and caryng, must be bridled with two strong bittes. Math.
6.11.
First, all our care must extend it self no further, then the present day:
Secondly, in caryng we must not trust unto our selves, but fix all our
confidence in the mercy and providence of God who blesses all, and without
whose goodness, nothing can come to pass, do what we will. As touching the
first, we have the direction of our Savior Christ: who teaches us to pray on
this wise. Give us this day our daily bread, whereby we are given to
understand, that we are only to seek for the present time, resting with this
persuasio^, that he which has blessed us this day, will also to morrow, and the
next day show his like goodness unto us. Again, in ye same place, our Savior
Christ speaks on this wise. Care not the^ for the morrow: Math. 6.34.
for the morrow shall care for it self: the day has enough with his own
grief. By this we learn that God will provide for every day all things
necessary, though we do not increase the present grief, with caryng and casting
in our heads how we shall live in the time to come. Now tell me what is the
cause that thou yearly do buy a Prognostication, and one of those, which
tell the straungest things? Is it because thou have a delight to read the style
of Prognostications? Or because thou would learn to Prognosticate? Or
because the pictures and Characters which they make, delight thy mind? it were
folly to be persuaded of this, seeing the very cause it self is manifest. Thy
whole desire is to fill thy coffers, and to heap up wealth, thou art afraid
least thou shall become poor, therefore thou greedely buyest thee
Prognostications, and continually searchest all the corners of them, to see the
state of the year to come, eue^ thus in mind reasoning with thy self. I can
never be quiet, nor take my sleep, until such time as I have known the state
of the year ensuing, that I may frame my business accordingly: This next year
there will be much rain, it will rotte corn upon the ground, it will be
spoiled, I will keep my corn until the next year following: I find that
corn will be dear about half a year hence, I will not sell my corn now, but
keep it, that I may have plenty of money for it, and sufficient beside, to
maintain my house: the sea and land is calm and quiet this year, the next
year many shipwrackes and troubles in many countries will fall, now I will
fraught my ships that then I may be quiet. These imaginations are lively
arguments of thy diffidence, and despair in the goodness and loving kindness
of God. If thou fear God, love God, put thy whole trust in God, you art content
to refer thy whole preservation unto the hands of God: now, these proling
and raingeing conceits of the time to come, argue that either thou never
thinckest on God, or at the least perswadest thy self, that either he will
not, or cannot help thee. And if thou, in thy covetous mind, pray unto God,
thou can not pray according to the institution of Christ, without hypocrisy,
give us our daily bread this day: UUherefore, seeing the having of
Prognostications, comes of so wicked causes, as is the greedy desire of
prosperity, and wealth, and argues some kind of diffidence in God: when thou
read these my words, examine thine own heart, if thou find my sayings true
(as certainly thou shall) never hereafter desire to know the state of the
year before hand, except it be for the seasons of the year, which I am
persuaded, you may know in some part, without any skill, even by thine own
experience.

The second Reason, neglect of Gods providence.
2 COncerning the contempt of Gods providence, thus much I say. The
Prognosticatour, if he be asked whether he confess the providence of God, he
will with all his heart confess it: but by his deeds he does deny it, for all
the things whatsoever, which can happen in a whole year, he attributes them
to the stars, and so he publishes his Predictions, always mentionyng
stars, never, or very sle^derly, making any signification of the power, and
justice, mercy, and everlasting wisdom of God. And surely, even for the very
paring of thy nails, for the cuttyng of thy hair, for the puttyng on of thy
shoes, for taking a journey two or three miles from thine house, for obtaining
at Gods hands thy request, for making thy bargain with thy neighbor, for all
thine actions be they never so small: these wise men (if thou will ask their
advise) will give thee counsel from the stars. Now when these their
irreligious predictions shall be had in thy bosom, and red of thee daily, thou
being a man unlearned and worldly given, never hearing any mention of the
special providence, and hand of God in every thing, but long discourses of the
virtues of Planets, and signs, do never think upon the wonderful and
most infinite power of God, working after a special manner in every matter, but
art drawn straightwayes into an admiration of the Astrologer, and a great
fear of the constellations of heaven. An experience of this I found in thee,
about two years ago. A learned man (yet in this case far deceived) wrote an
Astrologicall discourse of the co^iunctio^ between Jupiter and Saturn, wherein
he showed of great alteration in every thing to fall. At this thou wast sore
aghast, thy mind was inco^bred with ^ettling thy goods to set the^ in order
against that day: thy so^g for half a year was nothing else, but, the
conjunction the conjunction: the day being come, what staryng was there and
gazing into heaven, to see the meetyng of those 2. Planets: Now all this while,
where was Gods providence? where was that trust and rejoicing in him? where was
that praising of his name for all things whatsoever should come to pass?
where was that meditation of his infinite, and unsearchable wisdom? these
things were never thought nor hard of, and if they were hard of, yet by reason
of thine earthly affections, they took no place in thine heart. This thy
dealyng is like unto the folly of that man, who having a costly clock in his
bosom, never extolleth or thinks on the wit and invention of the
clockemaker, but is continually in admiration of the spring or watch of the
clock, by whose means all the wheels have their swifter or flower, their
backward or forward motions, and by which the whole clock keeps his course.
Wherefore me thincketh that in a Christian common wealth, those only books
should be published for thine use, which might beat into thine head, and make
thee every hour and moment to think on the providence of God: which being
once settled in thy mind, the consideration of the means, which GOD uses,
will follow it of self. Contrariwise, to tell thee the means which GOD does
use, to thunder out the aspectes and constellations of Stars, and seldom to
mention of his providence, makes thee to fear, and admire, and love the
means, quite forgetting the work of God in the means. This fault was very
rife amongst the Israelites, who came yearly unto Astrologers and wise me^:
Wherefore that which is spoken by Jeremy unto them, is also spoken unto thee.
Here ye the word of the Lord, Ierem. 10.12
that he speaks unto you, O house of Israel: Thus says the Lord, learn not
the way of the heathen, and be not afraid for the signs of heaven, though the
hethen be afraid of such: In like sort, God forbids his people of England to
give credit, or fear the co^stellations and conjunctions of stars and
Planettes which have no power of themselves, but are governed by him, and their
secret motions and influences are not known to man and therefore there can be no
certain judgment thereof. If thou will not hear and follow this which I say,
see what will ensue. Thou see that the greatest matters which these Diuinours
and Prognosticaters foretell, fall out flat otherwise then they say, to to
their perpetual shame, Truly I am persuaded, that it is the judgment of God
upon them (although they cannot see it) who makes them, when they think they
are most wise, to be most fools. For so the Lord used the wise men and
Astrologers of Chaldea, as he speaks by his Prophet Esaias. I am the Lord that
made al things, that spread out the heavens alone, Esaias. 44.24.
and stretch out the earth by my self, I destroy the tokens of soothsaiers, and
make the^ that conjecture fools, and turn their wise men backward, and make
their knowledge foolishnes. Do thou then O careless and miserable man,
think to escape the same, or greater punishment being a cause of this fault,
for if none desired to know what is to come, none would busy themselves in
that vanity. Wherefore, read the word of God in the 18. of Deuteronomy. When thou
shall come (says the spirit of God) into the land which the Lord thy God
gives thee, Deuteronomy. 18.9.
thou shall not learn to do after the abominations of those nations. In the
words following Moses numbreth 9. abominations.

As 1 To make his child go through the fire. 2 To use witchcraft. 3 To regard
tims, this is thy falt 4 To mark the flying of fowls. 5 To be a sorcerer. 6 To
be a charmer. 7 To counsel with spirits. 8 To be a soothsayer. 9 To ask
counsel at the dead.


Al these horrible abominations being rehearsed, mark what follows. For all
that do such things are an abomination unto the Lord, Deuteronomy. 18.9.
and because of their abominations, the Lord thy God does cast the^ out
before thee: now seeing most of these abominations, and especially the 3. is
used of us, why should we not fear ye like judgments upon us, unless we will
repent, and that with speed.

1 The reasons which concern the Prognosticatour, and may avail to the
persuading of thee, not to buy any more of their unprofitable books, as these
which follow, first their vnhability in Prognosticating: secondly, their
manifest untruths: thirdly, their impieties: fourthly, their tricks of deceit.
What? can they not foretell that which is to come? can they not make conjectures
of that which is like to ensue? No surely. And I will use arguments to
confirm it unto thee.

The first reason, of the use and end of the Heavens.
THe true use of the heavens consists in many points. 1. To declare the
glory of God. Psalm. 19.2.
The Heavens (says David) declare the glory of god and the firmament shows
the work of his hands. It is an Alphabet written in great letters, in which is
described the majesty of God, and that by these four special points: First,
the majesty of the work it self. 2. the infinite multitude of Stars. 3. by
the wonderful variety of Stars. 4. by the greatness of the Stars.

Secondly, 2
it makes sinners and wicked men inexcusable before the judgment seat of
God. Romans 1.20.
For the invisible things of him (says Paul) that is, his eternal power, and
Godhead are seen by the creation of the world, being considered in his works,
to the intent that they should be without excuse.

Thirdly, 3
they serve to the appointing of times, as day, night, month, year, Genesis 1.14.
which are both measured and described by the course of the son, and moon,
and other Stars. And so the feast of the Israelites, and the computation of
the year in our Church, depends thereupon, and without them there would be
great confusion both in the common wealth and Church.

Fourthly, they serve to be signs, 4
that is, to foretell things to come. And they are signs either of
extraordinary things, or things which be ordinary. When they are signs of
extraordinary things, then there is, and appears in them some extraordinary
work of God: as appears in these examples which follow. At the suffering of
Christ, not only the veil of the temple rent, Mat. 27.
and the dead rose forth of their graves, but also the sun was wholly
eclipsed, the Moon being in ye full. At which sight, Dyonisius Areopagita, a
good Astronomer spoke these words: either the frame of this world is destroyed,
or the God of nature suffers. The Prophet Ezechiel being commanded of God to
prophecy the destruction of Egypt, he first puts down extraordinary
signs: And when I will put thee out, Ezec. 32.78.
I will cover the heaven, and make the stars thereof dark: I will cover the
sun with a cloud, and the Moon shall not give her light. All the lights of
heaven will I make dark for thee, and bring darkness upon the land, (says
the Lord.) Before the second coming of our savior Christ, there shall be
signs in the sun, and moon, and in the stars. Lastly, the extraordinary
going back of the sun signified the lengthning of the life of king Ezekias.
Secondly the stars or signs of general things, which happen ordinarily
every year in nature among us.

As of 1 approaching and dedeclining of 1. The spring. 2. Summer. 3. Harvest. 4.
VVinter.
2 Ordinary weather in these quarters. 3 Ebbing and flowing of the sea. 4
Seasons of 5 Plowing. 6 Sowing. 7 Setting. 8 Planting. 9 Cutting. 10 Felling.
11 Reaping.



I say general, because the particular estate and affairs of men can in no
wise before signified by the stars. I say ordinary, because the things which
fall out seldom, and are besides the common course of nature, as plenty of
all things, famyne, plague, war, euersions of kingdoms, etc. Do not depend
upon the Stars. For the confirming of this, I have three reasons: first, in
the 1. of Genesis, God says that he made the lights to be signs, Genesis 1.14.15
and yet, the same God in the 47. of Esaias says, Esaias. 47.13.14.
he will destroy the signs of them which divine: flatly forbidding us to use
Stars, as means to judge of any thing to come, saving only of those, of
which they are expresely made signs of God in the creation: al which are put
down before. Secondly, this is manifest by the order of the creation: Genesis
1.12.14
the third day God created upon the earth herbs and trees, and the earth
brought forth fruits and was fertile: the fourth day God commanded lights to
be made in the firmament of heaven, to separate the dai and the night, and to
be for signs and for seasons, and days, and months, and then it was so, and
then God saw it was good. Out of which I gather that it cannot be a sign
causing famyne, or plenty and fertilnes, because fertility went before the
creation of the host of heaven. Also of wars, and plagues, and the particular
estates of men, they can be no signs, because man was not yet created, and
yet even then they were signs. Some will say they were no signs of those
matters in the creation, but now they may be, and are: No, for the works
which God created, he now preserves, neither increasing, nor diminishing any
thing in them. Philo, Iudeus in his book de opificio mundi says, he was
persuaded that God foreseeing the minds of men, given to search strange
matters to come, did in this order create the heavens, to confute and dysprooue
their imaginations. Thirdly the Heavens and stars were made for the use of man, and man is theii end, so that it is absurd to imagine they have any
force in the affairs of man. Now then, Prognosticatours if they will
foreshowe of strange things to come: they must undo the work of their
Creator, and give unto it new uses, otherwise they shall not be able to
prognosticate as they yearly do.

The second reason, the providence of God.
THe providence of God is his decree by which he appoints how every thing
shall come to pass. The continual execution of this decree is ordinarily by
means, but often without means. The means which God uses are either
general or special. General are these by which he governs all the whole
world, and every particular thing, which concerns this life: unto this
kind are referred spiritual creatures, called Angels, by whom the
philosophers say the heavens are governed, and we see that whole kingdoms,
Provinces, and Cities have been kept and defended by them, as also consumed
and destroyed. Again the stars and heavenly bodies are used of GOD to
govern and order things here below as it is in the 19* Psalm. Nothing is hid
from the heat of the sun. Psalm. 19.
And by the prophet Hosea, the Lord speaks thus I will hear the heavens, the
heavens shall hear the earth, the earth shall hear the corn, the corn shall
hear Israel. But this instrument is only a general instrument, and has
his wor^ in ordinary matters of nature. Beside* these means, there be many
^^her by which God rules the world. In the beginning he set (...) over the
whole world* that he (...) fowls, beasts and al things (...) set the first
born before their brethren, (...) Abell* Princess and Tirauntes over Cities*
Kingdoms, common wealths, and therefore by reason of their dignity calls
the^ Gods* There be also governors of families over their families, fathers
over their children, masters over their servants. Yet GOD has a more near
care in preserving and governing his chosen, as appears in the 43. of Esaye.
Thus says the Lord God that created thee, Esaias. 43.
O Jacob: and he that fourmed thee* O Israel* fear not, for I have redeemed
thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine: when thou passest through
the waters, I will be with thee, and through the floudes, that they do not
ouerflowe thee. When thou walk thorough the very fire, thou shall not be
burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, for I am the Lord thy God,
the holy one of Israel thy savior. This is also manifest by that Sympathy
which is in the Lord, when his Children are afflicted as appears by the 11.
of Zachary. He which touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. Zach* 11
And in the 9. of the Acts. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, Acts. 9.
that is, my elect. UUherefore there be also special means by which he
more carefully governs the elect. As be Aungelles, whom Paul to the
Hebrews calls ministering spirits: it is certain they defend every one of
the elect perticularly. Hitherto may be referred the preaching of the word of
god, the ministering of the sacraments. Besides this. God uses the devils, and
wicked men and tiraunts to exercise the faith of his elect and to confirm them
in patience: whereby they are called the servants of the Lord, axes, hammers,
sawes, and swords in the hand of God: as Pharao and Nabuchadnezzar, and
Senacherib* Moreover as the means by which he works upon ye wicked are also
many.

As* 1 Angels good and evil. Ex. 14. 2 Friends and familiars. Iere. 13.14. Amos.
7.1. 3 Wild beasts. Ierem* 8.17. 4 Heaven above. Deuteronomy. 11.17. 5 Diseases,
plague. Exodus 15.16. 6 Famyne. Hos. 9.3. 7 Fire. Hos. 8.14. 8 Fury. Hos. 7.9. 9
Hardness of heart. Romans 1.28. 10 Captivity. Ierem. 15.2.


All these means Gods providence uses, first that he might show his goodness
toward us: secondly, yt he might be known to be the Lord over al, thirdly,
that we might be thankeful, because he not only himself governs us, but also
makes his creatures to serve our turns. Ma^^ie this must be noted (as I said
before) that in all these secondarie causes, beside their natural work, which
God has given them, there is also the special work of God his special h^d
showed. God works not by second causes as Magistrates govern their common
wealths by their inferior officers. For they so govern by them, that they do
nothing or very little themselves* and peradventure never know what is done.
God governs not the world so, but in every particular work, he has his
particular stroke. That the thunder burns, moves, hurts, it is the
general providence of God: but that it burns, or hurts this or that manne,
on this or that part, in this or that manner, it is the special providence of
ye same God. The Lord has s^^wed his special providence in one excellent
example. If the hatchet, (says God) fall forth of the hand of him which
loppeth the tree, and kill a man in the way, I the Lord have killed him. God
also governs the world immediately, and his prouydence woorketh without
means, and many things he brings to pass against all means, which is
manifest by that of Matthew. Man lives not by bread only, but by every word
which proceeds out of the mouth of God. For example without means. The
spirit of God did move upon the waters, and cover them in the creation
immediately. The first garment which was made, was of leather, and God alone
without means made it. Noe in the Arc was preserved by God alone an whole
year against the force of the waters, without means did he keep the shoes
and garments of the Israelites whole forty years. He alone ius^ifieth,
sanctifies, and conuerteth a sinner, against the course of nature he made ye
sea to divide it self, the sun to go backward, the fire not to burn the 3.
children, the Lions not to devour Daniel. The causes of this, are these. 1 That
we may know when God works by causes, he does by no necessity, but freely.
2. that we might know when God uses means, that then he is not idle, but
works al in all. 3. That if means want* nay if means be against us, yet
we should not despair of GODS providence. Now to come to our
Prognosticatours, and Moon prophettes, how shall they be able to know what
will come to pass hereafter? for first, the heavens being only one particular
instrument of Gods providence, amongst many, they cannot certainly and truly
say, this thing or that thing proceeds from the heavens: secondly they
cannot determine whether GOD in extraordinary matters, as Plague, Famyne,
Barrenness, Distempered weather, Earthquakes, Wars, etc. Does work
immediatelye, or with means: If with means, they cannot determine, whether
the Heavens, or Aungelles, or men, or any other things be the means of
his providence. Thirdly, if they were able to know what the Heaven woorketh
naturallye, yet they were never the better, for GOD beside the power of the
heavens: has in all things his particular workyng providence, alteryng, and
framyng, and bendyng a^ wax his instruments to his good will. Truly by this
consideration, a Christian man will be brought to leave of to seek what event
the works of God shall have before they come to pass. If a man shall come
into a Ioyners shop can he by knowing the use of all his tools, tell what
things he has made in his shop? No. What is the cause of that? he uses not
only his tools in his work, but thereunto adioyneth his own hand, by which
he handles and tourneth the tool to his own pleasure, and so makes diverse
kind of works with the same instruments. The same may be said of our
Prognosticatours, which I would to God they would somewhat consider.

The third Reason, the want of experience.
IF our Prognosticators have any means to foretell things to come, they have
those means either without experience, or with experience: If they have them
without experience, then must thou account all which they do to be foolish
dreams and deceit. For all kind of human learning which is profitable,
and has use in the life of man, is taken from often observations, and
experience. If it be said that they have their directions in Prognosticating
from experience, and that of all times, I will convince them thus. True
experience of the causes of things is an often observing of the effects of
the same causes, with this ground that they can proceed from no other thing.
The Phisician says Rhoubarbe does purge choler. Well: how knows he this? he
has often tried this, and that in old men, young men, children: and has
found, that in the bodies of all men, the cause of purging this humor, could be
ascribed to nothing else. UUherefore he may peremptorily conclude, Rhoubarbe
purges choler. Our Prognosticatours, in the heavens, can have no such
experience. For they can not observe often the same position of stars in the
heaven. The order and cause of the fixed stars and Planets, which we find
in the heavens this day, the next day will be changed, and never the like
again. They will say, in deed although the same position of the whole heaven
never happen, yet the same conjunctions of notable stars, the same visinges
and settynges, and the same constellations of the chiefest stars are marked
often. I say again, that when these Eclipses and great conjunctions happen, the
rest of the stars being otherwise affected then they were before, and having
new positions, may either increase and diminish their effects, or else hinder
them, and quite take them away. As we see when the Sun casting his beams
into a chamber, the light of candels* and torches, and fires do make it shine
dim, yet these being absent, it will shine bright. Again, they are not able
to say that constellations, which they have marked, are causes of those
effects which follow, as wars, diseases, diste^pered wether, earthquakes,
famine, etc. For in those things which happen together, the one is not the
cause of the other. When Nero played upon his harp, Rome was on fire: yet
Neroes playing on the harp was no cause of the burning of Rome. Also these
effects may have others causes in the heaven, then those which they mark, and
they may come immediately from God, they may come only from the will of man.
UUherfore seeing that they cannot assure themselves that those Eclipses, and
conjunctions are the works of such effects upon earth, and they cannot have
often observations of the course of heaven, their rules of Predictions are
feyned and supposed, and not built upon true experience. Let a man which
knows not one herb, take all kinds of herbs, and put them into a great
vessel, yet so, that there be more of some herbs, and less of other some:
let him beat them all together, and make a compound virtue of all their
virtues: Can he now tell the nature and operation of every particular herb?
Can he divide and sever by any help the virtue of one herb from another? No
in deed. The same thing may be said of the stars of heaven: all their
lights, and all their influences (as they term it) are in the lower bodies*
more plainly, every earthly body has in it all the secret powers, and workyng
of every particular star: so that they make (as it were) a compounde
operation rising of all, or of the most of their virtues joined together? for
the Astrologers hold, that although the light may be hindered by the thickenes
of the body, yet the heavenly influence pearceth through all. Therefore they
are not able to sever, and learn the nature of these stars, except they ca^
stop the influence of what stars they list, and bring them into what
compass they will. Yet thus much I will grant them, that they may have a
little knowledge of the virtue of the Sun, and Moon. and some other stars:
as we see those herbs in the former composition, whose virtues be the
chiefest, though not fully, yet somewhat do represent their nature, and show
themselves above the rest. But what is this to the purpose? If I confess the
operations of the Sun and Moon. If I shall grant that Saturn is in nature
cold and dry, Jupiter warm and moist, Mars hot and dry, Venus cold and
moiste, Mercury in nature mixed, the notable fixed stars in the Zodiac to
be of the nature of Planets, and to have manifest operations, as the rising of
the ^^gg to make heat and tempestuous seas, the rising of Arcturus to make
rain and showers, Pleiades to be of the nature of Mars and the Moon etc. what
will all this suffice to make a Prognostication? for seeing all stars have
their own powers, and peradventure also the least stars* which we make no
account of, have great effects amongst us (as one grain of musk in the
Apothecaries shop makes a greater smell then all other powders be they never
so many) nothing will the knowledge of the operation of some* Stars prevail,
the rest being not known and never regarded. They will say they have some
experience but yet imperfect. I have showed how they have no true experience at
all: and their imperfect experience makes them perfect liars.

The fourth Reason, the ignorance of causes.
A Man which will judge rightly of any matter by the causes, must not only
consider the common causes, but he must also with them confer the particular
causes of all things which happen amonges^ us, so he shall judge a right. In
heaven the stars be common causes of all things amongst us, because they
show their virtue on every matter, one way or other. The same things have their
peculiar efficientes, and matters, and forms, by which, and not by the
heavens, they are made that* whatsoever they are. These proper causes because
their natures be unknown unto us, I cannot see how the Prognosticatour is able
to foretell any thing to come, in good and convenient manner, laying aside all
deceiuyng and forgeing of untruths. To make this more plain, I will use this
similitude. Suppose an hen to sit upon many eggs, some of her own, some of
diverse other fowls: she imparteth her heat equally unto them: at the length
she hatcheth, and some of her chickens are cocks, some hens, some crows,
some patriches, some doves, some black, some white, some like and live, some
dye, some are killed of the kite, some are roasted. No man, I think, will
profess so much skill, as to say that he by the considering of the hen and
her heat, which is a common cause of the chickens, and all that befalls
them, is able to tell, why of this egg came a partriche, of that a crow, why
this egg had no chicken, why that had a dead chicken, etc. except he do
therewith all adioyne the consideration of the particular effectts. The heaven
is as it were an hen fostring under her wings all earthly things, imparting
his virtue and heat unto all. Can our Prognosticatour: by the erectyng of
figures, by considering the disposition of every Planet in their houses, and
the significations of every thing, judge, why this man is wealthy that man a
beggar, why this noble man dies this year, none the next year, why it is
naught to travel this way, good to travail that way, why these diseases
abound, and not other, why corn shall be dear this quarter, not the next, why
this week is fair and temperate, that week, that month unseasonable and
tempestuous. Truly it is a thing flat impossible. They must hereunto adioyne
the particular nature of the country, the particular causes both in men's
minds and bodies, as, education, place, honesty, birth, blood, sickness,
health, strength, weakness, meat, drink, liberty of mind, learning. etc.
and all other special circumstaunces: which they never do as we may see in
their Prognostications: and if they would do it, yet they could not.
Wherefore I must needs say this, that their folly is great in publishyng,
their Prognostications: and thou also greatly to be blamed which by thy
greedy desire give them great occasion to be so unprofitably occupied.

To show more briefly and plainly of their inability in Prognosticating,
although I grant the stars have great force, Hos. 2.
yet I say they cannot judge of things to come. And there be 6. impedimentes.
The first impediment is imbecillicie of wit, for as man's eye from the earth
beholding the heavens and the stars perceives them not in their just
quantity, but as very small lights: for in deed the Sun is an hundred and
threescore and six times bigger the^ the earth, Saturn 90. times, Jupiter 95.
Mars one and an half the Moon is the 39. part of the earth: the biggest sixed
stars contain ye earth 107. times, the stars of the second magnitude 90, the
third 70. times, the fourth magnitude 54. times, ye fifth magnitude 35. times,
the sixth magnitude 18. times. So the weakness of man's understanding is not able
to conceive and learn the things which the heavens do bring to pass on
earth.

The 2. impediment, ye infinite number of stars which no doubt all have great
power, although we do not find it. For the Prognosticator only marketh 1028
stars and of these he takes only heed unto a very few. Which is as though
a man should judge the power of an army by the powers of one or two soldiers
and Captains, not by the power of the whole company.

The 3. impedim^^t is the infinite varieties of the virtues of stars, and the
parts of heaven, which Astrologers grant to be: yet they do not know the^. As
touching ye nature of the fixed stars, they know nothing but by the color,
which is red, leady* white, pale etc. resembling some Planet. And because they
know not ye virtue of all stars and every part of heaven, they are not able to
judge any thing but to their own shame, no more then the Physician is able to
know the nature of the co^pounde medicine without the knowing of every simple.

The 4 impediment, the manifold and daily change of the motions positio^s, and
configurations of the stars: for if a man could tell both the number and nature
of stars, yet the variety of positions breeds trouble and hinders right
judgment: because by this means the powers of stars are increased,
diminished, and changed. And these rules which served for ancient times to
foretell things, will not serve us, because all the fixed stars have changed
their places, and the rest are daily changed.

The 5. impediment, the infinite variety of inferior things, which do hinder,
pervert, change, receive, or not receive ye virtue and predictions of stars,
as ye nature of the soil, the disposition natural of air, orders, and
co^stitutions of the common wealth, occasions, education, institution, kinds
of meat and drink etc.

The 6. impediment, the will of man, which freely in common matters chooses
this, and refuses that. There are many things which are caused without any
work of stars, only by the will of man, and study, as we may see in
Socrates, Demosthenes, and other etc.

Thus much shall suffice to show that they cannot Prognosticate of things
ensuyng: now follow their manifold untruths, and most false rules. In
disclosing them I will keep the same order they use in their Almanackes.

In the first or second leaf of their books thou shall find a picture of ma^s
body with the 12. signs round about it, they call it the Anatomy of man's
body, showing how the 12. signs have government of the same, for the Moon or
any other significatour of any thing being in the sign, they say, that it is
dangerous to box, to sear that part or to let blood in it, which is subject
to the dominion of that sign. All these are nothing but vain Fables, as I
will manifestly prove.

1. Whereas they call it an Anatomy, me thincketh, it is a butcherly Anatomy:
nay that of the butchers is far better, for they join head and appurtenau^ce
together: these men being sparing give Aries the head, Leo and Cancer the heart
and longes. As for the liver. I know not which sign has it, peradventure in
old time men had no livers. At the Anatomye of a carrian crows deal friendly,
for every one has somewhat: but in the division of man's body, signs play
foul play, for Capricorn has got nothing but a pair of knees. It is like
that the signs scramblyng for their portions Capricorn being slow got
nothing, hereupon compassion being had, there was a gathering made, and
Sagittarius gave the lower part of the thighe, Aquarius the higher part of the
leg which both together make the knee. But to deliver thee out of all doubt,
mark these reasons which follow. 1. The signs cannot have any such dominion
over man's body: I make it manifest thus. There is no corporal heaven in deed
above the firmament, yet because the firmament or 8 Sphere has many motions,
to give reasons of those motions, the Astronomers have feyned two heavens above
the firmament, the Christaline heaven, and the first moveable or 10. Sphere,
which they divide into twelve parts. which parts they call signs. Now, I
pray you tell me, is it possible to conceive that an imagined part of any
imagined heaven void of all stars, shall either have in it self, or give
unto other Stars power to govern the parts of man's body? More reasonable was
that man, who being asked what was the cause of the sands in Sandwiche haven,
he answered the buildyng up of Tenterton Steeple Secondly the government of
the signs in the body is not taken from experience in nature, The twelve
Signs feyned.
but feyned long ago by some drowsy pate, and now because it has a cloak of
antiquity, it is allowed. More natural was this kind of way, that hot
signs should govern hot parts, cold signs cold parts, earthy signs
earthy parts. So Aries should govern the heart and the vital blood, not the
head, and the rest of the signs those parts which are of their nature and
disposition. Thirdly great experience of many men daily confuteth this rule.
For many learned Physicians, and expert Chirurgians have by infinite examples
found, that if a man be let blood in the sign, or lanched, or boxed, or
seared, no harm ensues, nay they have given testimony that the patients have
found even then great comfort. Wherefore let not these things trouble thy
mind any more, but let them be nombred even amongst vain and unprofitable
fables.

2. Next after follows Elections of days and hours, necessary for all
matters as follows.

Special days to Prepare humors. Let blood. Purge with Vomit. Electuaries.
Potions. Pills.
Cut hair. Comfort the virtue Bathe. Attractiue. Digestive. Retentiue.
Expulsive.
Put children to school Travel. Marrye. Hunte, Hawk, Fish. Plant. Geld
Cattle. Lay foundations.


Here, I pray thee, mark their naughty dealinges how they abuse thy
ignorance, to make themselves skillful and to do more then they can do. For,
if the judgments of the best Astrologers may be taken, certainly most of
these elections cannot be prescribed to thee, unless they know beforehand the
figure of thy Nativity. For all Election, which concern thy person, must be
moderated (to speak as plainly as their toys will suffer me) by the
direction of the root of thy Nativity, and by the monthly and diurnall
Progressions of thy present Revolution. If any of these pretend some evil,
the particular Election may be a means to increase, and to bring it to pass.
For example, suppose, thou being a man toward marriage, in the Almanacke thou
find a good day noted by the Prognosticatour to marry in: thou take thy
opportunity: after a while, thou art weary of thy life: the first day of thy
marryage was the last day of thy joy. UUhat is the cause of this? All the
Planettes which were signifiers of thy marriage in thy nativity, were then
euilly affected, and peradventure also, at the first thou wast borne, they
received some disgrace. So then thou may lay all blame, partly upon thy
self for believing and partly upon the Prognosticator, who deceived thee. But
to come unto particulers, the elections of days to purge the body with any
kind of purgation, and to comfort the same, are most ridiculous. Why do they
not also prescribe hours of eating meat? Why do they not appoint the kinds of
meats and drinks, which we must eat and use daily? If thou see that God does
daily bless the enterprises of those Physicians, which never regard those
elections in ministering to their patients: never esteem of them, let them go
as lies to the Devil from whence they came. Concerning the electio^s of days
to sow, to set, to plant, to lop, they are also foolish: the general
observation of the season of the year, in which these things are to be done
is sufficient. And S. Augustine in his book de ciuitate Dei laugheth at the
folly of them, which choose particular days to do their husbandry, as though
some certain positio^s of stars had some special influence to the things
which are sown then. His reason is, because many grains of corn being cast
into the ground together, springing up together, and riping al at one time:
yet some of them are blasted, some are eaten of birds, some are trode^ down
under foot, some stand and are never touched. The rest of the elections, and
especially that of laying foundations is most absurd. They say that if an
house, a city, a town have his foundation when the stars be well affected,
the inhabitauntes shall have prosperous and quiet living: if when the stars
be evil disposed, then trouble and disquietnes. They have no experience of
this, but yt only which is most false, for they know not the foundations of
cities and towns, neither the positions of the stars, when they were built. Let
Rome and Venice be examples, because these are most alleged of Astrologers,
the time in which they were built is uncertain, and the Planets are falsely
set in the figure of the foundation of Rome because Mercurye is contrary to
the sun, a thing flat impossible. Again the folly of this is thus
manifest, that an house, or City, or common wealth may remain the people
being gone, as it is in the time of plague, and banishment, and conquestes of
Princes: And the inhabitants also may be safe and remain, the building quite
ransumed, and beaten down, as we may see in Carthage, the people and common
wealth remai. ned, the City quite defaced. That al elections are unlawful,
Saint Augustine writing unto Ianuarius, proves it forth of the 4. to the
Galathians by these words: ye observe months and times and years (Therefore
says he) let us not observe days, and years, and months, and times, least
we hear this of the Apostles: I am afraid least I have taken labor in vain
with you: for he rebukes them which say, I will not go, because the Moon is
thus or thus moved, or I will take my journey that I may have good success,
because there is such a position of Stars: I will not do my business this
month, because such a Star governs this month: or I will do my
business this month because such a star rules. How then shall a man do,
not to break the word of God? Art thou a man that desire to lead a
christian life? Then take the example of Paul, as a pattern to govern all
the actions of thy life: without ceassing (says he) I make mention of you in
my prayers: Romans 1.10.
beseeching that by some means, one time or other I might have prosperous
journey by the will of God to come unto you. So thou if thou have any
business in hand, any journey to take, any thing to buy or sell, or any other
matter: never regard the constellations of Heaven, commit thy self to the
only providence of God, in whom thou have thy life, and motion, and being,
who directs all thy steps: pray unto him privately with thy self to bless
thee and all thy actions, that they may tend to his glory, thy welfare: thou
shall find that all thy enterprises will have better success, then if the
whole host of heaven, and all the Prognosticatours of england had promised
never so much prosperity. Now let us show their absurd folly in
prognosticating of the state of the year: of which their predictions are
either general for the whole year, or special for every day. In their
general predictions are considered either the grounds of them, or the matters
which they foretell. Their grou^des are especially two. 1. The figure of the
revolution of the year, erected when the sun enters into the first minute of
Aries. 2. The figure celestial for the time of the Eclipse of the sun and
moon: for vp^n these twain, say they, depends the whole state of the year.
In their celestial figures they consider the erecting of them, and the finding
of the Lord of the figure. The erecting of the figure, contains very many
absurdities.

1 They follow that way, which Regiomontanus did invent, never as yet proved
by any experience, and flatly differing from those ways which of ancient
Astrologers were used* and were invented by Gazulus and Campanus. Nay oftentimes
it makes the Planet or fixed star to signify a flat contrary thing to that
which these two other do.

2 The casting of the heavens into twelve parts, signifieng twelve didistinct
kind of matters is ridiculous, because it being imagined, and void of stars,
can have no force. Yet (some will say) other stars being in those places may
have and signify such or such effects. I answer that if stars of diverse
natures coming to such an house always signifieng some one kind of thing, then
the house must of necessity give some force unto the Planet: and so it shall
have not only an augmenting, but also an effectually working power, which
Astrologers deny, and no reason can prove.

3 They make the twelfth and eleventh houses being higher above the horizon
then the first, to be of less force then it: and the fourth house to be of
greater power then any above the Horizon not Cardinal: and the end of the
ninthe to be more in power then the beginning of the eleventh house: al which
are against reason, because a Planet the more perpendicular his beams are, the
more is his force. They answer, although the force of the light be greater,
yet the secret influence is less, and the first house has more forcible
influence the^ the twelfth or eleventh. If the influence be secret how can they
know it? again they can by no good experience show that those houses have
more influence then the rest: this influence makes against them. I say they
cannot prognosticate because they know not one stars virtue. For whereas they
say, that the sun, and moon and planets have most force. I answer that it
is by reason of their light, not their influence, which is small, and there is
far greater in the smallest fixed Stars. So that the fixed Stars
although they have no light, or very small light perceived, yet they have most
influe^ce. And so these men must needs dream because they judge by wrong
causes. Well, their figure being framed and distinguished with fair
characters, then go they on to find the Lord of the figure, that is, that
Planet which has most dignities in the figure.

The dignities of the Planets, are found out by these means especially.
1 Houses of Planets. 2 Exaltation. 3 Triplicitie. 4 Terms. 5 Stars. 6
Howses. 7 Freeness from Combustion. 8 Directions. 9 Velocity of course. 10
Sazimi. 11 Some aspects of other Planettes.
These toys be so foolish that a reasonable man would not vouchsafe to refute
them: yet a word or twain. If the houses of the Planettes shall be battered
and pulled down, all the rest of their worship and dignity will lie in the
dust. Aries and Scorpius are appointed the houses of Mars, Taurus, and Libra
the houses of Venus, Gemini, and Virgo, the houses of Mercury: Cancer the house
of the Moon, Leo the house of the Sun, Sagittarius and Pisces the houses of
Jupiter, Aquarius, and Capricornus the houses of Saturn. UUhat reason do they
give of this? Leo and Cancer, say they, are the houses of the Sun and Moon,
because they resemble the nature of these Planets; and because they come most
near our heads: such reason they give of the rest. What feeble grounds are
these? As in the North part of the world Cancer and Leo resemble the nature
of the Sun: so in the South part, in the contrary climats, Capricornus, and
Aquarius do resemble their natures. Also in every country some diverse signs
be either vertical or else come near the topp of the country, and so all
signs shall be the houses of the Sun and Moon. Now then, the sun being
displaced, I cannot find how the rest of the Planets can keep their hold. To
go further the exaltations of Planets in like manner are very dreams. They
suppose Exaltations be those degrees in which the Planets were in the
beginning of the world. But why should those places give more force then any
other? And if they could give more force, yet they have falsely assigned them.
For the Sun was not in Aries, when it was created of GOD, but was placed in
Libra, which I prove by this reason. GOD created man and beast in perfect age,
giving unto them all kinds of fruits being then ripe, so that in the
beginning was the time of the year, which we call harvest. Now, because God
never afterward changed the seasons, and we find that in the time of
ripeness the Sun is always in Libra, we must needs also say that his
place in the creation was in Libra. In the 23. of Exodus God commands that
the feast of tabernacles should be celebrated in the end of the year when
the Isralites had gathered their fruits out of the fields. Wherefore it must
needs be that harvest was in the beginning of the year (the beginning and
ending being both together) and so by compting backwardes we shall find that
the Sun was in Libra in the beginning of the world. To this agrees Josephus
de antiquit. Lib. 1. cap. 3. Rabbi Eleazer upon Genes. and Rabbi, Abraham,
Abem, Esra upon the 7. of Daniel.

The rest of the dignities of the planets consist of principles more weak then
water. First what is more unreasonable to a reasonable man then this, that
swift motion should give unto a Planet two dignities, and slow motion two
debilities: it seems to be plain contrary. For a swift course hinders the
force of the Planet, a slow course helps the same: and the stations of any
Planett make an effectual and sensible operation. A cole of fire in a man's
hand if it be shaken about very much, it heateth very little, if it be shaken
more slowly, it heateth more: but if it lie still, it burns violently. Beside
this, also experience confirms my assertion. In the year of our Lord 1513.
the Sun enteryng into Pisces was almost in trine aspect with Saturn
stationarie, a little while after, there was a great frost and snow continuing
many days: and when Saturn began again to be direct, the weather was
indifferent warm. In the year 1518. In April Jupiter almost in secunda
statione beholding Saturn in statione prima caused a great heat considering
the time of the year. In the year 1520. Saturn (as I said before) being
stationarie made such a cold, that spoiled the Grapes and made Wine dear.
Upon these examples and many other I may conclude, that the work and
influence of of Planettes, is most felt when they are stationarie: because
their virtue is fixed (as it were) in one place by reason of the slow motion,

Combustion is in like sort a feyned thing, UUhat reason can Astrologers give,
why it should give unto a star five debilities? They talk how that
experience teaches them, that Planettes being under the beams of the Sun,
do loose a great, nay (some say) all their force. It is a manifest untruth.
For, Mercury being of the nature of that Planett with which he is conjoined,
if he go from conjunction with Saturn unto the Sun, he gets no
debilities thereby, but rather losing the feeble and unfortunate Nature of
Saturn, receives a more strong and fortunate nature of the Sun. If any
manne say against me that Mercury combust has no force, he deceives
himself. For if he be not hindered, he naturallye will cause winds, being
combuste he not only engenders winds, but causes tempestuous winds and
foul weather. In Aries, Taurus, Cancer, he makes tempests, in Virgo and
Scorpius, raging Seas, in Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius and Pisces rain
and snow. Again when many days together there has been fair weather, the
Sun if it come to be in conjunction or any other aspect with Saturn makes
very foul weather, and therefore the aspectes of the sun and Jupiter are
called apertiones portarum pro pluuia. This could not com to pass if Saturn
had his force diminished by the beams of the sun. A Planet also being in
Cazimi, that is, being within 16. minutes of the suns middle haith thereby 5.
dignities, which cannot well be, if that co^bustion give 5. debilities. For the
Planet is in the middle of his combustion, and the sun casts his beams and
force very vehemently upon it. These suns show how absurd a dream combustion
is: yet if it were a good and sound principle of Astrology, and gave unto
every Planet 5. debilities, yet it could not be proved, that liberty from
combustion should give five dignities, being only a mere absence and privation
of the other. Magnes at the presence of the Adamant, is hindered from drawing
Iron: yet if the Adamant be away, the attractiue virtue of the magnes is not
increased. Here I might with ease confute ye triplicities of Planets,
directions, aspects, applications, preuentions, refrenations, with many such
like, but my intent at this time is only to show thee some untruths of our
Prognosticatours.

Thus much of the grounds of their predictions, now follow the matters of
which they Prognosticate, and they are very many: nay, there is no matter
almost, of which they will not give their verdite: but how they do this I will
briefly make it manifest unto thee, that their lies and their unchristian
dealing may be more loathed of thee.

1 They foretell of Comets, Earthquakes, Famynes, and plagues etc. but they do
it as the blind man which casts his staff he knows not where. No man as
yet ever knew the true causes of these. As for Cometes and blazing stars
they do not rise of the influence of any stars, neither are they any earthly
things, but are in heaven, most commonly far above the Moon, as by
Geometrical and Astronomical demonstrations may be be proved: how this comes
to pass the Lord only knows. And surely they do thee great injury, that
when as, no doubt, God does lighten them, and send the rest extraordinarily, as
threatnyng tokens of his sore displeasure, yet they will rock thee a sleep in
the cradle of security by telling that such tokens came from the ordinary
course of the heavens.

2. They foretell all things which happen in civil affairs amongst men, as
are these which follow.

As Love and hatred of kinsfolk. Marriages. Increase of farms and livings.
Injuries and quarells. Raising of rentes. Exactyng of subsidies by officers.
False rumors. Imprisonmentes. Hard entreating of Ecclesiastical persons.
Buying, selling, vnderminyng. The studying of sciences. Friends fall out for
trifles. Solemn progresses. Favor of noble men. Men shall fall, body, and
goods into the Princes hands. Merchandise unprofitable. etc.


These and such like proceed only from the will of man: the constellations of
stars are neither signs nor causes of them. Some will say, Non imponere
necessitatem, sed inclinare Stellas, that is. That stars do not constrain,
but only incline the minds of men: a most wicked saying, although most
commonly spoken of, and defended. For ye inclinyng of the will of man is only
the work of God, as the holy Scriptures do teach us. The heart of man (says
Solomon) purposes his ways, Prou. 1.6.9.
but the Lord directs his steps. Ier. 10.23.
O Lord (says Jeremy the Prophet) that the way of man, is not in himself,
neither is it in man to walk and direct his steps. He speaks this,
because that Nebuchadnezzar purposed to have made war against the Moabites
and Ammonites, but hearing of Zedekias rebellion, he turned his power to go
against Jerusalem, therefore the Prophet says, that whereas he had otherwise
purposed, yet this was the Lords inclination and direction. Again in the
Proverbs, Prou. 21.1.
we read this: That the heart of the king is in the hands of the Lord, as the
Rivers of water he directs it whether he will. It will be said, that although
God properly and immediately inclines the will of man: yet also some small
inclination must be given unto the Stars, and that immediately. For

Say some. Constellations work upon the Elements by the four first
qualities. Elements work upon, and alter the compound bodies and humors.
Compounde bodies by their qualities change the senses. The senses being
altered, the understanding is altered. The understanding lastly alters and
inclines the will of man. Therefore Constellations incline the will.


This reason is not much unlike that which the dronken man makes, serving as
well for the defense of his vice, as the former for approving of truth in
divination.

He which drinks well, sleeps well. He which sleeps well thinks no
harm: He which thinks no harm, is a good man: Therefore he which drinks
well, is a good man.
The deceites and untruths which be in their reasons, are very many.

1. The stars work upon men's bodies, yet so yt the nature of the Country and
soil, the meats and drinks have most commonly greater force. Why are the
bodies of Gentlemen of England and poor laboring me^ of diverse dispositions?
are they not both in one country? do not the stars show their force in them
alike? yes truly, but the kind of life and diet prevails. In the same
region, why are they, which dwell upon hills, of other temperatures then they,
which dwell upon plain and champion ground? Why? do not the same influences
of Stars make them of like natures? is it not because the nature of the soil
preuayleth? So then, when as there be many causes effectual, and differing in
altering men's bodies, to build an argument upon one cause is most unreasonable.

2. The stars work upon the Elements earth, water, air, by making heat,
cold, moisture, drines. The elements, how work they on men's bodies? They will
also say by making heat, cold, moisture, dryenesse: which is most untrue: for
the whotter and dryer the Elements be, the colder and moyster by nature are
men's bodies. According to that saying of Empedocles: Nature placed a whote body
in a cold country, and a cold body in a whote country.

3. The Philosophers say that all causes are either per se or per accidens. Now
the heavens being causes of the alteration of the senses per accidens, they
must not be causes of the inclination of the will, either per se or per
accidens, but per accidentis, accidens, which is most ridiculous.

4. This long chain by which they lincke the will of man to the stars, if
it shall be applied unto particulars it must needs break: for the actions of
the will is buying, selling, trauailyng, lying, heaping up wealth, murdering,
spreading of false rumors, offering of discourtesies, hatyng of kinsfolks,
and such like, which our heauengazers foretell, have no cohere^te with the
first qualities, heat, cold, moisture, dryness: neither can they any way
proceed from them, and therefore the stars cannot be causes of them, for they
work only by these qualittes.

5. This reason is nothing to their purpose: for because they grant that a man
may freely resist the inclination of the stars and he may hinder that, unto
which the stars bend his will, how dare they presume to say this or that will
come to pass. The heathen men gave up themselves to their own lusts and
vanities and followed every little and vain inclination: and of them, in this
order, did ancient Astrologers among them divine that this or that time, such
actions, such vices, such enterprises, such affairs should be among them. In
like manner our English wiseme^, speak of us as though we were beasts, not
reasonable men, as though we never had heard the blessed Gospel of God, never
tasted of the grace of God, never learned what is good and what is bad, never
labored to subdue our lusts and affections, always turned to and fro with
the blast of any influence, working very slenderly in us.

Thus much of Civil affairs. They make mention also yearly of the diseases
which shall reign: but the way which they follow, is taken forth of the
barren and uncertain rules of of the old Astrologers, who do so ascribe unto
every Planet certain diseases, that if need shall require, they may refer
the same disease unto many significatours as in the plague, the putrefaction of
humors is attributed unto Jupiter, the sharp fever unto Mars, the madness
which follows unto Mercury, the whole plague unto Mars. In the plurecie the
inflammation of the blood between the skin called Pluritis, and the ribbs is
attributed unto Jupiter, the suppuration of the blood unto Saturn, and the
whole pluresie unto Jupiter. In the Iaundes the inflammation and corruption of
humors, unto Jupiter, the yelow humor in the gaul, unto Mars, the obstruction
of the parts unto Saturn, the whole Iaunds being white unto Mars, black,
unto Saturn. And so in every disease, they use this inconstancy and
ambiguitie in Prognosticating. It is a rule among the Astrologers that if the
Planets signifiers of diseases be well affected, then there shall be no diseases
but health: if they be euilly affected then diseases follow. Our
Prognosticatours never mark this rule, but howsoever the Planets be affected,
they straightwayes pronounce that such diseases shall reign. For example the
last winter quarter, it was said by one of them, that ye diseases which should
afflict men's bodies were rewmes, coughes, cold laskes, swelling of the face and
throat, falling of the Colmel sore eyes, deafness, the stone, gout, dropsy,
greenesicknes, madness, quarterne fevers. etc. And all the Planets signifiers of
diseases in that quarter were indifferent well affected: wherefore thou have not
one cause to fear their threatninges, but rather to be sorry for their
continual deceites, wishing them minds that they may one day see their own
folly.

Concerning the time when the constellations take their effects, our
Prognosticators say that some take their effects, the same year, some not the
same year but long after, as great conjunctions and Eclipses. For they say if
the Moon be eclipsed one hour, she works her effect a month after, if two
hours, two months after: and the Sun for every hour it is Eclipsed takes
his effect an whole year after. Truly this rule which they follow, must
needs be against all reason. For why should not all conjunctions and
oppositio^s of the Sun and Moon differ their effects as well as those
conjunctions and oppositions in which the Sun and Moon is Eclipsed? if they
show forth their power immediately after, why should not these also do the
same? Moreover the Epignosticall Astrologers who have conferred the course of
the heavens, with histories show very manifestly, that Eclipses do not defer
the time of working their spite upon the earth.

In the year of our Lord. 1419. the Sun was Eclipsed in Aries, and presently
after showed all his force. There was a great sedition in Prage that year: In
Paris an uproar between them of the City and the University, and two thousand
Scholars were slain. Then also Wenzeslaus king of Bohemia being in a great
palsy dyed* In the year.1524. There was a conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter
in Scorpius and also a great Eclipse of the Sun in June, which took their
effects the same year: Charles king of France driven forth of his country:
war between Danes and the men of Sleswicke. There was a great plague in
Germanye, Civil dissension amongst the Princes of the Empire and them which
took the part of John Husse.1452. An Eclipse of the Sun in Sagittarius, his
effects began presently, and lasted a great while: Even then Constantinople
was taken by the Turk. The Hungarians and Bohemians besieged Frederick the
Emperor. 1473. the 27. of April: the Sun was Eclipsed in Taurus, Mars being
in Aries, and Jupiter in Sagittarius. The same year in summer was such heat
and dryness of weather that woods even withered, and one might wade over
deep rivers. In the years of our Lord. 1476. 1460. 1469. 1486. 1502. 1518.
And many years after there were both great conjunctions and strange Eclipses
which took their effects presently, not one, or two, or three years after
(as our heauengazers bear thee in hand). All these examples which I bring
against them, I have not feigned, but taken forth of those books which they
have in greatest estimation, and could, if need should serve, bring an hundred
more, all to show their lies, when as they commonly say thus, there shall be an
Eclipse this year, mary I will not here determine his effects, but reserve
them to be declared in my Prognostication one year or two years hence, when
it will take place.

To know where the effects of the stars shall take place, they have
appointed unto every sign certain countries, as over Europe they have set the
fiery Triplicitie, over the Oriental and North parts of the Asia the ayrie
Triplicitie, the waterie Triplicitie over Aphrica, over ye South parts of the
Asia the earthie Triplicitie: and so every peculiar sign has his dominion
over some parts of those. Now therefore, when a conjunction or Eclipse is in
any of these signs the Cities and countries subject unto them feel the force
of that constellation especially. This is a most manifest untruth and may be
confuted by many reasons. 1. The nature of the signs is not the same now as it
was in times past, and by the confession of the (...) learned have other
effects, now then they had in the days of (...) (...): yet we see the nature
of Countries and people to remain the same still, as may be seen by readyng
Tacitus, Pliny, Caesar, Strabo. 2. America which is half the world, has no
signs appointed over it: why? it was found out of late. True it is, but this
is an argument that ye rules of Astrology, are absurd, and were the bare
inventions and imaginations of idle brains. For, there is no doubt, but that
America his parts and Islands as Br^silea, Peru, Pari, Terra Florida, Iaua
Mayor, Iaua Minor, Puloana, Pauilonga, Subath: Massana, Mattan, Iuuacana,
Cozumella, Iamaica etc. Have felt the force of those Constellations, which
they attribute to some parts of the old world. Because these Countries be
about the middle Zone, and have both Planetes and signs full over them, and
therefore if the stars threaten any strange thing to come, they must
especially feel it. 3. Experience the cause of all acts is against them, as
is manifest in these examples. 47. years before the Nativity of our Savior
Christ there was a conjunction of the higher Planets in Scorpius. And then was
civil war between Caesar and Pompey: And the change of the Empire was in
Europe. But according unto the institution of Astrologers all these troubles
should have been in Aphrike, because Scorpius has his dominion there. In the
year of our Lord. 34. there was a great conjunction of Planets in Leo, and
then (says one very profanely) was the Gospel preached through the world.
But if he make this conjunction to be a sign of the preaching of the Gospel,
then it should more have been preached in the parts of Europe then Asia, which
is not true. In the years of our Lord. 331. and 1137. There were great
co^iunctions in Virgo, and yet the Countries subject to this sign felt no
harm, but Italy was troubled with the Popes superstitions, and Arrius his
heresy was broched. There was a meetyng of Planetes in Sagittarius. 73. years
after Christ, when as Otho, Galba, Vitellius, and Vespasian troubled the
Roman Empire, yet there was no where more gre^uous wars then in Palestine,
and no greater slaughter then of the Jews, who are subject unto Scorpius and
not unto Sagittarius. In the year.1464. a conjunction of higher Planets was in
Pisces, under whose dominion, although Europe be not placed, yet it most felt
the smart by troubles and civil wars. So 1576. and 1577. Two Eclipses of the
Sun, the one in Leo, the other in Capricorn took their effects in
Germany: when as Leo and Capricorn do not rule that Country. It is vain to
show the absurdity of this rule by more examples, these shall be sufficient.

This shall suffice to have spoken of their general Predictions, now follow
their special determinations of the state and temperature of the weather,
wherein I will set forth first of all a most manifest and absurd
contradiction, which most of them make and that is this. They use (as I have
said) to set down their judgments of the whole quarter, that it should be
either moist, hot, cold, or dry: afterward judging particularly they disprove
by particular days that which they said before. In the year of our Lord.
1581. one said that in ye Autumn quarter should be a great drought, yet I
perusing his particular judgments upon the days of the quarter, I find it
should have ple^tie of rain. In the year last past, an other said, the s^mmer
should be so hot and dry that even Wells and rivers should be dried up, and
fishes be scarce, and Cattle dry for want of water: yea the same party in
his particular judgment of the weather, makes 20. days of the same quarter,
at the least rain and misling, and 30. other either temperate or very cold.

In one word, the judgments which are set down, of the weather, they are
more tolerable then the rest: yet as long as the world endures, no man shall be
able to Prognosticate truly what weather shall be in every day of the year. The
causes of this I have set down before, and need not now to repeat.
UUherefore they might leave of any longer to busy themselves in this kind.
And it shall be sufficient for thee leading a christian life to know the general
and ordinary estate of the parts and seasons of the year.

The third reason impieties.
Besides all this the impious speeches and ungodly practices, which these men
use, might move a christian man to loath their predictions. First, yearly some
of them do foretell whether men shall study and embrace, or forget and neglecte
true Religion. UUhat a filthy and devilish thing is this, not to be suffered
in a common wealth where the Gospel of Christ is preached. Every man naturally
is the child of wrath, the vnprof^table servant, dead in all kind of sin,
his understanding it is enmity against God, his affections are rebellious
against his will: none does good no not one: not one has any faculty to
receive or keep true religion: we are as sawes in the hands of God, as the
prophet Esaias speaks: how then become we religious? by the only work of
God. Ioh. 6.44.
No man can come to me (says Christ) except the father draw him. And as God
draws us first unto true religion, so he also makes us continue in the
professing of the same, as S. Paul says, he which has begone a good work in
you, will finish the same etc. By what means does God do this? by the outward
preaching of the law and the Gospel, and by the inward working of his holy
spirit: other means the scripture never mentions. On the contrary part, if
any manne refuse the grace of God, and will not embrace the true Religion, it
proceeds from the hardness of his own heart, and wilful rebellion. Seeing
therefore the rebellion of man comes from his own will, 2. Cor. 4.34.
and the embracing of true godliness from God alone: UUhy dare they presume
without great impiety to adioyne ye constellatio^s as adiuua^ts either unto
man or God in this divine work. Again these predictions are very perilous,
for if a man be wickedly given, they hinder him from the acknowledging of his
sin, because they make him lay part of his faults upon the stars, when as
all indeed come from his own soul. And if a man be a penitent sinner and
feel the grace of God: yet being weak in faith and conscience, they make him
not to put his whole trust in God, and to love him with all his soul, with all
his strength but allure him in some part to attribute that unto the stars which
is the only work of God and not of any creature. 2 They use to foretell what
vices shall reign, as in these examples.

As There shall be much unlawful and secret whoredom. Great robbing by
hyewayes sides. VVanton and young women shall sit in their Ladies lappes, by
reason of their GODDESSES well placing. Many shall use deceit and cousening.


By these and such like, lewd and dissolute people, take occasions and ar
stirred up to live profanely, and to follow those vices unto which, ye lusts of
their nature carry them.

The fourth reason tricks of deceit.
A Iugler which takes upon him to do strange things must use many
sleightes, least if the stander by shall see his tricks of ligierdemayne he be
descried, and all his former cunning turn to his shame. Our Prognosticatours
understanding this, have thought it convenient to use in their kind some
tricks of deceiving Iuglers, I can call them by no better name, for so they are
in deed. First publishing their predictions in thy behalf, they use such
absurd, unknown, and insolent words, as (I think) never the like were red
or hard amongst us in England. As are these which follow.

1 A Prognostication Astrologically calculated for the pole areticke for such a
city whose longitude and latitude is thus. 2 Quartill revolution. 3 Rectified
for the motions and aspectes of the meridian and elevation. 4 Capricorn in
quality cold and dry, melancholy, in taste bitter, nocturnall foeminine,
meridionall, of the earthly trigon. 5 Mercurialistes, Iouialistes,
Martialistes. Hiemal Solstice Aestiual, Verual, Autumual. 6 Pars torturae
coupled with the Dragons tail. 7 Taurus a sign of the earthy trigonisme
naturally, cold in the sign horoscop: and virgo of the same stamp the sign
of the prevention praeceeding. 8 A sign of the same triangularity Jupiter
Lord of this revolution resident with Venus in domicilio deorsum ab Angulo
cadente. 9 Planets retrograde. 10 Cardinal or a succedent position. 11 Lunarie
defect. In his dodecatimorian. 12 Names of strange authors. Proclus,
Alchindus, Messahala, Zael, Albohazen Haly, Albumacer, Albubater, Guido,
Bonetus, Hispaleusis, Firmius, Abraham, Auenezra, Trismegistus, with many other
wo^drous Doctors having a great deal of small learning, and being far borne
as in Caldea, Persia, Arabia, Jury.
1 Thou will say what means all this? here is great learning no doubt, it
passes my capacity: who would not have an Almanacke, if it were for nothing
but for this, to see and hear how profounde our Prognosticatours are? Thou
far deceiuest thy self: for they perceiving well that their deceits and lies
may be soon espied, have invented strange terms to color them, and to
cast a mis^e before thine eyes that thou may not see their naughty dealing.
For any manne the more true and honest he thinks his matter, the more
desirous is he to speak plainly to the understanding of all.

2 It was a point of the knauerie of the Devil, otherwise called Apollo, as
the Heathen men asked his counsel, to answer doubtfully, because when as he
was ignorant of the event, yet would not, but seem to know, as in this
answer.

I tell thee Pyrrhus the Romans may conquer. It is understood two ways:
either that Aeacides might vanquish the Romans, or the Romans Aeacides. Our
Prognosticatours have chosen a very good pattern to follow, their dealing
with thee is the like: when they doubt and cannot tell what to Prognosticate,
then they use two ways of foretelling, either to speak that which is true every
way, or that which is true every year. For the first, amongst many examples,
I will put one or two that thou may see their dealing in true, not forged
examples.

1 The conjunction of Mars and Saturn threaten wars, but Jupiter will
mitigate the same: as a man should say, the Prognosticatour tells true,
except he tell a lie. 2 1585. We shall have a very dry winter, if peradventure
any floods and store of rain do fall, they shall proceed of former causes. 3
This summer quarter is like to be for the greatest part dry and whote, yet it
is like neither to be to hot, nor to cold, but indifferent. 4 Neither fair,
nor foul, both together. 5 Fair and calm, but a little missing. 6 Clouds
portending rain and snow.
Examples of those predictions, which may agree to every year are common with
them, as these.

1 This year Artificers must take heed of too much streining their backs. 2
Take heed of ventering in slipperie places holdly in building. 3 Old men shall
dye. 4 Death of Sheep and other cattle this year shall be. 5 Sundry diseases
are like to raygne amongst many which will sweep away many. 6 False rumors,
imprisonmentes, tortures. 7 Brethren and sisters shall love one another. 8
Sundry men and women shall be troubled with pains in their eyes. 9 Much strife
amongst men and women. 10 Small love amongst kinsfolks. 11 Much unlawful
lust, this year and secret fornication. 12 Some Ecclesiastical person shall be
in trouble, and some noble man shall dye, this is ever at one place, or other.
13 Many shipwrackes, and other stirs on the seas. 14 Many shall addict
themselves to the study of Negromancie.
Again beside these ways there is also a third, and that is this. They
fearing lest their Prognostications should not be regarded because of their
lies, and that they might win men unto the using of them, have adjoined
Astronomicall matters of the rising and setting of stars, of the aspectes and
motions of Planetes, which are no profit to thee. Here also they have annexed
Tables of all the Faires in the land, and of the chief high ways, which being
of some price with thee, make that which is naught of it self, to be of some
account.

A CONCLUSION.
THus much (good Reader) I hope shall be sufficient to persuade thee of the
Vanity of PROGNOSTICATIONS: if not, I beseech thee accept of my simple
endeavor, serving in some part unto thy profit. For if thou be a christian man
thou ought only to be contented with knowing the times and ordinary seasons
of the year: not regarding nor searching any secret and special PREDICTIONS,
for which the Lord never gave any man warrant, but in plain words has
forbidden the^. Nay they which be ingrafted into JESUS CHRIST indeed, are so
far from searching what shall be-fall hereafter, that they lead a life which is
a continual meditation of present death. The which the LORD for JESUS CHRIST'S
sake, grant unto us, that we may in some measure behold our own vanities.

Trinuno Deo sit omnis honos, omnis gloria.

