A COMMEMOration of the Right Noble and virtuous Lady, Margrit Duglasis good
grace, Countis of Lennox, Daughter to the renowned and most excellent Princess
Margrit, Queen of Scotland, espowsed to King James the fourth, of that name:
In the days of her most puissaunt and magnificent Father Henry the seventh,
of England, France and Ireland King:

Wherein is rehearsed her godly life, her constancy and perfect patience, in time
of infortune her Godly end, and last farewell, taken of al Noble estates at the
hour of her death. The ninth day of March. 1577. At her house of Hackney in
the County of Midlesex: And now lies enterred the third of April, in the
Chapel of King Henry the seaueth her worthy Grandfather. 1578. And Anno. 20.
of our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, by Gods permission of England, France
and Irelande Queen. etc.

To all Right Noble, Honorable, Godly and Worshipful Ladies, John Phillip
wishes the fear of God, prosperity and peace in Jesus Christ.
RIght Honorable and virtuous Ladies, when flourishing Ver had banished the
bitter storms of Hyems, and given Flora liberty with her gallant mantle of
green to garnishe the whole face of the earth: I was drawn by desire
thoroughly to consider the sundry pleasures, and diverse commodityes that she
most curtuouslye presented to worldly inhabitauntes, and finding occasion fyt
for my purpose, I took my way for my repast into the fields, where I found
the barren ground fruitful, proffering forth plentifullye her increase, and
the naked trees fullye pollished and covered with leaves: in the branches
whereof the chrping birds, the more to augment my solace, rendered forth their
well tuned concords, the sillye Lark mounting aloft toward the fyrmamente,
r^ndred forth his rattling noates of joy, the Thrustle coake, the Mauice, and
every bird in his kind observed his proper and ^omely harmonye. And thus as
on rapt or ravished with joy, Sir Phoebus with his trampling steedes rainging
through the Christaline skies, in the Charit of Phaaeton, making his asendent
to the top of the hiest Spyhre, I was constrained partly through weariness,
and partly the heat of the day increasing, to sit me down under a Betch tree,
the branches whereof seemed a Fortress to shield me from the partching gleames
of tryumphing Tytan: But as my glauncing eyes began to suruaye the nature and
effects of gallaunt Aestas, so also did I call to memory how Boreas bustering
blastes and Hyems hoarye froastes, converted those present pleasures that Ver
brought forth, to nothing, and in fine defaced them as though they had not
been* so that both those seasons I gathered did presayg unto me the fickleness
of our courssing time and the shortness of our transitory days, the
flowrishing flowers which long had bin shrouded in the bowels of the earth,
began not only to prognosticate to me our estates living her in ^ollitie:
But also set forth aptlye in their kinds, how and whereto we were subjected,
the pollished trees served as a scoolemayster, to publishe unto me, our hard
and heavy hazardes in this terrestrial vale of mysery and immortalitye, the
lesson that by them I learned was worthy to be considered: For the mark they
bad me ame at was Death, and yet after Death, as they through the sweet deawes
and sauory showers, did flourish and prosper again after they were wythered
away: so also gave they intelligence to me, that disspight of death and grave
by the mighty providence of GOD, all creatures should arise from their slumber
and come before the trybunall seat of the almighty, where the faithful should
be rewarded with eternal life, and the unbelieving recompensed with endless
torments. But as I sat discoursing these causes, Sol hasting with speediness
toward the Occident, Time gave me charge to repair toward my lodging,
which attained: I entered into my former Muse, and took my pen in hand,
mynding to have written some Pamphlet in these my former discourses: But lo,
contrary to my expectation, Mercury the messinger of Iubiter, arested mine eyes
with Sopor.

In which season Morpheius, (as it were in a vision) set before mine eyes to my
thinking a very p^ttifull spectacle* For there appeared unto me a Noble Lady
compassed with care, pursued by dolor, shoared up with perfyte patience amidst
her extremities, and lastly so supported with truth, that paysing her
infortunes which seemed in shoe incredible, and therewithal her constancye in
sufferinge calamities, I could not but wonder, on while I lamented her estate,
another while I tryumphed in her* Whose patience as a Bulwark was ready to
bear the brunts of fickle Fortune, thus one while drowned in grief, and e^t
again comforted by hoape, at last I waked, and looking behind me* I beheld
me thought the personages present, with whom in my slumber before, I had been
acquainted, and therewith all the truth began to speak unto me, persuading me
first to set aside all fear, and to mark since I had purposed to writ some
matter conserning the mutabilities of the time, what that Noble Lady would
di^course unto me: For that she had felt in this life the fullness of Fortunes
fallaces, to (...) heastes I gave my self willinglye, rather encour^^ed (good
Ladies) by the truth, then settling upon (...) own skill, to take so weighty
an attempt in (...) thus she began her tale as follows, which (...) freendlye
and faithful farewell, is rendered into your hands that fear GOD, lead your
lives loyally, and are lovers of virtue, whose reward in this life is honor,
and after the grave to the utter foil of Death, eternal fame, and the rich
and glorious kingdom purchased by Christ at the last day. The which place, God
of his infinite bounty and goodness, for his anointed Sons sake grant you.

Vestrae salutis dignitatisque studiosissimus I. Phillippus. Reginij
Cantabrigiensis Collegi^ Alumnus.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
The fourth Page, the third stafe, the forth line for the eight Henrye of fame,
read, a Prince of fame.

The sixth page the first stafe, the third linne, our substance is death, read,
our substance is earth. The sixteen page the third line and third staf^ for to
coast for unity, read, no coast for vniti^. The nineteen page, the last
verse, fourth line, for, were born^ him to obey, read were bound him to oba^.

A freendly Farewell given to Honorable and virtuous Ladies.
GOod Ladies al your listening ears I ^raue,
Til time my tale be fully brought to end:
Though y^ my corpse be subject to the grave,
Yet vouch awhile to hear your faithful friend.
To you these lines for my farewell I send,
Accept them then, and read them for my sake,
And of my name, a new memorial make.
I need not show to you my blood and birth,
Nor parentage de^eruing high renown:
That thing was known whilst I enjoyed y^ earth
though now of late Parchas has cut me down.
Henry the seventh that ware the royal crown,
Of England, was my Grandfather most dear,
As plain by proof Historians witness bear.
My Grandam hight, Elizabethes good grace,
And eldest Daughter was, as is well known:
Unto a perelesse Prince, of royal race,
whose worthy facts through out the world was blown*
Of England he atteind the kingly throane,
Edward the fourth even so was clypt his name,
And Henry the seventh espowsd this noble dame.
The knot thus knit to Britains lasting joy*
The house of York and Lancaster was one:
Where discord erst, did commons hearts anoy,
Love now had place, and they small cause to mo^^.
A blast of bliss in every place was blown,
For perfect peace, whyrld envy headlong down.
^h^^ that these states enjoyed the regal Croune.
Though rebels radge did kindle often the brand,
Of dyre debate, ye mortal wars and strife:
Yet did this Prince, with his out stretched hand,
Prepare to daunt, his ^oes with bloody knife.
As just he was, so mercy was as rife,
To all his acts, God ga^e so good increase,
That by his mean England, possessed peace.
In wedlockes right to make the commons feign
God on the earth did multiply his seed:
He by his Queen ^ight Children did obtain,
which did his joys and subjects heap indeed. Prince Arth^r weded to Kat^^en
daughter to Fardinando king of Spain.

His eldest Son that should the crown succeed
He did conioyne in wedlock this is plain*
With Kathren Daughter to the king of Spain.
Who with her in that holy sacred state,
Not full six months, enjoyed vital breath:
Amydst his bliss Jove did cut short his fate,
And in his youth hi^ body brought to earth*
When time is come death ways not blood nor birth
He strikes as well the Prince that were y^ crown,
As he does tach the beggar and the clown.
No gi^tes of goulde, no houldes nor yearly ^ee,
Can cause him stay when God commaundes to strike,
He fears no state, he spares no high degree,
The rich and poor to him are all alike.
He doubts not he the Champions push of pick*
The strong and weak he makes full soon to bend,
Its vain alas with death for to contend.
The Prince cut off by d^nt of death thus wise,
The Duke of York that noble Henry hight:
Whose ^ame Report bears to the orient skies,
Proclaimed was of Wales the Prince by right.
Though the first Son were reft the Fathers ^^ght,
The second did King Henryes joys increase.
Whose praise to vaunt the commons never cease.
My noble Mother then Margrit clipte by name,
His eldest Daughter much he did delight:
He sought her wealth and high renown ^o frame,
And unto James the fourth did her behight.
Who ware the crown of Scotland as his right,
And she to him was spowse and crowned Queen.
Such care for peace was in my Grandsire seen.
And for mine Aunt the Lady Mary's grace,
His heart was bent beningly to provide:
Twixt Christian Realms he sought sound love to place,
The fruits whereof might discord thrust aside.
Five of his Children here before him did,
And with the last my Grandams days did end,
And after soon the King to death did bend.
Thus time worn out there can remain no stay,
For sickness health efte soones we see does wound:
It strength consumes, and beauty wears away.
And last comes death to drive us to the ground.
From earth we came and earth a mean has found,
To clame her own, from whom, when death has done
No mean is left for us to start or run.
No Potenstate, no Caiser, no Prince nor King,
No Duke, no Marquis, earl nor Lord be bold:
Of dreadful death san escape the bitter sting,
When God appoyntes all flesh must turn to mould,
He strickes the young, he tames the aged old,
The Misers m^cke can not his life prolong,
When God decrees, death forth to stricke must throung
The wise man's skill, nor cunning cannot s^r^e,
When death does come his sauegarde to procur^:
He from the heastes of Jove will no time swerve,
The fool and wise, of death may be most sure.
Then worldly wightes whilst here you do endure,
Know life to death is subject every hour.
Whose stroke to ^^un no creature has the power.
Henry the seventh his Queen and children five,
Resining life as her by me is toulde:
Henry the eight as king remaind alive,
Whose praise of right ought for to be enroulde.
And regestred by Fame, in letters writ of goulde
That all estates may know and understand,
How nobly he did govern this land.
Queen Margrit my mother did then remain,
In Skotland with the king, James, clipped by name:
But the Lady Marie I must be plain,
Aboode with the eight Henry of fame.
He sought of her estate the wealth for to frame*
And minding each tide her name to advance,
He married his sister, to the king of France.
The spowsals solempnist, with joy and with glee,
In Parris mine Aaunt was crowned the Queen:
But king Iamy the fourth did soon decree,
To envy king Henry as well it is seen.
The read Roase that flourished with leaves full green,
He sought to extirpe and pluck up by root,
But soon his vain hoape was trod under foot.
The Queen my mother of curte^^e flower,
Would often on her knees, persuade with his grace:
To stay from his purpose and leuye no power,
The borders of Brittane to spoil and deface.
She could not prevail, he would follow the chase
His stomach found sturdy, would nothing relent*
He rainged all heedlesse, to pine and to detriment.
Thus reason made subject unto his will,
He sought to enlarge his pine and his pain:
But a prince to be ruled by his own skill
^an not secure nor safe long time remain.
All goes to wrack where men good counsel disdainde,
Raishnesse bringes peril and danger ten fould,
(But wisdom makes Princes always extould.
To great was the follye of king James be you sure.
Whose arrogant heart and asspiring mind:
His spoil and decay in time did procure,
So list ambition his senses make blind.
To Henry the eight, he waxed unkind,
And sought the seeds of discord dire to sow:
UUhere friendship and faith, of right ought to grow*
His fury increasing an ^oast he prepared,
Hi^ rage found restles, revenge did desire:
Yet when he thought least, with thrall he was snared,
And supt up the dregs of his conceived ire.
Presumption, revenge does always require,
The greater the gilt, the scourge sharper found,
For Justice the unjust whirles still to the ground.
My Uncle King Henry the eight of that name,
Beholding of James, the surquedie and pride:
Assembled his power this Prince for to ta^^e,
Whose folly a rod for him self did provide.
At Bramstome this battle should manly be tryde,
In which as God would king Iamy was slain,
His Army dispersest and Skots put to pain^*
Lo this was the fine of this abusion,
Here envy was plauged according desert:
His unkind dealing wrought his confusion,
His to fond bowldnesse through pierced his ^art.
Temeritie was cause of his spoil and his smart,
His guerdon was death and loss of renown,
For God the proud heart does daily cast down.
The Queen my Mother then hearing these news,
The kings infortune did greatly lament,
She mourned that ^he did counsel refuse.
And with his estate would not be content,
But such is the end of those that be bent,
To per sever in pride mischief and ill,
Shame is the reward of foolish fond will.
In Skotland my careful Queen mother I leave,
To take the guard of king James her young son:
And to France my tale tendes ye may perceive, James the fifth, Son and heir
to king James the fourth.

With the Queen mine Aunt I have not yet done.
The thread of life that Lachasis ^ad sponne,
Atropos pressed forth in sunder to share,
Of her husband the king, to dye we borne are.
All flesh is grass and does wither away,
Even as the flower that does partch with the sun,
No Physic can serve our lives for to stay,
When the clockes past and the hour full run.
By death to all ^ortes, Gods will must be done,
But how, or when, no mortal man does know,
Ne yet in what sort death will bring him low.
Some by long sickness their lives do resign,
Some with the sword are constrained to dye:
And some by famine to earth do incline,
And some in the floudes deep drentched do lie.
Some by the laws from death cannot fly,
Subject to miseries we are on the earth,
And certain to dye even from our first birth.
No charter of life is granted to man,
Our time is but short our days are not long:
Our substance is death and do what we can,
To earth we shall turn be we never so strong.
Let us not think then that death does us wrong,
When, or in what sort, he shall us arest,
No, let us be ready to welcome this guest.
Consider that time runs on without stay,
If he once pass by, he will not turn back:
And as the time fades man's days wear away,
For the Web of this life, runs still unto wrack.
In time keep watch then, least death the house sack.
For such as live careless glorying in sin,
Seek to themselves destruction to win.
Queen Mary mine Aunt a widdowe now left,
And so was my Mother of Skotland the Queen:
Their Princes by death both from them bereft,
A cause of care in each of them was seen.
Mine Uncle king Henry, whose fame lasts green,
Did comfort them both in their great distress,
As one well content their cares to redress.
Queen Mary mine Aunt his sister moast dear,
He sent for again to come into England:
And wedded she was to a noble Piere,
Of Sulfolcke the Duke, named Charles Brandon.
To him she byhight her heart and her hand,
And God on the earth their seed did increase,
Who gave them prosperity, plenty and peace.
My Mother in Skotland v^knowen to the king,
Did enter the knot of wedlock again:
With Lord Archimball Duglas consider this thing,
Of Angus the Earl, as known it is plain.
Unruly the Skotes as then did remain,
For which cause the Queen to England her took,
And Sotland awhile she left and forsook.
The king her brother of love moast entire,
At Harbo^ell Castle her harbor appointed:
Where and in which place since to know ye desire,
I was borne of my mother a Queen anointed.
And at the fountstoone, as the Prince appointed,
Margrit I was clipped this is most true,
As you that list search in Cronacles may view.
In youth I was trained, to virtue and grace,
In age I hild that in youth I did learn:
In faith and Gods fear I ran on my race,
Obedience and truth I held as chief stern*
No lightness in me could any discern,
My heart and my hand to do good was bent,
And wisdom to learn I was well content.
But such is the time and date of our days,
That life cannot last as flesh does require:
Though pleasure does grant to garnish our ways,
And Fortune accord to content our desire.
Yet when we think least, to death we are nyere,
Our music has end our pleasure does fade,
Our pomp as nothing in moment is made.
Our eyes that delight the courser to view,
(...) dazzled of truth in taking abreth:
Though knights at the tylt our joys do renew,
Yet both we and they shall turn unto earth.
(...) Captain can once conquer death,
^e ^eares no armor nor yet bar^ed steed,
(...) to death belongs indeed.
(...) nor coastly attire,
(...) moast rich nor Jewels worthy price:
(...), mountains of gould may death no time ^yre,
No, ^eau^y to save you can him once entice.
(...) after virtue, learn to loath vice,
(...) though death cut all degrees down,
(...) ma^ger the grave purchase renown.
My mother the Queen, king Iamies true wife,
A Ruler of Skotland from death could not fly:
Qu^^ne Mary of France, mine Aunt lost her life,
You see death does kingdoms and Monarkes defy. James the fifte brother to the
noble lady Margar^t Duglas.

He will not be parciall, no state he sets by,
The'^le Angus my Father did bow to the ground,
And so did my brother the king of Skots cround.
My parents bereft me, and also mine Aunt,
My brother and kinsfolk to mine anoy:
Yet list mine Uncle the eight Henry grant,
A mean distressed to bring me to joy. The Lady Mary's grace and (...).

To call me to Court his grace was not coy,
With Mary's good grace his daughter by right,
My room to alot his highness did delyght.
And after in time when God did decree,
Elizabeth's grace to the world to bring: (...)

Mine Uncle her Father so tendered me,
That with her in the Court I had my (...)
So dearly loved me Henry the eight King,
(...) bounty and kindness I may not forget
(...) me his Nece so greatly did set.
In Court I was lyked and loved of all,
At virtue I labored ^ill for to ame:
To looseness of ly^e I was never found thrall,
My words on wisdom I sought for to frame,
By means whereof I purchased fame
But when I thought lest to grief I was ^hrall,
From reason, by love, to soon I did fall.
Unknowen to the king my Uncle most dear, A contract betwixt (...) Lady
Margar^t Duglasis grace, and Lord Thomas Howard youngest son to the Duke of
norfolk who were therefore sent to the Tower.

My faith to Lord Thomas Howard I plight:
Most trusty to me his troath did appear,
But fortune her fawning list change unto spyght.
Our love she red^^st, into the kings sight,
Who ^or our offense to the Tower us sent,
Where much our infortunes we both did lament.
I mourned that I by Fancy was led,
And yet from my love I could not recoyle:
The Princes dispeasure, my cause of care bred,
But true love sought still my dolors to foil.
But love of, my love prepared the spoil,
The lord Thomas did fynish his life in (...) tower.
And he in the Tower did finishe his life,
To whom by contract I had vowed my self wife.
His death with my tears I did often lament,
Mine Unckles displeasure did grieve me as mutch:
Yet Patience gave charge I should be content,
She in my distress with hoape did me tutch.
And though fortune did against my bliss grutch,
Yet hoape at the last her hate did restrain,
And to the kings favor did bring me again.
The lady Margari^s grace pardoned and restored to the Kings favor.
My fault he remitted and took me to grace,
My bondage was past, my hoape, freedom won:
Yet when of my Lord I constred the case,
And how for my love his life was undone.
I wept the young wight, the Duke Norfolckes Son,
That for my love did, his life in bonds pay,
And yielded his corpse, to (...) claye.
To banish my cares and my bliss to augment, The earl Lennox espoused to the
Lady Margarit Duglasis grace.

Therle Lennox for me the king did provide:
To whose ^east of truth, I gave my consent,
Even he was my spowse, and I his true bryde.
Unto my Lord, steadfast my faith was tryde,
By whom in wedlock eight Children I had,
Our cares to diminish and make our hearts glad.
But death unto life found daily a foe, Henrye Lord Darley and Charles left
alive.
Six of our Children away from us ^ent,
In tender youth he laid them down low,
Whose loss with tears we much did lament.
But yet with Gods will we stood well content,
Whose divine working we could not withstand^
Who makes and kills in turning a hand.
But anew t'inlarge our mirth and our glee
A Prince, to the king mine Uncle he sent:
And Edward the sixth then named was he,
Whose birth of the commons, the joys did augment.
But after (alas) dire death from me hent,
The king mine Uncle a Prince worthy fame
Whose acts through the world reuiueth his name.
No marvel it was though then I were woe,
My griefs did increase, my playntes did abound^:
And with me all England, their ^obes did bestow,
To wail for his want moast highly renounde.
To Fren^chmen and Skots, a scourge he was found^,
Their B^lwarkes he racst and sacked many (...)*
Yet Ma^ger his might, death sent him to moulde.
A Mars he was name^ such was his power,
He gloried in fight to vaunt sword and shield:
With thump of Canon, he sacked many tower,
He with fire and sword his foes forcst to yield.
Not Hector could gain more honor in field.
Then Henry the eight in battle has wone,
Yet death to the grave constraind him to run.
Thus here you may see that death is the wight,
That neither spares king, Kaisar nor Prince:
He will not be hired death all does smyght,
The Conqueror he dreades not to convince.
(...) favors no town, he cares for no Province,
No Canon can scare him of this be you bold,
Death stricketh all states they must turn unto mould.
The death of the king the Commons did grieve, King Edward the sixth Cosen
(...) to the noble Lady Margarit Duglasi^ good grace
Yet did his seed their solace sweet increase:
King Edward the syxt their cares did relieve,
Who planted in England tranqu^^^tie and peace.
Of Scotland he began the rage for to cease,
And calmed the brages of the harby unjust,
To whose smooth tongue he had small cause to trust.
King Edward the syxt enjoying the Crown,
Was cut down by death in his tender years:
Whose name yet lives deseruiug renown,
Report to the Clouds his praises pure reares.
His loss to Britain procured salt tears,
Bewailed he was in port and in town,
^re seven years were past death cut him down.
Soon after him then Queen Mary did sucseede,
The Scepter and Sword came to her hand:
(...) cut her down also death doubtless decreed,
When she not six years had ruled this land.
Before those Princes I constant did stand,
My truth unblemished I faithful was found,
Obedience and truth was my chiefest ground.
Queen Mary disceast, to Englands great joy,
Elizabeth's grace attained the crown:
Who labored her subjects to shield from anoy,
Gods truth she aduaun^st, and fasehood put down.
Through Europ is blown her highness renown,
Whose flowring fame brauncheth like tholiue green
Triumph you Britains in your royal Queen.
For since that Brutus this Land did atchieue,
Her lycke ^ath not been of this be you boulde:
For wisdom a Saba your bliss to revive,
You all do possess, then let be extoulde.
Her virtue to skies let each tongue unfold,
The praise of this Queen (a Princess of peace)
Who s^ekes of the commons the joys to increase.
Like Iudeth she sittes with sword in her hand,
To daunt Holophernus and beat down his pride:
By her, the three graces continue and stand,
About her princely seat, Sibelles abide.
Such fate list Jove for this your Queen provide
The Musesnine, with her good grace to dwell
For prudent skyll, your Princes does excel.
With in her breast Justice a place has pyght,
And in her mercy welds the supreme sway:
The poor oppressed, to help she does delight,
Her hand is pressed to shield them from decay.
To all the fruits of love, she does display,
Her ears attend to hear each subjects wrong,
Like Saba she her subjects rules among.
The sacred Nymph that noble Vesta hight,
Within her bower, accompanies this Queen:
Like Phoebus rays, her glory glisters bright,
Adornde she sit^ with Lawrill lasting green*
Pernassus mount to scale this Prince is seen,
Of Helicon that River running cl^^re,
To taste her fill our Pandra has desire.
The scepter she, like sad Cassandra swa^es,
Corinna like, augmentes her learned skill:
Then Triton see, in haste thou take thy ways,
To spread her fame with taunting trumpet shrill.
Extol our Queen of God be loved still,
Whose word and will, dispight of Chacus ire,
She, to defend has settled true desire.
Her conntryes weal, to work her heart is bent,
Haute Hydrais head, she has cut of indeed:
Each Minataure, by skill she does prevent,
That in her ^oyle, of strife would sow the seed*
The woolfe she quails, the lamb she seeks to feed,
With pleasant milk, and honey passing pure*
God grant on earth her grace may long endure.
Whose blessed days all faithful hearts assent,
On be^^ed knees of ruling Jove to crave:
With all your powers let hearts and tongus consent,
To pray to God this ruling roase to save.
Thrice Nestors years, wish that her grace may have,
And as her love, to God is faithful seen,
So pray, always, that God may shield our Queen.
In court, my life, with sovereign mind I lead,
To whom my faith, most loyal I behight:
When I thought least, a cause of care was bread,
To banish bliss, and thrust my joys to flight.
I felt the force, of cruel Fortunes spite,
A web of woe, she tought my hands to wea^e,
As by my tale, ye shall anon perceive.
Mine eldest Son, Lord Darly, namd of right, Henry the Lord darley went from
England and was married to Marye Quee^e of Scotland by whom he had a son, which
Queen Elizabeth of england France and Ireland Queen, and the King^ of
France did baptize his name Charle James
From England went, to Skotland this is plain:
Mary the Queen, his presence did delight
And for him did, of Skotland rule ordain.
Wedded they were, and he their king did rain
And God on the earth to maintain their peace,
Did give them a Prince, their joys to increace.
The Queen of England, Elizabethes grace,
And Charles, of France the king this is plain:
Did baptize the Prince this is a plai^^ case,
Against which season, I list not to feign.
Our royal Queen certes a fount did ordain
Of fine pure goulde, most cunningly wrought,
Love to establish, she in this sort sought*
Charles James, this Prince, at the fount they then named
Whose birth to my state did yield some delight:
But Fortune afresh, my new sorrow framed,
My honey with gall, she saucst through her spite.
The king my Son a wise worthy wight,
(Alack) my tongue fayntes, the sequ^ll to shoe,
Without his desert did purchase a foe.
Where he did most trust his trust him deceived,
For treacherous treason did compass him round:
His hoape as hapless, of bliss him bereaved,
And causeless ingratitude, began him to wound.
The guiltless to harm, deceit a mean found,
Flattery bewitched him, some Skots were untrue,
And credit to light, to late made him rue.
A stranger in Court incen^st him to ire,
Whose hauty contempt he could not abide.
But death in the Court remained his hyre,
As meetest reward to lay down his pride.
The slaughter of whom his life did divide,
For where he most firmly sought safts to build,
Most soonest of all my Son was beguilde:
Alas that treason should counteruayle troath,
And falsehood the clooke of freendship should use:
Alas that Rebels should frustrate their oath,
(...)
(...) place) thou make me to muse,
(...) ^oate what solace in thee was frequented,
And yet what mischief false traitors invented.
(...) most brave in thee were prepared,
What Music, what sport, what triumph and joy:
So cost for unity alas there was spared,
To boast of true freendship, no state was found coy.
Those that most bragged wrought my Sons anoy,
But as under honey gall often does lurk,
So clocked craft (causeless) against him did work.
The fowlers their nets in secreete had spread,
The byrd to entrap (alas) all unware:
The bayght, was peril, whereon the fish fed,
Although of pleasure he sometimes have share.
The hook concealed does work the fish care,
Even so did flatery, most craftily frame,
The death of my Son king Henry by name.
By whose rufull fine let Princes take heed,
How or on whom, they do settle their trust:
Remember this proverb as true as the Creed,
For treason most tr^tcherous, raines in thuniust.
To ground on flattery let them that will lust,
Fair words and no deeds, at all they shall find,
Beware adulation make you not blind.
But flatterers presume to reatch to the Court, A Cauiate for Princes and noble
estates, by the spoil of Caesar to (...) and hate smoothe tongues that by the
means of their feigned slatteries seek the spoil of Princes and depoti^lation
of countries.

Cleo with Princes s^ekes to bear sway:
The just by flatteres often times do take hurt,
Note, flattery of Caesar wrought the decay,
Sy no that Gorgon his part so did play,
That Troy by flattery was laid in dust,
For treacherous treason con^^steth in trust.
Thus flattery does sack Regions and Towns,
Flattery bereaues man of lym and of life:
It spoileth Princes of their royal crowns,
(A flatterer) glories in mischief and strife.
In smooth tongues commonly deceit is found rife,
Trust not such Sirens their hermonies hate,
Least in Cha^ibdis you drown also late.
Henry King of Scots (...)
As did king Henry who yielding to such,
As smoothly could cloak and cover their guile:
Suffered hypocrisy his state for to touch,
The proof whereof, did broch treason vile.
Obedience and love, false rebels exile,
Their king they murdered (O woe, and alas,)
How may I with tears his death ouerpas.
B But yet remember thou and thy train, Bodwell (...)

O Offenders moast vile wicked and ill,
D Does God, not traitors hate and disdain,
VV We read in his wrath destroy them he will.
E Esteem that his justice lots them to spill,
L Look with thy consorts from the East to the West,
Your guile is ostended, God does you d^test.
Your crime is to great your fa^^es worthy pain
A scourge moast sharp your sin does require: ^^aughter.

what subjects nay traitors their prince would have slain,
That daily their welfare sought to desire.
Correction most sharp your sin does require,
In whom neither wisdom nor reason had place,
O Caines moast cruel and people past grace.
But (ah) why do I e^clame in this sort,
Oh silly woman too weak than art found:
To banquish these rebbelles so ripe t'ertort,
Their Prince most faithful that did on truth ground.
B^t ^est thae content though care do thee wound.
Ap^eale thou thou to God on him cast thy care
who for the unjust his wrath does prepare.
Thus lingering in woe my dolor increast,
Dame Nature constraind me to rush forth my tears.
To send forth my sobs I no time have ceast:
The heavens of my cries just record still bears,
The fact of this slaughter blown in mine ^ares,
My cares made dabble I wayld day and night,
Yet patience pure I plast in my sight.
But time at the last my cares did exile,
And Fortune prepared afresh for to smile:
Her pleasant looks did last but small while,
Even so list that dame of bliss me beguile.
Some Skots continuing their myschiefe moast vile,
Did yield me to drink a cup of new care,
Wherein of sorrow, I tasted my share.
(...) anguish was such as to bear was to great,
Yet God was my guide on whom I did stay:
Though Fortune began hardly me to entreat,
Yet to God, by prayer I still made my way.
And though on my neck his scouge he did lay,
I gladly did yield his cross for to bear,
And hoapt at the last, the clouds would wax clear.
The Earl Lennox my spowse, Lord Steward by name,
In Skotland as regent did bear the sway:
Under whose charge, the young king worthy fame,
As his Protector and Governor did stay.
To uphold Justice he labored night and day,
The commons weal he sought still to procure,
But no state of safegarde him self can assure.
At Starling, he meant, a Parliment to houlde, The Earl Lennox Regent of
Scotland, meant to hold a Parliament at starling.

Whereunto the states resorted with glee:
He sought that virtue might still be extoulde*
And labor there to place love and unity.
To him did accord all the nobility,
Save some most unkind, that virtue did hate,
The foes of their country, and regent my mate.
H Hautinesse came on to martch with his train, Hambletouns treacherous
treas^n*

A And treason the Ensine and Standert did bear:
M Myschiefe made speed the innocent to pain,
B Boldness st^pt up his rancor to rear.
L Lust longed to have the blood of my dear,
E Envy pressed on at unity to grudge*
T Treason in this case, presumd to be judge.
O Order by fraud and contempt was troode down,
V Virtue was quaild vice bear the sway:
N None more pressed, to blemish their Regentes renown,
Then they that of right, were borne him to ob^y.
Early in the morn, to his place they took way,
His house they beset (O cause of great care)
And entered the gates or ere he was ware.
Thus traitors through treason my dear in his bed*
With violence did of truth round beset:
The voice of their clamor amazed his ^ed,
The rage of these Rebels, he, ne might forget.
To weak was his force their practice to let,
Yet keept he his chamber mauger their ire,
Till they did threate, to consume him with (...).
Yet came he to parley before he did yield,
To those (most sedicious) cheef^ aucthors of strife:
Who promisde their regent from perrill to shield,
And vowde by oaths, he should have his life.
But hard its to trust, where treason is ryfe,
Yet he to their hands him self did commit,
Supposing that they from faith would not flyt.
But they not waying, his estate nor renown, Therle Lenox Regent of scotland
most traiterouslye slai^e in the Town of Sterling with apistole.

Nor yet dreading God, that gouerns the sky:
With a pistole slew him in midst of the town,
Th^se Rebels, thus wise their Regent made dye*
Faith was forsaken and nothing set by,
Thus treason bereft me of my Son and mate,
So froward ly^t Lachas twist on my fate.
O people most perverse stubborn and ill,
(O Rebels ruthlesse) and falsely forsworn:
What meant ye my Son, and husband to kill?
Would God I wish it, ye had never been borne.
The death of your king first made me to mourn,
The spoil of your regent, my cares makes duble.
Woe worth you Rebels, chief cause of my trouble.
To heaven I appeal in this mortal life,
For these great injuries unto me done:
To you that skorne peace and glory in strife,
Gods vengaunce in time, no doubt will be wone.
Through Europ de^ame see that thou do rone,
To publish the acts of these Skots untrue,
That their king and Regent, thus did subdew.
Think you good Ladies care cut not my heart? Lord Charles married to the
daughter of the lady Sentlowe now Countise of Sherisbury who diseased at
hacnye by who^ he had the Lady Arbella.

Think you that these pains ransackt not my breast:
These murders (God knows) enlarged my smart,
And made me to wail, when I should take rest.
In bed, and at boorde, my plaintes were expressed,
My sobs like larums to heaven I up sent,
But patience perforce bad me be content.
At Hackney with me Lord Charles did abide,
And wedded he was to a Lady full dear:
By whom God for my comfort list to provide,
Young tender infant my heart for to cheer.
Arbella was named, the young Lady fair,
But death from me reft her Father my Son,
Whose loss to lament with tears I begone.
Thus Fortune still bent my joys to diminish,
In this mortal life my cares did augment:
But shortly after my turmoyles to finishe,
Sickness to tach me by Gods will was sent.
To whom for to yield me I was content,
On God I did build my faith was most true,
Whose aid I required my flesh to subdue.
Heaven was my hoape this world I did hate,
Sweet Christ was the Rock on whom I did gro^^d:
His death was sufficient I knew to abate,
His Fathers displeasure, and cure the wound.
That Satan through sin, to make in man found,
By his illusion: the mean and high way,
To spoyl^ us of bliss and work our decay.
But Just was our God I cannot deny,
Condemned we were for Adames offense:
I know as justice did lot us to dye,
So mercy most mild should be our defense.
The seed of the woman a gem of excellence,
Was granted of love the Serpent to foil,
Us to reuine that sin sought to spoil.
Which seed was sweet Christ, the Son of God sure,
Who did for our sakes his essence imbace:
His conseption was holy his birth most pure,
Such was the working of God by his grace.
Gods sacred spirit considering our ^ase,
Did light on a Uirgin by his divine power,
Of whom was begotten Christ our sweet flower.
Flesh of her substance I know he did take,
And for our sakes he became perfect man:
Sin only except, and thus for to make,
Our atonement with God of love he began.
He quailed the boast and power of Satan,
But as he was man mark well what I say,
He was also God, believe me ye may.
For from his humanity this thing is true,
His Godhead divine was not inseperate:
Christ God and man our welfare did renew,
From death by his death the truth to relate.
He thoroughly beholding our wretched estate,
^^ducst us from death and brought us from hell,
God grant that in him we faithful may dwell.
For he it is sure that has done us good,
Not for deserts but of love by his grace:
Our sins are remitted in his dearest blood,
Our guile is forgotten, and we in good case,
If firmly our hoape in heaven we do place.
If we on Christ build and settle our trust,
His merits are ours he will make us just.
In health and in sickness, I this did believe,
And even till that death did finish my days:
No pain nor yet Cross could my faith remeeue,
For Christ my sweet Lord his name I did praise.
Then learn God Ladies to follow my ways,
Hoape still for heaven this world is but vain,
Let Christ your comfort in your hearts remain.
And unto your Queen be trusty and kind,
Her statutes and laws observe and obey:
Her bounty I wish you to bear still in mind,
For whose secure state, to God do you pray.
Whose presence God send you to the last day,
Then Britain shall prosper and flourish with fame*
That so it may be say amen to the same.
My sickness increasing my strength began to fail,
No Physic could serve my health to restore:
For death against life began to prevail,
Such is the state of the rich and the poor.
Learn to be reddy good Ladies therefore,
Let faith be your shield with sin for to strive,
Then life everlasting you shall atchieue.
In charity and love my life long I lead,
The pooreaas my guestes I daily did feed:
But faith h^th my joys in Jesus Christ breed,
Who to his flock does watch and take heed.
He was my comfort in dainger and need,
From death and decay, the Lamb set me free,
So great was his bounty shown unto me.
At Heackney to death my life did I bend
My soul to my Christ I there did commit:
My body to clay did joyfully wend,
Where it remains till God think it fit,
My body and soul together to knit.
Where and in which time before the Judge just*
I shall be sanctified such is my trust.
And thus good Ladies farewell and adieu,
My race is full run, my travels have end:
As death in this life, my life, did subdew,
So death unto you his footesteps will bend.
Regard my sayings, think you on your freende,
For as I am gone, believe me you may,
You needs must follow your sustaunce is clay*
Dixi. FINIS.
Yours at command (in the Lord) John Phyllips.

Imprinted at London by John Charlewood, dwelling in Barbycan, at the sign of
the half Eagle and Key.


