The Copy of a Letter and Commission, of the King of Spain, Phillip the
third, sent unto the Viceroy of Portugal, dated the 20. day of June, In the
year of our Lord God. 1602.

Wherein the dealings and trade of Ships and Merchandise is forbidden, with the
subjects of Holland, Zealand and England, etc. with the said Lands and
Countries of Spain and Portugal.

Whereby appears the inueterate, and continual malice of the said Spaniards,
against the Dominions of England, Holland and Zealand, etc.

Truly translated out of the Spanish original, into the Dutch tongue; and now
translated again out of the Dutch Copye, into English.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Pauier, and are to be sold at his shop in
Cornehill, at the sign of the Cat and Parets, near the Royal Exchange, 1602.

To the courteous Reader.
CVrteous Reader, after that Phillip the second of that name King of Spain,
had vexed these Countries of Holland and Zealand, with tedious and continual
wars, and with many Imbargos or arrestes, made upon their Ships and
Merchandise, to the mighty hindrance of their Navigations and Mariners, and to
the great damage and overthrow of many honest Merchants: And not therewith
contented, used moreover his great Tiranye against the Masters and Mariners,
putting them into his Gallyes, and like unto poor miserable slaves, with
chains and intolerable travails and labors tormenting them, until such
time as the Almighty God (by the wise dealings of the Honorable Lords the
States) at last did send release and freedom unto a great number, which then
remained alive. And after this, his son, Phillip the third, coming to the
Crown after the death of his Father, seeks and practices to Imitate herein,
the ways and foote-steps of his Father, as it appears most plainly by this
Letter, dated the 20. day of June 1602. sent unto the Viceroy of Portugal:
Wherein he declares those of Holland and Zealand, for enemies and rebels to
God and his Majesty: Notwithstanding they were never bound by oath of duty
unto him, nor ever were his subjects: meaning in this sort to rule and govern
over them as his Father has done before him: which is nothing at al to be
wondered at, seeing he has bin nourished and brought up under the wings of the
holy fathers of the Spanish Inquisition: we have in such sort fostred him,
that they name him to be Humani generis desiderium, that by him they may fully
effect their rage and tyranie according to their own wished desire, to the
surpression of these lands and their priueledges, and also to the rooting out
of Gods holy word, from which our merciful God defend and keep us. Amen.

An Edict, set forth and published by the King of Spain, against all Ships
and their lading, coming out of England, Holland, and Zealand: tearming them
by the names of Rebels of God and of his Majesty.
The King.

Marquess of Castle Rodrigo, principal of my Secret Council, my Viceroy and
Captain General in the Kingdom of Portugal. You have understood long since,
yt causes which moved the K. my Lord (whom God has taken unto him) to
prohibit the trade and dealings, which my rebels of Holland and Zealand used in
these Countries and Kingdoms, with the English, and other enemies of our Lord
God, and of my kingdoms: as also ye reasons which have happened in my time
concerning ye same matter, and such as have lately happened, your self being
present in Council, when the same was resolved upon and determined. And seeing
that at this present time, many reasons concur, moving us to the execution
of the said prohibition, and to see that such orders as are therein prescribed,
be severely held and maintained: my self being by diverse informed (that
notwithstanding the said orders) the aforesaid Englishmen, Rebels, and what
enemies else soever, have in no other place elsewhere so common and frequent
trade, as in the Havens of these our dominions, daily ariuing in our said
Havens, with their own Ships laden, and with false and cullored proofs and
Pasports, as if they came from free Cities or Towns, or else with the Ships
of the high Dutch, or other strange Ships: although that by the nature of the
said lading it is presumed that the commodities are of the Islands, or English:
the keeping of the said ordenances (so made and published upon all these
reasons) being of so great importance, that the reducing of the state of the
same countries depends thereon. Whereof I have resolved, that this
contraction and commorce shall be wholly broken and prohibited, to the end that
therewith also the molestations (which under color heerof) have been
accustomed to be used toward the ships of my friends and confederates, may
cease, which have been esteemed for enemies, and that the one ceasing, the
other shall be prohibited. To which end I have consented, that you only, and
such persons (as your self shall nominate) have power and authority to take
knowledge of all matters and occurrences appertaining to these arrestes.
Likewise I give unto you power and authority by virtue of this present
commission and faculty, to visit, and to give order that all Ships of
strangers which shall come into the Havens of these our said kingdoms may be
visited, naming and appointing thereunto in every Haven, some one person of
such quality and credit, that your self may be therein quiet and contented,
which shall use therein such faithfulness and integrity, as may be needful
and necessary, or at least wise in the most frequented Havens of most
importance, with commission that to this effect they may seize on all, or at
least wise on such as shall fall first into their hands: and such as shall be
found to be of the Rebels, English, or other mine enemies, you shall arrest all
the persons which shall come in the same Ships: and shall also attache and
lay hands on all the goods and Merchandise which they shall bring, to the end
that (the same being convinced, and proved to come from the lands of enemies
and Rebels, and the actions being prosecuted according to form of law) you
condemn the same to be lost and confiscated, as by me is ordained, applycating
the same according to the accustomed manner, as more perticularly at large
appears in the aforesaid ordinances, and others which I esteem as inserted
heereunto. And whatsoever you shall in this manner condemn and confiscate, you
shall presently cause to be sold, without let or hindrance of any appeal
whatsoever, which may in the Interim happen, and the same shall be done by Port
sale or Outcry, to the most benefit and profit you can. Unto all which doings,
the sercher General Don Iuan de Londona, shall repair to be present, as soon
as any such Ships or any of them shall be taken or seized: and that the same
Ships, and the goods therein laden, shall be Inuentared, if the same do
happen where he shall be resident. And for other places thereabouts, such
other as shall be appointed for this service in his name. And all such sums
of money as shall proceed hereof, you shall give order that the same shall be
put into a Christ, with three keys, having different locks, in the presence
of the beforenamed sercher General: whereof you shall have one, Don Iuan de
Londona (aforesaid) the second, and the third shall be delivered unto the
Paymaster, who shall receive these moneys. And my will and pleasure is, that
no man shall touch the same money, for any cause whatsoever, that shall happen
for my service, how special or importunate the same may be, without my
particular order before had. And in the Havens between Duero and Mino where
the like diligence is needful, the same shall be accomplished in the presence
of such as shall serve there for sercher of the Martial men in those quarters:
who also shall have one key of the Chist which shall there be appointed, and
the second shall be given to him whom you shall thereunto nominate, and the
third shall serve for the Paymaster general, using such diligence as is before
specifyed. And to the end that men may herein proceed with such justification
and upright dealing, as is thereunto necessary or needful: you are hereby
advertised, that all the appeals (which for Justice sake may in these causes
take place, made from the sentences pronounced by you, or by such persons as by
your commission shall be thereunto appointed) shall be made before my Council
at wars, and not before any others sitting in place of Justice, or other
Courts whatsoever. To all which, and to every part thereof, and whatsoever else
shall thereto appertain, depend thereon, or concern the same: I give and lend
you so full power, commission and authority: and to such persons as you shall
thereunto appoint or nominate, as thereunto shall be needful and requisite. And
I command that no man, of what quality, respect, or condition soever, shall
herein intermeddle or intrude himself, but you only, and such persons as you
shall thereunto nominate, and that such persons shall remit and send unto you,
and to such persons which shall execute this commission by your appointment, all
such processes and actions, which are or shall be brought into their Courts,
touching questions and differences upon goods, coming out of Holland, Zealand,
and England: and also I command that they seize, forbear, and forbid all
farther proceedings therein, either dyrectly or indirectly, and al such notaries
or other persons, which shall have any manner of such inuentaries, or actions,
concerning and belonging unto any such arrestes or possessions, I command them
to deliver unto you the originals, as soon as you shall demand the same, on
such penalty as you shall set thereon. Also, I command the Master of the
Requests, and the Governor of the Havens, and the Corregidores, and all other
Judges, and Courts of my Kingdom of Portugal, that they hinder you not in the
execution of these matters before written: but that they show unto you all
needful favor, help and assistance: and to al others (as is aforesaid) which
you shall nominate or appoint: and that they shall inuiolably follow and keep,
such orders which you shall either give, or send them, because the necessity of
our service so requires.

Given at S. Lorenco the 20. day of June 1602. Under written, L. the King, by
the commandment of our King. Esteuan de Ibarra.

Don John Christoual de Moura Marquis of the Castle Rodrigo, great Commander of
Altcateo, one of the Privy Council of his Majesty. Viceroy and Captain
General in this Kingdom of Portugal.
DOcter Michiel de la Plaha, the Ship S. Jacob, and others are in this Haven
arrested and attached, because it is reported that they are of, or come from
the Enemies Countries: and for as much as it is needful that their causes be
determined withal such diligence and form as his Majesty has written unto
me in his Kingly letter the xx. of June this present year, whereof the
Attenticke coppie shall be delivered unto you, heerewith I do bind and
nominate you, to the end that you follow the contents thereof in such manner
as if the same were directed unto you, to determine the cause of the said
Ships, withal the incidents, and dependants thereof, and to nominate, Notaries,
Alguasyl, and other servants and Officers which thereunto are needful: and to
cause such salarye to be given unto them as you shall appoint. To all which I
give you all, and the same power and authority as I my self have from his
Majesty: And for as much as in the mean season, I have not any thing to the
contrary to command you: you shall admit and embrace all such denuntiations,
and informations as shall be brought unto you, concerning this matter: And
shall determine the same according to the contents of the said letter.

Acted at Lisborne the 10. day of August. 1602. Don Christouall. At the
commandment of his Excelency. John Basques de Camara.

FJNIS.

