VARIETIES: OR, A SVRVEIGH OF RARE AND EXCELlent matters, necessary and
delectable for all sorts of persons. Wherein the principal Heads of diverse
Sciences are illustrated, rare secrets of Natural things unfoulded, etc.
Digested into five Books, whose several Chapters with their Contents are to
be seen in the Table after the Epistle Dedicatory.

By DAVID PERSON, of Loghlands in Scotland, Gentleman.

Et quae non prosunt singula, juncta juvant. LONDON, Printed by Richard Badger,
for Thomas Alchorn, and are to be sold at his shop, in Paul's Churchyard, at
the sign of the green- Dragon. 1635.

To THE MOST NOBLE AND ILLUSTRIOUS, JAMES, DUKE OF LENNOX, EARL Darnley and
March, Baron of Setrington, Treboulton and Methuen, LORD Great Chamberlane and
Admiral of Scotland; Gentleman of his MAJESTY'S Bedchamber; Knight of the most
Noble order of the GARTER, and one of the most Honorable Privy COUNCIL, in
both KINGDOMS.
WHo sacrificed unto their Gods of old (most Noble and illustrious Prince) were
accustomed to appropriate the matter of their offerings, as near as they
could, to the nature and better acceptance of the Deity to whom they immolated;
as to Mars a Horse, to Phoebus a Cock, to Venus a pair of Doves, to Vulcan
fire, and the like; in this Dedication I do not much deviate from that
ceremony, for as your Gr. knowledge is generally observed to be multifarious,
and as the many successive most famous Virtues of your illustrious Predecessors
do most conspicuously survive in you, so no where more duly could this volume
of Varieties be sacrificed then to your Gr. Larger merits, which have learned
Spain and other Countries to speak you every way most generous and Noble; and
which favorably shined upon by our most glorious Sun, makes all conclude you
to prove in your maturer years both delightful and profitable to King and
Country. What my continued nightwatches, studies, travells, and expenses have
been in these recollections, I will think worthily bestowed if they be
graciously accepted; and if they be thought worthy of your Graces Patronage, I
have my wish: Mean gifts have been favorably received by most worthy men;
the PERSIAN KINGS disdain not their Peasants cups of water; not Donum but
Dantis animus is most acceptable; and with what integrity of affection I offer
this, shall appear in what more worthy labor shall come from me hereafter;
which already is devoted to your G. most worthy Patronage; as are my perpetual
Orations to God for increase of all happiness to be heaped on you; which shall
be still seconded with the most real and best services that are in the
possibility of

Your G. most humble and most zealous devoted servant. D. PERSON.

In PERSONI Polyanthea.
SVbtiles, varias, jucundas res, simul uno
Congestas Libro, perlege lector, habes.
Hic Coelum, hic superos Manes, ac Tartara cernes,
Totus and ingentes quas capit Orbis opes.
Eximium miraris opus, long tamen infra
Authoris vastum subsidet ingenium.
Da. Episc. Edinburgensis.

Ad LECTOREM.
SI variis gaudes, miranda, recondita quaeris;
Si peregrina cupis, splendida, rara, bona;
Si leges, arts, and quae Coelestia spectant;
Si manes, mores, Physica, mentis opes;
Hoc opus eximium, ex cunctis praestantia pandet:
Perlege, vix aliud talia, tanta dabit.
Liv^r summa petens carpat; sed carpitur ipse
Irradiante libri lumine, ne invideat.
Io. Episco. Cathanesius.

In praeclara Davidis Personi gymnasmata.
FInibus hic arctis ingens constringitur orbis,
Et stupet humanae Iuppiter artis opus.
Hunc olim fragili conclusit Graecia vitro,
Nunc brevis immenso cum Jove charta capit.
Vitreus interijt, durabit charteus orbis,
Ingenij donec cultor and artis erit.
A. Ionstonus, Medicus Regius.

In Davidis Personi Lochlandij opera (...) seu de multifaria rerum varietate.
QVam variae rerum facies, quam gramine campi
Depicti vario, varij quam floribus horti,
Quam varium stellis Coelum, quam piscibus aequor,
Et picturatis volucrum sunt agmina pennis:
Tam varia and libri sunt argumenta perennis,
Quae Person tibi famam peperere perennem.
Io. Adamsonus Academiae Edinburgensis Rector Primarius.

Of Persons Varieties.
THe Lawyer here may learn Divinity,
The Divine, Laws, or fair Astrology;
The Dammaret respectively to fight,
The Duellist to court a Mistress right;
Such who their name take from the Rosie-Crosse
May here by Time, learn to repair their loss:
All learn may somewhat, if they be not fools
Arts quicklier here are lesson'd, than in Schools.
Distich, of the same.
This Book a World is; here if errors be,
The like (nay worse) in the great world we see.
William Drummond, Of Hathorn-den.

In DAVIDIS PERSONI Lochlandij (...). Ad Iuventutem Nobilem (...).
QVos plebi exemit splendour virtutis avitae,
Et ditant veteri praedia structa manu;
Dianae queis cura sequi, queis Castra diones;
Quasque voluptates lusus inanis habet,
Discite, Personus, quantum majora secutus,
Prima dedit Castris tempora Phoebe tuis.
Aemulus aethereos imitari deinde labores,
Deseruit charum patria quic quid habet.
Quique Isim, Rhodanumque citum, Rhenumque Padumque,
Qui Lirim, and Tiberim, Dordoniumque bibunt,
Tam varios hominum mores scrutatus and urbes,
Sedulo Palladias accumulavit opes:
Has quoque nunc ultro promit, queis pectora vobis
Sit fas eximijs excoluisse bonis:
Quaeque sibi multo constabant ante labor,
Dat vobis tenui mole paranda libri.
Nubila quicquid habent, quicquid versatilis ether
Eximium, aut vasto terra, vel unda sinu,
Daedala naturae secreta, Artisque stupenda
Quas sophia, aut parts clara mathesis habet,
Accipite, and grata pensetis mente labores,
Discite and hinc studium Nobile velle sequi.
Tho. Crafordius.

Generoso and omnigena cum ingenij tum morum Nobilitate illustri Davidi Persono
a Lochlands.
AStraeus poterat vates post somnia lauri
Gustatae, lauri demeruisse decus.
Maeonios postquam manes pater Ennius hausit,
Romani eloquij coeperat esse pater.
Pro monstro exemplum est; quando dij cuncta labor
Vendunt, and duris gratia rebus inest;
Tu varios hominum mores, urbesque secutus,
Evario florum germine mella refers.
Priscaque componens his tempora, cuncta perennas,
Cascaque temporibus das rediviva novis.
Ast ne ali^s tanti constent, compendia praestas;
Et macrocosmum terra Britanna legit.
To. Fairlaeus.

In DAVIDIS PERSONI Lochlandij, (...).
NVnc tibi, nunc quantum debebit doctior orbis,
Cui tuus unus erit Bibliotheca liber?
Gualt. B^llendinus.

A TABLE OF THE WHOLE BOOK: Wherein their several Chapters, with their
Sections, and whole Contents are orderly pointed forth.
The Table of the first Book, Wherein the matter and nature of the Heaven,
Sun, Moon, Stars, Air, Sea, and Earth is comprehended.
Sect. 1. OF the matter whereof the Heavens are composed, with the confutation
of various opinions of Philosophers concerning it. Page 4 Sect. 2. Of the
Stars, their substance and splendour, where also of the Suns place in the
Firmament. 8 Sect. 3. Of the Moon, her light, substance, and power over all
sublunary bodies. 10 Sect. 4. Of the Element of Fire, whether it be an Element
or not, and of its place. 12 Sect. 5. A brief Discourse of Meteors; of their
causes, matter, and differences. Sect. 6. That the Earth and Waters make but
one Globe, which must be the Center of the World. Of the Seas saltness,
deepnesse flux, and reflux; why the Mediterrancan and Indian Seas have none: Of
Magellanes strait; what makes so violent tide there, seeing there is none in
the Indian Sea from whence it flows. Of the Southern Sea, or Mare del Zur.
18 Sect. 7. That the mountains and valleys dispersed over the earth, hinders
not the compleatnesse of its roundnes: Of burning mountains and caves within
the Earth. 25 Sect. 8. Of time, whether it be the producer or consumer of
things: Of the wisdom and sagacity of some Horses and Dogs: How the Adamant
is mollified of the Needle in the Sea Compass; and the reason of its turning
always to the North. 28 Sect. 9. Of Fishes, if they may be said to breathe,
seeing they lack pulmons: Of flying fishes, if such things may be, etc. which
are the reasons of their possibility, are deduced, exemplified. 34 Sect. 10. Of
fishes, and their generation: How fowls are generated in the waters. If gold
can be made potable; and of the matter of precious stones. 40 Sect. 11. Of the
Earth, its circumference, thickness, and distance from the Sun. 43
A TABLE OF THE SECOND BOOK.
OF METEORS.
Chapt. 1. THe definition of Meteors, their matter, substance, place, and
cause. 46 Chap. 2. Where Meteors are composed of Clouds, where they are
fashioned, together with the solution of some questions concerning the middle
Region. 52 Chapt. 3. Of falling Stars, Fleakes in the air, and other such
^^ery Meteors. 55 Chapt. 4. Of Comets, their matter, form, nature, and what
way they portend evil to come. 61 Chap. ^. Of R^ine, Dew, H^are-frost, and
their cause. 69 Chap. 6. Of Snow, its cause, matter, and nature. 73 Chap. 7. Of
Winds, their true cause, matter, and nature, etc. 75 Chap. 8. Of Earthquakes,
their cause and nature. 79 Chap. 9. Of Thunder, Lightning, Ha^le, and certain
other secrets of Nature, with their solution. 82 Chap. 10. Of Rivers,
Fountains and Springs, their sources and causes. 88
A TABLE OF THE Third Book.
OF ARMIES AND BATTLES.
Sect. 1. THat greatest Armies have not always carried away the victory; the
reason of it; two examples of Semiramis, and Xerxes. 97 Sect. 2. Examples of
Greek, Roman, and British Battles, where the fewer number have overcome the
greater. 100 Sect. 3. Whether it be requisite, that Princes hazard their
Persons in field, or not; of the encouragement that their presence gives to
the Soldiers: When a King should venture to the field; and what Lievtenants
are to be deputed by him; all exemplified. 102 Sect. 4. Of the Romans prudencie
and foresight in sending two Commanders abroad with their Armies; and why the
Grecians conjoined two in their Embassies: and of the danger of too strict
Commissions. 105 Sect. 5. Difference between Battles and Duels: that Generals
may refuse challenges: with some passages betwixt Hannibal and Scipio in their
wars. 108 Sect. 6. That the exploits of our modern Warriors have bin every
way comparable to those of the Ancient; with some examples to that effect. 111
Sect. 7. The different betwixt the ancient manner of warfare, and the modern:
how far the modern engines of War exceed those of the ancient Greeks and
Romans. 113 Sect. 8. That the Ancients in their wars had greater
opportunities to try their prowess in battle, than the modernes have. 115
Sect. 9. The manner how the Greeks and Romans ordered their battles, both by
sea and by land; the battles of Cannas and Trasimenes described. 116 Sect. 10.
A Maxim in Military discipline, inferred, to confirm Pompeys oversight at
the battle of Pharsalia. 119 Sect. 11. That the French, what within their own
Country and abroad, have fought more battles of late times, than any other
Nation; and of their success in them. 120 Sect. 12. That Emulation amongst the
Princes in France, rather than Religion, was the cause of the many Civillwarres
there. 122
A TREATISE OF DVELS and COMBATS:
Sect. 1. OF Combats by Champions for clearing of Queens honors: Combats
betwixt Ladies; betwixt Churchmen; and betwixt Judges: Combatants, rewarded by
Kings their spectators; and S. Almachius killed for declaiming against Duels,
etc. Sect. 2. A recital of two memorable duels, the one in France betwixt
Monsieur de Creky, and Don Philippin; the other in Spain between Pedro
Torrello, and Ieronimo Anca, both of Arragon, in the presence of Charles the
fifth. 129 Sect. 3. How Combats may be thought permissible: the relation of a
Combat betwixt Iarnacke and Chastigneray, in the presence of King Henry the
second of France; citations of the Canon Law against Combats: Examples of a
Combat where the innocent was killed: that the decision of all such questions
whereupon Duels were permitted, ought to be left to God. 133 Sect. 4. Several
objections for the tolleration of Duels and Combats confuted; Cajetans opinion
of Duels, wherein also the lawfulness of Battles is allowed. 136 Sect. 5.
Cajetans reason for referring the event of Battles to Monomachie: where also is
inserted the story of the Horatii and Curiatii. 139 Sect. 6. That Kings and
Generals of Armies, for saving of the greater bloodshed of their Soldiers,
have fought single for victories: Examples of both; A quarrel and challenge
betwixt the Emperor Charles the fifth, and Francis the first, King of France:
how it took no effect. 141 Sect. 7. A discourse of a combat, where thirteen
French Knights fought against so many Italians; wherein the French were
overcome, and some observations thereupon. 144 Sect. 8. A memorable Polymachie
betwixt two kindreds in the High-lands of Scotland, (betwixt whom there had
been a long and mortal enmity) for the total extirpation of the one of them;
fought before King Robert the second, at Perth in Scotland. 147 Sect. 9. A
combat appointed by two French Barons, the one of Gasconie, the other of
Poictou, which was taken up of their own accord in the field: the end of this
Title. 149
A TREATISE OF DEATH: And of diverse Orders and Ceremonies of Burials.
Sect. 1. The remembrance of death requisite in all men: Ceremonies for the
remembrance of it; some documents against the fear of it: what death Julius
Caesar wished: of Autocides: of selfe-murtherers, etc. 153 Sect. 2. That
Christians ought not to fear death, as the Ethnicks did. All things, save man,
keep their constant course. The uncertainty of man's life. 156 Sect. 3. In what
reverence the interring of the dead was amongst the Ancients: Of Alexander: of
Sylla: How the people of Vraba did use their dead: Customs of Finland,
Lapland, Greece, and other places, concerning Burialls. 158 Sect. 4. Other
several Customs of interring the dead amongst Egyptians, Romans, and Indians;
that the manner of Christians interrements are preferrable to all other. 162
Sect. 5. That the Church of Rome reapeth great commodity by their funeral
ceremonies, as by their Bells, Cymbals, Torches, Processions of order, and the
rest: silent obsequies condemned: A story of a woman whose Ghost haunted her
Husband and family after death; and the cause thereof. 164
A TREATISE OF Mental reservation.
Sect. 1. THe Decree of the Council of Constance, That no faith is to be kept
with Heretics and enemies, is agitated: the commendation of peace: that a
necessary and just war is to be preferred to it: a story of Augustus Caesar.
167 Sect. 2. Montall reservation defined. All fraudulencie in making peace or
taking truce, condemned; for which purpose are instanced examples of Grecians,
Romans, and others. 170 Sect. 3. The integrity of the Ancients commended in
making peace, and their other pactions. A story of P. Corn. Scipio to that
purpose. Graeca fides, what, and wherefore used: Of the dishonest dealing of
Pope Alexander, and his Nephew Caesar Borgia, etc. 172 Sect. 4. The difference
betwixt the ancient and the modern Romans in uprightness of dealing,
instanced by a story of Pompey the Great, and Augustus Caesar. 175 Sect. 5. Of
the breach of faith to enemies: treachery at a siege of Capua: treachery and
cruelty committed by the Spaniards at a siege of Genoa: the strictness of
Generals over common Soldiers exemplified, etc. 176
A TREATISE OF Laughing and Mourning.
Sect. 1. THe benefits and content that all men reap by the works and labors
of Writers and Travelers. 181 Sect. 2. Of sudden deaths that have happened
unto men amidst their feasting and other jolli^ies, exemplified with stories
both sacred and profane. 182 Sect. 3. Stories of several worthy and brave
men, that upon occasions have shed tears: of the sensible grief of some
Horses, Dogs, and Hawks upon the loss of their Masters. 184 Sect. 4. Risus
Sardonicus, what and how to be taken: Of the holy tear kept in the Abbey Church
at Vandesme in France. 187 Sect. 5. Of weeping for the dead, how to be
moderated. The matter of tears: of laughing and weeping for one and the same
thing: moderation in both commended. 188
A TABLE OF THE fourth Book.
Of Curiosities, etc.
Sect. 1. THe difference betwixt factions and seditions: a rebellion of the
common people of Rome against the Senate and Patricians. Emulation a principal
producer of great exploits; the harm that follows Curiosity, and that
Churchmen are not exempt from it. 177 Sect. 2. How Curiosities have
wonderfully disturbed the peace of the Church; a recital of some impertinent
curiosities in Religion; with some also of Subtilis Scotus, and Thomas Aquinas,
etc. 179 Sect. 3. A continuation of some other Theological and Metaphysicall
subtilities and curiosities. 181 Sect. 4. Of Curiosities in Logic; the
relation betwixt the Creator and the creature: to what Heaven the Prophets
Enoch and Elias were wrapped: what place is said to be Abraham's Bosom. 182 Sect.
5. The curiosity of the Millenarii; with many other curiosities more frivolous
than necessary. 184 Sect. 6. That the Planets and other celestial bodies have
not that power over the natures of men and women, that Astrologers ascribe unto
them: that the stars are innumerable: Of the number and greatness of some in
Via lactea: where the center of the earth is; its circumference. Of Aetna,
Hecla, Saint Patricks hole, and the like. 186 Sect. 7. To search out the
secrets of Nature allow able, if men be not too curious in them; Eudoxus wish;
Plinius killed on the Mountain of Vesuvius: Aristotle drowned in Euripus: Too
much curiosity is a plague sent down from heaven on men; the Poet Simonides
acknowledged his ignorance of God; how the heathenish Gods were pourtrayed. 190
Sect. 8. Too great curiosities condemned; and a moderation to be used in them
prescribed. 193 Sect. 9. How God disppointeth the expectations of the most
curious; and that the most subtle spirits run into greater errors than the
meaner do. 194 Sect. 10. An inducement to the study and search of the secrets
of Nature: Of the Needle in the Sea compass: Of the inundations of the River
of Nilus, and from whence it has its source and beginning: Of the several
dispositions of men: Why continual burning Hills and Mount^ines do not
diminish, etc. 190 Sect. 11. Of Christopher Columbus his practical curiosity
in his discovery of the new World, or America. 199 Sect. 12. The conclusion of
this Treatise of Curiosity, containing a singular curiosity of Livia, Tiberius
Caesar's wife. 203
Of divine Philosophy, and Man's Felicity.
Sect. 1. THe Sun and Moon in the Heavens compared to the Understanding and
Will of Man Aristotle's definition of happiness: The distinction in
Understanding and Will; and wherein ancient Philosophers placed their chief
felicity. 205 Sect. 2. That our felicity consists in the actions of our Will,
is confuted: Aristotle's opinion hereupon. A theological solution on it,
seconded with a Philosophical; and an agreement of both to solve the
difference. 207 Sect. 3. Which of the three faculties of the soul,
Understanding, Memory, and Will, is the most excellent. 218 Sect. 4. Liberty
and compulsion defined; that the will is prompted by the understanding, and
that the adequate object of it proceeds from thence: At what the will and
understanding chiefly aim, proved to be the glory of God. 219 Sect. 5. That
all Philosophical precepts have come short to demonstrate true felicity;
Philosophical distinctions to know what is good of it self in Sciences; yet
all weak to illustrate wherein man's true happiness consisted; which is
philosophically agitated. 221 Sect. 6. That wealth and honor cannot be
esteemed to be our supreme good or felicity, and the reason therefore;
Philosophers confuted by their difference of opinions: Opinions of several
Sects of Philosophers concerning felicity, instanced to that effect. 223 Sect.
7. The later Philosophers have aimed nearer the definition of true felicity,
than the more ancient; and their opinions specified: the final and true scope
of man's felicity, is illustrated with an exhortatory conclusion to all men, for
endeavoring to attain unto it.
The Consonancie and Agreement of the ancient Philosophers, with our Christian
Professors.
Sect. 1. THe difference betwixt the Physiologer and Physician, compared to
that betwixt the Metaphysician and Divine. Some of Plato's opinions not far
dissonant from our Christian: The multiplicity of Heathenish gods: that Plato
came near the definition of the Trinity. 229 Sect. 2. Of Gods creating and
conserving of all things in an orderly order; Plato's reasons that the world
has a life. Aristotle's opinion of God; he is praised, and at his dying,
preferred before many doubtful Christians. 231 Sect. 3. Plato's opinion
concerning the creation of the world; seconded by Socrates and Antisthenes:
Opinions of Plato, Aristotle, and other Philosophers, confirming God only to
be the Creator of all things. 234 Sect. 4. Opinions of Plato, Aristotle and
some Hebrews, concerning the worlds eternity: the consonancie of opinions
betwixt some ancient Philosophers and Moses about the worlds creation. 236
Sect. 5. Ancient Philosophers attributed the framing and continuance of all
sublunary Creatures (as we Christians do unto God; with a recapitulation of
several consonancies betwixt us and them. 238 Sect. 6. Several other opinions
wherein the ancient Heathnicks agreed with us Christians, confirmed by the
testimonies of their Poets. 240 Sect. 7. Of good and bad spirits; and wherein
the opinions of the Heathnicks agree with ours concerning good spirits. 242
Sect. 8. How near the Ancients agree with us concerning bad spirits; and in
what orders they were divided of old. 243
OF SLEEP AND DREAMS.
Sect. 1. THat nothing can subsist without sleep or rest; exemplified in the
death of Perseus King of Macedon: The primary and secondary causes of sleep:
that a sound conscience is a great motive to sound sleep, proved in the
example of Thirois and his two Sons. 245 Sect. 2. Examples of Kings and great
Commanders, that upon the thoughtfulness of some great exploit or encounter,
have been extraordinarily surprised with unusual sleep; and the reasons
thereof agitated. 248 Sect. 3. Alexander the great his sound sleeping, when he
should have encountered Darius in battle, here excused. Cato's sleeping before
his death, whereupon is inferred a discourse against selfe-murther. 249 Sect.
4. Of Dreams both Natural, Accidental, Divine, and Diabolical: Apollodorus
dream; Abraham's, Joseph's, Pharaohs, Nebuchadnezzars, etc. 251 Sect. 5. The
Emperor Severus his dream of Pertinax; which he caused to be molded in
Brass: An admirable dream of the Emperor Henry the fifth; Cicero's of
Octavianus. That beasts dream, but hard laboring men seldom, and the reason
thereof, etc. 254
A Table of the fifth Book, Wherein the READER must conceive, that the Page
begins anew, and does not follow the former computation.
OF THE NVMBERS THREE and SEVEN.
Sect. 1. Treating briefly of Numbers in general. 1 Sect. 2. Containing
variety of memorable things comprehended within the Number of Three, as of
Heaven, and Hell, and of Poetical fictions, and some observations amongst the
Romans. 2 Sect. 3. Containing some Theological and Moral precepts and
observations, redacted under the number of three. 5 Sect. 4. Of Politic
Government: Of living Creatures; and of duties belonging to men of several
professions, as Physicians, Judges, and Lawyers, etc. with some Physical
observations, all Tripartite. 7 Sect. 5. Memorable observations comprehended
within the Number of Seven, as of the age of the World, and man's generation. 9
Sect. 6. How the seven Planets are said to rule severally over the seven ages
in the life of man. 11 Sect. 7. The opinions of some Fathers of the Church and
some Philosophers concerning the number of Seven, what attributes they gave,
with some of Hypocrates observations thereon. 13 Sect. 8. Of the Seven Wonders
of the world. 14 Sect. 9. A continuation of observations on the number of
seven, taken out of holy Scripture. 15 Sect. 10. Of the seven great Potentates
of the world; of critical days, and climacterick years, with other
observations. 16 Sect. 11. Of the Worlds Continuance and Ending. 19
A TREATISE OF Prodigies and Miracles.
Sect. 1. The definition of Miracles, with their distinction; In what time they
were requisite, in what not, etc. 21 Sect. 2. Of Prodigies, and in what
veneration they were amongst the ancient Romans. 23 Sect. 3. A continuation of
prodigies which happened in the time of the second Punick War; with many
others that were seen under the times of several Consuls of Rome. 26 Sect. 4.
Of Prodigies that happened during the civil wars betwixt Marius and Sylla;
of some in Julius Caesar's time; as, at his passing the River of Rubicone, the
Pharsalian wars, and at his death, etc. 28 Sect. 5. Of Prodigies before the
death of Galba, before the destruction of Jerusalem, and at the end of the
Valeri^n persecution. 29 Sect. 6. A continuation of other Prodigies, with a
conclusion of this Treatise. 31
SALAMANDRA* OR The Philosophers Stone.
Sect. 1. THe History of the life and death of Antonio Bragadino. 33 Sect. 2.
The reason that moved the Author to handle this matter: the different blessings
betwixt the Indians and Christians: the definition of the Philosophical Stone;
the general way and matter whereof it is made. 35 Sect. 3. The Authors
proposition: the reason of its denomination; opinion of most approved Authors
touching it; and of the possibility and factibility of it. 37 Sect. 4. That the
making of the Philosophers Stone is less expensive and laborious than many
things we both use and wear; why the makers of it enrich not themselves and
others. 39 Sect. 5. A general relation of the matters and materials requisite
to this Work; and in what time it may be perfected. 41 Sect. 6. Of the five
degrees whereby the Work is perfectioned, and first how to bring it to
Solution. 43 Sect. 7. How from Solution to make Coagulation. 44 Sect. 8. How
from Coagulation to produce Fermentation. 45 Sect. 9. The way to bring the
Work to Fixation. 46 Sect. 10. From all the former, how to perfectionate
Multiplication. 47 Sect. 11. A short recital of some other ways of perfecting
it, used by some Filii artis, and why it is called Salamandra. 47
OF THE WORLD.
Sect. 1. OF the various distractions of Philosophers in their opinions
concerning their Gods; and upon how ill grounds they were settled, 94 Sect. 2.
Of the several sorts of Gods amongst the Heathen; that they imagined them to
be authors of evils; that they were but mortal men: And some opinions of
Philosophers concerning the nature, being, and power of their Gods. 51 Sect.
3. Pythagoras opinion concerning the transmigration of souls rejected; of the
coupling of the soul and body together; with several opinions of the ancient
learned men concerning the substance of the soul. 54 Sect. 4. The former
Heathnick opinions confuted by our Christian Belief; that they differed
concerning the time of the souls continuance, and place of its abode; how they
thought souls after the separation from the body to be rewarded for good or
ill, etc. 56 Sect. 5. Philosophical tenants of plurality of Words confuted; of
Gods Creation of male and femall of all living Creatures. 58 Sect. 6. Several
opinions of several Philosophers concerning the Worlds Eternity; their
natural reasons for approving of it; and what the Egyptians thought concerning
the antiquity of the World. 60 Sect. 8. The most approved opinion of all
Philosophers concerning the Worlds beginning and matter: the infallible truth
of it; and a check of Augustines against overcurious inquisitors after those
and the like mysteries. 64 Sect. 9. How Philosophers differ from Christians in
the ways whereby God is known; the parts whereof the world is composed; the
division of the celestial Spheres, wherein several varieties may be
observed. 65 Sect. 10. The order of the Elements, with some observations of the
Air and Water. 70 Sect. 11. Of the Earth, that it is the lowest of all the
Elements; its division, first into three, then into four parts; and some
different opinions concerning them reconciled. 71 Sect. 12. Of the different
professions of Religion in the several parts of the world: what Countries and
Islands are contained within Europe, and what within Asia. 73 Sect. 13. With
what Religions and Sects all the Eastern and Northern Countries are
possessed, and in what places Christianity is most professed, etc. 75 Sect. 14.
America and the New found-lands briefly described; and some opinions about what
time of the year the world had its beginning. 77 Sect. 15. Wherein is to be
seen some things concerning the time when it is thought to take an end. 79
Sect. 16. Copernicus his opinion of the Earths moving, confuted: Archimedes
opinion of the world: an Induction to the following Section. 81 Sect. 17. The
division of the starrie firmament, in twelve hours; of the Power and efficacy
that is attributed to the Triplicities of them over every Country: and the
maintainers of these opinions confuted: the diverse dispositions of people of
several nations, how attributed to the natural disposition of the Planets: An
observation of Gods Providence. 83 Sect. 18. The causes of the Changes of
several things as of men, Countries; plots of ground, etc. and that these
proceed not from triplicities as Astrologers would have it. 87 Sect. 19. How
ancient Writers have compared Man and all his parts to the World and all its
parts; wherein is recounted the different dispositions of men of different
Countries; and to what Countries the faculties of the soul are attributed. 88
A general Introduction and incitement to the study of the METAPHYSICS.
Sect. 1. OF the several titles and appellations that have been given by
Heathnick and Christian Philosophers to Metaphysick; the reasons wherefore
every of those names were attributed unto it; and finally whereof it
principally treats. 91 Sect. 2. The Reasons why Aristotle added Metaphysick
to the other parts of Phylosophie; and how it is distinguished from the other
Sciences. 93 Sect. 3. Three Reasons conducing to the praise of Metaphysick,
inducing all men to the study of it; and setting down some principal ends and
uses thereof. 95 Sect. 4. The excellency and dignity of the knowledge of
Metaphysick; that only free and sublime minds, not distracted with worldly
cares are fit for this study; and the Reasons wherefore. 96 Sect. 5. For three
respects the Metaphysick is called the most excellent Science, and the most
necessary to be understood by Christians. 99 Sect. 6. The first respect, for
the universality. 101 Sect. 7. The second Respect, for the dignity. That the
consideration of the soul of man belongs to the Metaphysics, with several
Reasons for the proof thereof. 102 Sect. 8. The third Respect, for the
Usefulness. Of the great use of Metaphysick is toward the furthering of all
Divines, in Controversies, and other things: A Conclusion. 104
A Table of the principal Authors perused in the Contexture of this book.
A
AMbrosius. Augustinus. Ammianus Marcellinus. Alexander ab Alexandre.
Aristoteles. Aristophanes. Apuleius. Albertus Magnus. Aulus Gellius. Albertus
Coloniensis. Ausonius. Aetius. Auriliacus Albitegnius.
B
Bodinus. Buchananus. Boe^ius Hist. Beroaldus.
C
Chrysostomus. Cardanus. Caietanus Cicero. Cuspinianus. Cornelius Tacitus.
Cujacius. Copernicus Clavius. Chopinus. Comineus. Catullus. Conimbricenses.
Claudianus.
D
Pioniseus Areopagita Dion.
E
Ennius. Elias Vineti.
F.
Fernelius. Froissard. Fonseca.
G.
Guicciardin. Galen. Gensales Ovied^s.
H
Hieronimus. Horacius. Haly Arab. Homerus. Herodotus. Herodianus. Hypocrates.
Herpinus.
I.
Irenaus. Ius Civil and Canon. Iuvenalis. Justinius Trogus.
L.
Lactantius. Lucanus. Lu^^ius.
M.
Montaignes. P. Martyr Verini. P. Martyr De^ad. Mercator. Martialis. P. Matthew
Paris. Magirus. Macrobius.
N.
Natalis Comes.
O.
Origines. Ortelius. Onuphrius. Ovidius.
P.
Plato. Plinius. Plutarchus. Polybrus. Plautus. Philo Hebr^^^^, Propertius
Ptolomaus. Pierius Hierogli
Q.
Quintus Curtius. Quintilianus.
R.
Riplous. Rodiginus. Ruuius.
S.
Seneca Ph. Strab^. Sophocles. Seneca Trag. Suettonius. Serres. Scaliger.
Suarez. Sabellicus. Sacraboskus.
T
Tertullianus. Tibullus. Titus Linvius. Terentius.
V.
Valerius Maximus. Vitruvius. Virgilius. Velleius Paterculus. Villamont.
Vlpranus. Volatteranus.
X.
Xeuophon.
TO THE READERS OF these Varieties.
Courteous Reader,
AS best deserving Precedence I begin at you, whose short Character may be
this: One who is accomplished with such endowments as make an excellent man,
the meanest whereof would blow up some men with self-conceit, self-love,
selfe-praise, and an universal disparaging of others abilities; He has
learned that God distributeth not his gifts to all men, and makes good use of
it; for he derideth, despraiseth, nor condemns any man, nor his works nor
actions as being conscious that God might have endued him with that man's
spirits, to have produced no more admirable thing: He reads many books;
though he may serve for a library himself, yet his censure of these books he
measures by the Authors ability, good intention, and the profits it may yield
to meaner Capacities than his, but so discreetly, that his words favor more of
Commendation than reproach: In a word, he is one that escapes not the Venomous
bites of the ignorant Rabble, but has Antidotes against it, Yea he is one, who
when he considers my Travells, studies, expenses, and painful observations,
and withal that my ten years travel abroad has taught me almost to forget
my Native Language, and that the importunity of friends made me put this to
the view of the world which I thought ever to suppress, as being for the most
part composed in the Country, far from the conversation of the learned which
is the chief help to the perfectioning of such works; he is one I say, that
will then give such a Candide censure of me and it, that the most rigide
Critic will be struck dumb from Calumny; But before I leave him, let him
give me leave to tell him ingenuously, that to him only I present this work,
and promise that ere long he shall be gratified with a present far more
worthy of his excellently well qualified goodness. As opposite in all the
former expressions to the courteous, I address my self to the carping Reader;
He is not a naked but a ragged pretender to all wit and learning and has a
smattering of many some things: He is so conceited of himself that he is not
content to discommend some of the parts and members of another man's creature,
as not elegant enough or uniformely composed, but will lay most vile and
infamous asperations on the whole body of it whilst in his own conscience he
finds his to be but prodigious monsters, if ever he had a spark of Promethean
fire in him to give a short life to any thing: When he meets with any
ignorant men, then the Peacockes tail of ostentation spreads abroad and they
silly creatures admire the Variety of its colors even to the disparagement of
more perfect and more sweetly singing Birds: but presently that falls, and the
most ignorant then perceive the harshnesse of his note: He feeds all the world
with large promises of some rare work to proceed from him ere long, and
thereby he so long feeds and drinks; till both he and it and his name do
all die: and none to sing his requiem; Now being loath to resuscitate so
peccant a humor, I leave him too without an Epitaph in hope never to hear of
his succession or his ghost wandering after this.

For the ignorant Reader, he has such a quality, to make himself appear
witty, that he will commend every thing that he does not understand and so I
am sure of his approbation; but Land^^iab indocto vituperari est. Wherefore I
leave him to admire and wish for better proficiencie. Lastly, to the view of
all in general; I expose this book into the world; upon this confidence that
if the most discreet and Judicious give it but that auspicious approbation,
that many worthy and learned gave it before it sufferd the Press; for the rest
my care is taken; yet shall I to all (but in a different manner) ever be

A Well-wisher. D. P.

The Authors Friend to the Book.
Go ventrous book, thy self expose
To learned men, and none but those;
For this carping age of ours
Snuffes at all but choycest flowers,
Cul'd from out the curious knots
Of quaint writers garden plots;
These they smell at, these they savor,
Yet not free from fear, nor favor:
But if thou were smel'd a right
By a nose not stuffed with spite,
Thou to all that learning love
Might a fragrant nosegay prove,
So content thee, till due time,
Blazethy worth throughout this Clime.
To the curious Reader.
THough in the former leaves you may descry
The Sum of all this Book, drawn to your eye,
In succinct perspective; yet if you trace
A little farther, and survey each place
As it in all dimensions, colors, Art,
Is measured out; O! then it would impart,
That true content that every man enjoyes
Betwixt things Real, and fine painted toys:
Most Sciences Epitomized here
Are as the Noone days light set down most clear;
With other rarities, to yield delight,
If thou but daigne to read the same aright.
How er'e thou think, or speak, my comfort's this,
They Will speak themselves well, though thou speak amiss.
ERRATA.
What Errors have Escapt in this book, either in the Quotations, Omission of
Words transplacing, or the like, let them be imputed to the Transcriber, And
shall be mended Godwilling.

PErcurri librum hunc, cui inscriptio est Varieties, etc. nihilque in eo contra
Catholicam fidem, aut bonos mores inveni.

THOMAS WEEKS R. P. D. Epo. Land. a Sacris.

The first Book of Varieties. CONTAINING, A DISCOVRSE AND DISCOVERY OF some
of the Rarest and most Profitable secrets of natural things, whether in
Heaven, Air, Sea, or Earth.
As of The Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Stars, their Matter, Nature, and
Effects, etc. The Airs Regions, and their effects, etc. The Seas saltness,
deepenesse, and motion. The Earths circumference, and distance from the
Heavens: by way of Question and Answer.


The Preface to the following questions; wherein is set down the Praise,
Effects, Uses, Ends and Parts of Philosophy.

SEEING Philosophy (which is the love of Wisdom, and of the knowledge of
divine and humane things) by ancient Philosophers and Wise men in their
several ages, was accounted not an invention of mortal men, The praise of
Philosophy*
but a precious Jewel, and an inestimable propine, sent down from the Gods
above; Thereby, in a manner, to make men partakers of their divine knowledge:
which made the Poets feign Minerva (the patroness and president of wisdom)
to have issued from Jupiter's brain, and the Muses (nurses of learning) to be
his daughters) it is no wonder that Plato in his Timaeo, and M. T. Cicero, do
so highly extol the knowledge of it, giving to it the Attributes of the
Searcher of virtue, the Expeller, and chaser away of vice, the Directer and
guider of our lives, the Builder of Cities, Assembler of men, (for before that
knowledge, they strayed through Wildernesses like bruit Beasts) the Inventer of
Laws, Effects of Philosophy.
Orderer of manners, Promover of discipline, Instructor of moral good living,
and the mean to attain a peaceable and quiet death. Finally, seeing by it we
arrive at the perfect understanding (at least, so far as humane wit can
reach) of all the secrets that Mother Nature contains within her embraces,
whether in the Heavens, Air, Seas, Earth, and of all things comprehended
within or upon them.

What time can we better spend here on Earth, than that which we employ in the
search of her most delightful instructions? for thereby every sort of men,
whether Moralist or Christian, may have his knowledge bettered; Uses and ends
of Philosophy.
which made Saint Paul, and before him Aristotle confess, that by the
knowledge of these visible things we might be brought to the knowledge,
admiration, and adoration of our great and powerful GOD, the Maker of Nature;
for the knowledge of natural things, and of their causes, leads us (as it
were) by the hand to the search of their Author and Maker. This the Poet points
at, when he sang, Praesentemque refert quaelibet herba Deum.

There is nothing so mean in Nature, which does not represent unto us the
Image and Power of the Maker; and argue, that none but He could have been their
Former. And it is this sort of Knowledge, which properly we call Philosophy, or
Physic, which in this Treatise I intend most to handle; and by which, as by
one of the principal parts of Philosophy, the reader may have an insight in
the Cabals and secrets of Nature.

The Philosophers and Learned sort reserved, in a manner, to themselves the
other parts of Philosophy, as not being so absolutely necessary for all to
understand, except a very few, and these pregnant wits only: For Logic, Of
Logic*
the first and lowest of all, is but as an Instrument necessary for the other
parts, wherewith to serve themselves, by subministring grounds and ways of
reasoning, thereby to enforce conclusions of the precedents, which they
propounded.

Metaphysics again, Of Metaphysics.
contrary to the Physics, medleth with things transcendent and supernatural,
whereto every reader is not called, and whereof al alike are not capable; Of
Mathematics*
neither are the Mathematics befitting every spirit, giving hard essays even
to the most pregnant wits, all not being alike capable of the dimensions and
mensurations of bodily substances; no more than all are for the Military
precepts and Architecture, Printing, Navigation, Structure of Machins, and the
like; which are things consisting in Mechanic and Real doings: neither are
all alike able for Music, Arithmetic, Astronomy, Geometry, etc. whereas all
men as fellow-inhabitants of one World, and the workmanship of one Hand, by an
inbred propensenes, with a willing desire are carried to the search of things
merely Natural: though, as in a City, Commonwealth, or Principality all
in-dwellers are not alike, neither in honor, dignity, nor charge.

If in the discovery of these Mysteries and secrets of Nature, The Authors
Apology.
I answer not the vast expectation of the overcurious; the more modest and
discreet Reader will rest satisfied* that I infer the most approved Reasons
of the more Ancient and Modern Philosophers, and such men as have most
Copiously treated of them, thereby to ease thee and all men of the like pains
and turmoile, that I have had in the search of these secrets; which if they
bring thee that content and satisfaction that I desire and intended for thee; I
am assured of a favorable applause, and have the reward I expected.

Section 1.
Of the matter whereof the Heavens are composed with the confutation of various
opinions of Philosophers concerning it.

ALthough the world, and all comprehended within its embraces, is the proper
subject of Physic, and that Physiologie is nothing else but a Discourse of
Nature, as the Greek Etymology shows, and so were a fitting discourse for
this place; yet because the questions which concern a Christian to know,
Questions concerning the World.
against the Philosophical conceits; (Of the Worlds eternity, his pre-existent
matter, that it had a beginning, but shall never have an end: if there be more
worlds than one? If the world be a living Creature, in respect of the Heavens
perennall and incessant rotation, and the Airs continual revolution; the Seas
perpetual ebbing and flowing; the Earths bringing forth, o^ conceiving fruit
alternatively, etc. Because, I say, these questions of the World, together with
these, if there was a World before this which is now? or, if there shall be one
after this is consummated? if there be any apart by this?) are handled in the
Chapter of the World in this same Book; I pass them for the present, and
betake me to the more particular questions more necessary to be known, and
less irreligious to be propounded.

And because the Heavens, of all the parts of the World are most conspicuous,
as that wheretoever we bend our eyes, being the most glorious Creature of all
the Creators works; at it I will begin: but as I said, I would always have
the Reader to understand that I propound these questions not so absolutely of
mine own brain to solve them, The way how these questions are propounded.
as to give him a view of the variety of opinions; yea, of the most learned in
these high and sublime questions, whereat we may all conjecturally give our
opinions, but not definitively, while it please the great Maker to bring us
thither, where we may see Him and them more clearly.

Quest. First then, I ask of what matter are the heavens composed?

Answ. Diverse have been the opinions of Philosophers upon this subject: For
Averroes in his first book of the heavens, and there in Text 7. and tenth,
holds it to be so simple a body that it is free from all material substance;
which opinion of his, by this may be refelled, that with Aristotle in the eight
book of his Metaph. chap. 2. and in his first book De coelo, and Text 92.
What ever things falls under the compass of our senses, these same must be
materially substantial: But the heavens are such, and therefore they must be
material. Besides that all movable Essences consist of matter and form, as
Aristotle in his second book of Physic chap. 1. holds. Diverse opinions of
the heavens substance.
But so it is that the heavens are movable, therefore they cannot be free of
matter.

Quest. Seeing then it is evinced by argument, and concluding reasons, that the
heavens do consist of matter; I ask now, what kind of matter are they
compounded of?

Answ. The Philosophic Schools in this point are different: Some of them
maintaining, a like matter to be common with them, and the sublunarie bodies,
that is, that they were composed of the four elements, of which all things
here below do exist. Neither lacked there some Sects that gave forth for
truth, that the heavens were of a fiery and burning nature, What is the true
matter and substance of the firmament.
which opinion Aristotle confuteth by many reasons in his first Book, De coelo
chap. 3. establishing his own, which have been held for truth not only by his
Sectaries the Peripateticks, then; but ever since have been approved; which
is, that the matter of the heavens being distinct in nature, from that of the
four elements of which all other sublunarie things are framed, must be
composed of a quintessence; which opinion of his he thus maintains against
the Platonists and all others who maintained that it was framed of the most
pure and mundified part of the four elements: for (says he) All simple
motion which we find in nature, must belong unto some simple body; But so it
is that we find a circular motion in nature which no ways appertains unto
any of the elements, in regard that in direct line, they either fall downward,
as the waters and earth; or else they ascend upward, as the air, and fire: And
it is certain that one simple body, cannot have more proper and natural
motions than one. Wherefore it follows of necessity, that seeing none of the
elements have this circular motion as is before verified, therefore there must
be a distinct simple body from them, to which this motion must appertain, and
that must be the heaven.

As for those who enforce identitie of matter in kind, betwixt the heavens and
these elementarie things below, and consequently would involve them under
corruption, which is peculiar to all other things; their warrant is of no
validity: for although they take upon them, to demonstrate, by their late
Astronomicall observations in the Aetherian region, new prodigies not observed
nor remarkable heretofore, which both Ruvius and the Conimbricenses give forth
to proceed from a corruption, and defect of the first cause from whence they
flow; They mistake: in so far as they are rather extraordinary works of the
great maker, threatening mortals by their frownings, then other ways Symptoms
of the Celestial P^r^xysmes and corruption. Neither must you understand that I
do so adhere unto the heavens incorruptibility, that I think it free from all
change, but contrarily rest assured that at the last conflagration, it shall
suffer a change and novation, but no dissolution, as the low elementarie world.

Quest. You conclude then that the heavens are of a fifth substance, not
alembecked out of the four elements, but an element by it self, having it is
own motion several from the others which is a circular one?

Answ. Yea, truly I do.

Quest. But now seeing all circular motion is such, The earth rolled about with
the heavens.
that it has some immovable thing in the middle of it, whereabout it whirleth
ever, as we see in a Coach Wheel and the axeltree: What is this immovable
thing, whereabout the heavens circular rotation, and perpetual motion is?

Answ. The Globe of the earth, which (whatsoever fond conceit Copernicus had
concerning the motion of it) yet remains firm and immovable.

And the heaven does roll still about this earth, and has still as much below
it as we see round about and above it.

Sect. 2.
Of the Stars, their substance and splendour, where also of the Suns place
in the firmament.

Quest. But I pass from the motion of the heavens, and their matter, which you
hold to be a quintessence, and so a thing distinct from the four elements. Now
I crave to understand, what is the matter of these twinkling Stars which we
see glancing in the face and front of this heaven?

Answ. Of that same matter whereof the heavens are, What is the substance of
the stars.
because in simple and not composed bodies their parts do communicate with
that same nature, and matter whereof the whole is; so that the heaven being a
most simple body, and the Stars, her parts or a part of it, no wonder that
they communicate both of one essence; and of this opinion is the Philosopher
himself in his second book De coelo. chap. 7.

Quest. But if so be (as you say) the stars are of a like matter with the
body of the heavens; how then is it that they are a great deal more clear and
glauncing where they appear, then the rest of the heaven is?

Answ. Because they are the thicker part, and better remassed together, What
makes them so clear.
and of a round Spherick form, and so more susceptible of light. Now round
they must be, for besides, that we discern them so with our eyes; the Moon,
and Sun, are found to be round. But so it is, that all Stars are of a like
form and matter, but the lesser and the bigger differ only by the lesser or
greater quantity of their matter condensed, or conglobed together.

Quest. But whether do they shine with their own innate or inbred light, or is
their splendour borrowed from any other beside?

Answ. Some such light they have of their own, howbeit but little, whatsoever
Scaliger says to the contrary in his sixty two exercitation.

But indeed, the brightness of the Stars light flows from the Sun, the
fountain of all light, and that this is either lesser or more, according to
their diversity of matter, and their equality and inequality, there is no
question: For which cause the Sun is placed in the midst of all the moveable
Stars, The Sun placed amiddest the Planets and why.
as in the midway betwixt the starrie firmament, and the first region of the
air, from thence to communicate his light unto all; so that those which are
nearer unto him above, and to us below, do seem brighter than these higher
above; as may be seen in Venus, Mercury, and Luna.

Sect. 3.
Of the Moon, her light, substance, and Power over all sublunarie bodies.

Quest. NOw resolve me, if the Moon has not more light of her self then the
rest?

Answ. Yea she has a glimps of light indeed of her self, but that is dim
and obscure; as may be seen in the sharp-new (as we say:) but as for the
fullness of that light wherewith she shines unto us at the quarters or full,
What light the Moon thineth with.
she borrows that from the Sun. But we may better conceive the weakness of
her light in her eclipses; when the earths shadow, interposed betwixt the Sun
and her directly, vaileth and masketh her face; which then appears blackishly
brown, yet not altogether destitute of light. Now as the light of the Sun is
the fountain of warmenesse by day; even so, no question, but the winter and
Summer nights, are at a full Moon warmed more, then during the first or last
quarters.

Quest. But is it true which is usually reported, that in the body of the Moon
there be mountains, and valleys, and some kind of spiritual creatures
inhabiting; which Palingenius an Italian Poet describes at length?

Answ. It is certain, and our Mathematicians have found out, that in the Moon
there are some parts thicker, some thinner, which make her face not to look
all clear alike; what signifies the black spots in the face of the Moon.
for that dimmer blackenesse in the middle of it (vulgarly called the Man in
the Moon) is nothing else but a great quantity of the Moons substance not so
transparent as the rest, and consequently less susceptible of light: which
black part of it, with other spots, here and there Plinius lib. 2. cap. 9. of
his Natural history takes to be some earthly humors attracted thither by her
force, and attractive power; which I hardly give way to, in respect of the
weakness of her force to draw to her any heavy dull and earthly humor, which
never transcend the regions of the air, above all which the Moon is.

Quest. Now finally, has the Moon no power over particular sublunary bodies?
for I hear much of the influence and power of the Planets over the bodies of
Men, Beasts and Plants.

Answ. As for the power and efficacy of the other Planets over us, I have
something in the title of Necromancie. As for the Moons power experience
shows, that the ebbes and flows of the Sea, (how different so ever the
Coasts be) depend totally and constantly on the full and change of the Moon;
The Moons power over sublunarie bodies.
for accordingly her waters swell, or decrease. Moreover the brains and marrow
in the bones of Man and beast do augment or diminish as the Moon increases,
or waneth, as do likewise the flesh of all shell fishes. Daily experience too
has taught your Pruners of trees, gelders of cattle, gardners and the like,
to observe the Moons increase, and decrease: all which is strongly confirmed
by Pliny in his second book De Historia animalium, and Aristotle lib. 4. cap.
41. De generatione animalium.

Sect. 4.
Of the Element of Fire, whether it be an Element or not, and of its place.

Quest. LEaving the heavens, their number, matter, Sun, Moon and Stars, I
come lower unto the four Elements whereof the Philosophers will all things
below the Moon to be framed and made. First, Reasons that there is not an
lement of fire.
then I adhere to Cardan and Volaterans opinion, that betwixt the sphere of the
Moon, and the first region of the air, where the Philosophers place this fire
to be, which they make the first element, it cannot be, and so that it cannot
be at all; because, that if it were there, we should see it with our eyes; for
the Comets, and these lancing Dragons, and falling Stars, etc. whereof many are
neighbors with this Ignean-sphere, we visibly see, and the fires which burn
on earth also.

Answ. There is not a point of Philosophy, which if you read judiciously, and
peruse the Authors treating thereupon, but you shall find such controversy,
concerning the establishing of it amongst themselves, that one to an hundred if
you find two or three jumpe together.

Quest. But yet as a Mirror or Glass gives way unto diverse faces,
Comparison of a Mirror to variety.
and represents unto every one their own visage, although never so far
different from other, while it of it self remains unchanged or unaltered: So
it is with truth, how different soever the opinions be of the searchers out of
it in any Science; yet this verity it self abides in them all, and is always
one and alike in it self: and so in this point, what ever be Volateran or
Cardans opinion, yet sure it is, that the Element of fire is there; and the
cause why it is not seen as are our material, and grossly composed fires, of
all the Elements mixed together; is the pureness, subtilenesse, and simplicity
(if I may say so) of that Element. Which reason may serve too against them when
they say, that if it were there, it should burn all about. And which,
likewise, may serve for answer to the objection of the Comets, which are seen:
Why Commets are seen and not the Element of fire.
seeing they are of a terrestrial malign exhalation, and so having in them
that earthly mixture, and being inflamed by the neighbour-heate of that fiery
Element; no wonder though they be seen, and not it; her subtle pureness
being free of all combustible matter, and so the less conspicuous to our eyes.
(...) sive perspicuum, nisi condensetur, est (...), quia visum non terminat,
Iul. Scal. Exer. 9.

There is no such question about the second Element which is the Air: for of
it all agree, that it has three regions wherein all these you call Meteors are
fashioned, as clouds, hail, snow, thunder, wind, and dew; yea, and higher than
all these, in the first and supreme Region these blazing Comets, although other
men place them above the Moon, which are so formidable to ignorants who know
not the causes of their matter.

Quest. Is this so as you give it forth?

Answ. It is of verity, that the first Element which we call the Element of
fire, is disputable, and has been denied by many: but as for the Air, none
(to my knowledge) ever called it in question; neither is there in all our
Philosophy a subject more fitting a man of spirit to know, Knowledge of Meteors
fit for men of spirit.
than the discourse of the Meteors therein framed; of all which, although you
have a tractate hereafter, by it self, yet one word here more to make you
understand their nature, and matter, the better.

Section 5.
A brief Discourse of Meteors, of their causes, matter, and differences.

THE great Creator has so disposed the frame of this Universe, in a constant
harmony, and sympathy amongst the parts of it; that these Heavenly Lights,
which we see, above our heads, have their own force, power, and influence,
upon this Earth, and Waters, whereon, and wherein we live; marying (as it were)
these two so far distant Creatures, both in place and nature, by the
mediation of this Air above spoken of; which participateth of both their
qualities; warmenesse from the Heavens, and moistness from the Earth and
Waters. Nature then, but Melior natura Deus, or GOD, better than Nature, has
ordained the Sun, Fountain of light and warmth, to be the physical or
natural cause, yea, and the remotest cause, (as we say in the Schools) of
these Meteors; The remotest cause of Meteors.
as Aristotle himself in his first Book of his Meteors, cap. 2. observes.

When I speak of the Sun as most principal, I seclude not the Stars, and these
celestial bodies, which rolling about in a per-ennall whirling and rotation,
do lance forth their power upon the Earth also. The nearest cause.
The nearest Physical or natural cause again, must be understood to be cold
and heat; heat from these heavenly bodies, to rarifie or attenuate the vapors
of the Earth, whereby they may be the easier evaporated by the Sun; or
heat, to draw fumes and vapors from the Earth upward; cold again, to
condensate and thicken those elevated vapors in the Air; to thicken them, I
say, either in clouds, rain, or snow, or the rest.

Thus, Their remotest matter.
as the Meteors have a twofold cause as you have heard, so have they a two fold
matter. The first and remotest, are the two Elements, but of them chiefly
Earth, and Water: the nearer cause or matter are exhalations extracted from
these former two. Which exhalations I divide in fumes and vapors: fumes being
a thin exhalation hot and dry, elevated from the Earth; and that of their most
dried parts, by the virtue of the heavenly Stars, and the Suns warmenesse
elevated, I say, by the virtue and warmness of the Sun and Stars, from the
driest parts of the Earth, even the Element of fire, from whence, and of which,
our Comets, fiery-Darts, Dragons, and other ignean Meteors do proceed;
although later Astronomers have found and give forth, some of the Comets
formation to be above the Moon.

Whereas vapors are exhalations, Matter and cause of the moist Meteors.
thicker, and hotter, swifter drawn up from the Seas and Waters by the power
of the Sun and Stars; of which vapors, thither elevated, are framed, our
raines, snow, hail, dew, wherewith (they falling back again) the Earth is
bedewed and watered: When, I say, that these vapors are hot and moist; think
it not impossible, although the waters, their mother, be cold and moist; for
that their warmness is not of their own innate nature, but rather accidental
to them by virtue of the Sun and Stars warmness; by whose attractive
power, as the efficient cause, they were elevated. Now then as of fumes,
elevated to the highest Region of the Air, the fiery Meteors are composed: so
of their watery vapors which are drawn no higher than the middle Region,
proceeds rain, clouds, snow, hail, and the rest; or if they pass not beyond
this low Region wherein we breath, they fall down into dew, or in thick mysts.

Thus you see, Difference betwixt fumes and vapors.
that these vapors are of a middle or mean nature, betwixt the Air and the
Waters; because they resolve in some one of the two easily; even as fumes are
medians betwixt fire and earth, in respect that they are easily transmuted or
changed in the one or the other.

And thus as you have heard the efficient and material causes of Meteors:
Great differences of the Meteors.
So now understand that their form depends upon the disposition of their
matter, for the material dissimilitude, either in quantity, or quality, in
thickness, thinness, hotnesse, dryness, abundance, or scarcity, and so
forth, begets the Meteor it self, different in species and form, as if you
would say, by the abundance of hot and dry exhaled fumes, from the Earth, and
the most burnt parts thereof are begot the greater quantity of Comets, winds,
thunders; and contrary-wayes by the abundance of moist vapors, elevated by
the force of the Sun from the Seas and waters, we judge of abundance of
rain, hail, or snow, or dew, to ensue, according to the diverse degrees of
light in the Ayrie Region whither they are mounted.

Now, when I said before, that hot exhaled fumes are ever carried aloft, to the
highest Region of the Air; take it not to be so universally true, but that at
times, they may be inflamed even in this low Region of ours here; and that
through the Suns deficiency of heat, for the time: for as the uppermost
Region is always hot, the middle always cold, so is the lower, now hot, now
cold, now dry, and again moist, according to the Suns access, or recesse
from it, What are our S. Anthonies fires.
as Aristotle, lib. 1. Meteo. cap. 3. notes. And of this sort are these even
visible inflammations, which in the Seas are seen before any storm, flaming
and glancing now and then, as I my self have seen; yea, and sometimes upon
the tops of Ships masts, Stern, and Poope, or such as in dark nights now and
then are perceived to flutter about Horse-meines and feet, or amongst people
gone astray in dark nights. And these our Meteorologians call Ignes fatui and
ignes lambentes, wilde-fires.

Sect. 6.
That the earth and waters make but one globe, which must be the Center of the
world. Of the Seas saltness, deepnesse, flux, and reflux; why the
mediterranean and Indian Seas have none; Of Magellanes strait, what makes so
violent tide there, seeing there is none in the Indian Sea from whence it
flows. Of the Southern Sea or Mare del Zur.

THus then leaving the Air, I betake me unto the third and fourth elements,
which are the earth and waters; for these two I conjoyne in the Chapter of the
world, and that after the opinion of the most renowned Cosmographers, howbeit
Plinius Lib. 2. Naturalis Histor, cap. 66. and with him Strabo lib. 1.
distinguish them so, as they would have the waters to compass the earth about
the middle, The earth and waters not se^cred like the other elements but linked
together.
as though the one half of it were under the waters, and the other above, like
a bowl or Apple swimming in a vessel: for indeed Ptolomee his opinion is
more true, that the earth and waters, mutually and linkingly embrace one
another and make up one Globe, whose center should be the' center of the world.

But here now I ask, Quest.
seeing the frame of the universe is such that the heaven circularly
encompasseth the low spheres, each one of them another, these the fire, it the
Air, the air again, encompasseth the waters; what way shall the water be
reputed an element if it observe not the same elementarie course, which the
rest do, which is, to compass the earth also, which should be its elementarie
place?

Answer. True it is, that the nature of the element is such; but GOD the
Creator has disposed them other ways, and that for the Well of his Creatures
upon earth. Who, as he is above nature and at times, can work beyond, and
above it, for other ways the earth should have been made improfitable, either
for the production or entertainment of living and vegetable Creatures, if all
had been swallowed up and covered with waters; Why the waters are not about
the earth*
both which now by their mutual embracing they do: hence necessarily it
follows, that the Sea is not the element of water, seeing all elements are
simple and unmixt creatures, whereas the Seas are both salt, and some way
terrestrial also.

How deep hold you the Sea to be? Quest.


Answ. Proportionably shallow or deep; as the earth is either stretched forth
in valleys or swelling in mountains, and like enough it is, that where the
mouth of a large valley ends at the Sea, that shooting as it were it self
forth into the said Sea, that there it should be more shallow then where a
tract of mountains end; or shall I say that probably it is thought that the
Sea is as deep or shallow below, as commonly the earth is high in mountains,
and proportionably either deep or shallow as the earth is either high in
mountains or low and streacht forth in valleys?

But what reason can you render for the Seas saltness? Quest.


Answer. If we trust Aristotle in his 2 book of Meteors and 3. as he imputes
the ebbing and flowing of the Sea to the Moon, so he ascribes the cause of
its saltness to the Sun, by whose beams the thinnest and sweetest purer
parts of it, are extenuated and elevated in vapors, whilst the thicker and
more terrestrial parts (which are left behind by that same heat) being adust
become bitter and salt; which the same Author confirms in that same place
before cited, by this, that the Southern Seas are salter, and that more in
Summer, then the others are; and inforceth it by a comparison in our bodies,
where our urine by him is alleged to be salt in respect that the thinner and
purer part of that moistness, by our inborne warmenesse is conveyed and
carried from our stomach (wherein by our meat and drink it was engendered)
thorough the rest of the parts of our body: Neither leaves he it so, but in
his Problems Sect 23. and 30. for corroboration hereof he maintains, that the
lower or deeper the Seawater is, it is so much the fresher, and that because
the force of the Suns heat pierces and reaches no further, then the Winter Cold
extends its force for freezing of waters unto the uppermost superfice only,
and no further.

If it be true then that the Seas are salt, wherefore are not lakes and rivers
by that same reason, salt also?

Answer. Because that the perpetual running and streams of rivers in floods
hinders that, Why lakes and running floods are not salt.
so that the sun beams can catch no hold to make their operation upon them:
and as for lakes, because they are ever infreshed with streams of fresh
springs which flow and run into them, they cannot be salt at all: the same
reason almost may serve to those who as^^ what makes some springs savor of
salt, Why some fountains savor of brass, or salt, etc.
some vitrio^^^^e of brimstone, some of brass and the like? To which nothing
can be more pertinently answered, then that the diversity of mineralls through
which they run, gives them those several tastes.

What have you to say concerning the cause of the flowing and ebbing of the
Sea? Quest.


Answ. To that, all I can say is this, that Aristotle himself for all his
cunning was so perplexed in following that doubt, Of the Seas ebbing and
flowing.
that he died for grief because he could not understand it aright, if it be
truth which Coelius Rhodiginus lib. 29. antiquarum lectionum cap. 8. writes of
him; it is true indeed (yea and more probable) that many ascribe the cause of
his death to have been a deep melancholy contracted for not conceaving the
cause aright of the often flowing and ebbing of Euripus a day, rather than to
the not knowing the true cause of the Seas ebbing and flowing chiefly, seeing
Meteor. 2 and 3. he ascribes it to the Moon the mother and nurse of all moist
things; which is the most received opinion, and warranted with the authority
of Ptolomee and Plinius both, as depending upon her magnetic power, being of
all Planets the lowest, and so the nearer to the Sea; which all do acknowledge
to be the mistress of moisture, and so no question but to it it must be
referred, which may be fortified with this reason. That at all full Moons and
changes, the Seas flowing and swelling is higher then at other times, and that
all high streams and tides are observed to be so, seeing the Moon does shine
alike upon all Seas, what is the cause that the Mediterranean Sea, together
with the West Indian-Seas, all along Hispaniola and Cuba and the Coasts,
washing along the firm Land of America, to a world of extent, has no ebbing
nor flowing, but a certain swelling, not comparable to our Seas ebbing and
flowing?

Answ. Gonsalus Ferdinando Oviedes observation in his History of the
West-Indian-Seas, Why the Mediterranean and West-Indian Seas have no flux or
reflux.
shall solve you of that doubt; and this it is, He compares the great Ocean to
the body of a man, lying upon his back, reaching his trunck from the Pole
Artick (from the North and East) to the Antartick, South and West; stretching
forth the left Arm to the Mediterranean, the other to the West-Indian-Seas;
now the Ocean (as the lungs of this imagined body) works, by Systole and
Diastole on the nearer parts to it, and makes a flux and reflux where its
force fails in the extremities, the hands and feet, the Mediterranean and
Indian Seas.

Quest. How is that possible; Of Magellanes Strait, what makes so violent a
tide there.
that you admit no flux nor reflux to the West-Indian-Seas; seeing their
Histories inform us, that at Magellanes-strait, that same West Sea does glide
through the firm land of America, into the Mare Del Zur, and that with such
rapiditie and vertiginousnesse, that no Ship is able with Wind or Art to
return from that South Sea backward?

Answ. That must not be thought so much a flowing as the course of Nature,
whereby the Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Stars, yea, and the Sea, do course from
East to West, as that Strait does run. I may join to this the Easterly-wind
which of all others blows most commonly (as elsewhere) so there also, which
furthereth that violent course: and of this opinion is Peter Martyr in his
Decads upon the History of that Country.

Quest. Admit all be true you say: Why the Mare Del Zur has flux, and not the
neighboring Sea.
but what have you to say to this, that the Mare Del Zur has flux and reflux,
and yet your West-Indian-Seas have little or none, as you confess? how then
can the Moon be the cause of the universal Seas ebbing and flowing, seeing
they two under one Moon both, are nevertheless so different in Nature, and
yet so near in place?

Answ. Seeing Ferdinando Oviedes, who was both Cosmographer and Hydographer
leaves that question undilucidated, as a thing rather to be admired than
solved, leaving to the Reader thereby (in a manner) to adore the great Maker,
in the variousnes of his works; I think much more may I be excused not to pry
too deeply in it.

Quest. What is the cause then, seeing the Moon is alike in power over all
waters, that Lakes and Rivers flow not and ebb not as well as the Sea does?

Answ. Because these waters are neither large nor deep enough for her to work
upon, and so they receive but a small portion of her influence.

Quest. What is the reason? why, seeing the Sea is salt, Why Lakes and Rivers
ebb not nor flow not.
that the Rivers and Fountains which flow from her (for we all know that the
Sea is the Mother of all other waters) as to her they run all back again (
exinde fluere, says the Poet, and retro sublapsareferri) are not salt likewise?

Answ. Because the Earth through whose veins and conduits these waters do
pass to burst forth thereafter in springs, cleanses and mundifieth all
saltness from them as they pass.

It seems that your former discourse makes way for answer to such as ask,
Why the Sea w^xes never more nor less for all the waters run to and from it.
why the Sea does never debord nor accreace a whit, notwithstanding that all
other waters do degorge themselves into her bosom, the reason being, because
there runs ever as much out of her to subministrate water to springs and
rivers, as she affords them.

But is it possible which is reported that our late Navigators have found by
experience, Quest.
that the Seas water so many fathomes below the superficies is fresh so that
now they may draw up waters to their ships by certain wooden or rather iron
vessels, If the Seas be fresh some fathomes below he superfice.
which ovally closed, do slide thorough the first two or three fathomes of the
salted superfice down to the fresh waters, where artificially it opens, and
being filled, straight shuts again, and so is drawn up, which they report
to have but small difference in taste from the waters of fresh Rivers, which (if
it be true) is a strange, but a most happily discovered secret.

Answ. Yea it is possible, for probably it may be thought, that the Suns
rays which before are granted to be the cause of the Seas saltness,
penetrate no further than the first superfice; like as on the contrary the
coldness of the Northern winds freezeth, but the uppermost water congealing
them into Ice; or the reason may better be the perpetual and constant running
and disgolfing of Rivers, brooks and springs from the earth into it: And
verily I could be induced to think the Mediterranean sea, the Sound of Norwey,
and such like which lie low, and are every where encompassed with the higher
land except where they break in from the greater Ocean, The probability, that
certain Seas may be fresh low.
that such Seas should be fresh low, in regard of the incessant currents of
large Rivers into them, and in respect they do not furnish water back again to
the springs, rivers, and fountains, seeing they are low beneath the earth; yea
it has troubled many brains to understand what becomes of these waters
which these Seas daily receave: but it cannot be received for possible, that
the waters of the great Ocean are fresh, at least drinkably fresh under the
first two or three fathomes, it being by God in natures decree made salt for
portablenesse.

Sect. 7.
That the Mountains and valleys dispersed over the earth, hinders not the
Compleatnesse of its roundnesse: Of burning mountains, and Caves within the
earth.

But leaving the Sea, Quest.
thus much may be demanded concerning the earth, why it is said to be round?
since there are so inaccessible high mountains and such long tracts of plain
valleys scattered over it all?

Answ. These mountains and valleys are no more in respect of the earth to
hinder its roundnesse, then a little fly is upon a round bowll, or a nail
upon a wheel to evince the rotunditie of it, for the protuberances of such
knobs deface not the exact roundnesse of the whole Globe, as not having a
comparable proportion with it.

But what signify these burning mountains so frightfull to men, which may be
seen in several places of the earth; as that of Island called Hecla, in
Sicilie called Aetna, besides the burning hills of Naples which I have seen,
one in Mexico in our new found lands of America so formidable as is wonderful:
If the earth be cold as you give it forth to be; then how can these mountains
burn so excessively; or if they be chimneys of hell venting the fire which
burns there in the center of the earth, or not?

Answ. No question, but as there are waters of diverse sorts, Reason for the
burning hi^ls which are in diverse Countries.
some sweet, others salt, and others sulphurous, according to the mineral
veins they run thorough; right so there be some parts of the earth more
combustible then others, which once being enflamed and kindled either by the
heat of the Suns beams, or by some other accident, and then fomented by a
little water (which rather redoubleth the heat then extinguisheth it; as we
see by experience in our farriers or smiths forges, where to make their coals
or charco ales burn the bolder, they bedew or besprinkle them with water) they
hold still burning, the sulphurous ground ever subministrating fuel to the
inflammation. But they and the like do not hinder the earths being cold, no
more, than one or two Swallows make not the spring of the year.

But yet, if so be the earth be so solid and massy as you say it is, and that
it admits no vacuitie; How and whence proceed these terrible earthquakes,
tremblings, palpitations, to the overwhelming of Cities, shaking of Towers and
steeples, etc.

Answ. No question but as these are commonly prodigies and forerunners of Gods
wrath to be inflicted upon the Land where they happen, The true cause of
earthquakes.
as may be seen in the second book of the Kings chap. 22. Commota est, and
contremuit terra, and quoniamiratus est Dominus; So some way lack not their
own natural causes: and they be chiefly comprehended in one for all, The
comparison of the earth and man's a body.
and this is it, that the earth is not unfitly compared unto a living man's
body, the rocks and stones whereof are his bones, the brooks and rivers
serpenting thorough it, the veins and sinews conveying moistness from their
fountains unto all the members; the hollow of our bowels and of the trunk of
our bodies, to the vast and spacious cavernes and caves within the body of this
earth (and yet these not hindering the massinesse of the earth, for where earth
is, it is massy indeed) within the which hollow of our bodies our vicious
winds are enclosed, which if they have no vent, presently they beget in us
Iliak passions, collicks, etc. whereby our whole body is cast into a distemper
and disturbed; even as the winds enclosed in these cavernes, and hollow
subterranean places, preassing to have vent, and not finding any, making way to
themselves, do then beget these earthquakes. And of this opinion is Aristotle
lib. 2. Meteor. cap. 7.

Sect. 8.
Of time, whether it be the Producer or Consumer of things: of the wisdom,
and Sagacity of some Horses, and Dogs: How the Adamant is Mollified of the
needle in the Sea compass: and the reason of its turning always to the North.

SEeing there is nothing more properly ours, than time, and seeing it is the
eldest daughter of nature; How is this, that you Philosophers bereave us of our
best inheritance saying that there no time at all: in respect (say you) the
time past, is gone, the future and time to come is not yet, Reasons why there
is no time*
and the time present is ever glyding and running away, yea and your Aristotle
calls it but a number of motions: seeing then it consists but of parts not
having a permanent being, it cannot be said to be at all, say you.

Answ. Our true Philosophers reason not so, it is but our Sophists who by their
insnaring captions do cavil thus, therefore take heed of the subdolousnesse of
their proposition, The Reasons confuted.
which is not universally true: for admit that maxim might hold, concerning
the standing and not standing of a thing in its parts, in subjects material
essential and permanent, yet it must not evert things of a fluid and
successanean nature, such as time is: and whereas they say that the parts of
time are not, they mistake; in so far as time is to be measured by now, which
the Greeks do term (...), which ever existeth, and by which indeed time is
said properly to have existence.

Quest. What things hold you to be in Time? or whether is Time the consumer, or
the producer of things?

Answ. To the first, What things are said to be in Time.
with Aristotle, I understand only such things to be in Time as are subject to
mutations, changes, risings, and fallings, such as are all natural things
below the Sphere of the Moon; by which means, things sempiternall wanting
both beginning and ending, whose diuturnity cannot be measured by time, cannot
fall under it.

2. Ans. To the second, whether Time be the producer or consumer of things; I
answer, that as in the contravertible points of Philosophy our learned disagree
amongst themselves; so herein they agree not aright; indeed Aristotle (whom
customably we all follow) in his 8. Cap. lib. 4. Physic^^n, will have Time
rather to be the cause of the ruin and decay of all things, and that by virtue
of its motion, by which sublunary bodies are altered and corrupted, rather than
of their rising, increase, or growing. And with him many of our Poets, Tempus
edax rerum, Aristotle's opinion, that Time is the ruin of things how to be
expounded.
tuque invidiosa vetust as
Omnia conteritis, -- and again,
Omnia fert aetas, animum quoque, etc.
Tempora labuntur, tacitisque senescimus annis,
Et fugiunt (fraeno non remorante) dies.


To which opinion of Aristotle Cardan adhereth, calling Time the Author of life
and death: but as Julius Scaliger has refuted diverse of his opinions in his
exercitation, 352. not without reason has he confuted this also, making Time
to be an accidental cause of the decay of things; for beside Time there must
be causa agens which is the Law of Nature ingrafted in all things living,
moving, creeping, vegetating, by which they tend to ruin: as sin in Man
(besides his natural corruption) is, and must be thought the Author of his
death.

Now seeing your Philosophy admits no other difference betwixt Men and
Beasts, Quest.
but the use of reason, wherewith we are endued above them; how will you term
those many reasonable things performed by Beasts, whereof our Histories are
full: as that of Bucephalus of Alexander the Great, Of the wittiness of Dogs
and Horses.
who would suffer none to back him but his Master, though never so artificially
disguised in his apparel; Julius Caesar his Horse likewise, who at his death
was observed to fast so long, is remarkable: and that of Nicomedes, who
because his Lord was killed in the field, choosed rather to dye starving for
hunger, than to survive him: Stories of the sagacity of Dogs, books are fully
replenished with; the example of one only shall suffice; This Dog being with his
Master, Of the love of a Dog to his Master.
when a Robber killed him for his purse, and had flung him into a River that he
might not be found again, did first leap into the River after his dead
Master, and then upon his shoulders bore up his head so long, as any breath was
remaining within him, thereafter discerning him to be dead, straight follows
the rogue by his sent to the City, finds him, and incessantly barketh at him
whithersoever he went; while at length, his Master being missed, and the Rogue
under suspicion of robbery, and the Dogs violent pursuing the fellow drew the
people into a jealousy of the murder: whereupon the robber being called
before a Judge, Discourse of a Dogs memory.
after due examination confessed the murder, was condemned, and died for the
fact. Now I demand, if these and the like doings of Beasts be not founded upon
reason whereof we men brag as of a greater prerogative above them?

Answ. No ways; for we must distinguish betwixt actions of true reason, such
as ours are; and these which are done by a natural instinct or sensitive
faculty of sagacity, use and custom, but most especially, from that which is a
near tying bond even amongst the cruellest of Beasts, a perpetual resenting
of a good turn received; as is manifest in the example of the Lion,
Distinction between things done by reason and a natural inclination.
who not only saved the life of that poor condemned caitive, who fled into
his den and cave, because he pulled out of his pawe the thorn which molested
him, but likewise fed him, by killing beasts of all sorts and bringing them
unto him; whereof Gellius at length; and out of him Du Bartas.

If I should follow forth here all other questions of Natures secrets, the
task were long and tedious, and peradventure, less pleasant to the Reader,
than painful to me: as why, the Adamant-stone which (of its own nature) is so
hard, that neither fire nor Iron can bruise or break it, is nevertheless broke
in pieces in a dishfull of hot Goates-bloud, soft blood being more powerful
than hard Iron? Whether fishes do breath or not, seeing they have no lungs the
bellows of breath? What can be the cause of the Loadstones attractive power to
draw Iron unto it? Why, some Plants and Herbs ripen sooner than others? Or
what makes a member of a Man or Beast being cut from the body, to dye
presently; and yet branches of trees cut off will retain their lively sap so
long within them? That certain plants and herbs will grow hi^dlier together
than others.
Whether or not there be such affinity, and to say love amongst plants and
herbs, that some will more fruitfully increase, being set, planted, or sown,
together, then when mixed amongst others, according to that of the Poet, Vivunt
in Venerem frondes, omnisque vicissim
Felix arbor amat, nutant ad mutua palmae
Foedera, populeo suspirat populus ictu, etc.


To which questions, and some others hereafter to be handled, for me to give
answer, were no less presumption and foole-hardinesse, than a demonstration of
my grosser ignorance; since, Cardan and Scaliger are so far from agreement in
these matters, as may be seen in Scaligers Exercitations; yet having propounded
these questions, and to say nothing of my own opinion touching the solution of
such Riddles (as we call them) were someway an imputation; and I might be
equally blamed with those who lead their neighbor upon the Ice, and leave him
there; wherefore thus I adventure.

And first, why the Adamant which for hardness is able to abide both the force
of the fire, and dint of any hammer, yet being put in Goates-bloud, parts
asunder.

Answ. Howbeit Scaliger in his 345. Exercitation Sect. 8. gives no other
reason than that absolutely, it is one of the greatest miracles and secrets of
Nature; and therein refuteth their opinions, who allege the Analogy and
agreement of the common principles of Nature; which are common to the blood and
to the Adamant together, The true cause how the hard Adamant is dissolved in a
dish of Goats blood.
to be the cause; yet I think for my own part, that if any natural reason
may be given in so hidden a mystery, it may be this; That Goats (as we all
know) live and feed usually on cliffie Rocks whereon herbs of rare pearcing and
penetrative virtues and qualities grow; (neither is the derivation of that
herbs name Saxifrage other, than from the power it has to break stones
asunder) Goats then, feeding on such rockie-herbes as these, no wonder that
their blood having Analogy and proportion to their food, be penetrative, and
more proper to be powerful in virtue, than otherwise convertible in
fatness, for we see them of all grazing Beasts the leanest.

Quest. Now by what power draws the Loadstone Iron unto it?

Answ. Aristotle in the 7th. Book of his Physics which almost al other
Philosophers do affirm, What makes the Loadstone draw Iron.
That the Loadstone attracteth Iron unto it by their similitude and likeness
of substances; for so you see they are both of a like color: and that must be
the cause how the false-Prophet Mahomet, his Chest of Iron, wherein his bones
are, does hang miraculously unsupported of any thing, because either the pend
or some vertical stone of the Vault where it is kept, is of Loadstone: and
thus with Julius Scaliger, Exercitatione, 151. I disallow Caspar Bartholinus
his opinion, who alleges that the Loadstone does not merely and solely by
its attractive faculty draw Iron unto it, but for that it is nourished and fed
by Iron; for nothing more properly can be said to feed, than that which has
life. Therefore, etc.

Here also it will not be amiss to add the reason why the Needles of
Sea-compasses (as these of other Sun-Dyals) being touched by the Loadstone, do
always turn to the North; What makes the Needle in a Sea compass turn ever
to the North.
and this is the most received; That there is under our North Pole a huge black
Rock under which our Ocean surgeth and issues forth in four Currants,
answerable to the four corners of the Earth, or the four winds, which place
(if the Seas have a source) must be thought to be its spring; and this Rock is
thought to be all of Loadstone; so that by a kind of affinity (it would seem)
by a particular instinct of nature, it draws all other such like stones or
other metals touched by them toward it. So that the reason of the Needles
turning to the North in Compasses is that Nigra rupes of Loadstone lying under
our North Pole: which by the attractive power it has, draws all things
touched by it, or its alike thither.

Section 9.
Of Fishes, if they may be said to breath, seeing they lack pulmons: Of flying
fishes, if such things may be, etc. which are the reasons of their possibility,
are deduced, exemplified.

Quest. BUT whether and after what manner can Fishes be said to breath, seeing
they have no lungs, the bellows of breath?

Answ. This question has been agitated many Ages ago, both pro and contra,
as we say; Arist. cap. 1. De respiratione, denying that they can breath: Plato
and diverse others of his Sect affirming the contrary: they who maintain the
negative part do reason thus; Creatures that want the Organs and Instruments of
breathing, Reasons pr^ and contra that fishes breath.
cannot be said to breath or respire; but such are all fishes, therefore, etc.

The opposites on the other side do thus maintain their breathing; all living
creatures not only breath, but so necessarily must breath that for lack of it
they dye, as experience shows: nay, that the very insects, or (as you would
say) demi-creatures, they must breathe: but fishes are living Creatures,
therefore they must breathe. The Aristotelians answering this, distinguish the
major proposition, restraining the universality of it but to such Creatures as
live in the Air, whereas there is no Air in the water, the nature of it not
admitting place for Air as the Earth does, which being opened with any
Instrument, as with a Plough or Spade, may admit Air; whereas the waters will
fill all the void presently again, as we may see by buckets, boxes, or any
other material thing, being put into the water, and taken out again, do
leave no vacuum behind them; for the waters do straight ways reincorporate:
seeing then there is no Air in the Fishes Element, they cannot nor need not be
said to breath; for contrariwise we see that being drawn from the waters to
the Air they do incontinently dye.

For answer to both extremes, What way fishes may be said to breath.
I could allow for fishes a kind of respiration called refrigeration, which
improperly may be said to be respiration; but since nothing properly can be
said to breath but that which has lungs, (the instruments of breathing) which
indeed fishes have not: The conclusion is clear; That they have rather a sort
of refrigeration, then respiration.

Quest. If herring can ^^ie.
But is it of truth which we hear of our Navigators, that in the Southern
seas they have seen flying fishes, and herring like a foggie or moist cloud
fleeing above their heads, and falling again in the Seas with a rushing and
flushing?

Answ. Yea I think it possible; for the great Creator, as he has created the
fowls of the Air, the beasts of the earth, and the fishes of the Sea, at the
first creation, in their own true kinds; So has he made of all these kinds
Amphibia. And as there are four footed beasts and fowls of double kinds,
living promiscuously on land and water, why may there not be fishes of that
nature also? of which hereafter. So has he endued the Air (as the more noble
element of the three) with that prerogative; that in it, either fowls or
watery creatures might be engendered; out of vapors either moist or
terrestrial, or extracted from standing lakes, stanckes, marshes, myres, or
the like oily and marshie places; which waters, elevated to the Air, by the
violent operation of the Suns beams, either from the Seas, or the foresaid
places, How herring may be engendered in the Air.
by the benefit of the warm Air, where they abide, as in the fertile belly of
a fruitful mother, do there receave the figure either of frogge or fish,
according to the predominancy of the matter whereof that vapor is composed;
from whence again as all heavy things do tend downward, so do they also.
Which has made some suppose that herrings, (by them called flying fishes) do
descend from the air, A sea-sawing r^^^on why herring (...) site.
their place of generation: where indeed more truly, the error comes this
way; the Herrings, in their season, do come in great shoales (as Sea men say)
upon the superfice of the waters, where scudding along the coasts, some sudden
gale of wind (they being elevated upon the top of some vaste wave) may chance
to blow them violently so far, till they encounter, and light on a higher
billow, which has made Mariners think they fly.

Quest. What have you to say to this, that as there are fishes extraordinary,
so I have heard of fowls without either feet or plumes?

Answ. Fowls they cannot be, Apodes, or fowls without feet or Plumes.
because fowls are defined to be living creatures feathered and two footed;
and since these are not such, fowls they cannot be: And yet Julius Scaliger
exercitatione 228. sect. 1. and 24. makes mention of them, calling them
Apodes, which Greek word is as much as without feet.

Quest. But, leaving the various diversities of fowls, as the Geese who hatch
their eggs under their paw, Of Claick Geese.
or foot, and the like, how do those claick geese in Scotland breed, whereof
Du Bartas makes mention as of a rare work of nature?

Answ. Their generation is beyond the ordinary course of nature, in so much
that ordinarily one creature begets another; but so it is, that this foul
is engendered of certain leaves of trees, out of which in a manner it buddeth,
and ripeneth; Now, these trees growing upon the banks of lakes, do, at their
due time, cast these leaves, which falling into the lake, do there so
putrify, that of them is engendered a Worm, which by some secret fomentation
and agitation of the waters, with the Suns help, grows by little and little
to be a foul somewhat bigger than a Mallard, or wild Duck; and in those waters
they live and feed, and are eaten by the inhabitants thereabouts.

First then, I resolve their questions who argument against the possibility of
this generation, and then I shall clear you of that doubt you have proposed:
thus it stands then with these Argumentators; when Aristotle in his last
chapter of his third book De generatione animalium, before he had dissenssed
the material causes of all kind of perfect creatures, In the end falls upon
the material cause of insects, and so of the less perfect; Diverse kinds of
Insects.
one kind of them he makes to be produced of a Marish clay an earthie and
putrified slimie substance, whereof worms, froggs, snailes and the like are
produced; the Sun beams, as the efficient cause, working upon that matter; The
other sort is more perfect, and these are our Bees, waspes, flies, midges and
so forth, which are engendered of some putrified substance, as, peradventure, of
a dead horse, ox, or ass; out of which by the operation of the environing
air, and the internal putrefaction together they are brought forth: Sea
Insects.
The insects of the Sea are said to have the like generations, whereof
Aristotle De historia Animalium, lib. 1. cap. 1. Et in libro de respiratione;
and lately the learned Scaliger Exercitatione 191 sect. 2. Notwithstanding the
venerable testimony and authority of such famous Authors; yet our believers of
miracles do reason thus both against the generation of the Claik Geese; and of
the Insects also.

Every thing begotten must be engendered of a like unto it self, Reasons why
Insects are not propagated by a Celestial heat.
as men, horse, Sheep, Neat, etc. engender their life; and this by the warrant
and authority of Aristotle else where, but particularly cap. 7. Meteor. Text 2.

Quest. But so it is that the body of the heavens, the Sun and his heat, are
no ways similia or alike unto these Insects produced and procreated from the
slymie and putrified matters above rehearsed.

And therefore that cannot be the way of their generation. Thus they.

Answ. To this answer must be made Philosophically, in distinguishing the word
alike to it self; for things may be said alike unto other, either of right, or
univoce as they say in the Schools: That way indeed our Insects are not a like
to the putrified earth or beast they came of, but Analogice they may be said to
be alike, that is, in some respect, in so far as they communicate in this,
that they are produced of the earth, and by the warmenesse of the Sun, which
are things actually existing.

Quest. Now to clear the question concerning fowls wanting feet and
feathers; whether may such things be, or not?

Ans. Yea, for as the great Creator has ordained in nature betwixt himself
and us men here, Angels, yea good and bad spirits; betwixt sensitive and
insensitive Creatures, mid creatures which we call Zoophyta, and
Plantanimalia, as the Fishes Holuthuna, stella marina, Pulmo marinus, etc. Even
so betwixt fowls and fishes, nature produced middle or mean creatures, by the
Greeks called (...), or beasts of two lives; What middle Creatures are.
partly living by waters, partly by earth; And of this sort these fowls must
be, as betwixt land beasts and fishes, are frogs, and Crocodills; and some
others the like.

Sect. 10.
Of fishes, and their generation: How fowls are generated in the waters. If
gold can be made potable; and of the matter of precious stones.

Question. But you have not as yet sufficiently enough satisfied my mind of
that scruple, wherewith it was perplexed: for I was saying that if things on
the earth were propagated by their likes, as by the authority of Aristotle I
did instance, and almost unto that the Lyrick Poet Horace applaudeth while he
says, although not to this purpose wholly, fortes creantur fortibus, and
again, Nec imbellem feroces progenerant aquilae columbam; How fishes can be
said to live by the Sea seeing their flesh is more firm then the water whereof
they are gene^^ted.
then how can fishes be said to live, and have their substance of, and by the
Sea? For if the Maxim both of Philosophy and medicine hold good, that we
exist and have our being of those things whereof we are nourished; surely fishes
existing of a more gross and more material substance than water is, cannot be
said to live by the Sea; much less Fowls, seeing their flesh is more
terrestrial, and for that cause they build and bring forth their young ones
upon the Land; whereas otherwise it should seem that they live and have their
essence, and existence from the Sea: for in Genesis we read, that the Great
Creator commanded the waters to produce swimming, creeping, and flying
creatures upon the Earth?

Answ. With Aristotle whom you object to me, you must consider, that in the
fire and air no Creature is framed: For so in the 4th. Book of his Meteors he
holds: from them two indeed he admits virtue and power to be derived to
those which are created upon the Earth, How fowls are brought forth in waters
and in the Waters; true it is, that Fowls being volatile Creatures, their
generation should have fallen by lot in the Air; but in respect that none can
be well procreated there, the next Element became their bringer forth; as
nearest in nature to the Air, and as being little less than a condensed Air,
from which these Fowls might soon fly up: so that all things here below
being made up of a dry, and then of a thickened moist matter, which are the
Earth and Waters; no marvel, that properly of them all things are procreated:
howbeit they may be said to have their temperament and virtues from the
superior two, fire and air: and where it may be objected how the matter of
Fishes should be so firm and solid, they being nourished by the thin,
waterish, and slimy substance of the waters; it must be considered that the
Seas and waters are not so exempted of some mixture of earth in them, out that
even as the Earth some way participateth of them, The cause of the firm flesh
of fishes.
so they impart partly to it their moistness again; of which mixture both
Fowls and Fishes do live.

Quest. What is your opinion concerning the potablenesse of Gold, after which,
our Chemists, and Extractors of quintessences, Calcinators, and Pulverizers of
Metals make such search and labor; whereby Gold made drinkable (as they
undertake) our youth near spent may be renewed again, all diseases cured, and
the drinker thereof to live for many Ages?

Answ. Although Gold of all Metals be the King, That Gold cannot be made
potable.
as the Sun amongst the Planets, and that it is the softest of all, and most
volatile, so the easiest to be extended and wrought upon; in so much, that one
Ounce of it is able to cover many Ounces, and Pounds of Silver: yea, although
of all Metals it abides the trial of the fire best, and loses nothing by it,
as Arist. in the 3. Book of his Meteors, cap. 6. observes; yet that it may be
made potable I doubt much of it, and am a Galenist in that point, and that for
these two notable reasons which Julius Scaliger sets down in his 272.
Exercitation.

First, because there must be some resemblance betwixt the body nourished and
the thing that nourishes; which no more holds betwixt our bodies and gold,
than betwixt a living and a dead thing.

Secondly, because nothing is able to nourish us, which the heat of our
stomach is not able to digest: But such is Gold, and therefore, etc. Always of
the worth and virtue of Gold, read Plinius, lib. 1. etc. 3. cap^ 1.

Quest. Now what is the matter of precious-Stones; The matter of precious stones
earth it cannot be; for it is heavy, dull, and blackish colored; they are
glitteringly transparent like Stars: water it is not, for even Crystalline Ice
will dissolve, whereas they for hardness are almost indissoluble: yet
Cleopatra is said to have liquefide a Pearl to Anthony.

Answ. They are of most purified earth, not without some mixture of moistness,
but such as are both mavellously by the force of the Sun subtilized, tempered,
and concocted.

Section 11.
Of the Earth, its circumference, thickness, and distance from the Sun.

OUR Cosmographers generally, Quest.
but more particularly our Geographers have been very bold to take upon them
the hability (as I am informed) to show how many grains of Wheat or Barley
will encompasse the whole Earth, which I esteem a thing impossible to any
mortal man to do, and therefore frivolous to be undertaken: and I think it
very much, if they can demonsttate how many Miles it is in compass, leaving to
trouble their wits with the other: yet hereupon I desire to be resolved.

Answ. The Philosophical general knowledge of things, Two Philosophical
ways to know things.
is twofold, either knowing things which fall under the reach of their Science
in their effects, thereby to come to the knowledge of the cause; or
contrariwise, by the cause first to know the effects to come. But the
Mathematical demonstrations, whereof Geometry is a part, consist not in these
speculations, but in real demonstrations; and that in such sort, that their
positions being once well founded, thereon they may build what they please;
whereas on the other side, a little error or mistaking in the beginning,
becomes great and irreparable in the end: and so to make way to your answer;
there is no question, but if once a Geometrian give up the infallible number of
the Miles which the Earth will reach to in compass, but soon and on a sudden
he may show how many grains will encompasse it; for it is universally held
that the Earth is in circuit one and twenty thousands and so many odd hundred
Miles; a Mile consists of a thousand paces, a pace of five feet, a foot of
four palms, a palm of four fingers breadth, a fingers beadth of four
Barley corns; and so from the first to the last, the number of the Miles
holding sure, the supputation of the grains number will clear it self by
Multiplication.

Quest. By that means I see you seem to make no difficulty of that whereof I
so much doubted?

Answ. No indeed; and in this point I perceive how far learned men are to be
respected above ignorants; yea as much as Pearls, Diamonds, or precious Stones
are to be preferred to gross Minerals.

Quest. Seeing all depend upon the knowledge of the Earths compass, then how
many Miles hold you it to be in roundnesse?

Answ. The discovery of our new found-lands, What leeteth that We cannot aright
give up the supputation of the Earths cricumference.
and the confident assurance which our modern Navigators and Mappers have of
this Terra australis incognita, makes that punctually not to be pointed out:
but what may satisfy in that, or in knowing how thick the mass of the Earth
is, in how many days a man might compass it about, if by land it were all
travellable: or conjecturally to shadow how great is the distance betwixt the
Earth and the Firmament, I refer you to the Title of Curiosity following; for
as I find a discrepance amongst our most learned Writers, in diverse most
important heads of their professsion; So in this point also I find them
variable and disassenting; Diversity of opinions concerning the worlds Compass.
for Elias Vineti commenting on Sacrobosk upon that Text, gives forth the
Earths compass to extend to above two hundred and fifty thousand stadia,
whereof every eight makes up our Mile; which shall far exceed the most
received opinion of our expertest Mathematicians; who by their modern
Computations make the reckoning of its circumference but to amount to one and
twenty thousand miles and six hundred; and that answerably to the three hundred
and sixty degrees wherewith they have divided the great heavenly Circle, and
proportionably thereunto the Earth.

Yet pondering aright the discrepance and odds which does arise betwixt our
learned Authors, concerning the compass of the Earths Globe, we shall
perceive it to proceed from the great diversity of Miles in diverse Nations,
every man understanding them to be the Miles of that Nation wherein he lives:
but speaking to our Natives of Britanne, it is found by daily experience of
Mathematicians, that if a man go 60. of our British Miles further to the
North, then (I say) visibly he shall perceive the Pole to rise a degree higher,
and the Equinoctial to fall a degree lower; whereby it is manifest, that to
one degree of the great Circle of heaven (such as is the Meridian) there
answers on earth 60. of our miles; Now there being in every such great circle
360. degrees or equal parts, multiplying 360. by 60; The earths circumference
or compass.
we find that they produce 21600. miles British: for a line imagined to pass
by the South and North Poles, and so encompasse the earth, would easily appear
to amount to the same computation.

As for the diametricall thickness of the earth; The thickness of the earth.
the proportions of a circles circumference to its diameter (or line crossing
from one side to the other thorough the center) being somewhat more than the
triple, such as is the proportion of 22 to 7. called by Arithmeticians triple
Sesquiseptima, triple with a seventh part more; and seeing the circumference
of the great circle of the earth is a little less than 22000 miles; it
follows, that the thickness or diameter of it from face to face, is a little
more than 7000. And consequently the half diameter, viz. from the
circumference to the center near about 3600 miles. Now then suppose a man to
travel under the equinoctial or middle line of the earth betwixt the two
poles, making every day 15. of our British miles; It is manifest that such a
Traveller should compass the whole circumference of the earth in three years
345 days, some 20. days less than 4 years: As for the distance of the earth
from the firmament, I dare not give you it for current: Distance of the earth
from heaven.
yet in the Schools thus they shadow it, that the aires diametrical thickness
is ten times above that of the waters; the waters diameter ten times above that
of the earth: By the Air I understand here all that vast interstice betwixt us
and the Moon; which if it be true, counts it self: but because the distance
betwixt the center of the earth and the center of the Sun is more particularly
specified by our Astronomers; therefore to give you further content, thus much
of it you shall understand; that if you will remarke diligently, and compare
together the observations of Ptolomeus, Albategnius, and Allacen, you shall
find, that the aforesaid disstance betwixt the center of the earth and that of
the Sun contains the earths Semidiameter 1110. times: Now as I have said
before, the earths Semidiameter being somewhat less then 3500. we shall take
it in a number, to wit 3400. Which if you multiply by the aforesaid 1110. the
product will show you the whole distance betwixt the center of the earth and
the center of the Sun to be 3774000. The most approved opinion of the earths
distance from the Sun.
Three millions, seven hundred seaventie four thousand miles: likewise if
from this number you substract 3400. miles for the earths Semidiameter from the
center to the superfice, and 18700 miles, which is the Suns half diameter
according to the doctrine of the aforementioned Astronomers, there remains
3751900. miles, as the distance betwixt the uppermost superfice of the earth
which we tread upon, and the nearest superfice of the Sun, which being the
chief and middle of the planets may conjecturally shadow forth the distance
of the earth from the heavens.

OF VARIETIES THE SECOND BOOK: CONTAINING A DISCOVRSE OF METEORS, As of
Comets, falling Stars, and other fiery impressions, etc. Of Wind, Clouds,
Thunder, Hail, Snow; Rain, Deaw, Earthquakes, with their true Natural
Causes and effects, etc. Of Rivers, and Fountains, their Springs, and Sources,
etc.

BY DAVID PERSON of Loughlands in SCOTLAND GENTLEMAN.

Et quae non prosunt singula, multa juvant. LONDON, Printed by RICHARD Badger,
for Thomas Alchorn, and are to be sold at his shop, in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Green- Dragon. 1635.

To THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD PATRICK, By the providence of God
Archbishop of Glasgow, Primate of Scotland, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, and Exchequer in that Kingdom, etc.
My LORD.
TO whom can those two Pillars IACHIN and BOAS erected before Salomons Temple,
be more properly applied then to your Grace, who both in Church and
commonwealth have shown your self to be the lively Hieroglyphick figured by
them, as your Memorable deeds in both can bear record to Posterity? for with
what vigor did your piety and zeal extend it self in suppressing vice and
superstition in the Churches con^redited to your care, and in establishing
virtue and learning both there and elsewhere, may appear in the peoples
harmonious Concord in Religion to Gods glory, your eternal praise and their
eternal comfort; And as your Piety, so have your Justice, and travells been
extraordinary in settling of the Church rents universally through the land,
repossessing every man of his own tithes upon most competent considerations;
all which with your great gravity Munificence and other endowments fit for the
accomplishment of so venerable a Prelate, have heaped upon you both Gods
blessings, our Royal Sovereigns favor, and the peoples love, and reverence;
But least others should deem that adulation which the mouth of verity would
even extort from your enemies, without further commendations of your Person, I
humbly recommend this book to your Graces Patronage, acknowledging the strong
ties I have to continue

Your Graces most obsequious servant, D. PERSON.

OF METEORS, THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAPTER 1.
The definition of Meteors, their Matter, substance, place, and cause.

I Define Meteors to be things, Definition of Meteors: their matter, substance
and height of formation.
above our sight, in the air, as the Etymology of the word imports. I divide
them into dry and moist, according to the diversity* of the matter whereof they
are framed, which are dry and moist vapors and exhalations extracted from the
earth and waters; and from thence elevated to the regions of the air, where
they are fashioned; and that diversely, according either to the degree of the
Region they are framed in, or the matter whereof they are fashioned.

The Philosophers and mere naturalists have not alike consideration of them;
for Philosophers have regard to them both as they have their dependence from
above, specifying time, place, and all other their circumstances: whereas the
mere naturalists do particularize none of them, but generally show how they
flow from the earth: the knowledge of stars, and of the regions of the air,
better fitting the Philosopher then the other.

For so it is, Meteors severally considered by Philosophers and na^uralists.
that, the vapors, and exhalations which the Sun extracteth out of the Seas and
earth, sending them up to the regions of the air, are the true and original
material cause of these Meteors.

Not of all uniformely, but severally of each one, according to the height,
whereto they are elevated from the said waters and earth; and the nature of the
vapor elevated: A comparison of these Vapors unto the body of man, chiefly to
the ven^^icle and head,
which I may not unfitly compare to the natural body of man, whose stomach is
the center of his fabric, which sends up to the head, the moist or flatulent
humors, wherewith for the time it is affected; and receives back again
either heated and consuming distillations, or refrigerated and quenching
humors, wherewith to attemperate and refresh the incessant motion and heat of
the other noble parts by a circular motion.

Quest. I know the curiosity of more subtle spirits will move the question,
Whether there be any exhala^ions from the lowest Region of the air?
whether the Sun draws exhalations from the lowest or first region of the
air; seeing it is humid and hot, sometime hotter, sometime colder, according
as the reverberation of the Suns heat from the earth affects it: although I
grant, that the air, of its own nature, is hot; yet that hinders not, but
accidentally, it may be heated also, yea sometimes made hotter then of its
nature it is. To this question I answer.

Answ. That the subtilty and rarefaction of the ayrs humidity hinders the
Sun from exhaling of it; for although some parts of the moist air be grosser
than others, yet the same grosser parts are more subtle then any vapor, which
the Sun extracteth from the earth or waters: for not all subtle humidity is
evaporable, but that of water only, as that which may more easily be
apprehended by heat.

As then, The lowest region of the air is hot and moist, both by nature and
accident.
the lowest and first region of the air about us, wherein we breath here, is
hot and moist, both by nature and accident; as I was saying, by the
reverberation of the sunne-beames, upon solid and combustible bodies, and
heated by the exhalation of fumes from places or things that are apt to be
kindled, even so, the uppermost region is hot and dry, both by nature, and
accident; and almost more, or rather by accident then by nature, propter
viciniam ignis; albeit the supreme region must be hotter then the lower, The
uppermost region hot and dry.
both in respect of the propinquity of it, to the element of fire, (even as the
lowest region by the neighborhood of it to the earth oftentimes is colder
than hot) as also in respect of the nearenesse of it to the heavens, which as
with the light of them, they warm the lower things; So, by the rapidity and
velocity of their circular course, they heat this first region also.

Now as these two regions are of themselves hot, and moist, The middle region
is only cold, at least respectively.
and hot and dry; so the middle Region is only cold, but drierwhere it is
contiguous with the uppermost, and more moist whereit is ^igher the lowest.
This great coldness of it, enforced together, by an Antiperistasis (as we say)
or opposite contrarieties of heat above, and cold below.

The Air then being divided into these three Regions, wherewith the uppermost,
as comprehended within the concavity of the fiery Element, is ever hot and dry,
the lowest hot and moist, but of a weak and debill heat, which by a breathing
cold may be changed; the middle Region is always cold.

CHAP. 2.
Where Meteors are composed. Of Clouds, where they are fashioned, together with
the solution of some questions concerning the middle Region.

NOW remains to know in which of these Regions any of these Meteors are
framed: In what region of the Air the Meteors are composed.
and first, whether or not Clouds be generated in the middle Region of the
Air? It is most likely, that not there, but in the lower; because in it
diverse other Meteors alike in matter and form are framed.

To which, not so much cold is requisite, as to the other two; yet the nature of
Clouds being considered, we shall find them to be generated in the middle
Region only.

For, seeing Clouds are nothing else but vapors mounted, and thickened by
condensed cold; then sure they cannot be framed in the uppermost Region of the
Air, What clouds are.
because in it the Suns rays are directed, lacking reflex, beside the
circular and Spherick motion it has, by virtue of the proximity of the
Elementary fire, which warmeth it again: this thickning or condensing cold
cannot be in the lower region, by reason of the heat of it through the
reverberation of the Suns rays, beating upon the solid bodies of the earth,
and waters: so there rests the middle Region, in which the reflex fails, and
the virtue from above too of the direct Suns rays; so that naturally it
being cold, in it only these vapors must be condensed to a cloud. Clouds are
fashioned in the middle region.


And whereas I was saying before that it should seem that the Clouds are
begotten in the lowest Region; in respect that in it, Waters, as Dew and
Fountains, at least their matter and form are brought forth, that always
cannot hold; because that Fountains, and Rivers, are rather bred in the
concavities, and hollow places of the earth, than of it, or rather flow and
have their source from the Seas.

Neither must my words be mistaken, when I say that the middle Region is
naturally cold, seeing before I have set down the Air, naturally to be hot
and moist; for when I say that it is cold, it must be understood, but
respectively, in regard of the other two, as wanting the reflective heat of
the lower Region, and the circulative heat by the ignean or fiery warmenesse of
the other.

Now if it be objected that seeing the middle Region of the Air is cold,
Concerning the middle ^^gion.
and all cold things are heavy, and so consequently tend downward; what can
be the reason that this middle Region falls not through the lowest to its own
center of weight, Solution.
which is the earth? It avails not; for first, not all frigidity draws or
tends always from its circumferences, to the center, but that only which is
absolutely and simply cold; as that of the Earth and Waters, and not that of
the Air, which (as I say before) is but respectively cold; yea, albeit that
the middle Region divide not the lowest in whole, yet in parts it does; as in
rain, when it falls from the middle one upon the dissolution of a cloud.

Finally it may be said here, that clouds not only may be seen beneath us to
inviron the tops of our lower Mountains; for I my self crossing the lower
Alps, at Genoa, have seen them below me along the sides of the Mountains;
they likewise may be perceived to glide over the Plains, and swimming over our
Lakes and Rivers: yet that serves not to prove, that they are generated in the
lowest Region; The foggy vapors which we see like clouds skimming our lakes
are but ascending to frame the cloud.
but rather argues the ascending of these vapors, and the gathering of them
together; of which the clouds must be coagulated and no otherwise, as that
they are absolutely there framed. But this by the way.

CHAP 3.
Of falling Stars, Fleakes in the Air, and other such fiery Meteors.

THere be four Elements as all know; the Fire hot and dry, the Air hot and
moist, the Earth dry and cold, the Waters cold and moist. Now as of the
moisture of the Waters, whether in their own Element, or on the Earths
superfice, are composed all watery vapors, as clouds, rain, dew, hail, snow,
and hoare-frosts, etc. Even so, from the dry parts of the Earth, calefied, or
made hot by the Sunbeams do proceed fumy exhalations, whereof the fiery and
burning Meteors are generated.

But so it is, The matter and form of fiery Meteors from whence they proceed.
that of these vaporous exhalations, whereof all the ignite and fiery Meteors
or impressions are composed, all are not framed alike; for according to the
diversity of the dispositions of their matter they are either round or long, or
more long than round, or more round than long; for if by the efficient and
material causes, which are the Sunne-beames exhaling these fumous evaporations
from the driest part of the Earth, these spumeous exhalations are such as are
combustible and capable to be kindled (if it be of a like length and breadth:)
then in that case, it shall be seen to burn in the uppermost Region of the
Air like a blazing fire of straw: if it be longer than broad, then is it
taken for those long falling Stars, which by the Meteorologians are called
Dall. If otherwise broader than long, then are they called fiery
inflammations, which seem to reele in the Air, as it were, and to shoot
hither and thither. And because sometimes these exhalations (although dry) have
some coldness in them; therefore the ejaculation of that cold matter, makes
the Meteor to seem by that extrusion to fall; What are our falling-stars.
as being in labor to expel it; whence more properly are our falling Stars,
which Stars at some times seem to fall aside, at other times strait down, or
upward, according as their matter is for the time either disposed or placed.

And if it be objected how contrary to their nature can they descend or fall
down, What makes them fall down seeing they are light?
their matter being light and not ponderous? I told before, that that comes
by expulsion, and by way of projection; for confirmation whereof, Solution.
may be added the experience we have of Thunder, whose bolts and claps light at
times, even at our feet; otherwhiles what in our houses, beating down Pinacles
and Steeples, the tops of Turrets and the like, although it be both light and
dry; Of thun^er, the matter whereof, and place where.
and the reason is, That Thunder being generated in the middle Region of the
Air, not by exustion of any kindled hot matter, but rather by a separation of
an expelling cold; mean while this cold thickning and coagulating it self
together with violence, in a manner detrudeth the hot matter, which with it was
thither drawn up, and makes such a noise and terrible din, the time of that
expulsion, that not only the Air seems to be rent asunder, but the very
Earth also appears to tremble at its violence.

Just so, as the matter of the falling Stars is placed, they fall either
straight down, aside, or upward, as before I noted. Even so is it with the
Thunder.

Now, as those vapors, thickened in the air, do produce the aforesaid
effects; so shall it not be thought amiss, to say, that the same air, being
thickened, with their vapors, but not condensed in a cloud, by susception of
light, but chiefly from the Suns rays opposite to it either by night or day,
The matter and form of th^se which we call pretty Dancers
but chiefly by night, become fiery colored, and look as burning; the same
vapors stirring to, and fro, and being someway thickened, by refraction of
light, do assume unto themselves variable, and diverse colors; and those
fires in effect are the same which vulgarly are called pretty dancers: and by
reason that the material cause of such impressions is swift, and soon
vanishes, therefore they abide and remain the shorter time; for such
phantasmes not being come to the full perfection of other Meteors, (as seldom
they are seen to do) so their abode, and being is but short, and inconstant,
they being composed but of hot, and dry exhalations, from chalky, rocky, sandy
and sulphurous parts of the earth, there being a mixture of moisture with them.

And to the effect, Four sorts of vapors ascend from the earth and waters
which ar^ the nearest m^tter of all Meteors*
that this may be somewhat better cleared, we must consider: That four sorts
of vapors are exhaled, or drawn up out of the earth by virtue of the Suns
rays, beside the smoke of our fires, which ascending to the air also
augments these fiery Meteors.

First vapors hot and dry, not having so much humidity in them, as may be able
to overcome them; but rather such, as may make this dry vapor to be continued,
for no earthly thing can continue without moisture.

Secondly, cold and dry, which altogether are of the earth's nature, virtually
cold, albeit formally all vapors are hot.

The third are those vapors which are hot and moist, where humidity
predominateth over the heat.

The fourth kind of vapors which ascend, are cold and moist, in which
absolutely watery moystnesse bears rule, and this vapor virtually is called
cold. These four sorts of vapors then are the nearest matter of all our
meteors.

The first whereof, viz, hot and dry vapors, do ascend through the air
quickly, even to the concavity of the fiery and ignean element; where being
enflamed and enkindled, it becomes the right generation and propagator of our
fiery Meteors: whereas, the second, being hot, and moist, does not ascend so
high; and because it is easily resolved, Air what.
it comes to be air.

The other two cold and dry, and cold and moist vapors are elevated aloft also,
but no farther then to the colder parts, where they are thickened and coagulated
together, Rain what. wind.
by the invironing cold; but so, as cold and moist are converted to rain; and
the other cold and dry to wind, or this falls down with the pluvious or rainy
vapor. This being so, we may see, that there are four kinds of vapors and
exhalations, conformable to the four elements which make up the matter of
these Meteors; in such sort, that as there are hot, and dry exhalations, and
cold and dry, even so there are hot vapors and cold and humid ones also.

Since then, Quest.
you know the matter of wind, What is the cause, that the falling Stars make no
noise as the Thunder seeing one matter is common to both.
rain, falling stars and inflammations in the air, let us hear what can be
objected: One demands, what is the cause that the falling stars or other
descending flames or flashes make no such noise as the thunder does, seeing
their matter and manner of composing is almost alike.

Answ. Because the cloud which throws away and expels them, invironeth not
them in her belly, as their clouds do, in which the matter of the thunder is;
for the thunder bursting thorough the cloud occasioneth the clappe.

Quest. Now if it be asked, What means these fi^es we see by night before us
or by us when we ride at some times.
what mean these fiery inflammations, which at some times in the night are
seen, either amongst our horse feet when we ride, or about their maines, or
sometimes like the glaunce of a candle light before, a little above or about
us? The answer is, that these dry exhalations, as diverse other things, are of
several degrees; some elevated to the highest region, others to the middle
region, and these, which ascend no higher then this low region where we
inhabit, being composed of a more oleagenous, or oily substance, do inflame
sooner, than these of the middle region do, as being environed with cold.

Or if it be asked? Why are they not seen in the day time*
Why see we not such inflammations in the day time as in the night? No question
but that then they are, and more frequent then in the night, but the greater
light obfuscateth the lesser.

Or if it be asked; What mean the rents and clefts (as it were) which we see
in the firmament, as if it were opened and hollowed in (...) places? That is
nothing else, but the vapors and exhalations, carried up to the air, which are
condensed and thickened together; where, by accident, if in the midst of this
condensation, any part be more subtle, or thinner then the extremities are;
that thinnest part, appearing black, and the two extremities colored, makes
people believe that it is an open gappe, which indeed is not.

Quest. As to that question; What be these complainings and laughing which
sometimes are heard in the air?
by what cause it happens, that moanings, mournful voices, and sometimes also
laughings are heard in the air? I think the Meteorologians answer not so
fully satisfactorie as theirs, who treat of spirits, whom I may well call
Physiognosticks: for the Albertists, upon this place, say, that the cause is,
the multitude of exhalations, extracted out of graves and other Subterranean
places, pressing upward, thorough places not proportionable for them; and being
of themselves, of a resolutive nature, do make noyses, not unlike to those of
men; which in my conceit is ridiculous: and yet such is their gloss upon the
latin Text, De die igitur sol pro^ibet.

Answ. But I incline rather to their opinion, They are Aereall spirits.
who, speaking of the nature of spirits, say, that these Cachinnations or
laughings, and weeping voices, which we hear, are rather Aereall spirits;
which is handled more largely in my title of spirits, where you may find all
their orders and natures.

Now because the matter of comets, is of greatest moment, amongst all the
Meteors; I hasten to them.

CHAP. 4.
Of Comets, their matter, form, nature, and what way they portend evil to
come.

COmets, being of the number of Ignean and fiery Meteors; No question, they are
composed of a like matter; the difference being in the quantity of that matter
more or less, to wit, dry, clammie and hot exhalations, in their framing being
condensed, and by reason of the motion of the superior bodies, in the fiery
element beginning to kindle, do make these comets; and thus they differ from
the fiery Dragons, and falling sttars; for these Meteors, once kindled by way
of exustion, and extrusion, or projection, are thrown down suddenly, and so
vanish; where, on the other side, the dry and hot exhalations, whereof Thunder
is composed by way of detrusion, (the cloud renting asunder, in whose body it
was enclosed) do presently vanish, as lightnings (their forerunners) do.

Now where the nature of comets must be such; The nature and form of comets.
that neither the fiery kindling of them may soon consume it, by the greatness
and violence of it; neither must their matter be so weak and thin, that the
fire may on a sudden overcome it, but such as may endure at least for a little
season, both with the quality of the fire, and the disposition of the matter
condensed and thickened; and yet so as the exustion or kindling of the matter
and condensed exhalation, beginning at end of it may ascend upward, til it
consume the whole extent of its rays and beams upon the matter combustible,
in form of a beard, The reason of their long hair or beard.
or long discheveld look of hair, continuing so for a time; from whence Cometa
a Coma, hair, has its denomination.

Now the form and shape of these exhalations, is not ever after a like
proportion or fashion; that is, always long and broad; so that the one end
being kindled, the other remains but enlightened, like a beard, from whence
they are called Crinitae stellae, or Barbatae Cometae, bearded Comets. For
sometimes their figure will be Spherick and round; so that the fire taking these
Spherick exhalations in the midst makes the blazing beams which extend from
the center to the circumferences, Sometimes they are round.
to look like long hair circled about a face or head.

Neither must it be thought that this hair or invironing beams are like to
these which before a storm we see incompassing the Sun, Halos. 1. area* What
are the Circles about the Moon, which we call broughes?
but more frequently the Moon, which Aristotle calls Halae and Halones; for
these Circles by us called broughes, are a world of way remote from the bodies
of the Sun and Moon, and in effect, are but in the troubled Air, with
abundance of exhalations and vapors, through which, the Sun and Moons
rays, making way to themselves, do fashion these circles about them there.
Whereas these circles or long beards of the Comets, a^e directly under, yea,
sometime above the concave of the Moon; and thence to the first Region of the
Air they are conveyed with the Comets of that same matter of exhalation, and
nature; although our modern Astronomers, now averting this Aristotelian
opinion, have found out some Comets place to be above the Moon.

This being briefly spoken of the matter and form of Comets, What course the
Comets observe.
it may be asked what course they have? to which I answer; first, that the
motion of Comets is common with that natural course of the world; for either
it is from the Orient to the Occident, or from the West to the East: at times
most frequently it declineth to the South, and at other times to the North; now
high, then low, now seeming near to the Earth, then remote from it.

And if it be said, how can Comets have so many different courses, Answer for
the diverse courses of Comets.
seeing a simple body can have no more but one motion of it self? To this I
say, that as the Sphere of fire and the supreme Region of the Air, by the
heavenly motions are wheeled about from the Orient to the Occident; thus the
Comets exist above the first Region, and so naturally with it they should keep
the same course: in respect that conformably a thing placed, must turn with
the place, in which it existeth. So if this first Region by the rapidity of the
Heavens be moved; much more should Comets, they being nearer to it than the
first Region.

Now albeit the Heaven, Fire, and Air move in a circular motion, yet they move
not all alike, for by certain degrees the course of the one is swifter than
the other; so that the Air as nearest to the Earth, is flower than the other
two. By this subdeficiency then, the Air, and they within it, seems but to
go about from Occident to Orient of its own proper motion, having regard to
the swiftness and velocity of the superior course. And whereas I say, that
they move high and low, to and fro; that is to be understood in so far that
every thing perfectible striveth to attain to its own perfection; which
consists in the approximation and near attaining and touching of the
generant, which chiefly bears rule in the place, whereat they aim or tend;
whether that thing engendered be a Star, or any other celestial virtue,
whereunto this subdeficient striveth to attain.

Now the reason wherefore most commonly Comets do reach, What makes the
Comets commonly move from the South to the North.
either to the South, or North, is to be attributed to the special influence
of some other Star drawing them thitherward; as the Loadstone makes Iron turn
toward it: and whereas sometimes they appear low and near the Earth; at
other times farther remote from it: that must be appropriated either to the
inflammation of the Comets matter, either at the nearer or farther end, or else
to the height, or lowness of the Region, above which it is elevated: for none
of the three Regions, but have in them their own degrees and stations, some
parts in them being higher than others are.

The place of their appearing is most frequently in the Northern Climates; The
place of their abode commonly.
and that most often under Via lactea, which is that white colored draught
called the milkey way in the firmament, which may be perceived by night,
reaching in a manner from East to West. The time of their abode again is but
at shortest seven or eight days; albeit I read of some that blazed half a
year; but such have seldom happened: nevertheless the shortness or length
of their abode, is to be imputed imputed to the bigness or scantnesse of
their matter.

Now rests to know, Whether or not they can portend evil to come.
whether or not these Comets may portend or prognosticate bad or unfortunate
events of things here below, and whether over particular persons or Countries
in general? To this the Philosophers (who will have all things, The
Philosophers deny it, admitting them but as natural things.
either above or below, to be and exist by natural reasons, and admit no
prodigies or things beyond nature) make answer that Comets are but mere
natural things, no way fore showing evils to come.

Because (say they) when Jupiter falls to be in the sign of Pisces, or in the
sign of Cancer, if then the Comets appear, it foretokeneth abundance, and
wealth, as in the days of Julius Caesar, there was one seen; which
nevertheless had no evil ensuing upon it; as it may be seen in Albertus his
Commentary upon Aristotle's Text in the Meteors, The Philosophical reason why
not.
latinized, Ejus autem quod est.

Besides this say they, when Comets are seen, then these evils which follow
them, and which they portend should fall forth through all or very many parts
of the Earth, seeing they are seen by all, or most: the contrary whereof is
known.

Besides, that burning Lances or Spears which now and then also are seen in
the Air; and other fiery impressions, which are of that same matter with these
Comets, should foretell evils to happen, as well as they which are not.

But above all, Other of their reasons why they can portend no evil to come.
seeing it is oftenest thought, that Comets either foretoken great winds, or
raines; none of which can be, say they: not winds, because the matter whereof
the winds behooves to be, which are dry exhalations, are converted toward the
framing of the same Comets themselves.

Not rain; for no one thing can be a sign of two opposite contrarieties. Thus
seeing Comets portend drouth, they cannot likewise preaugurate inundations, and
overflowings; Other reasons of theirs.
finally, much less the death of Princes and Monarchs no more than of other
private men; seeing the same constellation and ascendent may be equal, and
have regard to mean men as well as to them, in a like distance.

Which reasons, with diverse more albeit at first view, they may seem forcible;
yet being better considered their insufficiency will soon appear: for none of
the natural Philosophers but do acknowledge their Prognostications, for some
one thing or other; albeit the Astrologicall Philosopher particularizeth them
more punctually.

And thus they say, The contrary is seen by experience.
that a Comet circumbeamed about with that which they call long hair (to say
so) invironing it as we see, about the Sun, Moon and Stars; before a
storm and great tempest, does signify and portend great debording of waters;
whereas if it be but radiant in one side, that is a sure sign of terrible and
destructive drougth, and consequently of famine and scarcity; because without
humidity and warmenesse corn and fruits cannot grow.

Now as high winds move and stir the Seas with other waters; so from that
commotion arises rain and boisterous showers; so that appear how they will,
yet they ever portend some one evil or other.

As for death of Princes and change of estates fore^howne by them, experience
of former Ages can qualify; and by late miserable proof it may be understood
by that blazing Star, which appeared in the year 1618. I being at that time in
Florence, where an Italian Astronomer, upon the third Bridge, drawing in his
Table-bookes the height and aspect of it, was overheard by us who gazed on him,
to cry although with a low voice, Lamentable accidents which have followed
after the appearing of Comets.
Vae Germaniae, Woe unto Germany: and who so is, but never so little acquainted
with the histories of diverse Nations, shall soon perceive in them what
lamentable accidents have ensued after extraordinary deluges, and overflowings
of waters, and intolerable droughts; but more especially after the appearing
of Comets, what dreadful effects according to their affections: so we require,
that those Recusants would with the Philosopher, who denied that the fire was
hot, but put their finger into it to try the truth of his assertion.

Neither do our Astronomicall Philosophers want their own grounds, wherein
they settle the warrant of change of estates, after the apparitions of these
Comets; and this for one.

That the exhalations of hot and dry vapors from the Earth, The reasons which
our Astronomicall Philosophers give, that Comets may portend change of States.
whereof these Comets are made, betoken a bilious and wrathful, sudden and
irefull disposition of the in-dwellers of these Countries; for the same air
which they attract, and emit, does someway affect them, and this air is filled
with these exhalations, resolved by the heat of the incumbing Sun; so no
question but this same way it moves their bodies and minds to fear fiery and
sudden revolts, fightings, seditions, and uproares.

Comets appeared in England before their Country was conquered by the Normans:
Examples of Comets appearing before desol^tion.
and thereafter another, when they subdued France. What more remarkable one
then that which appeared above Jerusalem, before its sacking and captivity?
And again, what desolation befell all Italy, almost after that prodigious
debording of waters which fell from the Alps without any former rain? Charles
the 8th. of France his entering thereafter, and the disasterous chances that
followed thereupon can testify: all which our and their stories can record,
besides many others, as Sabellicus in the penult. book of his last Aeneids
does intimate.

Neither yet may I be induced to believe, that the Star whereof Tichobray,
that famous renouned and noble Astronomer makes mention, which is yet seen and
was affirmed to be (though the Prince now be dead) most fitly appropriated to
the victorious, wise, and fortunate Gustavus King of Sueden, to have been no
other than a Comet, what ever reasons he alleges to the contrary. Albeit such
remarkable Stars are rather observed to appear at the death of great men and
Kings, than at their birth. Neither must we instance the example of the Star,
which was observed by the wise men of the East, at the birth of our Lord and
Savior at Nazareth; such extraordinaries should be admired, not inferred to
exemplify things.

For answer to this, Answer to the former objections.
that the death of common people may as well happen under these Comets, as that
of Princes: there is no question but that the supereminency of great persons
and States making them the more remarkable, makes their death also more
perspicuously to be notified.

And as in the Title of curiosities I have shown, that not ever the most
curious questions of Arts and Sciences are the most profitable; Even so in this
I allow not of Hali the Jew his commentary, upon the centiloquy of Ptolomee;
where, referring the death of Princes to comets he thus says.

Quod si apparuerit cometa Domino istius regni exeunte in Orient, significat
mortem Regis, vel principis; si autem Dominus istius regni fuerit in Occidente,
significat aliquem de regno suo interfecturum Regem; I over-slip the
interpretation of these words, least the divulging of them might more harm
than profit. Conclusion of comets with a particular observation.
Always leaving Philosophical alterations, thus much by natural experience
we may resolve upon; that they never appear, but some bad event follows
thereon, either to the country over which it blazeth, or to which it
aspecteth; or else to that country over which rules a star which that
comets tail tends toward or follows; though much rather to that country
which it has aspect unto: not by virtue of its influence, but by reason of the
superabundancie of malign, dry, and hot exhalations regorging and dispersing
themselves over it.

CHAP 5.
Of Rain, Dew, hoare-frost and their cause.

AS hot and dry exhalations are the matter and cause of Meteors in the upper
region of the air, of which before: Even so, cold and moist vapors are the
causes of these; after this manner; vapors elevated up into the air, by force
of the Suns beams; and being separated from the heat which accompanied them;
either, by that heat's ascending higher, and leaving the grosser vapors; or the
subtillest of that heat being extinguished by the grossenes, and abundance of
cold and moist vapors, which mounted up with it in the air: or else by the
coldness of the place, the middle region of the air. These grosser vapors I
say segregated from that heat, The first matter of rain
which accompanied it, and being thickened and carried about in the air for a
time, fall back again to the earth; but being first coagulated in a cloud, The
way how rain falls down.
which dissolving, falls down to the place from whence it ascended: so that
by a circular motion first the waters resolving in vapors, the vapors thickning
in a cloud, then that dissolving back again into waters, imitateth in a manner
the circular motion of the Sun, by whose approximation as these vapors are
elevated, even so by his elongation (if I may say so) they do fall back
again.

Now, as this is the general cause of these moist Meteors, so is it the
particular cause of the falling of Rain: for Rain being a watery vapor,
carried up by heat into the Air, and there that heat leaving it, resolves and
falls down again in great or lesser showers, according to its quantity.

Dew and Hoare-frost are not so generated, The matter and manner how dew is
engendered.
for why? When there is not such quantity of vapors elevated in the day time
(through want of heat to draw them up, or through great drowth upon the earth,)
they are not carried high: in hoter countries they fall down again before the
day be spent, and that by them is called Serene, What is that which in France
we call Serene.
as in France particularly: So when these elevated vapors are thickened in
waters, without either so much heat as may dry them up, or so much cold as to
congeale them; then I say the dew appears.

Now the Hoar-frost happens otherwise; The matter and manner how Hoare-frost,
are fashioned.
as, when the like exhaled vapors are congealed, before they be condensed;
whereby you may see that dew falls in temperate times and places, whereas
Hoare-frosts fall in Winter and in the colder parts of the earth: and the
reason may be alleged, that, seeing vapors are hoter than water; in respect
of the concomitating heat, whereby they are carried up; no question, but more
cold is required, for the congelation of vapors, then of waters: and so if in
cold seasons, and places, waters congeale, and harden, much more may we say of
vapors congealable into Hoare-frost. Thus we have touched the material and
efficient causes of dew and Hoare-frost; so it shall not be amiss to show that
the time when the Sun ingendreth these Meteors in the air, by the drawing up
of these vapors, from out the earth and waters, must be, when the lowest region
of the air is, calm, serene and clear, without wind rain, or cooling
clouds; for they being mounted thither may either hinder their ascending or
condensation and thickning; as also the stirring winds would hinder their
condensation, or at least their congregation or gathering together.

Now that both dew and Hoare-frost are begotten of vapors not carried high in
the air, The place where dew and hoare-frost are framed.
by this it may be known; because we see little Hoare-frost or dew, in the
higher mountains, where it seems likeliest, they are made and do recide in
regard of the cold there; which is so much the more probable in this, that the
heat, which elevateth these vapors from low and Marshy places, carrying (as you
would say) a burden heavier then their hability can comport with, leaves them
ere they can ascend any higher.

Besides that, we may say, that the second region of the air, being higher
than these mountains, and carried about; and in a manner drawn after the
circular wheeling about of the heavens, dissolveth these vapors by its motion;
and by this means makes the dew and Hoare-frost, for so I expound Pruina.
Notwithstanding this, a greater motion is required, to disgregate and sunder
apart heavy and many vapors, then few and light ones; now seeing the matter of
Snow, and Rain is greater and contains a great many more vapors then the
matter of dew and Hoare-frost: Therefore it is, that in exceeding high
Mountains, Some more good observations of dew and Hoar-frost
neither rain, dew, nor Hoare-frost fall; because of the violent motion and
great flux of the air there: for that matter is rather even wheeled about with
that violent motion, whereas in the lower Mountains again, because of the
lesser flux and motion of the air snow and rain falls, but not deaw nor
Hoare-frosts.

To end this part in a word then, I say, That dew and Hoare-frost have a like
matter common to both, viz, moist vapors exhaled from the earth and waters,
but not highly elevated in the air; and (except in quantity) they differ not,
but only in this, that dew is fashioned of moderate cold, the other is
begotten by a more violent.

CHAP 6.
Of Snow: its cause, matter and nature.

THe matter of Snow, What Snow is?
is a cloud, composed of an aereall substance, whereby it may be made some way
hot; and of a terrestrial and earthly matter, whereby when it is dissolved, it
leaves some muddy substance behind it; but the most special matter of it is
of the vapors exhaled from the waters dispersed over the earth. Their place, is
in the middle region where violent colds are; which excessive cold must not be
thought their generation only, but then, when that cold is dispersed through
the whole air; for then this cold is not so sharp and piercing, as that cold
is, which, by the dispersed heat in the air, is reenforced and crowded into
one place. Now because such colds are not spread abroad through the whole air,
but at certain times, as in winter, in the end of Autumn, and in the
beginning of the Spring; therefore it is that in winter in the tail of Autumn
or in the beginning of the Spring, Snow falls (at least then) most
frequently. Much Snow in the Northern climats, and Why?
And because the Northerly Climats are coldest and farthest remote from the hot
Zone, as there where the Sun beams has least reflex; -- Quod sol obliqua
non nisi luce videt.

Therefore it is also, that in these places snow is most usually seen.

Now if it be said, how can it be, that the snowy cloud must be of a hot ayrie
disposition, seeing the other two ingredients are earthly and waterish vapors
which naturally are cold, for by this I should include contrarieties in one
subject? To which I answer; that there are no absurdities in that; for in this
case, the one is as ingredient, the other as egredient, the one over-comming,
the other remitting something of its dignity: for as the cold holds together
this snowy cloud, till it dissolve into water; so, before this cloud begin to
dissolve into snow, we find the air which before was marvailous cold, during
the time of the congealing of this cloud, to wax somewhat hoter by reason of
the aerie heat, which leaves the cloud and disperseth it self through the
air. Difference betwixt the Snowy cloud and the rainy one.
From whence likewise we may gather the reasons why the snowy cloud, before it
dissolve in the air, is clear, and clears the earth also: Whereas the rainy
clouds do both dim the sky and earth, and are exceeding cold immediately
before the rain fall down? That is, because the rainy cloud, has nothing but
gross and heavy earth and watrish vapors in it; whereas the snowy one, has
besides them, the air enclosed, which being by nature warm, and then being
thrust out of the cloud by the predominancie of the other two, clears and
warmeth both.

CHAP. 7.
Of Winds, their true cause, matter and nature, etc.

IN the former part of this treatise, we have heard that there are two sorts of
exhalations, whereof all Meteors above us, in the Air, are composed: one of
them moist, called vapors; the other dry, called fumes or smoke; not that any
of these are so either wholly dry or moist, or that they have no mixture of
others, for that is not: but that the predominancy of the one above the other,
in the compound, makes the denomination.

Now as the heat of the Sun, extracting these two from the earth and waters is
their efficient cause, so they again are the material causes of the Meteors
made up by them, viz. vapors, the causes of rain, hail, snow, dew, clouds
and so forth. As the dry and fumous exhalations are the causes of wind in
particular, as also of the hot Meteors above mentioned. Hot and dry exhalations
then are matter and causes of the wind; The matter and cause of wind.
and as they are elevated in the Air by the force of the Sun; so no question
but from that same Air, the winds begin to blow, and not from the Earth first;
which in this may be discerned; because that the highest Mountains (I mean,
if they exceed not the first Region) Towers, Trees, Steeples, and so forth, are
more agitated with winds, then the lower and baser are, as being nearer the
air.

Feriunt summos fulmina montes.
Saepius ventis agitatur ingens
Pinus --
And the reason is, because straining to mount aloft conformable to their
nature, they are reverberated again by the middle region, their opposite
(being cold and moist) to their hot and dry nature.

Now as the beginnings and first springs of Rivers are small, but by
corrivation of other lesser ones they increase: The beginning of wind is but
small, but it increases in blowing.
Even so the first beginnings and principalls of winds are commenced but with
few exhalations; no question but their increment flows from the adunition and
combination of more exhalations; Whence it is, that some years are more windy
and some seasons too, then others; and commonly the dryest Summers makes the
windiest and most tempestuous winters.

It is said in Scripture, that the wind blows where it pleases, and that
none knows, either whence it comes or whither it goes. A place of
Scripture concerning winds solved.
And it is truth indeed to speak particularly, we feel it and find it, we
know it evanish away into the many vast and spacious inturnings of the air;
but from what particular place it flows, we know not well: for as they are
small in their principalls, so no doubt, but they receive augmentations in
their progress. Here then it may be inferred, that winds and rain are not
procreated of the self same matter, as some foolishly do maintain; which by
this only may be evidently confuted, that often times the winds are abated by
rain; and commonly after rain we have winds: What makes rain commonly
follow wind.
The first for this natural reason, because that violence of winds blowing
clouds together, and the invironing cold condensing and thickning them
together, makes them dissolve into water.

The other is because of waters or rain falling from the clouds, And what
after rain.
by which means the Air is warmed, and consequently the Earth; which makes
it yield abundance of hot exhalations for the Suns rays to transport upward
to the Air, wherewith wind is framed again.

And if it be objected, What makes some winds cold, other hot seeing one
matter is common to both.
that exhalations are common causes of winds, and yet of the same winds, some
are cold, as the North, and East, whereas the Southerly and Westerly are
commonly hotter? To this may be answered, that the exhalations themselves are
not the occasion of that, but the disposition of the Climats from whence they
flow; the Suns heat never aproaching the North Climat, but afar off, and
obliquely, or side-wayes; occasioning the cold of it, and consequently of the
winds blown from thence.

Whereas more perpendicularly it glanceth on the other Meridian and Western
parts; by which means, as the Earth is warmed, so are the winds.

And if it be asked, why in the height of Summer (the Sun being in Cancer) that
then are fewest and lowest winds, as in the extremity and cold of Winter there
are few likewise, as by experience may be seen:

To that may be answered, What makes that in the heat of Summer there are
fewest winds, seeing then there should be most.
That as in all things extremities are vicious, even so in this matter; for
great heat and drought in June, July, and August, do keep back the winds and
their matter, as extremity of cold does in December and January.

The Earth in that time of Summer, being burnd up with scorching heat,
hinders the winds to rise; because the earth then is burningly dry wthout any
mixture of moistness; out of which drougth of the earth, without some
moistness no fumes can be exhaled.

So the Air clogged with cold, thick, heavy, and lumpish clouds of rain and
waters, holds (as it were) the winds within their Precinct; hindering them to
blow then, till the Air be disburdened of that load, and do give way to the
winds to sport themselves in the spring, recompensing their long captivity with
licencious unbridled blasts.

Or to know how the wind blows is this: The way how the wind blows.
First, the exhalations whereof it is composed, are carried from the Earth,
high up to the middle Region of the Air, but so, that when it is there, it is
encountered and repercussed, tossed and moved with cold and condensed Air;
finally it is put aside, from whence again by violence it is thrown down by
the cold predominating in that Region, so it strikes upon this lower Region of
the air, in the descent of it; not right and diametrically down, but
slentingly; which air again beating the Earth, by the superior impulsion,
and the earths repelling it upward or back again, makes it (following the
round circumference of the Air) to blow about, filling it with its noise.

As for the number of the winds, what Countries be subject to such or such
winds, what makes the Northerly winds to blow dry, the Southerly moist; I
refer the first to Seamen, whose experience is surer than our contemplation:
the other are soon solved by a good Naturalist; for the Sun shining upon the
South Countries more kindly and hotter than upon the North, makes the winds
conform to the Air of the Countries, hotter there, than in the North, and
moister.

CHAP. 8.
Of Earthquakes, their cause and nature.

THIS question depends upon the knowledge of the former; for the nature and
matter of winds being well understood will clear this the sooner. I formerly
said then that cold and dry exhalations, by the force of the Sun elevated up in
the Air, and from thence by predominating cold beaten aside, and from that
through the Air downward to the Earth back again whirling upon the face of
it, Again, the way how the wind blows.
and round about through this lowest Region, are the matter and nature of the
winds; which cold and dry exhalations, I say, are the matter of these winds,
which often times so lowdly blow upon the superfice of the Earth; that not
only Ships on the Seas, Trees in the Woods are overturned by their violence;
but likewise high Steeples and Towers are made to shake and tremble in such
sort, that even Bells have been blown out of the one, the roof of the other
uncovered; our fruits and corns beaten down to the terror and amazement of
the beholders.

Even so dry and cold exhalations, The matter and form of Earthquakes.
but these more gross, and not so Elementary as the first, enclosed within the
bowels and concavities of the Earth, (for Nature has no vacuity) and there
converted into winds, do struggle and strive as it were, to burst up through
this earth to attain to its own right place, which is upwards; and that is
the cause of this trembling and motion of the Earth which we call Earthquakes.

And because the Southern Countries are hotter than the Northern, What makes
the Southern countries most subject to these earthquakes.
in respect of the Suns approach to them, I mean in its perpendicular
beholding of them, they (I say) are consequently more apt to be enflamed, and
so to be concaved and wasted within; yea, and to be more capable of the
engendring and reception of these exhalations and winds, and their effects:
therefore it is, that these Countries are more subject to the motions and
tremblings of the earth (whereof their particular Histories afford us
testimonies enough) than the more Northerly are; for they having grosser and
less matter evaporated from them by the Suns heat, do admit less
concavities, and so fewer exhalations: so then, both winds and Earthquakes are
of one selfsame matter and subject, viz. of cold and dry exhalations, whereof
they are framed; and they differ only in this; That the exhalations whereof
the winds are, do rise more purified, of the superfice of the earth, and as we
say in Schools, Ex Elemento superiori; The od^ between wind and earthquakes*
whereas the other, more grosser are from below, Et ex Elemento inferiori, so
that both in matter and motion they do agree.

Neither is this called in question by Aristotle, handling the same matter, A
very fit comparison.
Lib. 3. Meteor. Where his Commentator Albertus Coloniensis compares this
motion of the Earth by the power of these enclosed vapors in the bowels and
cavernes of it, to the motions and tremblings of our pulse, by the Systole and
Diastole of our spirits, in and above our hearts, and so within the cavity or
hollownesse of our body.

And yet, not content with this comparison, he insisteth in the duration and
continuance of the Earths motion, saying, that even as the tremblings wherewith
our bodies are agitated (during the fits of a Fever) do continue so long as
the faulty and peccant humor reigns in our veins, As our bodies are stirred
with a hot ague, even so the earth with an enclosed wind.
and accordingly diminishes its proportion, as the matter occasioning the
fever impaireth: even so it is with this trembling of the earth, having
respect to the multitude of vapors and to their declining; for the more these
vapors are, the Earthquake lasts the longer, and is more violent; but when
they spend and decline, its violence and continuance is remitted.

I know now the Philosopher and Naturallist (who admit nothing done in nature,
to be otherwise than by natural means) will admit nothing beyond the reach
of Nature when they are posed.

How is it then that commonly after Earthquakes, A remarkable question.
Plagues, Pestilences, and death of Bestiall do ensue? To this they answer,
That the exhalations which causes the Earths motion, having burst up through
the Earth, infecteth our Air with the infective breath of it, which it
contracteth when it was incarcerated within the bowels and wast places of the
said Earth?

Likewise they ascribe some such or not far different reasons in their own
degree, to the cause of evils which usually (I will not say ever) befall after
blazing Comets, Solutions both Philosophical and Theological.
which although in effect they have their own probabilities; yet they should not
deprive our great Creator from the supernatural working thereof, who by such
unusual and terrible Syncopes of nature, would even foretell, and have mortal
men, (whom these prodigies admonish) forewarned of some effects of his wrath to
ensue; to the effect, that if they will amend, and turn to their God by
humiliation, and repentance, they may avert that evil threatened, and prevent
his judgments.

CHAP. 9.
Of Thunder, Lightning, Hail and certain other secrets of Nature, with their
solution.

AND first concerning Thunder. Quest. What can be the causes of the lightning,
and firefleakes, which in Latin are termed Fulgura, and coruscationes, either
in the clouds themselves, from whence Thunder proceeds, What is the matter of
lightnings.
or wavering in the air? Whether or no the exhalations, enclosed within the
cloud from whence they do proceed, be the cause, and occasion, both of the
Thunder it self, it is sound, and of the coruscation and lightning also?

Answ. Yea; but diversely, and by it is own course; for first by the agitation,
and motion of it, within the cloud, it causes the sound after this manner: The
dry exhalation, (whereof this sound, thunder it self and lightnings are
generated) ascending upward, in the vapor, to the middle region of the air,
is engrossed in a cloud, through the coldness of the place: so it is
compacted, and this exhalation coarcted within the belly of that thickened and
condensed matter: which dry, or fiery exhalation, thus enclosed, (by
Antiperistasis or contrariety) by the environing cold, in the outward body of
the cloud, striveth to get out, and make way for it self; at last, with much
reluctance, The right cause of the noise of thunder after the lightning.
overcomming the environing cold, makes that hideous and horrible noise,
wherewith here on earth we are so terrified, that sometimes Women are struck
in such fear by it, that they part with child; So by that same agitation it
kindles too, being of a combustible substance, viz. of a dry, terrestrial,
and inflamable matter; which, once kindled by Antiperistasis, expels it
self, with violence, through that cold thickened cloud: but first in, and about
the cloud it makes these flashes and coruscations spoken of before: so in
lightnings, it disperseth it self, here, and there through the air, both
clearing the cloud above, and the air beneath.

Now if it be asked; Why we see the lightning before we hear the noise.
What is the cause, why we see sooner the lightning then we hear the thunder
clap? That is because our sight is both nobler, and the eye is sooner
perceptive of its object, then our ear; as being the more active part and
priore to our hearing: beside the visible species are more subtle, and less
corporeal then the audible species, this being real, the former intentionall,
as the skillful in Optics know: and this is the reason why likewise we see the
flash, ere we hear the noise of discharged gunnes.

Question. Again, being asked, why fire, being naturally light, does not
rather ascend then descend?

Answ. (To that as before:) Because it is extruded by violence from its abode.
And why do^^ it descend seeing it is light.
Besides this, it being accoupled to a matter contrary to its own nature, and
that matter predominating, viz. A dry terrestrial substance, in which it
existeth; that I say, this terrestrial matter, tending downe-ward, draws the
fire perforce with it: which may be perceaved by a kindled charcoale thrown
out of ones hand, which carries the fire along with it.

Again, if it be expostulated, what can be the cause of the admirable effects
of this thunder? at some times bruising the blade of a sword, The cause of the
admirable effects of thunder.
the sheath un-offended; melting money and gold in a pocket, the pocket
remaining entire; and killing a Man and not harming his clothes; And what
makes things touched by it smell of sulphur and brimstone? And to kill a man
in such sort, that the bolts shall bruise all his bones, the flesh never a whit
hurt, nor by appearance touched; and the like.

Thus much for answer. The thunder which is expelled or extruded from black
clouds, is more violent and has greater force, Why the thunder of black
clouds are more terrible, then those of White.
than that which is ejaculated from the whiter clouds. This thunder then by
nature subtle, and pearcing, but much more purified in it is distent, when it
mixeth with the air, is far more subtilized: And again being by the fire, and
heat of the thunder repurged of all grossness, it is made so purely
spiritual, that is pearceth suddenly, and insensible as it were, almost all
porous bodies, and never exercises it is force till it find resistance: And
hereby it appears plainly how the skin is, as it were, untouched when the
bone is broken, which may serve for all accidents in this kind.

But when it only touches the outward of things without any great hurt, it
betokens the weakness, and imbecility of the matter. Why those that be thunder
beaten smell of brimstone.
And where commonly bodies, so thunder beaten, do smell of sulphur and
brimstone, the matter of Thunder gives the reason, for it is composed of dry,
and sulphurous exhalations, as of the smoke of Sulphur-terrae by Naples; of
hot smoke in bathes, and rocks there; of Monte de Sommi; of Aetna in Sicilie:
of the burning hills at Mexico in America: of our Hecla in Island, and such
like chalkie, lymie and sulphurous places; so vapors elevated out of these and
the like places, must make thunder which is composed of them, to savor of them.

Now to those, who ask which is the place where thunder is procreated, The
true matter of thunder.
and begotten: answer may be made, from the gross humidity, having in it some
terrestrial glutinous, and viscous humor not easily separated from it that it
existeth in; which being thickened in a cloud in the highest part of the middle
region whither they are elevated, above all other clouds, composed of other
moist vapors; from thence (I say) by the invironing cold, by Antiperistasis,
or a stronger opposite part, they are extended and thrown down.

Qu. Again, if any demand why black clouds are conjectured most to contain,
and send forth thunder bolts most fearful?

I answer, indeed as black clouds, flashes, and lightnings, The reason why the
thunder of black clouds are most dangerous.
are little to be regarded, in respect that the blacnesse of them argues but
little fiery matter to be within; But contrarywayes that it abounds in
waterish vapors; So commonly after thunder great raines, ensue; the cloud
being dissolved, and the fire expelled. But indeed, if the lightning be not
much to be feared of such a black cloud, yet the thunder bolt of it is
terrible, as being violently expelled by the predominating cold, even as the
great charge of a Cannon enforces the bullets flight, and causes the roaring
noise of it.

Of reddish, or whitish colored clouds, the bolt is but weak in regard of the
rarity, and paucity of cold vapors to expel it; but the flashes and lightning
will be found dreadful, in respect of the abundance of exhalations, wherewith,
after their own color, the cloud is dyed.

But leaving these fiery and hot Meteors, we betake us again unto the moist
and watery ones, as more consonant and frequent to our climate.

First, if it be asked whether our moist Meteors, such as snow, hail, and
rain, have one common matter, whereof they are generated; and if they have
one, what can be the cause of their different shapes and forms; All weak
Meteors have one common matter*
for we see the snow broad and soft, contrarieways hail, round and hard. No
question but one matter is common to all, viz. Waters; from which, by vapors
they are elevated to the air; and in which they are dissolved again: but the
difference stands here. Their difference in form, and place.
That the nearest matter (to say so) of snow, is vapors congealed in a cloud,
which has in it a great mixture of air; by which means, being some way
heated, when the snow dissolveth, you see it holds, open and soft, by reason
of that air, whereas hail has no airy substance in it, and thus qualified by
experience, that we see hail fall down on a sudden, and ofttimes with
violence, because of the terrestrial heaviness of it, whereas snow falls
but leasurely.

The reason why hail is round may be this, Why hail is round.
because falling down from the middle region where it is congealed, by the way
it reencountereth with some circular and round drop of rain or water, which
accordingly by the rolling about of the hail it self, becomes hard
likewise; more especially, as not having any hot place, but the cold air to
fall through, till it light on our lowest region; which accidentally hot, for
the time, you see, makes them immediately after their lighting upon the earth,
to dissolve quickly, or at least not long after. And as these two are formed in
the highest of the middle regions, and for the extreme cold which is there are
congealed: Why rain falls in drops.
so on the other side because the clouds from whence rain issues, do not
ascend so high, therefore they dissolve in drops before they can be congealed.
And so by degrees, dew and Hoar-frost, because they are not mounted so high as
the matter and clouds of rain; Therefore they fall sooner, and softlyer then
rain does; so one matter is common mother unto all of them, but the degrees of
their elevation in the air makes their differences: the hail higher then the
Snow, the Snow then the Rain, the Rain then the Hoar-frost, mildew, or dew is.

CHAP 10.
Of Rivers, Fountains and Springs, their sources and causes.

THere arises a question here not unworthy of our consideration. Whether the
Springs and Rivers, in and on the earth have their original from the waters of
the Sea, by subterranean conduits, or from the waters on the superfice of the
earth which is caused by rain; or finally from the huge and unmeasurable
caverns, and hollow places of the earth, From whence fountains have their
courses.
in whose bowels are monstrous lakes, pooles, and other standing waters,
created of the air, therein enclosed, which not having any vent to ascend
upward, but being condensed there, dissolveth it self into these waters. Now
before we enter into the solution of this question, we must understand, that
when I speak of the vast and endless caves, like valleys within the bowels of
the earth, wherein waters are, that it is no invention of mine own: for Seneca,
and with him Aristotle in his Meteorologicks in the 19 book of his natural
questions instanceth it, saying, Quid miraris (says he) si distructos terra
non sentiat, cum adjectos mare non sentit? And again, Quemad modum supra nos
imbres, it a infra nos fluvios aer facit, supra autem nos diu segnis aer stare
non potest, qui aut sole atte^uatur, aut vento exp^nditur; sub terra autem,
quod aerem in aquam vertit idem semper est, scilicet umbra aeterna, frigus
perenne and in excitato densitas quae, semper materiam fontibus fluminibusque
praebebunt, and so forth: all which he confirms in that same place by
authority of Theophrast, whom he brings in saying, That since the Earth has
swallowed Towns, Cities, and houses, who can doubt but that there are within
her bowels, Brooks, Caves, Dens, and Valleys? which seeing they cannot be
empty, must of necessity be full of waters. Seeing then all things are
composed of all the Elements, as of their common causes; (For water is a
thickened air; and the Air again a rarefied water:) How then can these
subterranean hollow places, but be full of waters, since the Earth does
dissolve in waters, That there is waters within the earth.
to fill them up? For the earth being delved or dug but a very few footsteps
down, water does straight appear, earth and water being of as great affinity
as air and waters are: howbeit Zeno and others do contradict this opinion,
saying; That the Earth is a massy, The Sea the mother of fountains.
solid, and homogenean body. I say, that absolutely the Sea (as a common Mother
to all waters) is she, from whence all Rivers, and Springs have their source,
but yet not so wholly, but that they may be augmented by rain and water, as
we see by experience; that after huge raines, both Fountains and rivers do
accreasse. And if it be asked, how water being of its own nature heavy, can
leave its own element and center, and be conveyed to the tops of Mountains
and high places, as may be daily seen almost every where?

To this first, How Fountains are on the tops of mountains.
I say, that the Sea being some way higher than the Earth, most easily, by its
own conduits, and channels, it may make passage unto it self, as through so
many veins.

Besides this, the vapors which the Suns heat, and the power of some other
Planets, raises from the waters even under the earth, are not ever exhaled and
carried aloft to the Air, but sometimes are even retained for a long time in
solid places of the innermost parts of the earth; where gathering themselves
into the concavities thereof, they boil upward by the force of the said
agitation, as a pot upon the fire, by the force of an under hear: so these
waters bubling up through the earth cause our fountains; which running
downward again, to the Valleys and Plains, do make our Brooks, Rivers, and
Springs. And of this opinion is venerable Albertus Coloniensis, commenting
Aristotle upon this question, Dubio nono and decimo. Or it may be said, that
the caverns and concavities of the earth, being filled up with waters, which
distill from the want of the caved earth above, are procured by the gross Air
there enclosed and converted into waters, which issuing out of the rarer or
voider parts of the Earth, above, do occasion these Springs, Rivers, and
Brooks.

If it be demanded if steep Mountains do not retribute and send down waters
to feed our Springs and Rivers; How mountain; furnishes water unto fountains.
there is no question, for in their concavities, of certain, there are
treasures of waters, which bursting out at their lower parts, do yield plenty
enough, to bedew the lower Countries; not that these waters are gathered there
by raines which fall (for raine-waters penetrate not so deep into the earth)
but rather that the Mountains themselves, being spongeous, do attract and
draw together, their whole dissolved waterish matter, to the frontiers and
concavities; from whence surging and breakingforth through orifices, they grow
into springs, brooks and sometimes rivers.

Quest. What causes some Fountains to last longer than others? certainly,
that must proceed from the copiousnesse and abundance of the vein and and
waters, such long-lasting ones have, above the others.

Or finally, if it be demanded what can be the cause that some Rivers, and
Springs, which formerly did flow in large swift currents, do lessen, and
sometimes totally dry up? That must not be imputed to the situation or change
of the Stars, Why some springs cease running.
as some suppose; by which (say they) all places in the world are altered; but
rather unto the decay of the vein: peradventure, because the earth preasing to
fill up voidnesse, has sunk down in that place, and so choked the passage,
and turned, the course another way.

Neither can there be a fitter reply given unto those who ask; What makes two
fountains a little distant, one hot and another cold.
what makes two Springs or Fountains which are separated only by a little
parcel of ground, to be of a contrary nature? yea, one sweet and fresh, the
other brackish and salt; one extreme cold, another near adjoining to it, to
be lukewarm.

Then the diversity of Oars or Metals, through which these waters do run,
which is the cause of their different tastes and temperatures; as on one parcel
of ground some flowers and herbs salutiferous and healthful; others venomous,
and mortal may grow.

The Moon is often said to be the efficient cause of the ebbing and flowing
of the Sea; now if so be (as universally all the Learned hold) what is the
cause, seeing she is universally seen by all Seas in a manner, (and I may say
equally) that therefore all Seas flow not and ebb not alike?

To this I think no better reply can be given, than that some Seas there are
which be rather Lakes, in a manner, and of fresher water than Seas, in respect
of the incessant running of endless Rivers into them, whereof they make no
account again (to say so) by subministring matter to Rivers, Fountains,
Brooks, or Lakes, as the Ocean does: the invironing banks, and shoares being
higher almost than they: such are all Sounds, Gulphs, and (it may be) the
Mediterranean Sea also. Or yet we may say, that the profundity and deepenesse
of some Coasts hinders the flowing more then it does upon shallow and ebb
sands and other valley and low banks.

Now the cause of our hot Baths near Bristoll, The veins through which the
waters run makes them salt, hot, or cold.
in Flanders, Germany, France, Italy, and else where, is only the sulphurous
and a brimstony Oar, or Metal through which their waters run; as the salt
earth through which some waters do run, is the cause of their saltness,
such as the Salt Pits in Poland, and Hungary, out of which Salt is dug, as
our Pitcoales, and stones are dug out of Quarries. And no question but these
waters are heated too by running through such earth.

These, and the like, are the reasons given by Philosophers, for such secrets
of Nature, as either here before I have touched, or may handle hereafter: and
howbeit, by humane reason men cannot further pry into these and the like, yet
no question but the power of the great Maker, Gods power outreacheth man's
wisdom*
has secrets enclosed within the bowels of Nature, beyond all search of man:
To learn us all to bend the eyes of our bodies, and minds upward to the
Heavens from whence they flow, to rest there in a reverent admiration of his
power, working in, by and above nature; and that by a way not as yet wholly
manifested unto mortal men.

By all which, and many more we may easily epsy as the power, so the wisdom
of this our Maker, in disposing the form of this Universe, whether the great
World, or the little one, MAN; in both which there is such a harmony, sympathy,
and agreement, betwixt the powers above, which we see with our eyes, as the
Heavens, and the distinguished Regions of the Air in the greater World, with
the Earth and Seas; or of the soul, mind, life, and intellect of Man; the
heaven in him comparatively, with his body, the Earth, and such like, of the
one with the other; that is the great and little world together, as is a
wonder. The comparison of the great and little world.
For as in the Air, how the lower parts are affected, so are the superior;
and contrariwise, as the superior is disposed, right so the inferior. So we
see that not only a heaven of Brass, makes the Earth of Iron, but likewise
waterish and moist earth, causes foggy and rainy air: as a serene or
tempestuous day makes us commonly either joyful or melancholy: or as a sad
and grieved mind causes a heavy and dull body: but contrariwayes, a
healthful and well tempered body, A worthy similitude.
commonly effects a generous and jovially disposed mind.

OF VARIETIES THE THIRD BOOK: CONTAINING FIVE TREATISES. OF 1. Armies and
Battles. 2. Combats and Duels. 3. Death and Burials. 4. Laughing and Mourning.
5. Mental Reservation.


BY DAVID PERSON OF Loughlands in SCOTLAND GENTLEMAN.

Et quae non prosunt singula, multa juvant. LONDON, Printed by RICHARD Badger,
for Thomas Alchorn, and are to be sold at his shop, in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Green- Dragon. 1635.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS Earl of Hadington LORD Privy Seal of
Scotland, and one of His Majesty's most HONORABLE Privy Counsel in both
KINGDOMS.
Right Honorable,
IF writers of books in former ages have made a grateful commemoration in the
front of their works, of worthy, men who for their brave deeds either in
Peace, or War, Church or Common wealth were renounced, thereby to enternize
their fame, and by their examples to extimulate others to the imitation of
their virtues; nothing could expiat my trespass, if I should pass over your
Lordships most accomplished rare virtues, thereby to deprive posterity of so
excellent a President, especially amongst your other many exquisite perfections
you being in this barren age so worthy a pattern, and Bountiful Patron of
letters and literate men. Let antiquity boast it self of the integrity of a
Greek Aristides, in the gravity and inflexibilitie of a Roman Cato, and the
rest: yet our age may rejoice to have all these accumulated on your Lordship
alone; Envy cannot conceal with what credit and general applause (as through
the Temple of Virtue to the Sacrary of Honor) you have past all the orders of
our Senatoriall Tribunal even to the highest dignity; where, like an Oracle,
you strike light through most foggie and obscurest doubts. The continued favor
of Kings, the aggrandizing of your estate by well managed fortune, the peopling
by the fecunditie of your fruitful loins not only your own large stock but
many of the most ancient and honorable families in our nation, may well set
out your praises to the world, but the true Panegyric which I (if able) would
sound abroad your Honors due deserving merits, to which, in all humility and
reverence, I offer this small pledge of my entirer affection, hoping ere long
to present them with something more worthy the studies and travels of

Your Lordships in all dutiful obedience. D. PERSON.

OF ARMIES AND BATTLES: Wherein by the way our modern Warfare, is compared
with the Old Roman. THE THIRD BOOK.
Section 1.
That greatest armies have not always carried away the victory, the reason of
it; two examples, of Semiramis, and Xerxes.

I FIND in Histories, that not always the greatest, and most numerous armies,
have carried away the victories in Battles; whether it is, that the LORD of
Hoasts will disappoint them who trust in their numbers, Greatest armies have
not always done great.
and armies of men, or their Martial Horses and their strength, or in their
military discipline. For it is probable, that as their infinite numbers, cannot
ever be so well Marshalled, as that, at all times requisite, they can come to
blows; so on the contrary, if once they chance to turn backs, the Panike
fear that seazeth on so gross, and peccant a body, is so remediless, that
they can scarce ever be brought again into any right or perfect order, which
in lesser armies, driven to such extremities, we hear and read to have
happened: Or rather shall we say with that Captain of the Volsci, marching
against the old Romans?

Armati armatis obstant virtute pares, sed necessitate superiores.

And again;

Iustum est bellum, quibus necessarium, and pia arma, quibus nulla, nisi in
armis, relinquitur spes.

I need not insist too much on battles of unequal numbers, for the Greek and
Roman Histories are replenished with them; yet two I will produce, as
incredible for their numbers, as unlikely for their loss. The one, Semiramis
innumerable army defeated by a very few under an Indian Prince.
of Semiramis Queen of Babylon, who setting out for the conquest of the
Indies, made up an army of three millions of armed men, whereof ten hundred
thousand Horsemen, the rest were foot, besides many hundred thousand Chariots,
with blades like sythes, or falchions, sticking out on either side; with many
hundred thousand Camells and Elephants to fight on. Which horrible army was so
overthrown by the Indian Emperor, that scarce one hundred returned home alive.

The other was of Xerxes, Xerxes alio overthrown by a handful of Greeks and
Salamines.
that powerful King of Persia, who intending to subdue Greece, came down upon
it with such an army, that Rivers were drunk dry by the multitude of his
soldiers. Herodotus reporter of the former two, reckons this whole army to
amount to seventeene hundred thousand by land: and two hundred and fifty
thousand by Sea, with 2200 Galleys; for, by Sea and land, he intended their
subversion, and came down for that intent.

The insolency of this King (environed with this terrible army) was such;
that intending likewise to subdue Europe, and for which purpose he prepared to
pass the Hellespont, (some seven miles broad) but because his bridge of
boats, by the waters impetuousnesse, was overthrown, which he caused to be
contrived for that effect (as Alexander did at Tire) he made his Soldiers,
with him, vainly to whip the Sea for it is resistance against his so vast
power. Nevertheless this presumptuous King (I say) with all his forces, and
numbers of men, by a small number of Greeks, was overcome at the Battle of
Thermopilae; The battle of Thermopilae.
in so far that, that same glorious King of Medes and Persians, was forced to
steal over the Hellespont, slenderly accompanied in a frigate, or Shallop, in
the year of the world 4720. or thereabouts, if Sabellicus mistake not.

Now as these two remarkable and populous armies were thus defeated by the
smaller number, and so confirms this assertion aforementioned; So who will
follow forth the tract of all either divine, or heathen Histories, shall find
it more manifestly approved.

As for holy Histories, unless I were obliged not only by an Historical but
by an Evangelicall faith also, to trust all comprehended with^n the old and New
Testament as undoubted verity, I could hardly be induced to believe, that so
little a territory as the holy land was (and yet is) could afford so many
hundred thousand fighting men, as were so often recorded to be raised in it;
unless that some would say, that beside the blessing of God upon that land in
making it to overflow with milk and honey, wheat, wine and oil, that so he
would have it to abound in men likewise.

Sect. 2.
Examples of Greek, Roman, and British Battles, where the fewer number have
overcome the greater.

THere is a freedom left to every Reader of Histories, to believe or not
believe every particular in them: yet those battles, where the fewer numbers
have overcome the greater, will most startle belief; as that victory of
Alexander over Darius; the battails of Thrasymenes, Cannes, with the Pharsalian
field, and the like. For Alexander, with but a few, did beat Darius great
hosts: Hannibal, with lesser multitudes overthrew the Roman Consuls, Paulus
Aemilius, and Terentius Varro; Julius Caesar, with almost the half of Pompeys
number put him and his army to rout.

But neither the imparitie of the Greek, nor Roman battles fought by them can
give so great assurance of possibility, that small troops have overcome the
greater. As that battle of Poictiers by Edward the black Prince of England,
John King of France overthrown by Edward the black Prince of England.
against John King of France! where, not only four times as many that day
were put to rout, by the worthy English, but likewise the King himself was led
captive into England; whose ransom redacted his country unto that penury, and
scarcity of money, that they were forced thereafter, to coin and stamp pieces
of leather money, as their History of that time records.

Neither, Edward Carnarvan of england overthrowen by Bruce at Bannak-burne.
was that glorious victory over the French much more remarkable, nor more
sufficient for proof of this then was that famous victory of our valiant
Bruce, at the battle of Bannak-burne, against an other Edward.

I might add to these two the renowned victories woone by Scanderbeg a petty
Prince of the Epirots, Scanderbeg with a handful^ overthrew Mahomet.
who with but a handful of men (as it were) did overcome the hundreds of
thousands of that victorious Mahomet, as at length may be read in the Turkish
History.

Sect. 3.
Whether it be requisite that Princes hazard their Persons in field or not; of
the Encouragement that their presence gives to the Soldiers: When a King
should venture to the field; and what Lievtenants are to be deputed by him; all
exemplified.

Our Politicians, If Princes may hazard their persons in a field or not.
of latter times, have made it a great question, whether a Sovereign Prince
should hazard his person in battle or not, considering the great loss that
ensues either by his death, or captivity; a thing never doubted of in former
ages; no not by such Kings who though sickly and diseased, have caused to carry
their bodies from their bed unto the field, thereby the more to encourage, with
their presence, their mutining and doubting armies; as Plutarch witnesses in
the life of Eumenes. Yea, Xisca had such a conciete of himself and his own
presence, that after his death, he ordained his skin to be flead off him, and
a drum to be covered with it; imagining thereby, that, as he in his life had
terrified and sorely beaten his enemies, so the sound of this after his death
would be a terror unto them.

Neither, Queen Elizabeth on the front of her army in 88.
was there any thing encouraged our brave English, at the approach of the
Spanish armado, more, than the assurance and undismayed countenance of that
ever famous Q. Elizabeth, ryding in the front of her troops with a Iaveline in
her hand (like an armed Pallas) as the Bishop of Ely in his treatise of the 88.
most appositely relates.

Philippe de Commines observes nothing more worthy of re-marke in the battle
of Fornouncie (which the Italians call the battle of Tarr which was struck at
the foot of the Appennine mountains, by the French King Charles the eight,
against the Venetian an army, under the conduct of the Marquise of Mantua,
their general, at the Kings return from Naples homeward,) then the young King
his generous encouraging of his people, The countenance of a King a great
encouragement unto soldiers*
with a cheerful countenance: and so much the more; because that the night
before, the army was so terribly frighted with thunder, flashes of fire from
heaven, horrible tempests of wind, and rain, all which he persuaded his
Soldiers, were only ominous prodigies, to dismay their enemies.

So then, when I seem to admit, or allow the presence of a King in his Army,
rather than to devolve that charge on Deputies; it is not to be understood,
that therefore he should play or act the part of a Soldier, exposing his
sacred person unto danger and palpable hazard, which are only for common
Soldiers; but only by his advice, and countenance, to encourage, direct, and
ensure all things. -- stetit aggere fulti
Cespitis intrepidus vultu, meruitque timeri
Nil metuens -- As Lucane
speaking of Julius Caesar, exquisitly remarketh: neither yet is it to be
understood, When a King should be in proper person in a field.
that a King should in person be in his battles, and armies at all occasions,
but then only and especially, when the enemy is within, or approaching his
Country; for otherwise he may very conveniently do his business abroad, by
his Lievetenants. Provided always, that he who is employed, be not of such
eminency, as thereby he be able to encroach upon his estate; and then armed
with men, power, and strength, favor and means, attempt against his
Soveraignety: but that by consanguinity, or other obliging bonds, the Prince
be assured of this great man's fidelity and trust: as examples of former Ages
can yield sufficient testimony to have been practiced: Why powerful subjects
are not alw^yes fi^est to be elected Generals of armies.
to which purpose I will only instance, that notable authority of Velleius
Paterculus, in his abridgement of the Roman History; when he speaks of that
great employment entrusted unto Pompey, in scouring the whole Seas of those
mighty and many Pirates which infested it. Idem autem (says he) in Marci Antonii
praetura ipsi concreditum fuit, populus id aequo animo ferebat; (and why) Quia
raro eorum invidetur honoribus quorum vis non timetur, tum demum vero extrema
eorum formidantur, qui vim in potestate habent.

Next it is most requisite in the deputed expeditions that two Commanders be
not placed over one army, One General ^itter, not two,
the Heavens cannot abide two Suns, as Darius was told by the Macedonian
Alexander.

-- omnisque potestas
Impatiens consortis erat --
But leaving former examples, or later miserable experiences of this we have
in hand, I cannot but applaud that memorable Motto of the Duke de Main, on his
Colors and other Ensigns, which does well to this purpose; for when he had
taken upon him the conduct of his Brother the Duke of Guyse's forces, after he
was killed at Blois, had these words for his Motto, -- vno avulso non deficit
alter
Aureas, and simili frondescet virga metallo.


Section. 8.
Of the Romans prudency and foresight in sending two Commanders abroad with
their Armies; and why the Grecians conjoined two in their embassies: and of the
danger of too strict Commissions.

IF it be objected here, that the Romans and Grecians (who were chief Masters
of this military Art) did in all their expeditions send two Consuls, How the
Romans and Grecians send two Commanders with their armies abroad.
or Deputies together; yet that makes not any ways against the former
assertion: for as the several effects thereof proved not always successful,
as their lamentable wars can testify; and particularly the bloody fights
betwixt Silla and Marius, each vindicating to himself the honor of
captivating the Numenian Iugurtha: they commonly were sent, so, that either
alternatively they should bear rule; or the younger was accoupled to the
elder, that the younger might submit and give way to the gravity, years, and
authority of his Senior; or finally these Consuls were so attemperated in that
charge, Their foresight and prudence herein.
that one of a slow and procrastinating disposition was still joined to one of
a sudden and forward nature; yet none of all scarce ever proved successful to
the City: For what desolation Terentius Varro his suddenness brought unto the
State that day that befell him to command, (although against the will or
consent of the elder Paulus Aemilius) at the battle of Cannes, their Histories
yet may bear record in letters of blood.

And though Marcellus and Fabius, Fabius and Marcellus contrary dispositions.
were so joined, that Marcellus impatiency was tempered and allayed by the
delaying nature of Fabius, yet there are few Fabii Maximi to endure the
upbraiding and insolent bravadoes of a camarade as he did; yea, and of his
whole Army, for not fighting at such occasions as they thought advantageous;
of whom the Poet said well, Vnus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem.

And of both, their legender Plutarch; That Marcellus was the Sword of Rome,
and Fabius the Buckler and defense!

That the Grecians sent always two together, Why the Grecians did send always
two, in embassage, or to field.
either to wars, or in Embassage, was rather to the effect each should pry
into, and control the others actions, to save their Commonwealth unbetrayed,
then for advancing the business they were sent about; as in the lives of
Lisander and Calicrates is manifest; every one of them for envy, emulation, and
ambition, undoing that which the other had plotted.

Now, as the Roman and Greek examples above rehearsed, do make little for
the authority of two Generals over an Army, seeing the formerly particularized
evils do ensue: In as little do I think their example to be imitated in
these our days for prescribing particular and precise injunctions unto
Generals, in so far, that they may not in a jot transgress the limits of
their Commission. For though the Roman History affords examples enough of
Fathers; who, when their own sons had returned victorious, and the business
they went about, well and honorably performed; for which the first day they
were honored with the Ovations and Triumphs due unto victors; yet the next day
were put to death for having gone beyond the points of their Commission; yea,
but for halting one day more by the way, than punctually they were enjoined to
do: The limitating of Generals Commission dangerous.
(though peradventure they had brought the enemy unto such a pass, that if
that day had escaped from giving battle, or any other thing of like
consequence, the state of the Commonwealth might have been imperilld, or the
enemy escaped, or the like.) Yet I know not how their doings, by Laws of a
well managed state, may be lawfully warranted.

For in wars it may be, that the opportunity of doing well presents it self
so, that if the General lose the point of that present service (though his
Commission carry no warrant for it) he may hazard to posterity both his fame
and credit, and may, (which is more) endanger the state, or Prince whom he
serves.

But as the jealousy of the Romans for the conservation of their liberty and
state burst out in these strict Commissions; so I shall wish that for the
preservation of ours, all expert Statesmen upon most weighty considerations
do advise, such as the multifarious exigencies of affairs require; for I am
no ways to direct.

Section 5.
Difference between Battles and Duels: that Generals may refuse challenges:
with some passages betwixt Hannibal and Scipio in their wars.

NOw to return to our Battles from which we have digressed; Great ods betwixt
battles and duels.
I observe great ods betwixt battles and duels: for in battles neither Generals
of Armies repute it a point of disparagement or discredit, if either they
refuse to fight, when they are bravado'd by their enemy: nor yet a point of
disgrace to sue for conditions of peace and friendly compositions, when all
things all the clear in the field: any of which, or both, in matter of duels,
should be reputed a perpetual disgrace, unless it were in such terms as the
Barons did; mentioned in the Chapter of combats.

Of the first, we have the example of Fabius Maximus, whom Hannibal bravadoed
so insolently, that Fabius's own soldiers had him in derision. And of late,
the Duke of Parmas example, who relieved the Town of Paris, from that terrible
siege, wherewith King Henry the third and last of the Valoyses had beleagured
it; for rising in arms against him in favor of the house of Guise: I say,
this Duke having raised this siege, To shun fighting at times is no disgrace
unto a General
at last releeved the City with necessaries, in spite of all King Henry the
great, then of Navarre, his valor, and hard pursuit; yea, and offer of
battle: yet he returned the way he came without apprehending any disgrace, but
deferred till he thought fitting again to give him battle.

And on the other part, if any of all the worthy Ancients had reputed it an
aspersion, or imputation either to their fame, valor, or fortune, who so
unlikely to sue for putting off fighting, as that witty, wise, valorous (and
till then fortunate) Hannibal, and that at the hands of the man on earth, with
whom he stood most upon points of credit and reputation, viz. Scipio, his
Antagonist?

And yet the History represents unto us, that the sixteenth year of the Punick
wars, when Scipio the African, had invented, and prosecuted that stratagem of
war, to draw Hannibal out of Italy, by kindling the fire of war in his own
Country, yea, at the Gates of Carthage; which accordingly as he had invented,
he put in execution; so that the Country and City, at the first approach of
the Roman army, posted away Commissioners unto Hannibal to have him over into
Africa with all his force, or else that all was undone.

Hannibal, Hannibal sueth for peace at Scipio.
I say, considering that policy, and withal remembering unto what extremity he
had both driven Rome, and almost all Italy, and what he might have done if he
had not been so soon fatally recalled; moreover, being landed, and finding
his forces not able enough to encounter Scipio (both Armies being in sight of
other) before the battle should begin, desired parley with Scipio, and in these
or the like terms the History makes Hannibal in mid-field to speak unto him,
after serious eying each other.

The Heavens be propitious unto our meetings; now that I, who am the elder, sue
for cessation from fighting this day (great Scipio) impute it unto fortune;
whom now I perceive like a woman to favor thee at this time, Hannibals speech
unto Scipio.
who art the younger; the variableness of these events (me thinks) should
move thee to condescend unto the peace I plead for, yea, as willingly and
effectually as I crave it, if you do but ponder in the balance of an
impartial and not preoccupied mind, what diversity of chances have fallen out
since the beginning of our wars, and how, even now, this same City, which
offers conditions of peace, had both your glorious Rome, and in it all Italy,
quaking and trembling under the auspices of my fortunate successes; and how I
am still the same man as before: and withal, how the Gods have a watching eye,
and revenging hand when they are invocated as witnesses unto equal conditions
offered and refused for the preserving of humane blood.

And as they ever were, so still they are able, to turn the chance against
all, whose swelling presumption would hinder the perpetual peace of both
Empires. I am confident yet, great Scipio (says he) that the sense of
vicissitude in martial affairs shall touch thee so, as not to endanger all
thy fresh former Trophies under the hazard of a doubtful battle. Call but to
mind the fatal examples of so many brave wariours, and particularly of your
countrieman Attilius Regulus (seeing homebred experiences are most sensible)
who having attained the vertical point of honor, and preferment, by the
fortunatenesse of his succesfull victories, while he did not command his
felicities, was plunged in the miserablest of misfortunes, etc.

Sect. 6.
That the exploits of our modern warriors, have bin every way comparable to
those of the Ancient; with some examples to that effect.

AS no judicious man can be so unjust as not to retribute due honor to the
never dying Worths, and valors, of the many renowned Roman and Greek
Commanders, with others in all former Ages; so ought no man to be so
transported with their so largly famed deeds, as thereby to derogate from the
true worths, the many most admirable exploits; the undaunted courages, of the
many excellent and most warlike Commanders that have of later Ages, like so
many Comets, shined in their times, over Christendom; of whom our own
Countries (without ostentation I say it) have filled up a very large number.

It is not to be doubted but that in these our latter ages there are men every
way equal for all manner of warlike exploits, whether stratagems, policy, or
undaunted courage, to the so famed Hannibal, Scipio, Fabius Maximus and the
rest. That exploit of Hannibals indeed, when Fabius Maximus had enlabyrinthed
him in that straight of the Apennine Mountains was preferable to any in my
conceit: with which I balance that admirable stratagem of Sir Francis Drake in
firing the Spanish Armado in 88. Sr. Fr. Drakes stratageme in 88.
That it bred the ruin of that so huge and expensive Navy and so formidable
to this whole Island.

It is observed of Hannibal, that being in that straight, Hannibals stratagem.
and recollecting his wits how to escape, with his army, he gathered together
all the Oxen in the country about him, and under cloud of night, having tied
unto their horns bundles of vine branches, like little fagots, which he
kindled, and therewith chased them along the Mountains. Now they being so
terrifyed with the flames of fire, burning about their ears, made such a
noise, and dreadful show along the sides of the mountains, as they ran,
that the Roman army, which lay in the valley, being astonished at such a sight,
(it being in the night) when all things are most dreadful) did betake it self
unto the opposite Mountain, and made way to the Carthaginian army which then
marched to escape: neither think I, but for all the fame of these ancient
illustrious deeds registrated in their records, but if either they had chanced
to have ado with the people of these ages, where the acts of war are better
refined, and purified then in those times; Or yet if our commanders had served
in that age; but they had come shorter of victories here, then ours had done in
their achievements there. But as Alexander reputed Achilles happy who had a
Homer to sound his praises; even so these brave Heroes were a like happy, whose
Histories have not been sparing to set them out in their fullest dimensions.

Sect. 7.
The difference betwixt the ancient manner of warrefare; and the modern: how
far the modern engines of War exceed those of the ancient Greeks and
Romans.

IN marshalling of our armies, and Battles, our modern plans jump almost with
those of the Ancient; yet our Sieges, beleaguring of towns, and instruments of
war do far exceed theirs, whether by Sea, or by land.

And first that the form of drawing up of our armies, A comparison of drawing
up of our armies with the Old Romans.
is not far different from theirs, appears in this. Our armies consist of so
many regiments, the regiment of so many companies, and our companies of so many
Soldiers; then, subdivided amongst themselves. Our armies, in whole, having
their Generals commanding them, our Regiments their Colonells, our Companies
their Captains, and every one of these their Lievtenants and underofficers,
conformable unto the stations of their charge, such as Sergeant Majors,
Quarter Masters, Ancient Corporalls, Sergeants of companies, etc.

Even so the Roman armies were composed of so many legions; the legion made up
of 6000. soldiers, over which a Tribune had command: these again were
subdivided into so many Cohorts: the Cohorts into so many Manipuli, which being
redivided in Centuries, were again subdivided in Contuberneys which were the
meanest company in a legion. These had a Captain, a Lieutenant, and Ensign
bearer, wherefore they were called Subsignarii Milites.

Thus two centuries made up a Manipulus, 3. Manipuli a Cohort, 10. Cohorts a
legion, and so many Legions an army less or more according to the exigencie
of their affairs. When a Legion stood in battle array, the least squadron of
it, was a Manipulus wherein was two Ordaines conjoined together making 10. in
front, and their Lieutenant in the reire: this excellent order of the old Roman
warre-fare, is well nigh imitated by our modern warriors, as I was saying in
the fields, when, both then, and elsewhere their armies, were like well
governed Cities. Yet on the other side the Roman sieges and all their engines
of war, come short in comparison of our manner of beleaguring now adays,
notwithstanding their testudines, If the Roman field malice exceeded ours, yet
our beleaguring, and instruments of war exceed theirs.
vineae, aggeres, and Turres, which were hurdells and plankes of Timber, built
in such sort that Soldiers might securely fight under them, or like Mounts of
earth rolled before them, under which they might make approach unto Walls,
either for scaling, or undermining; these and all others of this sort, when
they come in comparison with our fire works, but chiefly our thundering
Cannons, they are found to be but of little avail.

But what shall we say? Truly we may conclude that in these days, true valor
and strength had their just assayes, cum latus lateri, dextra dextrae, pes
pedi, as Plautus says, were opposed to one another. Whereas now the bravest,
and most venturous fellows without much proof of their undoubted courages, are
prostrate on the ground: So that for any thing I either hear or can read in
the French Histories, where manifest fights have been in these latter ages;
and since these Vulcanian Thunderers have been in request; The terriblenes of
our pieces.
I understand (I say) yea even by those who were present, and had borne a part
of the play themselves; that so soon as the fire and showers of shot were
spent, the victory almost began to incline, unto one side, or other; before
the push of Pikes, wherein commonly the strength of battles consist; the Romans
indeed had their fundi, and hurling; Darts, but what were all these unto the
former?

Sect. 8.
That the Ancients in their wars had greater opportunities to try their
prowess, in battle; then the modernes have.

AND as in their field battles, and seiges of Cities, How the Romans had a
fitter occasion of trying their valor then we.
their people had occasion afforded, by the lack of these shot, to prove
themselves and show sufficiently unto their commanders, testimonies of their
valor, strength, and dexterity: Soin their Sea Fights, though they had no
Ships of any bigness but Galleys (which then, as now, were of a low tire;)
yet, whenever they encountered, they had occasion to exhange blows enough.

Whereas our Sea Fights (as they say) now adays, are able to astonish Nepture
himself; no mercy being to be found nor almost place secure within our Ships,
exposed as butts unto the fury of the roaring Cannon. That their numbers in
these kind of fights exceeded ours, beyond compare, there is no question, their
Histories do verify it: but if ever in their time there was such a Naumachie
or sea fight in their seas, The battle of Lepanto surpasses all the Romans
Sea Fights.
as the battle of Lepanto betwixt us and the Turks, I doubt of it. Where the
favor of the Lord of Hoasts seco^ding the Christians order, valor, Commanders
and Soldiers willingness, and affections to that fight, purchased that
victory worthy to be sung by a King, yea the best since Solomon, of one that
bore Crown, KING James of blessed memory, which at length is to beseene in
the Turkish History, and in Du Bartas small works.

Sect. 9.
The manner how the Greeks and Romans ordered their battles, both by Sea, and
by land; the battles of Cannas and Trasimenes described.

AS for the disposition of the Roman, or Greek Sea Fights and battles, I find
little other order, Four forms of drawing up of armies used by the Romans
then that they were drawn up in a cressant, and so was the battle of
Lepanto. But for their land battles, I read of four kinds of pitching of them:
For they were either into a straight front, by them called recta acies very
usual amongst them; Or else the manner of imbattelling observed by Caesar
against Ariovistus, was in request, which was, when one corner of the army was
advanced nearer the nearest point of the enemies army then the other was; to
the effect, the one being wearied, the other might advance to renew the charge
a fresh, which by him in his Commentaries was called acies obliqua. The third I
understand, to be that observed by Scipio in Spain called acies sinuata, in
manner of half Moon, whose points were advanced, as the Sea-battells spoken
of before: And his reason of marshalling of them thus was, because he
understood his enemies best men to be placed in the middle of their army, and
so by advancing his cornets he discomfited, and put their battallions unto
confusion, before the better Soldiers could come unto blows. The fourth is
acies gibbera, or gibbosa: When the maine battle advanced, but the two cornets
lay lagging behind in manner of Cressant too, with the Horns or points
arreirward: This form was observed by Hannibal at the battle of Cannas,
whereas he did the contrary unto Scipio, neither wanted he his warrant as the
effect proved.

And howbeit Sr. Walter Raleigh in diverse places of his great and judicious
works takes me much, yet in nothing more, than in this description of the
plain order, fight, and end of that battle at Cannas, which was thus;
Terentius Varro having enforced the gross of Hannibals Cressant, in which,
contrary to Scipio's order, Description of the battle of Cannas.
his worst soldiers were, whilst some Numidians counterfeiting a flight, to
train the Romans unto their chase, some further within the Cressant made way
unto them; till in the end, they were encountered by Hanniball himself: who
standing in his squadron of Carthaginians, under the shadow of the vanquished
gross battallion drove them back again, within the circumference of the half
Moon, whose face looked toward him; which closing again, where it was first
enforced, environed the il-governed Roman Army; so that they were exposed as a
pray, unto the fury of the Maures, Numidians, Spaniards, Carthaginians, and
some of their Contrymen Italians, whereof Hannibals Army consisted.

Which overthrow of the Romans, The defeates of Cannas and Trasimenes rather by
the Romans unskilfulnesse then prowess of their foes.
with that at Trasimenes received under the consulship of Cneius Servilius, and
Titus Flaminius, happened rather by the fury and blind ambition of the two
younger Consuls, for the time (who would not attend the opportunities of times,
and places appointed by their elders, viz. Paulus Aemilius Consul with Varro,
and Cne. Servilius, with Flaminius,) then by the dexterity of Hanniball; or yet
the valor of his people above them; yet may they not counterpoyse, or at least
overvalue that of Pharsalia, where, the Romans, amongst themselves, gave sound
proofs of their courages unto their own destruction: although Julius Caesar's
part (with fewer numbers) was more to be admired above Pompey, in regard of his
providence above him in this.

Section. 10.
A Maxim in military discipline, inferred to confirm Pompeys oversight at
the battle of Pharsalia.

IT is a maxim of military discipline, A maxim of military discipline.
that if thy enemy invade thee, by running upon thy Army with force, in that
case, to abide their charge in settled and sound station; if otherwise, they
budge not to fly upon them: Pompey his oversight at the battle of Pharsalia.
for Pompey his Army being composed of the flower of the Roman youth; no
question, but if he had commanded them to give the charge, they, whose hot
blood and rising spirits, had incensed and redoubled their courages, by the
onset, had enforced Caesar's host (which although it was composed of old beaten
soldiers, yet being so far inferior, as it was in numbers unto them) to a
flight, so to avoid the swelling and furious onset: whereas, on the contrary,
they were commanded to abide Caesar's charge: and thus by that attendance, their
young and first fury being cooled and abated; withal, Caesar (as a well
experienced Commander, enjoined his people to invade these young bloods,
imagining (as it came to pass) that being amorous youths, they had rather
turn their faces than have them torn (howbeit these skars are rather the
honorable badges of true valor, than hindrances or lets of love to a
discreet mind) by which means, as Pompey lost the field, so did he all hopes
of redintegrating his losses again, making his recourse unto the King of
Egypt, where by the way he was killed.

Section 11.
That the French, what within their own Country and abroad, have fought more
battles of late times, than any other Nation; and of their success in them.

BUT to leave Greek and Roman Histories, The nearer our own tim^s writers are
more spa^ing to write without sure warc^nds.
and to pass by the battles, whereof in them are plenty to be read: I will
descend to the later Ages, where the liberty of Writers is some way better
restrained from debording; and whereof the commemoration will be more taking,
and delightful unto the Reader.

And to begin with the French; I find, that they have given maniest battles
within this later Age, both at home in their own bowels, and abroad: and at
home with strangers, though not with discredit, yet with small advantage.

For to take a survey, More battles of ^ate amongst the French, than all
countries ^e^ide.
either of their battles with the English in France, or in Italy; either in
Lombardy for Millan, or in, and about Naples with the Spaniard; we shall find
by their own Writers, that few of them have been fortunate: in so much, that
beside the common loss in field, their Generals were either taken, or killed,
both by the English and Spanish.

Indeed I will not say, but at some times their deeds have been most worthy,
both in the fights at Giradadda, and Tarr, which may counterpoise the loss of
Gaston de Foix at Ravenna; Few fights abroad to their commendation*
the Duke of Nemoures at Cerisoles; and almost the captivity of their King at
Pavi^: yet what shall we say? they have lost all their footing beyond the
Alps: whether by their misfortune, ill government, or the Heavens decree,
which have bordered France in with such unpassable marches, in a manner, that it
may learn to live by it self without encroaching upon her neighbors.

As for their intestine battles again; so many in so short space have not bin
struck in any place throughout the world.

For albeit Flanders and Holland, have been now for long time debated, betwixt
the Spaniards and the States; in so far, as it has been, seeds belli, and
the public Theater whereon the Tragedies of bloody Mars have been acted unto
the view of all Christendom, since the beginning of their troubles, and the
reformation of Religion, as well as France: yet we shall scarce find in all
their History of one set battle; for the story of Newport which comes the
nearest unto one of any, was rather a successive fight, than a pitched field.

Section. 12.
That emulation amongst the Princes in France, rather than Religion, was the
cause of the many civill-warres there.

Whether the procrastinating and long suffering humor of the Spaniard, The
Spaniard more slow and mature in their doings than the French.
with whom the Hollanders have to do (wherein they exceed the French) whether
their fear to hazard the undoubted loss of the whole Countries unto the
parties overcome upon a doubtful battle; or whether (like wise Scipio) they
are loath to lose a soldier, be the cause of their never appointing set field,
I know not: but I dare say, that there have been more civill-wars and battles
struck within the bowels of France, since the reformation of Religion, there,
than in all Christendom, for that or other causes whatsoever. The battle of
S. Dennis, Moncon tour, Yvri, Iarnack, Coutras, Arques; besides, diverse others
less remarkable may witness. Which argues necessarily how hot and sudden the
disposition of that people is. And how justly Julius Caesar in his Commentaries
(and with him diverse others) have hit, when he describes the nature and
humor of the ancient Gauls.

Neither must it be thought, that the zeal of Religion only rouseth up this
ferocity, on both sides, unto such bloody fights and battles. For other
Countries about, have appeased all dissentions about Religion with fewer
fights, and less bloodshed at, least in open field, as who frequent their
Histories may find. And howsoever Religion was partly a motive unto it: yet it
was sometimes used as a cloak to cover the emulous ambition of some great men:
as that betwixt those illustrious Families of Bourbon and Guyse, Emulation
betwixt the house of Gwyse and Bourbon, and not religion the cause of wars of
France.
both aspiring unto the Crown, by the visible declining of the name of Valois,
in the person of King Henry the third.

As for all the late battles fought in Germany and other places of
Christendom, there being so copious and plentiful relations of them every
where to be had, I pass them by, and refer the Reader to them.

OF VARIETIES THE THIRD BOOK. OF DVELS AND COMBATS.
AS by Duels and Combats (under the false gloss of gaining, maintaining, or
repairing of Honor and reputation) there has been more young, generous, and
Noble blood spilt over Christendom, then by any other Pestilentiall Custom
whatsoever; So, no Nation has been so universally and so long infested with
them, as France; in so far, France most subject to Duels.
that it almost may be said that the first fountain of them sprang from
thence, all Christendom beside not affording so many memorable ones as it
alone. Their heat and impatient sudden fury that way being imputed by some of
their own Writers to Mars the Predominant Planet over that Clime: And first I
observe, that by their Salick Law Title 69. Duels were authorized, ^ombats
authorized.
and that Law seconded by the Gambetts Law, as Agobardus ad Ludouicum
Imperatorem has it; and continued so (though not without some opposition till
the reign of Henry 2.

Sect. 1.
Of combats by Champions for Clearing of Queens Honors: Combats betwixt
Ladies; betwixt Churchmen: and betwixt Judges: Combatants, rewarded by Kings
their Spectators; and S. Almachius killed, for declaming against Duels, etc.

LOtharius (says P. P. Nicolas in his 5. Chapter:) desirous to make trial of
the Chastity of his Wife Teuberga was advised by the Bishops to choose a
Champion, Lotharius trial of his wifes Chastity.
and his wife another; which two were by simple Combats to resolve the Scruple:
Their Queens too had recourse to Duels, in choosing Champions to maintain
their Honors and clear any imputations laid against them: Champions in Duel
to clear Queens Honors.
for Iudeth, Wife to King Lewis the Gentle, being by him accused of having
dishonored his bed, by accompanying with Bernard his kinsman and Prince of the
blood, was purged of that stain by Bernards entering the lists, and freely
offering Combat to any that would maintain that wrongful quarrel. That
Ladies have fought combats.
And their Ladies also, not Content to have their honors and their other
quarrels maintained by their Champions, have themselves to public view, within
lists, body against body fought in single Combats, as Petrus de Auriliaco in
his Title de Duello, affirms.

And not only their Women, but their Churchmen also, were licensed to decide
any debate of great consequence that had risen amongst them by Duel, Combats
of Churchmen*
whereof I will only mention that out of Goffridus Abbas Vindoci in his 3.
book 38 Epistle. of Rhenold Chesnell Clarke of the Church of Xanites, who
fought a Combat with one Guilleaume a Religious Monk of Vandosme. But more
memorable is that of Anselme Besse, Churchman and Treasurer of the Church of
Laon, who being accused of having robbed the Church treasury, of several rich
and precious pieces, and sold them to a Goldsmith of Soissons, who had deposed
against him, obstinately denied the fact, and craved combat, which was
granted; they fought, and the Goldsmith was overcome; notwithstanding these
things were sold him by the Monk: yet (says my Author) the Goldsmith for
having violated his oath, which he had given unto the other, never to reveal
the theft, was condignely punished.

Nor have their Judges been exempted from this trial by duel; Combats of
Judges and Counselors a^ Law.
for Chopnius de Domanio, Tit. 26.. 15. tells of one Marsilli a Counselor of
the Parliament who, being accused by another of corruption or bribery, was
dispensed withal by the authority of Parliament to challenge his accuse^, and
did fight with him in the quarrel.

Moreover, Petre d' Auriliack declares, that their Kings did not only
authorize Duels, but were ofttimes eyewitnesses and spectators of them.
Charles the 6. (says Frossard in his 3. Tome) was present on S. Thomas day,
behind S. Martines in the fields at Paris, Combats, whereof Kings have been
spectators.
at the combat of John de Carrouges, and James Legris, and from that time
conferred a Pension on Carrouges: And Charles the 8. (says Ferronius, lib. 1.
Hist.) Combats rewarded by Kings.
did behold Zerbulo and La Laud whilst they fought, and rewarded both, giving
to Zerbulo 300. Crowns, and to La Laud 50. And of later days K. Henry the
2d. was present at that of Chastangueraye against Iarnack; of which hereafter.

Nay, the natures of that people in former ages have been so averse to have
any custom, how pernicious so ever, abrogated, that it is recorded of S.
Almachius, S. Almachius slain for speaking against combats.
that for having declamed publicly against Duels and the frequency of them in
his time, he was, by the obstinate and seditious multitude overrun, and
violently put to death.

But not minding to fill up this Discourse with the many famous and memorable
combats that have bin fought amongst themselves, and against strangers in that
Nation; as that of Peter Bajard against Don Alonzo de Sancto major: Anno, 1503.
Or that of the Earl of Arguemont, against Montmorancy in the Isle of Maisiers;
Six score men killed in combats in one voyage of K. Lewis of Fran.
or that of Delarges against Vaudrey, Anno 1521. with many others: Or of later
days, how in King Lewes's voyage toward Limo^ine, six score were killed in
single combat; with as many or thereabouts in his voyage toward Savoy. I will
only mention in stead of all two most memorable ones, the one in France, the
other in Spain; and first of the French in the following Section.

Section 2.
A recital of two memorable duels, the one in France betwixt Monsieur de
Creky, and Don Philippin: The other in Spain between Pedro Torrello, and
Ieronimo Anca, both of Arragon: in the presence of Charles the fifth.

THE French shall be first inserted here, although latest acted, for it was but
in the days of King Henry the 4th. surnamed the Great; set down by du
Mathieu, and thus briefly it is. In the wars betwixt the said King, and the
Duke of Savoy, for the recovery of the Marquisat of Saluces usurped long before
that time, during the time of the French divisions by the said Dukes, and now
reclamed by this King, as having bin formerly rent from his Crown, although it
lies in a manner within the Savoyards bosom: The quarrel, a Commander on the
Kings side.
it fell out so, at the taking in of a little Town there, that Crekie did vant
to have got in that conflict A principal man in the Dukes party, and brother
to him.
Don Philippin's skarfe: which words being conveyed to his ears, he
forthwith challenged Crekie of a lie; and that so much the rather; for that at
certain other swaggerings, where Philippin his fortune was to be before this
fatal fight; Crekie likewise, had vented and vaunted, The challenge
that he had dipped his hand in the (...) blood; which wrongs (at least so
pretended by him) accumulated together, drove him (if the French History say
right, for Fides sit penes Authorem) to undertake the challenge, yet not
without the valorous Duke his brothers threatening instigation: The combat.
the time, place, weapons, judges, and all, agreed upon, they fought
courageously both: but yet so, that the French having the advantage of the Sun,
which even then was tending toward the West, by good fortune, and it may be by
the equity of the challenge (for Perkins holds Duels not to be examens of
innocence) left the Savoiard dead upon the field:

The Spanish duel was more remarkable in its circumstance, Comparison of the
French and Spaniard, Venetian and Florentine.
howbeit inferior in the dignity of the combarants, and in the event of their
fight; for although it be proverbially spoken, that the French in single combat
or duel, are better than the Spaniard, and the Spaniard in battles and greater
numbers do surpass the French* even so in Italy I have oftentimes heard, that
the Florentine alone is more wise, and subtle than the Venetians: but they
again in counsel are more wise and deliberate than the Florentines In this
combat the Spaniards gave very sound proofs both of their courage and daring.
The discourse of it is at length, and in its punctual circumstances set down
in their Country story, A duel betwixt two Spaniards granted by the authority,
and fought in the presence of the Emperor Char^es the 5.
which I will briefly touch.

In the days of Charles the 5. that fortunate Prince, for the time both
Emperor and King of Spain, there lived in his Court Peter Torello, and
Hierome Anca Arragonois, both Gentlemen of note (for so they were called) and
withal entire and loving Comerades: these two on some occasion faling to
contradictory terms, from words they fell so foul, that it came to a
challenge, from challenge to a meeting, from that to fighting; in which
combat, after some bouts, Peter Torello was overthrown by the default of his
Rapier, which either broke, or else was beaten out of the hilt by his
Antagonists furious blows; The occasion, and quarrel.
by whom he was forced instantly either to dye, or sue for life; who being put
to that extremity, condescended to accept of his life; but conditionally, that
on the faith of a Gentleman, he should reveal that secret to none living,
which he might do the more trustily, seeing no other were witnesses to it, but
more especially seeing it was not through lack of courage on his part, nor of
daring, but rather by chance of war. Things thus put up, they return to
Court, living together after their old fraternity, as if never such a thing had
been amongst them, never so much as a motion or whispering of it; till within
a certain space of time a report of Torello his overthrow burst out, Occasion,
moving the challenger to petition a public combat.
which coming to his ear after it had been blazed through the whole Court,
he pondered with himself, that he could not be avenged on his companions
perfidiousnesse by a private duel again, whom he persuaded himself was the
only revealer of his disgrace and that secret; (notwithstanding Hierome Anca
certainly affirmed the discovery thereof to be by a Neat-heard, who unknown of
them overheard and saw them) Torello therefore being set on revenge to repair
his disgrace, which he believed was whispered and talked of by every one, had
recourse to the Emperor, and begged at his Majesty's hands, that it might
please him for the recovery of his reputation now in question, to grant him a
public combat with his enemy, who perfidiously against his plighted faith, had
revealed the matter, whereof he made a particular rehearsal: whereunto the
Emperor after many instant solicitations gave way, but with this restriction;
that first, Conditions granted by the Emperor whereupon they should fight.
they should fight armed: next, that when he should throw in betwixt them a
golden rod, which at solemn times he bore in his hand, they should give over,
and not fight to death, as in other combats: these conditions were accepted by
both parties, the day and place appointed, where in the Emperors presence,
Ceremonies observed in this combat.
and face of the whole Court, with great pomp and solemnity, the two
combatants did appear clothed; first, in their most sumptuous attire, and
accompanied with their most honorable friends: from whence, after low and
humble reverences done; first, to the Emperor, sitting there in his Chair of
state, next, to the Chancellor (whom the Story highly regards) they were
conveyed every one to their own pavilion at the ends of the Carieer; from
whence coming forth again, armed at all pieces, and (as they say) Cap ape,
they re-entred the precinct of their appointed place; where after solemn
oaths made, that no other quarrel brought them to that hazardous encounter,
but the defense of their honor; they commenced that memorable duel to the
admiration of their beholders, with uncertain victory; till in the end, the
Emperor throwing his golden rod betwixt them, The event of their fight.
approving the courage and proofs of both, caused them to be parted, though
without great difficulty they could not be separated.

Sect. 3.
How Combats may be thought permissible: The relation of a Combat betwixt
Iarnacke and Chastigneray, in the Presence of King Henry the second of France;
citations of the Canon law against combats: Example of a Combat where the
innocent was killed: that the decision of all such questions whereupon Duells
were permitted, ought to be left to God.

IN the former combats Spanish was more remarkable then the French; that first
it was authorized by an Emperor and then countenanced by him. Wherein if any
would infer, that by this I would seem to authorize Duells; What way combats
permissible if they should be at all suffered.
hereafter the contrary shall appear: But thus much I may say; If any sort of
Duels should be tolerated in a Commonwealth, I think that that which is
performed after this manner (wherein as in his Miles gloriosus, Plautus
speaks, Pes pedi, dextra dextrae, latus lateri opponitur) it is more
dispensable then otherwise to permit men to butcher one another; true valor,
strength, dexterity and courage being then put to the essay, although with the
hazard of their lives, yet not with the infallible loss of any or both, as in
other Combats.

These two examples I have brought in out of the French and Spanish Histories,
brieflier couched here then in their own Country Registers, Where they are at
length and in their smallest circumstances set down.

Now as here I allow of the Spanish sort of Duells (if any way to be tolerated)
so can I not but disapprove the French King Henry the second his admitting and
permitting of a Duel, not betwixt two men of a private estate, nor by
themselves in private, neither for any remarkable injury done by one to
another; but in the face and presence of himself and Court in their shirts,
and so to inevitable death of either, or both, and for nothing but a ledger or
slight French quarrel, as a demanti betwixt two notable persons, of two
illustrious houses, Iarnak and Chastaigneray; where the fortune of the fight
favoring the weaker for the time, to wit Iarnak, sent his adversary, if not
from the field to the grave, yet so sore wounded, that within few days
thereafter he dyed.

I might have alleged more of former ages, but that the nearer our own days
things fall out, they bring with them the greater credit to the present times.

Charles the fifth his example may be thought to be tolerable: and though by
the constitutions or rather permissions of some Princes, Duells have been
tolerated, as particularly when the notoriousnesse of a fact (as of murder)
can neither be proved by witnesses, The Canon Law gaine-sa^eth their
permission, and Why?
nor oaths of parties, and such other legal ways; which sort of proofs the
Civilians call a vulgar sort of probation, as in the Decretalls lib. 2. quest.
5. cap. consuluistis, and cap. De Monomachia, is apparent. Nevertheless, the
civil laws as well as the Canon, do absolutely condemn them, because say
they, it is a fallacious proof, the order of nature favoring commonly the
stronger above the innocent. As in the Decretalls cap. supra citato de
purgatione vulgari, is manifest by a case propounded of two, Example where in a
Du^ll the innocent was killed
who upon accusations of theft, challenged each other to Combat, where the
stronger having overthrown the weaker, was found nevertheless guilty; for the
goods in question were at last found in the Victors house.

To say here; What shall a Prince do when he is importuned by one for Justice
of such or such a man, for this or the like crimes; but to refer it to a
Monomachy or Duel, seeing other proofs fail?

I answer, that by such means both God and the King are tempted; for if God
has reserved to himself the discovery of what by all searching cannot be
discovered, is not that an intolerable importunity, to pry or search any
farther in that, but that the Magistrate (all legal proofs being used) do
absolve him, whom secundum allegata and probata he finds innocent, and refer
to the all-seeing and all knowing God, the punishment of him who is guilty,
seeing in his own time he can by means unsearch'd by men, bring about a
punishment on him, whom peradventure the civil Judge has absolved: We should
rather refer to God the punishment of a misdeed, which by no legal means
can be cleared, rather then to a fight.
for otherwise it should seem, that we were suing after a miracle, by
permitting a Combat for proof, as was used in Linonia or Lapland in like
cases, as may be seen in the aforesaid Chapter De probatione Vulgari in the
Decretalls: for there says the Canonist; If any crime such as that could not
be proved, and that the accused or suspected, cried that he was innocent, and
so stood forth in the avouching of his innocence, he was forced for the more
and farther proof thereof, either bare footed to tread on hot iron, or else to
wash his hands in hot boiling water.

For notwithstanding all the circumspection of Judges in prescribing equality
of arms, and all the objections which can be thought on, either for
prescribing equal quarters to both, or to save both from such treachery and
circumvention; Yet can neither of these caveats be so punctually and
judiciously set down, but that the one part may be weaker than the other:
neither yet have we assurance, that God will ever show his justice in such
Combats; because it is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

Sect. 4.
Several objections for the tolleration of Duells and Combats confuted;
Cajetans opinion of Duells wherein also the lawfulness of Battles is allowed.

IF it be said here, David his fight with Goliath should not serve for example,
and Why?
that David did fight in single Duel with GOLIATH; That makes not against us
for that was done by the instinct of the HOLY Ghost: Neither are all the deeds
of the Saints to be obtruded as exemplary for all men, to imitate; they are
rather to be admired than followed: for then Abraham his going to sacrifice
his beloved and only Son Isaac, might be an instance too for imitation. But
with Demosthenes we should live by Laws not examples, albeit examples are more
moving at some times then laws.

I find indeed, Cardinal Cajetan his permission where and how?
that Cardinal Cajetan admits them; but upon two considerations: first, when
two Armies are ready for the shocke and yet where the most equitable part has
the fewest forces, in that case says he, the event of the battle may be
referred to a Duel of one of both armies, for avoiding of greater bloodshed;
for in that case, si bellum sit licitum, quid ni and duellum? Next when any
private man accused of a crime whereof he is innocent, is nevertheless borne
down by power of adverse parties, if then by the Magistrates authority (to
whom he complains) a Duel be offered, to decide the question, in that case,
he admits these fights to be permissible: for why (says he) if we may
safely fight with a Rogue, who would rob us of our goods, why not with him who
would do so with our honor, it being alike to him, at least the odds not
being great, whether he dye by his adversaries hand, or by the sword of the
Magistrate, it being a lot of chance experimented in the person of Jonas.

As all the Canonists, save Cajetan only, in the causes and cases
abovementioned do disallow Duells, so the Civilians approve them not; for in
the F. de gladiatoribus. L. Constant. it is said, that Cruenta spectacula in
otio civili non placent. Then Leo and Anthemius Titulo de Feriis. L. Dies
festos command, ut lachrymosa spectacula ferarum tollantur. Now if such
sanguinolent and bloody shows and baitings of Bores, Leopards, Bulls and
Lions, either amongst themselves, or else of condemned persons with them, yea
and sometimes of venturous fellows to try their strength and daringnesse with
them, were for these unnatural sights prohibited, much more think I, should
these of men one with other be absolutely discharged.

Now if it be objected here, that in the civil law, we find the Emperors
themselves, Solution of certain Ob^^ctions.
to have promised immunity and impunity to the gladiators, who either had
vanquished their Commerad, or peradventure killed him in such fights, as ad
Aquiliam. L. Qua action.. Si quis, is evident:

To that I answer, and not without the same Law.

That such killing when it did happen amongst these Luctators (which were men
appointed to wrestle and fight together for sport to the people, who beheld
them barter strokes, and exchange blows in the bottom of the Amphitheatre
called Arena, whilst they sat in security) was not injuriae causa, or by any
premeditated malice, but only by mere accident without the deliberation of
him, qui intulit damnum; whereas in these combats or Duells, they fly to it on
intention and resolution, either to kill or to be killed: and the intention
judges our actions, not the events.

Neither need I for this be reputed an Anabaptist, It is not a good
consequence, seeing I refuse Duells, therefore Batteils too.
though I refute the lawfulness of duells, by the aforesaid reasons; as
though I therefore denied the lawfulness of necessary Wars, because they are
founded upon some apparent grounds of Scripture, for out of the same we have
many Warrants more enforcing besides examples where the Lord of Hosts has
shown his power and approbation in favoring of battles undertaken for his
cause. No more is it a good consequence, if wars and Battles be lawful,
therefore Combats (...)


To say si bellum sit licitum, quidni and duellum? if a War be lawful, why not
a Duel?

It follows not, for howsoever Majus and Minus change not the species and
kinds of things, as we say in the Schools, yet is there great discrepance
betwixt the two; for battles are approved by the authority of God, nature and
Nations; provided the causes be lawful and just, as pro aris and focis: for
the other there are none at all; for David and Golias, their fight carry no
example for imitation: But if any Nations have tolerated them, it has been
but such, Quos sol obliqua non nisi luce videt.

Not the Greeks, Latins, Assyrians, Egyptians and the like.

Sect. 5.
Cajetans reason for referring the event of Battles to Monomachie: Where also
is inserted the story of the Horatii and Curiatii.

AS for the first condition admitted by Cajetan for Duells; which is, when two
armies are ready to join, for preventing of greater bloodshed, he averreth
that it is better to refer the event of a battle to a Monomachy of two, then
otherwise to hazard all:

There is nothing more memorable in all the Roman History then the experience
of this, A Notable Combat of 3. Brethren Romans against so many Albans.
in that notable not so much Monomachy as Polymachy of three brethren, Romans,
called Horatii, against other three brethren of the Alban side called Curiatii,
and those partly of kin and alliance, to which the decision of the victory of
either of the armies, by the Roman and Alban Kings with their whole armies
consent was concredited.

Those six in the middle of both Armies valourously fighting for their own
private lives and credit, their countries fame and liberty, having so glorious
a Theater to act so important and tragical a combat upon, Their fight.
did so bravely on both sides, that the panting armies were in no less anxiety
for the event of their trials, then the perplexed combatants themselves: at
length the victory, which seemed dubiously disposed in favors of either side
begun to incline to the Albans first, and that by the death of two of the Roman
brethren; whereupon the Roman Survaior counterfeits to fly, and so was pursued
by the other three; but turning to the foremost of his pursuers he set so
furiously upon him that he forthwith killed him; then turning to the second
with like fury rewarded him after the same manner: Now the Survaiour of the
Curiatii being brother in Law to this victorious Roman, received the same lot
that his brothers had from his valorous hands, which afterward caused the
death of his own Sister, the last killed Albans Spouse, as in the Roman
History may be read at large.

Section 6.
That Kings and Generals of Armies, for saving of the greater bloodshed of
their Soldiers, have fought single for victories. Examples of both. A quarrel
and challenge betwixt the Emperor Charles the fifth, and Francis the first,
King of France: how it took no effect.

WHEN I say then, that neither the Greeks nor Romans admitted single combats,
it must be understood, except in time of just wars, in which either one or
more soldiers may single out a combat with one of the adverse party, with
permission of the General, or else one General with another for saving the
bloodshed of many; as Cassius and Marcellus did each of them fight with their
adverse Generals: Some Grecian, Roman, Hunnish, Danish Kings have combated with
others for saving much blood.
yea, and sometimes Kings one against another have done so for sparing the
blood of their subjects; As Alexander the great did combat single with Porus
King of the Indians, Godfrey of Bovillon, against Arnold King of the Saxons;
Romulus, with one of the Kings of Latium; and Hundick King of Saxony, with a
King of Denmark; Challenge, but no meeting nor fight, betwixt the Prince of
Aragon, and Charles of Anjou.
and of fresher memory, Charles of Aniou challenged Peter of Arragon, to duel;
where at Bordeaux in Aquitany, before the Prince of Wales, for the time, with
swords, they should have tried the right and claim that they both pretended to
the Crown of Naples, but they met not just on the day and place appointed;
whose default it was, their diverse Histories agree not: like as the Histories
of France and Spain dissent upon the challenge given in a manner, and accepted
by Charles the 5th. Emperor for the time, and King of Spain, with Francis the
first of that name, King of France: albeit Guicchardin neutrall to both; and
reputed as another Cornelius Tacitus for his impartiality in his History of
Italy, following forth the circumstances of the battle at Pavie shows at
length, how the French King Francis was beaten there, and taken prisoner by the
Viceroy of Naples, General of the Imperial forces, from whence by sea he was
conveyed into Spain: and how after a long and strait imprisonment, he was
put to so high and invaluable ransom as lightly has not been heard of:
moreover, the quitting of the best branch of the patrimony of his Crown, the
rites, titles and interests he pretended to the Kingdom of Naples, the Duchy
of Milan, Challenge, betwixt Charles the 5. and the French King, Francis.
for the which then they had been a swaggering; His rights and soveraignties
of Artois, Brabant, Hainault, and so forth: yea, to the marriage of Eleonora
Widow of the King of Portugal and sister to the said Emperor, a ransom which
he was as unwilling to pay as agree to any of the former Articles, her favor
being as it was unfavourable to him, who otherwise was an amorous Prince; and
although the distressed King subscribed to all, and confirmed the Articles with
his promise, yet it was so, that often he protested even there (neither did he
smother it) that promise what he would, perform them he could not, neither
legally might he. So that being set at liberty, his two sons accepted in
hostage for him, and returned home; he was charged by the Emperor for the
performance of the points subscribed by him: whereto he answered, That it was
not in his power, no more than in any other Kings to alienate things belonging
to the Crown, The occasion of the quarrel.
without the consent of his whole States obtained thereunto. And for his
promises he said, That seeing extraordinary conditions had extorted them from a
Prince in close prison, and his consent to them violently wrung from him, they
must consequently be infirm, for promises accessory to such like compulsions
cannot be of better force and value. Which with the like and better replies,
when they came to the Emperors ears, he forthwith challenged the King by his
Heralds of breach of faith, and offered in single combat to fight with him in
the quarrel, which the French king accepting, desired him to appoint day and
place, giving him the lie as often as he would say, that he had falsified his
promise. But as their several stories disagree upon the particulars, so every
one does vindicate their own Prince, from all aspersion and stain of breach.

Section 7.
A discourse of a combat where thirteen French Knights fought against so many
Italians: wherein the French were overcome; some observations thereupon.

THE Italian and French Histories agree not upon the verity of that, Combat of
13 French knights against so many Italians.
not so much monomachy as polymachy of thirteen French Cavalliers against so
many Italian. And because it is counted as a very memorable thing in their
History, I shall the briefliest I may, touch it, to give the Reader content.

At Barletta in the kingdom of Naples where the French and Spanish forces lay
debating by sword, the right that either King clamed to that Crown; by their
Generals for the time, Lantrek the French, and Consalvo Ferrandes, The quarrel
and challenge.
the Spaniard: it fell out so, that at Kubos a Village of no great importance,
a French troop had got the foil by an Italian one, for the time, under the
pay of the Spaniard; of which several Companies, certain soldiers by hazard
ran encountering together by their contumelious and reproachful objecting of
one another defects: the Italians to the French their vainglorious brags,
and that in effect their courage was not so good. The French to them, their
subdolous and crafty tricks by which they fight more fortunately than stoutly.
They brought the matter to such a height, that thirteen of the one side were
to fight on Horseback against thirteen of the other, the field to be Career
rayled about on the side, but not at the two passages, in the middle of both
Armies; the quarrel was for the maintenance of the honor of their countries;
and it was agreed upon, that the victors should not only have a certain sum
of Gold, but the ransom also of their captived Prisoners.

As soon as they had covenanted, The conditions agreed upon.
they met, they fight; the French are beaten, some killed, others taken.

Which notable overthrow albeit Guicchardine lib. 5. of his History of Italy
attributes absolutely to the valor of his countrymen above the French; and
penneth it in all circumstances with the exhortatory Orations of their
Generals before the fight and the triumphs after: yet the French in their
books, and with them Sabellicus also an Italian, lib. 2. Aenead. XI. imputes
it rather to the cousening subtilties of the Italians then otherwise, to their
sole courage, because (say they) and Sabellicus with them, it was condescended
upon, that if any horseman that fallied should transgress the precinct of the
Career through error or un-skilfulnes, that he should be held as dead, neither
thereafter should be admitted to reenter the list to help his fellows; by
which means the Italians knowing the eagernes, heat, and impatiency of the
French, did plant themselves within the center of the camp, without budging,
and attend the French charge from a little distance within the limit of the
Career; where wisely if they had remained as they were placed, and not
precipitated the charge, they had apparently won that field.

The French then whose charge is ever furious, and then more than ever, let
loose so fiercely upon them, that five of their side and but two Italians
transgressed the bounds; who not being able to wheel and rain about their
Horses again, by that means lost the victory, in the sight of the panting
and votary Armies.

Now albeit in this so conspicuous and ominous combat the French were beaten,
nevertheless we find commonly, that one for one the French surpass the
Spaniard, although in companies they surmount them; and in this same fight
although the French had the worse, yet by all likelihood, if their Horses had
not proved their loss, they should have borne away that days credit.

Always as in this heat of an impatient nature, Observation upon this combat.
we communicate with the French, and it may be in our single combats too;

So our neighbors the worthy English may justly be said to participate with
the long patience, mature and ripe deliberatnes of the Italian and Spaniard:
consequently more capable to maintain and keep well, than with the other to
conquer and suddenly to subdue.

Sect. 8.
A memorable Polymachie betwixt two kindreds in the High. lands of Scotland
(betwixt whom there had been a long and mortal enmity) for the total
extirpation of the one of them; fought before King Robert the second, at Perth
in Scotland.

I Were ungrateful to my country to pass here with silence, A memorable combat
betwixt two powerful Clan: and parties of our own nation d^bated of Pearth.
that true Polymachy, recorded of in our Histories, registered there to
posterity, as a thing memorable, which befell in the days and under the Reign
of King Robert the second, if I rightly remember.

This brave Prince being often molested with the mutual complaints of two
powerful Clans or Surnames in the High-lands where his Majesty's judicial
power could but hardly and with many encumbrances execute his authority upon
the parties offenders on both sides.

After their mutual supplications given in, that they might at one time both
rid his Majesty of molestation, themselves and their successors of the
perpetual fear wherein they daily were, for their Wives, children, goods, and
Cattle; by one open fight, where all of either of these names should be on
both sides.

The King giving way to their Petition, the day and place was appointed, it
fell out so, that there were one fewer on the one side than on the other; where
the generosity of the party having the advantage of the supernumerary man, did
appear in so far that they refused to fight with the advantage of one more,
neither yet could any of them be induced to lie by to make them equal, all
being desirous to be equal sharers of the common fortune: which controversy
a Saddler of the City of Perth where the Combat was fought perceiving; least
the King, Court and Country which were met (to see so famous a spectacle)
should be disappointed, The conditions accepted and agreed upon.
did offer for pay to make up the odd man, and was observed by all to do so
well for his own hand, that when all the rest were either killed in the field,
or else with terrible and deadly wounds left so (it being one of the most
bloody butcheries of so many as is seldom read of) he alone or else with few
more escaped, and that by swimming the River of Tey. Howsoever France in the
days of KING Henry the third and fourth, was so overspread with the blood of
Gentlemen killed in Duells, which amounted to such a number (notwithstanding
all the Kings edicts to the contrary) that almost they could have made up an
army, and that Duells came to such a height, that none was reputed a brave
fellow except he had killed a man as they said: Yet find I none so remarkable
as that combat betwixt the Duke of Savoy his bastard brother and the Chevalier
Creky, the time of the Wars betwixt King Henry the 4th. and the said Duke, for
the Marquissate of Saluces, of which before.

Section 9.
A Combat appointed by two French Barons, the one of Gasconie, the other of
Poictou, which was taken up of their own accord in the field: The end of this
Title.

NOw to end this discourse: Exemplum alios fortasse nepotes instruet.

In my time I remember at the Court of France an ancient Gascon Baron and
Poictouvin 2 man of his own coat, but younger, falling to contradictory
terms for a naughty matter, because in the Kings house they durst not put hand
to their swords, did agree to meet elsewhere: time place and arms are
designed; the Gascon that same morning betimes calling on his page, commands
him to provide a bottle of Wine and to have it in readiness at the place
appointed, before he came: where he himself following and presently espying
his adversary, both being demounted, and in their shirts, before they began to
lie at their guard, in these or the like terms the Elder bespake the younger.

That I as the Elder do take upon me to speak first, impute it not to any
presumption I have of my worth, but to the priority of my years. We read in
the Roman History, that two of their Consulls who before had bin at mortal
enmity and variance, going together with their Armies against the enemy, An
Exemplary Combat betwixt two French Barons.
being a pretty way from the City, the elder should say to the younger,
Camerad, seeing we go together on a public charge, in conjunct offices, let
us lay down all former grudges under this stone, now if thou please, at our
return, lift thou it up again and reassume them: you may advise; but for the
present I think this best, which was agreed unto to the great contentment of
the younger.

So say I to thee, if it please thee for so petty and frivolous a quarrel,
that we expose our lives and estates to the hazard of a doubtful fight and of
a variable fortune, I will not decline it: For as none doubts of your
courage; So I trust, that none dare call mine in question; so then if you list
Cavalier, with the worthy Roman, let us bury in this Boule of wine our
yesternights rash words: so we shall procure Gods blessing upon our souls and
bodies, and our Prince his favor by our good examples to his quarrelling
courtiers; and withal indissolubly tie our loves together for ever, without
any disparagement of our credit or reputation; which being accepted by the
younger, and related to the King, they were by him in presence of the whole
Court condignely praised, as most duly they deserved.

Now albeit it be not of those or the like voluntary duels I treat of here, but
of these which are tolerated by permission of the Prince or Magistrate for the
eschewing of murder and greater bloodshed in the commonwealth, upon apparent
conject res of wrongs received, yet I thought it not altogether imperinent to
insert this story. Now for the other. Although some have permitted them, as of
old Fraton King of Denmark, and are yet tolerated in Muscovia: yet we find
that Rhotaris King of Lombardy, absolutely discharged them: and although his
successor for the inconvenience which thereafter ensued licensed them again,
yet he protested that it was against his will and conscience: and as these
good Kings inhibited them; so, many of the French Kings, as Philip le bell,
Lewis the 9th. Charles the 9th. King Henry's 3d. and 4th. and many more of the
best governed Commonwealths have done the like. Which makes me admire why
Bodin in his 7. Chapter of his 4. Book of Republic, gives way to their
toleration; they being both repugnant to the Law of God, and contrary to the
Civil and Canon Laws, and the constitutions of best governed Kingdoms.
Indeed, the said Bodin, admits them only to be permissible, when legal
proofs are wanting, provided, that they be only for matter of honor, not
wealth; and consequently among persons honorable, for the preventing of
further bloodshed, averting of kinsfolks murders, and such like evils which
might ensue: to which if he had subjoyned Charles the 5th. his condition of
fighting armed, I think his reasons might have been more passable.

But however in elder times, duels were tolerated by certain Kings, which by
appearance, the necessity of those times required; as common Stews were for
eschewing of greater inconveniences; yet they being practices so ill-grounded,
so unnatural, and so far both against the Laws of God, and Man; Succeeding
Kings (in every Nation almost) have enacted most strict Laws against them,
with most exemplary punishments, to be executed on the rash infringers of them:
all which, being well known every where, were superfluous to be inserted in
this small Treatise.

A TREATISE OF DEATH, And of diverse Orders and Ceremonies of Burials.
Section 1.
The remembrance of death requisite in all men: Ceremonies for the remembrance
of it; some documents against the fear of it* what death Julius Caesar wished;
of Autocides; of selfe-murtherers, etc.

THERE is nothing whereof a Christian should be more mindful than of death.
The Ethnickes that wanted the true consolation which a believing and faithful
Christian has, had nothing more frequent in their mouths than Death: The
Poets are full of these passages.

Vive memor, quam sis aevi brevis --.
Nascentes morimur, mors rediviva brevis.
Especially Horace, with Tribullus, Catullus, Propertius, Seneca Tragoedus,
Persius, Iuvenall, Claudian, Ovid, Lucianus, and the rest; whereof to make
mention, were to fill up a little Volume: there is nothing almost under the
heavens but may serve man as a memorial thereof; All things we see serves to
refresh our memories of death and mortality.
the Sun sets at evening, the day gives place to the night; Summer, to
Winter; infancy to childhood; that to youth, it to manhood; this again to
decrepit old age: whence it may be inferred, that the best fruits we can reap
of all our studies, yea, chiefly of Philosophy, are to prepare us for this
death: neither almost to any other end tend all their documents, than to live
with pleasure in reason here, and then to dye in patience, no ways dismayed at
the approach of death, because of its inevitableness, of our our obedience to
the Law of Nature, of the examples of al Ages, sexes and conditions of men to
this hour, who have gone before us: The documents of all the old Philosophers
tends to this chiefly, not to fear death.
so that the principal aim of virtue whereof they made such account, was to
induce and prepare all that have been, are, or shall succeed, to a patient
acceptance, or rather a contempt of it, that we might pass our lives more
peaceably here; which otherwise by the perpetual fear of it, would be a
never-dying life.

For this cause, Burials and tombs in most conspicuous places erected for that
cause.
it should seem, the Ancients, did institute Graves, Monuments, and Tombs, to
be either in the Churches, or Churchyards adjoining thereunto, as in the most
conspicuous and usual places where the living frequented most. I cannot but
wonder, that what the Philosophers thought fit continually to be thought on,
Julius Caesar should wish to come upon him suddenly and at unawares. Histories
relate, that while some Philosophers were reasoning before him, What sort of
death was best; some alleging one kind, Julius Caesar his death which he
wished, not to be allowed of by a Christian.
and some another; He maintained that a sudden and unfore-seene death, was the
best: for howsoever unto a man of his high estate and profession, it might
seem a word dispensable; yet to a Christian who is learned to say, A morte
subita and improvisa libera me Domine, it cannot so well be allowed: who as he
should not wish a death unforeseene, neither yet be unprepared at the sudden
aproach of it; so should he not by any means either accelerate or wish it,
thereby to be rid out of any incomberances that may befall.

Nec metuit mortem been conscia vita --
Nec optat --
For as Saint Augustine reason well against such Autocides and self
murderers, S. Augustine reputeth it a token rather of pusillanimity to put
hand on our selves, than of courage.
it is rather a token of pusillanimity and lack of courage in them, than
otherwise a mark of true resolution to do so; seeing they had not the daring
to abide the dint of adversities which threatened them.

Let us all remember to implore in our daily prayers, our Makers assistance
from above, to aid us in that last hour: My usual prayer.
for my own part, I think it one of the best fruits of my studies or travels,
to be ever arming my self against it: and as in my morning and evening prayers
I call for peace of conscience, in the assurance of my reconciliation with my
God; and for peace on Earth, for his blessing upon my children, his favor upon
my King and Country: so more specially for the favorable assistance of the
Holy Ghost the comforter to assist me then; that neither the terror of a
present death may affright me, nor my trust and confidence breed in me
presumption, nor my fear, despair; but there being a sweet harmony betwixt my
soul and my God, I may lay down my life, in hope to reassume it again for
ever.

Section 2.
That Christians ought not to fear death, as the Ethnicks did. All things,
save man, keep their constant course. The uncertainty of man's life.

IT is true, The ancients for all their good injunctions, yet feared it.
that the consideration of death, which of all terrible things is most
terrible, as being the partition of the soul and body, and so the destruction
of this structure, was the cause, why diverse of the Ancients fearing almost
even to name it, were wont to say in stead of (he is dead) he sleeps, he has
left off to be; he is gone down to the lower parts of the earth, -- hunc
ferreus urget
Somnus, in aeternam clauduntur lumina noctem.


Or desiit esse, or transiit ad manes, and so forth; the reason being, that few
or none of them had the full knowledge, much less the assurance of the
enjoying these pleasures after this life past, which we Christians being taught
at a better school, have: wherefore as well learned disciples of so worthy a
master; let us learn not only to name it, but sted fastly to abide the
approach, the frown and dint of it.

In me si lapsus labtur orbis --
-- impavidum ferient ruinae.
Remembering our selves, Not to be afraid of death, and why?
that howsoever soul and body be severed for a season, and that the body lie
companion with them that sleep in the dust; yet that they shall conjoyne again
in the glorious resurrection to possess those joys unknown to many of the
Ancients, which our Lord and Master has purchased to us by his death:
remembering that howsoever we should live to the fullness of years, that we
shall see no more, All things except man keep their constant course.
even unto the last date of our days, than a boy of ten or fifteen years:
For the seasons of the Year, the Days, and Nights, the Seas, Sun, Moon, and
Stars, Plants, Herbs, yea, Beasts themselves, etc. keep a constant course,
which in a perpetual revolution were set: and if so be that in these any
change be, then be sure it is a foretoken of Gods kindled wrath against us. If
change be in things, a token of Gods wrath.
For the Heathen Astronomer, when the Sun did eclipse at the time of our
Lords passion, could well say, That either the God of Nature was suffering, or
else the frame of the world was to dissolve, the eye of all things suffering
such a deliquie: now if the elder see any thing other than the younger, be sure
it is not in the nature and course of things above spoken, which in perpetual
revolution do observe the course prescribed unto them by their Maker: But in
the persons of men, which points out unto us the frailty of their estates;
and even of them also (if we remarke well) we shall find more who have died
within thirty or thirty five years of Age, than past it: But death being the
common subject of our preachers especially in their funeral Sermons, I pass
it over as their peculiar Theme, and according to my first purpose do hasten
to the diverse sorts of Burialls.

Sect. 3.
In what reverence the interring of the dead was amongst the Ancients; of
Alexander; Of Sylla: How the People of Vraba did use their dead; Customs of
Finland, Lapland, Greece and other places, concerning burialls.

AND first for the Antiquity of interring of the dead, The Antiquity of
interring the dead.
as Writers do abound in their testimonies, that even amongst enemies in the
hottest of their hostility and Wars, Truces were granted for burying of the
dead; so particularly in the Word of God we have warrant out of the Macchabees,
that although there were not positive laws of Nations and Countries for this
effect, Nature seems to have ingraued it in the hearts of all; thus Palinurus
case in Virgill is regrated, that he wanted the honor of burial, for having
made ship-wracke; thus the Poet deploreth his loss. Heu numium Coelo and
Pelago confise seren^,
Nudus in ignota Palinure jacebis arena.
What reverence and regard the Roman Emperors The Old Roman Empero^s respect
had thereunto.
have had unto it in their laws and statutes in Justinians works may be seen
plentifully, and especially in one Title expressed by it self, De non violando
Sepulchro.

Alexander the great having discovered Achilles Tomb in Greece overgrowne with
brambles and briers, Alexander of Macedon daunced about Achilles tomb.
so honored it, that being crowned with a Garland of Laurel and Cyprus, he
carowsed so many full bowls of Wine to his memory, until he had almost lost
his own.

So did Tullius Cicero for the time Questor, send into Cicilie to readorne
Archimedes Tomb, it being almost obscured with thorns and brambles.

Contrariwise to this, Sylla his cruelty against burialls remarked in Histories.
Sylla his cruelty and inhumane barbarity against the dead bodies of his
enemies, is yet registered in the records of his Country; for that he (to be
avenged upon his enemies being dead, whom alive he could not come at) caused to
disinterr the half putrified carcases whereon he trampled with his Horses; and
being Jealous of being so served after his death, ordained his body to be cast
into Tyber, and caused to divert the Rivers course, so to disappoint all who
should search after it.

The like I find done by a certain Pope, who caused to carry about with him
the Corpse of some Cardinals in Sheletons, upon Mules ever before him, to be
avenged of them, for that either they had crossed his election, or had
conspired against him; whereupon the Author, Septem praelati Papa iubente
praelati, etc.

Even the most barbarous Nations, who otherwise wanted all sort of humanity
and civility, have had respect to this. For I find in Peter Martyrs decads
touching the History of the West Indies in Vraba and other parts thereabout,
The memory they carry to the dead, in Vraba, and the way how they use the Corpse.
how they do dry (as we do fishes) the bodies of their dead, which thereafter
they hang up round about the Walls of their inner rooms, adorning their heads,
shoulders, and upper lips with Gold and Pearl: The manner of burialls observed
in Find-land and Lapland.
And Ortelius in his Cosmographie, speaking of Find-land, or Lapland, (which he
calls Livonia) where there is no Religion almost at all, (because after the
manner of the Heathen they worship the Sun, Moon and Serpents, etc.) I find
(I say) that when any one of great esteem dies, his friends sit round about
his corpse laid on the earth, but not yet covered with any mould, and make good
cheer, and drink to his farewell; and putting the Cups in his hand, as if
he could pledge them, they quaffe about a long time; in end, they lay him in
the grave with store of meat, and drink by him, and put a piece of money in
his mouth, and a sharp Pole-axe fast by him: then they shout aloud in his
ears, and give him in Commission, that when he shall come to the other world
whither they had victualled him, and given him money to defray his charges, that
he fail not whenever he meet with any Dutch man, to correct him, as well as
they had thralled him and theirs in this world: which custom (but after a more
solemn manner and sumptuous.) they of China, Cathay, and Tartarie keep almost
in all points.

The like whereof that same Author observes done in Ternessare a City of the
East Indies, but not to a like enemy: In Greece, yet (as of old) at least in
such parts of it as are under the Turkish Empire; whenever any remarkable
person dies, all the women thereabouts after their old heathen custom, meet
together about the house of the deceased and there choosing the lowdest and
shrillest voices to begin, betimes in the morning they make lamentable
howlings and cries; weeping and tearing the hair from their heads, beating
their teats and breasts, with their nails, defacing their cheeks and faces,
they conduct him to his grave singing by the way his praises, and recounting
what memorable things he had done in his life. Which custom Aetius an ancient
Historian of our Country observes to have been used of Old amongst our
British, That same sort observed of old in this same Country, and yet in
certain parts of our Highland^*
and yet in our Highlands is observed: The Poets in their Luctus and neniae
make mention of this and the like, as Ovid, Horace, Iuvenall, Catuallus,
Tibullus, Propertius; amongst the Greeks, Sophocles, Musaeus, Aristophanes,
Phocyllides and the rest; whereof Ennius, speaking of himself.

Nemo me lachrymis decoret, nec funera flet^
Faxit, Cur? volito vivus per ora virum.
Sect. 4.
Other several Customs of interring the Dead amongst Egyptians, Romans, and
Indians; that the manner of Christian Interrements are preferreable to all
other.

NOw what has been the Curiosity of the Egyptians for the keeping of their
dead, their Momies can testify, where the whole and intyre bodies of some of
their Princes and great men were to be seen of late, who died many thousand
years ago; whereof who pleases to read may consult Diodorus Siculus, The
Egyptian burials and their Momies most remarkable.
Ammianus Marcellinus, Strabo, Herodotus and others: the Athenians, and after
their example the Salaminians (says Sabellicus. lib. 5. Aeneid. 2.) used to
interre their dead with their faces turned to the Sun setting, Two sorts of
interring the dead most remarkable.
not to the rising, with the Megarians; and apparently Catullus was of their
opinion when he said, Nobis cum semel occidit brevis lux, nox perpetua una
dormienda est.

But of the several fashions of burying the dead I find two most remarkable;
the one of some Greeks and Romans, and not used but by those of the better
sort, The Romans burned and consumed theirs to ashes.
which was in burning the Corpse of the deceased after this manner; There was
either an Eagle or some other great foul tied unto the top of the Pyramide of
Wood wherein the dead body lay; This Pyramide being kindled by some of the most
entire friends of the deceased, amongst the cloud of smoke the Foul being
untyed which was tied before, was seen to flutter and fly away, which by the
Spectators was taken to be the soul of the deceased flying to Heaven; the
Ashes then of this burnt body they collected and kept in an Vrne, and of this
the Poets almost every where make mention.

The other was the Indians in eating the dead bodies of their Parents, The
Indians again did eat their dead as thinking their bellies a honorable
sepulcher for them.
and friends, as they did in ire to those of their foes, thinking that they
could give them no more honorable Sepulcher, abhorring the others burning into
ashes as a thing unnatural; which might well be seen at the time that
Alexander had conquered them; for he willed both Greeks and Indians to do
alike, but they upon no condition would condescend to that, the power of
custom being so strong, as it was impossible for any Novations (though never
so good) to alter it.

Amongst al fashions above rehearsed, I think that of our Christian interments
to be most consonant to nature, seeing of earth we are, and that to it we must
return again: As for the Greeks howling, weeping, renting their clothes,
hair, and faces, it seems that Saint Augustine in his work De cura pro
mortuis habenda, aimed at them; for in that whole work, I perceave nothing
that makes much for praying for them, but chiefly he wills all men to
moderate extraordinary Griefs mournings and howlings for them, seeing they
rest from their labors; and his conclusion is good, that if prayers for the
dead be not meritorious for them, yet at least that they are some way
comfortable for the living; Si non subsidia mortuorum (says he) tamen solatia
sunt viventium: Indeed I will not deny but that Father and others also in
their writings allow prayer for the dead; as Peter Martyr, Vermillius also in
his loco. 9. lib. 3. in the Title De Purgatorio, denies it not, but only he
refuses such prayers to have been subsidiary or helpful to them, but rather
congratulatorie, for that they were released from all their miseries; which he
instanceth by the funeral Oration of Saint Ambrose upon the deaths of the
Emperors, Theodosius and Valentinian, where there is no mention of praying for
their souls to ease or shorten their pains in Purgatory.

Section 5.
That the Church of Rome reapeth great commodity by their funeral ceremonies,
as by their bells, Cymballs, Torches, processions of order and the rest: silent
obscquies condemned: a story of a woman whose Ghost haunted her Husband and
family after her death; and the cause thereof.

NOw for all this, as there is nothing whereby the Church of Rome reapes more
commodity then by their prayers for the dead; for it is called, the Friars
kitchen; So it is, there is nothing wherein their pompous solemnities and their
devotion appears more than in their accompanying their dead to the grave,
with the sound of Bells and Cymballs, Tapers, Torches, prayers, music, Church
Ornaments, solemn processions of the fraternities, and not without contention
of precedence of orders: all which ceremonies as they bred a kind of pious
compassion in the beholders, The dumb and silent obsequies of our burialls
condemned.
So it begets a manner of content to their eyes and ears; But our silent
and dumb obsequies, as wanting Bells and other noise, does not so take the
Spectators and such as accompany them.

Now I will close this Title with one observation which the Poets remarke; who
affirm that the spirits and Manes of them who want their due burialls, wander
here and there in Ghostly apparitions until their bones be interred.

Nec ripas datur horrendas, aut nigra fluenta
Transportare prius, quam sedibus ossa quierunt.
For the punishment of the neglect of it may appear in one of our Northern
Countries, A History of a Gentlewoman, who for not being interred in the
Churchyard molested her family, by her ghost, while she was disinterred, and
according as she desired, was buried.
called Lawder; who on her deathbed had enjoined her husband to bury her in the
Churchyard, which if he did not, she threatened that her Ghost would haunt
him after her death: but the plague then raging in those parts, and he fearing
that if she were publicly buried, that all would have suspected her to have
died of the plague, whereupon every one would have deserted him, and so lest
he should be left succourlesse, he resolved to conceal her death, and buried
her in a corner of his Garden; but thereafter, this woman's ghost, I say, did so
incessantly both haunt and affright, both him, his children, and family, that
there was no resting for them at any time; till by the advice of the Clergy she
was taken up again and buried, where she desired to be in her lifetime; which
being done, both she and they rested.

A TREATISE OF MENTALL-RESERVATION; And of no faith to be kept unto Heretics.
Section 1.
The decree of the Council of Constance, That no faith is to be kept with
heretics and enemies, is agitated: the commendation of peace: that a necessary
and just war is to be preferred to it: A story of Augustus Caesar.

I begin this rhapsodicall Treatise with the famous act of the Council of
Constance, wherein it was decreed, That no faith was to be kept unto Heretics
and Enemies of the faith; by virtue whereof, as Vlidislaus King of Hungary
violated the peace concluded betwixt him and Amurath (for the time great Turk)
at the instigation and solicitation of Cardinal Julian sent to him from Rome
for that purpose, to the great prejudice of the civil Christian estate, and
aggrandizing of theirs; So by virtue of the same the Martyrizing of John Husse
and Hierome of Prague although under trust and safe conduct granted by the good
Emperor Sigismundus, was to the great prejudice of the Ecclesiastique Roman
estate, by renting a sunder from her Sea a great many of the Churches of
Europe: for he that is the God of peace and Hosts both, never exercises his
revenging hand better then when things agreed upon equal terms are not
observed: So the Histories report, that the same day of the Battle given by
the Hungarian King unto the Turk, that Amurath lifting up his eyes unto
heaven, should say, Jesus, if thou be a true God, and of this people who
encounter me this day, and that they honor and serve thee, show it by the
equity of this cause, which by his obtaining of that days victory was plainly
manifested: and it is manifestly seen, that the breach of faith plighted to
the two Bohemians, and their burning unto ashes, was so far from smothering the
faults whereof they complained; that on the contrary, diverse worthy and
learned men after them, blowing this coal, by them then kindled, have made its
flame to blaze through all the world: as the bloody wars through many parts of
Europe, for maintaining of their cause; at least their opinions, can to after
ages bear record.

It is true indeed, this word Peace sounds sweet in every ear; wherefore our
Savior Christ leaving this world, left his peace with his Disciples; and his
house also is called Domus pacis: and blessed be the feet of those that carry
the glad tidings of peace; yea, the Angel from heaven proclaimed peace on
earth, and toward men good will: in a word, Beati pacifici, Blessed are all
peacemakers: yet it has never been thought so gracious, but that a necessary
war was to be preferred unto it, if it was dishonestly violated, or
shamefully agreed upon.

What then may be said to Bartoll one of the greatest Lawyers of his age,
Bartol and Vlpian admit deceit to be used with the circumventer, and no faith
to be kept to particular enemies
who in the Law, Conventionum codice de pactis, or at least in the Digestis
maintains, That faith is not to be kept to particular enemies; which Cicero
in his 3. lib. Officiorum, although but a Heathen, contradicts: and that of
Vlpian, no less in credit than he, That it is lawful to circumvent one
another; and chiefly, seeing in all their writings they esteem more of the
true keeping of our promised faith in all our actions, than of strict and
precise justice; The Emperor Augustus kept faith, although to a rogue.
but so thought not the good Emperor Augustus Caesar, though he had promised a
great many Talents of gold to those who should bring him the head of Crocotas a
notable robber in his time, which robber hearing of this reward, came of
himself, and laid down his head at the Emperors feet, and craved the reward
conditioned; whereupon the Emperor did appear so far from revenge, that he
forthwith granted him not only his life, but the promised Talents also.

Neither did the noble Joshua so, when he was deceaved with the Gibeonites; for
although those deceaving Politicians, or rather hypocrites hold for truth that,
Frangenti fidem, fides frangatur eidem.

And worse than that, they do violate likewise their plighted faith to those
who have done them no injury, nor made any breach of faith at all: yet, I say,
Joshua did not so to the Gibeonites who deceived him; for when the Jewish
Captains would have been revenged on them; the Princes answered: We have
sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel, now therefore we may not touch
them, etc. Josh. 9. 19.

Section 2.
Mentall-reservation defined. All fraudulency, in making peace, or taking truce
condemned; for which purpose are instanced examples of Grecians, Romans, and
others.

WHat shall be said to those, who while they swear and promise, have
nevertheless in their mind no intention at all to perform?

Linguajuravi, Of mental reservation, what it is.
mentem injuratam servavi. A maxim with the former, not hatched in the brain
of a Florentine matchiavill, but raked out of the profoundest Cabinet of the
most secret, and most obscure dungeon in hell: Cleomenes after a truce made up
with the Argiues for seven days; Cleomenes although packt up a truce with his
enemy, for some-dayes, yet in the night surprised them
the third night thereafter under trust and assurance, surprised them; and then
being challenged of his promise, made answer, That he made truces for days,
and not for nights: Lysander used to say, that men should be deceaved with
oaths, Alexander the great could honorably say, Malo me fortunae pe^iteat
quam victoriae pudeat.
as children with apples: the generosity of a noble Alexander acknowledged no
such guile; who when Polypercon his Counselor had advised him to take
advantage of the darkness of the night, against Darius, could reply, That he
had rather choose to repent the loss of his fortune, than to purchase victory
with shame, Malo me fortunae poeniteat, quam pudeat victoriae: and the
magnanimous Romans were offended with their Ambassador Lucius Marcius, The
Roman offended with their Legate L. Marcius, because that in their wars under
him with Perseus King of Macedon, he used subtilties and circumventions.
in the managing of his wars with Perseus King of Macedon, because he went
about by subtilties and circumventions to purchase his victories: on such
considerations as these, they sent back to Pyrrhus, K. of Epirots his
Physician, (who had undertaken to poison him:) likewise Camillus at the siege
of Veij, made the children whip their Master with rods, who had rendered them
by his treachery into the Consuls hands. The bravest, both Commanders, and
Soldiers, who were taken prisoners by the Samnites, and had obtained liberty
to come back to Rome to take leave of their friends; were by them sent back
again, or rather, returned of their own accord, although some to a certain
death: so far were they from holding, that faith should not be kept either to
enemies in general or particular, much less to stretch a thing to the
contrary, whereof they had a reservation in their mind; for by such juggling
evasions those Roman prisoners taken by Pyrrhus, and permitted to come home and
visit friends, might have alleged, that they were not obliged to return, (as
they did) because they might have said, that howsoever they had sworn with
their mouths, yet in their hearts they thought not so: likewise, Attilius
Regulus the Consul, taken by the Carthaginians, and set at liberty to visit
the City, upon promise of return might have said: but the innocence of that
age knew no other way but the right and square, and rather choosed to undergo
death, than to make a breach of the integrity of their faith made unto an enemy.

Sect. 3.
The integrity of the ancients commended in making peace, and their other
pactions. A story of P. Corn. Scipio to that purpose. Graeca fides, what, and
wherefore used: Of the dishonest dealing of Pope Alexander, and his nephew,
Caesar Borgia, etc.

I will not pass under silence the manner observed by the Ancients in breaking
truces, peace, pactions, or leagues amongst them; that posterity may
understand, how averse they were from having their thoughts dissonant from
their words: The manner observed by the ancients in making their truces, peace,
or other pactions.
and to this purpose I remember, that at the peace concluded on betwixt the
Romans and the Carthaginians in the dictatorship of Pub. Corn. Scipio, a Roman
Herald standing up betwixt both parties, assembled for finishing of the same,
after they had spoken their minds, hinc jnde, the Herald, I say, standing
with a stone in his hand, in these terms concluded the matter.

If justly, and without any fraud or guile, I make the oath of observancie, and
do finish this paction, then may the Gods be propitious, The terms and words
of their covenants.
and grant that all things may fall happily out unto us; if I either do or
think otherwise than I have spoken, then, (so all the rest be safe) let me
fall and perish alone by mine own Laws, in my own family, with my private
Lares, and domestic Gods, in my own Temples and Sepulchers, as this stone
falls from my hand; which words finished, he throws the stone from him, or
rather lets it fall to the ground, and so ends. The Carthaginian Herald
swore by all their Country Gods, and their private ones, to observe all that
is covenanted. Livius notes these same terms to have been used in the first
peace concluded on betwixt these same people in the consulship of Iunius
Brutus, and Marcus Valerius, or shortly after (if Sabellicus mistake not),
which two first Consuls, Rome had diverse years before Zerxes expedition
against the Greeks: always Polybius has these same words both exemplary and
memorable: like as Sabellicus in his 6. lib. Aenead. 4. punctually fetteth them
down, albeit both Livie and Dionysius remarke but the generals: the special
thing which I observe, is the word Cogito: if I think otherwise; which
confounds all our mentallists, and makes them Mentirists: let the Greeks with
their deceaving tricks and coosenages keep that dishonorable honor, The
Grecians branded with that, to be called, Not keepers of their oaths.
Graeca fides, which is always taken for a subdolous and fraudulent faith: but
God defend that ever such aspersions and imputations be laid to a true
Britanne; and let Popish Rome, now of late declined and degenerated from the
old honest Rome, pride her self and her sectaries in their
mentall-reservations; Pope Alexander and his nephew Borgia both remarked
dishonest in their deeds and words.
let one Pope Alexander and his nephew Caesar Borgia vaunt themselves; the one,
that he did never think the thing which he spoke; the other, that like our
mentallists, he never spoke the thing which he thought: and let a Leo the
tenth of that name, promise truth and faith to a Paul Baillon, (who had
expelled his nephew out of Perugia,) that he under trust of his Holinesse's
word should come unto Rome safely with his associates, to live at Court as
before, and yet nevertheless, did put him and them to death: as likewise a
Cardinal, Alfonso of Sienna, who for suspicion of poisoning the Pope with a
Buccado, or Nosegay, retired himself from Court, perceiving his Holiness
countenance to be cast down upon him, and would not be moved to return
again; but under his holiness faith and true promise made, not only to
himself, but to the Ambassador of Spain, in his Masters name, for his more
security also; yet nevertheless having once caught him in his net, did put him
to a violent death.

His successor Clement the seventh did almost this same to the Florentines,
Other Popes guilty of that same fault.
to whom, as he had solemnly conditioned to give them their liberties and
Immunities, as likewise to the Spanish Ambassador in his Masters name, for
them, for theirfurther security; yet being once possessed of their City, contrary
to promise, he subjected it to his Nephew, who having strengthened it with
strong and mighty Cittadells and forts, did appropriate it to himself and his
family: Let these Popes (I say) think and promise one thing, and do another;
Exhortation to his Countrey-people not to do so.
far be it from any Britan to do so; as equity and truth is, or ought to be
in your hearts, so let truth be in your minds also.

Sect. 4.
The difference betwixt the ancient and the modern Romans in uprightness of
dealing, instanced by a story of Pompey the Great, and Augustus Caesar.

AND now it shall content me to parallel one example amongst thousands which I
could produce, of the honesty and integrity of old Rome with our new
Christianized Rome; and then let the indifferent reader judge of the one and of
the other; The integrity of ancient Romans.
The great Pompey, when he with his Navall Army (so much renowned in their
stories,) had scowred all the Mediterranean Sea, then infested with Pirates,
having (I say) given his promise of safety to one or two of the most special
amongst them, did not violate nor molest them; but that was little; for
Augustus Caesar did as much to Crocotas; but herein showed he his honest mind,
that when he had two of his most special enemies within his chief Galleon,
(although for the time but coldly enough reconciled unto him,) and was spoken
unto by the Pilot, who acquainted him, that now it was the time to rid
himself of them both; and if he pleased, that he himself should be the man
to do the business; No, no, said he; If thou had killed them without
acquainting me therewith, then had thou done a piece of good service; but
now, do it not, since they are here under my trust.

Quia habita fides ipsam obligat fidem. We should make our words and actions
agree and jumpe together, such Princes who in their life time dissembling grant
pardons to offenders, and yet leave it in charge to their successors to be
avenged on them, can no ways be excused: for seeing our intentions do judge
our actions; death cannot acquit them of that obligation, besides that the
entrant King is made formidable at his entry, who otherwise should enter his
Crown with love and peace.

Sect. 5.
Of the breach of Faith to Enemies: Treachery at a Siege of Capua: Treachery
and cruelty committed by the Spaniards at a Siege of Genoa. The strictness of
Generals over common Soldiers exemplified, etc.

NEither yet know I how to exempt from the scandal of this fault these two
which I read of in the late Italian History; Of keeping no faith to enemies.
The one, that of the LORD Aubigny at the Siedge of Capua, where he commanded
the French without the Town; and Seigneur Fabricius Colonna within: A fault'
committed by our Duke Aubigny at the siege of Capua, or rather by the insolent
French under him.
For the History says, that while the said Colonna was parlamenting on the
face of a bastion with the said LORD Aubigny, upon conditions of surrendering;
That the (French by the negligent watch of Centinells within, suspecting no
hostility during a parle) entered the City in fury, and so made Prize of it.

Although it might be lawful to all commanders (where there are no covenants
made) to take the best advantages of their adversaries that occasion can offer;
and though Montaignes, whether favoring his own country, or being
misinformed of the passages of that Siedge (I know not) thinks that this
Policy was intended or premeditated by that ever upright and most valourous
Warrior Bernard Lord D' Aubignie (which must be a mistake;) yet the Precedent
and succeeding most valourous and many most generous acts of that ever renouned
man, may witness the contrary; for many French Writers, (as may be seen in
Master Quines book of his life) have so ingenuously, honestly and according to
his Merit, illustrated his brave acts in so lively Colors, that the honors,
which for them were conferred upon him, would convince one, and confirm their
credit that have so largely and truly spoken of him: that it may truly be
continued of his worth.

Vivet post funera Virtus. The other at Genoa, where the Marquess of
Pesquierra was commander of the Spanish forces without the Town, and the Duke
Seigneur Octavian Fregoso commanding within in the name of the French King; in
like manner (and it may be for revenge and compensation of the Capuan cruelty)
whilst the two Generals were under terms, yea, and final conditions of
rendering the Town; A Cruelty committed at Genoa against the French within, by
the Spanyard without.
The Spanyard (taking advantage of the negligent attendance of those within,
who were secure, thinking all ready for the surrendering) entered the City,
putting them all to the sword without distinction of Age, Sex, or condition. I
know not (I say) how to quit these two from the imputation of treachery, except
to say, that at times the insolency and fury of poor incensed Soldiers is so
hardly suppressed by the threatenings of their Generals or Commanders, as is a
wonder; yea admit it were in as reformed a Warfare as that whereof the Lord
Montagues in his Chapter of Conscience lib. 12. speaks; where amongst diverse
others of his notable discourses, he brings in a General causing to kill a
Soldier and rip up his stomach to see the pottage which a poor woman
complained he had wrest from her, and with which she was to save her child
from starving, conditionally, that if it were not found there, the Woman
playntife should dye, to expiate his death and her false accusation.

But strange it is albeit, this former recited Maxim should hold in Wars;
That from a general Council which (as they say) cannot err, the
representative body of the holy Church, the Column of verity, that from it (I
say) such a decree should have sprung, which may occasion us to say of them as
was said of the licentious Soldiers, Quibus, cum quod libet, lioet, and quod
libent, audent, and quod audent, faciunt: O Saecucula, O mores!

A TREATISE OF LAVGHING AND MOVRNING.
Section 1.
The benefits and content that all men reap by the works and labors of
Writers and Travelers.

HIstories and travelers are said to be like those who crack the Nut and give
away the kernel; their toils, labors and witty inventions are by them ready
dressed for all readers, hearers or seers; for when they read their travells and
studies, they are like those who lying secure upon land, do from some
Promontory behold a ship tossed on the swelling billows, beating with raging
winds and tempests, and well nigh Ship-wrackt: Et mare cum Spumis candentibus
astra lacessit: and cum tartarei subsidit ad ima barathri: Who sees or reads
their works receive the sweet of their toil: but yet not hereby challenging
any singularity unto my self above others, I freely offer and expose these
labors to all, which for the variety will (I hope) be acceptable; and
gracious acceptance is the reward I crave. But to the matter in hand.

Section 2.
Of sudden deaths that have happened unto men amidst their feasting and other
Iollities, exemplified with stories both Sacred and profane.

IN the Country of Agenois (a part of the famous province of Aquitaine,) where
first I spent some years not without some copious and several observations: a
Baron there, Mr. de Longad la barriere, at a feast in his own house, laughing
and making merry with his Guests, having a leg of a pullet in his hand,
expired suddenly amongst their hands. Mirth at banquets should not be
excessive but moderate; Little good follows commonly excess of mirth and
laughter.
for which the Egyptians used at their feast to set a Scull or Anatomy on or
by the table, that by the thought and sight thereof they might moderate their
excess, which oftentimes hastneth death or else diseases.

Holy Scriptures furnishes us with examples, Examples of Nebuchadonozor,
Baliasar, and the rich glutton to this purpose.
as those of Nebuchadonosor, Baltasar, and the rich glutton, who had the most
exemplarie punishments in this kind that we read of.

In the Roman History Cornelius Balbus recorded by Tacitus, who, whilst he was
under a cloud and silence of night, carousing, quaffing, and laughing so loud,
that the sick Emperor (his Lord) could hear him from his chamber windows
with his camrades, is memorable, who not only endangered the loss of his
Princes favor, but of his life also for his so unseasonable and insolent mirth.

Now, if we shall leave feasting, and but speak of other Joys, we shall find
that when men think their estate most secure, and do rejoice in the enjoying
of it; that even then their sudden fall happens, and follows them as their
shadow: King David for glorying in his numbered people, was plagued: Examples
of such who in the midst of all their felicities, have been taken away.
Julius Caesar in his imperial Throne having by the overthrow of his enemies
attained that vertical point of earthly honor, was even then and there
murdered.

King Henry the second of France, was amidst the triumphs and tiltings of his
Sisters wedding solemnities, killed. King Henry the third at the rendering up
of his rebellious City of Paris to him, was murdered by the traiterous
stroke of a black Friar, his predecessors both shortly taken away: But more
miserably, his great and valorous successor Henry 4th. in the midst of that
glorious City, and of the pompous shows at his Queens coronation, was
murdered.

Our hopeful Prince Henry taken away about the time of his sisters mirthfull
Nuptials.

And I read of a Prince in an Historian, whose torch dedicated and lighted to
Hymen in his nuptials, served to kindle his funeral pile.

Not to speak a word of Philip of Macedon killed in the midst of his Army,
while he is assisting the sacrifice to the Gods: Nor of his Son Alexander the
great, cut off in the flower of his years, Joys, and glorious great
victories, with a thousand of this same kind.

Section 3.
Stories of several worthy and brave men; that upon occasions have shed
tears: of the sensible grief of some Horses, Dogs, and Hawks upon the
loss of their Masters.

WHich being so, Wisely was it ordained that the Paschall Lamb should be eaten
with four herbs.
we may see that the Lord ordained wisely the Pascall Lamb to be eaten with
bitter herbs; And providently the old heathen enjoined us to mingle cares
amidst our joys.

Laeta tibi austeris varientur festa profestis. From holy Scripture we have
warrant, that it is better to be in the house of mourning and weeping, then in
that of laughing: And blessed are they that weep; for they shall be
comforted, Our Savior did never laugh.
and their tears washed from their eyes; our Savior is said to have wept, and
never to have laughed: we read of St. Peter's tears; of the royal Prophets,
of the Prophet Jeremy his complaints; of the groanings, howlings and lamentings
of the best servants of GOD, of none, or little of their rejoicing, except it
had been under the Cross, or at least in the Lord; finally with tears we
come into this world, with care we abide in it, and with pain we remove from
it.

Yea even of those who are most enured, Four famous and renowned Warriors,
have shed tears.
and hardened with fights, bloudsheds, alarmes, and consequently, who should
seem most averse from tears, pity and compassion, some I mark to have
solemnly wept and are signalized, more peradventure in consideration of humane
frailty, as measuring things by themselves, then otherwise for any great matter
or reason they had to shedd tears for the time; seeing they had obtained the
thing they so eagerly desired.

-- Nam cum praeda sternitur, alter
Praemia solliciti certa laboris habet.
The good Emperor Adrian at his triumphant entry into Rome after a remarkable
victory, The Emperor Adrian even amidst all his triumphs. remembering the
frailty of nature.
seeing the innumerable spoils of his enemies before his Imperial chair, and
the Captives themselves manicled and fettered with chains, doing homage unto
him; It is recorded of him, that though he rejoiced in public, yet in private
he wept, and in a manner expressed by all likelihood no less than our famous
Buchanan in this distich.

Tuquoque crudelis Babylon dabis improba paenas,
Et rerum instabiles experiere vices.
King David shed tears at the sight or hearing of his son Absoloms death:
The Prophet David, when he did hear of Absoloms death Julius Caesar at Pompeys
head. Vespasian seeing the temple of Solomon on fire.
Julius Caesar, at the sight of Pompeys head: Vespasian, seeing the holy and
magnificent Sanctum Sanctorum on fire: Xerxes, the insolent Persian King, yet
seeing a number of hundred thousands in a plain, wept, considering the frailty
of nature; for that of so many as he saw there, they might be all dead in few
hours, Xerxes seeing all his numerous Army before him.
days, or years. To these, I may subjoyne Bajazet successor to Mahomet
Emperor of the Turks, Anno, 1481. his tears, after his brother Zizimus had
surrendered himself to the great Master of Malta, in name of all the Christian
Princes; whom nevertheless he drove to that extremity. As for Heraclitus his
perpetual weeping for the misery of this world, I think it as worthy of
blame, as Democritus his continual laughing at the folly of it: seeing (with
Solomon) there are times to laugh, and times to weep also, -- Nam res humana
fatiscit,
Laeta nisi austeris varientur festa profestis.


And if we trust Sabellicus; not only Men, but also Horses and Dogs, We read
of Horses which have wept.
have been seen to weep for the loss of their Masters; he instanceth
particularly, that those Horses which Julius Caesar vowed to Mars at his
passage over Rubicon, were observed before his murder to stray carelessely up
and down, prognosticating (as it were) their masters death by their
unaccustomed drooping, dejectedness, and shedding of tears: Du Bartas Hawke,
which he relates to have cast it self (after some other signs of sorrow)
into the grave with the corpse of its dead Master, may be mentioned as rare and
memorable.

Section 4.
Risus Sardonicus, what, and how to be taken: Of the holy tear kept in the
Abbey Church at Vandesme, in France.

NOw for laughing: that which we call Risus Sardonicus, is a perfect model and
pattern of our humane laughing: for as they who have eaten of the herb
Sardis, do all the perfect gestures of one tickled with joy or mirth, as
dimpling their cheeks, and other like gestures; yet it is only the contracting
power of that venomous herb, that procures that convulsive gesture in them:
the Crocodiles tears may be compared oftentimes to our weeping, as being
either delusive, treacherous, or revengefull; and too many (I fear) do like
Judas, kiss, only to deceive.

But what shall be said to the Tear which is conserved in a Violl, and kept in
a little Chapel on the North-side of the Abbey-Church, The Tear which is in
the Abbey Church of Vandome, what it can be.
at Vandome in France; which they give forth to be a tear which fell from our
Lords eyes, and was kept since in that Violl by some holy Saint living in those
days; which in an overpious belief, they say, has continued since without
diminution; by them called, La Saint larme, The holy tear: this at solemn
festival days they show and exhibit to the superstitiously credulous people,
that repair thither from the remotest parts of that kingdom; who with great
and submissive prostration and kneeling, kiss it, to the great and gainefull
profit of the keeper: truly, for my own part, I am not so universally
catholic (though I have seen it) as to believe that, no more than their
religious paradoxes of the transportation of our Lady De Loretta her chamber
from so many diverse places and countries, to the place where now it is:
neither find I any motion to pray God for help in my unbelief of this and
other such fained miracles of theirs, being so merely and palpably gross
inventions of men.

Sect. 5.
Of weeping for the dead how to be moderated. The matter of tears: of laughing
and weeping for one and the same thing: moderation in both commended.

ALthough Tertullian in his book De patientia, Weeping for the dead allowable,
provided, it be not immoderate.
did forbid the people in his days to mourn and weep for the dead, yet our
Lord and other Saints have wept for them: S. Paul indeed, reprehendeth the
immoderatenesse of it, 1 These. chap. 4. where he forbids not the
Thessalonians to sorrow at all; but not sorrow as those who had no hope of the
resurrection. The Poet could find fault with immoderate mourning for the dead;
which in this Iron and declining age of the world but very few needs to be
reproved for.

Tu semper urges flebilibus modis
Misten ademptam, nec tibi vespero,
Cadente decedunt amores,
Necrapidum fugiente solemn.
The philosophical reason given for not mourning for the dead, I think
neither allowable to a Christian, nor to a mere naturallist; for they say,
that it is but lost time and action, seeing death is remediless, common,
necessary; and tears cannot prevail to recall them again, and therefore
avail nothing: for such like arguments are rather to reinforce sorrow, than
otherwise to mitigate grief: and so much the rather, because there is no
remedy for it: for as another Philosopher replieth to one who reprooved him for
lamenting so heavily the death of his son, since (said he) you know that
there is no remedy for it; and therefore (replied the other) do I weep: yet
some of the wisest sort of them agreed unto this mourning for the dead, as a
kind, natural duty; in so far, that they who wept not for their parents
death, were by them said, In patrios minxisse cineres.

Not to speak of the matter of tears, The matter (...) our tears.
whether it be the same with that of sweat, or the waterish part of blood, all
these being salt: I shall enquire the occasion of tears, which we find out of
holy and profane stories, We laugh and weep dive^sly for the selfsame causes.
to be both joy and sorrow. In Ezra, when the Jews saw the holy Temple
re-edified, They wept (says the Prophet) but diversely, some for joy to see it
rebuilt again, others for sorrow to see the glory and ornament of it, as it
was then, not comparable to the former: so wept Joseph for joy upon his
brethrens necks: in a word, ire and revenge will occasion tears, as well as
pity and compassion; yea, some will weep on no occasion.

Men's immota manet, Neither they commendable who laugh always, nor they who
mourn.
lachrymae volvuntur inanes. I can say no more to the stupidity of these
people, than to their folly who laugh at all occasions without cause.

OF VARIETIES THE FOVRTH BOOK: CONTAINING FOUR TREATISES. OF 1. Curiosities.
2. Divine Philosophy, or Man's felicity. 3. The Consonancy and agreement betwixt
Ancient Philosophers and Christian professors. 4. Sleep and Dreams.


BY DAVID PERSON of Loughlands in SCOTLAND GENTLEMAN.

Et quae non prosunt singula, multa juvant. LONDON, Printed by RICHARD Badger,
for Thomas Alchorn, and are to be sold at his shop, in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Green- Dragon. 1635.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JOHN, Earl of Traquair, Lord Linton and Caberston;
his MAJESTY'S Treasurer Depute of Scotland, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privie-Councell there.
Right honorable,
EXamples of Histories and daily experience teach us, that as Piety and Justice
are the pillars of a State, and the Country happy (as none more than ours)
whose King is endued with them, seeing people commonly follow their example; so
most fortunate is the Land, where a most wise King substitutes such officers of
State, as whose piety, justice, charity, and other virtues, may be a comfort,
rule, and example to the people, over whom God and their King has placed them:
That this reflecteth upon you my Lord, none of our Nation is so destitute of
understanding as to question; upon which assurance I have adventured this
dedication to your Lordship, that where these eminent virtues do so clearly
shine there can be no clouded mystinesse cast betwixt a candide and auspicious
acceptance, and this small tender of my duty to honorable virtue, and entire
affection to your Honor: which in your younger years at Paris (where I began
this work) I did vow unto your then blooming merits; and now perform, that it
may remain to after Ages, as an everduring token of the love, favor, duty,
honor, and respect, that was always carried to the most illustrious name of
Stewart in general, and to You my Lord in particular, as a Noble branch of the
Honorable Stock of Lennox, By

Your Lordships faithful and affectioned servant, David Person.

OF VARIETIES THE FOVRTH BOOK, Of Curiosities, where the greatest Subtilities
of all Sciences are some way unfolded, and disapprooved; and some natural
Curiosities propounded, as of the Heavens, Air, Seas, Earth, etc.
Section 1.
The difference betwixt factions and (editions: a rebellion of the common
people of Rome against the Senate and Patricians. Emulation a principal
producer of great exploites; the harm that follows Curiosity, and that
Churchmen are not exempt from it.

AS order and unity are the upholders of a Commonwealth, Difference betwixt
factions and seditions.
so factions and seditions are their overthrow; These two I hold not to be
one; for sedition is by open violence; faction, under color of Justice; That
both these are procured by too curious and ambitious brains and diseased
spirits, who envy other men's preferment or wealth above their own; it is
manifest; Vproare of the Commons at Rome against the Patricians, appeased by
Menenius Agrippa.
as through all the Roman history, so particularly in that sedition of the
Commons who openly rose up against the Senate and Patricians, flying in arms to
the Aventine Mount, where nevertheless by that elegant Oration of Menenius
Agrippa (set down by Livius at length) they were appeased.

My purpose here is not to hinder that honest emulation, and allowable curious
ambition of well doing either in private or public men; for both the Greek
and Roman stories do sufficiently inform us, Emulation and ambition in well
doing is allowable.
that there were never greater incitements to an emulous antagonist, then their
opposites glorious exploits in war, and virtuous proceedings in peace; nor
sharper spurs to waken and rouse up their lasinesse (if any was) then the
desire to parallel them; examples are very obvious in this kind. My intent
here is to desire a moderation in men of all conditions, especially the
learned; for the harm, Curiosity the Mother of mischief.
prejudice and evil that idle and sturring Curiosities (which have been
caused by Antagonists emulations, and disputes) have procured in private and
publik men or States, in war and peace, is universally and daily perceaved
and regrated: And who so would think that our Clergy and Gown men who
prescribe rules of wisdom unto others, Our Schools and Learned men not
exempt from it.
are to be exempted from this fault, are far deceaved; for both of old and
late days they have barboyled the sound doctrines of their professions, with
their idle, unnecessary, and too curious questions; who so will with me skimme
over but a handful of them, shall soon confess this truth.

Section 2.
How Curiosities have wonderfully disturbed the peace of the Church; A Recital
of some impertinent Curiosities in Religion; with some also of Subtilis Scotus,
and Thomas Aquinas, etc.

ANd first then, it may be demanded, what solid peace and agreement has been
in the sacred Church which is the pillar of Truth, What peace has the most
curious questions brought unto the Church, but rather has divided us all.
since the purity of the Primitive Doctrine left by the holy Evangelists,
Apostles, and their Successors has been adulterated, and martyred with
curious questions; as those of Transubstantiation, Concomitance, Latreia,
Dulia, Hyperdulia, mental reservation, equivocations, implicit faith,
congruities, condignities, and Supererogations, together with the inerrability
of the Popes Holiness, Semi-man, and Demi-God; as also those questions of our
late Divines, whether CHRIST'S death alone was satisfactory for our salvation,
or His life and death together? And those questions also of providence, of
predestination, of prescience, Gods effective and permissive power in sin, if
GOD can lie, or recall time past, or make a thing done, to be undone, etc.
what has moved our so inquisitive Curiosists, as Subtilis Scotus, and D.
Thom. who have (as it were) so overclouded all with their pregnancies of wit,
to be so curiously sollicitous, as to enquire, In Metaphysick we crossed to
know, if there be in nature any other production besides Creation and
Generation.
whether or not besides Creation and Generation, there were any other
production of things in nature different and distinct from those two? Which
surely is not; for by that means accidents should befound to be concreated and
congenerated, not inhesive, and having their being in the subject according to
the Logicians rule, accidentis est inesse. Whereupon followed that no less
idle then curious question, Whether accidents be create or concreat.
whether GOD may sustain accidents after the substracting of their subject
from them, in which they were, and with which they were concreated; If God may
sustain accidents without their substances to subsist in.
as who can imagine a whiteness to exist without a wall, paper, cloud, cloth
or some such subject to be in, wherewith first it was concreated, as Ruvius in
his Commentary upon the second Phys. and second de anima fondly gives forth?
seeing it is certain, The actions of Gods will tend unto, and terminate with a
subject.
that the actions of GODS will are ever bounded to, and terminated with an
object, either possible or actual; and the reason of this is, because all
potency and possibility to be, tends to and terminateth in an object, from
which it may assume the own species and kind; So that the acts of the divine
Intellect or understanding tending to an object extant, or in aptibility to
exist, do tend to it, as it is in the Divine intellect; and so consequently
such, as actually or possibly existeth.

Such questions as these being more fit to cruciate and perplexe the minds,
yea even of the most learned, then otherwise to instruct them or any of the
weaker sort.

Section 3.
A continuation of some other Theological and Metaphysicall subtilities and
curiosities.

SVch as this, If there be multiplicity of forms in one self same matter.
is that of the multiplicity of forms in one self same subject, and this; if
the forms of matters be extracted out of the potentiality of the matters,
which certainly is, the first, not: wherein I agree with Suares, If forms of
matters be extracted out of the potentialitie of the matter.
in his disputation upon the first of the Metaphysics; and whether Angels be
species or individualls; howbeit in my mind, what ever Divus Thomas speaks
in favor of species, they are more properly to be held as individualls; If
Angels be species or individualls.
yea, and with our Modern Divines reverence, whether Protestants or Jesuits;
what can be the formal object of our faith, the subject of it being once
perfectly known; howbeit in effect to my opinion, the formal object of it
(with Divus Thomas) must be the divine verity manifested unto us in holy
Scripture by our Lord and Master, the holy Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles,
the pen men of GOD, together with the authority of the Church, which authority
is but as a testimonial, and secondary, and with both and all others
permission, who prye and dive so deeply in the Orcum and mysteryes of
Learning, as, whether or not Creation be all one with the thing Created,
sooner solved, then advisedly propounded: for so it is, that Creation being an
action of the divine will, fiat and factum est. Genesis 1. 34. Moreover, that will
in GOD, and His Divine essence being all one, there is no question, but that
Creation is prior to the thing created: the like, or part whereof neither the
Jewish Thalmud, nor the Mohammedan Alcoran scarce ever did propound to their
Readers. But I leave the sublimity of Theological and Metaphysicall questions
which has puzzled marvellously even the best refined and acute Spirits.

Section 4.
Of Curiosities in Logic; the relation betwixt the Creator and the creature:
to what Heaven the Prophet Enoch and Elias were wrapped; what place is said to be
Abraham's bosom.

What has the Logician advantaged his art of reasoning by troubling himself
and others, Curiosity in Logic to know what sort of relation between the
creature and the Creator.
with what kind of relation is betwixt the creature and the Creator? Whether,
with Aristotle, predicamentall or not? mutual, or that it holds only of the
creature, not of the Creator also? howsoever, predicamentall with Aristotle it
cannot be; for that Creation argues no change in GOD, (as it does in the thing
Created, which is transchanged from a not being to a being which is certain,)
because GOD and supernall intelligencies (as mere forms free of all matter)
do work by their intellect and will; So that Creation proceeding from GOD as
an act of His will and intellect, must have been from all eternity with Him,
nothing being in Him which was not with Him likewise.

To the former add this curiosity likewise: what Heaven it was which the
Prophets Enoch and Elias were wrapped into? What Heaven the Prophet Enoch was
wrapped unto.
for our curious Our anographers by their doings (I warrant you) shall exclude
them out of all Heavens: for why say they? into the Air, (which is the first
Heaven) they could not be wrapped, seeing if they were taken up from the Earth
for rest and ease, there they would find little, it being the proper place of
storms and tempests; neither into the second, for if for ease, joy and rest,
they were taken from the earth, it behooved to be elsewhere then there, because
that starrie Heaven by many is held to be in perpetual revolution and motion;
much less will they admit them into the third Heaven; because they were not as
yet gloryfied, at least, there is no warrant in Scripture for it: besides that,
our MASTER JESUS CHRIST being Primitiae resurrectionis was the first that
entered, which was many ages after their uptaking.

Where the bosom of ABRAHAM is, to which most credibly they were rapt, our
curious Topographers cannot agree; their sublimities and curiosities rather
producing scruples then instruction. What it is, What and where Abraham's bosom
is by all almost agreed upon; but where it is, makes the doubt: with Peter
Martyr Vermillius loco. 16. Classis 3. It is thought to be nothing else then a
place of rest, where the souls of the Fathers departed before our SAVIORS
coming to the World, were attending, and in joy expecting it, denominated from
Abraham the Father of the faithful, without excluding the rest of the Fathers;
which place, what ever they say, I take to have been in Heaven, in which (we
know) there are many stations, how ever they perplexe themselves in marshalling
our lodgings there. And, against them all, of this opinion is S. Augustine,
Commenting on the 85. Psalm.

Section 5.
The Curiosity of the Millenarij; with many other Curiosities more frivolous
then necessary.

THe curiosity of the Millenarij, called by the Greeks (...) is worth your
notice; who give forth, that after the general resurrection, the godly shall
enjoy a thousand years pleasures in soul and body on this earth, before the
wicked be resuscitated, which they on earth did want whilst the wicked
flourished; and that according to Irenaeus his opinion. lib. adversus
haereticos. But they have even as much likelihood and warrant for this out of
holy Scripture, If beasts, herbs plants, will be renewed with man after the
resurrection.
as others have for that other tenent, that after the resurrection of man,
there shall be likewise a renovation of beasts, herbs, plants, etc.

But to proceed in their subjects, what curiosity has driven our Inquisitors
to ask, if death shall bereave our most learned of all sense and insight in
Sciences, If there be degrees of glory in heaven.
that in Heaven they shall be in no better degree of happiness then the rude
ignorant; whereas in the first to the Corinthians and the fifteenth Chapter it
is said, alia est gloria lunae, alia solis; better it were to know how to come
there, then inquisitively to search what higher places there are there: but no
question if the arguments drawn from contraries, do hold, then sure in hell
there be diversity of pains, so in Heaven also there be disparity of joys:
for in the house of the Lord are many mansions.

Yea, but says my curiosist, what language shall we speak in Heaven? What
language in heaven.
an idle question; what other language should we have but Hallelujuhs, hymns,
and praises to Him who sits upon the Throne? This with many other scruples,
and errors in inverting, perverting augmenting, derogating, transverting,
throwing, wresting GODS Word, Will, Truth, and Decree, I pass, and apply my
self to the Physiologist enquiring, if there was a world before this began;
Curiosity in Physic to know whether there be more worlds then one.
if there shall be another after this. If there be more then this which
presently we inhabit; if there be more celestial spheres then one; what time
of the year this world began, and when it shall have an end. All which, in my
Title of the world I handle, If there was one before this.
excepting only the multiplicity of heavenly orbs which I do admit, refusing
always their Eccentrick and Epilicks; as also I dissallow the Eccentricks of
the earth, as being all curiosities of small moment, and remit the Reader to
the sound and true knowledge of the course, nature, and influence of the
planets; which our curious Physicians, or Pseudo-Astrologers imaginatively do
handle.

Section 6.
That the Planets and other Celestial bodies have not that power over the
natures of men and Women that Astrologers ascribe unto them: That the Stars
are innumerable; Of the number and greatness of some in Via lactea; Where the
center of the earth is; its Circumference. Of Etna, Hecla, Saint Patricks hole,
and the like.

NEither can I be induced to believe the enforcing power they ascribe to these
planets over men and women's natures at the hour of their birth; The Stars
and heavenly lights force not our inclinations.
they may well (I confess) incline and help our propensnes, force them they
cannot: for with Homer latinized; Tales sunt hominum mores, qualis pater ipse
Jupiter aurifer as lustravit lampade terras.


Or rather with Hippocrates the Lord of their Art I think, against these sublime
curiosities, that the heavens work not upon the sublunary bodies of children,
but by the mediation of the Air, which being always in motion, and seldom
alike at all times, cannot always produce such and such like infallible
dispositions proper to any one alone more then to others, in, and of that same
time and place: the contrary whereof we see.

Mill hominum species, and rerum discolor usus.
Velle suum cuique est, nec voto vivitur uno.
But what ever fall out, it must not be so much attributed to the domination of
any Star at the Nativity of him or her, that way disposed, more then to
others who suck in that same Air, but rather to the diversity of men's
inclinations of whom they are propagated; The inclination of Parent^ more
mooveth children naturally, then the Stars do.
or to their studies, educations, and affections, etc.

Thus the extremity of Philosophy is accounted folly, as the best rules in
Physic are; not but in case of extreme necessity, to use Physic at all.

But yet, what extremity of folly is it in our Astronomers to give up the
reckoning, yea even of the immovable Stars, when GOD their Maker (blessed
forever) holds them (in respect of men) as innumerable; as when He assured
Jacob the Patriarch of the numerousnesse of his posterity, He compares their
innumerablenesse to the Stars of the heaven; when (howsoever these of via
lactea alone are so miscounted, that there are miriads besides, millions of
misreckonings given up by the Arabs themselves) Reneus Herpinus in his Apology
for Bodin against Augerius Ferrerius his book de diebus decretonorijs
intends to give their supputation, if not infallibly, The number and
greatness of certain Stars in the via lactea.
learnedly and Astrologically; yet too too curiously, in that place fol. 22. he
divides them in forty eight figures, and places twelve in the Zodiac,
fifteen Meridionalls beyond the Ecliptic; twenty one Septentrionalls, and so
forth; besides so many obscure ones, of which some of the biggest he instanceth
to be 107 times bigger then the earth; some again of the first and sixth
bigness, eighteen times bigger, observing the diameter of the largest, four
times bigger then that of the earth. Whereas the diameter of the lesser sort is
in comparison to that of the earth, as fifteen, to eight, in respect of twenty
one: all which he prooveth against Ferrerius to observe a constant, equal,
and not different course; of which Stars nevertheless, their number, course,
bigness, force, etc. not only Ptolomeus (the Primat and Patron of that
Science) (although Plotinus, Proclus, and Prophyre have not adhered to his
demonstrations) in his work, at least in his Preface (...) speaks rather as
of things sooner remarked by the Ancients, then rightly understood by him or
them either; But likewise his Commentator Theon Alexandrinus on the like
subjects gives forth, Diversities of opinions.
that in these and the like matters, he desires not his words to be taken for
undoubted authorities: What have our Topographers won by inquiring, what can
be in the center of this Terrestiall Globe, which he gives up to be near
seven thousand miles in diametrall thickness? whether hell be there or not?
and whether or not Aetna in Italy, hecla in Island, Saint Patriks hole in
Ireland, or that formidably burning Mountain by the American Mexico (wherein
at times as elsewhere also (if our Historians mistake not) there are plaints
and mourning voices to be heard through) by the vents and Chimneyes of hell,
as they give out.

Or what advantage have our Vranographers, or our familiar describers of the
heavens, made (not to be behind with our Geographers, who have given up the
compass of the earth? how soon a man may encompasse it, as in the first
Treatise of the secrets of nature may be seen? what have they advantaged (I
say) by giving up the vastness of the firmament so unmeasurably large as they
do? for by their calculation, though a man ride forty miles a day, yet shall
he not see so much ground in many thousands of years as the firmament goes
about the earth in twenty four hours: Via Lactea differently given up.
So learned Clavius calculateth in his Commentary upon Sacroboscus.

But withal to know whether or not the Moon be inhabited, or has mountains,
valleys, and champion ground within her body, and so forth; and whether the
rest of the planets as she, be likewise inhabited; considering (say these
curious fellows) that these vast bodies cannot be framed for light only, if
not for this use also: but being wearyed with these and alike more curious then
profitable questions, I leave them.

Section 7.
To search out the secrets of Nature allowable; if men be not too curious in
them; Eudoxus wish; Plinius killed on the Mountain of Vesuvius: Aristotle
drowned in Euripus; Too much curiosity is a plague sent down from Heaven on
men; The Poet Simonides acknowledged his ignorance of GOD; How the Heathenish
gods were pourtrayed.

IF any curiosity may be allowed, The enquiry of the secrets of nature,
convenient food for a curious Spirit.
I think the inquiry of the hidden and abstruse secrets of nature are
agreeable and pleasing for a curious spirit; provided that their curiosity
carry them no further then to a reverent and respectfull admiration of the
power of God, working in Nature by them.

But if once such curious and inquisitive brains do transgress these limits,
and after the meditation of these things, do begin to draw out of the secrets
of Nature that which is unprofitable, being known, and so do become
transgressors of the old Law, Non altum sapere, not to be too inquisitive;
Eudoxus craved to be near the Sun although it should be with the hazard of
his life, as that he might know it.
then I say their curiosities become vicious: such as this, was the curiosity
of Eudoxus, who desired at the hands of the gods to be so near the Sun as to
discern the matter of it, (which was in question amongst his fellow
Philosophers for the time) although it should be to the hazard of his life;
Such curiosity as this: cost Plinius his life, while too curiously he
approached to the top of the Mount Vesuvius, by Naples (which I did with the
hazard of mine also) from thence to look down to the body of the hollowed hill
to see if he might discern the cause and matter of that fire, which bursting
up in flames now and then, had made it hollow within, for then being choakt
with a flash of a suddayne flame, he dyed; So the river Euripus did requite
Aristotle his curiosity with the like punishment, although not drowning or
overwhelming him with waves, yet causing in him such melancholy for not
comprehending its nature, as procured his death!

We have warrant from holy Scripture, that too much curiosity to know things,
is sent down upon men as a plague, in so far, that Herod esteemed Saint Paul
distracted through his too much learning; and they are scarce otherwise, who
think by their shallow capacity, to comprehend the height, length, and depth
of GODS works, which are so much the rather His, by how much the less we
understand them.

And it is observable that our belief is settled upon things incredible to
humane reason; Because curiosity to know, is a plague, therefore our faith is
settled upon things incredible to human reason.
to which a humble submission of spirit attayneth sooner, then a curious
inquiry.

Thus Saint Augustine esteemed, GOD better to be adored, been sentiendo, quam
multum loquendo; In such sort, that Simonides the Poet, who was desired to
describe God, required first one day to think upon the subject; and then
another, lastly a third; and in the end confessed ingeniously, that the more he
studied it, the further he was from comprehending it, and the more he searched
into that Theme, the less he understood it; which gave us well to understand
how wisely the Egyptian Priests, Indian Brachmians, the Persian Magi, the
French Druides, and all the old Philosophers and wise men did, who caused to
mould and pourtrayte their gods with their fingers upon their lips, The Gods
of the Ancients were pourtraited with their fingers upon their mouths, and why.
to teach men (their Adorers) not to be too curious inquirers after their
Nature, or rashly blabbe forth what ever they imagine of them, least that being
discovered, they should have been found in the end to have been but men,
either worthy in their time for war or peace, and after their death, deified.

Micat inter omnes
Iulium fidus, velut inter ignes
Luna minores.
Whereas the Nature of our great Godhead is so profound a gulf, and hid
mystery, that as the Sun beams dazeleth our mortal eyes, being too steadfastly
fixed upon them; even so does overcurious inquiry after God, and such other
abstruse mysteries, obfuscate the dim eyes of our understandings: And as the
Sun cannot be seen but by his own light; So no more can God be known but by
himself.

Section 8.
Too great curiosities condemned; and a moderation to be used in them
prescribed.

THus then, As in Divine mysteries we should not be too curious: So should we
not in any worldly business.
as in Divine and heavenly mysteries we should not be too curious, but should
rather content us with what is revealed; So should we not in our worldly
affairs busy our selves too curiously and perplexedly: For as Gods secrets
are not disclosed to the highest and most eminent amongst men, but to the
meaner and ignorant sort; even so fortune and chance of this world falls and
follows not always the wisest and most curious, but on such as for the most
part do not pursue them; and these we do term, fool happy or more happy
then wise.

Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contraria currunt. When I blame the extremity of
curiosity as a master-vice, As we should not b^ overcurious; ^o should we not
be l^sse curious with the Stoics referring all to destiny.
it is not for that we should with the Stoics, ^ull our selves asleep, and
cast off even allowable care concerning the events of our affairs in this
life; as to remitt and put over all to destiny; which is no less blameworthy,
then with the Epicureans, to eat and drink, as if the morrow we were to die:
For as the golden mediocrity, and commendable virtue consists betwixt
extremes; even so (I say) avoiding both evils, this meant good may be
admitted, to be curious after all such things as concern our vocation and
trade of life: And for this indeed we have warrant; but so, that we refer
the event of all to the alseeing providence, who best knows our wants, and
can best help them.

Section 9.
How GOD disappointeth the expectations of the most Curious; And that the most
subtle spirits run into greater errors then the meaner do.

I Wonder, As the most curious craftsman is not ever either the wisest or the
Wealthiest; So the most curious heads are not they to whom God manifests his
se^rets.
since neither the subtilties of this present age, nor the wisdom of our
predecessors, neither Prophets of old, nor preaching of new, no not theirmost
curious inquiries could rippe up the causes and notions of things, which it has
pleased the Everliving to work both above and below the concavity of the
Moon, in a manner to dazell men's eyes, and to make their profoundest wits
stoop under the wonders of His works; Why then should our curious Spirits
rack their brains about the resolution of such questions, which, as they are
difficult to be solved, so are they dangerous (I may say) and impious to be
propounded.

And it is great presumption for mortal men to reduce under the precinct of
humane sciences those things the knowledge of which GOD out of His infinite
wisdom has thought fit not to impart to mortals.

For as God is above nature, God as he is above Nature, so works he beyond
Nature some times.
so works He after His own will, either supernaturally, or else by some
secret power of Nature unknown to us; To which point, the most subtle of all
the Ancient Philosophers some times were driven.

And yet these great spirits who could not content themselves but with the
speculation of such things, as fell not under the reach and capacity of the
weaker, and meaner sort; did sometimes in the meaner subjects stumble most
miserably.

So while they ran above the heavens, roaving and tormenting themselves with
their numbers, matter, force, motions, sounding, depths and center, yea, and
turning the circumference of the earth, Great and sublime spirits stumble more
vilely, then the meane^ sort.
overskimming the Seas, saluting the Antipodes, and bringing novells from their
Courts, and of their Caballs, dreaming with themselves (as Archimedes did) that
they might remove the Globe of the universe out of its own place, and turn it
about, if they had whereon, and wherein to fix their machins; they in the end
(I say) do stumble, and fall in gross absurdities; like those men who
peradventure, having sailed the better part of their lives, upon the stormy
Ocean, and past her greatest dangers, may nevertheless at last be drowned in a
little Brook.

Medium tenuere Beati. Section 10.
An inducement to the study and search of the secrets of Nature; Of the Needle
in the Sea compass; Of the inundations of the River of Nilus; And from whence
it has its sourse and beginning; Of the several dispositions of men; Why
continual burning hills and Mountains do not diminish, etc.

But on what more fertile and spacious a field can curious Spirits extend, and
expatiate the wings of their fancies, then the discovery and searching out of
the secrets of Nature, as in those things which are obvious to our outward
senses, leaving those contemplative mysteries before spoken of, to the
omniscious Author of them, for when man's curiosity has reached or rather dived
into the depth of the secrets of the heavenly bodies and their changes; then
the Creator, to check (as it were) their curiosities and presumption, alters
that orderly course that they presumed to have gathered thereby; Dion:
Areopagita's observation of the Eclipse at our Saviors suffering.
which made Dionysius Areopagita, seeing the Sun Ecclipsed at full Moon,
when our LORD and SAVIOR suffered, contrary to their Astronomicall position,
to cry out, that either the God of Nature suffered at that time, or the course
of Nature was inverted, or the Machine of the universe was to dissolve; with
other the like examples known to all that are versed in the Scripture. Now to
speak a little more of the incertainty of these curiosities; Mercator,
Opinions of the needle in the compass.
and other more modern Geographers hold, that the needle in the compass, does
vary more or less from the Pole, as the place of observation is more or less
distant from the Azorick Meridian, from whence it has its longitude; Whereas
the more ancient took its longitude to be from the Canaries Meridian. Some
again, as Herodotus, will the River of Nilus, to take its source and beginning
from the forked top of the Mountain Sienna in Ethiopia, from whence (says he)
do surge two admirable Currents, one toward the South and Ethiopia; the other
toward the North and Egypt; I call these currents admirable, because the
Whirlepooles and bublings in these waters are so great, violent and absorping,
that though a Boat were there tide with most strong Cables, yet they would
suck it in and ingurgitate it! Of Nilus, her sourse and inundation.
Others will have its inundations and Increment, to issue from the hills of the
Moon in Arabia, A montibus lunae Arabia-Australis: whereupon such abundance of
Snow falls, that it liquifying and melting, runs so abundantly and
violently down, that it procures these wonderful inundations: Plinius again
(if Sabell: mistake not lib. 3. Eneid: 1.) makes its source and deboarding to
flow from Afric crossing Media, as the Danube does Europe; Or else from
Mauritania the lesser, instancing for possibility that the melted snow
discending from thence causes the overflowings in Egypt; from whence (say
they) serpenting and gliding through a vast tract of ground in the bowels of
the earth, that striving (as it were) to be refreshed with new air, it
bursteth out in Mauritania Caesariensi, where it runs the space of twenty
days journey again under ground; from whence it issues again and
plentifully stretches it self through Ethiopia, with many meandres and
turnings, and separateth Egypt from the rest of Africa; where finally through
most rockie, Precipitious and Declivous Mountains with most hideous rumbling,
and terrible noise, it casts it self down where the Catadupae dwell; and
running through Egypt, disburdeneth it self, into the Mediterranean Sea. Men's
dispositions.
Others again (not without great contradiction) do variously picture out the
several dispositions of men according to their several Countries, whereof
read Bodinus in his sixth Chapter lib. 5. of his Republic: where he says,
that those who are borne toward the South are more humane, ingenious and
affable then those toward the North: with several other distinctions which
he sets down in that Chapter: Some too, give the reason why so many great
hills in several places of the earth do incessantly burn, without great
diminution of the earth or their greatness, to be because the Sea winding it
self in by secret Conduits, Burning hills and Mountains.
does continually arrouse, or water the Sulphurous vain which subministrates
fuel to their flame; as the endlesnesse of the combustible matter is the
cause of the not diminishing of the earth: with many of the like, as may be
read in several authors: Wherefore thus much for the contemplative and
coniecturall curiosity; Now to the Practick.

Section 11.
Of Christopher Columbus his Practical Curiosity in his discovery of the new
World or America.

NOw lastly, to conclude this treatise with Practical curiosity, instead of
many, I will only touch that so fortunate and so much famed one of Columbus in
the discovery of America; He was an Italian, borne in Genoa, whose most
pregnant, curious and searching wit, far excelled all that ever were before
him, in the like attempts; Columbus first intention, and motive to his voyage.
This worthy Columbus (I say) imagining, that since the Globe of the universe,
the celestial Spheres, Air, Waters, and all superior bodies were round,
concluded with himself that the earth could not be triangular, as in a manner
it then was when he knew no other lands, but Europe, Africa, Asia, but
circular and round also; as the rest of the Elements; and so consequently that
there behooved to be some vaste tract of land, yet unknown, which should
extend it self from South West to North West; Which conception of his he thus
fortified.

That seeing of three hundred and sixty degrees, Columbus his reason.
which the world contains in longitude, there being only one hundred eighty
filled up with land; that the Almighty Creator would not have suffered from all
beginning the waters to overflow all the rest.

But not content with this contemplation only, he never gave over till he put
the trial of it in practice; wherefore in the year of God, 1492. aided and
therefore furthered by the King of Spain, he set to sea, directing his course
to the Canary-Islands (whereat from Spain he first arrived) toward the
Southwest: His voyage.
but having spent many days upon the Sea without sight of land, to the great
toil, labor, and anguish of his men, who began to mutine amongst themselves
and despair of ever returning home, much less of attaining their adventure;
he was driven to his wits end, whereupon politickly, (and as it were
prophetically) he strove with all probabilities to assure them that within two
or three days, at furthest, they should discover land; His policy.
which the more confidently he undertook, because (says my Author) he had
perceived the color of the clouds then tending toward him, to be more white
and more purified like landclouds, from whence they behoved to come, then those
that merely proceeded from the seas; which conjecture of his proved true; The
cause of dearth since Columbus voyage.
for it pleased God, that the third day thereafter they discovered this land
they sought for, of which, with its length, breadth, nature, etc. there are
whole volumes extant; and from this country it is, that the gold, money and
ware be transported, which has caused our dearths; all things in the days of
our forefathers, being bartered one for another as common merchandises.

This man's spirit (no question) was warmed with a more celestial fire than
ordinary; who first of all before him, did both invent and execute so glorious
a design, and profitable an enterprise, as the discovery of a new world.
Nevertheless, there has not wanted some; who, to bereave him of this honor,
do gather out of Plato's dialogue twixt Critias and Solon, Columbus's worth
depraved.
that there was some knowledge of this world in former times; because so it is,
that the Egyptian Priests of the City Sais reported unto him, that they had
found in ancient Monuments, some mention of a terrible great Island, called
Atlantida, which was opposite, or went off and on, with the straits of Gibaltar,
of old called Hercules Pillars; but that it was taken away by Deucalions
deluge, as we read of Sicily to have been rent from Italy.

Which admit were true: His vindication.
yet who, amongst the sons of men, before Columbus, did ever adventure to
discover it? nay who so thinks it to be an Island, mistaketh far: for our
modern navigators have found it to be continent almost, and firm land; as
joining to the East Indies on the one hand, and to those Lands under the two
Poles on the other: moreover, whereas Sicily is removed from Italy but a very
few miles (if ever they were conjoined) as Ireland is from Britanne; this
America, or, as they would have it, Atlantida, is distant from the mouth of the
straights, where (they say) it was taken away, some thousands of miles.

I know too, how Peter Martyr, cap. 1. and first decade, attributes the first
discovery of this to a Spaniard, to defraud Columbus of his due praise and
honor: and how some have gone about, to take away from him the denomination of
that Country, Columbus denomination of Americus conferred on Vespucius.
attributing it to Vespucius, calling him Americus, because he entered farther
in the firm land than Columbus; who glad of his first discovery, made no long
stay there: so that at the second setting out of a new Navy, Here again
vindicated.
this Vespucius went further in, Egregiam vero laudem: as if the honor were
not the first attempters: so Sheep bear wool, and Oxen plough, although not
for themselves. Some too, say, that Columbus, being a learned man, gathered
this enterprise from some verses in Seneca in his Medea, Another aspersion on
him.
Venient annis secula seris.
Quibus oceanus vincula rerum
Laxet, and ingens pateat Tellus,
Tiphis que novos deteget orbs,
Nec sit terris ultima Thule, etc.


And why not? for this same (if it so was) argued the sublimity of his spirit;
for who, I pray you, before him, ever marked or gathered the like from them to
put that Theory and contemplation in practice? Then, sure it is, that none of
the ancients, Greek or Roman whatsoever, can in this be compared or balanced
with him.

Sect. 12.
The conclusion of this Treatise of curiosity; containing a singular curiosity
of Livia, Tiberius Caesar's wife.

BUT ere I fully close up this Treatise, and where I might bring before you
many; let me only present you with one woman, whose singular curiosity was
admirable, or (if you will) casual; it is reported by Cuspinian, an ancient
and famous Author, in the life of Tiberius Caesar; Livias curiosity.
that Livia being with child of Tiberius, fell into an inquisitive curiosity,
to know whether the child she went withal should prove male or female:
whereupon, repairing to Scribonius the Astrologer, she was advised by him to
take an Egg from under a sitting Hen, and to hold it so long betwixt her
hands, till (through the heat of them) the egg should burd and break the
shell; which accordingly she did, and thereout came a Cock-chicken: whereupon
the Mathematician divined, that she should be delivered of a man child; who as
the bird was crested, should bear a crown, and command over others: and so
thereafter it happened.

OF DIVINE PHILOSOPHY, AND MAN'S FELICITY.
Section 1.
The Sun and Moon in the Heavens compared to the understanding and will in
Man. Aristotle's definition of happiness: The distinction of understanding and
Will; and wherein ancient Philosophers placed their chief felicity.

AS there are two Lamps in the heavens which enlighten this lower world, The
understanding and reason in man, is as the Sun in the firmament.
the Sun, and the Moon: So there are two principal faculties which rule in
Man, the understanding and the will. For as the Sun in the Firmament, is as
Master of the rest of the Stars, giving life to the Earth by the mediation of
the Air; so this understanding rules the rest of the faculties of the mind;
Will, as the Moon which should have no light cut from her Sun, reason.
and as the Moon has little light of her self (as being but a diaphanous
body or susceptible of light) but what it borrows from the Sun, as the wife
has her luster from her husband; so should not the will obstinately will any
thing, but what the cleerenesse of the understanding foreseeth to be
conducible unto us; and what has passed and bin sifted through the judgment;
though otherwise we see it often times come to pass. The Philosophers have a
much disputed question, in what our happiness consists, Whether in the
actions of our understanding, or in those of our will (which indeed are nothing
else but that which we term contemplation and action) distinctly in any one of
them, or in both conjunctly.

For seeing Aristotle defines happiness to be an operation of the soul
according to most perfect virtue, What happiness is, according to Aristotle.
and that elsewhere he calls it, the best and pleasantest thing that is; it
cannot be then but one; because, what is spoken superlatively, is peculiar but
to one only: so it would seem, that this felicity or happiness consists
only in the operation of one of them and not of both; the one and the other
way being both for the object and their operation the most pleasant and perfect
things we have: by the operation of our understanding or intellect, By our
understanding we know God, by our will we love him.
we have the speculation and contemplating of God, and by the will his love.

Howsoever by this it would seem, that it consists in some one of the two
only; yet if we have regard to reason which enforces the placing of it so, or
the Texts in Scriptures, where it is said, that our happiness consists in
the contemplation of God, or in his knowledge; we shall find, that neither
this perfect vision and knowledge of God can be separated from his love, nor
his love from the knowledge of him. Wherefore it must consist of both jointly.

But if by one of the two simply a man were made happy, then he could not
totally, but diminitively be called so, which should not be thought; seeing
nothing which is not entire ought to be attributed to felicity, because it
should not be defective in any thing: whereupon we may conclude, What, and
wherein consists the old Philosophical felicity, so much spoken of, being
that whereof we now treat.
that the perfect felicity whereof both the Philosophers of old have treated,
and here now we handle, is neither divisively an action of the intellect
according to prudence and wisdom, nor yet of the will, according to moral
virtue, as Aristotle in his Politics alleges; but one combined of both
according to perfect virtue.

For if the question were betwixt the two, to which of them the prerogative and
pre-eminence should appertain, the matter were very ambiguous.

Section 2.
That our felicity consists in the actions of our will is confuted:
Aristotle's opinion hereupon. A theological solution on it, seconded with a
Philosophical; and an agreement of both to solve the difference.

IT is true, that the understanding goes before the will, whereas will must
wait for information from the understanding; seeing we cannot well will a
thing we understand not, Ignoti nulla cupido. Besides this, seeing our
beatitude and felicity consists in the acquisition and fruition of the end of
the thing we aim at: That our felici^^ cannot consist in the actions of our
will.
certainly that cannot be by the act of our will, although it has goodness
it self for the object; considering, that Will, almost even in the most
regenerate is so depraved, that without the grace of God, we cannot so much as
will any good thing, without the preceding judgment of reason, in regard that
Will is defined to be a rational appetite; consequently it is, that even in
those who say that their will stands for a reason, yet in their judgment
there wants not their judiciary election.

For St. Bernard in his work of Grace and Free Will affirms; that Will, to
what hand soever it turn it self, has reason accompanying it; yet not that
it is always guided with true reason, but that at least it is never without
its own reasons. These considerations being had, it would appear, that this
our happiness should be placed in the understanding, and not in the actions of
our will; except we take them so, as they have a reference to reason or
understanding, in which they are rooted, or (at lest) should be.

But if that be true on the otherside, It would seem that our happiness did
not consist in the actions of our reason and understanding, but in these of our
will.
as certainly it is, which Aristotle in his Ethics affirms, that our
happiness perfecteth it self by the most noble operation of the most
excellent part upon the excellentest subject; sure it is, that the noblest part
of a man is his soul, the most excellent faculty whereof is his free will;
whose most lively operation is love, and whose most worthy object is God: so
that from thence it would follow, that our happiness consists in the love of
God, consequently in the operation of our will.

Now that the will has the more excellent power then the understanding, is
clear; because that faculty (whose habits, Reasons in favors of Will.
operations and objects are more noble than the others) surpasses the other:
but so it is, that will surpasses in all these, for knowledge and wisdom
must give place to love and charity; because it were better never to have
known God, then having known him not to love him.

Besides all this, seeing the actions, which are done, do depend upon the
nature of the agent, the actions of the will, are so much more noble, then
those of the understanding, in how far the Intellect may be necessitated by the
object of it, and by forcible and convincing reasons, which it cannot
withstand; whereas will is free and cannot be forced; for then it should
rather be a nilling (to say so) then a willing.

Moreover in good Philosophy an argument taken from the nature of opposites is
forcible: by the like reason I say then, if the understanding were better than
the will, that then the contrary to the understanding were worse than the
contrary to the will; seeing contraries are the consequences of contraries: but
so it is not; for the contrary of will is worse than the opposite to the
Intellect; because the hatred of God, which is opposite to the love of God,
which depends upon the action of will, is worse than the ignorance of him.
Epist. 2. Pet. 6. 2.

Now as the actions of the will do surpass them of the understanding, so does
the object of it; for goodness which is the object of the will excels
verity the object of the intellect, The actions of the will, the object of it
seems to be more noble then these of the intellect.
as far as deeds do words; seeing verity is nothing else, but an adaequation
or conformity of our conceptions with the words we utter.

Sect. 3.
Which of the three faculties of the soul, Understanding, Memory, and Will,
is the most excellent.

THe three principal faculties of man's soul, understanding, memory, and will,
have their several operations: the understanding plays as it were the
Advocate, memory the Clerk, and will the Judge; but who knows not that the
Judge is always above the other two?

To say then that will cannot well make election without preceding sciscitation
from the Intellect, is often times true; but not always: for sometimes without
the information of understanding the will works, Et nunquam visae flagrabat
amore puellae.

In a word, since the actions of the will are more noble then these of the
understanding, it being true (as it is) that actions work not but with a
regard to their object: the object of the will being an universal good, and
that of the understanding but a particular, under the restriction of verity;
thereupon it follows, that the object and action of the will (being the
better) in them consists our happiness.

Sect. 4.
Liberty and compulsion defined; that the will is prompted by the
understanding, and that the adequate object of it proceeds from thence; At
what the will and understanding chiefly aim, proved to be the glory of God.

ARguments in the behalf of will, are grounded most upon the freedom of its
operations, whereas these of the understanding are coarcted and limited as is
said. Yet when all is spoken, our understanding wants not its own liberty,
at least in so far as liberty is opposed to compulsion.

For if there were nothing compelled but that which is repugnant to the
inclination of the thing, certain it is that inclination to any thing agrees
very well with the intellect.

Now whereas it is said that the object of will which is good, Will and
understanding how coincident.
supposes that of the intellect, which distinguishes the verity of the
thing: we must consider; that the will of it self could not have willed that,
except first by the understanding it had known it to be such; so by this
means the will has no further regard to the object of it, in so far as it
begets felicity and happiness, then the intellect has; and although, by
way of understanding, it be made the adaequate or proper object of the will,
yet it cease not to be the object of the understanding also; as having all
things that are, and which may fall under our capacity, for object; and
consequently, it should be thought nobler and freer then the will, in regard of
the boundless object which it has in its extent.

But to leave the decision of this question to better Divines, This question of
felicity consisting in will and understanding is coincident with that
Theological question, of Faith and good works.
seeing it falls near on the controversy of faith and good works (by which
together we attain salvation, as by the operations of will and understanding
we attain felicity)

I say, that all men naturally do desire for the well of their will, to be
happy and have contentment; and for the exercising of their understanding to
have a mark to aim at, which all Philosophers allow to be true; yet few of
them came ever to the just point of both. It is necessary then to have a butt,
and to have that good, and to have one, because GOD has given us an
understanding whose perfection is wisdom, and so one; to which as at a mark
our understanding addresseth all her powers, and bends perpectually all her
forces: again to have it good; because he has given a will whose perfection
is goodness.

And certainly, God who is wisdom and goodness himself, had an eye unto
both these in the creation of all things: For seeing the Philosophers confess,
that nature does nothing amiss, what should then be thought of God, whom
nature serves, is but as a handmaid.

Now as GOD who is the beginning, middle and end of all things, has had no
other end in his works But himself: Even so, we his Creatures, should have no
other aim nor end in our actions but him only, seeing we have both our
beginning, continuing and ending from him: Naturally all reasonable creatures
do wish well to themselves, and therefore propose some mark which they aim
at as their peculiar good: which can be naught else but the end for which man
was created, to wit the glory of God, who has made all things for it: So that
in striving to come thither, he attaineth to his own proper end and good,
which is the good he aymeth at and naturally seeks.

By this means if we find either the principle butt of man's aim or our
Sovereign good, we have found both, the butt he shoots at as the object of
his understanding, and his good for the object of the will; he therefore
should apply all his endeavors to this end, and all his desires to this his
good.

Section 5.
That all Philosophical precepts have come short to demonstrate true felicity;
Philosophical distinctions to know what is good of it self in Sciences; yet
all weak to illustrate wherein man's true happiness consisted; which is
Philosophically agitated.

IF man had persisted in his first integrity, he had not been now to seek
this felicity; for then his understanding clearly perceaved truths, and his
will readily desired all good things.

But since the loss of the first, the ladders of the Philosophers in all their
sciences have been too short to lead us to the latter: The end of all Sciences
is to know, which the Philosopher says is good of it self*
for although their end is to know (which Aristotle affirms to be good of it
self, as by Moral Philosophy to discern good from evil, and right from
wrong; by physic, health from sickness; by the Mathematics, equal from
unequal proportions: by Astrology, the course and force of the Stars, and
the celestial signs: by Geography the length and compass of the earth; by
the Physickes the natural principles and causes of things: by Metaphysics
supreme essences, good and evil spirits) yet none of all these could lead us
to that right knowledge that I intend here.

For all their sciences did conclude only to us, that a man's happiness
consisted in a quiet and pleasant life, whose tranquillity is not interrupted
with fear, want, sickness and the like, but all these will not serve our
turn; for their worth passes no further than this life and the body, and so
must perish; but true happiness never has an end.

In the handling then of this felicity and happiness it must be remarked, The
properties of our Sovereign happiness.
that it is common to the whole species of mankind, and therefore as all are
borne capable of that end, so all should tend to that butt.

Man fears nothing more then his end (it being of all terrible things the
most terrible) nor wishes any thing more earnestly then ever to be, and this
Sovereign good we aspire unto is the end of man; beyond which we shall crave
no more; for if there were any thing further to be craved, it could not be our
end, because beyond the end there can be nothing; or if we craved any thing
further, it could not be our Sovereign good; The greatest property of our
feli^i^y is, as to crave nothing more, so not to fear the loss of that which
we have.
seeing the greatest property of this beatitude is as to crave nothing further,
so not to fear the loss of that we have, and withal to be content with that
which we possess.

Of necessity then, that which must be our Sovereign good, behoved to be
agreeable to the nature of man, particular to his species, yet common to all
the individua of that kind: And in so far as it is our Sovereign good, it
must be universal, perfect and everlasting. Thus having found out the nature
of this our beatitude and felicity, let us a little run over the world, and all the Philosophers, to see, if either the one has in her bosom, or if the other
has found it out by their curious inquiries.

Sect. 6.
That wealth and Honor cannot be esteemed to be our supreme good or felicity,
and the reason therefore; Philosophers confuted by their difference of
opinions: Opinions of several sects of Philosophers concerning felicity
instanced to that effect.

THe things of this world which should seem to make a man most happy are these
two, Wealth and honor cannot be our happiness.
wealth and honors; but alas! the one is wind, and the other clay; they
content not all men, for all men attain not unto them, and yet they that have
them are not always content, seeing they who have most, do for the most part
still crave more. Lastly they perish and decay; and the fear to lose them is
more galling then the pleasure almost to enjoy them is solid; by which means
they cannot be our sovereign good, seeing these do neither limit our wishes,
nor fulfill our wills: they are not common nor permanent. Vigor, strength and
beauty are but blossoms of youth, which decay with age.

As for the Philosophers, The different opinions of the Philosophers upon this
purpose.
look how many sects and diverse orders they had, so different were their
opinions. Aristotle in his Ethics alleges two sorts of happiness; the one
civil, and Politic, which consists in the prudency of our actions; the
other private and domesticke, which may be thought contemplation: but both
these leads us not to the end we hunt after, nor yet are they the end
themselves. Plato indeed in his Phaedon comes nearer the truth, when he
says, that beauty, health, strength, wit, do corrupt and make us worse; so
they cannot be our chief good, unless conjoined with the Gods goodness,
whereunto Aristotle (both in his first book De coelo, and in his work De
mundo) agrees. But I list not hereto fill this short Treatise, with long and
tedious allegations of authorities.

St. Aug. in the 19th. book of the City of God, in the 1. chap. reports out of
Varro, that there was in his days 288. different opinions upon that matter,
but few or none that hit aright.

For as in Mathematics, a little error in the beginning becomes great in
the end; as the mistaking of one in a million in the beginning, falsifies the
whole account in the end: so fared it with them; the further they went, the
further they strayed. Socrates indeed came near (by the Oracle of Delphos
thought to be the wisest amongst them all; Happiness wherein it did consist,
according to Socra.
in respect he confessed, he knew nothing, because he knew not himself) when
he says, that if any man may be termed happy, it must be he who has a clear
and undefiled conscience, whose tranquil and secure ignorance is not perturbed
with the worlds cares, but being void of coveting and fear, which molested
others, neither needs nor craveth any more.

Solon thinks, that no man can be happy before his death, seeing the end
crowns all; considering belike, that as a Ship which has sailed the vast and
spacious Seas, when to appearance all danger is past, may peradventure make
shipwreck in the haven: so might a man whose life had been past in pleasures
and security, make a tragical end, as monuments of all ages can bear record:
and the particular example of Croesus King of Lydia, who in his dying hour
called on the name of Solon, attesting this saying of him to be true: and this
same Solon, hit the mark a great deal nearer than Epicurus, The Epicureans
and Stoics, their opinions*
who places our felicity in the pleasure of the body; whom the Stoics deride,
saying, that there was no rose without its prickle, and so they settled it in
the peaceable government of moral virtues. From these again the
Perpateticks, and Academick Philosophers do differ, amongst whom, divine Plato
has come nearest the foresaid mark.

Sect. 7.
The later Philosophers have aimed nearer the definition of true felicity than
the more ancient; and their opinions specified. The final and true scope of
man's felicity, is illustrated with an exhortatory conclusion to all men for
endeavoring to attain unto it.

THE later Philosophers do clear this matter more fully; The latter
Philosophers have refuted al others establishing their own.
wherefore more worthy of citation, as Seneca, Cicero, Plutarch, Iamblicque,
and Porphyre, all which have not only refuted most wittily the Epicures and
Stoics touching their opinions, but have shown that they and all the others
were only disputable opinions, and have concluded, that the beatitude of man
consists in the knowledge and union of us with God: but little knew they that
the first knot of our union with this God was united, and therefore the
question is harder now; how we are to be reunited again.

To cast up here the opinion of Aristippus, who placed our happiness in
Venery; or of Diodorus, in the Privation of pain; of Calypso, and Dinomachus
in Pleasure and honesty together: of Herullus, in the knowledge of Sciences,
esteeming that thereby we might live both contentedly and prudently: of Zeno,
in living according to nature; and so forth in the rest; might be enough to
try the readers patience: seeing of these things which they esteemed
happiness, some were common to us with the Beasts; others were not common to
all, and so they failed in the rules of our felicity.

This being so, Finally, what our true felicity is, and wherein it does consist.
let us now at least find it out, and so in a word conclude. Briefly, as all
happiness at first consisted in the union of man with God; so our happiness
renewed, consists in the reunion of us with the same God, from whom we have
fallen; by which reuniting, we shall both contemplate his face, and love him,
in whom we shall have our joy accomplished, wherewith the heart of man can
never here be satiated, beyond which we shall crave no farther: this felicity
is not peculiar to the great ones of this world above the meaner, but equally
obtainable of all who in humility of heart, and uprightness of conversation,
do embrace JESUS the Son of GOD, by whom only we may be reunited, since he
is the only and sovereign Mediator, blessed from all eternity.

The conscience, which has its assurance grounded upon this foundation, and
rock of verity, may call it self truly happy, because it has the earnest in
this life, of that great felicity which is to come, whereby it possesses it
self in peace which passes all natural understanding (one of the surest
tokens of this happiness) neither perturbed with the terrors of the
superstitious, nor yet with the carelessenesse and lulled security of the
Atheist; but in a sweet harmony betwixt the two extremes, By this sovereign
felicity, a man lives in tranquillity, and dies in peace.
it retains the golden mediocrity.

This is that sovereign felicity to my judgment, whereby a man lives
contentedly here, whatsoever befalls him; and dies in peaceable assurance of
that happiness which is to come; which sovereign felicity we shall attain
unto, if by a lively faith we embrace the Son, and live according to his
will; and so put in ure and practice that great Canon of Religion, to live and
believe well; espousing by that means our will and understanding together.

THE CONSONANCIE AND agreement of the ancient Philosophers, with our Christian
Professors.
Section 1.
The difference betwixt the Physiologer and Physician; compared to that betwixt
the Metaphysician and divine. Some of Plato's opinions not far dissonant from
our Christian: The multiplicity of Heathenish gods: That Plato came near the
definition of the Trinity.

AS, where the Physiologer leaves to contemplate, there the Physician
begins; so where the Metaphysitians end, there the Divines commence their
study, not to follow forth their doings, but, to refine their grosser
rudiments; like cunning Painters, by the subtlety of their Art, giving life,
breathing, A Simile.
and in a manner, moving unto a picture, which a more gross Painter had but
rudely delineated.

It was of old held for a truth, Platonicos pa^cis mutatis fieri posse
Christianos: That with the change but of a very point, the Platonicke
Philosophers might be brought to be Christians; from whence Plato was called
Divine.

Who so shall revolve the monuments of his works, Difference betwixt Platonic
and Christians.
shall find that, not without reason, he has been so styled: for all other
sects of Philosophers, have but like men in Cimmerian darkness, gropingly
stumbled, now and then, upon the nature of the true Godhead; and every nation
in those days, had their several, and those strangely imaginary Gods,
distinguished in so many ranks, employed in so many businesses, appointed to
so many different and sometime base offices; that their number, in fine, became
almost innumerable! Multiplicity of Gods, amongst the heathen.
In the mean time this man, soaring above them al, has more nearly jumped
with our belief touching the Godhead. In so far that Amuleus that great
Doctor in Porphyre his Schools having read Saint John the Evangelist his
proeme, was struck with silence and admiration, as ravished with his words;
but at length burst out in these terms: by Jupiter (says he) so thinks a
Barbarian, meaning Plato; that in the beginning the word was with God, that it
is this great God by whom all things were made and created.

Now that this is true, This much I find, in his Parmenides, concerning the
nature of the Godhead. That there are three things to be established
concerning the maker of all: The Trinity shadowed by Plato.
which three must be coeternal, viz.

That he is good; that he has a mind or understanding; and that he is the
life of the world.

Section 2.
Of Gods Creating and conserving of all things in an orderly order; Plato's
Reasons that the world has a life. Aristotle's opinion of God; he is praised,
and at his dying preferred before many doubtful Christians.

THis King or father of all, which is above all nature, immovable yet moving
all; has in him an exuberant and overflowing goodness! From the Father and
goodness, the mind or understanding proceeds, as from the inbred light of
the Sun comes a certain splendour; which mind is the divine or Fathers
Intelligence, and the first borne Son of goodness.

From this mind (the life of the world) flows a certain brightness, as
from light; which breaths over all, distributeth, yields, and conteyneth
all things in life; So that the world which consists of four principles, or
elements, comprehended within the compass of the heavens, is but a body, whose
parts, as the members of a living creature, cohering and linked together, are
moved, and do draw breath by benefit of this life or spirit (as he thinks.)
This Virgil in his sixth of the Aeneids aimed at when he says, Principio
coelum and terras, camposque liquentes,
Lucentemque globum lunae, Titaniaque astra
Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus
Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpore miscet.


By his opinion here, Plato his reasons why the world lives.
as all animalls and living creatures do live every one by their own life; so
the world as of greater dignity then any of the rest, has a more noble life
whereby it moves, then they: And in effect, many pithy reasons he produces
both in his Epimenides, in Timaeo, and in the 10. Book of his Laws, to prove
the world to be an animal, both from the constant and perpetual course of
the heavens; from that natural heat of the Sun, seeing the Sun and man
engender man, to which, as to all the Stars, he attributes a soul, by which
they live; but so, that as they are of a delicate and transparent body, so live
they a most blessed life: yet not that they are moved with an other life then
the whole world is.

For as in the body of man the soul, whereby our sinews, bones, flesh, blood
and all, are moved is one and the same, notwithstanding all the members be not
alike vivificated; so is it there.

For what reason is there (says he) that man who is called a little world, and
encompassed of the four elements, as well as the great world is, should be
said to live, and in the mean time to deprive the greater one of life; Seeing
the motion of the heavens, and of her lights, the moving of the Seas, the
seasons of the year, all keep their equal and constant courses? Always as
Plato here before setleth a Trinity in the Godhead, the Father; the mind, or
men's which is the Son; and the life of the world flowing from them as the
Spirit, and as brightness from light: So in his Timaeo he avoucheth that there
is in the heavens one certain Ens, which is ever alike unto it self, without
beginning or ending, which neither needs, nor takes help of any; which can
neither be seen by mortal eye, nor yet perceived by any mortal sense, but
only to be contemplated by our mind and understanding. So Aristotle in his
Metaphysics, and in his works De mundo, esteems this Ens, sempiternall,
unmeasurable, incorporeall, and individual, not resting in this habitable
world, but above it, in a sublime one, unchangeable, not subject unto any
passion or affection; who as he has of himself a most blessed and perfect
life, so without error may it be said of him, that he gives life unto all
other things below; and it is to be observed, that as in his writings he
acknowledged this God, so in his dying-houre, he made his writings and words
jumpe together. Which is so much the rather to be remarked: because, whereas
many Christians did profess a sort of religion in their lifetime, which on
their deathbeds they did disclaim: yet this man as he acknowledged God in his
writings; so dying, he recommended his soul unto him in these words, Ens
entium, miserere mei.

And particularly in his Book of the Heavens, the 9. cap. as is clear; there
(says he) without the outmost heavens there is no place, vacuity, or end:
because, those that are there, are not apt or meet to be in place; neither yet
makes time them any older, nor are they subject to change, or alteration,
being exexempted from all passion, affection or change: they lead a most
blessed and eternal life.

And in the 12. of his Metaphysics, cap. 7. but more especially, cap. 10. De
unitate primi motoris. In God (says he) is age and life eternal, and
continual, which is God himself.

Section 3.
Platos opinion concerning the Creation of the world; seconded by Socrates and
Antisthenes: Opinions of Plato, Aristotle, and other Philosophers, confirming
God only to be the Creator of all things.

AS the Philosophers do agree with us herein, and in sundry other places about
the nature of God, so do they likewise; that this God made the world, and all
that is in it, governs it, and sustaineth it. And first Plato in Timaeo: if,
says he, this world be created and begotten; it must necessarily be, by some
preceding cause, which cause must be eternal, and be gotten of none other.

Now what this cause is, in his Epimenides thus he expresses, I (says he
there) maintain God to be the cause of all things, neither can it be other
ways. And in that dispute which is betwixt Socrates and his friend Crito: let
us not be solicitous what the people esteem of us, but what he thinks who
knows equity from iniquity, who is above, and the only verity, who cannot be
known, nor pourtrayed by any image or representation (says he) because no eye
has, or can see him: who whilst he moves all things, yet abides
unmovable, who is known to be mighty and powerful, and who is only known
by his works to be the Creator of this world: His opinion of God.
as Socrates, so his disciple Antisthenes acknowledged this: yea, Plato in
Epimenide, maintains these Gods to know all things, to hear and see them:
then, that nothing escapes their knowledge, whatsoever mortal things they be
that live or breathe. And Aristotle in his book De mundo, proves, that all
things which it comprehends, are conserved by God; that he is the perfecter
of all things that are here on earth; not wearied (says he) like man, but by
his endless virtue indefatigable.

By all which, we may discern, that he acknowledges, (I may say religiously)
this visible world, and all things therein to be created of God, as in the 2
Book and 10. chap. of his Work of generation and corruption, at large
appears. To which authorities we may add these of Galenus, lib. 2. De foetu
formando; and of Plato, Deum opificem and rectorem nostri esse: and that of
Aristotle, Deum cum genitorem, tum conservatorem nostri esse, quorum
principium, medium and finem continet. Of Theophrast, Divinum quiddam omnium
principium, cujus beneficio sint and permaneant universa. Of Theodoret, Deus ut
Creator naturae, sic and conservator, non enim quam fecit naviculam destituet:
but chiefly Galen, Eum qui corpus nostrum finxit, quicunqueis fuerit, adhuc in
conf^rmatis particulis manner.

Now although in these particulars they agree both with us, and amongst
themselves; yet in one point, as may be seen in the subsequent section, they
differ.

Sect. 4.
Opinions of Plato, Aristotle and some Hebrews, concerning the worlds
eternity. The consonancy of opinions betwixt some ancient Philosophers and
Moses about the worlds creation.

ARistotle would conclude the eternity of the world, saying, Some of the
Hebrews of the same mind.
that as it had being from before all beginning, so that it should never have
an end; to which opinions some of the Hebrews (particularly Leo the Thesbite)
seem to assent so far, (howbeit they speak not of the ever durancie of it)
that after six thousand years expired, they understand it shall rest one
thousand; which then ended, it shall begin of new again, and last other seven.
And so by course last, and rest, till the revolution of that great jubilee of
seven times seven be out run. At which time, then this elementary world, and
nature the mother of all things shall cease. To which opinion some way Origin
in his work (...), Quod mundus cum tempore coeperit, did incline.

Yet for all this, I say, Plato in his Timaeo, speaking of the procreation of
the world, and of the virtues of the heavens, proved that the world had a
beginning, and consequently that it shall have an end. And that this is true
(says he,) it is aspectable, and may be seen, it may be handled, it has a
body: whence follows, that it has been begotten, and seeing it is begotten,
it must be by some preceding cause: Now, says he, as it is a great work to
search out this causer of it, so by our enquiry having found him, to divulge
him unto the vulgar is not altogether convenient. Further he says, that God
willing to beautify this world, as his chief work, made it a living creature
subject to our sight; containing within the enclosure of it, all other living
creatures, according unto their several species and kinds; whereas he
approaches nearer the mind and sense of our profession, Platos opinion of
propagation and continuance of all things.
than his fellow Aristotle: so directly in his Timaeo he maintains, that as
God created or begat the world, so he infused in it a procreative power; which
by divine or heavenly heat, induced from above, might propagate and procreate
every thing according unto the own kind of it, whether living or vegetable,
whether above or below. And as the great Prophet, and servant of God, Moses,
brings in God speaking unto his creatures after their creation was finished,
Platos terms not far different from Moses words.
Increase and multiply, etc. So Plato in his Timaeo, brings in God speaking
of the world, and all contained therein, in these words; All ye who are created
by me, give ear to what I am to say, I will give you seed and a beginning of
being; wherefore, do ye for your parts beget, and bring to light living
creatures after your kinds: augment and nourish them with food, and when they
shall cease to be, let the earth receive them back again from whence they
came. And to this Aristotle in his 2 Book De generatione and corruptione, cap.
10. gives way where preferring in that place generation unto corruption, he
says, that it is more worthy to be, then not to be; seeing properly to be
appertains only unto God, and not unto creatures.

After the fabric of the universe was accomplished, it should have been for
no purpose, if creatures had been wanting in it: therefore lest God should
seem to have forgot it, he infused in every one, according unto their own
kind, a procreative power, by which the generation of things might be
perpetuated.

But how did he this? says he, First generally, having spread abroad in the
Heavens, and Stars his divine seed (for they claim a part in our generation)
Then particularly, in every thing the own proper seed of it: all which he
avoucheth in the 12. Book of his Metaphysics, cap. 7.

Section 5.
Ancient Philosophers attributed the framing and continuance of all sublunary
Creatures (as we Christians do) unto God; with a recapitulation of several
consonancies betwixt us and them.

IN which places and several others of their works, as these worthy men have
ascribed the cause of the being of all things unto God; contrary to the opinion
of these other frivolous preceding Philosophers; who imputed the cause of it
unto the concourse of Atoms: So ascribe they the government of all these
sublunary things unto the powers above, with us Christians: and not unto chance
or fortune, as these former Philosophers did.

Thus Aristotle in the first of his Meteorologicks; It is necessary, says he,
that this whole world which environeth the earth, should be continuated with
the superior conversions, or revolutions of those celestial circles, and
bodies, which roll, and wheel above: because the whole virtue of it depends
from thence. Neither is it probable, that he, who has created the world, and
all that is within it, should abandon and leave it so: but that as the frame of
the fabric was his, so likewise the guiding and ruling of it should be
ascribed unto him also.

Which is more clearly expressed by the said Aristotle, in his book De mundo.
Where he says that it is an old saying, and left by tradition from our
forefathers; that all things both are of God, and likewise sustained by him;
and that there is no nature of it self, left unto it is own Tutory able to
attain well being (for so I interpret Salutem) without his assistance or
help: wherefore his opinion is, that God holds the beginning, middle, and
end of all things. So Theophrast says, that all things have a divine
beginning, by which they are and do subsist.

Dionysius likewise in his book De divinis nominibus avoucheth, that nothing
has subsistence, but by the omnipotent power of God: with whom, Theodoret,
that the governor of nature is the Creator of it: neither will he forgo that
Ship which he has built: Hence GOD is said by the ancients to be divided
through all natures, as if all were full of God; because his divine power
spreads it self over, and is seen in all his works, how be it one way in
the heavens, another way again in the inferior creatures; for in them also
his power manifests it self.

Inde hominum pecudumque genus, vitaeque volantum,
Et quae marmoreo fert monstra sub aequore pontus,
Igneus est ^llis vigor and coelestis origo
Seminibus --
Section 6.
Several other opinions wherein the Ancient Heathnicks agreed with us
Christians; Confirmed by the Testimonies of their Poets.

GOD then as he created all things, Comparison of the old Roman Philosophers
with the Roman Church now.
maintains and governs them, both according to these Philosophers opinions,
and ours; so they jumpe with us in this, that, to procure his greater favor
and to shun his greater curse, we should adore, invoke, and sacrifice unto him
not only the calves of our lips, but real sacrifices, as in those days
under the law was done by Aaron and his successors under the Old Testament; and
as they who were appointed to attend upon the Altar were sequestrated from
amongst the rest of the people, so was it amongst them.

The Poets are full of the testimony of both these.

Now as particularly Processions were used for the good success of their
corns, (as yet in the Roman Church is observed) so had they particular days,
which they esteemed more sacred then others. Tibullus in the first Elegy of
his second book perfectly particularizeth it.

Dii Patrii, purgamus agros, purgamus agrestes,
Vos mala de nostris pellite limitibus.
Neu seges eludat messem, etc.
Vina diem celebrent: non festa luce madere
Est rubor, errantes and male far pedes.
And as yet in the said Church there is invocation of certain Saints, for such
or such diseases, and for rain, whose relicts in such processions they carry
about; so the same Poet in the same Elegy acknowledges some Gods to be
appropriated (as I may say) to this, or that use and place.

Huc ades aspiraque mihi, dum carmine nostro
Redditur agricolis gratia Coelitibus
Ruracano, rurisque Deos.
Lastly as in the new Roman profession there is almost in every family the
Statue of some Saint, so find I amongst the ancient to have been the like.

Sed patrii servate lares; aluistis iidem, cursarem vestros cum tener antepedes.
Nec pudeat prisco vos esse e stirpite factos,
Sic veteris seeds incoluistis avi.
Tunc melius tenuere fidem: cum paupere cultu
Stabat in exigua ligneus aede Deus.
That they acknowledged nothing to happen unto men by chance, but by the
dispensation of the supreme powers, In that also they agreed with us.

Finally, I may say that as these Philosophers acknowledged punishments for
sins to be inflicted upon men both in their life, and after their death, so had
they confidence of joys to be reaped in the world to come for their good
deeds, as Socrates in his Apology for himself at length declares.

Sect. 7.
Of good and bad Spirits: and wherein the opinions of the Heathnicks agree with
ours concerning good Spirits.

AS for their opinion concerning good, or bad spirits; I read Plato and
Aristotle come so near ours, that you would believe, that they had collected
their sayings out of the holy Scriptures yet they do startle my belief, when
they say that the continual rolling of the celestial orbs and their spirits
do make that harmony they speak of in the heavens; I could much easier have
trusted them if they had spoken any thing of Music within the heavens by
those spirits, where we have warrant indeed, that the blessed Spirits there,
assisting the presence of him that sits upon the Throne, do sing Allelujas,
glory to God on high. Which good Spirits, as I find them distributed in 9.
several Quires or orders by Dionysius, so in Plato find I 9. distinct orders
of good daemones.

Yea the story of the evil spirits is no cleerer set down by our own
Writers, then they have it expressed in theirs.

The blessed spirits as I was saying, are divided by Dionysius in these Quyres,
The Hierarchy of blessed Spirits.
Seraphins, Cherubins, Thrones, Dominations, Virtues, Powers, Principalities,
Archangels, and Angels; subdivided in two ranks.

The first of them assisting the presence of the Almighty.

The second is called inferior, because as it obeys the commandment of the
first (as Dionysius in the tenth Chap. of his book touching the heavenly
hierarchy witnesses:) so their employment is much in the world: as the Lord
his servants excuting his will, appointed either for whole countries, or
particular persons.

Apparent accinctae aurae flammaeque ministrae, ut jussa accipiant. Sect. 8.
How near the Ancients agree with us concerning bad spirits; and in what
orders they were divided of old.

AS for the b^d spirits who were banished heaven, (the first and best mansion)
for their pride, they invaded the principality of this world, and so bewitched
it by their craft, that there was no nation almost that they did not draw to
their obedience under the name of God, and that so strangely, that every where
after a like manner, they were worshipped and adored as Gods, both amongst the
French Druides, and the remotest Gymnosophists of the Indies, in shapes of
Idols: how soever since the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, both
they and the old Sybillas have ceased for a great part, although, yet in many
places their sacrifices do continue. And that same Lucifer goes about yet as
a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour.

So Plato by several arguments proves not only that they are, but sets
down their division and power over the world; both generally and particularly.
But leaving all, both Deos majorum, and minorum gentium, The gods, as they
termed them, of greater, or lesser Nations; their Gods Patrii and Penates,
ordained for the custody of provinces, or families; their Dii Lares, which
were propitious ones, or Larvae the badder sort, with their Genii, good or bad
Angels, ordained as they thought for the guarde and attendance of every
particular person and so forth, I conclude this Treatise.

OF SLEEP AND DREAMS.
Section 1.
That nothing can subsist without sleep or rest; Exemplified in the death of
Perseus King of Macedon: The Primary and secondary causes of sleep: That a
sound conscience is a great motive to sound sleep; Proved in the example of
Thirois and his two Sons.

ALL motion tends to, Sleep, mainteiner of all living creatures
and ends in rest, except that of the Heavens; Which, in a perennall rotation
wheeleth ever about! Wherefore men, beasts, Foul, Fishes, after the days
travel do covet, and betake themselves to rest, as it is in the Poet.

Nox erat, and placidum carpebant fessa soporem
Corpora, per terras, syluaeque and saua quierunt
Aequora, cum medio volvuntur sider a lapsu,
Cum tacet omnis ager, pecudes, pictaeque volucres.
-- Et corda oblita laborum, etc.
Captabant placidi tranquilla oblivia somni.
This sleep is so necessary to the life of man, Perseus dyed for want of
sleep.
that for want of it many have dyed, as Perseus King of Macedon, who being
prisoner in Rome, and for torture being kept from sleep, there dyed.

Causes of sleep are two fold, Primary and secondary: The true, Primary,
Philosophical, and immediate cause of sleep may be said to be this; the
heart, the fountain and seat of life, having much ado to furnish every part
of the body with the streams of vital spirits, has most ado to furnish the
brains, which are the greatest wasters of them, in regard of the many and
ample employments it has for them, Causes of sleep
as for Pensing, Projecting, consulting, reasoning, hearing, seeing and so
forth; which functions of the brain do so exhaust the animal spirits, sent
up thither per venas carotides, through the veins organs; after by circulation
in that admirable Rete, or net of the brain, they are there settled, that of
all necessity either our life in the heart behooveth to cease, or it must
betake it self to rest again, for the recollection and drawing back of her
spent vital spirits, to refurnish the brains with a new recrew of them.

Secondary causes of sleep are diverse; Secondary.
as excessive labor, agitation of the body, repletion, as by excess of meats
or drinks, inanition, as by Copulation and many more of this kind, which do
so waste the spirits, that of necessity, there behooveth a cessation to be for
a time, that new spirits may be recollected for refreshing of it; Ausonius
wittily chiding his servants lasie drowsinesse, imputes it to excess of meat
and drink.

Dormiunt glires hiemem Perennem,
At cibo parcunt; tibi causa, somni est
Multa quod potes; nimiaque tendas
-- Mole saginam.
Add to these causes the tranquillity of a sound Conscience; Whereupon it was,
that the two Sons of Thirois (mentioned by Quintilian) upon most reasonable
judgment; were quitted from the murder of their Father, Thirois murder.
who was found in that same Chamber with them alone, and they both in a sound
sleep, the murderer perchance having fled away: for it was reasoned, no men,
guilty of so heinous a crime, as Patricide, could sleep so soundly, as they
were found to do, by the discoverers of their murdered Father. But leaving
examples of this or the former causes whereof every where are plenty, I proceed.

Section 2.
Examples of Kings and great Commanders, that upon the thoughtfulness of some
great exploite or encounter, have been extraordinarily surprised with unusual
sleep; and the resons thereof agitated.

WE read that great men and Commanders upon the most important point of their
exploytes and affairs, have sometime fallen in so deep sleeps, that their
servants and followers have had much ado to get them to awake, the like
formerly being never perceaved in them. Justinius and Quintus Curtius in the
life of Alexander the great relate of him: That, in the morning of that day
appointed for that memorable battle betwixt him and Darius, Alexander the
great his sleep.
he fell in so deep a sleep, and slept so long, that, on the very shock of
the battle, very hardly could his favorite Parmenio, after two or three
trials get him to awake. It is agreed upon that hotter constitutions are least
subject to sleep, and all his actions and proceedings mark him out to be such
an one; so it could not be his constitution that brought that sleepiness on
him; but he being then in hazard either to loose or conquer a field, whereby
both his Crown, Country, and reputation lay at the stake (motives to keep a
man awake) had so, no question, toyled his mind and body in the right
preparing and ordering of all things befitting a man of his place, for the
encounter; that being at a resolution, he gave himself to sleep, which his
former thoughtfulness and pains did augment upon him; and not, as some would
have it, the terror of his enemies forces: as Marcus Anthonius objected to
Augustus in that Navall combat against Pompey in Sicilie, Augustus his.
that he had not courage enough to behold the order of the battle; for indeed
he fell asleep and slept so long till the Victory was his, which he knew not
of till Agrippa with much ado had awaked him.

But indeed I construe both their courages rather to have been so great (as
their former and succeeding actions may witness) that they disdayned that the
app^^hension of such hazards or accidents as might ensue so great encounters,
should any way startle them from giving way to their own inclinations, whether
to sleep or wake, or do or not do this or that.

Section 3.
Alexander the great his sound sleeping, when he should have encountered Darius
in battle, here excused. Catoes sleeping before his death, whereupon is
inferred a discourse against selfe-Murder.

But laying all these excuses aside; I cannot much marvel at this sleeping of
Alexander, he being so young in the flower of his age, and so more subject to
sleep; Alexanders great fortune.
besides being so puffed up with the fortunate successes of his affairs, which
made him have so high a conceit of himself, (as to whom (says one) fortune
gave up towns captive, and to whose pillow, whilst he slept, victories were
brought;) as I must admire that strange sleep of Cato; who, after Caesar's*
Conquest of the field at Pharsalia, despairing of the liberty of his enslaved
Country, resolved to kill himself rather then behold the ensuing alteration
which Caesar's government would bring with it; He then (I say) having put all
his domestic affairs in order, Catoes sleep.
expecting news of the departure of his Colleagues from the Port of Vtica,
fell in so sound a sleep, that his servants in the next room, overheard him
to snort extremely; yet after that sleep, which (as it should seem) would
have opened the eyes of any man's reason and understanding, so far as not
only to abhor his first so ill-sett resolution, but totally to extirpate a
future thought of so damned an intention: he awaked so strongly confirmed in
his former intent, that forthwith he stabbed himself: His death.
And sleep is said to mollify and mitigate fury or rage in any man's mind,
Praeter Catonis invictum animum.

Now, though this man, (whom, his many other excellent virtues had made famous)
and many other worthy men amongst the ancients, did imagine for the like
deaths to be highly commended for courage; yet Saint Augustine (and with him
every good Christian) reputeth it rather to be an infallible mark of
Pusillanimity, A digression against self murder.
and want of firm and constant resolution, to behold and withstand dangers,
and inciteth us rather to awaite death, which is the worst that can befall us;
then, to prevent the sufferance of trivial crosses by unnaturally Boutchering
our selves: In his book de Senectute.
To which purpose Cicero, in presence of this same Cato, says: That since, we
are placed here by our general the GOD Almighty, as Soldiers in a garrison;
that it behooveth us not basely to forgo our station, till it be his good
pleasure to call us off: So much for sleep, now to dreams which are the
companions of sleep.

Section 4.
Of Dreams, both Natural, Accidental, Divine and Diabolical: Apollodorus
dream; Abraham's, Joseph's, Pharaohs, Nebuchadnezzars, etc.

MAny more things might have been brought in, in the former Sections, as of
those that walk or talk in their sleep, with the reasons thereof, and
illustrations to that purpose; but so many having handled those theames, and I
studying so much as I can brevity, and to shun tautologies, I remit the Reader
to them; and will now by the way touch upon dreams: And they are either
Natural, Division of dreams.
Accidental, Divine or Diabolical.

Natural are caused either by the Predominant matter, humor or affections in
us: As the Choleric, who dreameth of fire, debates, skirmishes and the like;
The Sanguine, of love-sports and all joviall things; The Melancholicke on
death, Natural which
dangers, solitudes, etc. where the flegmaticke dreameth of Waters, Seas,
drowning and the rest.

These dreams which proceed from our Natural or predominant affections are
either of love, jealousy, fear, avarice, envy, etc. by the first we may
Presage and judge of the sickenesses which may ensue upon the superaboundance
of such and such humors; (because they being the effects of the redundancy of
these humors, have a connection in Nature with them, as all other effects have
in their causes.) By the latter dreams we may presage, and judge of the
affections, and passions of the mind, and so consequently of the vices,
consisting in their extremes; So the avaricious dreameth of gold, the lover of
his Mistress, the Jealous of his corrivall, etc. and if not ever, yet for the
most part, this happens true or at least in part.

Accidental dreams, Accidental.
are caused either by diet, by fear or joy conceaved in the day time; or the
propense desire to have such or such a thing to come to pass, and the like:
Thus often times a vicious soul will figure to it self in dreams the terrors
that it fears: As Apollodorus, who dreaming that the Scythians were fleaing
off his skin, thought that his own heart murmured this unto him: Wretched
man that thou art! I am the occasion of all these thy evils which thou
endurest.

Divine dreams are those, Divine.
whereby it pleases God to give either a warning or insight of things to come*
such the Lord sent on Abraham the fifteenth of Genesis; and on Joseph in the
first of Saint Matthew; that too of Pharaoh, Genesis forty one: Of Pharaohs
Butler, and Baker, Genesis forty: of Nebuchadnezzar, etc.

Diabolical dreams cannot fore-shew any thing unto any man; Diabolical*
they may give a shadow or representation of things past unto us, but not
otherwise: Then seeing there is little connection of things past and to come,
therefore can there be no foresight by them; for although the Devil knows
many things, and at some times even speaks the truth of things to come,
thereby to inveigle our credulity, when in effect he only lies to deceave us;
yet unto them we ought to give no regard or faith. Now how Natural or
accidental dreams can portend or foreshew future things, it is doubted:
indeed Cardan sets down the (...) how, but not the (...) why, any ways
clearly enough, to my understanding.

For the dreams that GOD sends upon a man, I understand to be mystical, and
portending something touching his service: Our spirits it cannot well be; for
when we are awake, we cannot foreshew any thing to come, at least without
praemeditation, not by any Philosophical ground whatsoever. Neither can they
be moved by the devil, for he is a deceaver, and all his works impostures: It
must be then some other spirit, that infuseth these accidental dreams whereof
we will instance examples hereafter; to my mind, it must be rather some
peculiar extraordinary inspiration in the dreamer for the time, than Anima
Mundi, or spiritus universitatis, although many learned men ascrybe such
dreams to it particularly.

An example of this kind I read in Herodian, Severus dream of Pertinax.
where it is reported, that the Emperor Severus dreamed he saw Pertinax mounted
upon his richly Caparassoned Horse, and received as Emperor by the Pretorian
Soldiers, but that the Horse straight ways flung Pertinax off his back, and
came stooping to Severus; who reaching the Horse by the main forthwith mounted
him, and was by the same Soldiers received and admitted Emperor; which indeed
came so to pass.

Section 5.
The Emperor Severus his dream of Pertinax; which he caused to be molded in
Brass; An admirable dream of the Emperor Henry the fifth; Cicero's of
Octavianus. That beasts dream, but hard laboring men seldom; and the reason
thereof, etc.

WHereon he caused the whole drift as it happened, Severus causes to be cast
the manner of his dream in brass.
to be cast in brass, of which at length in Sabellicus Aenead. 7. lib. 5.

To which I may subjoyne that dream of the Emperor Henry the fifth, who being
grievously pained with the stone, dreamt that Saint Barnabas had cut him and
gave him the stone in his hand; Henry the 5th. his admirable dream.
which when he awaked, to his great Joy he found to be true, if we may be
believe Cuspinian.

Likewise that Dream of Cicero may be ranked amongst these: He dreamt that
there appeared a Boy before him who once should be Emperor and Master over
Rome; Cicero's dream of Octavianus.
the next day, after his accustomed manner passing through the public market
place, and espying Octavianus Augustus a little boy playing the part of a
Commander over the rest of his companions, he called to mind the feature and
stature of the boy who the night before had appeared to him in his sleep, and
finding that in every lineament he assimilated Octavianus, took him by the hand
and brought him before all the people that were there assembled, presented him,
and told them that one day that boy should command over them, which thereafter
came to pass.

Now dreaming is not proper to men only when they sleep, but to beasts also;
for War Horses accustomed to allarmes, and skirmishes, are observed to start as
afrighted, and sometime to neigh; Spaniels, Hounds and other hunting Dogs are
known with their voices to hunt in their sleep.

-- Iam Iamque teneri
Credit, and extento stringit vestigia Rostro.
But sleeping men do not at all times dream, wearyed and labour-toyled bodies
do never find them.

Dulce sopor fessis in gramine. Again, Sopor virorum dulcis agrestium.

Because nature has enough to do to disburden and digest the drowsinesse,
wherewith their whole senses were clogged.

But I will add no more of dreams, then that which Cato long ago has warned
us of, Somnia ne cures, nam men's humana quod optat
Et sperat vigilans, in somnis vidit id ipsum.


That this is love, beside daily experience we have warrants out of our most
famous Poets.

In somnis eadem plerosque videmus obire,
Causidicos causas agere, and componere lites,
Induperatores pugnare and praelia obire.
The reason hereof being that the object of our senses do not only move them
while they are present at a business, but also leaves some certain Idea
imprinted in the mind; which rancountring with our drowsy fantasies amidst
our sleeps, produces these confuted dreams above spoken of.

FINIS.
OF VARIETIES, The fifth Book. Containing five Treatises. 1 Of the Numbers
Three and Seven. 2 Of Miracles and Prodigies. 3 Of the Philosophers Stone. 4 Of
the World. 5 An Introduction to the Metaphysics.


By DAVID PIERSON of LOVGHLANDS in SCOTLAND Gentleman.

Et quae non prosunt singula, multa juvent. LONDON printed for T. A. 1635.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, my noble good Lord, THOMAS Lord BINNING, etc.
My ever honored good Lord,
NO so base attribute but might justly be vented against me, had I so far
suppressed Your Lo* most generous goodness, and many singular favors conferred on
my demerits, as not in this dutiful dedication, sacrificed to the altar of
your larger merits, present this small offering of my greater good will and
affection: I will not implore your propitious acceptance, for your noted and
courteous affability to all, and gracious acceptance of meanest gifts, animates
me to this presumption. What your known virtues (my Lord) are, would require a
more accurate and tighter Pen than mine to delineate; yet were not the world so
given, that even truths themselves are taken for palpable flatteries, I could
tell with what universal applause and commendation your younger virtues and
generosities in your travels made even strangers to honor and admire you! I
could tell what great hopes our Country has already received, that you will
not only to the Lands and Possessions of your worthily noble Father, succeed
as Heir, but to his singular Knowledges and Virtues also; which have already
so fairly budded and now ripen so hopefully, that none can doubt the success;
I could tell too of your Prudence, Courage, Charity, and your other ample
endowments; but I am so full of admiration of your every goodness, that what
the Tragedian said of Cares, I may of my affections, Leves loquuntur, ingentes
stupent: Accept then (my dear Lord) for expression of all, this little Book;
which, how voluminous and accurate soever it could be, were due to your high
deservings from me; That Your Lo: in it, is mixed with so noble Partners, I
hope for pardon not reproof, which likewise entreat for all my other
trespasses and boldness with your Honor, always humbly desiring the
continuance of your Noble Love and Favors to one, who would no longer wish to
live, if it were not both to live and die

Your Lo: most faithful and entirely-affectioned Servant* D. PIERSON.

OF THE NVMBERS THREE and SEVEN.
SECT. 1.
Treating briefly of Numbers in general.

GOD at the Creation is said to have made all things in number, weight, and
measure, as indeed they were in a most exact order, symmetrie and proportion.

Antiquity have remarked many things by several Numbers, as Pierus in his
Hierogliphicks at length relates, Antiquity superstitious in the observance of
numbers.
Pythagoras is said to have esteemed much of the number of five, as composed of
the first even and odd, numbers two and three: Numero Deus impare gaudet.

Several men have severally treated of several numbers, but I have here made
choice of three and seven, The use of number.
as finding maniest and most memorable things in all Sciences comprehended
within them; which thus pack't up together, cannot but be infinitely
delightful, and most helpefull to the memory of every Reader.

SECT. 2.
Containing variety of memorable things comprehended within the Number of
three, as of Heaven, and Hell, and of Poetical fictions, and some observations
amongst the Romans.

THree of all Numbers should be held in greatest veneration.

The Persons of the Godhead are three, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which is
that most blessed Trinity.

There are said to be three Heavens; Three Heavens.
Aeriall, which is betwixt this and the starry Firmament: Etheriall, that great
Primum Mobile encompassing the first: and Empireall, or Cristalline Heaven, the
habitation of the blessed Spirits, whither (as is supposed) Saint Paul was
ravished. There are also three Regions of the Air.

As three heavens, Three Hells.
so there are said to be three Hels; The Grave, the place of torment, and the
anxiety of a vexed mind.

Saturn had three Sons, Pluto, Neptune, Jupiter. Jupiter had his threefold
Thunder, Neptune his three-forked Trident, and Pluto his three-headed Cerberus.

Diana, Heathnick superstitions.
according to the place where she was, has three several names; in the
Heavens, Luna or Lucina; on Earth Diana; in Hell Hecate.

There were also three Graces, Aglaia, Thalia, Euphrosine: and the Muses are
numbered by thrice three.

Three Judges are fained by Poets to be in Hell; Minos, Aeacus, and Radamanthus.

Three Furies Daughters of Acheron; Alecto, Tyfiphone, Megera.

Three Hesperides; Aeagle, Arethusa, Hesperethusa.

Three Sirens; Parthenope for wit; Ligia for virtue; and Leucosia for beauty:
Aspectu verbis, Poetical fictions.
animi candore trahuntur
Parthenopes, Ligiae, Eeucosiaeque, viri.


Three Sisters of the Destinies called Partcae; Clotho draws out the thread
of our lives; Lachesis, spinneth or twisteth it; and Atropos cutteth it at our
deaths: Clotho Colum bajulat, Lachesis net, Atropos occat.

Gerion was said to have had a threefold body: Three shaped Chymaera; Sphinx
was fained to have three several Visages; and three fatidick or prophesying
Sybeles, and many the like amongst Poets: Martia Roma triplex, Equitatu, Plebe,
Senatu.

Amongst the Romans were three kinds of Flamens or Priests, their Deals,
Martiales, and Quirinales.

They had also three kinds of Prophets; Aruspices, who divined by sacrifices
on Altars; Augures by the chirping of Birds; and Auspices, who foretold the
events of things by beholding the entrals of birds.

They divided every of the twelve months in three; Ides, Nones, and Calends.

The Romans also, for recovery of the Greek Laws, sent three men, Spurius
Posthumous, Servius Sulpitius, and Aulus Manlius: And amongst them three were
noted for obteining greatest spoils from their Enemies, Romulus, Coriolanus,
and M. Marcellus.

Romes threefold government was first by Kings, then Consuls, lastly Emperors.

SECT. 3.
Containing some Theological and Moral precepts and observations, redacted
under the number of three.

THere are three Theological virtues; Theological and Moral Virtues.
Faith, Hope, and Charity; and three principal Moral virtues; Temperance,
Justice, and Fortitude.

Three things incident to man; Of Sin.
To fall in sin, which is humane; to rise out of it again, which is
Angelical; and to lie in sin, which is Diabolical.

Three things in all our actions are to be observed; How our appetites are
bridled.
that our appetite be ruled by reason; that neither lesser nor greater care
be taken about any thing then the cause requires; and that things, belonging
to liberality and honor, be moderated.

There are three principal duties belonging to every Christian in this life;
Christian duties.
to live in piety and devotion toward God; Charity toward our Neighbors, and
Sobriety toward our selves.

There are also three subalterne, and less principal; to use respect to our
superiors, clemency to our inferior; and gravity to our equals.

We offend God three ways, How we offend God, an how to appease him.
with mouth, heart, and hands, (by hand here I understand all our senses;) for
which to him we ought to make amends three other ways, by Confession,
Contrition, and Satisfaction.

Three degrees of Christ's humiliation; his Incarnation, Christ's humiliation and
exalation.
life, and death: three of his exaltation; his Resurrection, ascension, and
sitting at the right hand of the Father.

There are three things incident to unregenerate Nature; Ambition, Avarice, and
Luxury.

There are three ways to know God: How to know God.
Negatively, whereby what evil is in man, is denied to be in God: then by way
of excellency, whereby, what good is in man we acknowledge to be in God most
eminently above man, and in the abstract of it: Lastly by way of causality,
whereby we acknowledge God to be the efficient cause of all things.

Gods word was written by Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles.

David for numbering his people had choice of three things, David.
Plague, Sword, and Famine.

Solomon had choice of three blessings; Solomon.
Wisdom, Wealth, and length of days.

Three great enemies continually assail man: Man's Enemies.
the Devil without him, the World about him, and the Flesh within him: Against
which he should be armed with these three weapons; Fasting, Praying, and Alms
giving.

Love three fold; Divine, Worldly, and Diabolical. Love.
Moreover we are tied to a threefold Love; Of God, our neighbor, and our
selves.

A threefold fear also possesses us; Of Fear.
a Natural fear, for our lives and goods; a Civil, for our honor and fame;
and a Conscientious for our souls.

So we are said to see with three kind of eyes; of our bodies, reason, and
faith.

The Popes Mitre is engirt with three Crowns.

SECT. 4.
Of Politic Government: Of living Creatures; and of duties belonging to men of
several professions, as Physicians, Judges, and Lawyers, etc. with some
Physical observations, all Tripartite.

THere are three kinds of Government; Monarchy, Degrees of government.
of Kings; Aristocracie, of Nobility; and Democracie of Commons; as our State
consists of Clergy, Nobility, and Commons.

Philosophers, About dye^^
Physicians, and Divines do severally prescribe diet for living to all men;
the first a moderate, the second a sparing, the third a most strict continency.

There were principally three kind of Creatures ordained for the use of man,
What Creatures God ordained for man's use.
living in three several Elements, Foul in the Air, Beasts on the Earth, and
Fish in the Sea.

Three kind of living things, Intellectual, Sensitive, and Vegetable; as Men,
Beasts, and Plants.

There are three Principles of Physic; Matter, Form, Privation.

There are also three things requisite in a Physician; Physicians.
to restore health lost, to strengthen it being weak, and to preserve it when
it is recovered.

Even so the Lawyers parts are threefold; to recover means lost, Lawyers.
to preserve them when they are purchased, and to purchase such only as we
have right to; which three the Canonists perform, in purchasing of Benefits,
recovering those which are lost, and in conserving those which are once
obtained.

A Judge should have these three qualities; Judges.
not to be delaying, mercenary, nor ignorant.

Laws of men are threefold; Division of Laws.
of Nature, of Nations, and of Cities; and the Laws of God are, Moral,
Ceremonial, and Judicial.

Three things chiefly are to be observed in Judgment, Examination,
Consultation, and Sentence.

Three things too are requisite in a good Chirurgian; Chirurgian.
an Eagles eye, a Lions heart, and a Ladies hand.

Three things required in an Orator; Orator*
to speak fitly, ornately, and copiously; or as some will have it, demonst
ratively, deliberatively, and judicially: and in every of these, the
Circumstances are to be observed, Time, Place, and Persons.

There are three objects of the whole Civil Law, Civilian.
Things, Persons, Actions.

Amongst Latin Poets, Poets.
three kinds of Verses are chiefly used, Heroic, Elegiack, and Lyrick; under
Lyrick are comprehended Saphick, Iambick, and the rest.

Three species of sickness wherewith we ate affected; Physical observations
which are of quality, humor, and substance; which again resolve in three
kind of fevers, Simple, Corrupt, and Pestilentious: Simple fevers too are
threefold, Quotidian, Tertian, Quartan: Corrupt or Hectic Fevers threefold;
the first being in the consumption of our ordinary humor; the second in our
Balmie or oily substance, both curable; the third which consumes our noble
parts called Marasmus, past cure.

Of all measurable bodies there are three dimensions; length, breadth, and
deepnesse.

Three things especially the Persians taught their children; Customs amongst
the Persians.
to ride, shoot, and speak truth.

The day is divided into Morning, Noone, and Evening.

Every Moon has her increase, full, and wane, and Post triduum mulier
fastidit and hospes and imber.

SECT. 5.
Memorable observations comprehended within the Number of Seven, as of the age
of the World, and man's generation.

THe Number of Seven by many learned men has been held the most mystical,
and by some entitled the most sacred of Numbers, as on it many most
remarkable matters have happened: God created the world in six days, and
rested the seventh; and therefore amongst the Jews every seventh month, and
seventh year were appointed to ^est: and in how great reverence was their
great Iubilee, which every seventh year being multiplied by seven, fell out
every 49 year?

The age of the world is divided into seven; the first from Adam to Noah's
flood; the second from that to Abraham's time; the third from Abraham to the
freeing of the people of Israel from their Captivity in Egypt; the fourth, from
their coming out of Egypt to the building of Salomons Temple; the fifth, from
that to the Babylonish Captivity, at what time Jeremy writ his Lamentations;
the sixth, was the time betwixt that and the coming of our blessed Savior:
the seventh from our Saviors time to the end of the world. And some have given
forth, that the world shall take end the six thousand year of its age, and
rest the seventh.

The first seven days after conception, the seed of man in the womb
becomes Embrion, the seventh week there-after it becomes faetus and
quickneth; and the seventh month after that it is partus, and is brought into
the world.

SECT. 6.
How the seven Planets are said to rule severally over the seven ages in the
life of man.

AStrologians, who will have the life and constitution of man to depend on the
force of the stars and celestial bodies, The seven ages of man's life
attributed to the seven Planets.
(no ways depriving God of his Sovereign and absolute power) have divided the
age of man into seven parts, ascribing to every part one of the seven Planets
which rules over it. The first they call Infancy,

The second from four to fourteen, called childhood, Mercury, because he of
himself is indifferently good or bad, according to the good or bad Planets
with whom he is joined; so in this age a boy bewrays his inclination, and is
so flexible, that according to his education and company he is mingled with,
he becomes either good or bad, and that impression he then takes, can
hardly be rooted out of him.

The third contains the next eight years, and Venus, Et primae lanuginis
aetas in Venerem est praeceps; and it was called Youthead.

Adolocencie, lasts twenty years, and continues till the 42 year, and is
governed by Sol, the Sun, which Astrologians call the spring, the light, the
eye of the world, and King over the other Planets: In his age man attaineth to
his full strength and vigor, becomes hardy, judicious, understanding, etc.

Mars, a bad star, dangerous, fierce, and hot; for in that men begin to wax
angry, impatient, and avaricious, but more temperate in their diet, and more
constant in their actions.

Jupiter, a noble Planet, making men religious, just, chaste, temperate, and
pious: In this age men abandon on pains and travel, and practice devotion and
good works.

Saturn, the highest and most malign Planet, cold, dry, and mellancholick;
cumbersome, insupportable, weak, and growing again childe-like.

SECT. 7.
The opinions of some Fathers of the Church and some Philosophers concerning
the number of Seven, what attributes they gave, with some of Hypocrates
observations thereon.

BY Saint Ambrose in his 12. chap. de Moha and Arca; S. Origin in his 2 Homily
on Genesis, and his third on Exodus; and Eusebius de Praeparatione Evangelica;
this number is sometime called a clean number, a holy number, a virgin number,
a mystical, a number of perfection, with many the like Epithets attributed
unto it both by Civil and Ecclesiastical Writers; yet Chrysostom in his 24
Homily on Genesis, speaking of the number of Beasts that entered the Arc,
inveyeth against, and taxes all observers of numbers: Hypocrates in his work
de partu Septimestri, enlarging himself on the properties of this number,
says, that the life of man consists of septinaries; that in seven days a
child has all his complete members; and that if any man abstain totally
from meat and drink seven days, he cannot live; that a child borne the
seventh month may live, but not one borne the eight; because (says he) that
then Saturn, by course over-ruseth the birth; that in seven year children
have all their teeth; that the Guts of man are seven times his length; that the
celesticall bodies of the Moon, and of the eight and ninth Orb do move by
Septinaries; the Moon makes her course in four seven days; the eight
Sphere finisheth its revolution in seven thousand years; the ninth, in seven
times seven thousand, which make out forty nine thousand, and many the like.

SECT. 8.
Of the seven Wonders of the world.

THere have been seven wonders famed through the world, so called, either for
the vastness of the fabric, or curiosity of workmanship: 1. The Pyramides of
Egypt. 2. The Tower of Pharos, built by Ptolemy King of Egypt. 3. The Walls of
Babylon, built by Semiramis. 4. The Temple of Diana in Ephesus, Seven Wonders.
which was beautified with 127 Pillars of Parian Marble. 5. The Tomb or
Sepulcher of Mausolus King of Caria, built by his Q. Artemesia. 6. The Colossus
at Rhodes, the Image of a huge Giant cast in Brass, which be-stridde the River
which runs to Rhodes, under which a ship might pass: By some the Palace of
Cyrus which was reported to be cimmented with gold, obtained the seventh
place, though some, as Martial in his first Epigram, prefers Vespasians
Amphitheater at Rome before it, or any of the former: but the matter is not
worthy a controversy. So I leave them and proceed.

SECT. 9.
A continuation of observations on the number of seven, taken out of holy
Scripture.

THe Israelites compassed the Walls of Ierice seven times; and at the seventh
blast of the Rams horns, which they carried about them, they fell down to
the ground, and the Walls were thrown down.

The greater part of ancient Sacrifices were by sevens, as seven Rams, seven
Bullocks, etc.

Sybilla enjoined Aeneas to sacrifice in sevens, Nunc grege de intacto septem
mactare juvenc^s
Prestiterit, totidem lectas de more bidentes.


The principal Feasts and Solemnities of Gods people continued seven days.

Seven days the people eat unleavened bread at the Passover.

God had seven thousand reserved unto himslfe, which bowed not their knee to
Baal.

Job had seven Sons; and Zachary makes mention of seven eyes, wherewith God
sees all things.

The Prophet Elisha commanded Naaman the Leper to wash himself seven times in
the River of Iordane.

The number of Beasts which entered the Arc of Noah were seven: The Arc
rested on the Mountain of Ararat on the seventh month: and in the 19. of
Proverbs, Wisdom has built her house on seven Pillars; the seven
Candlesticks, the seven Churches of Asia; the Book closed with seven seals;
the seven Angels, with their seven Trumpets; the seven viols of Gods wrath; the
seven degrees of the Temple; seven loaves served the whole Company which were
with our Lord: Pharaoh dreamed of seven fat, and seven lean kine: and God in
the 26 of Leviticus, threatens a sevenfold curse to be multiplied on all that
think the evils that be fall them to come by chance; all which with many more
mentioned in Scripture, cannot be without their own mysteries; No marvel then
that Pythagoras and others have reputed this number a religious one; since
Scriptures are full of occurrences of this number; and the world consists of
the harmony of seven Unities, Natural, Conjugall, Regular, Personal,
Essential, Ecclesiastical, and Political.

SECT. 10.
Of the seven great Potentates of the world; of critical days, and
climacterick years, with other observations.

IN the Heavens are seven Planets, and in the Earth seven great and powerful
Potentates do rule: the great Cham of Tartary; the Emperor of China, by them
called the second Son of God; the Sophy of Persia; the great Turk; the
Emperor of Germany; Prester John; the powerful Monarch of Aethiopia; and the
Emperor of Russia.

The seventh and forteenth day in all diseases are accounted most dangerous,
and are called Critical.

Macrobius, Aulus Gellius and others observe, that every seventh year in the
life of man there follows some alteration either in estate, voice, color,
hair, complexion, or conditions: And Seneca, Septimus quisque annus aetati
notam imprimit, wherefore the 7. 14. 21. 28. 35. 42. 49. 56. and 63. the great
Climactericke year are counted dangerous for all. Firmian advises all to take
great heed to themselves in these years: Octavianus Caesar having passed this
date, writ to his Nephew Caius, to congratulate with him, that he had yet seven
years more to live.

There are seven Liberal Sciences, Grammar, Dialect, Rhetoric, Music,
Arithmetic, Geometry, and Astronomy: Gram. loquitur, Dia. vera docet, Rhet.
verba colorat,
Mus. canit, Ar. numerat, Geo. ponderat, As. colit
astra.


Seven Roman Kings, Romulus, Numa Pompilius, Tullus Hostilius, Ancus Martins,
Tarquinius Priscus, Servius Tullius, Tarquinius Superbus.

Rome was built upon seven Hills; Palatinus, Capitolinus, Quiritalis, Caelius,
Escalinus, Aventinus, and Viminalis.

There were seven wise men of Greece; Solon, Thales, Chilo, Pittacus,
Cleobulus, Bias, and Periander.

There were seven kind of Crowns amongst the Romans.

1 The Triumphall, first made of Laurel, and there after of Gold, given to
their Emperors by the Senate, in honor of their Triumphs. 2 Obsidionall,
given by Soldiers to their Emperors, for delivering them from a Siege; and it
was made of grass, gathered from about the trenches of that Siege. 3 The
Civicall Crown, which was bestowed on any Soldier that had releeved a
captived Citizen. 4 A Murall Crown, which was given to any man that first
entered a Town, or had scaled the Walls of it. 5 Castrensis, a Crown, given to
the first enterer into the Enemies Camp or Trenches. 6 The Navall Crown,
bestowed on him that first had boorded an Enemies Vessel. 7 Was called Ovalis,
or a Crown of rejoicing, made of Myrtle, which was put on the heads of their
Emperors, in ^vatione (as they said) or in sign of rejoicing at his
admittance to that dignity.
SECT. 11.
Of the Worlds Continuance and Ending.

THat subtle and excellent Philosopher Leo Hebreus, expatiating in the
meditation of this Number of seven, admiring and speaking of the worlds rest,
says; That after six thousand years are expired, in the seventh thousand this
elementary world shall rest, which God thereafter will renew seven times,
betwixt every seven thousand giving one thousand years rest; after all which,
says he, this elementary world, the Earth and all beneath the Moon, the
Celestial world also shall take an end: which Proclus also the Academick
secondeth, when he says, that the life of this world is septenary, its parts,
proportion, and circles are septenary; and with them many other Philosophers
have dived too deep into these mysteries; yet I cannot pass by Charon, who in
his History brings in Elias the Jew (not the Thesbite) affirming, that the
world shall last but six thousand years: viz. two thousand before the Flood;
2000 from it to the coming of the Messiah; and from that two thousand more to
the Consummation of all things; which in all amounts to 6000. Whereto S.
Augustine in his first Book on Genesis, ad Manichaos, some way enclineth; yet
Hesychius ingeniously confesses his ignorance of it, since neither to the
Son of man (as he was man) nor to the Angels that knowledge was revealed:
Origin adheareth to Leo Hehraeus opinion of 7000. years continuance in his
Homily, Quod Mundus cum tempore caeperit, in this third Book (...); and goes
further, saying, that after this world is ended, another shall begin; and that
before this world, there was another which he would strive to approve with
Authorities out of holy Scripture, which does savor a little too much of
presumption; for in all the Scripture there is no express mention to be found
either of the one or other: But we are commanded, not to pry too far in
these and the like mysteries which concern not our salvation, and which God
has kept only to himself.

Mitte arcana Dei, coelumque inquirere quid sit: Yet indeed this Father in his
Homily de fine vel consummatione, ingeniously confesses, that he only handled
those matters by way of reasoning, than any ways to conclude an infallibility
of them; for in the end he acknowledges, that he wrote them in great fear
and suspensive trembling.

OF PRODIGIES AND MIRACLES: Which are true, which false.
SECT. 1.
The definition of Miracles, with their distinction; In what time they were
requisite, in what not, etc.

SAint Augustine, that famous and reverend Father of the Church in his 6. Book
de utilitate credendi ad Honoratium, defines Miracles, Two kinds of Miracles.
to be things beyond the expectation and power of the beholder: Whereof there
are two kinds, True and False.

The false are such Miracles as are not in effect the thing they seem to be;
False Miracles which.
or if they be, they are not of any power that excels nature, but merely of
and by the power of nature, though obscured and hid; which the bad spirits as
well as the good can perform.

True Miracles are done by the power of God, True Miracles.
beyond all faculty of created nature, partly to draw the beholder to a due and
true admiration of him in them, and partly to confirm their says: such as
these were; the bringing back of the shadow ten Degrees in the Dial of Ahaz,
for Ezechias: A Virgin to conceive with child, and yet remain a Virgin: To
draw water out of a hard Rock: To make the Sea to part in twain; the Sun to
stand still; to turn water into wine; to cause Manna fall from heaven, and
many of the like kind comprehended in holy Scripture, which indeed were
miraculous things of themselves, if we consider the nature of their doing;
where, on the other side, false Miracles may, Difference betwixt true and false
Miracles.
in a manner, be thought miraculous, but not so much for the nature of their
doing, as for the manner how they are done; Neque enim (says one) constant
miracula magnitudine operum; so these Miracles are not so much to be measured
by the greatness of the work, as by the way of doing of them: and such as
these bad spirits cannot bring to pass, because how wonderful soever their
miracles appear to be, yet they do no ways exceed the reach of Nature:
Itaut mirabi lia quanquam sint, non proinde sint, and Miracula.

Neither is it to be denied, but that God serves himself with, Why God
permits false miracles.
and permits the false Miracleworkers, intending thereby rather to try the
faiths of the beholders of them, than any way to allow or confirm their
doings, as Deuteronomy. cap. 13. verse. 3. may be seen.

Now, where it is said before, that true Miracles are for the confirming, as
false ones are for trying of our faiths; this must be understood to be, when
the workers of them do teach withal so sound doctrine, that his Miracles may
be judged by it, not it by them. Hereby I intend not to enforce a necessity of
miracles perpetually for confirming our faith; When miracles were most
necessary.
for though, during the Churches infancy, they served some way toward the
establishing and confirming of the weak and wavering faiths of the hearers;
yet now they are not so requisite, seeing the Law, Prophets, Evangelists, and
Apostles works and writing are so universally preached unto all.

SECT. 2.
Of Prodigies, and in what veneration they were amongst the ancient Romans.

BEing loath to trouble the Reader with the tedious definitions of Prodigies,
nor with the several and many opinions of Writers concerning them I will
relate only some stories of them, and of the times wherein some of them
happened; of all which, as the most part of the Roman Writers make mention, so
particularly Sabellicus in his Rhapsoeticall history of the world; and that
from the 11. or 12. Book of his 4. Aeneid, unto the end of his Work.

During the first Punick War, (which was the first betwixt the Carthaginians
and Romans) under the Consulship of Appius Claudius, and Marcus Fulvius
Flaccus, which was the four hundredth and ninety year after the building of
Rome; the Roman Histories were then both more frequent, and did savor more of
truth and possibility than their former: Wherefore to begin with that time, I
observe, that there never happened any remarkable Prodigy, The piety of the
ancient Romans after any remakeble Prodigies.
either in the Air, Water, or Earth, after which there were not presently
Expiations, Lustrations, Prayers or offerings made unto their Gods, to whose
Temples and Altars people of every sex, age, and condition did flock and run,
to pacify and appease their incensed wrath; which may serve to condemn the
neglect and contempt that is in Christians of the like Prodigies, and teach us
(as these Heathen did when they chanced) to repair to our true God, Christians
blamed.
and implore for mercy, and forbearance of wrath at his hands.

To begin then (as I said) with Prodigies observed in the time of the first
Punick or Carthaginian War; of those many admirable ones recorded by
Sabellicus, I find this most worthy of relation: In the Picenean Territory,
Cneius Domitianus, and Lucius Annius being Consuls, A River ra^ blood.
a River was observed for the space of a whole morning, to run red blood, no
accident that might cause it being perceived by any; for which, and some others
the like, The institution of the Nov^ndi^lia sacra.
the Romans entitled their Novendialia sacra, or expiations for nine days;
and Livius likewise in the time of Tullus Hostilius their third King, relates,
that the like propitiatory Sacrifices were ordained for the like causes.

In Hetruria also, The heavens burned.
(which is now the Florentines bounds) the heavens were perceived to burn.

In the City of Ariminii, Three Moons*
three Moons at once were one night seen by the Inhabitants; all which
Prodigies appeared about the end of the foresaid first Punick Wars.

Shortly after, about the beginning of the second war, A child of a month
old spoke.
after Hanno was overcome by Scipio, a Child of a month old was heard to cry
in the Street Triumphi, Triumphi.

In the fields of Amitermin near Rome, ships were discerned in the sky, and
men in long white garments were perceived to march toward one another, Men
seen in the sky.
but never to meet.

In the Picen Territory it rained stones; and the Sun and Moon were seen to
joust (as it were) at one another; Two moons at once.
and in the day time two Moons appeared in the heavens. At Phalascis the
heavens seemed to be rent asunder: And at Capua, the Moon seemed to burn;
and, as envolved in a shower of rain, to tend toward the Earth; Civitas ob
haec prodigia (says Sabellicus) lustrata est, lectisternium and supplicatio
indicta, aliaque aliis diis placamina decreta.

SECT. 3.
A continuation of Prodigies, which happened in the time of the second Punick
War; with many others that were seen under the times of several Consuls of
Rome.

IN the first year of this second Carthaginian War, under the Consulship of
Fabius Maximus, A green Palm tree took fire of it self.
and Marcus Claudius Marcellus, a green Palm tree in Naples took fire, and
burned away to ashes.

At Mantua, a little Rivulet or stripe of water which ran into the River
Mincio, Rivers run blood.
was turned into blood: And at Rome it rained blood. An Ox was heard there to
speak these words, An Ox spoke.
Cavetibi Roma.

Afterward in the Consulship of Quintus Fabius, son to Fabius Maximus, and
Titus Sempronius Graccus, the similitude or likeness of great, long, and tale
ships appeared to be upon the River of Taracina in Spain: At Amiternum in
Italy, a little Brook ran blood for several days: It rained stones.
In Albano monte in Rome, it rained stones. The Sun at diverse times was seen
of a bloody color: Many Temples and holy houses in Rome were beaten down with
Thunderbolts from heaven: some of the City Ensigns or field Colors were
observed to sweat blood; Ensigns sweat blood.
two Suns appeared in the Heavens; at one time it rained milk, at another
stones.

During the Consulship of Cornelius Cethegus, and Sempronius, at what time the
Africane Wars were appointed to Scipio, (...)
two Suns at one time were seen in the Heavens: and the night (which is by
nature dark) appeared extraordinary light: A Comet in form like a burning
torch was discerned to reach from the East to the West; and it rained stones
after that notable overthrow given to Hanniball by Scipio, (which was the last
to Hanniball) and at the time when the Consul T. Claudius was appointed to
prepare for Africa, to appease some mutinies that had risen there; upon his
setting out to that voyage, the Orb and face of the Sun was visibly
discerned to be less than usual: Moreover in the Veliternean fields, The
^arth rend asunder.
the Earth rent asunder in so huge and frightfull gappes, that trees and whole
houses were swallowed up in it; after which there followed showers of stones.

In the Consulship of ^n. Belius, and L. Aemilius Paulus, it rained blood for
two whole days together: A Statue wept.
And the Statue of Juno in the Temple of Concord at Rome was perceived to
shed tears.

SECT. 4.
Of Prodigies that happened during the civil wars betwixt Marius and Sylla;
of some in Julius Caesar's time; as, at his passing the River of Rubicone, the
Pharsalian wars and at his death, etc.

AT the beginning of the Civil wars betwixt Martus and Sylla, a Mule, by
nature barren, The Capitol destroyed by fire from heaven.
did foale: The Capitol took fire; and which was lamentable, it being a work
of four hundredth years standing, and famous through all the world, was
destroyed, the whole City was so shaken with Earthquakes, that the face of it
was wonderfully defaced: and a woman conceived and was delivered of a Serpent.

When Julius Caesar had crossed the River of Rubicon, contrary to the decree of
the Senate, the heavens, as foreseeing what imminent danger was to ensue
thereupon, Images in Temples sweat blood.
rained blood. The Statues and Images of their Gods in the Temples did sweat
great drops of blood; and many fair buildings in the City were beaten down
with fire and thunder from heaven.

On the same day that the Pharsalian battle was struck, the Statue of
Victoria, which stood in the Temple of Minerva at Eulide, was seen to turn
its face toward the Temple door, whereas before it beheld the Altar. At
Antioch in Syria, such great noise and clamours were heard twice a day about
the Walls of the Town; that the people, afrighted with a supposed approach of
the Enemy, ran out of the City in their Arms. In the Temples of Ptolemais,
Organs and other Instruments were heard to play before Caesar's death:
Instruments heard to play where none were.
And those horses, which at the passage of Rubicon he had consecrated to Mars
the day before his massacre, were observed and seen to weep and to forsake
their food, and stray about. Shortly after his death too, about the
proscription of Lepidus and Antonius, An Ox spoke.
an Ox being led out to plough, uttered these words to his Master; Why urge
you me to work, we shall lack no corn, but men: and a newborn child did
speak.

SECT. 5.
Of Prodigies before the death of Galba; before the destruction of Jerusalem,
and at the end of the Valerian persecution.

THere were such fearful Earthquakes before the death of the Emperor Galba,
that at the renting asunder of the Farth, most hideous noyses were heard, not
unlike to the lowing of Oxen: But of all the Prodigies and Miracles that I read
of, those which went before the destruction of Jerusalem, were the most
terrible, whereof Josephus makes mention at length, yet my Author recounteth
others no less memorable, which were these: A Comet like a sword hang over
Jerusalem.
The Comet in the shape of a Sword that appeared and (as it were) did hang
directly over the City, before the destruction. An Ox cal^ed.
An Ox leading to the Altar to be there sacrificed, in the middle of the
Temple, did bring forth a calfe, to the amazement and astonishment of all
beholders of it: One night, about midnight it grew as light within the Temple,
as at noonday. Hoasts of armed men, and Chariots appeared in the air; and
the Priests heard a voice within the Sanctuary express these words; Let us
remove from hence. About the end of the Valerian persecution, before the death
of Galenus the Emperor, (in whose days the Empire began mightily to decline)
there was darkness for some days over all that tract of Earth, in and about
Rome; Formidable Thunders and Earthquakes
There were most dreadful thunders heard, with most frightfull noyses, as
roaring and fearful lowings in the air, and bowels of the Earth; whereupon
followed so terrible Earthquakes, and openings of the Earth, that whole
Villages and Towns were thereby destroyed: Lastly, through the dread and
terror of these frightfull noyses, and by the sight of these Prodigies and
portentuous wonders, many both men and beasts were stricken dead.

SECT. 6.
A continuation of other Prodigies; with a conclution of this Treatise.

ABout the end of the Goths and Vandals wars against the Romans, there were
seen in the air, Armies flaming as all on fire; from which there rained drops
of blood: and thereafter followed extraordinary overflowing and deboarding of
Rivers, The deboarding of Tyber ominous to Rome.
but chiefly of Tyber; which of all other Rivers is observed to deboard both
most excessively and most often; and these ever go before some evil to happen
to the City: But of all her deluges, none more memorable than that which
happened under the Pontificy of Pelagius, which overswelled the walls of the
City, destroyed all the Corn in the lower Countries, and procured such a
famine and Pestilence, that thereby many thousands perished, amongst whom the
Pope himself, after whom Gregory, the most worthy Pope of that name succeeded.

In the time of Sabianus successor to him, A blazing star.
a terrible and Portentuous blazing star was seen; and the sea cast up many
Monsters with visages like men. The sea cast out monsters.


These, and many the like were seen before the days of Bonifacius the third,
in whose time the Roman Church obtained of Phocas then Emperor, the title of
Mother and supreme Church; for till then the Greek Church claimed the
superiority.

In the days of Adrian the second Pope of that name, It rained blood three
days.
it rained blood three days. A little before the death of Sergius (the first
Pope that began to change his Proper-name) terrible fiery torches and fleakes
were seen in the air, with great noise and thundering.

In the Pontificy of John the eleaventh, son to Sergius, a fountain in Genoa
ran blood in great abundance.

About the time that John the twelfth was for his flagitiousnesse and
abomination deposed by the Emperor Otho, A huge stone fell from heaven.
a great stone fell from heaven: In Naples likewise within this hundredth years
there fell a brownish colored one of an extraordinary bigness. In France
likewise upon a St. John's day there fell a great piece of Ice, A great piece of
Ice fell in Rome.
in a shower of rain, many feet long.

In the year of our Lord 1012. when Jerusalem was taken by Anmrath the great
Turk, there were terrible earthquakes, and fiery impressions seen over all
the firmament, and the Moon appeared bloody.

But to recount all Prodigies and Miracles which in latter ages have appeared
in several Countries; and to set down the several Reasons that are given for
them, Conclusion*
with the events observed to ensue after every of them, would take up a greater
Volume than I intend this whole book to be; therefore I will here put an end
to this discourse.

SALAMANDRA, OR A short Treatise of the PHILOSOPHERS STONE
SECT. 1.
The History of the life and death of Antonio Bragadino.

THe History of one Antonio Bragadino a Cyprian Gentleman, which in my time I
did read in Villamont a French Barons travels and voyages, has occasioned
me to undertake this task. This man, says he, for the good services done to
the Venetians in the time of their Wars upon that Isle, being retired to
Venice, and there become their stipendiarie, (or rather pensioner) having
fallen at variance with some clarissimo whereupon ensued blood; (...)
not being able to keep their city any longer for fear of his life, withdrew
himself to the country; where being in necessity (through reason of his
pension which he wanted) bethinking himself how he might live by his wits; in
the end, retiring to a desert, he rancountred with an Hermit, His meeting with
an Her^^te.
who took, him to his cell; and having imparted to him his distress, got this
comfortable answer back again; that if he would be partner with him of the
task which sundry years agone he had undertaken, that he would not only
releeve him of his present necessity, but likewise (if the event: deluded not
his intention) would make him one of the richest and wealthiest men in the
world: His proficiencie in the Art of Chimestrie.
To which discourse having listened, and perceiving it was nothing but the
blowing of the coal he meaned, being allured thereto by his present want, the
hope and expectation of future gain, the venerablenesse and gravity of the
person, the religious silence of so solitary a place, he embraced the offer,
and in the end became so expert in the calling, that by his white powders, (for
as yet he had not come to that perfection to make red) he redeemed himself
from his exile, His Present to the Senate.
by presenting the Senate of the City with Ingots, to the value of fifty
thousand Crowns, with certificate, if that it should please them to restore
him to his wonted liberty (for thither was his affection carried beyond all the
parts of the world, in regard his Mistress was there) he should enrich their
Treasure for ever. Restored to favor.
Wherewith the Senate being much pleased, received him to their favor again,
where he was entertained like a Prince, attended with a Guard not so much for
honor of his person, as for fear he should have left them, and gone
otherwhere; while in the end his Ingots being suspected and called in question
for the validity of them, He is suspected of Treachery.
his Guard beginning to vilify him, and to neglect their wonted strict
attendance, he under cloud and silence of night, with his Mistress, and a
black dog which still followed him, fled their City and Territory; and in
the end having come to the Duke of Baviers' bounds to Germany, He flies to
Bavaria.
was there apprehended and hanged upon a gilded Gybbet, He is hanged on a
gilded Gybbet^
as one who had deluded the world by his sophisticate moneys.

SECT. 2.
The reason that moved the Author to handle this matter: The different
blessings betwixt the Indians and Christians: the definition of the
Philosophical Stone; the general way and matter whereof it is made.

THe History, I say, of this unfortunate man, and rich couzener, made me the
more curious and desirous to know the nature of so rare a thing as that which
they call the Philosophical Stone, which if men might attain to, the West
Indes should not be so much frequented as they are; but O how great is the
wisdom and power of the Creator of all, who reserveth the perfect knowledge
of so high a secret to himself, and imparteth it but to very few, knowing the
insatiablenesse of the heart of man; and to these who know not the worth of
gold, he does bestow it in such plenty, The plenty of gold which the West
Indians have.
that their ordinary household stuff, as Tongs, Chuffles, Pots, Tables, and
Cupbords, etc. are made of it whereas they starve in a manner for that whereof
we have such store; and which they esteem as much above their gold as we prize
their gold above our other necessaries.

So far as I can learn, I find that the Philosophical stone (by the Arabes
called Elixir)is the very true and just seed that engendereth and begets
gold: For gold is not procreated (as I may say) either of Brimstone, nor of
Mercury, nor of any such thing as fraudulently some suppose and give forth;
but it is to be searched and found out of gold it self, and that most
purified: for there is nothing in Nature which has not of it, or rather in it
the seed of its own kind, whereby it may be multiplied; but yet hardly by
Art may it be drawn out, by reason that the greatest and most vigorous
strength of that seed consists in a certain oily substance, The true
matter of gold.
or rather adhereth to it; which, whenever by fire we go about to draw out,
or segregate from the substance it self, it consumes away; which not being so
in gold, because by the violence of no fire it can be so burnt away, but that
it may abide the whole strength and force of Art; therefore out of it only
that seed or Elixir may be extracted, whereto it seems the Poet alludeth,
when he says, -- Vni quoniam nil deperit auro
Igne, velut solum consumit nulla vetustas,
Ac neque rubigo, aut aerugo conficit ulla
Cuncta adeo firmis illic compagibus haerent.


SECT. 3.
The Authors proposition: the reasons of its denomination; opinions of most
approved Authors touching it; and of the Possibility and factibility of it.

I Pass by the method and order of Fernelius in his last chapter de ab ditis
rerum causis, as being too speculative; for I will here set down a more full
and ample description of it, and such as has been imparted by the most
accurate wits that this age affords, after I have a little spoken of the names
both of it, and of the Authors who treat of it; and have resolved some
scrupulous difficulties; yet my intention herein is rather to let the Readers
know the most approved opinions of the most learned Writers on this subject,
then definitively to set down mine own.

It is called a Stone, because the things whereof it is composed are
consolidated and coagulated in a hard and heavy (yet friable) mass, and
thereafter reduced to a most subtle powder.

It is called the Philosophers Stone, because Philosophers were the first
Inventers of it, and they best know the making and use of it.

They give it an infinite (almost) number of names partly to set out the
matter, Ripleus c. 3. P. 74.
nature, and properties of it, and partly to obscure and hide it from the
ignorant and impostors; for the which cause they gave it many figurative names,
styling it by some part of the matter whereof it is made, Iodoc.
and by similitudes, Grenerus p. 36.
as they call it Salamandra, quae igne concipitur, ^los Flor. p. 35. 37.
igne nutritur, igne quoque perficitur: It is conceived, nourished, and
perfected by the fire and in the fire: Philosophi celare volentes veritatem
quasi omnia figurative loquuti sunt.

Many think the Philosophers Stone a thing impossible to be got, Thom. Aquin.
ad fratrem, c. 1.
but a multitude of most ancient and modern Philosophers have thought
otherwise, who knew both the theorie and practick of it: And of the
transmutation of metals, Libavius brings in a great number of them that
testify the same, in his Appendix de natura metallorum, amongst whom he
produces Geberus Hermes, Arnoldus, Thomas de Aquino, Bernardus comes; Ioannes
Rungius, Baptista Porta, Rubeus, Dornesius Vogelius, Penotus, Quercetanus, and
Franciscus Picus, who in his 3. Book c. 2. de auro, declares eighteen
particular instances, whereby he affirms plainly, that so many times he did
see the transmutation into silver and gold, so that the possibility and
factibility of the Philosophers Stone and transmutation is evident.

If any would allege difficulty, it is true any thing is difficult, and even
the most facile thing is such to them that are ignorant, but to those that know
it in speculation and operation, it is most easy, even as ludus puerorum, and
opus mulierum.

SECT. 4.
That the making of the Philosophers Stone is less expensive and laborious
than many things we both use and wear; why the makers of it enrich not
themselves and others.

THe true making of that Stone is neither expensive, nor long, nor wearisome to
those that have the dexterity of it.

Betwixt the Barley grain that must be sown, and the aquae vitae that is made
of it, there is both a longer time, and many more points of labor: And betwixt
the linnessed, and the linen cloth we were, there is a longer time, and much
more labor than in the framing of Philosophers Stone, as these blowers would
have the world believe.

It is true, many chymicall Philosophers so soon as they attained this
precious Stone, the very knowledge of it delighted them more than worldly
gain; and they made more use of it in Physic than in projection. And if any
would ask; what was the cause they made not themselves and all their friends
most excellently rich. It may be well answered, they lacked not, they had
contentment, they delighted more in theory than practick: they disdained to be
gold-makers to those that were greedy, or to those that were through idleness
needy, and were afraid to be made a prey and captivate slaves to avaricious and
cruel tyrants: these things and such like made them obscure and hide from the
world what they knew or could do, intending rather to have by the Philosophers
Stone a balsamic universal medecin than the feminary of gold.

Many have written diverse treatises of this subject some one way some another
way, some more mystically some more plainly; and what is dark in one, is
found again more clear in another, specially to such as are diligent Readers
of the Hermeticall Philosophy, I will therefore set down here what by most
approved consent of all, is the most easy and compendious way to perfect the
Philosophers Stone, without prejudice to others, that think they knew a better
way. In this my discourse there shall be nothing obscure, but that which a
^^lius artis may easily understand.

SECT. 5.
A general relation of the matters and materials requisite to this work; and
in what time it may be perfected.

ANd first, these principles and grounds for this work are to be understood,
to wit, 1. Every metal consists of Mercury as a common versatill and flexible
matter of the which all mettalls are, and unto the which all may be by Art
red^ced. 2. The species of metals, and their specific and essential forms
are not subject to transmutations, but only the individuals of the species. 3.
All metals differ not in their common nature and matter, but in their degree
of perfection and purity. 4. Art surmounteth and over-reacheth Nature, for Art
assisted by Nature in a short space may perfect that which Nature otherwise by
it self was a thousand years in perfiting and accomplishing. 5. God has
created every metal in its own kind, and has implanted in them (specially
in the perfect metal) a seed whereby they may be by Art multiplied.

The chief matter of this Work is most purified gold, Tauladan. p. 28.
and silver joined together in the progress of the Work; Rosarum. p. 18.
and (as some hold) Gold alone in operation ad rubeam tincturam, Libaniu^
Mullerus*
and silver alone ad albam; Aquinase. 3.
and Mercury according to Art well prepared, is the principal perfiter of the
Work.

The only and chief key in this Work, Daustricus. p. 16.
is that black brat that arises and is emergent out of the solution of Sol and
Luna with Mercury; Monachus p. 16.
called Caput (...) etc. Benedictus p. 5^, 57, 58. etc.


The chiefest works are Solutio and Coagulatio; by solution caput corvi is
obtained, Mo^iennes two principless
as a seminary arising from the dissolved Sol, Luna, and Mercurius, Solut. and
coagulat.
and must be chiefly regarded. By coagulation caput corvi is fixed and fitted
for impregnation and fermentation. Solution whereby caput corvi is obtained, is
more facile; but coagulation is more difficile.

The time to finish the whole Work is not years, Moriennes Theob.
but some months; the expense are not many, Arnaldus.
but tolerable, and the pains are easy, with some diligent attendance on the
Work: One Furnace Philosophically made for distinction of the degrees of the
fire will suffice: And one or two Glasses will be needful; the Glass must be
a Vial in form, and with a long small cragge or neck, the body of it must be
round, and so devised, that consisting of two parts, the inferior part may
receive the superior part, that it may be closed skilfully, and opened again
at the Artificers pleasure*

SECT. 6.
Of the 5 degrees whereby the Work is perfectioned, and first how to bring it
to Solution.

THe whole artifice in composing the Philosophers Stone consists in five
distinct operations each following other in order, (...) p. 61, 62.
to wit, Solution, Coagulation, Fermentation, fixation, and Multiplication.

Solution.

Take of Mercury (made menstruall by calcination, Exercet. 3. in tu bam.
so subtily prepared by sublimation, that it may become sharp and piercing)
twelve ounces: Arnald. in specie.
of Solis the best sort refined by frequent fulmination, Scala philosoph. p.
103* Mulletus de lap. philosoph
and drawn forth in most thin plates or pieces, one ounce; upon the which in
a Glass power some of the Mercury about the fourth or fifth part. Set the
Glass in a luke warm heat in the first degree on ashes, and so stopped and
closed, that nothing fall in nor out of it, when it is stirred and inclined;
and let all stand for the space of 15, or 20 days, during the which time a
part of the Sol will be dissolved into the Mercury, by reason of the internal
fire and corroding acrimome thereof, power off that menstruall and keep it,
and power on another part of the same, doing as is said before; and let all
stand eight or ten days, and so forth do till the Sol be all dissolved into
the mercuriall watter, which after the commixtion and resolution of Sol into
it, Mercury which before was menstruall, now is of another temper, and is
called lac virgineum, aqua vitae wherein Sol is fully dissolved.

Put all this lac virgineum in the Glass with the foresaid degree of heat
every eight or ten days, then will appear a black brat and matter, partly
emerging and swimming above, and partly subsident which (the watter or lac
being first powered off) must be collected so often as it appears, and is to be
kept for coagulation: Rosarium p. 189.
It is called caput corvi, sulphur auri crudum and nondum fixum. Libanius
Arnaldus.


SECT. 7.
How from Solution to make Coagulation.

COagulation: Iullius, p. 116.
put the sulphur Solis into the viol-glasse closse stopped, and set it in the
foresaid first degree of heat for eight days, Arnaldus.
till it be almost exsiccat with the humidity of lac virginis that was left
inherent in it; Mullerus.
and then open the glass and pour thereon as much of the lac as is the weight
of the caput corui, Miracula chymica.
and mixing it well, let it stand one or two days till they both be coagulat
in one, Libanius.
and become almost dry; and so forth do thus till all the lac be drunk up,
which will be about the space of 90. days more or less, according as the
matter is of quickness and activity; and if this lac or aqua vitae be
suspected to have contracted any dullness and superfluous humidity while it was
in the former work of solution: in that case it is to be prepared again,
quickened, sharpened, and made fitter for this present work of Coagulation.

Both these, to wit the Lac virg. and Sol. being Coagulat as is said, the
Coagulation must yet go on, and with the second degree of heat for the space
of a month, the matter Coagulat must stand in that heat, till there appear
cauda pavonis, that is, a variety and multitude of colors; and at length it
will turn to a white color, called corpus album, sulphur album, coagulatum
album, terra philosophorum, etc.

SECT. 8.
How from Coagulation to produce Fermentation.

FErmentation: Isaacus.
take as much of purified and laminated Sol. Lullius.
(as answers to the third part of the foresaid coagulatum album) and of
menstruall Calid. c. 6.
Mercury four parts of the weight of Sol. Rolinus. p. 283.
Amalgamaz them and put them in the viol on a lukewarm heat for 15. days,
Dastin^s p. 30.
till Sol. by the Mercury be reduced into a subtle calx. Mullerus.
Then amalgamaz Libanius.
in a marble mortar all the foresaid coagulatum album with the Calx Solis and
menstruall Mercury, then put altogether in the viol, and set it for a month in
a heat of the second degree: then set it in a heat of the third degree, and let
it so continue a good space till it become an hard white heavy mass, and from
thence to an yellow color, and from this to an orange color, and thereafter
incline to be redish colored.

SECT. 9.
The way to bring the work to Fixation.

FIxation: Scotus p. 61. ^^1.
for projection and transmutation, take the half of the said mass and bruise
it, put it in a luted glass, and set it on sand in a furnace, and increase the
fire unto the fourth degree, that all may be made so fervent, that if a drop of
water do fall on the sand it make an hissing, it must stand so, for 40. days,
till the pulverished mass become a most subtle powder.

And for projection of this powder, one part of it upon a 100. parts of Mercury
vulgar (but washed with vinegar and salt) will make the whole, a perfect
tincture, and as some hold; one part of this hundredth fold tincture projected
on another hundredth parts of Mercury: in whole will make and afford 1000. parts
of tincture for gold, whereof one part projected on 100. parts of warm
Mercury, will presently transmute it into perfect Sol.

SECT. 10.
From all the former, how to perfectionate Multiplication.

MVltiplication: is that wonderful part of this artifice, whereby the stone
being once made, needs not to be made over again; but may be multiplied to
suffice continually, and it is thus done. Take the other half of the mass
left in Fixation, or what quantity you please of it before Fixation, and put to
it of Lac virgineum or aqua vitae (prepared and provided for the purpose, and
made after the manner aforesaid) a third part, and handle it after the same
manner as is set down in the work of Fermentation, and it will become as fit
both for Fixation to Projection, and Multiplication as before, and will ever
be, so often as it is reiterate.

SECT. 11.
A short recital of some other ways of perfecting it, used by some Filij
artis, and why it is called Salamandra.

IF any please to make the Philosophers stone only ad album, that is for
transmutation of Mercury into Luna, he may observe this forefaid method, which
is only ad rubrum, and so proceed in all things after that same manner,
except only two things. 1. for Sol take Luna fined and battered out in small
and thin plates. 2. when it comes to the work of Fermentation, give it
only a heat and fire in the third degree, so long till the Fermented mass
become somewhat hard, and then proceed with it to Fixation and Multiplication
as is said in the operation ad rubrum.

Some join together both Sol and Luna in the progress of the work till it
come to Fermentation, and then to obtain tinctura alba for transmutation into
Luna, they put to Luna for the Ferment, and to obtain tinctura rubra for
transmutation into Sol they put to Sol for the Ferment, and so they proceed as
is said.

There are diverse otherwise in the making of the Philosophers stone, some
more compendious, some of a longer process, but this that is here set down is
the best.

The Philosophers stone is rightly called Salamandra, because its bred and
nourished in the fire. It is a treasure both for turning other metals into
gold or silver, and for any universal medicine to cure and prevent almost all
diseases. Which so admirably being once by art found out, does show its power
and force; that with Augurollus, Ipsius ut tenui projecta part, Agur^lls.
per undas
Aequoris: Argentum vivum tum si foret aequor
Omne velimmensum, Verti mare posset in aurum.


OF THE WORLD, Its Beginning, Frame, and Ending; At least the conjecturall
Ending.
SECT. 1.
Of the various distractions of Philosophers in their opinions concerning their
Gods; and upon how ill grounds they were settled.

IN perusing the Monuments and Writings of the old Philosophers, as I find
them abstruse and intricate in diverse points of their professions; so
particularly I remarke their irresolutions, and likewise the differences
amongst themselves. Of these special heads following, Three special points
wherewith the ancient Philosophers was most perplexed.
to pass by diverse others which I have observed in their Poets; First of the
true nature and essence of the Godhead which they worshipped; Next of the
descent of their souls into their bodies, and of the event of these souls
when they should leave them: And lastly, of the beginning and ending of this
World, of every one of which a little here.

Always in handling these points, and the first principally I exempt Plato and
Aristotle, for what their opinion is herein, I have touched in that Title which
shows, how near in all these three they jumpe with our Christian Religion,
which otherwise distracted the rest of the Sects.

To be brief then, a love principium* this is admirable, that some Gods they
admitted as not perfect ones; whence Ovid says, or at least brings in
Jupiter to this purpose. The opinions of the old Philosophers concerning the
nature of the Gods.
Quos quoniam nondum coeli dignamur honor,
Quas dedimus certe terras habitare sinamus;
as if in any Deity, there should be imperfection; But, why not so to them?
seeing Chrysippus admits some mortal as well as immortal, which at the
last conflagration of the world shall all be consumed by fire; so that of their
Dii minorum gentium, none shall go safe, except Jupiter alone.

To pass by, that Srato exempts the Gods from all charge and office, ascribing
all things to be done by Nature; presupposing, as many restoratives ordained
for the upholding of it, as there are destructives appointed for its undoing.

Was there not Gods appointed by them, as the Patrons to all vices, and
authorizers of it? yea they set them at odds one against the other; Mulciber
in Troiam pro Troia stabat Apollo.

And again, Neptunus muros, nagnoque immota tridenti
fundamenta quatit, etc.
And through all Homer, Minerva aideth Achilles; Jupiter lamed Vulcan; he
again enchained Mars and Venus, and the like fopperies.

SECT. 2.
Of the several sorts of Gods amongst the Heathen; that they imagined them to
be authors of evils; that they were but mortal men: And some opinions of
Philosophers concerning the nature, being, and power of their Gods.

IT was some way dispensable, The philosophers not only admitted their Gods a^
inventers of good, but fomenters of evil also.
yet at least (quoad eos) to have fained Gods almost for all natural
productions, as Flora for the flowers of the Gardens, Bacchus for the Wines,
Ceres for the Corn, Juno for Childe-births, and so forth: yea and to have
prescribed one for every Craft or Trade; yea and one for the tutelage of every
Country.

But that they should have imagined their Gods so irreligious, as to have been
fawtors or authors, much less actors of evil, I think far beneath the
belief of any (ex faece) of the lees and dregs of the people, much more of a
wise man and a Philosopher; which moves me to think, that those were wisest
amongst them, who meddled least to speak of their Gods, and vexed not
themselves with their enquiry; but with Socrates, esteemed the best judgment
that they could make of their Gods, to be, to judge nothing at all of them.

The most diligent inquirers in the end discovered them to have been but
mortal men, who in their lifetime had proved worthy either in War or peace
and were deified after their death: And accordingly Augustus Caesar had more
Temples and pompous solemnities instituted in his favor, than Jupiter Olimpius
almost had.

So that to obscure the baseness of their Gods, it would seem, that they were
molded or painted of old with their fist closed upon their mouths, or at
least their fingers, as willing thereby living men, to speak either sparingly
of their nature, or nothing at all.

Thus Pythius Apollo said well, and before him Timaeus to his Disciple
Socrates, speaking of the nature of the Gods; Vt potero explicabo, non ut certa
and fixa sunt quae dixero, sed ut homunciolus
probabilia conjectura adumbrans.
And in other places, Sperantium sunt haec non probantium.

But to enter here into the diversity of their opinions concerning the Deity
the nature and descent of their Gods I am loath, lest we should imagine those
Philosophers, The Philosophical error concerning the descent and progeny of
their Gods.
in stead of wise men, as they were called, to have been stark mad: Thales
esteeming Gods to be spirits, which had made all things of water, for he was
the first that ^ried in the cabin of their secrets: Anaximenes on the contrary,
wills them to be of the air, because they (as it) should be in continual
motion: Others of no little note, repute the Sun and the Moon with the
Stars to be Gods.

Labentem coelo qui ducitis annum
Liber and alma Ceres vestro si numine, etc.
Some again made that Law imprinted in our hearts, by which we are inwardly
(as it were) driven to do good, and to abstain from evil: Pythagoras reputed
God to be a certain Spirit, spread and shed abroad on, or in the nature of all
things; so that with him all were full of Gods: Others finally flatly deny that
there was any at all, but that all things had being as they are, and should
continue in a perennell motion, vicissitude, and change: But I should weary you
if I should but relate every one of their several opinions.

SECT. 3.
Pythagoras opinion concerning the transmigration of souls rejected; of the
coupling of the soul and body together; with several opinions of the ancient
learned men concerning the substance of the soul.

O What perplexity and doubts were the ancient Philosophers plunged in
concerning the transmigration of their souls? The errors touching the descent
of their souls.
their renowned Pythagoras avouched that strange opinion of Metempsychosis, of
the change or transplacing of the soul of a dying man, to, and in the body of
a newborn creature, whether beast or rational body; and then that body dying
again, that self same soul to remove and regaine a new habitation, and so to
continue from body to body. To which so fond an imagination, I think no old
woman's fable comparable.

And yet I excuse some way the irresolution of the Philosophers in this point,
much more than in the mistaking of their Godhead; because I find, that besides
them, even the best Professors have doubtings in this point; that some of our
Christian Fathers have been touched with an admiration how the soul and body
were coupled and yoaked together, whence one of the most famous is brought in,
saying that Modus quo animae adherent corporibus
omnino mirus est, nec comprehendi a^
homine potest; as before him Plinius,
Omnia abdita and in naturae majestatis gremio reclusa;
So that with the Poet, no marvel though they should say likewise, Ignoratur
enim quae sit natura animai
Nata est, an contra nascentibus insinuetur.
Et simul intereat nobiscum morte perempta
An tenebras orci visat, vastasque lacunas,
An pecudes alias divinitus insinuet se.


The alterations and disputes concerning the substance of the soul are so many
and different as is a wonder; some deny there is any soul in the body, Diverse
opinions of the philosophers concerning the substance of their souls.
but that our bodies move of themselves, by the instinct and power of nature;
Others again confess that there is a soul wherewith our bodies are vivified,
say, it is a mixed thing composed of water and earth; others, of fire and earth:
Empedocles wills it to be of and in the blood; thus Eurialus dying, was said to
render sanguineam animam, -- Sanguineam vomit ille animam: Zeno more
judiciously in that kind, esteems it to be the quintessence of the four
Elements: Hypocrates, a spirit diffused through the whole body and every part
thereof, Ita ut sit tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part: It was a general
and received opinion, that in this world there was a general Soul, Anima
mundi, from which as all particular ones were extracted, so being separated
from their bodies, thither they returned again, according to which Virgill
says, -- Deum namque ire per omnes, Terrasque tractusque maris, etc.

And again, Scilicet hinc reddi deinde ac resoluta referr^
Omnia, nec morti esse locum. --


SECT. 4.
The former Heathnick opinions confuted by our Christian Belief; that they
differed concerning the time of the souls continuance, and place of its abode:
how they thought souls after the separation from the body to be rewarded for
good or ill, etc.

THe last most plausible opinion, and which has purchased to it self most
Patrons, was, that the Father infused it into the Child by generation; from
which opinion few have swarved but Christians, who are taught to believe that
the soul is given us from above.

The Jewish Church held (as we) Coelitus demissa, and not ex traduce: Thus
Solomon, Eccles. 12. ver. 7. The Philosophers generally held the contrary: the
Poets (whom I account Rythmicall Philosophers, as Philosophers unversified
Poets) are copious in this subject.

Fortes creantur fortibus, and bonis,
faith the Lyrick,
Nec imbelles faerocem.
progenerant aquilam columbae:
And again another, Dolus vulpibus, ac fuga cervis
A Patribus datur.


Now as they differed in opinion touching the substance and descent of their
souls; The different opinion concerning the event of souls after their
separation from their bodies.
so no less varied they about the time how long, and the place where the
souls should continue after the dissolution of their bodies.

The Stoics maintained, that the soul shall remain a certain space after
the dissolution from the body, but not ever: Pythagoras and his Sect, of whom a
little before, that the souls of the departed did remove from that body to
another: of which sort yet some were of opinion, that of these same souls some
removed to heaven again, and within a space thereafter reddescended to the
lower parts, which Virgill intimates when he says, O Pater! Anne aliquas ad
caelum hinc ire putandum est
Sublimes animas, rursumque ad tarda reverti Corpora est?


And again, Lathos culices and longa oblivia potant.

Plato (and that he has out of Pindarus) esteems that as a man has lived
well or ill in this world, accordingly his soul shall be requited hereafter;
if well, that then it shall be rejoyned to the Star to which it was first
assigned; if ill, that then it shall be coupled to one of some malignant
influence.

Finally, Apuleius Madaurensis in his tractate of the Moon, brings in
Plutarch, maintaining, that the souls of well doers here during their abode in
bodies, to be converted into Demigods or Saints: On the contrary, the ill
ones, or at the least the worst are turned into Demons: As for the absolute
eternity of them, they meddled with that opinion rather more Sperantium quam
probantium.

By this preceding discourse, we may see how far we are obliged to the
infinite mercies of our great God, who as he has revealed himself truly unto
us, at whom these ancient wise men but in a glimpse obscurely aimed; so has
he rid our minds of that perplexity, wherein they were wrapped and infolded
touching both the descent and event of our Souls.

SECT. 5.
Philosophical tenants of plurality of Words confuted; of Gods Creation of
male and femall of all living Creatures.

BEcause the discourse of the World, and the Philosophers opinions touching the
beginning, continuance, and ending of it, is the Theme which directly here I
intend to handle; I haste me to it.

That there were more worlds than one, Democritus, Epicurus, and others
mantained as an undoubted verity, whence the Poet, Terramque and Solemn, Lunam,
Mare, caetera quae sunt
Non esse unica, sed numero magis innumerali.


The reason whereupon they grounded the probability of their opinion, Their
reasons why there were mo^ worlds than one.
was this, because that in all the Universe there was nothing created alone
without a mate or fellow, as in all birds, fishes, beasts; Yea in plants and
herbs, and in man their under Monarch may be seen, but as Aristotle himself
has confounded that opinion of his, prior Philosophers concerning their
plurality of worlds, so natural reason may lead us by the hand to its
convincing; for, if there was another world, it behooves to be as this is,
spherite and round, because that of all figures the orbicular is as most
perfect, so most spacious; then if they were round, howbeit in their sides they
might touch and kiss one another, yet sure betwixt the superior convexes and
lower concaves, there behoved to be vacuities, which their own Maxims admit
not, for Natura, say they, abhorret a vacuo.

As for that conjugality (if abusively I might say so) of all living Creatures
in paires, it was ordained by the great maker for the propagation and
multiplication of their kinds, which otherwise had decayed; for with Apulcias,
Cunctatim sumus perpetui, sigillatim mortales.

SECT. 6.
Several opinions of several Philosophers concerning the Worlds Eternity;
their natural reasons for approving of it; and what the Egyptians thought
concerning the antiquity of the World.

THeir other opinion of the Eternity of the World has had more Patrons than
this, Opinions concerning the Eternity of the World.
and that so much the rather, because that seeing the Godhead, their supreme
Ens was from all Eternity, that therefore I say, he could not then even from
all beginning (if Eternity could admit a beginning) be a Creator without a
creature, for otherwise he should have nothing to do, as they say.

So that those of this opinion do not infringe, that of the most famous in all
the Greek schools, favoring the Eternity of the World saying, that the World
was a god created by a greater One; this World being a body composed of soul
and body, which Soul had its seat and residence in the Center, from whence
it diffused by musical numbers, her force and power to the remotest
extremities of the circumference, having within it, other lesser gods, as the
Seas, Air, Stars, which do corresponde to other in a mutual harmony, in
perpetual agitation and motion. The Earth sending up vapors to the Air, the
Air rayning down upon the Seas again, the Seas by secret conduits and
channells transmitting them into the earth like veins ramifying themselves and
bubbling up in fountains, rivers, and brooks, etc. The Sun and stars
infusing their force upon all Creatures and vegetables: The Moon hers upon the
Sea. Apuleius as in his tractat de Mundo Luna, and Deo; Socrates aims at this
above spoken: So Herodotus when he enquired at the Ethiopian and Egyptian
Gymnosophists what they thought of the Eternity of the Word, had for answer,
That since their first king of whom they show him the picture exquisitely done,
There had run out a leven thousand and so many hundred years, and that by
their observations, the Sun had changed four times his ordinary course, and
the heavens theirs also.

And Diodorus sets down that in his days the Chaldeans kept Register of
four hundredth thousand years since the first beginning, which admit, were but
Lunarie (which is problematicke nevertheless) it is above all measure far
beyond the reckoning of their neighbors the Jews: The Gymnosophists answer
concerning the Eternity.
To this opinion of the Egyptian and Indian Gymnosophists, favoring the
Eternity of the World, may be added the opinion of the Materiarie
philosophers, who howbeit they admit the beauty of the World to have come unto
it with time, yet they hold confidently that the Chaos and matter it self
(whence I call them Materiarcy) was coetanean and contemporary from all
beginning with the Maker: Of this opinion was Hesiod in his Theogoma saying,
(...), etc.

Now to speak of the diverse opinions of the other old Philosophers who
admitted a beginning to this world, and what principalls they supposed for it.

Heraclitus was of opinion that the world was begun with fire, The
Philosophical differences concerning the beginning of the World.
and that by the fatal order of the Destinies, it should be destroyed by it
again, and dissolved in flames; yet in such sort, that after some ages thus
being purified, it should be renewed again, which Leo Hebraeus some way admits.

Thales again would have the beginning of it to have been of water, having
fished that out of Homer as it seems and Virgill from him again: At nos
interram lympham vertaminor omnes.

And we often read in Homer and Virgil, pater oceanus.

But what more foolish or idle conceit than that of Democritus and Leucippus,
The fond conceits of those who imagined all things to be by the encounter of
Atoms.
who imagined the beginning of the world and of all contained therein to have
been by the casual encounter of Atoms (which are little infectile bodies (not
unlike the Moates which we see to tumble and roll about in the Sun beams,
when they pierce any glasse-window or cranice, whose encounter like unto these,
say they, do either perpendiculagor or obliquely, sphericall or angularly,
crowde together this globe, and all the diversities in it, whereof indeed I
may say with the Satyrists: Spectatum ad missir sum teneatis amiei?

This is that which Virgil savoreth when he brings in old Silenus his Canto
to this purpose, in these words: Nemque canebat uti magnum per inane coacta
Semina, terrarumque animaque marisque fuissent
Et liquidi simulignis ut his exordia primis
Omnia
-- and ipse etiam mundi concreverit orbis.


All which opinions in this may be refuted, that they derogate too much from
the power of God, A theological observation upon the premises.
whether they would have had the world eternal, or of any preexisting water,
insomuch as they thought not him who is able to draw light out of darkness,
sufficient to have framed by his very World all this Fabric of nothing, or
yet if this Chaos had been drowned in oblivion, and sunck in darkness, not to
have raised and reframed a new one, by the same Word and his power.

SECT. 8.
The most approved opinion of all Philosophers concerning the Worlds beginning
and matter: the infallble truth of it; and a check of Augustines against over
curious inquisitors after those and the like mysteries.

THe more tolerable opinion was of those who held all things to be composed in
time of the four elements; admitting the Creatures of the Etheriall Region to
be of a like kind and species with these of the Sublunary, and yet they
thought not that any thing of them could be, but by some preexisting matter.

Whereas we hold sacred anchor of verity, that the mighty infinite, eternal,
and all-powerfull God, created this World of nothing in and with time about
five thousand six hundereth and odd years ago, Our Christian belief
touching the Worlds beginning and ending.
and that he shall destroy it in time known only to himself.

And if they ask what God was doing before this short number years; We
answer with S. Augustine replying to such curious questioners, that he was
framing Hell for them. Seeing then it was created, and with time, it cannot
therefore be eternal: (these two being repugnant and incompatible ad idem as
we say) which indeed to mortal men enlightened but with nature only, is hard to
believe: As for Trismegistus in his Poemander, and Plato in his Timeo, what
they have spoken more divinely than others herein, no question but they have
fished it out of Moses his Pentateuch, who flourished before them, as Diodorus
and Josephus both witness.

SECT. 9.
How Philosophers differ from Christians in the ways whereby God is known;
the Parts whereof the world is composed; the division of the Celestial
Spheres, wherein several varieties may be observed.

THere are three ways of knowing God; first affirmatively by which, whatever
good is in man, they with us acknowledged to be in God, Three ways of knowing
God.
in a supereminent manner, and in abstracto (as we say in the schools)
Secondly, by denying what ever evil is in man, can any ways be in God which
is called the way of negation; But in the third way which is called the way of
causation, by which we acknowledge God to be the causer of all things only.
There they did mistake in so far as they imputed the cause of many things to
a continued series and a perennall succeeding of one thing to another, for
although Saint Augustine, Lib. 2. de civitate dei. cap. 17. and 4. holds that
nature has charecterised that much in every one, to know the finger of God in
their Fabric. For that which to us Christians are as undoubted truths, to
them were dubitable grounds, grounded upon their physical maxim. That ex
nihilo, nihil fiet.

But leaving these opinions of Philosophers (as almost al Cosmographers do) I
divide the world into two parts Caelestiall and Elementary; A brief
description of the World.
for the Almighty has so disposed and linked them together, That the
Elementary or lower world cannot subsist without the Celestial; Her virtue,
power, motion, and influences; for effectuating whereof the heavens are framed
like a concaved Globe, or a hollow Bowl, whose center or middle body is this
earth, environed about with these heavens, distant equally at all parts from it.

The Celestial Region, which properly is all the bounds betwixt the Sphere of
the Moon, and the highest heavens comprehends in it eight Starrie Orbs, of
which eight; seven Plannets have their spheres betwixt the starrie firmament
and the air: but so set that every ones orb is lesser than the other, until
they reach the Moons; which is the least, last, and lowest sphere of all.

The eight orb which is the starrie firmament comprehends all the rest of
the fixed stars, The division of the heavens and Celestial Spheres.
and under it the planetary spheres before mentioned; But yet so, that it
again is environed by one greater, more ample and capacious, called the ninth
sphere; And this ninth is girt about again by that most supreme of al, called
the tenth or primum mobile, above which again is the Emperian or Christaline
heaven, which is the domicile and habitation of the blessed Spirits.

The tenth sphere or primum mobile, is that in order, by whose perennall
revolution, the starrie firmament and all the rest are rolled and wheeled about
in the space of 24 hours from East to West, upon the two Poles of th world
called the South and North, or Polearticke or Antarticke.

Hic vertex nobis semper sublimis at illum
Sub pedibus styx atra videt, manesque profundi.
And yet that revolution is not so swift, The Plannets and their retrodations
in their proper spheres.
but that the Plannets have every one their own course and motions, and that
from the West to the East upon other Poles; by the Astronomers called Zodiac
Poles: Nor is each Plannets course aalike swift and rapid for the Moons course
through the Zodiac is ended in one month. The Suns in a year and so forth
of the rest: So that Saturn finished his but in 30 years, Jupiter his in 12.
And Mars in less and fewer, to wit in 2. Venus, and Mercury whose place is
next below the Sun, in the like space with the Sun; but by reason of their
changing by retrogradation and progression, they are sometimes before the Sun
in the morning, and sometime behind at evening, and at othertimes so near him
that they cannot be seen: finally the Moon as remotest from the first Mover
or tenth heaven, is swiftest in her own peculiar motion through the Zodiac,
which she ends (as I was saying) in 27. days and some odd hours. Neither
think It strange although the change fall not until the 29. and a little more;
the reason being, that during the time of 27. days wherein the Moon goes
thorough the Zodiac, the Sun in the mean time by his peculiar motion has
gone 27 degrees forward in that same Zodiac; Cause of the Moons change.
which space the Moon must yet measure before she can be in Conjunction with
the Sun, which in effect is the change. So they two are to be distinguished,
the Periodick motion of the Moon, and her Lunation from change to change.

All these motions of the Stars, our Astronomers have found out by visible
demonstrations; as for a peculiar motion allotted to them besides, it is a
thing of some further consideration. Aristotle, and the Astronomers of that age
do teach, that the eight Sphere, commonly called the Firmament of fixed
stars, is the highest and next to the first movable; yet the later
Astronomers observing in the fixed stars, Different motions of the Stars.
beside the daily revolution of 24 hours, another motion from West to East,
upon the Poles of the Zodiac, in regard one simple body (such as is the
Firmament) cannot have but one motion of it self, have concluded, that above
the Firmament of fixed stars, there behoved to be a ninth heaven: And last of
all the later Astronomers (and chiefly the Arabs) observing in the fixed
stars a third motion, (called by them Motus trepidationis, or trembling
motion) from North to South, and from South to North, upon its own Poles in
the beginning of Aries and Libra, have hereupon inferred, that there is yet
above all these a tenth heaven, which is the first moveable in 24. hours,
moving round about from East to West upon the Poles of the World, and in the
same space drawing about with it the nine inferior heavens; and the ninth
heaven upon the Poles of the Zodiac, making a slower motion to the East,
measures but one degree in one hundredth years, and therefore cannot absolve
its course before six and thirty thousand years; which space is called the
great Platonic year, because Plato believed, that after the end thereof, the
heavens should renew all things as they had been in former times, seeing they
returned to their first course; What the great Platonic Star was.
so that then he should be teaching those same Scholars in the same School:
whereby it seems, that this motion was not unknown in his time. The
slownesse of this motion proceeding from the neerenesse to the first moveable,
like as the eight Orb or Firmament finisheth its trembling motion in 7000.
years; but of this trembling motion as also of the number, motions, and
aspects of the Stars, who lists to read Ioannes Herpinus his Apology for
Bodin against Ferrerius, shall rest marvellously contented.

SECT. 10.
The order of the Elements, with some observations of the Air and Water.

NOw betwixt the Sphere of the Moon and the Earth and Waters, is the Element
of Air, next after the Element of fire, filling up all that vast intecstice,
divided in three Regions, whose middle Region by Anteperistasis (as we say) of
the supreme one ever hot; and the lower ones now hot, now somewhat cold, is
ever cold, and so is made the receptacle of all our Meteors, Rain, Hail,
Snow, and so forth, framed there accordingly as the matter elevated from the
earth and waters is either hot, moist, dry, cold, high or low.

Next to the Element of the Air, is the Element of Water and Earth, which two
make but one Globe, whose uppermost superficies is breathed upon with the
incumbing and environing Air.

These two are the center to the Globe and environing heavens; The Waters and
Earth make but one Globe.
the great Ocean (by Homer and Virgil called Pater Oceanus) which compasses
the earth, and windeth about it; as it is father to all other floods,
fountains, brooks, bays, lakes, which do divide themselves through the
whole body and upon the face of the Earth, like so many veins shed abroad
and dispersed thorough our humane bodies, whose source and spring is from the
Liver; so has it diverse denominations from the Coasts it bedeweth, as
Britannick, Atlantic, Aeth^opick, Indick, and so forth.

Now the reason why the Seas which are higher than the Earth, Why the Seas
debarred from overflowing the Earth.
do not overflow it (seeing it is a matter fluxible of it self) cannot be
better given by a Naturalist, (setting aside Gods eternal ordinance) than that
the waters having their own bounds from the bordering circumferences, do
always incline and tend thither.

Praescriptas metuens transcendere metas. SECT. 11.
Of the Earth, that it is the lowest of all the Elements; its division, first
into three, then into four parts; and some different opinions concerning them
reconciled.

THe Earth is as the heaviest, so the lowest; subsidit tellus though diverse
admit not the waters to be higher than the earth; of which opinion Plato
seems to me to be, placing the spring of Rivers and Fountains in orco or
cavities of the earth.

The former opinion our famous Buchanan elegantly illustrateth, in his first
Book de Sphaera, Aspice cumpleuis e littore concita velis
Puppis eat, sensim se subducente Carina
Linteaque and su^mo apparent Carche sia maio
Nec minus e naviterram spectantibus unda
In medio assurgens, etc.


Which argues rather the Earth to be round, nor that the Seas or waters are
higher than it: so it may be confidently enough said, that the water is above,
about, and in the Earth, yea and dispersed thorough it, as the blood is
diffused and dispersed thorough the body or man or beast, from its spring the
Liver, the Orcum (as we may say) of it.

This Earth always by the Geographers of old was divided into three parts,
Division of the Earth.
viz. Europe, Asia, Africa, not knowing any further, but suffers now a new
partition or division; since the days of Columbus, who in the year 1492, by
an enterprise (to the eternal memory of his name) made discovery of America,
Of America.
added by our modern Mappes as a fourth part, which (according to our late
Navigators and discoverers, shall be found to exceed the other three in
extent; from whence the gold and silver comes hither as Merchant wares,
occasioning all the dearth we have now, considering how things were in value
the days of our Fathers, as Bodin, in his paradoxes against Malestrot,
averreth; so that the profuse giving of their gold for our trifies, What makes
all things so dear now.
through the abundance of their inexhaustible gold mines, makes now, by the
abundance of money, which formerly was not; that a thing shall cost ten, yea
twenty, which before was had for one or two*

Mercator, that most expert Cosmographer, expects as yet the fifth part of
the Earth, intituling it Terra Australis; the Spaniards in their Cards, Terra
dell fuego, which must be by South, that Sea descried by Magellanes: So that by
his supputation the world shall be divided yet in three, making Europe, Asia,
Africa but one, as but one Continent, which in effect it is; America, and this
looked for terra Australis, the other two.

SECT. 12.
Of the different professions of Religion in the several parts of the world:
what Countries and llands are contained within Europe, and what within Asia.

But leaving those two last parts (as most remote from our commerce and
knowledge) of Europe, Of our old known world, the third part is not Christian,
and that as yet different amongst it self.
Africa, and Asia, thus much I find in Cosmographers, that scarce the fourth
part of these three is Christians, and yet those Christians differing amongst
themselves; the Greek Church differing in five principal points from the
Roman; that from the Protestants; and the other amongst themselves.

For not to speak of Europe where Christianisme is gloriously professed,
consisting of Spain, Portugal, France, Italy, Greece, Thracia, Germany,
Hungary, Rusland, Poll, Sweden, Denmark, Gothland, of the Islands lying in the
Ocean, as Britain, Ireland, Island, Greeneland.

In the Mediterr anean, as Cicilie, Rhodes, Malta, Cyprus, Corsica, Sardinia,
Candia, Majorica, Minorica, and some few others; if we shall but overlooke the
large and plentiful bounds of Asia, illustrious in this, that the History of
the Creation and Redemption of the world was especially accomplished in it,
with the places wherein were the largest Monarchies, (so much blazed in
Histories) in all this I say shall be found little or nothing of Christianisme.

For to divide it in five maine Principalities, or rather Monarchies (whereof
now it consists) to wit, in that of the great Duchy of Muscovia or Russia,
(a good part whereof is in Europe) in the great Cham of Tartary his Empire,
Division of Asia.
both these two lying or reaching to the North; In the Empire of China, whose
Lord by them is called the Sovereign of the Earth, the Son of heaven: In the
Monarchy of the Sophie of Persia, lying in the bosom of that part of the
world; and in the Turkish Empire, together with the Indian Monarchy: To omit
the Emperor of Germany.

SECT. 13.
With what Religions and Sects all the Eastern and Northern Countries are
possessed, and in what places Christianity is most professed, etc.

WHat in all these (I say) of our Christian Religion but little, The West and
East parts.
and where there is any, it is so mixed with Iudaisme and Paganism as is a
wonder; for in Iappan, and thorough all the East Indies, howbeit the Jesuits
indeed have labored to draw them to Christianisine, yet their Histories
record how and what way they are mixed; And to wind about again toward
Aethiopia and Prester John his estate, reputed Sovereign and Monarch over
forty or fifty Kings and Provinces: There are there also some footesteps of our
profession, but as elsewhere, so intoxicated with Iudaisme, that besides
diverse other points, they are promiscuously circumcised and baptized: Then to
pass by Egypt, next neighbor, how it is all enslaved to the Mahumetans, all
know: In what better case are the Africans, the Numids, Maures, Barbars; and
then in and about the Atlantic coast, these of Fez and Marroco, and so forth.
So it has pleased God the Maker, to chastise the world for the sins of men;
in which although light has clearly shined, yet they have delighted more in
darkness than in it.

I will not say but in Musco, Tartary, China, and Persia there be some
Christians also; but these are commonly Greeks by profession, and yet so far
rent asunder and eclipsed from the true doctrine acknowledged by S. Paul to the
Corinthians, Ephesians, Philippians, and the rest, as is pitiful: divided
amongst themselves in diverse Sects, as Nestorians, Iacobites, Georgians,
Armenians, Copits, etc. thus dispersed thorough all the Eastern Church; they
obtrude unto us of the Western too, that we are Schismatics, and severed
amongst our selves likewise, as Papists, Anabaptists, Lutherans, Calvinists,
etc.

Nether are the Negro Princes of Africa, the Turks and Mahumetans, and all the
other idolatrous people and Nations of the South, so in accord amongst
themselves, that they are free from division; for Leo After in the third Book
of his History, quoteth particularly their differences and divisions; for the
Turks four great Doctors and Mahomete successors are divided in 72 several
Sects, Turkish professors divided amongst themselves.
which are extended and dispersed thorough all the Turks Dominions, in Europe,
Africa, Asia; always the rest of the World, as Terra Australis, and all
America, except in such parts where the late Conquests are made by the
Spaniards, English; and French are so far from Christianity, that they dwell
all in the profoundest darkness of most gross Paganism, serving and adoring
the Devil and his excruciating spirits; sacrificing their children, and those
of the best sort, either to pacify their ire, or to conciliate their favor.

SECT. 15.
America and the New-found-lands briefly described; and some opinions about
what time of the year the world had its beginning.

I Can speak nothing of Terra Australis or Incognita; as for America, I find
in the Map of the new found world, A little description of America, and the
New-found-lands.
that although it be almost all continent, yet in a manner it is divided in two
Islands, but so that they are made contiguous by nature, by a little Tract of
Land or Isthmos, where their principal and Metropolitan City stands,
called Mexico; a brave City indeed, lying in that Bay.

The Peninsule, or Northerly part of this America contains in it
Hispanianova, the Province of Mexico, Terra florida, Terra nova, Virginia, nova
Francia, nova Scotia; further North is not yet discovered: The Southern
Peninsule again reaching toward Magellane; and that part contains Peru,
Brasil, etc.

This is the whole world as yet known, of which Plinius in the second Book
Naturalis Historiae, (which you may be sure was long before the discovery of
this America) speaks, when he raileth against the covetousness of Princes,
who incroached upon others limits; and men's ambition in conquering pieces and
lumpes of inheritances here and there; not taking heed, that so little a piece
of ground must contain the best and worthiest Monarchy in the end.

Which world has neither been made over again, and recreated as a thing with
time worn and grown old, needs restoration; of which opinion was Philo
Hebreus out of Theophrast; neither yet was it from all eternity, which
Aristotle in his 3. cap. lib. 1. de caelo gives way to, saying, that to be
created and to be from all beginning, are (...), and de numero impossibilium:
But, on the contrary, we have a warrant that it is, and was created, and that
consequently it shall have an end, when it shall please the Maker thereof to
bring on that period of time; at which, howbeit both Divines and Philosophers
have conjectured, yet punctually to say when, the Angels of heaven know it not,
much less they; uncertain it is likewise, at what time of the year it did
begin; although the Rabins, and many Christians following them (as Bodin in his
Republic, and his Apologetick friend Herpinus) accurately maintain, that it
began in September, which September is with them mensis Nisan; and I could be
induced to that same belief: yet more probably the Spring of the year may be
thought to be the time when the world began, What time of the year the world
was created.
as the day begins with the morning, and as the sun rises upon our
Horizon with the day. And howsoever the authority of fabulous Poets should not
serve to instance a matter of so high an importance, yet Virgill his testimony
in his fourth Georgicks, is not wholly to be slighted.

Haud alios prima crescentis origin mundi
Illuxisse dies, aliumve habuisse tenorem
Crediderim: ver illuderat, ver magnus agebat.
Orbis and Hybernis parcebant flatibus Euri.
SECT. 15.
Wherein is to be seen some things concerning the time when it is thought to
take an end.

Diverse (you see) have been the opinions of the Worlds beginning, number, and
ending also: some thinking it eternal, others corruptible, and those also
differing among themselves.

Cyprian Ludovicus (whom Johannes Bodin refureth in his cap. of the changes of
States) presumes the year when this dissolution shall be, may be known:
howsoever we should hold us to the written word of God, as to a holy Anchor;
in which as we learn that it had a beginning, so must we know that it shall
have an end; and rather to be preparing for the approach of it, than curiously
and superstitiously to be inquiring when that shall be; seeing it has not
pleased God to make it known; for where God in the Scripture has not a tongue
to speak, we should have none to enquire or ask, or an ear to hear: I will
relate the opinions of some in this point, among which, in my opinion, the
Arabs, Moors, and with them the Jews, as particularly Albumazar a Cabalist,
have by all likelihood conjectured best the time of its dissolution, that any
before either Chaldean or Egyptian have done.

For, within these few hundred years they have discovered the Caball and
secret of the trembling motion of the eight Orb, that it does not accomplish
its course but in seven thousand years; which in Analogy and relation is some
way answerable to the seventh years rest of the Earth, the seventh days rest
from labor: So that indeed by Leo Hebreus his opinion, When probably it may
be thought to take an end.
the world should last but 6000 years, and rest the seventh; which opinion is
founded upon the c. helck, in the Jewish Sanhedrim; where it is written, 6000
years the world shall last, and then it shall decay: which Lactanctius lib. 7.
cap. 14. illustrateth, comparing the six thousand years to the six days of
the weeks labor, the seventh to the Saboaths rest: our ancient both Poets and
Orators have all given after ages to understand, that they all, I say, almost
knew generally that its destruction was to come in the appointed time by the
Fates. Although as wiser than us their successors did not touch the question,
as Plato in his Timeo; Cicero in his Book de natura Deorum; Macrobius c. 10.
de somno Scipionis: and for them all Ovid us lib. 1. Metamorph.

Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur affore tempus,
Quo mare, quo tell us, corruptaque regio coeli
Ardeat, and mundi moles operosa laboret.
SECT. 16.
Copernicus his opinion of the Earths moving, confuted: Archimedes opinion of
the world: an Induction to the following Section.

NExt unto this, I subjoyne the frantic and strange opinion of Copernicus,
who takes on him to demonstrate, speaking of the worlds frame, that the Sun
is immovable and placed in the Center of the World, and that the Globe of the
Earth is moveable, Copernick his opinion that the Earth did move, rejected.
rolling and wheeling about, admitting the change of States to depend upon the
Eccentrick of the Earth; so that he gives not only to the said Earth a daily
running about the Sun in 24 hours, in the space of the day and night, but
likewise an annual revolution; which opinion how absurd it is, as Nature
convinces it of error, so authorities of the Learned shall confound it: for
besides that, in Scripture we have warrant, that the Earth is stablished sure
-- -- Stat nullo mobilis aevo
Terra, super solidae nitens fundaminae molis
Pollenti stabilita manu.


Moreover Archimedes the rarest Mathematician that erst was or since has
been, and who caused to be engraven upon his Tomb in Sicilie the Sphere,
with this admirable position -- Datun^ pondus movere.

Granted to King Hieron of Siracusa, that there was no weight which he could
not move; And that if there were any other earth beside this whereon he might
establish his Machin, and Mathematical Instruments, he durst undertake to move
this out of its place, whereon we dwell; By which he would have us know, that
the earth budged nor moved not, much less in such celeritie to compass the
Sun, as Copernicke esteemed.

Lastly, I am to evert that ground of some too curious Astrologers, Why the
change of Triplicities cannot be a ground for change of States.
who upon the change of Triplicities, undertake also to found the change and
alteration, which they would prove upon the face of the earth, both in the
nature of the ground, and in the qualities of people: But because the Word of
Triplicitie is not so usual as that every one understands it aright
therefore thus much for the intelligiblenesse of it in the following Section.

SECT. 17.
The division of the starrie firmament, in twelve hours; of the Power and
efficacy that is attributed to the Triplicities of them over every Country:
and the maintainers of these opinions confuted: the diverse dispositions of
people of several nations, how attributed to the natural disposition of the
Planets: An observation of Gods Providence.

THe body of the Starrie firmament which with our eyes we see, by the modern,
at least not very old Arabs, and Moors (who first found out the trembling
motion of it, as they hold called by them Motus trepidationis) is divided in
twelve houses, which for more cleerenesse, and intelligiblenesse are more
compendiously packt up in four, The starrie firmament divided in so many
Asterismes.
every one of the four answerable to a corner of it; as we see in Scripture
the four Winds mentioned; To every one of which four again, there are three
houses or Asterismes appropriated.

These houses or stars belonging to them are observed to appertain to the
Region upon which they glanced first: So that what ever nature either the
people or ground there at the first influence or aspect of that house had
thereupon, by this trembling motion of theirs, the Triplicitie having changed
about is transported to another Region, which is another thing than the
Triplicit^e set down, or at the least alleged so by Ptolomie in his book
Quadripartit, Bodin his triplicit^ie is not such.
whereof Bodin makes mention in his fourth de Republica: Allotting the
Triplicitie of fire to Europe, of Water to Africa; to Asia Septentrinall and
Oriental Air, and the Triplicitie of earth to Asia meridionall. To say that
the fixed stars in these houses of theirs, by the trembling motion of their
Orb; had changed place or seat also, and thereby that they had changed the
triplicitie or nature of the regions of the earth either in the quality of the
ground, or nature of the people, were most absurd, and capable to subvert all
the Maxims of Judiciary Astrology concerning the Horoscopie of men and
Cities; which hold as true now as they did this day two thousand years, as
Cardan averreth, who held Ptolomeus his Maxims in that point, which he again
had from the Caldeans and Egyptians, amongst whom there is not a word of these
triplicities.

For to say with Haly Arab, that Ptolomie obscured it amongst his writs, to
make it a caball and secret, argues it self of falsehood, as being unlikely
that he had interred and smothered so rare a secret, or yet made it a caball
which otherwise might have added so much luster to his works.

But so it is on the contrary, that notwithstanding all these alleged changes
of triplicities, we see these same proprieties of Celestial signs; which
Cardan and Julius Maternus observed by Caldeans and Egyptians stand good in
such sort, The changing of triplicities notable to change the nature of things;
and Why?
that not only the Elements and Elementary things, Reptiles, Plants, Animalls,
with all living and moving creatures of all species and kinds mineralls, etc.
keep that same frame and figure without, and nature within which they had at
first ingraft and engraven, and primitively characterised in and upon them; But
also we see the seasons of the year, nights and days, Sun, Moon, and
Sarres, to observe their constant and equal course which from all beginning
was imposed upon them.

Whereby even now as before, we see the people of the North different from
these of the South in nature, Stature complexion, color, disposition, as at
more length I have set down in my Title of the diversity of men's humors: And
that not only by authority of famous writers who have described them to be
just so then, as now yet we see them; But likewise conform to the positure of
the very body of the heavens themselves. So that in a manner the nature and
seat of the Plannets argues of necessity the nature of the people to which
they shall be found to appertain.

As Saturn to the Meridionall and Southernely people, Diversities of peoples
natures conformeable to the positure of the heavenly Plannets.
a dry and Melancholious Star: Mars, to the Septentionall, as strong and
Iustier Jupiter again, father of light and life equal to both: Venus for the
Southern, as more lascivious than the other: The Moon for us in the North
again as more moist and unconstant than they, while Mercury shall be equal
almost for both: But more enclyning to the Southern, as being better spirits;
for from them eloquence, and contemplative Sciences do flow unto us: The
natural disposition of the Plannets argues the Inclination of people over
which they are planted.
As from us to them Miriads of lusty great people, which overranne all their
fertile provinces: And if it be objected, how it comes to pass seeing Venus
and lasciviousness are attributed to them, that they should be less populous
than we; To this I answer, That their women in numbers far exceed their men.
Thus Polygamie was and is so frequent amongst them, for if according to their
wits they were both strong and numerous, the World could not abide them: Thus
the Al-seeing God has disposed things wisely in this world, that the worst and
subtilest creatures are fewest in number; as Lions, Foxes, Wolves, Leopards,
whereas the weaker and more Innocuous sort are more frequent, as Sheep,
Beeves, Heart, Hind, and so forth.

SECT. 18.
The causes of the Changes of several things as of men, Countries; plots of
ground, etc. and that these proceed not from triplicities as Astrologers would
have it.

NOw if so be that some of the people have changed any whit of their former
innated Natures, If people be changed from that which they were wont to be,
Why? and How?
That must not be imputed so much to the change of Triplicities as to
education, and the commerce of other more politic Nations, which is more
frequent than before; formerly it being counted a rare thing for a man to make
a voyage to Spain or Portugal, whereas now new found worlds and people of
other countenances, are nothing so strange and wonderful unto us.

Finally, that some Countries, or rather Grounds, are become more barren than
they were, that men are more weak, and lower of stature than they were; must
not be imputed to their triplicities, but rather it argues the wrath of God
upon the earth for the Sins of Mortals, the inhabitants thereof, and in like
manner, the decaying age of the World, as in plentifulnesse, If some Countries
be barren, others plentiful, Why, and How?
so in virtue: for if the Luxurious plenty of Sicily, Asia the lesser, of
Egypt on the other side again; and Barbary; if by these triplicities they are
changed, I pray you, where is it? for my own part wheresoever I have been,
whatsoever I hear or read, nothing but universal complaints of the Earths
waxing worse and worse: I end this with that of Plimus in his Natural History,
complaining upon the badnesse of the times in his days to that they were
before.

Gaudebat terra triumphali aratore
and laureato v^mere subigi.
This was when the Emperors themselves took pleasure in Agriculture, leaving
their Scepters, to betake themselves to the Plough.

SECT. 19.
How ancient Writers have compared Man and all his parts to the World and all
its parts; wherein is recounted the different dispositions of men of different
Countries; and to what Countries the faculti^s of the soul are attributed.

AS these above cited Writers and many others have gone about with most
apparent reasons to attribute the temperament of several Countries, and the
several dispositions and complexions of men in those Countries, to the site
and disposition of the Planets that govern over such and such places and men;
so they instance many inducing examples for the proof of it.

One of them in comparing the great World to the little world [Man, Man
compared to the World.
] wills us to imagine a Man, walking or laid, according to the natural
motion of the superior bodies, from East to West; and we shall evidently
perceive, that his right Arm, (wherein his greatest strength and vigor is)
and his right Side, (where the Liver and Gall are placed) are toward the
North; and the left hand and side (which is called the feminine part) toward
the South; whereupon it is inferred, that according to this and the posture of
the celestial Bodies, the place and people of the world, that the right side
beholds, which are the Northern (wherein the Eastern are comprehended) are
strong and lusty, where the people of the opposite part of the world, are more
weak and lash.

The one fair and lovely, the other brownish, swarthy and hard favored; the
one cold and moist, the other hot and dry; the one given to labor and travel,
the other to study and contemplation; the one joviall and merry, the other
mellancholick and grave; Qualities of the Northern and Eastern people.
the one simple and no ways malicious, the other crafty and deceitful; the
one inconstant, the other pertinacious, never swarving from his intended
resolutions; the one prodigal, the other parcimonious and sparing; the one
affable and facill, the other arrogant and stayed; the one merciful, the other
cruel and revengefull; the one chaste and bashful, the other venereous and
affronted; the one impatient, the other long suffering; the one in Counsel
rash and sudden the other more constant and deliberate, with several other the
like qualities, wherein the one half of the world North and East, do differ
from the other, South and West: All which they do back with many forcible
Reasons, in so far, that there is not any part in the Microcosme Man, to
which they do not assimilate some part of the great World: The three faculties
of the Soul.
yea the three principal faculties of the soul, Imagination, Reason, and
Understanding are attributed to three parts of the World.

Imagination, which is proper for meditations of divine and sublime Sciences,
which consist not in demonstration and Reason, but on a naked and simple
belief, is appropriated to the Meridionales or Southern people, who of all
others are most carried away with superstitions.

The second Reason, to the Mid-people, participating of both extremes, betwixt
the religionary Southern, and the laborious, industrious, and warlike
Northern.

The third, which is Understanding, to the Northern, who have more strong and
robustuous bodies, fitter for labor and handy-workes than the other two.

So, Conclusion.
(as succinctly as I could) I have given you a relish, what the most learned
have both written and thought of the world, and its parts till a fitter time,
wherein (God willing) you shall receive a more ample content in this and other
things.

A GENERAL INTRODVCTION AND INCITEMENT To the study of the METAPHYSICS:
Wherein the most excellent ends and uses thereof are illustrated, and how
necessary it is to be understood by Christians.
SECT. 1.
Of the several titles and appellations that have been given by Heathnick and
Christian Philosophers to Mataphysick; the reasons wherefore every of those
names were attributed unto it; and finally whereof it principally treats.

THe high and sublime Science, which we call Metaphysick, has diverse titles
and styles attributed unto it, partly by Aristotle himself, and partly by
other Authors, as is observed by Suarez in the beginning of his first
Metaphysicall Disputation, Metaphysick first called Sapientia.
and by Fonseca in his prooemium, prefixed to his Commentaries upon Aristotle's
Metaphysics cap. 8.

For first, this Science is called Sapient^a ^ Metaph. c. 1. and 2. because it
disputes of highest and most hard matters, and of the first and most general
causes of things.

Secondly it is called Philosophia (...) or by way of excellency, 2
Phylosophia (...).
4 Metaph. cap. 2. because it exceeds all other parts of Philosophy in
dignity very far, and as a Queen it has Sovereignty, and royal
prerogatives above them all, prescribing unto every particular Science the
bounds and limits of it, confirming or establishing the principles of them all.

Thirdly, 3 Prima Philosophia.
it is called prima Philosophia, 6. Metaph. cap. 1. and lib. 2. cap. 6. because
it treats of most excellent matters, as of God and of the Angels, in so far
as they may be known, by the light of Nature: for as they are known to us by
divine revelation, the consideration of them belongs to Divinity.

In the same respect it is called Philosophia Theologica, 4 Philosophia
Theologica.
6 Mataph. cap. 1. and Scientia Theologica, 2 Metaph. cap. 6. and by Christian
Philosophers, who know another Theology above, for distinctions cause, it is
called Naturalis Theologia.

Last of all, 5 Metaphysica and why.
it is called Metaphysica, which word occurreth not in Aristotle himself, but
is used by his Interpreters and followers; yet it is grounded upon the titles
of Aristotle's Books of Metaphysics, which after by Aristotle himself, or by
Theophrastus, who is thought to have collected Aristotle's Works, and to have
digested them in order, are entitled (...), idest, post naturalia aut
transnaturalia, and that, either because this Science was invented after
Natural Philosophy, for the knowledge of the natures of bodily substances,
(which is called Physiology) or else because the things considered in it, are
beyond and above the order or rank of natural things; that is, of gross and
bodily substances, for it does treat of spiritual and invisible substances,
Whereof it treats.
viz. of God and of the Angels; as also it treats of the attributes and
notions or conceptions of entity or being, which are common to all things,
which have a real being, whether they be bodily substances, or spiritual, yea
whether they be substances or accidents.

SECT. 2.
The Reasons why Aristotle added Metaphysick to the other parts of Phylosophie;
and how it is distinguished from the other Sciences.

ARistotle, who is thought to be the first author of this sublime and almost
divine Science, Two causes why Metaphysick is added to the other Sciences.
added it to the rest of the parts of Philosophy, chiefly for two causes, as
Fonseca well observes in the 6. chapter of the Preface to his Commentaries
upon the Metaphysics.

First, The first.
because in the Physics these substances are considered, which are composed of
bodily matter and form; and in the Mathematics, they are said to be
accidentia abstracta a materia secundum rationem; yet truly and really in
their being or existence they have a necessary dependencie from bodily matter,
and therefore are called Accidentia materialia, because they have their being
in, and from gross and bodily substances. Now besides these, there are some
things merely immateriall, that is, neither composed of bodily matter and
form, nor yet any way depending from bodily matter, (which therefore are in
the Schools said to be abstracta a materia and secundum rem and secundum
rationem) as God, the Angels, spiritual accidents and caet. And therefore, as
material substances are considered in the Physics, and material accidents in
the Mathematics; so it was requisite, that there should be a third kind of
Science, to wit, the Metaphysics, for the consideration and handling of things
merely immateriall, and independing from bodily matter.

Secondly, The second cause.
there are some general degrees and conceptions of entity or being, as also
some attributes, properties, principles, and some divisions or distinctions,
which are common to all things, whether they be bodily and material, or
spiritual and immateriall, as ens, essentia, existentia, unitas, veritas,
bonitas, and the divisions of ens, in completum, and incompletum, finitum and
infinitum, necessarium and contingens, permanens and successivum, absolutum and
respectivum, principium and principiatum, causam and effectum, subjectum and
adjunctum, signum and signatum, mensuram and mensuratum, actum and potentiam,
etc.

Now these things are transcending, and do exceed the limits of particular and
inferior Sciences, Metaphysick excels other Sciences.
as Physic, Geometry, Arithmetic, and the Sciences which are subalternate and
subordinate to them; wherefore they cannot be handled in them, but for the
handling of them there must be some general and transcendent Science, whose
speculation is not limited to any particular species entis, but comprehends
and takes in all things under the capacity and amplitude of the object of it.
And this is Metaphysick, of which we are now speaking.

SECT. 3.
Three Reasons conducing to the praise of Metaphysick, inducing all men to the
study of it; and setting down some principal ends and uses thereof.

BY this, every man may clearly see the necessity of this Science for the
perfection of Philosophy. But it may be, that some will think, the
consideration of these immateriall or spiritual things, of which I did speak
in my first reason, as also these attributes, properties, and distinctions
which are common to things material and immateriall, and of which I did speak
in my second reason, some, I say, will think the consideration of them not to
be necessary, A supposition resolved.
but to be more curious than profitable. But I persuade my self, no wise or
judicious man will think so.

For first, First Reason.
without the knowledge of these general and transcendent Metaphysicall terms
and notions or conceptions no solid knowledge can be had, for the subjects
which are handled in inferior Sciences.

Secondly, Second Reason.
seeing man in respect of the constitution of his nature, is participant, both
of things bodily and material, as also of things immateriall and spiritual,
(for which cause by Philo Iudeus in his Book de op^ficio mundi, he is called
nexus Dei and mundi, and rerum materialium and immaterialium hor^zon) were
great sottishness or stupidity in man, to labor for the knowledge of
material and bodily things, with which he symbolizeth in respect of his baser
part, that is his body, and not to care for knowledge of spiritual and
immateriall things, to which he is like, and as it were of kin in respect of
his better part, to wit, his soul.

Thirdly, Third Reason.
seeing the happiness of man, I mean his contemplative or speculative
happiness, stands in the knowledge and contemplation of these things, which
are most excellent and most sublime, he would come very far short, of that
happiness, if he were ignorant of these things, which are handled in the
Metaphysics: for they are spiritual and immateriall, and consequently are
most excellent, and also most sublime and difficult, in respect they do far
exceed the reach of all sense and sensitive knowledge.

SECT. 4.
The excellency and dignity of the knowledge of Metaphysick; that only free
and sublime minds, not distracted with worldly cares are fit for this stud^e;
and the Reasons wherefore.

I Have spoken already of the diverse names and titles of this Science, of the
reasons wherefore it was invented, as also of the necessity of it: Now in the
last room I will speak something of the excellency and dignity of it.
Aristotle in the 1. Book of his Metaphysics 2 chapt. says, two things which
serve very much for manifesting or declaring the excellency of this Science,
first he says, that it is a Science more fit and suitable for God than for
men; or to give you it in his own words, that ejus possessio non existimari
debet humana, that is, that man is not sufficiently worthy to possess or enjoy
this Science, and that because this Science, That Metaphysick is free from all
subjection to other Sciences.
of all Sciences, is most free; yea it only is free from all subjection to
other Sciences, and from all reference to any higher or more eminent knowledge:
for all natural knowledge can equal, and much less exceed the sublimity of
Metaphysicall speculation; and therefore this Science requires a mind free
and sublime, that is, a mind not depressed with base cogitations, Reason.
nor distracted with worldly cares, as ordinarily the minds of men are, in
respect of the manifold wants and necessities into which they are subject in
this life. Seeing then God only is free from such distracting and depressing
cares, therefore in Aristotle's judgment, this Science is more suitable for him
than for men. Secondly he says, that this Science is amongst all Sciences the
most honorable, because it is most divine: Why the Science of Metaphysick is
most honorable.
And that it is most divine, he proves by two very forcible reasons, first
because this Science versatur in rebus divinis, it contemplateth divine and
heavenly things: and this he proves, because it considers God himself as
he is the first principium, and the supreme cause of all things. Secondly,
because Haee Scientia maxim a Deo habetur, the perfect and exact knowledge of
this Science most truly and properly is attributed to God: for this Science in
a manner, vieweth and considers all things, it has an especially eye to
spiritual and invisible substances, and amongst these it especially and
chiefly contemplateth God himself, as the highest degree of entity, and the
supreme cause of all things.

Now to take a full view of all the ranks, orders, and degrees of things to
have a positive and distinct knowledge of that invisible world, the world of
Angels, and above all, to have a perfect and comprehensive knowledge of that
boundless Ocean of being and goodness which is in God, it requires not a
finite ingine or understanding, but an infinite capacity and an unspeakable
sharpness of wit.

SECT. 5.
For three respects the Metaphysick is called the most excellent Science, and
the most necessary to be understood by Christians.

BY these things which are said by Aristotle in that chapter, and in other
parts of his works, for the commendation of this Science, we may see this
Science to be most excellent in three respects.

First, because of the universality and amplitude of the object or subject of
it; for in the Sphere or circuit of it, all ranks, orders, and degrees of
things are comprehended, so that look how far the knowledge of the whole
celestial Globe exceeds the knowledge of one constellation, Comparison.
and the knowledge of the universal Map or table of the whole Earth
exceeds in dignity the knowledge of the Map of one Province or Country, as
far does Metaphysick (which is as it were one universal Card or Map,
presenting to our view all ranks, orders, and degrees of being) exceed in
dignity these particular delineations and descriptions of things, which are set
down in inferior Sciences.

SECT. 6.
The first respect, for the universality.

SEcondly, because of the dignity of the subject of it; for, not only is this
Science exercised about the speculation of the highest and most general
causes, Christian Philosophers.
principles, and attributes of things, but also it descends into a special
consideration of the most noble and excellent things of the world, that is, of
God and of his Angels: for, not only do Christian Philosophers now in the
Metaphysics dispute of them, Aristotle.
but also Aristotle himself in his Metaphysics, especially in his 12 Book,
does most excellently discourse of them. And truly it is more than mavelous,
that an Heathnick or Pagan-philosopher should, by the light of Nature, have
penetrated so far into the knowledge of God. For to pass by that which he
writes in the 10. chapter of that Book De unitate Dei, proving and
demonstrating, unum esse principium and gubernatorem universi; and concluding
his discourse with that saying of the Poet: (...)

To omit, I say, this discourse of his De unitate primi motoris, or (as he
calls God in that Book) primi moventis immobilis, in the 7 chapter of that
Book, he shows, that God is primum intelligibile and primum appetibile, that
is, he is ens omnium aptissimum and dignissimum quod intelligatur and
appetatur, as Fonseca, Fonseca.
commenting upon that place, does expound it: that he necessario existit, and
caetera omnia ab co pendent: that perfectissimam and beatissimam vitam degit;
that ejus beatitudo est perpetua, and sine intermissione aut alteratione; that
Dei beatitudo ex sui contemplatione nascitur; that ejus contemplatio est (...),
jucund^ssimum quid and optimum; that not only vivit vitam beatissimam, but he
is ipsa v^ta beata; or as he speaks himself, vita sempiterna and optima.

Truly this Pagan Philosopher has found a wonderful joy and delight in this
his speculation of the essence and happiness of God, Suarez.
(as Suarez notes writing upon this place, in his Index locupletissimus in
Phisicam, lib. 12. cap. 7.) yea he seems to have been ravished with the
sweetness of this heavenly contemplation. It is no wonder, that Dav^d in the
104 Psalm verse. 34. said, My meditation of him (that is of God) shall be
sweet, and ^ w^ll be glad in the Lord. For if Aristotle found such sweetness
in the contemplation of God, as he is Pater mund, or Pater entium; what
sweetness, yea what heavenly, what ravishing joy may a man living within the
Church have in the contemplation of God, as he is Pater Ecclesiae, and Pater
misericordiarum? 2 Cor. 1. 3.

SECT. 7.
The second Respect, for the dignity. That the consideration of the soul of
man belongs to the Metaphysics, with several Reasons for the proof thereof.

THere are some who think, that not only the contemplation of God, and of the
Angels do belong unto the Metaphysics, but also the contemplation De anima
humana seu rationali; and that, because it is a spiritual or immateriall
substance. Suarez in the first Tome of his Metaphysics, Disput. 1. Sect. 2.
Parag. 18. most justly condemns this opinion; and that 1. because
consideratio totius, and consideratio partium ejus ad unam and eandem scientiam
pertinet.

Now the consideration of man himself belongs not to Metaphysick, That the
consideration of man's soul, and not himself belongs to Metaphysick.
but to Physic; and therefore the consideration of the soul of man, which is
a part of man, belongs also to Physic or natural Philosophy. 2. Albeit the
soul of man be an immateriall substance in it self, and although in the real
being of it, it has not a necessary dependencie from bodily matter, yet God
has appointed, that the ordinary and natural existence or being of it, as
also the operation of it, should be in materia corporea.

It is far more probable, that which is affirmed by Ruvins and Conimbricenses
in the Frontispiece of their Treaties de anima separata a corpore, Ruvins his
opinion.
and in their first question prooemialis, before their disputes de anima, that
the consideration of the being and operation of the soul in statu
separationis a corpore, after death until the day of the general
resurrection, does belong not to Physic, but in some respects to Theology,
and in other respects to Metaphysick.

For the handling of these questions, [An status separationis a corpore, sit
animae rationali naturalis; an anima a corpore separata habeat naturalem
appetitum redeundi ad corpus; an anima separata specie ab Angelis differat, and
quas facultates seu potentias, quas species intelligibiles, quos habitus, and
quem modum cognoscendi habeat anima separata a corpore:] the handling, I say,
of these questions does belong properly to Metaphysick; nevertheless these
same Authors, whom I have now cited, as also Suarez in the place already spoken
of, affirm, that the Tractatus de anima separata, may most commodiously be
added to the Books de anima, not as a proper part of the Science de anima, but
as an Appendi^ to it.

SECT. 8.
The third Respect, for the Usefulness. Of the great use Metaphysick is
toward the furthering of all Divines, in Controversies, and other things: A
Conclusion.

THirdly and lastly, this Science exceeds all the rest indignity, in respect
of the great use it has in all other Sciences and Arts, especially in Theology
it self; I need not to insist in the confirmation of this: for it is very
well known, that by the grounds of Metaphysick, The benefit of the knowle^ge of
the Metaphysick^.
we may demonstrate against Atheists, that there is a God; against Pagans,
that this God is one; against Cerdon, Marcion, and the Manichaean Heretics,
that there are not duo principia, but unum summum and primum principium;
against the Stoickes, that there is not such a fatal necessity in all events
as they dreamed of, against that damnable and detestable Heretic Conradus
Vorstius that Deus est infinitus, Controversies.
immensus, indivisibilis, simplex, totus in qualibet re in qua est; aeternus,
and quoad substantiam suam, and quoad ejus decret a immutabilis, and omnium
accidentium expers; for that wretched and mad Doctor denied all these things.
In many other Questions and Controversies, which the Church has against
Heretics ancient and modern, there is great use of Metaphysick.

But I fear to weary the Reader with these Generals, For I intend hereafter
(God willing) to put forth a small Treatise of Metaphysics, wherein you shall
find that noble Science more perspicuously delineated.

FINIS.

