LAMENTABLE News, Showing the wonderful deliverance of Master Edmond Pet
Sayler, and Master of a Ship, dwelling in Seething Lane in London, near
Barking Church. With other strange things lately happened concerning these great
winds and tempestuous weather, both at Sea and Land.

two men in a ship, drawing something from the water

Imprinted at London by T.C. for William Barley, dwelling over against
Cree-church, near Algate. 1613.

LAMENTABLE news showing the wonderful deliverance of M. Edmond Pet Sailer
and Master of a ship, dwelling in Seething Lane in London, near Barking
Church. With other strange things, lately happened, concerning the great winds
and tempestuous weather both at Sea and Land.
GOod Reader, I have here set down unto thy view, and for thy example to
amendment, the great hurt and losses that has been both at Sea and Land, but
especially the wonderful preservation of one Master Edmond Pet Sayler, and
Master of a ship, and part owner, who was coming from New Castle with his
Ship lading, and with diverse others in the ship, both passengers, and his own
servants: grief to tell, as it is well known, and too well, if it had been
Gods will to the contrary, the wind being ruff and furious, caused the Seas
to be outrageous and boisterous, and the waves thereof to be so great, and to
arise so hie, that many times they were ready to ouerwhelme the ship, yet by
Gods providence and the great care of this Master Pet being Master, and sore
labor and earnest prayer unto the Lord, night and day of those in the ship,
they were preserved until they came within the kenning of Land, both of
Yearmouth and Harwich, and other towns, but still the wind did grow more
strong, and the waves greater, and every one ouertyred with sore labor, as
some at the pumpe, and some otherways, not one having leisure or stomach
almost either to eat or drink, so that then they did wholly rely upon Gods
mercy, ceasing from their labors, and then did this Master Pet make a godly
speech: saying unto the rest, Let us all kneel down with earnest prayer, and
even with the knees of our hearts, desire God for his dear son Jesus Christ
his sake, to deliver us from this great danger, crying all with loud and woeful
voices, O Lord preserve us now, that we may live and honor thee in praising
thy name with Psalms of thanksgiving, as thou did preserve Jonas three
days in the maine Seas, and in the belly of a mighty devouring Whale, and
chaste Susanna from the wicked Elders, who would have dishonored God in their
lust, and brought to destruction that godly woman and chaste wife. Likewise O
Lord, thou did preserve thy servant Daniel from the greedy jaws of the
cruel and ravenous Lions, being of purpose kept hungry in their dens. O good
Lord thou did make the blind to see, the halt and lame to go, and the dead
to arise and walk, so good Lord if it be thy blessed will, thou can now
deliver us, even now when all man's help is past. And now in this space while
Master Pet was using these speeches, and earnest prayer to God, the ship began
to sink deeper and deeper into the Sea, whereupon every one began to shift for
himself in laying hold some upon one thing, and some upon another. As they
were standing upon the hatches still called on God, but seeing there was no way
to save themselves, then with great shrikes and loud cries they were al
drowned: Nay more, not one living thing in the ship saved. And Master Edmond
Pet, after he had been under water, by Gods help took hold of the maine Mast
and got out his knife and cut certain cords or lines and made shift to get up
to the top of the Mast, and there tied himself, for fear least by the
strength of the wind and rain, he should be blown off into the Sea. All which
this man in misery did see, and himself looking every minute of an hour to
taste of the same cup the rest had done: for now half the maine Mast whereon
he sat was covered with water, this being about seven of the clock in the
morning. Thus sat this grieved man all that day and all night, seeing nothing
but water ready to swallow him up: yet upon the next day, between the hours
of seven and eight of the clock, to his great comfort, he descried a ship
coming toward him, he being beaten so sore with wind and weather, that he
could hardly speak, for his body was swelled as big as two bodies, and
likewise his legs did grow to such a bigness, that they were more like to the
waste or middle of a man, then the leg of a man, yet when this ship came
near unto him, he cried and called as well as he could, that they would save
him, and take him into their ship. One or two of them answered very briefly, we
are sorry, we are sorry, but we cannot stay. O most unkind men, and in
humane, that ever man should have cause to say, that ever any Christian should
be so hard-harted to leave a man in that distress. But when he saw them sail
away, Oh! it was more then half a killing to his poor heart. Well when he had
sat on this maine Mast until the next morning, which was 48. hours, there
came toward him by Gods appointment a man of war, being a Hollander, who did
show him kindness and mercy, for he did send his ship-boate for him, and brought
him to his ship, and did seek to comfort him in what he could, like the good
Samaritane, but this Master Pet was so weather beaten, and so swelled, that he
could neither eat nor drink: yet this man of war would and did what he
could for him, for seeing he could not comfort him with any thing he had in his
ship, he sailed into a town in Suffolk, called Harwich, and there st him on
shore, not leaving him until he had brought him to some of his old
acquaintance, who did not know him: nay more, his own wife did not know him,
when he was brought home to London, by reason he was swelled of such bigness,
and so changed with sitting, as I told you before 48. hours in the wind and
rain. And see and hear and give God praise; yet more of Gods wonderful
kindness in delivering this Master Pet once before, who coming from a far
voyage in a Ship of Merchandise, by misfortune the Ship was split, the Ship and
all the goods lost, and to the number of eighteen persons drowned. And this
man left alive to tell unto the world what God had done for him, that all that
hear it might praise the Lord: and praised be the name of the Lord, he is now
well and in perfect health. And as I said before, dwelling in Seething Lane in
London. Well now leaving this sad story of Master Pet, with grief I must tell
you, of others harms and losses: First there was to the great terror and
grief of many the beholders, six score dead men taken up, upon Yarmouth
shore, the losses of Boats and Lyters, and men lately upon the Thames, is too
well known, if it had been Gods will to have been otherways, for many have
seen dead men swimming too and fro between Graves End and London, being
carried by the Tide, and still hats or cloakes, and staves, and diverse other
things of Passe^gers have seen been upon ye Thames swimming too and fro, and a
great Barge being laden with fagots and billets, and other timber to make
cartwheeles, was cast away near London bridge, being in a storm of wind, and
all her lading swimming up and down the Thames. Likewise near the coast of
Dover and Sandwich, and so to Wayborne Hoope in Norfolk, was much hurt done,
with the loss of many men's lives. Likewise all the upper parts of a windmill
in Bedfordshire was blown away, but God be praised none killed. Near
Sharnbrook, a traveler of London that came down to see his friends, was by
the strength of the wind blown off from a bridge, but by others was taken up
alive and saved. Two men and their horses in Glostershire were blown from a
bridge, and both horse and men drowned. A man near Bedford being thatching a
house, was blown off and killed: trees blown up by the roots, other rest and
torn, houses and chimnies quite blown down, falling upon cattle and killed
them, to the great loss and hurt of many men. And diverse other strange matters
I could speak of, all which is for our sins. God grant we way take warning
to amend our lives by these dangers and losses, or else we must needs look for
farther punishment. For as God is merciful, so he is Just, and will punish us
if we will not be warned by these examples. God grant for his Son Jesus
Christ's sake we may all be warned to amend our lives. Amen.

FINIS.

