THE SPANISH PILGRIM: OR, AN ADMIRABLE DISCOVERY of a ROMISH CATHOLIC.

Showing how necessary and important it is, for the Protestant Kings, Princes,
and Potentates of Europe, to make war upon the King of Spaines own Country:
Also where, and by what means, his Dominions may be invaded and easily
ruinated; as the English heretofore going into Spain, did constrain the Kings
of Castile to demand peace in all humility, and what great loss it has been,
and still is to all Christendom, for default of putting the same in execution.

Wherein he makes apparent by good and evident reasons, infallible arguments,
most true and certain Histories, and notable examples, the right way, and true
means to resist the violence of the Spanish King, to break the course of his
designs, to beat down his pride, and to ruinate his puissance.

LONDON Printed by B. A. and are to be sold by Thomas Archer at his shop in
Popes head Alley, over against the sign of the Horse-shooe. 1625.

THE EPISTLE OF THE French Translator, to all the Protestant Kings, Princes,
and Potentates in the Christian World.
Most excellent Princes,
IT was my hap to contract amity with certain Gentlemen of Arragon, and other
Spaniards (not Castillians, for to them I wot not how to carry any affection,
which should exceed the prescript rule of the Gospel) of whom I understood
many things t^uching matters of State, which were to me strange and unknown:
by reason that there were amongst them some personages exceedingly well
learned, and most conversant and expert in all Histories, and notably well
seen and practiced in the affairs of the World. There was one above the rest
in their company, a man of great spirit judgment, and experience who had seen
a great part of Europe, and (having been for a long time in Portugal) had
dealt and conuersed with the Portugals, whose Language he spoke naturally, and
had read all the Histories of that Realm, and was so well acquainted with all
their affairs, and knew them all so particularly, that I did greatly wonder at
it. For, in things that were to come, I found him in manner of a Prophet: in so
much that for the viuacity and quickness of his spirit, and the long
experience which he has had, he seems to me to have as great knowledge in
things to come, as if he saw them present before his eyes. He made proof unto
me by many reasons (which did not only plainly convince my opinion, but did
as it were bind me hand and foot) that these voyages, and others of like
kind, would never draw with them any other profit, nor serve to any other
purpose, then to waken the sleeping dog, and to re-enforce the common enemy.
Now considering that Don Philip King of Castile has a Council, the most
choice and excellent, such as never Prince in this World had a better, his
seruitors most loyal and faithful, great forces, and abundance of treasure,
upon the which all other things do depend: and yet notwithstanding all this,
he does not leave daily to cause diverse Books to be imprinted in his favor
and defense, I do therefore desire to have drawn from this learned and worthy
person some thing written with his own hand, which I might present unto your
Majesty's: and to this end did I diverse times make request unto him, but I
could never get him to yield or condescend thereunto. Wherefore bethinking with
my self, that as poverty, grief, and melancholy, does bury, and (as it were)
kill the spirits of a man, so the commodities of this life, contentment and
cheerfulness, does revive and quicken them, I determined because I saw him
sad, pensive, and melancholicke, by reason of his exile and misfortunes out of
his own Country, to procure his pleasure and contentment, knowing that by
this means I might obtain the accomplishment of my desire, I did therefore
set open my gates and my House unto him, I presented him with my Purse, and
made him partner of my Coin; I cherished and entertained him for many days,
and (for love of him) some other of his company. And by this courtesy I made
him so beholding to me, that afterward having many times held dispute and
conference together, I caused him in the end to take his Pen in hand. Thereupon
did he compose in the Castillian Tongue, this Discourse, which he entitled
Trattado paranaetico: and he presented it unto me. The which when I had read, a
most strange admiration or astonishment did ravish me: for that I never saw (I
will not say in so little a Volume) but not even in great Books, so many
curiosities reported, so many and diverse Histories, things so secret and
particular, admonishments so necessary to be embraced, nor counsels so just to
be followed. And knowing perfectly the excellency of this work, and how
greatly important it would be to be seen of your Majesty's, and by the Kings,
Princes, Potentates, and Commonweals of Europe. And albeit I know my style to
be rude and barbarous, yet such was my ambition (I confess mine own
infirmity) that I was not willing that any other should have the pleasure in
doing it. In some places I have augmented it: holding it so to be needful, for
the better and more clear understanding of the History. Touching the
original, I thought it reason not to abridge or cut off any part thereof. I
most humbly beseech, in regard of your most Christian Majesty's, to receive it
with that good affection, which Princes owes to their Subjects: who for his
service, will not esteem to hazard the loss of all that he possesses: much
less to make himself incapable for the obtaining of that which of right is
due unto him, and who for the good and honor of his Country, will spend his
life most freely and willingly. God preserve and bless the most Christian
persons of your Majesty's, with so great abundance of spiritual graces, and
assist you and make you to prosper with so many riches of temporal blessings,
as is possible to his divine Majesty. Amen.

The most faithful Subject of the most Christian King of France, and loyal
Servant to the most wise and excellent King of England, I. D. Dralymont.

The Publisher to the Reader.
FRiendly Reader, thou have in this little Pamphlet an incomparable treasure, a
rich storehouse and magazin full of precious speeches, true Histories, rare
examples, lively reasons, and wholesome counsels: the which if their Majesty's,
and the Kings, Princes, Potentates, and Commonweals of Christendom would
embrace, follow, and put in execution, without doubt they should soon obtain
and find a medicine for so many mischiefs, a remedy for so great and
continual afflictions and intolerable travels, wherewith their Subjects have
for so many years wrastled and contended. And I dare assure them, that by
observing the advice here given them, they shall preserve their Estates in time
to come from all danger: for even as the great fishes do persecute and devour
the small and little ones; so in like manner those neighbors which are most
mighty and puissant, do despoile and consume the others who are of less
puissance. Now we know that there are two especial reasons for which the
Author has prolonged and drawn out at length this his Discourse, enriching
it with Histories so singular, and beautifying it with such rare authorities
and examples. The former is: for that, as he has endeavored lively to depaint
unto us our enemy, and to make us know the natural disposion of those Nations,
of whom we have great cause to take good heed; seeing that all that which he
has spoken, does set forward this his intent and purpose, he saw it would not
be any inconvenience, to use therein some prolixity. If a man by compact, as
bound thereto by another, or of his own proper motion and free will, and upon
curiosity, would undertake a voyage of some three or four leagues, not having
any time prefixed nor limited for dispatch thereof, what harm would it be unto
him, if in his passage he do find some Gardens where he may recreate and
refresh himself, from the travel and wearisomenesse of the way? So do you my
Masters read this Treatise at your pleasure, use it for your recreation, and
take your delight in the sweet odours of her flowers and pleasant posies. You
need make no great have, there is no man that does urge you thereto. A second
reason of the prolixity of this Treatise, is, for that as the Author is driven
of necessity to handle the virtues and the vices of diverse persons and sundry
Nations: so his will was, that each of them should have his due desert: the
good and those that have done well, praise and honor; but the evil and
vicious, blame and reprehension. In the end of this Treatise you shall find the
explication which he promises, Fol. 143; in the which there are many things
both of great curiosity, and also as necessary to the matter in hand as any of
the rest. For that in knowledge, understanding, and experience, he does far
exceed me, as his work does show apparently. Touching the which briefly, I
dare not affirm any thing, but this, that each word of his is a sentence, and
that each sentence contains many. I must confess, that to some persons in
particular, his Treatise will be ill accepted: but what remedy? he has spoken
but the truth, and what he affirms he proves, and he alleges nothing
without his Author to justify it. And truly I for my part am of this opinion:
that it is not against reason, to publish the wickedness and vices of some one
particular person, which being true, may be made known to every man,
especially when the knowledge thereof may redound to the great good and benefit
of the weal public. But to come to an end, let me entreat you to take in good
part that which I have said.

A Table made by the Author, of the principal things contained in this
Treatise.
THe reasons which have moved Philip king of Castile to stir up war in
France: and what opinion he has of the French. page 2. The league in France
imitateth that in Spain, in the year 1463. page 4. Philip against his
promise, causes the captain Anthony to hanged. page 4. What pains and
labor Philip has taken, to procure war against the most Christian king
Henry the 3. deceassed, by the mean of the king now being: and of the
promises which he has made unto his Majesty for that purpose. page 6. The
great desire which the late king Henry the third had to have set Portugal at
liberty. page 8. That Portugal is the cause of the war in France. page 8.
How necessary and important a thing it is, that the enemy have war made
upon him in his own country. page 8. What the nature and disposition is of
the natural Spaniards. page 15. What sorrow and grief the Princes and Lords
of Spain did take to see the invasion and usurpation of Portugal: and what
desire they have to see it deliverer. page 17. The malice of the
Castiliannation, and their disloyalty against strangers, when they have any
occasion offered them to domineere and rule over them. page 19. The enmity and
hatred of the Castilians against the Portugals. page 22. The loyalty and
fidelity of the Portugal. page 24. The cause why Portugal was not restored to
her liberty in the year 1589, when the king Don Anthonio drew the English
into Portugal: with a true declaration of that voyage. page 27. The great
riches found at Lisbon. page 29. The reason why so many faults were committed
in that Army of the English. page 33. That the most Christian king, and the
Princes and Potentates of Europe have very great cause and interest, to hinder
the Portugals from according with the Castilian. page 33. A deduction of
certain reasons, between the Author and a Frenchman, upon the voyage which it
behooves the French to make into Spain, and what losses they have had for
default of putting the same in execution in times past. page 36. What the state
and condition is of an assailant, and of a defendant. page 40. That tyranny,
and cruelty, and a disordinate and dishonest life is the cause of the ruin
and destruction of great Estates and Monarchies. page 43. The cause wherefore
the king Rodericke lost Spain. page 44. That the English heretofore going into
Spain, with the Portugals, did constrain the kings of Castile to demand
peace in all humility: and what conditions (to their great disadvantage) they
were constrained to receive of them, and of the valor of the Portugals, with
the honorable testimony of the king of Castile, and of the force and
puissance of Portugal against Spain. from page 50. to 53. Where, and by what
way Spain may be invaded, and the enemy easily ruinated. page 55. The
Portugals most impatient when their honor is in question. page 56. How and by
what means the king of Castile has so easily usurped the realm of
Portugal. page 57. What and how great the force of Portugal is: and the
negligence of the king Don Anthonio and of his Counsel. page 59. The unlawful
and unjust treaties made by king Philip with Muley Malucco, whereof ensued the
loss and destruction of the king Don Sebastian: And how Philip does rejoice
and triumph at the prosperity of the Turk: and for what cause he forbeareth
to hinder the Turk from making war in Europe, which he may easily do. page
60. The description of Portugal, with the greatness, riches, and puissance
thereof. page 65. King Philip much addicted to Cosmographie, and greatly
practiced and expert in histories. page 70. That the Castilians for these three
hundred years last past have done nothing of any worth without the Portugals.
page 73. That Portugal is the principal cause of all the wars and reuolts
which have bin since the year 1580, even till this day: and will be still if
order be not taken to the contrary. page 74. How king Philip does gourmandise
and incroch upon the elections of the Popes and Cardinals. page 74. That
tyranny is as proper and natural to the Castilian as laughter is to a man: and
that all which he has in any part of the world, has bin usurped, either by
his predecessors or by himself. unjustly and by plain tyranny: and that it is
now a long time since the predecessors of, Philip have used to serve their
turn by poisoning. page 76. The hatred which the Ecclesiastical and Regular
persons of Portugal have to Philip king of Castile. page 85. The nature and
disposition of the Portugals. page 86. John the second king of Portugal, the
scourge and chastiser of the Castilians. page 87. That the realms of Arragon,
of Valencia, and the County of Barcelona, and other Seigniories, do appertain
of right to the Duke of Loraine: and how Fernand the great grandfather of
Philip was one of the masters of Machiauell. page 88. The cruelty of Philip:
and how he makes no exception of persons, be it Pope, Nuncio, Bishop, etc.
page 89. and 91. That king Philip promised fourscore thousand Ducats to have
the king Don Anthonio killed. page 95. The blindness and inueiglement of
those, who being the followers of king Philip, do excuse and defend him. page
97. Good and wholesome counsel for subjects toward their Princes. page 99.
The great rents and revenues which Philip draws yearly from the Churches of
Castile. page 101. The offer made by Philip to them of the pretended Reformed
religion, to cause them to make war against the late King of France. page
104. How greatly Philip has pained himself, to trouble the estate of the
French king, by the means of some of the chief heads both of the one religion
and of the other. page 105. The reason wherefore king Philip yielded the city
of Arzil to Muley Hamet. page 107. The great difference and diversity between
the manners of Philip king of Castile, and Anthonio king of Portugal. page
107. The cause why Don Anthonio refused the means to recover his realm of
Portugal. page 109. Offers made by king Philip to Don Anthonio. page 109. The
explication promised by the Author. page 119. Of the proverb: Jf the Cockerell
had not come, the Cock had bin taken. page 119. Of Auila. page 121. Of
Simancas. page 122. The judgment given by the Lackeys against the Archbishop
of Toledo. page 123. Of Gelorico. page 124. Of the Castle of Coimbre. page 125.
Of the king of Castile. page 126. Of Egbert the first king of England. page
132. Of the Castilians and Castile. page 132 The reason why Braga entitleth it
self Primate of Spain. page 132. Toledo, Cordua, and other king^^mes of new
Castile, set at liberty, and recovered from the Mores. page 132. Of the Cities
of Spain. page 134. Of the towns of Spain. page 135.
THE SPANISH PILGRIM, OR A ROMISH CATHOLICS DISCOVERY, By way of
exhortation. Wherein is showed by good and evident reasons, infallible
arguments, most true and certain histories and notable examples, the right way
and true means to resist the violence of the Castilian King, to break the
course of his designs, to abate his pride, and to ruinate his puissance.
MOst excellent Princes, they which do make profession of wrestling or of
fencing, do principally study how to discover the tricks and devises used by
their adversaries in these kinds of exercises; for that having once marked and
taken notice of the same, they do enter into the lists, and present themselves
in place, and do combat with so much the more hardiness and assurance, as
having conceived thereby a full and assured hope to overcome their enemies, and
by giving them the foil, to gain the prize propounded for the victory. In
like manner ought we in all affairs diligently to search out the original of
every thing, that we may foresee and prevent all the inconveniences which may
grow therein, to the intent, they may not endamage us in the time to come
afterward. Now that which we in this Treatise ought most curiously to put in
practice, is to know and discover the reasons which have moved Philip King of
Castile to make war in France, with so great expense and charge of his
treasure, with so great loss of his people, and with so great decrease and
diminution of his dominions, especially in the Low Countries. If the most
Christian King Henry the third were living, he could say as much as a certain
stranger his servant coming from Spain, in the year 1583. in the month of
May, did give him to understand: and that was, that the said King Philip seeing
how his most Christian Majesty had permitted Monsieur de Shosse, the County du
Brissar, The reasons that moved Philip king of Castile to stir up wars in
France, what opinion he has of the French nation
and other Lords and Gentlemen, to go with an army by Sea to give aid and
succor to Don Anthony the true and rightful King of the Realms of Portugal,
who had been elected King according to the custom of the Portugals, by all
the cities and towns of the said Realm, and by many Provinces and Signories
out of Europe, being dependants of the same Realm and Kingdom. The said
Philip did deliberate in a solemn set Council to stir up and procure a
civil war in France: saying, the French nation is at this day of such a
nature, and likewise the English, that they never think upon the time to come,
nor care for any thing, but for the present, and that which they have in hand,
as being more desirous to gain day by day three or four Crowns then to keep
three or four thousand already gotten: so far are they changed from their
old and natural disposition. For in former times they had a desire to go
abroad out of their own Counttey for the succouring of Kings and Princes
afflicted and despoyled of their Realms and Dominions: and to make war upon
the Infidels, and to chastise tyrants, whereas now their thoughts are quite and
clean altered, and they do set their minds altogether to the gotting of money
v^on any conditions whatsoever, and they are now grown to be no less in love
with the lasciviousness, and delights of their own country, then they are in
dislike with the sterility and extreme heat of Spain, and other
discommodities of this country: and for this cause we shall the more easily
persuade and induce them to make war within their own countries, even
against their own brethren, cousins, parents, and countrymen, rather then
abroad against their enemies. And for this cause I will and am resolved to
spend one million of gold the more yearly, to the intent I may keep and
entertain them always in domestical and civil wars. So that being held
occupied, and having their hands full in their own country, they shall not be
able to resolve to pass into the Realms and dominions of any other. And so by
means hereof shall I be able easily to preserve the Realm of Portugal to my
sefle with all that does depend upon it. And whatsoever it shall cost me the
keeping, yet the profit will be greater then the expense, for that each year I
do leauy thereof near three millions of gold, and continuing in the
possession of the same. It may be that in time I shall be able to gain the
affections and good wills of the Portugals, howbeit that I know they be now at
this day very contrary against me. But hereafter, if I get them once to be my
friends, and having with them their strong ships, gallions, and other vessels
of war, besides the good counsel and conduct of all their sage and
experienced mariners, I shall make my self sole and absolute Lord of all the
Ocean Sea, and I shall cause my self to be redoubted and obeyed throughout the
whole world, and so will I retain and keep in my hands this realm, which of
all the kingdoms of Spain is of most importance, to the intent I may leave it
sure and peaceable to my successors. This is the sum of the speech which Philip
had, and of the conclusions which he took with his counsel in the city of
Tison in November 1582. after the arriual thither of the Marquess de Santa
Cruce, at such time as he returned victorious from the Island of S. Michaell. In
the same Council was by him also laid the first and principal stone, The
league of France made in imitation of that in the year 1463. Stephen Garibay.
lib. 17. cap. 10. 11 12.
whereupon the late League of France was founded. And there it was first by him
ordained, concluded and baptized, in imitation of that which was so named, and
made by the rebels in Castile against King Henry the fourth, and which
afterward was again revived in favor of Isabell and Ferdinand his great
grand parents. This great design and resolution of his was faithfully reported
unto the said King (as has been said) by this stranger his servant with many
particularities: and amongst others, that the Castilian had sent into France
nine sundry men, of purpose to corrupt with money and fair promises, the
Princes, Lords and Gentlemen of France, of whom many were particularly named,
who from thence forward held the party of Philip, and many which were ready to
do the like, as the event did afterward make manifest. And the said Philip to
gain likewise the Captain Landreau, had once resolved to send into France the
Captain Anthony, a Portugal, who being married at Rochel, was at that time
prisoner in the Castle of Lisbone; and for this effect had granted him his
life, with offer of his good favor by the means and procurement of the Alcade
Tayade, A lead is the grand Provost of the kings house.
who did oftentimes repair to the castle of purpose to see and visit him, and
had conference with him for a long time together. Notwithstanding Philip
fearing least he should discover the practice, caused him afterward to be
hanged, notwithstanding the promise he had made him. This Captain Anthony
discovered the whole matter unto a certain personage in whom he had great
trust and affiance, and requested him to keep it very secret, till such time
as he should be gotten into France, to advertise the most Christian king
thereof, and the king of Portugal: unto whom the said Captain Anthony had
prayed him to communicate it, as he did. And as touching the Captain Landreau,
he was enforced to take part with the Castilian, and to accept the money that
was offered him for the safety of his own life: whereof also he advertised the
king of Portugal, who was then at Beauvais on the Sea: and having given him to
understand to what intent he had done it; he prayed him to look to the
safeguard of his person, for that he was in exceeding great danger. The which
the said Prince Don Anthonio did within few days after prove to be most true,
and had been taken, if he had not saved himself with great speed, as there
was then taken one of his sons, with many gentlemen Portugals of his train,
by the people of the Duke de Mercaeur: who did ransacke and make spoil of all
that did appertain both to him and his train, of whom some held themselves
happy, that they could get away in safety. Of these nine men (of whom I have
spoken) certain were apprehended, who discovered the whole intention of the
enemy. Notwithstanding as little and small reckoning was made thereof at that
time, as there is now at this day of any thing, be it held never so necessary
and needful to free us from utter ruin and destruction. Moreover, the same
stranger (of whom we have made mention) did at the same time of his coming,
advertise the most Christian king, that it was reported throughout all Spain,
among all persons of any good sort and quality, that his Catholic Majesty
had resolved to enter into league, and to confederate himself (Sir) with your
Majesty, and to make you great proffers, to your exceeding great benefit and
advantage, so that you would make war upon the said late king your
predecessor. Besides, it was reported, that he promised to give unto your
Majesty a pension of two hundredth thousand crowns a year. Howbeit, some say,
that this was only to be for an earnest and assurance of his promises: and
they do affirm this for most certain; that the two hundredth thousand crowns
were all in a readiness within a castle named Oxagaui appertaining to the Lord
of Luxes not far from Rounceual. And it was further reported at the same
time, Philip by unlawful treaties laboreth to stir up war against the French
king
that the said Philip, to be the better assured of the amity of your Majesty,
did demand to have in marriage the Lady your sister, with this condition, that
the children which should be borne of this marriage (were they sons or
daughters) should be inheritors to the realm of Navarre: and that he would
give unto your Majesty in recompense the Isles of Sardinia and Maiorque and
Minorque, and would moreover bind himself to establish your Majesty, at his
own proper costs and charges, king of Guyene: and that he did also desire to
give you in marriage, the Lady Isabel Clare Eugeuia, The practice of a good
Catholic.
the infant of Spain his eldest daughter, together with the Duchy of Mylan:
promising to that effect, to get a dispensation from the Pope, and all such
declarations, as should be needful thereunto. Your Majesty should know these
things here alleged better then any other: and whether the report which ran
thereof at that time (when he did hold treaty with you) were true or no.
Surely this was a great tentation: but the love, which your Majesty bare to
your country, and the obligation of loyalty which you ought unto your king,
had more force and interest in you, then all the promises of an ambitious
Tyrant. The brute which ran thereof throughout all France, and also the
certain report of the ill entertainment given by your Majesty to a gentleman,
who had the managing of this business, and had made an ouerture thereof unto
you, did gain you the affections of all good Frenchmen: who did thereupon
imprint you in their hearts, and much more, when it was known, that your
Majesty had advertised the most Christian king of the same, in the year 1583
Insomuch that his Majesty did permit you the year following 1584. to make an
assembly of the chief Heads and Lords of the religion at Mountaban: where it
was well known, that your Majesty did sharply reprove those which had plotted
these troublesome practices, and others which were seen afterward to be set
abroach by the enemy, in the year 1585. And that your Majesty did then make
an accord reciprocally, neither to enterprise, nor to deliberate upon any
thing, the one against the other. And it was reported, that all the pretended
reformed Churches in this assembly, did require your Majesty for their Chief;
and secondly, Monsieur the Prince of Conde: and that all this was done by the
permission of the said most Christian King; who did greatly repent himself,
that he had let pass the opportunity, to give aid and succors to the late
king of Portugal, for the recovery of his Realm, as himself declared to
that stranger above mentioned, being at Bloys, in the year 1589. At which time
he complained of the tyranny and irreligion of Philip, and sent him into
England, there to entreat upon his affairs with the Queen and the King of
Portugal: unto whom he promised, that the first thing which he would do,
after he had recovered Paris, should be, to send an army into Portugal, and
to make war upon the enemy within his own country, and to constrain him
to demand peace, as the English with the aid of the Portugals had at other
times constrained his predecessors to do the like. And in case, that the said
King of Portugal did and should undertake the Voyage, as it was given him to
understand that he was so resolved; he prayed him, that so soon as he should
be arrived thither, he would advertise him hereof; to the intent, The desire
that the French K. Henry the third had, to restore Portugal to her liberty.
that immediately upon his coming into Portugal, or any other part of Spain,
if he had but two thousand men, yet he would send them away with all speed,
because he knew full well, and was most assured, that if the enemy were once
entangled in Spain, and kept busied at home, he should soon be rid of him in
France, as the event did make it manifest. For as soon as the news came, that
the King of Portugal was at Lisbon, the most Christian King, for the
accomplishing of his promise, commanded the late Monsieur, the Marshall de
Biron, that he should put himself in a readiness to pass into Portugal with
as great speed and diligence as was possible, for to succor the Portugals, and
to give aid to their rightful King Don Anthonio, to reestablish him in his
Kingdom.

But God, which with a just and equal balance does weigh and examine all
things, did display his wondrous works, where and when it pleased him.

Portugal the gate of the war in France.
Hereof then we do gather two things: the first, That the enemy, to keep
Portugal, has brought and caused the civil War in France: the second, That
our deliverance and his ruin do depend upon this, That there be sent a good
army into Spain, whereof he is exceedingly afraid.

Wherefore, most excellent Princes, to deliver your estates from the danger
that threateneth them, and to set them in assurance, you ought to undertake,
and to enterprise this Voyage, so importune, and so necessary for all
Christendom, without having any regard to the charge thereof, be it never so
great, considering that in not doing it, and that presently, you shall every
day more and more in time to come, bring your selves into hazard and extreme
danger. Take example by the times fore-past, and look upon the instructions
contained in Histories, written by men no less curious then vigilant and well
affectioned to the weal public, and in reading and understanding them, make
your own profit and benefit of them.

Agathocles, after he had been about seven years King of Sicily, being
environed both by Land and by Sea, within the City of Syracusa, by the
Carthaginians: and finding himself in great trouble and perplexity, How
important a thing it is, to make war upon an enemy in his own Country.
as being lately forsaken of many people of his own Realm, who had at the
first been partakers with him; and perceiving also that he wanted both
victuals, money, and other necessary munitions for the war, and that it was
not possible for him to escape out of the hands of the Carthaginians, if he did
not use some draught or device, which had not erst been put in practice: He
did at the last leave within the Town a brother of his own, to whom he
committed the command and charge thereof, and left with him for the defense
thereof, a certain number of men, whom he knew to be well affected unto him;
and taking with himself certain other troops, he embarked them, unknown to
any whither he went, and setting sail to Afric, he there landed: where he
warred so courageously upon the Carthaginians, as if they had been but his
equals. And having at the first beginning defeated certain of their Captains
that came against him, he ouer-ran, harried, and wasted all their Country, he
burnt and ransacked all their Towns, Villages, and houses of pleasure round
about Carthage. After which victory and good fortune, with a certain number
of soldiers, Bandoliers, and adventurers, which came and joined themselves
with him (a thing usual and ordinary in such tumultuous and troublesome
times) he encamped within a League of Carthage. By this stratageme, his
affairs did not only prosper in Afric, but throughout all Sicily also: for
Antander (so was his brother named) being certified of the good success of
Agathocles, took courage unto him, and sallying out of Syracusa upon the
Carthaginians that besieged him, he won their trenches, and having slain a
great number of them, he made such havoc amongst them, that this their
overthrow, and the victories of Afric, being spread abroad and reported, from
thenceforth all the strongholds and places of Sicily (that before held with
the Carthaginians) did then revolt from them, This was about 314. years before
the birth of Christ
and did altogether abandon them: which was the occasion also, that Agathocles
returning victorious into Sicily, did all the rest of his life time afterward
enjoy it quietly and peaceably.

After the death of Agathocles, and his partisans, the Signiorie of Carthage
continued the War for the Conquest of Sicilia, in such sort, that in the end
they carried it, and held the whole Island in their possession, which was about
277. years before the birth of Christ. Whereupon the Romans considering of
all these their exploits, and perceiving that the puissance of the
Carthaginians was very great, and that they held not only the greatest and
best part of Afric, which they had subdued by force of Arms, but also many
peoples of Spain, with sundry Isles in the Sea, round about Sardinia and
Italy, they did very wisely imagine, that this neighborhood of theirs would
prove very dangerous and perilous unto them, if they should finish and go
through with the conquest of all Sicily. For this cause they took such good
order in providing for their affairs, as they brought the Carthaginians to
this extremity, that they had no more in their possession save the Town of
Erix: the which Amilcar Barcyn, the father of Hanniball, did defend against
them most valiantly for a long time, and did therein marvelous deeds of arms.
Notwithstanding, This was about 240 years before the birth of Christ
the Carthaginians seeing that they could not withstand nor resist the force
and puissance of the Romans, they sent a messenger unto Amilcar, commanding him
to render and deliver up the Town immediately, and to make peace with them, to
the greatest honor, profit, and advantage that he could possibly, for the state
of Carthage.

Amilcar (doing as the Seigniorie had commanded him) gave up the Town to the
Consul Luctatius, and within few days after, following the course of his
affairs, returned into Afric, where he had many victories against certain
seditious persons: and so he settled the estate of Carthage in rest and
quietness. In the year 237.
This done, he made a voyage into Spain, taking with him his son Hanniball,
who was not then above eight or nine years of age, together with his mother
(who was a Spaniard) and three other of his younger sons, Asdrubal, Mago, and
Hanno; of whom, Amilcar their father was wont to say, A saying of Amilcar
touching Hannibal and his other sons.
That he nourished four fierce Lions whelps, who were resolute to work the
destruction of the estate of Rome. Amilcar then being in Spain, by his
prudence and liberality did gain the hearts and good affections of the
Spaniards, that he knew well he should be able by their means to have about
again with the Romans, to recover from them both Sicilia and Sardinia (which
they had also in their puissance) and that so in the end he might pass from
thence into Italy, and there to procure their utter ruin and destruction. But
being prevented by death, In the year 228.
he charged his son Hannibal (whom he had coniured to be, during his life,
an utter and unreconcilable enemy to the Romans) to put this his enterprise in
execution. Hannibal, after the death of Asdrubal his brother in law (who
succeeded his father in law Amilcar in that government) being then made
governor of Spain, In the year 223.
took the City of Saguntum (which is now called Monvedre) after he had held
it besieged the space of eight months. In the year 217.
After the taking whereof, he began to dispose and prepare himself to the
voyage of Italy: and having with great travails and many difficulties passed
the Alps, In the year 216.
he obtained in process of time so many notable victories against the Romans,
and did put them in such fear and terror, Hannibal passes into Italy.
that they did in a manner hold themselves utterly undone and forlorn. And so
had they been indeed, if they had not been advised to send Scipio into
Afric: Scipio goes against Carthage.
who made such cruel war so forcibly and so violently upon the
Carthaginians, that he constrained them to call home Hannibal out of Italy;
who within short time after, with the whole estate of Carthage, was overthrown
and brought to naught, as is well known unto all men. And so by this means
were the Romans eased and delivered, enjoying peace and quietness, and the
Carthaginians undone, defeated, and subdued: and their estate (which had been
so famous and renowned) was utterly ruinated and brought under the power and
puissance of their enemies.

Xerxes King of Persia seeing himself in a miserable estate, and bethinking
how he might deliver and raise himself up again, he made choice of certain
of his servants, fit for the execution of his intended purpose, and them he
sent into Europe with store of money, to corrupt the Orators of the Towns and
Commonwealths of Greece: and having corrupted them of Athens and of Thebes, he
made them to rise in arms, and to make war upon the Spartans. Plutarch in
the life of Agesilaus.
By this means Greece being set in trouble and dissension, sent for Agesilaus
(who having at that time subdued a great part of the Empire of Persia) and
being willed to come home, was enforced to quit and abandon the same, for the
relieuing of his Country from those troubles wherewith it was entangled. And
because the Money of Persia had an Archer engraven on the one side thereof, the
same Agesilaus had a saying, That ten thousand Archers had driven him out of
Asia, and had been the cause to make him loose a most stately and puissant
Empire. By this policy then did Xerxes rid himself from the trouble and
extremity wherein he was, driving out his enemy from his Country, and
recovering his estate, that was near ruin and confusion.

By these examples (most excellent Princes) was Achaius King of Scotland,
Achaius King of Scotland.
the son of Elfinis, a singular good Prince, and of excellent virtue, induced
in the year of Christ 791. to make a perpetual and irreuocable Peace and
League of Amity with Charlema^^ne King of France, at such time as he saw
himself hardly bestead by the Saxons and English, who then possessed the
better part of Great Britain, which within a few years after was called by
one only name, England. The other Kings, the successors of Charlemaigne,
considering that this peace and amity was more necessary for them, as being
more to their profit and advantage, then it was to the Scots themselves, who
sought it, they have continued the same even till this day, and by means
thereof have oftentimes constrained the Englishmen, when they have been in
wars and enmity with them, to retire and withdraw themselves out of France:
and many times also they have kept them so busied in their own country, that
they have had enough to do to defend themselves. And they have taken from them
both the desire and the means to pass into strange and foreine Nations: Money
given to the Scots by the French
yea, there have bin some of the French kings, who have given to the Scot, to
this end and purpose, more then 500000. Crowns; which was as much in those
days then (having regard to the change and difference of the times) as two
millions are at this day.

I will omit many other Histories, which make notably to this our purpose,
because I know well that these are sufficient to show how greatly it concerns
and imports the Protestant Princes, and most Christian King of France to free
your self from the encombrance of this burden now laid upon you, and to send
a good army into Spain: for as much as by such a voyage well handled and to
good purpose, depends both the safety of your selves, and the ruin of your
enemy. If you make war upon your enemy within Spain, he shall be compelled
to call home all his forces, not only from France and the Low Countries, but
al those which he has in Lombardy, Naples, Sicily, Sardinia, and other
countries: The means to ruina^e the enemy.
we had good proof and experience hereof even of late: For as soon as the
Castilian saw the English possess^d of Calice, he did incontinently send for
all his galleys of Naples, Sicily, and Genes: He sent to entreat the grand
master of Maltha to send him the Galleys appertaining to the knights of the
Religion. Which had been done if the French Gentlemen, which were of the order,
had not opposed themselves against it. He caused in all haste the Forces which
he had in Britain to pass into Spain: and there is no doubt but he had
likewise called home all those which he had in other countries, if the English
had remained there any longer time. You see then (most excellent Princes) that
by passing into Spain, you may withdraw from over your heads the sword of the
Castilian and deliver your country from his proud yoke and tyranny. But you
will say: the enemy has great and puissant forces, and a great number of old
and expert soldiers; by whose means, albeit they be far off, yet being
called back into Spain, he will greatly endamage and annoy you, and
consequently, your voyage may prove unprofitable, and perhaps very dangerous:
and so you may be enforced to retire and return home again, not only with
shame and confusion, but (which is more) in great trouble and extreme peril.
But unto this I answer.

Good and sound counsel
First, if you do all things with prudence and good advise,

Blauet in Britain: and those will serve you for sure places of retrait.

Thirdly, in Spain there are many nations which do hate the Castilian
extremely: for that they have been tyrannized, either by himself, or by his
predecessors: and these (when they shall see themselves aided and assisted in
good earnest, and to purpose) for the great desire which they have to be at
liberty, will soon take arms against the enemy.

Fourthly, those Soldiers which are out of Spain being called back by their
Lord and master, cannot arrive there within four months at the soonest, and
within two months may you arm and furnish fit and ready for the wars, all
those of the country which will take your part. For this is most certain,
that the very Climate of the country does help and aid to make them able and
active. I my self, and many others in Portugal have sometimes seen a company
of new soldiers at their first entering into garrison, to seem rather a troop
of beggars, and poor rascals, rather then soldiers, al of them being so
poor, naked and miserable, as we had pity to see them; and yet within four
or five days, after that they have been new apparelled, and well appointed,
if you had seen them settled in the garrison, you would have said, that they
had been great Gentlemen, and they did carry themselves with so good a grace
and countenance, as if they had been brave and old trained soldiers. I do
assure you, that two months will suffice to them of the country to make them
soldiers. The greatest difficulty is to make them abide, and not to fear the
fire of the Hargubush. Moreover, the Provinces of Spain are rich, as all the
world knows, The nature of the natural Spaniard.
and the inhabitants make not any account nor reckoning of their wealth, when
there is any question for the recovering of their liberty. For in this case
they will not spare to spend it liberally, as was to be seen by the offer
which they made to king Philip, after that the Englishmen were retired from
Calice: and therefore by sending of money into these quarters, they will gather
together fifty thousand men of war to pass into Spain for their succor,
defense, and preservation, sooner then the enemy shall be able to cause five
thousand to come thither from any foreign party.

If any man shall say, that seeing two months are sufficient to make the
natural Spaniards good soldiers, the enemy may therefore much sooner assemble
and arm a great number of men then we shall get for succor. I answer: I would
agree thereto, if there were in Spain arms sufficient wherewith to arm and
furnish them: but they are so rare and dainty there to be had, that there be
many great towns notably well peopled, within the which a man cannot find
fifty Hargubushes. Arms very rare in Spain.
And if there were any store of arms to be had, yet the Spaniards in Spain
would take arms sooner, and much more cheerfully for their liberty, then for
the service of one that tyrannizeth over them. Especially the Princes and great
Lords, who do desire nothing so much as that there were some realm or
province within Spain in full and free liberty, and which might be governed
by it self, to the intent it might serve them for a place of refuge and
sanctuary, as they had the like in times past. For Spain being in manner as
an Island, at this day the Princes, Spain in manner of an Ila^d.
Lords and Gentlemen of mark cannot easily withdraw themselves from thence; by
means whereof they are held in great slavery and subjection. When there were
several kings in Navarre, Arragon and Portugal, if the Castilians were at any
difference with their king, or the Nauarrois, the Arragonois, or Portugals with
theirs, they would have retired themselves the one to the other; by whose
liberality they were ever provided of all things needful and necessary for
the life of man, and sometimes with greater ease and commodity then in their
own country: as it happened in the time of Fernand king of Portugal, and of
Henry the second king of Castile, who slew his own natural and lawful
brother; which was the cause that County Don Fernand de Casire, and Don Alvar
peers de Castre his brother: Men Suares, Grandmaster of Alcantara: Suer Iuan de
Parada Governor of the Realm of Galatia: Petro Giron, Grandfather of
Calatraua, Alonso Giron his Nephew, and many other great Lords and Gentlemen,
with a great number of Cities and Towns holding the party of the king
deceased, did convey themselves into Portugal, where they were received by the
king Fernand, and had most honorable entertainment, with most notable favors,
rich presents, and incredible gifts, which he gave unto them most bountifully.
In so much that from thenceforth the Castres did continue still and inhabit in
Portugal, from whom are descended those which are there of that name now at
this day. Hierom Guliel. cap. 23. fol. 81 page 2.
The like happened to Diego Lopez Pacheco a Portugal (albeit not for so just
and honorable a cause) who going from Portugal into Castile for being charged
with the death of the Queen Dame Iues de Castro, in the time of the king Don
Peter of Portugal, he was then created Lord of Beiar, and his children also
made Lords of other peoples, of whom the Marquess of Villana, the Dukes of
Escalon, and many other great Lords have their descent and original. In like
manner, in the time of king Juan of Portugal of happy memory, Alias John.
the Acugnas and Pimentels went into Castile: and of them are descended
directly in the line masculine, the Dukes of Ossuna and Counties of Benauent,
and in a manner all the Princes and Lords of Castile, and Dame Julian de
Lancastre Duchess of Auero in Portugal. Now at this day the Nobility of
Spain does greatly want such places of refuge and sanctuary, and now, The
Nobility of Spain want places of refuge and sanctuary at this day.
the least Provost or Marshall is sufficient to arrest the greatest Lord of the
country, yea though it were the brother of the King himself: in so much that
the Princes and Lords of Spain do as heartily desire to see some Realm or
Province set at liberty, as they do their own safety. The sorrow and grief
of the Princes and Lords of Spain to see the invasion and usurpation of
Portugal, and the desire they have to see it at liberty.
None can tell how great an affliction and notable a misery famine is, but he
that wants bread to eat: and the Nobility of Spain does at this day with
great grief find that to be true, which they most of all feared in the time
of Charles the fifth, whose greatness they had even then suspected: and for
this cause they did show themselves mightily aggrieued at such time as King
Philip did enterprise the usurpation of Portugal.

Conestagio a Genouois in the book which he has written in favor of the said
Philip, and which is entitled, The union of the Realm of Portugal with the
Crown of Castile, does tell us both the one and the other of these matters.
And although in that work of his there be many true reports, yet we do know
him for a great and notable Liar: and even the very first word of that book is
an untruth; in that he has entitled it, The union of Portugal with the
Crown of Castile: The oath of K. Philip.
for king Philip in the assembly of estate which he held at Tomar in the year
1581. where the Portugals against their wills, and by force did receive him for
their king, promised and swear with a solemn oath, never to intermingle the
matter and affairs of Portugal with those of Castile, The Explication of the
Genealogy of the French K. now reigning: The author whereof was Friar Joseph
Texere.
but to keep for ever the Monarchy of Portugal entire in the same estate, and
in the same manner, as the kings his precessors had always preserved and
maintained it: paying all the pensions, fees and wages to all the officers of
the kings house, both Spiritual and Temporal, in like sort as they were paid
in the times of the true and good kings forepassed. Somewhat of this matter a
man may see in the end of the book of Explication of the Genealogy of his
most Christian Majesty, where it is spoken of the first king of Castile.

Moreover, the said Conestagio, as a man of a malign and perverse spirit, is a
most ungrateful enemy of that nation, which has both advanced and honored
him. For we knew him at Lisbon when he served Anthonio Caulo, and afterward
with Stephen Lercaro, 3. fol. 62.
a Merchant of Genoa. He has in his book these words: In Castile this
succession gave great matter whereof both to muse and to talk, both in private
and in public: for that the king caused the Estate of Portugal to be united
to his other Realms and Dominions, not caring how, nor in what fashion it were
done, so it were effected. The which the Nobility took very ill: in so much
as it seeemeth that all the great men of Spain, since the time of Charles the
fifth to this day, could not away nor like of the greatness of the king:
because thereof it has proceeded; that he makes less reckoning of them then
did the ancient kings of Castile, and he constrains them to be equal to
their inferiors, as well in justice as otherwise.

If Don Antonio king of Portugal were living, he could witness, how after
that the enemy was entered into Portugal with a huge army, and had taken
Lisbon, he being then in the town of Badaios, many Lords of Castile did offer
him to have entrance into the said town, and did promise him all their best
aid and assistance to seize upon the enemy himself. The which the said
Prince could not effect nor put in execution; for that within few days after
he was dispossessed of all the realm in the city of Puerto of Portugal. He
could also certify us, how that seeing in these parts many great Lords of
Castile did send unto him, offering him their service and assistance, in case
that he would set foot in Portugal: the which matter he communicated (if I be
not deceived) to the king and principal Lords of France, and principally to
the estate and Council of England. Notwithstanding, touching this desire of
liberty, it is a matter which does principally touch the Princes, great Lords,
and Hijos de Algo of Spain. For, as concerning those masters of the long robe,
and the rascal sort of Castilians; they take a pleasure in this their slavery
and servitude under the king, because they alone do command and rule all, and
triumphing over others, have the principal and chief managing of all the
affairs of the Realm: yea, and even the government of the king himself, in
their own hands. And although they do hate him most extremely, and do wish
ill enough to his person: yet notwithstanding they do wish so well to their
own country, and do so delight to see themselves to have the command over all
others; that if they know any thing, either in public or in private, which
might hinder and endamage his tyranny, they will not fail, only in regard
thereof, to advertise him of it: such is the natural disposition of the
Castilians, Josephus de bello Iudaice lib. 1. cap. 3.
who being issued and sprung from the race of the Jews, cannot but follow the
tracke of their predecessors. Today they would follow and honor Antigonus, to
morrow they would accuse his bounty, as a crime of high treason, and judge it
to be little less then pride and vanity, and as traitors they abandon and
forsake him, accusing him before Aristobulus, and so be the causers of his
death and destruction. And therefore most humbly I beseech your Majesty's, and
all Christian Princes, to keep your selves from the Castilians, and not to
trust them, Good and sound counsel
howsoever they show themselves mortal and deadly enemies to their kings, and
do make never so fair semblance, that they are well and heartily affected to
do you service.

The common sort of Castilians (Sir) are so malign and perverse, so full of
pride, arrogance, ambition, The malicious nature of the Castilian nation.
tyranny, and infidelity; that Fernand king of Portugal, being the right and
lawful heir to the Realms of Castile and Leon, and being called upon by the
people of the same kingdoms, who offered to receive him for their Lord and
king, the Portugals would in no wise consent thereunto, saying: that they would
not have any thing to do, nor meddle with them, no not though it were to
command over them. It was my hap one day, to devise upon this matter with a
noble man of the French kings Council, who seeming much astonished at the
report thereof, did make me this answer: Certainly, this that you tell me,
does make me not so much to marvel, as that which I have heard reported of a
Friar Preacher, who in the year of our Lord 1576. Math. 22.
preaching upon this part of the Gospel: Thou shall love the Lord thy God, etc.
and thy neighbor as thy self: said, that by this precept, God commanded us,
not only to love our father and mother, brothers, kinsfolk, friends, and
countrymen: but even heretics also and strangers, Jews, Paynims, An example
worthy the marking.
Moors, Turks, and the Castilians themselves. This happened (as it was told
him) and this Preacher was a religious person of the order of S. Dominicke, and
he did Preach in a parish Church of Lisbon, called Saint Magdalens, being one
of the principal Churches within the city, and there were present at it, the
most part of the Governors of the town, with many Presidents of the
Parliament, Counselors, Gentlemen, and rich Merchants. The said noble man
showing himself greatly abashed at this report, did demand of me; how it could
be tolerated, that this should be spoken openly in the Pulpit, and the
religious person not punished for it. Whereunto I answered: that there wanted
not any accusers, to call him in question for it: but the number of them (that
did bear with him and favored him for the franknesse and liberty of this his
speech) was so great, Portugals hold the Castilians to be worse then Infidels.
that those which did accuse him, could not be heard. Moreover, it is an
ordinary and usual thing with the Portugals, to say: That the Castilians are
worse then the Infidels themselves. But let them speak the worst of them they
can, yet will they bear and endure it, because they re^pe great benefit and
advantage by it. The which the said Nobleman seeing, in sort to make doubt of,
he did thus reply unto me: Albeit I do believe some part of this you say, yet
there rests one thing, which is as a scruple in my mind; and that is, in that
(as I have read) the Portugals and the Castilians are both of one and the same
Province, and are borne in a manner of one Stock, and issued of one Root, and
do speak one and the selfsame Language: that is the opinion of Conestagio,
Conestag. lib. 1. fol. 4. pa. 2.
of whom we have before spoken. But he says he knows not what: for the
Portugals are descended of the Gauls, the Celtes, and the Braccates, and their
Language is almost the same with the Latin Tongue. But as touching the
Castillians, we cannot certainly say, from whence they are descended:
Nevertheless, the best judgment and conjecture thereof, that can be made by
circumstances and evident proofs, is, that they are descended of the Vandals,
of the Jews, and of the Moors; and their Language is in a manner all one with
that of the Moors, and their pronunciation is all one, or much alike. Thereof
it comes, that the Castillians being in the country of the Saracens, or of
the Turks, they do soon and very easily deny the Christian Faith, and do
turn altogether Turk and Infidel. True it is, that the Princes, great Lords,
and Hijos de Algo, are extracted either from the Goths, or from the ancient
Spaniards, which inhabited the mountains and the countries of Leon, and of
Ouiedo, and the Province of Galitia, within which is enclosed the ancient
Portugal. Conestagio in the same place last before recited, says, that these
two Nations do hate each other most extremely: and he sets down one
notable untruth, to wit, The untruth of Conestagio
That the hatred of the Portugal does far exceed that of the Castillians;
which is altogether false, and untrue. The Portugals do not hate the
Castillians, but they abhor their actions, as most wicked, and full of
cruelty and tyranny: The Castillians on the contrary, because they cannot
with any reason hate the actions of the Portugals, for that they are good and
just, they do therefore have their persons, who have so often overcome,
vanquished, and ill handled them; and so much the more, for that their numbers
were always (as a man may say) infinite, and the Portugals were very few, and
in comparison of them, as nothing. The hatred of the Castillians is so certain
against the Portugals, that it is usually spoken in manner of a proverb, That
since the battle of Alijbarto, the Castillians would never suffer any to
preach upon the Friday, in the first week of Lent; on which day the Church
uses to sing that part of the Gospel, Matthew. 5.
where it is said, Love your enemies: and therefore they judge the Portugals to
be like themselves; and they esteem them to be of the same nature and
disposition as they are. Both the one and the others hatred may well be seen
by that which Charles the fifth said one day to the Colonel Ferras, a
Portugal, who in the wars between the said Emperor and Francis the first,
King of France, did serve on the French party against the Imperialists. The
wars being ended, and peace concluded between those two Princes, the
Portugal retyring himself into his country, did pass by the way of Castile,
where he went to visit the said Charles the fifth, who knew him very well, and
did love him for his valor; and doing him great honor in his Court, he stayed
him there for certain days with him: during which time, as he was one day
devising with him very familiarly, A speech of Charles the 5. to Captain
Ferras, a Portugal.
he used this speech unto him: Captain Ferras, I would gladly know, what
should be the cause that made you to follow the party of the French against
me, seeing we are of one and the same Nation? for albeit you be a Portugal,
and I a Castillian, yet are we both Spaniards. The Colonel made him this
answer: Sir, when the Portugals do travail abroad out of their own
country, whether they be rich or poor, their only end and scope is, to get
them honor and reputation. For mine own part, I had the means to live
honestly in my country, like a Gentleman: nevertheless, being resolved to see
the world, I began to cast my account with my self, what course I were best to
take. Having made my reckoning, I conceived with my self, that I should
purchase me more honor, by bearing Arms against the greatest Captain of the
World, then in taking of his part to serve against any other: and for this
cause I took Arms against your Majesty. The Emperor smyling, said: I
believe that this is not the cause, but rather the old rancour and hatred which
the Portugals bear to the Castillians. Portugal answered him again in great
choler: Sir, An excellent answer of a Portugal to Charles the 5.
I swear unto your Majesty, That neither for good, nor for bad, I trouble not
my mind with the Castillians, not so much as to think of them. The Emperor
making semblance as though this answer did content him, did embrace him many
times and often: but he judged of the Portugal as his affection led him, for
he had enough of the blood of a Castillian by his mothers side, to make him to
hate him: A little Leaven, etc. And thus may you see the untruth of Conestagio:
His History is well written, and in a good style, but most false, and full of
passion, for he both reprehendeth and iniurieth all those of whom he
speaks; yea, even King Philip himself, in whose favor he wrote it: and for
this cause principally it was forbidden in Portugal. But leaving Conestagio,
now that we have showed how the Castillian Nation is much more malign and
perverse then all the other people of Spain, I will tell you one thing worthy
to be noted ere we proceed, which does more nearly touch the Portugal Nation
than any of the rest; that is, That all those Nations generally are so desirous
of liberty, that they do seek by all means possible to obtain it, being
ready to receive even the Devils themselves, if they would be ready to
further and favor them in the same. And yet, if any strange Nation should
pass into Spain to any other end, they would use the uttermost of their
endeavors to stop their passage, and to hinder their entrance, making little or
no reckoning of their lives, and much less of their goods and substance. When
I do speak of causing strange Nations to pass into Spain, I must tell you
thus much, That they shall be much more welcome, and find better entertainment
of the people of the Country, when they shall be mingled many and diverse
Nations together, then if one should go thither alone: for that this
diversity will take from them all conceit and suspicion which they might
otherwise have, that their coming were to make a conquest of their country,
and not to procure their liberty and freedom; and so they would undoubtedly
receive them joyfully, and with all assurance. In like manner, if the Tyrant
should command them to go to the wars out of their own country,
especially if it were for their Religion, they would serve him more faithfully
then did Auila and Simancas in Castile, or Celorico and the Castle of Coimbre
in Portugal. For proof hereof, The meaning hereof is expounded in the end of
this Treatise.
you may remember, how in the year 1588. the King of Castile in his Fleet and
Army by Sea, that came upon the Coast of France, sent two Regiments of
Portugals, each of them consisting of eight hundred men, or thereabouts. The
loyalty of the Portugals.
These forces (notwithstanding, that in regard of his usurpation of the
country, they were enemies to him) yet having promised to serve him faithfully
in this voyage, in the fight which they had against the Englishmen and
Flemings, they did make such proof of their valor, that they did far excel
all the rest of the Army in prowess and deeds of Arms; and they alone did
more for the service of the King of Castile, then all the residue of his
Allies: insomuch, that there was none of them (who had command and government
in the Army) that were received with honor by the King Catholic, save only
the Portugal Colonels; Portugal Colonels in the Army of the year 1588.
namely, Gasper de Sousa, and Antonie Perera: The which Perera before that time
had served and fought most valiantly for the defense of the liberty of his
Country, and for the service of his true and natural King, against the said
King of Castile, at such time as he entered into Portugal with a mighty Army
to invade it.

In the year 1582. when Don Aluar de Bassana, Marquess de Santa Cruce, did
encounter upon the Sea with the Lord de Stroce, those which fought best, and
showed themselves most valiant was the Marquess de Fauare, Marquess of Fauare.
a Portugal, most true and faithful to his Country, and to his King; and by
whose counsel and aduertisements, a certain great and excellent seruitor of
the estate, and of the King Don Antonio, had his life preserved, besides
certain other Gentlemen, his countrymen.

Who took the Ship called the Revenge, The taking of the Revenge of England.
belonging to the Queen of England? even Don Jews Coutigno, a Lord of
Portugal, who before time had been most true and faithful to his Country;
and for the defense of his King, fighting against the Duke de Alua, had
received many mortal wounds in the battle of Alcantara, the same day that
Lisbon was lost, which was in the year 1580. and the 26. of August.

And for the more distinct and clear demonstration of the truth of this
matter, I will recite unto you a most true History.

In the year 1589. Don Anthony, King of Portugal, accompanied with the
Englishmen and Hollanders, made a Voyage into Portugal, and casting anchor in
the Haven of Penicha, they of the Castle began to play with their Ordinance
upon the army: but the Captain of the Castle, Anthonio de Arauio, a
Portugal, being ascertained that the king Don Anthonio was in that army, he
forbad the Cannoniers to shoot any more, and caused a white Ensign to be put
forth; upon sight whereof, Don Anthonio commanded that every man should go on
shore, and take their way toward the Town: the which they did, not without
some resistance made by certain companies of Castillians, who in the end were
forced to retire, with the loss of some of their people. The first that
arrived to the Town, was the County of Essex, a Prince of the blood Royal of
England, and one that was adorned with many moral virtues. This Lord coming
to speak with the Captain of the Castle, which was upon the Wall, one of his
company said: My Lord, the Earl of Essex is come hither by the commandment
of the Queen of England, in whose name he commands to have the Castle
rendered unto him. The Captain answered him; Philip King of Castile has
committed the keeping of this Castle unto me, and for the same I have done him
homage: in regard whereof, I will defend it against all those that shall seek
to dispossess me of it; and I will not yield it up to any person, save to the
King Don Anthonio, because his it is, and I acknowledge him only for my King
and Lord: and if he be not in this army, as has been told me that he is, I
would advise that every man do retire himself, otherwise I shall cause you
all to loose your lives. Upon this word, the County of Essex retired himself
to the Sea side, and there went to meet him, the Lords Scipio de Figueyredo
Vascoucelles, late Governor of the Terceras, and Anthony de Brito Pimentell,
and other Gentlemen Portugals of the Kings train; who understanding by the
Count the speech of the Captain, went on directly to the Castle, and assured
the Captain, that the King Don Anthonio, their Lord, was come thither. Within
a while after the King arriving there, and calling the Captain, who knew him
by his speech, he made him this answer: Sir, I come to open the gates unto
your Majesty. The port being opened, he kneeled down before the King, and
kissing his hands, The yielding of the Castle of Penicha.
delivered him the Keys of the Castle. This is most true, that if he would
have held good, the English army had not bin able to have taken that Castle,
it was so well furnished and provided of artillery, and all things necessary:
for besides great store of Iron pieces, there were 85. of Brass.

All these examples do show evidently, how faithful the Portugals are to
them, to whom they have once promised and plighted their faith and fidelity.
And for as much as I know that your Majesty's have conceived an opinion of me
as of a person given to be somewhat curious, and who is acquainted with the
accidents which passed in this Voyage, and that your Majesty's have a desire to
understand what was the cause why Don Anthonio did not continue in Portugal,
and what made him to render up this Castle, and other places which were
impregnable, and to return into England with his army, without doing any
other act of any worth, and with the loss of the greatest part of his
company, with which he was embarked; I will briefly recount the success of
this Journey, craving many particularities, because to count them all, it would
require much more time then is requisite for the finishing of this Treatise. I
say then, that as God, when he chasteneth and humbles great Estates and
Monarchies, does suffer and permit, for the sins of the people, such as are
like Pharao's, Nabuchodonozors, Caligula's, Nero's, and Dioclesians, using them
as his executioners and hangmen (as Attila called himself the Scourge of God,
and Tamerlan the Wrath of God:) so it seems he has permitted, that K. Philip
should be his minister and the executioner of his wrath and anger; and that in
his secret judgment, beyond all appearance of humane reason, his will is not
yet that Portugal should be delivered and set at liberty: for it is not
possible, that men should be so blinded, to their own loss and destruction,
as they were in this Voyage, if the Divine puissance had not blinded them, by
taking away the use of their sense and understanding.

The greatest part of the Army was embarked at Dover, The declaration of the
Portugal Voyage in the year 1589.
the 24. of March, and from thence went to Plimmouth: From thence they departed
all together the 29. of April; at which time perceiving their numbers to be
greatly diminished, by the contagion that was amongst them; in stead of taking
the direct way to Portugal, they set their course for the Groine, where the
most part of the soldiers died, and all the best Canoniers: insomuch, that
their forces were much abated, and they gave thereby good leisure unto the
enemy, both to send fresh men into Lisbon, and to draw out of Portugal those
who were any way suspected: as they did indeed take from thence more then an
hundred Lords and Gentlemen of mark, Noble men taken out of Portugal by the
Castillian.
who were all of them very contrary to him, and by their absence were greatly
missed both of their King and country. They came to the Groine the sixth of
May, where they were till the twentieth, on which day they did again take
shipping, and set sail toward Portugal, where they took land at Penicha the
six and twentieth. From thence (having left in the Castle certain soldiers
with Anthony de Brito Pimentell, above named, who is the chief of the House
of the Pimentels of Spain, and about 800. sick men) they took their way (the
General Drake by Sea, and the Lord General Norris by Land) with 35. or 40.
horse, and some 6000. foot, so ill armed, that a good part of them wanted their
Swords, and there was not of them above 50. Corslets: the cause whereof, was
want of Wagons and Carriages, for to carry them over the land; and the
soldiers themselves were constrained to carry their powder on their shoulders.
Besides, many of them at their departure out of their lodgings, had left their
Pikes, and some their Harquebuses, loading themselves with pots and bottels of
Wine, which they found there in great abundance, Wine marreth all.
the which in very truth did the more hinder and endomage them: for by means
hereof they fell into diverse diseases, and died in great numbers; the English
Nation not being accustomed to drink Wine always, and their Beer is not so
strong a kind of drink. The day following, 3. leagues before their arrival to
a Town called Loires Vedras, the keys of the Castle were brought to the king
Don Anthonio, which Castle is so strong, that 20. men with necessary munitions
may keep and defend it against 100000. All the way along to Lisbon (which is
60. good miles) there was not one Castillian that durst appear; and 7.
horsemen English did put to flight 60. Castillians. From thenceforth many
Portugals came to kiss the hands of their King, in great abundance:
notwithstanding, for that they came without arms, having been before
disarmed, and for that there was no body of whom they might get or have any
neither for love nor money (howbeit that they brought with them good store of
silver purposely to that effect) they did the most part of them return again
to their own houses: and there could not be armed of them above one thousand
foot, and 120. horse with Lances and targets: notwithstanding that the number
of them which came was in a manner infinite. Amongst whom there were many
Gentlemen of good re^^oning, who (because they were not clothed in Velvet and
Satin, but plainly after the fashion of the country) were not known nor
acknowledged by the strangers to be of that quality. On the Friday the second
of June, The army arriueth at Lisbon.
they came in the night time to Lisbon, and were lodged in the suburbs of Saint
Katherine, which are so great, that there were above 12000. persons of the
Army lodged there all at large, and yet they held not the third part thereof.
The officers of the king Don Anthonio found, A great suburbs.
that the Merchandise in this suburbs was worth more then four millions, to
wit, spices, drugs, sugers, wines, flesh, corn, 4. Millions of merchandise of
the suburbs of Lisbon.
Biskets, and other provisions: as Sir Roger Williams an English Colonel (who
was in this army) did witness afterward in the town of Manthu, in the
presence of many persons of good quality: affirming that he had entered into
most of the houses of the said suburbs, with an English Merchant which is come
forth of the city, and that the Marchandizes which he saw there, were worth
above six millions. This suburb is toward the West Lisbon; 6. Millions.
in the which they were lodged contrary to the resolution which they had before
set down in a Council held the day before, about two leagues from the city;
which resolution was, that they should have encamp^d on the East side of the
city for two reasons: one was, to hinder the enemy, that they should not have
any succors by land: for that the army by sea being on the West side, and the
sea upon the South side, and the mountains of Sintre on the North side, they
could not possibly have any intelligence from any part. The other reason was,
for that being in that quarter, on the East side, they should clear and free
the way for the good people of Portugal to come and to have recourse unto
their king. Now in that they took up their lodging on the West part, was an
occasion that the enemy might safely and at pleasure sally out of the town
with two hundred horse, A sally of the Castilians.
who slew and took prisoners many Portugals, and a great quanrity of victuals
which were sent by the towns that took part with the king: and they were an
hindrance also to many others that they could not come to join with him. The
Saturday following, the third of June, about two or three hours after mid day,
there issued out of the city about two hundred horse and eight hundred foot;
some of the which entering within the streets of the suburbs, and crying aloud,
God save the king Don Anthony, The great negligence of the officers of the
army.
they came even unto one of the courts of Guard, and there slew to the number
of thirteen or fourteen, for that they were lodged in the street without any
Baricado^ made for the fortitying of their lodgings. Notwithstanding the
Portugals which followed the king, having discovered them to be Castilians and
not Portugals, did give the Alarm so hotly, that a regiment of Englishmen with
certain Portugals making out toward the enemy, did charge him with that fury,
that they made them betake themselves to plain flight, The repulse and flight
of the Castilians.
and slew of them upon the place sixescore: besides that they took forty or
fifty of their horses; and the flight of the Castilians was so hasty and
headlong, that in their entry into the City, they left the gate of Saint Antan
wide open. In this encounter died an English Cauallier, Colonel of a regiment
named Bret, a brave man, and had great experience in the art Military. Now for
that the General Drake did not enter within the port or haven of the city
until the Sunday following (as was before resolved he should have done:) and
for that also the most part of the soldiers had neither match nor powder left,
save only for the discharge of some two or three volley of shot, The siege
raised from before Lisbon:
the Lord General Norris was constrained to raise the siege, and to retire his
forces the Monday morning, without any other thing attempted against the city:
The hope of the Portugals.
within the which the Portugals did expect to have seen the ladders raised up
against the walls, for to have made an assault upon the Castilians. Don Rodrigo
de Lobo executed by the Castilians in Lisbon.
And for this very cause the same day that the camp did rise, Don Rodrigo
Lobo, a Gentleman issued of an honorable house, and brother to the Baron de
Aluito (which is the only Baron in Portugal, and a great Lord) was made
prisoner and lost his head. The same monday being the fifth of June, the army
came to Cascais, from whence they of the army made certain sallies against the
enemy, who were so terrified, that 50 Musketeers English, and 7. horsemen
Portugals made 200. horse Castilians to dislodge from a village within a league
and a half of Cascais, and to fly to Lisbon in such post have that they left
behind them part of their Arms and baggage and their dinner ready dressed. The
Castle of Cascais rendered to the K.
After that (the Castle Cascais being rendered) the King and the Generals in a
council held the twelfth of that month about noone (whereat were present the
Count de Essex with many other Lords and all the chief Commanders of the
Army) they resolved to return again to the City of Lisbon the day
following, which was the day of S. Anthony, A Council held to return to
Lisbon.
a Portugal by birth surnamed Saint Anthony of Padoa: and their resolution
was thus set down; That the Lord General Norris with all such soldiers as
are sound and lusty should march by land, and in his company should be the
king: and that the General Drake with the Mariners, and all the hurt and sick
soldiers, and such Gentlemen as were not able to march by land, should go by
sea: And to put the enemy in the greater disorder and confusion, they should
cause 2to pass on the other side of the Sea 300. Portugals and 800. English.
Which if they had put in execution, without all doubt they had gained the
City, notwithstanding that there were within it more then four thousand
Castilians: who had conceived a notable fear of the English and Portugals
which were with the king, and they of the cities likewise, The victory at the
Groine.
as knowing well that at the Groigne 800. English, with 200. Hollanders, and
few Portugals, had defeated 10000. of their people, amongst whom there were
some thousand old soldiers which lay there, and were the remainder of the
Army by sea, set forth the year before: besides the County de Andrada, the
County de Altimira, and the Lean of S. James de Compostella, and many other
Gentlemen: insomuch that they of the city had resolved, that as soon as they
should see the Fleet and sea forces of the English to pass the Tower of
Bethleem, or the Army by land to give an assault unto the city, the Cardinal
of Austria would have embarked himself with all his people to pass on the
other side of the sea: and for this purpose they held all the Galleys, and many
barks in a readiness to set sail. Amongst which there were many hired for
300 ducats for the passage of three leagues only. This counsel being ended,
and Drake himself being a board the ship called the Revenge, did set sail
about three hours after noone, and took his course toward Lisbon. Some
thought he went to see the channel of Alcacena, which is an entry into the
Haven, by which men do commonly pass, which would avoid the danger of the
Tower of S. Julian, because in this council (where had been called many old
Pylots Portugals, Tower of S. Julian.
who were very expert and well acquainted in that sea) it was resolved, that
the Fleet and sea forces should enter that way for their more surety: besides
that at that time there was water enough for them, by reason of the conjunction
of the Moon: Drake takes the Sea, contrary to the resolution taken in counsel
and the wind also was very favorable unto them. Notwithstanding Drake, when
it grew toward evening, turned the head of his ship to the Westward, by reason
he was advertised, that there passed by a Fleet of thirty sail of Esterlings:
of the which he took 25. or 26. But this hindered the resolution formerly
taken; so as it sorted not to that effect which was purposed. And it
constrained the Lord General Norris, The embarking of the army for England.
the King, and the Earl of Essex, to embarke themselves the day following, and
to take the Sea, where they met with Drake the Friday following.

I suppose that this short Discourse (which I have here set down, without
specifying of any other the particularities of this expedition) will suffice to
satisfy the desire of your Majesty's, and to show the cause, why there was
nothing done in Portugal, and that Gods will was not as yet to reestablish her
by the means of this voyage. And I say moreover, that the principal cause,
The reason why so many faults were committed in the English Army for Portugal.
why so many faults and ouersights were committed, and that nothing was
performed or put in execution (according as had been resolved in council, was,
because this army was leui^d by Merchants, whereas in matters of this kind,
Princes only ought to employ themselves, and that with a settled and advised
deliberation: in such sort, that there ought not any name of an army to be
used, but by and from them only: and they ought to have more interest therein
then any other, and ought to be at the whole and only costs and charges both
of leuying and maintaining of all armed forces. And last of all, to them alone
does belong the choice and election both of the Heads and Leaders, and of one
General and chief Commander: unto whom, as to the Sovereign, all the others
should be subject and obedient. See then the reason why the Lord General Drake
(being named and sent by Merchants who were most engaged in this voyage) did
frame himself to do that which they would, and what came into his own brain
and fancy, rather then that which the other Lord General Norris did well and
wisely advise and counsel him, who was a man of singular experience, wisdom
and understanding, as well in politic government, as in deeds of Arms, and
all matters of warfare. For this worthy Lord did strive and labor by all means
convenient to have made a longer abode in Portugal, both in the quarters of
Lisbon and elsewhere: but after that the army had once set sail, the said Lord
General Norris could not from thence forward, by any entreaties, persuade Drake
to set foot on land again in Portugal, and not so much as to take one City,
where it was well known that there was not any forces, nor any resistance made:
neither was there any mean for the enemy either to have succored it, or
after the taking thereof, to besiege it for one year at the least. Besides
that, with the same it is most certain, that they might have found in Gold,
Silver, Silks, and Clothes, more then a million of Ducats. Moreover, the said
place might easily have been fortified, and by that means might have
commanded many other places: and afterward, money being sent into France,
England, Holland, and other parts, they might have levied and led thither above
fifty thousand soldiers sooner, then the enemy could have gotten together
five thousand. And this I think will suffice for your Majesty's to understand
that which you desire in this behalf.

But now let us return to the purpose which we had in hand. We have said,
that by this one example it may easily be perceived, how faithful and loyal
the Portugal Nation is to them, unto whom they do once promise faith and
loyalty: and therefore God grant, that they do not accord nor unite
themselves to the Castilian, and that neither your Majesty's, nor the other
Princes and Potentates of Europe do not consent nor permit them to do it, nor
do give them occasion to lose the hopes which they yet have of their liberty.
And you ought not to attend or stay upon the death of Philip: for it may be,
that the Portugal will more easily accord with the son then with the father.
And further, as the Monarchy of the Castillian is neither governed nor
conserved with the sword, but by good and sage counsel; so albeit he should
die, yet the same counsel continues and remains still. Besides, for these
many years of late, it has been governed without his presence: and therefore
there is little or no hope for any great change or alteration by his death.

Now of what great weight and importance this matter will be, Don Francisco de
Ivara (the father of Don Diego de Ivara, lately Ambassador at Paris during the
League) did confess and make known unto a French Gentleman at Madril, in the
year 1579. The Gentleman is yet living, and can testify the truth of that
which I will now tell you. The said Francis demanding of that Gentleman (who
was then newly come from Barbary, where the late King had sent him, for
certain of his affairs) what news he brought out of that Country? his
answer was, That the Moors were in a notable fear, by reason they had
intelligence, that the King Catholic did levy a great Army to pass into
Barbary, to revenge the death of his Nephew, the King Don Sebastian. The
speech of a Spanish nobleman to a French Gentleman.
Whereunto the said Francis replied, It is not amiss that the Moors should be
in fear: but it were more meet, that the King your Master did understand to
what end this Army is leuyed; for in very deed, it is for Portugal. The most
Christian king and all the Princes and Potentates of Europe have great reason
to hinder that the Portugals do not accord with the Castillians, and that they
give them no occasion to lose the hope of their liberty.
And if the King Catholic, my Lord, do make himself Master of that Realm,
as he verily hops (for he holds it in a manner as already wrought and
practiced) he will bring to pass, that not only the most Christian King
shall be inferior and tributarie unto him, but also all the other Princes of
Europe shall be subject unto him, especially the seven united Provinces of the
Low Countries: and the Pope, with all the Court of Rome, shall do nothing but
what seems good unto him; because, having added unto his Empire the Monarchy
of Portugal, who can be able to resist him? For this reason it will concern
the most Christian King, and all other Christian Princes, to join themselves
together, as in a common cause, for that otherwise the King my Master will
make himself Lord, and the universal Monarch of all the World, whereby they
shall be his subjects, and we shall be his slaves and vassalls perpetually.

This that we have here left recited, does prove that which was before
spoken: and therefore to return to the matter in hand: I say in the fifth and
last place, that whenever a great and puissant army shall be raised to pass
into Spain, be the charge never so great, if it do nothing else then wast and
spoil the country, and take some few cities and towns, and if in regard
thereof the Castilian be enforced to call home his forces (which he holds in
these part of Europe for his own defense, though the coming of those his
forces should cause our army to retire, yet I should hold this for a very great
benefit; because that which cannot now be done with an hundred, will then be
done with ten men, and the charge and expenses will be still less and less.
But it may be, that some of your Majesty's subjects will say unto me, that this
is a matter of great difficulty, and at this time especially very hard to be
done: for that having the enemy here at hand, even at our backs, there were
small reason for us to transport our forces into foraine parts. This a good
doubt, and may be some trouble to men of a shallow and small understanding, and
such as have little judgment to discourse upon the state of matters: but to
them which know the depth and ground of things, it will carry no appearance of
danger. But to the intent the truth may the better appear, let us reason
together each with other by way of demanding and answering, as is used in the
Schools.

A discourse or reasoning between the Author and a Frenchman touching the
passing of an Army into Spain.
The Subject. Be it so if you please, for I will hear you with a right good
will. The Pilgrim. Say then, what is it that you think will endamage you?
Subject. The enemy with his forces and with his intelligences. Pilgrim. But if
you find a mean to disnest him from hence, who then can hurt you afterward?
Subject. No body. Pilgrim. Do then as I have told you, and without doubt the
enemy will be gone from you. Subject. That cannot be. Pilgrim. Wherefore?
Subject. Wherefore, say you? How would you, that we should go into a strange
and foraine country to war upon others, and leave our own country in the
power and puissance of our enemies? If we send our forces into Spain (as you
would persuade us) we should be utterly undone, as I have given you to
understand. Pil. Good God, how are you without judgment and understanding?
Take that which I tell you, as I speak it, and not as you conceive it, and
answer me to one question categorically. If there were now an army raised to
go into Spain, to the making whereof, let France spare some four or five
thousand men: England three or four thousand: the Estates of Holland, Zeland,
Freezland, and all the rest of their Allies, two or three thousand, besides
ships, of which they have great store; and let some other Princes, Potentates,
and Commonweals, disburse some proportion of money, for the aiding and
furthering of this enterprise: and to these add three or four thousand
Zwitzers or Lance knights: and then tell me shall France be unprovided? or
shall England be dispeopled? or shall the Estates be unfurnished of men and
shipping, and without means to keep the Seas? or shall the other Princes and
commonweals be reduced to such misery, that they shall be unable to hold
their ordinary course in their affairs and proceedings: but rather as they may
well spare twice so many men to furnish them to pass into Spain out of the
several Kingdoms, and yet they are sufficient to employ greater forces into
other his dominions in the West, and nevertheless powerfully maintain their
own. Sub. No: I think not so. Pilg. Why then do you not that which concerns
you so near, and whereof depends the whole and only remedy of your
mischief and misery, and wherein you for your part, have a greater interest
then any of the rest. Sub. Marry sir: to make up these thousands of men which
you speak of; there must be had great store of money, which will as hardly be
had, as they that have it, will be loath to depart with it. Pilg. O how blind is
this people! and how deuoyd of counsel and prudence is this nation! O that
they would be wise, and that they would understand, and provide for things to
come. Our town, which the enemy may take to morrow next, does it not import us
more then 300000. crowns, which is the most that we shall need for the
furnishing of 4. or 5. thousand men? If after the taking of Laon, and the
reducing of so many good towns, there had been employed 200000 crowns, which
are demanded for this enterprise, it may be, you should have had by this time
more then three milllions in your purse, and you should not have lost al these
towns in France of so great import; Cambray, Dourlan, Calice, Ardes, Amiens,
and many other places, with your great Admiral: and so many brave gentlemen
and Captains which are now dead, would still have lived to speak in French.
Moreover, do not excuse your self and say for your discharge, that a man
cannot divine what will follow: for you have been too too much forewarned of
matters as they have fallen out, and there is yet living a Lord, one of the
Council, who at Fountain Belleau in May 1595. did by all means he could
possibly devise, persuade the undertaking of this enterprise; alleging so many
reasons and so evident, that he plainly showed, how greatly it did import
France to make a voyage into Portugal: but they would not understand, nor so
much as give ear unto him: Thy destruction is of thy self, O Israel. Is not
this true? answer me. Sub. I confess it; there is nothing more true: and at
Cambray, Calice, and Amiens we have lost so much, as it is a mockery to speak
of three millions, for that the moueables of Calice only were worth more then
a million, and those of Amiens much more. And if the enemy should happen to
possess those two places any long time, the game would soon cost us more then
13. Millions. Pilg. Now then, if you confess thus much, and do know what the
issue and effect of this matter will be, as you say: why do you not that which
concerns you so much, and is so necessary for you? Sub. Seeing you do press
me so far, I will tell you without hiding any of our thoughts from you. The
cause is, for that we are unwilling to hazard and set up the rest of our
estates upon the sayings, Nota.
and upon the opinions of a Nation that is passionate and in misery: but we
hold it better, to defend our own as well as we may, rather then expose all to
utter ruin and destruction: for to what purpose will it be to send 12. or 15.
thousand men into Spain, where there is so great a multitude of people? We
cannot believe that there can come so great good of such a iourny, as you in
the beginning of your Treatise would persuade us: and all the world does both
think and speak no less; affirming, that it is only the desire of those
(who are tyrannized and in bondage, and do long to see their country
delivered from that tyrannical servitude) which does make all things to seem
and appear easy to be done. Pil. O that it would please God to open the eyes
of your understandings, that you might know your selves, and that you might be
able to discern the good from the ill, the sweet from the sower, and the
black from white. It must needs be a great grief unto the Physicians, when
they see that their patients are wilful and obstinate, because in the curing
of them, there is neither reason nor counsel which will seem pleasing or
agreeable unto them. And in very truth, I do assure you, that I hold it in a
manner impossible for any man (be he never so sage, or quick and clear
sighted) to perceive the thousandth part of the grief and sorrow which I endure
to see you (my masters) even you of France and England so obstinate, as that
you will neither conceive, nor so much as understand, that whereupon your whole
saftetie and deliverance does depend: that you are so inclined to follow a
tracke or by-path, which will throw you down headlong to a most miserable
ruin, out of which there will be no recovery. But seeing I have gained so
little in speaking to you in particular, and that every man does talk of these
matters in public, I will now therefore turn my speech to the whole world.

First, I say, that it is very hard and difficult to put in execution any
matter of great weight and importance, without indangering of some things of
like kind and nature; To gain any thing there must be much hazarded.
and a man cannot gain or purchase any thing without some great hazard and
adventure. If Merchants should not adventure their goods upon the Seas, and
commit them to the mercy of tempests and pirates, or enemies, they would not
make such great gain and commodity as we see them to do daily: neither should
Kings or Princes have need of so many officers, or of so many customers: and
the excessive profit which men make both for themselves, as well as for their
country would soon cease: neither would they so prodigally spend and bestow
their goods and their lives, in running into so many dangers for the
discovering of Lands so far scattered and removed from them. If all this be
done for the gaining of 10, 15, or 20, for 100, how much more ought you to do
it to redeem and deliver your selves from so great trouble and calamity, and
from so many dangers which do threaten and menace you? And if you cast your
your account well, you shall find that you gain more then 100 for one. Thus
much concerning the first point of your speech. And whereas you spoke of people
passionate and in misery: I cannot forget it, but I must and will answer you to
that point also. O how it would rejoice me, if you would understand, that this
is but the malice of the devil and his followers, to make men believe, that
that which is told them (howsoever it be founded upon truth and reason, and
those aduertisements which are given them for their good and benefit (and which
were needful for them to receive and embrace) do proceed only of passion: to
the intent he may by means hereof hinder and withdraw them from all good
actions, and bring them to utter ruin and destruction. The condition of the
assaila^t far differs from that of the defendant.


Secondly, it is most certain, that the condition and estate of them which are
defendants, is much more miserable then that of the assailants, because for to
defend themselves they shall need greater store of men and forces, then to
assail their enemies. The reason: for that those which stand upon their
defense, do not know upon what side the enemy will essault them: and they
which do assail, do well know where the enemy holds his principal force and
strength for his defense. For example; suppose that the enemy put within Amiens
100. horse only, and four or 5000, foot: now for you to defend your self
from them, it will be needful that you do place good and strong garrisons in
Abbeuille, Eeu, Diep, Roan, Gisors, Gournay, Pontoise, Beaumont, Senlis,
Compeigne, Han, S. Quintin, Pe ^onne, Corbie, Bologne, Montreil, S. Esperit de
Ru Beauuoys, Clermont, and many other places, if you would not see your self
ruined: but assail your enemy, and then shall you have the advantage. March
therefore into Spain, into Flanders, That it is necessary to pass with an
army into Spain.
or other his dominions that may be nominated, and you shall have peace at your
pleasure, otherwise you shall have it with shame and dishonor, and you will in
the end repent you, that ever you spoke of peace. If you stand here at home
upon your own defense, you seek your own ruin and perdition: if you go
thither to assail him, you shall ruinate and destroy him. Let the multitude of
examples which are every where in all histories learn you to be wise;
consider well I beseech you that which Scipio Scipio.
(one of the most peudent and greatest Captains of the world) said unto the
Romans: The Romans. Hannibals Speech of Scipio,
who had lost three great battles against Hanniball: There is great
difference and ods (said he) between spoiling and preying upon the country of
the enemy, and to see our own flaming with fire, and spoiled and ransackt by
our enemies. Moreover, he which assaulteth is more courageous then he which is
put to his defense: add hereunto, that the fear and astonishment is much the
more and greater, where it is not foreseen and prevented. Now as soon as a
man enters within the enemies country, he shall soon take knowledge both of
the good and evil that may befall him therein, and he shall quickly discover
the commodities or the discommodities of the country. Liu. Dec. 4. lib. ^.
Saying of P. Sulpitius to the Romans.
Remember well that which P. Sulpitius said unto the Romans, and take it to
your selves, as if he had spoken it unto you, to wit: That they had had good
experience by that which was past, how their wars were always more happy and
fortunate, and their armies much more puissant in the country of the enemy,
then in their own. Hearken to the counsel which Hanniball gave unto
Antiochus, Idem. Decad. 4. lib. 4.
and make your profit thereof better then he did: Assure your self that the
country of the enemy will yield you soldiers, who desire their liberty: and
will furnish you with victuals, and all commodities for your army. Let the
faults and ouersights of others make you wise: do as Cyrus did, who cast
himself away by contemning the counsel of Croesus, Herodotus.
and by not making any recknoning of Tomyris his enemy. Halicar. lib. 1.
Take heed that you do not incur more blame in this behalf then all
others, and it may be more deservedly; because you have ever, and do daily,
use too too much to contemn, and not to regard your enemy. Certainly, this is
the first and principal cause of the ruin of all estates, when they contemn
and set not by their enemies: and when they will not hearken to any thing that
shall be alleged to the contrary. For the question is not now of entering into
a foreign country, to subdue and conquer it, or to get to be Lord and
Master of it: but only to restore unto liberty so many peoples and nations,
who do cry and call for aid under the yoke and burden of this tyranny: and
to deliver your own subjects from the arms of the enemy, who has gotten
footing in the best and goodliest province of your realms and kingdoms. If
you do not as I advise you, I fear me, least to morrow they will take yet
some other of your towns, and the next day another, and so afterward at one
blow will seize upon all the rest. Take heed therefore to that which I tell you:
I would not have you for the assailing of your enemy, to leave your selves
undefended; but that in doing of one thing, you do not let pass another:
because 4. or 5. thousand men which you men of Guyen, Languedock, Dauphine, and
other provinces, will not bring you to any such want of men, but that you may
have means enough to defend your selves both in Picardie and elsewhere.

Thirdly, to deprive a king from his Crown and scepter, and to dispossess him
of his realms and dominions, Two things do soon deprive a Prince of his
crown and scepter: cruelty, and licencious living.
when he is a tirant, cruel, or of a wicked, licentious and lewd life, there
needs no great forces.

Two thousand men which Charles the 8. King of France gave unto Henry Earl of
Richmond his cousine german removed (for he was the grand child of Katherine
sister of Charles the 7. his grandfather, who had to her first husband Henry
the fifth king of England) were sufficient for the said Earl passing over into
England to gather together men enough to bid battle to Richard the third: in
the which Richard was defeated and slain most shamefully, The cronicles of
England.
by reason of her cruelty and tyranny.

Peter king of Castile the son of Alphonse the Iusticier, The histories of
Spain.
for his tyranny and many cruelties which he committed, got the surname of
cruel, and was for the same cause slain by his brother Henry the bastard.

The cruelty which Christierne (the second of that name, Many histories.
brother in law to Charles the fifth) used toward the principal and chief
Nobles of Swethland, made him lose the said Realm, and consequently also the
kingdoms of Denmark and Norwaie, which he was rightful king and Sovereign.

The kingdom of Spain was taken from the King Roderike, a most loose and
licentious Prince, The common history of Spain.
only by twelve thousand Moors, whom the Earl Julian, Captain of the town
of Septa, procured from Vlit king of Barbary: who in the year 713. passing
into Spain in Merchants ships, had for their Chief and General Tarif Ab^n
Zarca, who being blind of one eye, gave the name unto the Town of Tarifa,
which was before called Carteya: and having destroyed the Town of Seuill, did
take and ruinate many others, both i^ ^he Province of Boetica, and in
Portugal, and did overthrow in set battle a cousin of the said king Roderike,
which Roderike himself afterward assembling his forces upon the river of
Guadelethe on the seventh of July (or according to others) on the seventh of
September, in the year 724. did give battle unto the Moors: in the which he
was overcome and vanquished, and immediately after he lost almost all Spain.
The wicked li^ of this king was the only cause of this loss, and of the ruin
of that kingdom, and especially because he had dishonored Caua the daughter
of the said Earl Julian, who upon this occasion finding himself grievously
outraged, gave free entry unto the Moors by that town of Septa, which is (as
it were) the key of Affrike and Europe. Besides, he did serve for a guide unto
them in that their invasion. At which time the said Mores had very good and
happy success in their affairs in Spain, by reason that they found the
people not used nor accustomed to the wars, as they are not now at this day
likewise.

Antiochus the Great, for his dissolute and disordinate life, at such time as
he should have set Greece at liberty, and have made war upon the Romans,
for the assurance and security of his own Empire, was reduced to such terms,
that he saw himself constrained in the end to accept peace of them, upon such
conditons as pleased them. And retiring himself out of Europe and Asia, he was
glad to withdraw himself into a corner, as their vassal and tributary.

The Annalls of France.
Childericke for his voluptuous living, and for seeking nothing but for his
own pleasures, lost the Crown and kingdom of France. By all which examples,
sufficing as well as 6000. more, may be seen how little strength and small
forces there do need to trouble and ruinate the enemy in in Spain, which has
not at any time induced, nor had any Prince so tyrannous and cruel, nor of
such wicked and licentious living.

Fourthly, touching your incredulity, and the opinion which you have, that the
love of a man's country does easily deceive them, and make the remedy of their
miseries and servitude to seem easy; surely we may with good reason call
this incredulity a blind ^nueiglement, and darkness of understanding. and
therefore I come once again to say as I have said, and I do again and again
advise you, That to send a good and well conducted Army into Spain, or other
parts of his Dominions, will be the only mean to resist and withstand the
enemy, to break the course of his designs, to beat down his pride, and to
destroy his puissance. And albeit that this may well be granted to follow, by
that which has been above spoken, yet I will prove it by one other example
only; which being most true, makes very much to our intended purpose.

Henry, Count of Trastamara, The Histories of Castise, Portugal, England, etc.
the bastard son of Alphonsus the Iusticier, by the aid of the French had
slain the King Don Pedro, his lawful brother. Of this Peter there remained
two daughters: The youngest, Isabel, espoused Edmond de Langley, the fifth
son of Edward the third, King of England. This Edmond having gotten sundry
victories in fau^ur of the Portugals (who accompanied him against the
Castillians in Spain) did manage those affairs with such prudence and
wisdom, that he constrained the said Henry, King of Castile, to accept and
receive of Fernand, King of Portugal (who was in a manner brought to utter
destruction, both he and his whole Realm) such conditions of peace as were
most ignominious and dishonorable, and very prejudicial both to himself, his
vassalls, and subjects. In regard of which his notable deeds and deserts, the
said Edmond was afterward made Duke of York by Richard the second, King of
England, his Nephew, the son of Edward the Black Prince, his eldest brother,
in a Parliament holden at Westminster in the year of Christ, 1386. Of these
two, Edmond and Isabell, descended the Queen of England, likewise named
Isabell. The other daughter, being the eldest of King Peter, and called
Constance, espoused John of Gaunt, the fourth brother of the said Edmond both
by father and mother, and Duke of Lancaster by his first wife Blanch, who had
by him Henry the fourth, afterward King of England; and two daughters, of
which the eldest, Philip, was Queen of Portugal, the wife of Ivan the
Bastard. Of John of Gaunt, and Constance, was borne one only daughter, called
Katherine, of whom we shall hereafter make further mention. The said John of
Gaunt, in regard of his wife Constance, did entitle himself King of Castile
and Leon: Guaribay, lib. 15. cap. 25.
and for the obtaining of his right to that Kingdom, he passed from Gascoigne
(which was then under the Dominion of the English) into Spain with eighteen
thousand footmen, and two thousand horse; where, with the aid of the
Portugals, who were his good friends, he took the Groigne. From thence he went
into Portugal, out of which he entered into Castile, marching even to the City
of Burgos, which was distant from the place of his departure more then a
hundred and twenty Leagues. The entry and invasion of the English, with the
Portugals, into Castile.
And from the time of his first arrival, he took and made himself Lord of
all the Cities, Towns, and Castles, which he found in his way: besides, such
as being farther off, did come to render and yield themselves for very fear
and terror. And he might easily have passed on much further, if his people had
not died, who by reason of their disorder which they kept, and by their ill
rule and demeaning of themselves, were oppressed with extreme famine, whereof
ensued this plague and pestilence amongst them. And they were reduced to such
necessity of Victuals, The amity of the French and English out of their own
Countries.
that they were constrained to have recourse even to the Camp of their enemies
(where then was in favor of the King, John of Castile, Jews Duke of Burbon,
accompanied with the French forces) of whom they demanded relief, for the
sustentation of their poor and wretched lives. The which being perceived by
John the Bastard, then elected King of Portugal, he complained to the Duke of
Lancaster, telling him, that he held it not good, nor convenient, that his
soldiers should go to entreat with the enemy, affirming, that these might
more endomage him then the others: and that therefore he should immediately
recall them, and forbid them to have any communication, conference, or parley
with any of the contrary party; otherwise, that he would fight against them
altogether, The valor of John, the Bastard King of Portugal. Thomas
Walsingham.
and would cause them all to be put to the sword, the one for the love of the
other. Thomas Walsingham, an English Historiographer, does set it down in
these very words; and he says, that the King of Portugal had then with him
four thousand Portugals, well armed.

Some have esteemed the saying of this Historiographer as very ridiculous, or
as a mere Brauado only; The valor of the Portugals.
but they are much deceived: for these four thousand Portugals, having their
King for their Chiefetaine and Leader, had been sufficient to defeat twenty
thousand Castillians.

The same King with five thousand, An History worthy the marking.
and so many Portugals, and a hundred and fifty Englishmen, did defeat the
said John, King of Castile (both of them being present in person in the
battle of Aljibarot) and put him to flight, having with him four and thirty
thousand fighting men; of the which died upon the place twelve thousand: and
there were of prisoners, ten thousand taken by four thousand, and so many
Portugals, and a thousand Englishmen, who remained masters of the field: for
there died in the fight about a thousand Portugals, and five hundred English,
who fought as if they had been Lions.

About the same time, Don Nunalvres Pereira, This History is well worthy the
marking, and the battle was called the battle of Valverde
Constable of Portugal, with three thousand footmen and a thousand horse,
defeated five and twenty thousand Castillians, and slew and took the
principal and chief men of Castile.

The same King, before that he came to reign, and afterward, had many
victories upon his enemies, no less admirable then that other; insomuch, that
a certain Nobleman of Castile being in speech one day, and devising with his
King (which was the said John) he said unto him: Sir, I cannot conceive the
cause why the King of Portugal, with so few men, has so often vanquished you,
seeing that you have always had five or six against one of them. The King
answered him: The cause is, for that the King of Portugal does fight against
me, being accompanied with his children, and I combat against him, being
accompanied with my subjects; I am King and Lord of Castile, and he is King
and Lord of the Portugals. Even so did the valiant Alphonsus Henriques, the
first King of Portugal, begin to entitle himself King and Lord of the
Portugals.

An honorable testimony of the loyalty of the Portugals.
This valor of the Portugals was not then at that time only, but it has still
continued even to this day: for we our selves have seen, in the year 1580.
how the King Don Anthonio, with less then five thousand footmen, Portugals,
being but even nouices in Arms, and young soldiers, did defend himself for
many days against more then twenty thousand old soldiers of the Duke de Alna.

In the year following, on the five and twentieth of July, being S. James his
day, Scipio de Figueiredo de Vasconcelles, a Gentleman whose valor and
fidelity is well known, and of whom there is often mention made in Histories,
being Governor of the Isles of Assores, he defended himself in plain field
with less then four hundred Portugals against more then a thousand
Castillians, whom Don Petro de Valdes had made to take land in the I Will of
Terceras, near to the city of Angra. The Portugals were no soldiers, but
mechanical persons, handycrafts men, and laborers, and amongst them, there
were not ten Gentlemen; for the Governor had left them in the Town, for the
defense and government thereof. The Castillians were old soldiers, amongst
whom (as is reported) there were two hundred men who had been Commanders in
Armies of Castile, and they fought from four hours after morning, till four
of the night: at which time they caused a great quantity of Kine to be driven
down from the Mountains, with the which they brake the ranks and order of
the Castillians, to the intent they might come to handy-strokes with them: and
by this stratageme coming to the sword, A good stratageme.
they overthrew them. Some of the said Castillians saved themselves by
swimming, many were drowned, and there were buried by just account, 875. A
notable victory of the Portugals upon the Castillians. Conestagio 8. fol. 234.
page 1.
Of the Portugals were slain by the hand of their enemies, fifteen; and by
the fall of a wall, six; and some hurt. The famous Conestagio does recount
this History otherwise, but falsely; howbeit, that he confesses, that there
were slain six hundred Castillians, and thirty Portugals. But I have heard
what passed in this encounter, of many Gentlemen Spaniards, my countrymen, who
were present at it, and especially of one that was borne in Valentia, named Don
Gasper, who saved himself by Sea, being sore hurt; and of a Drum, that was a
Castillian; and of a Portugal, borne in Villa Vicosa: the which two only had
their lives saved, being found upon the Seashore, after the heat of the fight
was past. There died one of the nephews of the Duke de Alua, and one of the
nephews of the Marquess de Santa Cruce, and a nephew of the aboue-named Don
Pedro de Valdes, and that renowned Philip Hartada, an Arragonnois, and seventy
more, of such as were the eldest brethren of sundry good Houses; of whom, a
good part were near neighbors to Salamanca. To be brief, there died all the
flower of Castile: for that they seeing how Portugal was yielded unto them so
easily, and having heard that the Isles were very rich, and that the East Indie
Fleet was like to fall into their hands, and being allured with the late sack
of the suburbs of Lisbon, which was valued at three Millions; they had
embarked themselves for this service as cheerfully, as if they had been going
to a Wedding. This is a thing well known, that four or five young Portugals,
from between eighteen and twenty years of age, did at Lisbon, with their
Swords and Cloakes only, make no account of a dozen of Castillians. By these
reasons men may understand, that that which Walsingham says, is not a
ridiculous thing, much less a Brauado. But return we to that we had in hand.

Within a few days after, there came certain Ambassadors to the Duke of
Lancaster, sent from the King of Castile, who in all humility did demand to
have peace; but the Duke would not hearken unto them. Notwithstanding, hunger
and the pestilence constraining him to retire into Portugal, to the Town of
Trancoso, they came again to seek him out, being sent thither unto him the
second time by the said John, King of Castile, with their former request;
showing unto the Duke by many good reasons and arguments, the great profit
which would ensue of a good peace made between them. The Castilian demands
peace of the Duke of Lancaster in all humility.
Thereupon did the Duke give them audience, and in the end did accord to their
demand, howbeit that it was full sore against his will: First, because he was
given to understand, that the King of Portugal was willing to have it so: And
secondly (which in effect was the thing that did most urge him) because he was
advertised, that the troubles and wars began afresh between the French and
the English, and that there were certain Seditions grown in England, by
reason whereof he should not be able to have any fresh succors from thence,
The Castilian constrained to receive conditions to his disadvantage.
whereof it seemed he had then great want; and the mortality which was in his
Army did now threaten him, that he should have need of a further supply. The
accord therefore was made between the King and the Duke in this sort: That
Henry, the eldest son of John, named Prince of Castile, should espouse
Katherine, the only daughter of the said Duke, and of Constance his wife; and
that they two should succeed in the Realms of Castile and Leon, and other his
Seigniories: That the King should endow both the Mother and the Daughter (as he
did) giving to the Mother the City of Guadalaiara, Medina del Campo, and
Ouiedo; and afterward, being with her in the said Town of Medina, he gave her
Hueta also: and to the daughter for her Dowry, he gave the Esturies, making
and naming her Princess, and his son Prince of Esturie. And from that time
forward, the eldest son of the Castillian King has always borne and had the
surname of this Principality, as of Dauphine in France the Dolphin. Besides it
was couenanted, That he should give unto the Duke six hundred thousand Franks
of Gold, for his return into England, and forty thousand Franks of yearly
rent, during the lives of him and his wife. John of Castile accepted all these
conditions, and that very gladly: for albeit he had France, and the Frenchmen
also on his side, and the King of Arragon likewise (with whose sister he had
been married, of whom was borne the said Prince Don Henry and Fernand, who was
afterward king of Arragon, All Spain with the succors of France against
Portugal, which gained notwithstanding.
against all right and equity, and to the prejudice of the true and lawful
heirs:) and had also Charles the third king of Navarre to his friend: yet he
knew nevertheless that having civil wars in his own Realm, and Portugal
his enemy: he should hazard the fortune of all his estates and dominions, of
such power was the Realm of Portugal against all the rest of Spain. This is
most certain and assured, The paissance of Portugal.
that at all times and as often as Portugal shall have the aid and favor of
France or of England, or of any other strange Prince whatsoever, she will soon
constrain the king of Castile (to whom it is as a bridle) to yield a reason,
and to submit himself to the yoke, and to receive such conditions as shall be
both dishonorable and prejudicial. And those of the Duke had been much more
to his profit and advantage in this accord, if the king of Portugal had been
willing thereunto: because he having the sword in his own hand, he might have
made partition of the country at his own will and pleasure: he was the judge,
and did what seemed good in his own sight. Plutarch in Apothege.
He that has the sword may divide the lands as he lists. Thereof it came to
pass, that the Duke departed not very well contented with the King,
notwithstanding that he had given him in marriage Philip his eldest daughter.

An exhortation to the French King, etc.
Oh that it would please your Majesty's to consider well this that I tell you,
and to the which I would willingly persuade both your Highnesses, and other the
Princes and Potentates of Europe, and that you would once know your own
puissance; and being assisted by your neighbors, with their Shipping,
Gallions, and hardy Mariners, with their Artillery, Munitions, and other
furniture for the Wars, and of which they have great abundance; besides the
ready forwardness and willing desire which they have to accompany you, as
has been most apparent for these many years: you shall find, that you alone
have men enough, and forces sufficient, to make your selves the Judge and
Arbitrator of these Affairs: and holding the Sword fast and firmly in your
hands, it will be in your powers to make partition of the Realms and Provinces
of Spain; and you shall be able, not only to take back unto your selves that
which is belonging and appertaining unto you, but you shall make them to render
unto every man his own. What greater honor? What greater felicity can there
be? Defend (Princes) your right, which for so many Ages you have inherited from
your predecessors. There wants not even at this day in your Realm of
England, neither Champions of Saint George, nor other late Captains, such as
Noble Essex, Drake, Candish, Forbisher, Flawkins, Norris, Williams. Likewise in
the Realm of France, who neither wants Martelles, nor Pepins, nor Rowlands,
nor Oliuers, nor Renaulds. In stead of the twelve Peers of France, you are
enriched with more then twelve hundred of the like. Your neighbors for one
Richard, will furnish you with an hundredth; and their Allies will fit you with
an Ogier, so fully adorned with all perfections, and so expert and well
practiced in the Art Military, and so followed with good and valiant
soldiers, that the Constables of Castile, the Counties de Fueutes, and the
Verdugo's, with all the residue of their companions, shall have no odds, nor
advantage of them.

This is the right and direct way: this is the most certain and most assured
mean to have a good and happy peace: even by the strength of your own arms,
without the use and employment of any supporters. You shall give laws unto the
enemy, according to your own will and desires: you shall force him to accept
of such conditions as shall be profitable and commodious, not only to you and
your own realms, but to your friends and allies also. What can the enemy do,
if you should pass into Spain with an army well furnished of all
necessaries? The quality of a good General.
and being led and conducted by some Prince which may be chosen and named by
your Majesty's for chief and General of the same, such a one as shall be
descended of some great and ancient house, and of noble blood: and accompanied
and adorned with such graces and rare gifts, as may easily draw others without
any difficulty or grudging, to submit themselves to his command; and one that
shall be able to govern with great prudence and wisdom? without doubt the
enemy would hold himself utterly forlorn and undone, (as indeed he should be
no less) and he would esteem himself happy and well apaid, if we would
suffer him to remain Lord of Castile: he would restore un- your Majesty's the
realm of Navarre and surplus of that which he and his predecessors have
usurped upon France: unto the most excellent Duke of Loraine, he would restore
the Realms of Naples, Sicily, Arragon, Valentia, and Catolonia, and such other
signiories as are dependants of the same: and the Realm of Portugal, to whom
of right it appertains. And he would be brought to do reason unto the house
of the Duke de Neuers, of the Duchy of Brabant, of Limbourg, or Lothier, and
of the town of Antwerpe. Likewise it would constrain him to restore the
Palatinate and Zwitzerland.

If you should demand of me, on what side it were most fit and commodious, and
convenient to enter into Spain: I say, that if you would enter by Navarre
(whereof his Christian Majesty, is the natural and lawful king) you should
even at this day there find the grand children of them which have lost their
lives and their goods for the service of his ancesters, and many others
likewise who do love and desire him, as their rightful king and Lord, and
will incur all worldly hazards and dangers for him, especially he being
turned true and perfect Catholic.

If by Arragon, the wounds thereof are yet so fresh, that the blood thereof
does yet, even now seem new to abound. If by Portugal, the sores are yet open
in the quick flesh, and remain altogether vnheaded, and that with such grief
and dolor, that even those very hands which should offer to touch them
(though it were to remedy them) would make them to quake and tremble: for,
Horrent admotas vulnera cruda manus.

And as it is a very difficult and hard matter for a sick man, being in
captivity and servitude, to recover his health: so it is impossible for any
man (though he should live a hundredth years (to see those two nations, the
Portugal and Castilian, to agree and love together: notwithstanding the king
of Castile does at this day entreat the Portugals (in comparison of his
ordinary and natural cruelty) with some gentleness, and does maintain them
in their privileges and liberties. The Castilian proud and arrogant. The
Portugal impatient.
For proof whereof, leaving an infinite number of reasons that might be
alleged, one only shall suffice; and that is, because the Castilians are
extreme proud and arrogant, the Portugals too too impatient, when their honor
is any way touched or in question, for then they will sooner grow to blows
then to words.

The French Translatour
This is a thing most certain and assured, and the Portugals do so regard
their hononur, and they are so ambitious of the same, and it is so recommended
unto them from the father to the son: that if they should lose but one jot
thereof, they would grow stark mad, as men that had lost all sense and
understanding. Fernand Magellan his great impatiency and folly.
Fernand de Magellan a Gentleman of Portugal, upon an opinion that his King
had done him much wrong, did conceive such a despite thereof, that he fled
from Portugal, and retired himself to the King of Castile, purposing to
discover unto him the enterprise of Peru. Now see the folly, or rather madness
of the man; his coffeehouse proceeded of no other matter but of this: for
that the King had denied to give him a pension only of half a Duckat monthly
for his son: for the custom of Portugal is, that all the Gentlemen shall
take a pension (which they call Moradia) of the King, according to the degrees
and qualities of their Nobilities, (which they do properly call Fuero:) and
they are to be enrolled in the books of the Kings house, which they call the
Book of the Kitchen, or the Book of Matriculation. The quality of Magellan
was to be one of the Knights of Hidalgo (that is to say) Feal, or one that
does Fealty: his pension was every month three Ducats: and he had a
petition to the king, that his son might be admitted into the same quality
as himself was, and that he might have the like pension. Of these demands the
King granted the one, The reason why Magellan did disco- the enterprise of Peru
to the king of Castile
and refused the other: for he accepted his son for one of his Knights Feal:
but he would not give any more then two Ducats and a half for his pension,
observing therein the custom of his predecessors, who did not use to give to
the children so great a pension as to the fathers save only when by the death
of their parents they came to succeed them in their inheritance. And for as
much as in Portugal the manner is, that the Nobles have their place and
precedence according to the degree and quality of their Nobility: and they
which are of one like degree and quality, do take their place each of other
according to the quantity of the ponsion, more or less, which they receive.
Magellan did take in so evil part this refusal of the King, made unto his
son of half this duckat, only because by means hereof he should lose his
precedence, that he became most foolishly enraged, as a man that had lost all
sense and understanding: and to show the extreme grief and sorrow which he
took for the loss of so small an honor, he purchased to himself the name
and estimation of a Traitor, and for such a one do all histories recount him:
because he did not perform that du^ie and deuoire to his king which he ought
him, but did give it unto a stranger: and he was the occasion that things came
to that pass, that the two realms of Portugal and Castile, were upon the
point to have fallen at variance each with other. So that it was the extreme
and ambitious desire of honor which made Magellan thus mad, and will work the
like effect with all true Portugals: and it was not the desire of getting a
little piece of money, as some have taken it, and have not been ashamed to set
down as much in writing, for the matter and subject incident hereunto do show
the contrary. I speak not this without cause, for that S. Goulart de Senlis in
his translation imprinted at Paris by N. Bonfons in the year 1587. and in the
three and twentieth Discourse, does affirm as much. The words of Osorius
touching this matter, Hier. Osorius of the deeds of Emanuel klng of Portugal
lib. 11.
are these: Notwithstanding the Portugals, for that they are vnmeasurably
desirous of honor, and do think that their Nobility is greatly increased
and augmented by the adding of a little money unto their living: that they do
oftentimes imagine, and are persuaded, that they ought stoutly to fight and
contend for such a small sum of money, as if their whole safety, reputation
and dignity did depend thereupon.

This being so: you will say perhaps, that it is greatly to be wondered at, how
the Castilians should then be able so easily to subdue and conquer the realm
of Portugal as they have done, the same being so great and so puissant a
Monarchy. Hereunto I answer: that it would be a long and tedious matter to
recount all the reasons thereof: and in very truth it so happened, rather for
want of resolution, then for any defect of color or courage: for the
Castilians are not better soldiers then the Portugals, as we have before
showed: and it did well appear, how about five thousand foot, and some
thousand horse did defend themselves for the space of four months and twenty
days, against more then twenty thousand old soldiers under the Duke de Alua;
the others being but new soldiers, and plain country peasants: The reasons
why the Castilians took Portugal so easily.
and if there had not been such abundance and store of treasons, it may be
that the Duke himself had found but bad entertainment, and woult have passed
any further. But Portugal was altogether unprovided of Chieftains and leaders:
all of them being lately slain in Africa with their king, Conestagio. li. 1.
fol. 45. pa. 2.
as Conestagio in the end of his first book does sufficiently set down unto
us, where he has these words; Sebastian went into Afrike, leaving his realm
quite and clean without money, without any of the Nobility, without any to
succeed or inherit it, and in the hands of such Governors as were but badly
affected toward him.

The Translatour.
In this battle died the Duke de Aueyro, great graundchild of Don Iuan the
second king of Portugal, two Princes his cousine germans, one of the sons of
Theodosius Duke of Bragancia, and one other that was heir to the Marquisat of
Ferrara, and four Counties, as it is reported in the life of the King Don
Sebastian by a Jew, Duard Nonnes de Leon, a Jew his book of Censures, etc.
named Duard Nonnes de Leon, who, contrary to the laws of Portugal, which
excludes all Jews, and such as are descended of the Jewish nation, from al
honors and dignities, yet was made of the Council of the realm of Portugal by
the King Catholic, who preferred him to that honor, only in recompense of a
Book which he made, called the Book of Censures; and is not only most
infamous but full of heretical unadvised propositions: it was written against
Friar Joseph Texere, a Portugal, of the order of the Friars Preachers; who is
at this day a personage greatly renowned in all Europe, Friar Joseph Texere a
Portugal his commendation.
and known of all the Princes of Christendom both Ecclesiastical and
secular; and especially in France, where the chiefest and greatest persons of
the realm; and all men of honor do love and gladly entertain him, for his
honest conversation, fair conditions, and singular doctrine: be being a man
the most accomplished in the knowledge of histories, and in the genealogies of
great personages, of any living at this day: as his works and ordinary
communication do sufficiently testify. J do much wonder at the patience of
this religious man, who being so exquisitely seen and practiced in histories,
so expert in matters of State, and so jealous of his honor, as we know him to
be, that he does not set hand to his pen, and write, not only against the
errors and untruths of this Jew, but even against the Catholic Majesty
also: seeing it was his Majesty that caused this false and infamous book of
Censures (whereof we speak) to be made against him: and he did auow the same
by his privilege given thereunto in the year 1590. permitting the said Jew to
imprint the said book (entreating of the Genealogy of the Kings of Portugal)
after he had translated it into the Castilian tongue, out of another which he
had formerly made in Latin by the commandment of the said King Catholic: in
the which book the Jew did of set purpose, forget to name and set down,
amongst them that died, Don Emanuel de Meneses, otherwise de Almada, Bishop of
Coimbre, and another Bishop Don Aires de Silua, Bishop of the City of Port,
and cosen german to the Regedour of Portugal (which is a dignity
representing throughout all that Kingdom the person of the King, in all causes
of Justice, both civil and criminal) both which Bishops were issued of the
royal House of Portugal: so were also the Baron of Portugal, and the County
de Prado with his eldest son, besides some other Lords and Princes, near
kinsmen unto the Kings of Spain.

The residue of them which remained unslain in Barbary, the Castilian with
gifts and fair promises had so corrupted, that they desired nothing more then
to deliver up the Realm unto him. The chief force of Portugal wherein it
consists.
The Knights of the Lance (which are those whom we in France call Esquiers,
and in whom consists the greatest force of Portugal,) did in a manner stand
still looking on, not having any other commandment; The negligence of the king
Don Anthonio and his counsel.
which was long of the negligence of the King Anthonio and his Council, who
did always show themselves very vnresolute and inconstant in the
administration of their affairs: by means whereof the Realm of Portugal is
fallen into this so piteous and miserable estate, not knowing how to recover
her former liberty: there was none that had any faithful affection or desire
to oppose themselves against the enemy, save only the Ecclesiastical and
Regular persons, and some few of the nobility. And though the people (who were
both without experience, and without arms) were likewise of the same
affection, yet had the Castilian by his policy and fraudulent devices drawn
them into his power, by giving out a false bruit and report, that the Soldiers
which did then leuy and assemble in Castile, were only to pass into Affricke
against the Infidels, for to revenge the death of his Nephew Don Sebastian:
which notwithstanding were in very deed for Portugal, as the success did make
manifest: for he began to make those his preparations for that attempt as
soon as the King Don Sebastian did begin to make provision for his voyage;
to whom he having promised five thousand Soldiers and fifty Galleys, when it
came to the issue that he should have had them, Conestagio l. 1. fol. 18. pa.
1.
he utterly refused to give him any, to the intent he might the sooner attain
to that he desired. And besides, falling to an accord and agreement with Muley
Maluco, he promised in the treaty made with him, that he would abandon the
poor King of Portugal: The Castilian king accords with an infidel
and to that effect did the Moo^e promise him certain Towns in Barbary, which
he had before offered to the said Sebastian, upon condition he should not give
any aid or succors to Mahumet Xeriffe. But that Prince would not accept them,
saying, that he had passed his word to the said Xeriffe to help him. Surely
Sebastian was more true of his promise then his Uncle Philip, who to compass
his affairs the beteer, and to get that into his hands, which he had of a long
time most ardently desired, did assure his own doings by the breach of his
conscience, The Infidelity of the Castillian King.
his faith, and his promise, in refusing to give those succors, which he had
promised unto Sebastian: and more then that, in commanding by a public Edict
or Proclamation, that none of his Subjects should follow him, nor serve under
him in that voyage. And this does Conestagio give us evidently to understand in
his second Book, Conestagio lib. 2. fol. 34. page 1.
where he says: At that time there arrived in the Camp the Captain
Francisco de Aldana, who had promised the King Sebastian to serve him in that
journey: who to that effect had gotten leave and license of the King Catholic,
which no other could obtain of him.

The Translator.
Conestagio writes, that Philip meeting with Sebastian at our Lady de
Guadelupe, Idem lib. 1. fol. 14. page 2.
did not dissuade him from the enterprise of Barbary, but only that he should
not go thither in person: for Philip knowing the generosity of this young
Prince, saw very well, that if he did once undertake this voyage, there would
nothing hinder him, but that himself would go in proper person: and therefore
to the intent he might conceal his ill intent, and so excuse himself to the
World, he did in show discounsell him from going, but not from undertaking of
the enterprise.

It seems that his Sorcerers by the means of the Devil (who is very
skillful in conjectures) had prognosticated unto him the loss and overthrow of
the Christians. Thus you may see how even before the departure of this poor
Prince, he did then prepare himself to swallow up and devour that morsel
which he so much esteems and loves: and for preservation whereof he is at
great costs and expenses, The Castilian to keep Portugal to himself, does
work many mischiefs to all Christendom.
and fears not to work exceeding great mischiefs unto all Christendom, and
to make peace with the Infidels, to the intent he may the more commodiously
make war upon the Christian: in so much, that he does even now triumph in
the good success which the Turk has against them. His reason is; because,
seeing how the Popes holiness has embraced and received to favor the most
Christian King (whose ruin he desired more then his own proper safety,) and
that the Princes of Italy do seek his friendship and amity (which I hope they
will do continually, in regard of the public good that may ensue thereby: he
judges, and not amiss, that it may turn to his damage and detriment, and
that it may be an occasion to break off the course of his great designs and
enterprises. Viz. The House of Austria, which is indamaged by the Turk.
For this cause does he rejoice at the losses and misaduentures of the
Christians: notwithstanding that the mischief do light upon his own flesh
and blood: in so much, that the prosperity of the Infidels makes him the more
proud and haughty.

And this is it, that has made him so hardy, The Ambassador of Venice ill
entreated by the Castillian.
as to give ill entreatie to the Ambassador of Venice, if it be true that is
reported; if he be not hindered, ere long he will give worse entertainment to
all other, without any exception of persons. He thinks that Almaine and
Italy especially, in their afflictions and troubles, will have need of his
help and assistance: by reason whereof, he is persuaded, that they will not
resolve themselves to follow and favor the party of the most Christian king:
by means whereof he shall be well able to effect his affairs in France. If
he had been disposed to hinder the Turk from making war in Europe, he
might very well have done it, by molesting and disquieting him in the East
Indies as the true and lawful kings of Portugal have done. He needed have
done no more but have joined with Xatama the great King of Persia, the friend
of the Portugals, for to keep the Turk in awe, and within compass.

Infinite are the praises, wherewith Historiographers have celebrated the
victory which D. Stephen de Gama a Portugal, The victory of Stephen de Gama
against the Turks.
Governor of the East Indies, did obtain against the Turk, upon whom he
made war for that effect and purpose. This battle was fought at the foot of
Mount Synay: Gama made many knights at the foot of Mount Sinay.
after which the said Gama made many Portugals knights, for bearing themselves
valiantly in that battle: amongst the which there were two of special mark;
who being issued of noble parents, did leave behind them an immortal memory
of their honor and glory. The one of them was called Don Juan de Castre, The
victory of Don John de Castre
who afterward being Viceroy of the said East Indies, did get that famous
victory, which you may read of in the life of the king Don Emanuel: in the
which with less then four thousand Portugals, he defeated an infinite number
of enemies, and put to flight Moiecatan Constable of Cambaia; who being sent by
the king Mamud his Lord and master with fourteen thousand men, to succor
the city of Diu, which held the Portugals besieged within the Castle: he was
constrained to leave 300. of his men dead upon the place: having lost the
Guydon royal, with all their baggage. Iuzarcan the younger (a great Lord in
those parts) was taken prisoner, and Raman the Governor of the said city,
(which was great, goodly and populous) was there slain: and the Portugals made
themselves absolute Lords of the city. Of this valorous Captain, Don Iuan de
Castre, who is now at this present in France, is the grand child: and he also
has been as faithful to his king and country, as the said Don Iuan his
grandfather. The other of those two knights was called Don Jews de Altaida,
Don Jews de Altayda.
afterward County of A^ouguia, who being in Almaign at the battle which the
Imperialists gave to the Duke of Saxony, and the Princes of his party, Anno
Dom. 1548. 24. April.
Charles the fifth did him great honor, by reason he surmounted all the rest in
that journey, and recovered the imperial Guydon, which the enemies had once
gained: in so much, that the Emperor gave him all the honor of this victory,
according as himself wrote unto Don Juan the third, king of Portugal, his
brother in law, Don Jews de Altaida Governor of the East Indies the first
time.
and cosen German, who had sent him thither for his Ambassador: and this noble
man was twice Viceroy of the East Indies. First, in the life time of Don
Sebastian, at which time he defended it against all the forces of Asia, both
Moors and Paynims had made a league against the Portugals, who both by
defending themselves, an assailing of their enemies, did purchase perpetual
and immortal glory. Don Jews, Viceroy the second time.
Afterward being made Viceroy, the second time after the death of the King
Sebastian, during the reign of King Henry: and knowing that the people of
Portugal had chosen and appointed certain Governors to govern and defend the
realm after the death of the said Henry, and that they had named ce^taine
Judges also to decide the cause, touching the difference upon the succession of
that kingdom: he said openly; I for my part will not yield up the Indies to
any other, His saying, touching the possession of Portugal and the East Indies.
then to whom the Realm of Portugal shall be adjudged. Insomuch (as some say)
that they (which followed the party of the Castilian:) knowing well that the
Judge would never admit him to the succession of Portugal, and being drawn on
by the counsel, persuasions, and fair promises of the Castilian himself,
which were sent unto them over land: (add hereunto the notable diligence and
industry which he uses in all his affairs. They caused the said Jews to be
made away with poison: so died that valiant and faithful Portugal; Don Jews
de Alcaida poisoned.
and there succeeded him in that government a most ungrateful and notable
Traitor, who presently after delivered up the Indies to the enemy. To the
intent the happy memory of Don Stephan de Gama might be preserved, there is an
Epitaph set in a Palace builded by Gama himself (after his return from the
Indies) near to the town of Setuval in Portugal, which in the Portugal
language, though somewhat glossely, is thus written: Quem Cauelleyros armou
O pe do monte Sinay, Stephan de Gama his Epitaph.

V^io acabar aquy.


That is to say: He which made so many Knights,
At the foot of Mount Sinay,
Here (as you see) now does he lie.


But to our purpose: At this day Philip has more force, more puissance, and
many more commodities, to hinder the Turk on that side of the East Indies,
from making wars in Europe, then all the other kings of Portugal have had
heretofore. Howbeit, as that is not the way to advance his ambitious desires:
so cannot he abide in any case to hear thereof. For, though it were a good
deed and well done: yet it will not be any help unto him toward the
preservation of this his Monarchy of Portugal, which he has usurped with so
many fraudulent devises and unlawful means: and which he pretends to leave
unto his heir, be it by right or by wrong: for he knows it to be of most
great and noble puissance, Portugal, the most rich and precious pearl of the
crown of Spain.
and he esteems it as the most rich, precious, and important pearl of his
crown: and indeed so it is. And therefore I cannot but grieve at some that
hold themselves to be wise, and of no small judgment and understanding; both
French and English, who will not in any case be persuaded, but that Portugal
is a very small and barren country, and no greater then Normandy. And some
others (who show their ignorance) affirm it to be as great as Brie only:
neither will they believe nor agree, that Portugal is within Spain; but that
it is a country separated therefom: and they will seem (forsooth) to reason
and discourse hereupon, breaking their own brains about it, to the trouble
both of themselves, and those that hear them. These my maaisters do
constrain me to become a Geographer in this discourse; howbeit, that I make no
profession of that science: nevertheless, because it makes to our purpose, it
will be requisite, that we make a general description of that country, and
recount some special particulars thereof, to the intent the greatness,
riches, fertility, and puissance thereof, may be the better known and
discerned.

Portugal is a part of Spain, The description of Portugal.
situated upon the maine Ocean: and it extends to the Westward from the East
115. leagues, and from the South to the Northward 25. leagues. On the North
side thereof is the realm of Galicia: toward the East, it has the Provinces
of Taragon, Lusitania, and Boetica: and to the South, it is bounded with that
part of the Ocean Sea, which lies toward the coast of Affrique. It contains
four principal Provinces: the first la Transtagana, which encloseth the
realm of Algarba: the second, la Cistagana: the third, between Duero and
Migno: and the fourth, la Tronsmontana. These four Provinces contain part of
the Province of Taragon, the greatest part of Lusitania, and a part of Boetica.
It has in length 5. degrees and a half from North to South, and begins at
Cape S. Vincent, in 37. degree, taking a little of the 36. and ends in a
manner in 42. and a half, not far from Bayonne de Vigo: and it extends
from the South South East, to the North North East, where every degree
contains 19. leagues and a half: and it has commonly in breadth 40. leagues,
in some part less and some part more. Of the greatness of Portugal.
The leagues are not reckoned according to the leagues of France, but by the
leagues of the degrees: each of which has from North to South seventeen
leagues and, according to the account of Portugal: and so having regard what
is ouerplusse, and what is wanting, the country of Portugal is fully forty
leagues in breadth: so that making a Figure quadrant of five degrees and in
length, drawn from the North North East, to the South South East, and of
forty leagues in breadth from East to West, it will enclose within it all
Normandy, a good part of Beaulce, the Duchies of Maine and of Aniou, the
greatest part of Tourayn, in a manner all Poicteau, and almost all Xantogne,
and some part of Angolesme, with a part of Perigort. And this we shall see
clearly by demonstration, if we make the said Figure quadrant in France of 5.
degrees and in length, and 40. leagues in breadth: the form thereof will be
thus: Draw a line from the Angle on the East side of the quadrant and where it
has the North at the head; and it will begin at Crotoy upon the river of Sum
(which is in 50. degrees of elevation) even to Lybourne in Perigort (which is
44. degrees and a half) passing near by Roan, by Eureux, Dreux, and Amboise,
near by Chastellerauld, by Coue, and between Negre and Iarnac and Angolesme,
and between Barbesieux and Coutras, till you come to the said town of
Libourne: All that country which is in the West of this figure, is as great as
Portugal. And to the intent, that this which I say, may be the better
perceived, it shall not be amiss to describe the rest of the Figure. The
quadrant which has his head toward the North, and begins in the East at
Crotoy, drawing toward the West, ends in the Sea, about 6. leagues off the
Sea coast of Cherebourg, and so passing by Constance and by Graundville near
the town of Dol by the villages of Becherel, Redon, and Arebon, and entering
into the Sea between Guerrand and Croisic, even to 44. degrees and a half, to
the East of the said town of Libourne 10. leagues from the land, which is to
the South of Anchises: we shall come to have our Figure perfect. Moreover,
because there may be no doubt in this demonstration, we will answer to an
objection which may be made by those which will not that Portugal should be
greater then Normandy, and that is, seeing the line from the west side of our
Figure passes by Cherebourg, Constance, all this land, and all the country
which remains there, may be put within the West Angles of the Figure, which
are void, because they end within the Sea. Now this demonstration being well
made and understood, and being compared with the greatness of Portugal,
Portugal as great as England.
we shall find that her circuit is not only as great as all these Provinces of
France, which we have spoken of, but even as great as all that circuit which is
comprehended in the Isle of great Britain, which we call England.

As touching the fertility of Portugal, a man may easily judge thereof by
that which Strabo writes of it speaking of Lusitania, The fertility of
Portugal. Strabo. lib. 3. de situ orbis.
which is the greatest part of the said Realm, saying, Lusitania, is a Region
most fertile in fruits, in cattle, in gold and silver, and many other like
commodities. And the Provinces and lands which the Portugals possess in Spain
out of Lusitania, are held to be much more fertile, then those of Lusitania it
self: as the lands which they hold in Boetica, in the Province Tronsmontana,
(which the common people call Tras los Montes) and in the Province between
Duero and Migno, which the Latins named Interamnis, and which (the said
Strabo) against the common and true opinion, places within Lusitania. And he
says further; in Lusitania is the river Lethe which many call Limaea, and some
others Belion: wherein he is deceived; as also in saying that Minius surpasses
all the rivers of Lusitania in greatness: for Lyme is shut in within the
Province that lies between Duero and Migno: which Provinces (following the
true description, are enclosed in the Province of Taragon: and Migno is much
less then Duero, Tago, and Guadiana, which are in Lusitania.

There are in Portugal three Archbishoprickes, and ten Bishoprics: all
which, Archbishops and Bishops of Portugal and their revenues
even at this day do bring to their Prelates about 400. thousand Ducats of
yearly rent. The country for the greatness thereof is well peopled: the Duke
of Bragantia alone in one City, and in the Towns, castles and villages (of
which he is Lord) has 200000. The dominion of the Duke of Bragantia.
vassals. Portugal sends into the East Indies, Barbary Cape de Verd, the
Isles of Buan, Mina, S. Thomas, Congo, Angola, Brasill, and other places some
6000. men yearly, of whom, the third part never returns home again into
their country. If Philip durst at this day put any confidence and trust in the
Portugals, he might draw out from Portugal, to send unto his war^es more then
100000. men from the age of 25. years to 40. who having nothing to hinder them
from going, nor have any excuse not to obey him, if he should command them.

It is not unknown to the whole world, that in the time of Sebastian king of
Portugal, there were throughout all that realm 1200. companies of footmen, in
the which there were none enrolled nor mustered, but only the people of that
country, Artizans, handicrafts-men, and such like mechanical persons and
laborers, and yet not all of them: the Noblemen, Gentlemen, officers of
justice: the the governors of cities and towns: the students and such as
professed learning: in sum, all the Nobility, the Ecclesiastical and regular
persons, with their servants, and many other sorts of men privileged were
excused and exempted, and were not bound to enroll themselves in the said
Companies: of which the most part consisted of 200 men, some of 300. The number
of men fit for war in Portugal.
and of 400. Let us allow to each of them 200 men only, and they will amount
to the number of 240000 men. Consider then how great the number may be of them,
which were not bound to be enroled in those Companies. I do not here make any
mention of the number of companies of Horsemen, of which this Realm has a
great quantity, because it is not possible to know the certainty and truth
thereof.

The greatness of the king of Portugal.
Moreover the Kings of Portugal are so great in one respect, that therein they
exceed all the Kings and Princes of Europe, and that is, that they are able in
less then a quarter of an hour to give unto their vassals and subjects 10 15
or 20 Millions in tickets, consisting in dispatches for Gouernorships,
Captainships, receipts, and other charges and Offices, and for licenses to make
voyages by Sea to Banda, Malucco, China, and other parts of the East Indies: by
means of which dispatches, they which do obtain them, do recover the said
sums of money immediately.

Hereby may a man easily judge the greatness, the riches, and the puissance of
this Realm, whereunto adding the seigniories which it has and possesses in
Affrike, Asia and America, and in the Islands which it holds in the Ocean Sea,
it makes a most notable, great and puissant Monarchy: and therefore I marvel
not though the King of Castile does commit such excess, and is at so great
costs and expenses for the keeping and preserving of the same: he knows full
well how much it imports him, and of what value and worth it is unto him: he
is not ignorant, as one that knows not the estate of things, but on the
contrary rather he is wise, advised, very politic, and well experienced in
affairs and matters of state.

The Translator.
This thing Anthony de Perez ( Secretary of estate to the King Catholic Don
Philip the 2. Anthony Perez. 2.
the man here spoken of) does show us in the second part of his advertisement,
upon the point of the process made against him, where he entreats of the
dissimulations, deceits, and subtilties ^sed by the said Philip toward Don John
de Austria his brother, upon pretense of the Realm of Tunes, Don John de
Austria dyed of poison.
and the intelligences of England, at such time as he sent him into Flanders:
where (as the report is) in the end he caused him to be poisoned.

Besides, the said Philip is notably addicted to Cosmography: for he has in
his Palace of Madril, Philip much given to Cosmography.
a very great and goodly House, wherein are the descriptions of all the
Provinces and Realms of the World, not only in general Maps, but even in
particular: there does he spend the most part of the day, and contemplating
and beholding those descriptions, he does whet on and augment his ambition, and
extends the bounds of his tyranny: there he sees what is most fit and
convenient for him, and most easy for him to conquer: there he sees by what
means he may take Cambray, and how afterward he may obtain Calis, and what
reason he has from thence to leap over to Amiens: and thus does he consider
and devise with himself what will be most for his profit and advantage, in
such sort that nothing can escape his hands, and that he may not be at charge,
Philip well seen in Histories.
nor hazard his means in vain, and to no purpose. He is also well seen and
much conversant in Histories; and by them has he seen and discerned how much
it does import him (for the attaining to his desire) to have the Monarchy of
Portugal, The Castilians for these 300 years past have done nothing without
the Portugals.

The war of Salado.


and the Portugals at his devotion, to the intent he may have the aids and
succors from thence which both he and his predecessors have heretofore had
from them: for during these 300 years past, the Castilians have done nothing
worthy of memory without them.

The chief cause of that famous victory which they call del Salado (where were
partly taken, and partly slain 400 thousand Moors,) and only 20 Christians
(as was reported from the mouth of Alboacem himself King of Marocquo) was the
King of Portugal Alfonsus the 4. called the Brave, and his Portugals, the
which Alfonsus, at such time as the Moors besieged Tariffa, gave succors to
Alfonsus King of Castile, called the Iusticier his son in law, not because he
deserved to be aided, but because the war was against the Infidels.

The war of Granado in the year 1501.
At such time as Alfonsus de Aquilar was slain in Granado, and that the Moors
remained victors, and pursued the victory, the Portugals did hinder them from
passing forward: and keeping the field where the battle was foughten, did save
and preserve the rest of the Castilians.

When the peoples of Castile did rise in arms under pretense of the common and
public good, and many great Lords and Princes with them against Charles the
fifth, The communalty of Castile in arms against Charles the 5.
by reason of the great, excessive and new exactions and imposts laid upon
them: the Ambassadors of the said Princes, and of many Cities and Towns of
Castile came to the King of Portugal Don Emanuell, praying him that he would
vouchsafe to take and acknowledge them for his vassals and Subjects, The true
amity of Emanuel King of Portugal to Charles the 5.
for that they were desirous to have him to their King and Lord: but he would
not only not receive their offer; but he gave them good counsel and
admonition, showing them how they ought to conform themselves in obedience to
their King. And to other of the Princes, Cities, and Towns of Castile, which
taking part with the said Charles, came unto him likewise for his aid, he gave
them both money, artillery, powder, and other munition for the war. Some say
that the said King Don Emanuell did lend them 500000 ducats, and many pieces
of artillery, which was an occasion that they which were risen in arms, did
fall to an accord and agreement with their Prince: Anno 1522.
and thereof it ensued that Charles the fifth did again usurp the Realm of
Navarre, which Mounsieur Andrew de Foix had before restored and set at liberty:
the King Don Emanuell never suspecting nor doubting of any such matter intended
by him. And Philip now likewise for his part has rewarded Portugal with the
like good turn, as he has done the like to France, and now lately a great
part of Christendom, to whom he was not meanly bounden.

When the said Charles the fifth passed to Goletta in the year 1535, who took
it? The taking of Goletta with 22 other ships of war.
That did the Gallion Cagafuego of Portugal, which the King Don John the third
had commanded to accompany the Infant Don Jews his younger brother.

How came it to pass that the same Charles the fifth took the Town of Tunes,
The taking of Tunes.
the capital and chief City of the Realm of Lybia? was it not with the
assistance and aid of the said Infant and his Portugals?

The taking of Pignon de Belles by the Portugals.
Who was it that took Pignon de Belles with the residue, not above 35 years
since, for the King of Castile? even Francisco Bareto, General of the Galleys
of Portugal, and the Captain Diego Lopez de Sequeira his Nephew, with the
Portugals of his company.

The war of Granado finished by the Portugals.
Who finished and gave an and to the oppression of Castile, in the behalf of
the Granadians that were revolted in Granada in the years 1566. 67. and 68?
That did 7 or 8 thousand Portugals send for a succor by the King Don
Sebastian. Philip King of Castile knows all this full well: and that is the
cause that he labors and paineth himself with so grear care and diligence
to keep this Monarchy of Portugal, pretending not only to usurp it, to
tyrannize over it, and to pluck it by force and violence out of the hands of
the Portugals, but to take from them also their honor, their glory, and their
valor: for he sees well, that having the Portugals on his side, he shall be
able by their means to satisfy his ambitious humor: and yet shall they not
have the honor due unto them for their prowess, but he attributes all to
the generosity of his Castilians. So has he tyrannized, and does yet still
tyrannize over the honor of the Arragonnois, the Catalans, the Valentians, the
Nauarrois, and other the Nations of Spain: and only his Castilians (which
carry the name of Spaniards, and are so called by those that are ignorant, and
know not the difference that is between the several Nations of Spain,) they
(I say) are those Lions, those Tigers, and conquerours of the World. But we
will come to the conclusion of this part of our Treatise touching Portugal,
the most precious and chiefest pearl of his Crown. It was my chance to be one
day in his company with a personage of great estate, who is daily at great
charges, and does spend good store of ducats to have notice and intelligence
of that which passes abroad in the World: and he did assure me for a certain
and undoubted truth, that one of the greatest favorites of the King of Castile
did demand of him this question: What should be the cause that he suffered
Freezland, A question moved by a gentleman to the King of Castile.
and many Towns of other Provinces of no small importance to be lost, and to
fall into the hands, and into the power and subjection of Heretics; by means
whereof they were constrained to forsake the true Religion, (a thing worthy to
be lamented) only to succor the Princes and Towns of the League, and to
entertain the war a foot still in France? Whereunto the King smiling,
answered: Let them alone: let them take Freezland and all the rest: The answer
of the King of Castile.
that which most touches me is the keeping of Portugal: which if I do; as I
hope I shall, I will cut them out so much work, and give them so much to do
in their own Country, that they shall not easily come near mine, and I doubt
not at length but to have the rest also: for know this; that if I keep and
possess Portugal in peace and quietness, they shall not only not be able to
live without me, but I shall make them in the end to be my subjects, and to
become tributaries unto me: and therefore let it not grieve you to see what is
lost, for all will be recovered well enough in time, and leave the care thereof
to me alone.

The French Translatour.
Philip seeing himself Lord of so great a Monarchy, does aspire by all means
he may to the Realms of France and of England, and of other Provinces: and he
does reap so great contentment in his ambitious thoughts and purposes, that
he cannot but discover his conceit in that behalf: insomuch that not only
they of his Council, but his particular private Soldiers do know it. After
the taking of the Jle of Terceras, the Captains which accompanied the
Marquess de Santa Cruce in that journey, said openly: Now that we have all
Portugal, England is ours, and by liitle and little we shall gain France
also. For proof whereof we have need of no other witness, then that which
his own Writer Conestagio says in continuing his History before the taking
of the said Terceras, where he has these words: Conestagio lib. 7. in fine.
But the King having so lately gotten the possession of Portugal, and seeing
the Portugals not yet very quiet, he thought it best to pacify that Realm,
before he intended any other enterprise. And he said, that by keeping his men
in arms in those quarters, he should bridle not only Portugal, but all
Spain and France it self also, and it may be he would not otherwise have
failed to have sent a good part of those forces even for England, at the least
for Ireland.

Portugal the principal cause of all the wars.
By those last words above used by the King, and the former recited examples,
may be easily discovered, not only the ingratitude of this perverse and un
pleasing Catholic, but we may also collect and gather, that Portugal is the
principal cause of so many wars, so many murders and mischaunces: and that
if the same were wrung out of the hands and power of this tyrant, the most
Christian King, and the other Princes of Christendom should dwell in peace;
the Potentates and common wealths of Europe should be in rest, the Cardinals at
Rome should not be at his direction, nor the elections of the Popes at his will
and pleasure: over the which he does so tyrannize, that in each of them he
makes himself the first person: and (as the saying is) prefers himself
before the holy Ghost. There is never any election of a Pope, How Philip does
germandise the elections of the Cardinals and Popes.
but he names some three, four, or five persons, to the end that the Conclaue
of Cardinals should choose one of them: was there ever seen greater impudency
or presumption, that a mortal man should dare usurp Gods office? Ha, most
Christian King, it is the part of your Majesty, to defend and maintain the
sovereign and chief Bishops: they are in their possession to be defended and
preserved by the most Christian Kings of France: and to that end have they
endowed them with so great privileges, liberties, and prerogatives. Banish
therefore and drive away (Sir) this monster, break the head of this Serpent,
tame this Lion, and deliver the Church from this so tyrannical servitude and
hard captivity. Restore unto your pupils their wonted peace and liberty, to
the intent they may with hardiness chastise the evil and vicious, and without
fear reward the good and virtuous. How often have the sovereign Bishops
desired to honor and do good to some persons, in recompense of their virtues
and merits, and to correct others for their vices: and have not been able to
perform either the one or the other? Oftentimes against their wills have the
Popes permitted the wicked to triumph, and more often have they consented that
the good should endure afflictions.

Who did better deserve to be made a Cardinal (if I may not say Pope) then
that famous learned man, Doctor Martin Aspilcueta of Navarre, Martin Aspilcueta
a Nauarrois.
whose memory shall be eternal, both for his doctrine, and for his holiness
and virtue? Nevertheless only because Philip could not abide him, for
defending against him the cause of that reverend Prelate Don. Fra. Bartholmew
Carrance, Fra. Bartholmew Carrance Archbishop of Toledo.
a religious person of the order of S. Dominicke Archbishop of Toledo: and for
maintaining also with many and strong reasons, that the Portugals ought of
right to choose their King by election: and for proving by most firm and
infallible arguments, that his Catholic Majesty, did possess the Realm of
Portugal by unjust and tyrannical title, was therefore thrust out of all, and
dyed in the estate of a poor and simple Priest. Who did ever in all reason
deserve better, or more worthily to be strangled and burnt then N? and yet
because Philip would have it so, he lives still and triumphs. Wherefore,
most humbly I beseech both your Majesty's, even for the honor of GOD, (wherein
your selves have more interest then any other) that you would vouchsafe to
attend this matter of so great importance: and that you would undertake to leuy
and make ready a good Army to pass into Spain: and to consider withal, how
great is the prudence, the industry, and subtilty of this common enemy: that
your Majesty would regard his actions, his ambition, and his tyranny: that you
would awaken and grow to a resolution, knowing that you have so great a tyrant
to your Neighbor, as of himself alone is greater then all others that ever
were, or which now are in the World, Tyranny as natural to Ph^lip, as is
laughter to a man.
all of them set together: and who has gotten, (like his predecessors) all
that which he possesses, by pure and plain tyranny: which is indeed so
proper and natural unto him, and does belong unto him as properly and
unseparably, as laughter does to a man.

Give me leave, I p^ay you, to prove that which I speak, by most clear and
certain Histories, to the intent I may take away all occasion from those (who
are addicted to ill speaking, and to deceitful dealing) to think or take me
for a liar, for this that I say, may be verified by all the Historiographers of
Spain, both ancient and modern, which are worthy to be credited, or have any
truth in them: some of which do live yet at this day, and it is no long time
since they made their works, and imprinted them with the favor, and at the
costs and charges of the said Philip. And this I will endeavor to prove as
briefly as I can, and I will show how in all the Realms and Provinces which
the King Catholic possesses in Spain, (whereof I my self being a Spaniard,
do know somewhat) he possesses and holds them by tyranny, committed many
times and often. And for as much as to prove that which I intend, it shall
suffice to touch only that which has happened since the 380 years last past:
I will not speak of any thing that has befalne before the year of Christ
1217.

Castile tyrannized ^he first time.
Henry King of Castile the son of Alphonsus the noble, dying, left his eldest
sister Blaunch Queen of France, which was the mother of S. Jews, who was then
but two years old: Garibay. lib. 22. cap 41.
and his Father (who was not yet King of France) was occupied in the wars of
England, whither he was called by them of that land against their King called
King John, who was reputed for a tyrant. Henry being dead (as is said) his
youngest sister named Berangera, the wife of Alphonsus King of Leon with her
son Fernand encroched upon the possession of the Realm of Castile, and
usurped it against the right of the said Blanch her eldest sister, and
consequently against the said S. Jews her nephew.

Fernand being dead, Alphonsus his eldest son called Emperor of the West
(because some of the Electors of the Empire had elected him, whereas the
residue had chosen Richard the brother of Henry the third King of England)
made an accord with the said S. Jews the cosen German of his father, touching
the succession of Castile in this manner: That Fernand the eldest son of
Alphonsus should e^pouse Blanch the daughter of the said S. Jews, with
condition, that the children borne of that marriage should inherit Castile. Of
them twain were issued Alphonsus and Fernand, who were deprived of their right
by Sancho their Uncle, the younger brother of their father Fernand, Castile
tyrannized the 2. time: and ^eon the first time.
who died having the government of the Realm of Castile and Leon, in the
absence of his said father Alphonsus, which then was gone into Italy, there to
solicit his friends, and to make means for the Empire. As soon as Fernand
was dead, the said Sancho took upon him the government, Ierom Gudiel in the
History of the Girons. Garib. lib, 13. cap. 16.
getting the possession of many cities and towns in Castile, against the will
of Alphonsus his father, who dying at Seuill, upon a friday the 2. of April
1284. cursed his son Sancho, calling him disobedient, rebellious, usurper,
and a tyrant, and pronounced and named for the true and right heirs of his
Realms, and Seigniories, his grandchildren Alphonsus and Fernand: and in case
they should die without children, then Philip the hardy King of France his
cousine German removed, the son of the said S. Jews his Uncle. But neither
the curses nor denuntiations of the father, nor the fear of God, could make
Sancho to render or restore to the others their right, but he still detained
it, and left for his heir his son Fernand the fourth of that name.

Alphonsus surnamed the Iusticier, king of Castile, the son of the said
Fernand, and the grandchild of Sancho, amongst many tyrannous acts by him
exercised, is reported to have committed one act most unworthy not only of a
king, but of a man even of most vile and base condition: for that it was an
action full of notable treasons and infidelity. Don Iuan le Tuerto Lord of
Biscay murdered.
For having invited Don Iuan le Tuerto, (that is to say, the squint eyed) Lord
of Biscay, to dine with him, he caused him most cruelly to be murdered in the
year 1327. And albeit, he had begun to discharge himself of this murder for
a season, yet he could not disguise nor cover his tyranny: Gariba. lib. 14 cap.
4. Biscay tyrannized.
for that afterward he caused him to be condemned as a traitor, and
confifcated his lands and Seigniories: and within a short time he seized upon
them all: namely, about a fourscore towns and castles.

The same Alphonsus caused Don Aluar Nugnes Osorio his Governor to be slain,
who had before received of him many great honors and favors; and afterward
being as certained of his death (which was in the year 1328) he seized upon
all his livings, The Countie^ de Trastamares usurped. The County thereof
slain. Garib. lib. 14. cap. 5.
Castles, and great Treasures, and vpn the County de Trastamara: and within a
few days after, he caused him to be condemned at Tordehumos as a traitor: and
having made him to be dug up out of his grave, he willed his body should
be burned, and his goods confiscated.

Henry the 2. a bastard son of this Alphonsus Count de Trastamara slew his
brother Peter, (of whom we have formerly spoken) and possessed himself of the
Realms of Castile and Leon, ^^^^e tyran^^^^ (...) third (...) and Leon (...)
disinheriting his Neeces Constance and Jsabel, who with a solemn oath had
been acknowledged Princesses and heirs of Castile, first by the estates
assembled at Seuill to that end and purpose: and afterward at Albuberca 1363.
And if it had been true, that these two sisters had no right in the said
realms, because he alleged them to be bastards: by the same reason, had the
said Henry much less right and interest in them: for he was not only a
bastard, but murderer also of his own brother. And in such like case was
Fernand King of Portugal the great grand child of Sancho above named, right
inheritor to the said realms; as was the king Don Peter his cousine german
removed, and cousin german also: for Beatrix the mother of Peter, was the
sister of Peter the father of Fernand. For this cause Samora, Toco,
Cindad-Rodrigo, and other cities and towns of the realms of Castile and
Leon, did call in the said Fernand, and offered to receive him for their king:
especially the realm of Galitia, which was wholly resolved to render it self
unto him. And for this reason did Fernand go in person to take possession of
the Groigne: The History of Fernand king of Portugal, anno 1369.
and he might as well have seized upon the other places and holds, if the
Portugalls would have consented thereunto. For they did purposely oppose
themselves against the desire and will of their King, for two reasons: the
first was, because they had good trial and experience, that there wanted much
of that valor in Fernand, which was in the father and his ancestors: the
second was, The Portugals have an ill opinion of the Castilians.
because the Castilian Nation is so malign and perverse (as the Portugals do
hold it for a maxim among themselves) that it is dangerous to have any thing
to do with them, yea to have any command over them, as has been before
touched. And I say yet once again, that their nature is so malign and
perverse, that the venom and poison thereof does so spread it self abroad,
that they which are their next neighbors and borderers do feel the
reuerberation of their malignitie and malicious disposition: insomuth, The
malignity of the Castilians.
that some of them, when they leave and abandon their own country, and do
withdraw themselves into strange and foreign lands, are more wicked and
malicious, more dangerous, and more to be feared, then the very Castilians
themselves.

In the year 1474. after the death of Henry the fourth king of Castile,
Jsabel the sister, the wife of Fernand king of Arragon, did most tyrannically
get possession of the Realms of Castile and Leon, and of their other
Seigniories, excluding Jane the daughter of the said Henry her brother: who in
the year 1461. had been acknowledged Princess and inheritrix of the said
Realms, for default of heir males, in a full assembly of the three estates,
which were assembled to that end at Madrill, by the commandment of her father.
And the first persons which took the oath of fidelity, and did so acknowledge
her, were the infant Don Alpho^sus, and the said Isabel, the brother and sister
of the said king: after whom all the residue did the like, every one in order
according to their degrees. And after that she was again the second time
acknowledged Princess and heir of the said Realms in Val-de-Locoia, after
diligent enquiry made upon the legittimation of the said Princess, which was
done by the Cardinal de Alby a Frenchman, who to that effect was come into
Castile by the commandment of King Jews the eleventh of France: the which
Cardinal in the presence of all the Princes and Lords of the Realm, having
caused the mother to be sworn and take her oath, demanded of her, if the
Princess Dame Jane her daughter, were the daughter of the King her husband:
whereunto she answered upon her oath, that she was. Secondly, the King (which
took the same oath, and) protested that he did fully believe and assure
himself, that this infant Dame Jane was his daughter, and that in all
certainty he had continually so taken and reputed her ever since she was
borne: and therefore he did will and command that the oath of fidelity and
obeisance, which was usually accustomed to be taken in his Realms and
Dominions, as due to the eldest of the Kings children, Guarib. lib. 17. cap. 2^.
should be made unto her. These are the very words of Steven Guaribay: Hierome
Surite (who is yet living) does rehearse this history very plainly and
distinctly in his general history of Spain, and how Henry being ready to
yield up the Ghost, Hierome Surite in the general history of Spain.
did even then maintain, that the said Jane was his daughter and that he
commanded his Confessor openly to reuale it. And the said Guaribay affirms
that Henry did confess himself the space of a good hour, before his soul
departed from his body, and that he being in good and perfect quietness of
sense, and of a sound and good memory, after he had named the executors of his
last will and testament, and declared them for the Governors of this Realm, and
had given commandment, that his servants should be paid out of his treasures
and jewels, he named the said Princess Iaene, for the universal heir of all
his Realms and dominions, calling her by the name of his daughter, and
recommending her with all his affection to the said Governors.

By that which has been said, appears clearly, that the Realm of Castile,
in less then 258. years has been tyrannized four times, and that of Leon
thrice, and all the other Realms and Seigniories likewise, which are
dependants of the same: the which the king Philip possesses even at this
present day by a most unjust, wrongful and tyrannical title.

This also is one thing worthy to be marked, and (which may be seen by the
histories both of the same authors, and of diverse others) namely, that when
there has happened any difference or disagreement upon the said succession,
they which have been in possession, have altogether prevailed, and made their
title, even by the right of those very parties whom they have dispossessed:
which is the greatest tyranny that can be. And that this may the better be
perceived, I will allege only two examples.

Rodrigo Sanches Bishop of Palance recounteth, In the life of John the first
king of Castile
how John the first King of Castile and Leon (of whom we have before spoken)
seeing that John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, pretended the said Realms of
Castile and of Leon to appertain unto him, for the reason heretofore alleged;
he said in defense of his claim, that the said Realms did of right belong
unto him, The cunning of John the first king of Castile.
as being the son of Jane and the Grandchild of Don Iuan Emanuel and of his
wife, who was the daughter of Fernand de la Cerda, the lawful heir of the
said Realms: because his brother Alphonsus was deceased without children, and
that for this cause he did hold them with a good conscience, and that he did
not hold them from his father, whom himself confessed to be a bastard.

The other example is like unto the former. For in a great assembly of Princes,
Lords, and other principal personages, held in the town of Trogillo, for the
taking of the oath of fidelity to Fernand the second king of Arragon, The
policy of Fernand the ^econd King of Arragon, etc.
and Isabel his wise Queen of Castile, the said Fernand pretended that he had
more right of himself, then the said Isabel, and that he ought to be
acknowledged as the true and principal heir of the said Realms of Castile
and Leon, not as husband to the said Isabel, but as discending in the right and
lawful line male of the kings his predecessors, because he was the son of
John the grandchild of Fernand, and the great grandchild of John the first:
who on the side of his mother same Jane the grand daughter of Fernand de la
Cerda (as has ^eene said) was the true and rightful heir of the said
Realms. Jsabel knowing the intent and ambition of Fernand her husband,
resolved to bend and employ all her force and puissance for the maintaining of
her right: and for a reply to his speech she said: That that which he had
spoken was to be granted, if women had not been usually admitted to the
succession of those Realms: but seeing the custom was to the contrary,
therefore her said husband ought not to be preferred: and for proof of that
which she said, she named certain women which had succeeded to the said
crowns: amongst others Katherine the daughter of Constance, and of John of
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster above mentioned, where she did assure her self had
been admitted, and received to that inheritance as the granddaughter of her
graund-father Peter, and that Henry the husband of the said Katherine, her
ancestors, had right thereunto only by mean of the said Katherine his wife.
For these reasons Jsabel was preferred before Fernand, and she was acknowledged
as the true heir of the said Realms of Castile and Leon, and he reputed to
have right only as her husband and companion, and not otherwise. And this is
it which Marin Sicilian speaks of. In this assembly of estates (says he)
Fernand seeing himself king and Lord of the most of two third parts of Spain,
Marin Sicilian.
partly in his own right, and partly in his wives, and having there prefent
all the Lords and Deputies of cities and towns, which were their subjects, he
did endeavor by all means, to cause himself to be entitled king of Spain:
but those of that assembly would in no case yield their consent thereunto: but
to the uttermost of their power, did oppose themselves against it, and did
thereupon give unto the kings of Castile a new title, which Philip holds and
retains at this day, having augmented those Realms and Seigniories, which
both the said Fernand and Charles the 5. his father did successively usurp
each after other.

The Translator.
Philip Carried on with the same wind of ambition, as were his great grand
father and his father, Philip carried away with the ambition of his ancestor,
causes himself to be called king of Spain.
upon an exceeding desire which he had to usurp this title of King of Spain:
and seeing that the Realms of Spain would not accord nor agree that he should
so entitle himself: and that in the assembly of estates (which he held in
Portugal in the year 1581. within the town of Toma^) it was expressly
defended him, and that himself had taken a so^emne oath, never more from
thenceforth to take it upon him: nevertheless he caused for all that (like a
notable tyrant) certain moneys (which he coined in the Indies and in Flanders)
to be engraven with this superscription: Philippus Hispaniarum Rex: wherein he
imitated the said Fernand his great graund-father, who took so great pains,
to gain or rather to usurp this honorable title, that many strangers of
foreign natioas did liberally give it unto him, who neither knew, nor would
understand what advantage the same would bring unto the tyrant, and what
detriment the nobility, peoples and provinces of Spain should suffer, by
allowing the same title unto him.

So that herein may be seen most apparently, the notable tyranny of the
predecessors of the king Catholic now reigning: who, after they had for a
while suppressed the right of others, to the intent themselves might tyranize
over those Realms: yet would afterward seek again to revive, and to retain
that very right, and title which they had before most injuriously usurped. A
thing certainly, which may induce us rather to sigh and to lament, then to
conceive any pleasure and delight, to see the Princes of the earth, which bear
the name and title of Catholics, to be nevertheless so bad Christians, and
so insupportable tyrants, as is this Philip the King of Castile. Which is the
cause that all the Ecclesiastical and regular persons of Portugal do hate
him so extremely, that when the commandment was given them, that in certain
of their prayers, and in their Canonical hours, they should expressly
pronounce the name Philip (for the King knew well, that under the name of King
used indeterminately, they did in their hearts understand and pray for Don
Anthonio.) They took his commandment in so ill part, that they could not be
brought to do it. But in the end they seeing themselves pressed by the
commandment of the Bishops and Prelates, they did at length pronounce his
name, but with such disdain and in dignity, as I am ashamed to speak it:
notwithstanding because these matters do well concur together, and it is not
from our purpose; and besides, because he that shall rehearse them, is not to
be blamed for the reciting, for that he is bound to represent them only in
manner and form as they were done, I have determined to recount unto you two
examples concerning this matter, of the which we do now entreat.

The Archbishop of Lisbon having given out and published the Kings commandment
before mentioned, through out all the Churches of Lisbon, in the year 1582. the
first of January: upon the day of the three Kings next ensuing, a certain
Curate, as he was saying a solemn Mass in his Parish Church, with great pomp
and solemnity, and the Church full of people, when he came to the end of the
prayer which is usually said after Gloria in excelsis: in singing of these
words, Et Famulum tuum regem nostrum (that is) thy servant our King; he
suddenly stopped, and turning himself toward the Deacon and Subdeacon, he
spoke unto them with loud voice. Tell me, tell me, how call you this Devil:
And they answering him, Philip, he named Philip, and so went on with his Mass.

At the same time it happened that a religious person of the order of S.
Dominicke, making mention of the King in a certain prayer, without naming him
by his name of Philip, and being commanded by his Prelate, under pain of
contempt and disobedience, that he should name him by his proper name: he then
repeated it, saying; Et Famulum tuum regem nostrum Philippum, Ducem Albensem,
Sanchum de Auila and Rodericum Sapata, caeterosque omnes diabolos, etc. That is
to say: And thy servant our King Philip, the Duke de Alua, Sancho de Auila, and
Rodericke Sapata, and all the other Devils. When I rehearsed this unto a
Nobleman of good account, with whom I communicated the greatest part of this
discourse, he wondered greatly, using this exclamation; Jesus, do the Priests
and Religious persons of Portugal thus hate his Catholic Majesty? This is a
strange thing, and I marvel much that they hating him so extremely, and being
of such strength and puissance in their Country, (for the most part of them
are Noblemen and Gentlemen, and some of them great Princes) that they do not
cause the people to rise in arms against that Tyrant. I answered him, the
cause is, for that albeit they have never so just a cause to take arms, yet
the Portugals are a people of great patience and sufferance toward their
Prince: and they do also go to the wars with so ill a will, (howbeit, that
being once in the wars, they prove very good Soldiers) that they had rather
go to hanging. Nevertheless, if they should once rise against the Castilian,
they would defend themselves in such manner, that he should never more be able
to suppress them.

The whole substance of the matter is: that they do once grow to a resolution,
and that they set hand to the work: which if they once do, I believe that
they will make as great a wall between Portugal and Castile, as they of China
did in times past make between them and the Tartarians: and if it were but
only to content the soul of their King John the second, John the 2. the
scourge of the Castilians, named, The man and King of peace.
named, The man and King of peace, who was the scourge and plague of the
Castilians: and of him is yet spoken that old proverb; Jf the Chicke had not
come, the Cock had been taken. This Prince knowing the manners, the life, and
the tyrannical actions of the Castilian, was wont to say, that he did greatly
desire to see between Portugal and Castile, The grief and disco^tentment of
King John the 2. of Portugal.
a wall feared up so high, as might reach up to Heaven; protesting, that the
thing that most grieved him in this World, was: for that the Sun did first
pass by Castile, before it came into Portugal: and that which made him quite
and clean out of all patience, was, because he knew not how to remedy it.

The Nobleman, to whom I recounted all these things, giving me great thanks,
said unto me: Certainly I am very glad, and do thank you heartily for
acquainting me with these particulars, which are things worthy to be remembered,
and such as I have not at any time heard or seen written. But I do not
understand (quoth he) what should be meant by that proverb above mentioned: If
the Chicke had not come, the Cock had been taken: as that also which you have
spoken of the loyalty of Auila and Simancas in Castile: of Celorico and of the
Castle of Coimbre in Portugal: and of the King of Castile and the Castilians,
and of the Cities and Towns. Monsieur (quoth I again) I would gladly declare
the same unto you, but I fear lest I be blamed for making such long
digressions: for I am so well acquainted with the disposition of men, that I am
not ignorant in how many parts of this my discourse, they may accuse me in that
behal^e: and therefore I pray you to suffer me first to make an end, and then
after the conclusion of this Treatise, I will satisfy your desire particularly
and at good leisure: for I do assure you, I would keep silence concerning
many things in this work, were it not most requisite and needful that they
should be spoken of and published, for the better attaining to that which I
intend and purpose; the which (I do persuade my self) that both you my
masters of England and likewise of France, and you also my masters the Princes
of Europe (who are all of you highly interessed in the greatness of the
Castilian) will embrace cheerfully, and with open arms, if you be not
altogether without judgment and understanding. But it is now meet, that we
pursue the proof and demonstration of the tyranny of King Philip, which
calls himself the King Catholic.

We have lately showed, how King Philip by usurpation and tyranny, non solum in
modo, sed in genere, (as the Ciuilians use to speak) of his predecessors, does
possess the Realms of Castile, of Leon, of Galicia, of Toledo, of Civil, of
Cordona, of Murcia, etc. with some other Provinces contained within the
precincts and streights of his Realm. Let us now come to the Realms of
Aragon, of Valentia, the Counties of Barcelona, of Cerdonia, and Roussillon,
and the Isles of Maiorica, Minorica, and Sardinia.

Aragon, Valentia, etc, tyrannized.
Fernand the Infant of Castile, the graund Father of Fernand above named,
usurped all these Realms and seigniories, of the which he deprived Isabel
Countess of Vrgell his own Aunt, sister to his Mother: which Isabel had also
one Daughter named Isabel, which married with Don Peter the Infant of Portugal,
the younger son of John the bastard King of the said Realm. Of Peter and
Isabel was borne the Lord Don Peter Constable of Portugal: The Lord Don Peter
Constable of Portugal, and King of Aragon, poisoned by John.
which Don Peter, by reason of his Mothers right, and other auncesters, was
called and acknowledged by the Catalognians, for their King and Lord. And after
he had reigned over them for the space of five years and more, he was
poisoned by John the second of that name, son of the first Ferdinand, whom we
named to be the successor of Alphonsus King of Arragon his elder brother.

Charles the 4. the rightful King of Navarre, empoysoned by his stepmother.
This John was a notable Tyrant, and he retained the Kingdom of Navarre
tyrannously after the death of the Queen Blaunch his wife, the right heir of
the said Realm, against the rightful title of Charles his own son, unto
whom that Realm ought to have descended, by the death of his mother: as it did
likewise fall unto Jews Hutin by the death of his mother Jane, who dyed eight
years before her Husband Philip the fair. For this cause the said Charles
(being a most courteous and virtuous Prince) had great difference and suite with
his Father, who caused him to be poisoned by his stepmother Jane, the Daughter
of Don Federike, the second, Admiral of Castile.

The Translator.
The grandmother of King Philip on Charles his Fathers side, was the graund
daughter of this John and this Jane: from whom principaly he has learned and
retained the art and science of poisoning so perfectly, that not only to the
said John the Graundfather of his Graundmother, and to the said Jane his wife,
but even to all his predecessors, he may give forty five, and a fault at that
game, and yet be no looser; were they never so cunning in that art and science.

Of Peter Constable of Portugal and King of Aragon, there was no lawful issue
remaining: for the line of Jsabel his mother, was extinguished in John the
second, King of Portugal: by reason whereof, the right of that Realm, and all
the Seigniories depending thereupon, ought to descend, and do appertain to
the most excellent Dukes of Loraine, as the true and rightful heirs of Yoland
Duchess of Anion, The Duke of Loraine, the right heir of the Kingdom of
Arragon.
the wife of Lewe^, Grandfather in the fifth degree of the said excellent Duke
of Loraine now living: the which Yoland was the lawful Daughter of John King
of Aragon, (the eldest son of Peter the ceremonious King of that Realm, who
was also the Father of Martin, which reigned after the said John his elder
brother,) and was the true heir of this Crown, and of all the demaines
thereof, by the death of her elder sister, the wife of the Earl of Foix, of
whom she had neither son nor daughter.

The Realm of Navarre was usurped, (as is reported by diverse Historians,
Navarre vsu^ped.
even Spaniards themselves) upon false informations by Fernand the great
Grandfather of King Philip, which Fernand was one of the Masters of Machiauel,
Fernand the 5: king of Castile one of the masters of Machiauell.

In his Book of the Councels and Councellers of Princes.

Dis. 14. par. 11.


(as Bartholmew Philip does tell us in that Book which he caused to be
imprinted in the year 1585, where he has these words:) Those Princes which do
fully resolve themselves to prevail and grow great by force of arms, ought to
imitate the Catholic Don Fernand the fifth of that name, King of Castile, who
held himself apart, and gave the looking on to the wars, which the Princes
of Christendom made one upon another, to see what issue and what forces they
should have, to the intent he might aid and succor those which were weakest:
and he would not suffer any to grow great or puissant in Italy, who pretended
to be Lords and Commanders there, neither would he at any time enter into any
leagues made by the Princes of Christendom, unless he might make some profit
and benefit thereby unto himself. This was Jews the 12. of that name.
For this cause he would not make war upon Jews King of France, when Pope
Julius, the Emperor, and the Swissers did war against him, for that he
thought he should not advantage himself by the diminution of that Realm, if
the adversaries of the said Jews should make themselves great by his losses:
and yet being persuaded that the said French King would augment his estate, Let
the French King and the Princes and Potentates of Europe consider this well.
by making war upon the Realm of Naples, he entered into league against the
King of France, with the Emperor and the King of England.

The Book (whereof I speak) was dedicated by the Author to Albert Cardinal
of Austria, when he was Viceroy of Portugal, who is the third Graundchild of
the said Fernand, both on the Fathers and Mothers side.

Portugal and her demaines tyrannized.
Now how Philip himself has tyrannized and usurped the Realm of Portugal,
and the Seigniories which are dependant thereupon, raising himself into a
great and mighty Monarchy, and yet ill considered, or known by strange and
foreign Princes, all Books in general do sound it forth: and the
Universities of Coimbre, of Bologna, and of Pisa, and many learned personages
have adjudged it to Katherine Duchess of Bragancia in Portugal, The sons
of Katherin Duchess of Bragancia. 1. The Duke Theodosius: 2. Edward. 3.
Alexander. 4. Philip.

the lawful daughter of the Infant Don Edward brother to the mother of his
Catholic Majesty: which Katherine is at this day yet living, and has four
sons, good and sound Catholics, learned, wise, goodly, and courageous
Gentlemen, and two o^ three daughters. And the University of Pauy has adjudged
it to Raynuncio, now at this present Duke of Parma, the son of Mary the
eldest sister of the said Katherine, the said Mary being deceased a long time
before her Uncle Henry. I suppose that I have most clearly and sufficiently
showed the tyranny which all Spain has endured and suffered under the
predecessors of King Philip the Catholic: and as for that which the West
Indies has suffered under himself, as also all the rest whereof he does
write himself Lord, by what title and pretense they have been gotten, it is
well known even to the little children, who do openly cry and speak of it in
the streets: and both Naples, Sicily, Millan, Vtreich, Guelders, Zutphen, and
other the Provinces of the Low Countries, and the Countries of high Almaine,
(all which have been tyrannized by him and his Ancestors) do manifestly
prove and verify it: so that it seems unto me, that I have made good and
sufficient proof by these Histories and examples, that tyranny is the first
and principal heritage of his Catholic Majesty, even of Don Philip of
Austria; and that it is as proper and natural unto him, as laughter is unto a
man, and that it belongs unto him properly and inseparably. Wherefore now
that we have made known his tyranny, me thinks it would not be amiss, nor
impertinent to our purpose, (most Christian Kings) to entreat somewhat touching
his cruelty: for as much as Spain did never yet find his like or equal, as the
flesh and blood thereof has too too well tried, and had the experience.

All Books, all men, and even his own mischievous and wicked actions, Of the
cruelty of King Philip.
do every where yield open and abundant testimonies of his cruelty. If Julius
Caesar (as it is reported of him) were cause of the death of more then a
million of men, they which have been acquainted with the carriage and behavior
of this tyrant, will confess, that he has been the death and destruction of a
far greater number. Caesar was extremely grieved to see Pompey his enemy
dead. And as Antigonus when his son Alcinous presented him with the head of
Pyrrhus, slain at the entry of the City of Argos, did sharply reprove him,
Plutarch.
(Filiumque nefarium and barbarum vocauit) calling him a wicked and barbarous
son: so Caesar in imitation of his example, seeing the signet and the ring of
Pompey, did of pure compassion fall a weeping, in so much as he was resolved to
make war upon Ptolomey, because he had slain Pompey traitorously, and he
did so much, that he caused him in the end to be the instrument of his own
death. See hereafter.
Philip on the contrary, does not only not grieve at the death of his
servants, friends, cousens, nephews, brother, son and wife: but he does
rejoice and triumph at the same; yea, he does procure and advance it, giving
great sums of money, excessive rewards, and great honors unto the
executioners and ministers of his cruelty: and for the satisfying of his
pernicious ambition, when there is any thing whatsoever, be it never so little
that touches him, he makes no exception of persons, be it Pope, Nuncio,
Bishop, Monk, or other Ecclesiastical person, he poysoneth them all, without
fear of God, or shame of man.

The Translator.
Of his servants and friends he has caused to be made away the Counties of
Egmont and of Horn, the Lord Mountigny, and the Marquess of Bergues, with
many other Noblemen and Gentlemen, whose blood is yet fresh in remembrance: the
Prince of Orange, Mark Anthony Colonna, Don John de la Nuca great Justicier of
Arragon, the Duke de Villa Hermosa, the Marquess de Fuentes, Don John de Luna,
etc. his Cousin the Emperor Maximilian, his Nephews by his Sisters, Don
Sebastian King of Portugal, and Don Alexander Farnese Duke of Parma, Don John
Duke of Bragantia, his brother Don John de Austria, his son, the Prince
Charles his eldest son, his wife Isabel, Sister to the three last Kings of
France deceased. Pope Sixtus the fifth, Alexander Formenti, Nuntio in Portugal,
sent thither by Pope Gregory the 13. as he was on his return toward Rome, in
his passage through Castile. The Archbishop of Toledo.
Of Bishops, Monks, and Ecclesiastical persons, Don Bartholmew Carrance,
Archb. of Toledo. of whom we have lately spoken, being his own master, a man
of so great authority and excellency, that by the space of many years Spain
has not brought forth his like. This good Catholic was the cause of his
imprisonment, so strict and so long, as all the world knows: this good
Christian, in imitatio^ of Nero, did persecute this personage with most notable
hatred and rigor, till such time, as for very grief and sorrow he died at
Rome: the Doctor Friar Hector Pinto, Provincial of the order of S. Jerome in
Portugal, and ordinary professor of the holy Scriptures in the University of
Coimbre, whose great, learning is sufficiently witnessed by the most godly and
grave writings which he has sent into the world, being imprisoned in Portugal
by the commandment of his Catholic Majesty: some of his friends (who were
well affectioned to the Castilian party) did earnestly entreat and persuade
him to retract and recant that which he had publicly read and preached: and to
declare, that his said Majesty was lawful heir of the said Realm of
Portugal: the which he would not do, notwithstanding all the prayers and
persuasions of his said friends, to whom he made this answer: That which I have
said, I have said: and true it is, Hector Pinto his speech touching King Philip
his usurpation of Portugal.
that Philip has not any right in the succession of this Crown: but inuading
and intruding upon the same in such sort as he has done, without staying till
the cause were lawfully and orderly heard and decided, he has committed
violence and tyranny: and therefore J for my part do not acknowledge him for
my king, but rather for a tyrant and usurper. Whereupon his friends gave him to
understand, that this would be a very dangerous thing for him to maintain:
for (said they) they will lead you away into Castile bound hand and foot, and
fettered in iron: and there will they make you languish away in misery, and in
the end th re to die without all hope ever to see Portugal again. Whereunto
he answered: Little does that trouble me, howbeit that it be an extreme grief
unto me to end my days out of my dear country, and that (which worse is) in
Castile: and J protest unto you, that although I do against my will enter in
the realm of Castile, yet shall not Castile ever enter within me. And so as he
persisted in this fidelity to his country, and disauowing of Philip, by his
commandment there was poison given him, whereof this godly, grave, learned and
excellent man died in the flower of his years.

The like misaduenture happened to Don Laurence Don Laurence
Prior general of the Cannons Regulars of Saint Augustine, of the congregation
of the holy Cross of Coimbre, who for his singular prudence and religion
(wherewith he is notably adorned) had three several times with great
commendation and honor executed and dischargd this charge. What shall we say
touching the immane and brutish cruelty which he has practiced in Portugal
against an infinite number of other notable personages? namely, against that
most reverend Father Friar Steven Leyton ^ryer Steven Leyton.
of the order of Friars Preachers, the kinsman of the Duke de Aueyra, and of
the Duke de Leyria, and of other Princes and great Lords, who was twice
Provincial, and thrice Vicar general of his Order. And albeit that all the
world did admire the miraculous life of this vvorthie man, yet because he had
tooth and nail (as the saying is) defended the right of his country, the said
Philip caused him to be taken and imprisoned, depriving him of his voice
active and passive, and of the exercise of his Priesthood, which was the
occasion of his death, through extreme grief and sorrow.

These things and many others has he committed against a great number of
persons, both Regular and Ecclesiastical, whom to reckon up were infinite.
All those above mentioned, they have been either ill entreated, or else put to
death by the commandment and order of his Majesty, that is so Catholic: as
is well known by true and manifest proofs, and by most clear and evident
conjectures. It may be that one day you shall see touching this matter a more
ample and large history then this same: which contains only his cruelties
toward his neighbors, and yet not all of those neither. See an epistle which
Anthony King of Portugal sent unto Pope Gregory the thirteenth of that name,
in the year 1584.

Behold then how he dispatcheth all his affairs, and in what manner he
deals with all the world. It was not long since there was taken in the City
of Leon a packet of letters, written with his own hand, and sent to the
Constable of Castile, within the which were found certain grains amongst the
letters: and a certain Gentleman suspecting somewhat, gave of those grains to
eat to many living creatures, which all died immediately. Another like matter
as this same happened within a while after in the frank County of Burgoigne,
in a certain house where the Constable of Castile had lodged; after his
departure from thence, a chamber-maide of the house found a ball within a
very fair purse; within which ball she thinking to have found some great
treasure, found certain grains, of which was made the same proof and
experience: and all those creatures that did eat thereof, died. This is that
notable tyrant which does all that he can do, to the uttermost of his
ability, and that dares seek to take away the life of the most Christian
Majesty, To wit, of ^he Queen of England, and Prince Maurice Count of Nassau,
etc, Fol 216. p. 2. 80000. ducats promised by king Philip to kill Don Anthonio
and other Princes by such shameful and abominable means, as there is none
but would shame to write them, save only master Hieronyme Franchi
Conestagio, of whom we have formerlie spoken. For he in the seventh book of
his history says, that Philip did prize the life of the Priour (that is to
say, of Seigniour Don Anthonio king of Portugal) at fourscore thousand
ducats, as being a rebel and disturber of the public peace and quietness.
And so did he handle another Prince that was both his cousin germane, and
cousin germane removed, and so many ways of kin unto him, and so strictly
allied unto him in friendship and amity, that they carried themselves each to
other, as if they had been each others father; yea, and as if they had been but
one person: and yet did he use him as if he had been a common thief, a
robber, a malefactor, and a man of no reckening nor estimation. And this
horrible and abominable cruelty does not end in Portugal, but it passes
over the sea, and the Pyrenean mountains, into France, and into England;
where he has bent and employed all his means to take away the lives of the
Monarchs of those realms. O barbarous, O abominable hangman and murderer!
have thou no shame? If thou be a Catholic, as thou do entitle thy self,
how is it, that thou know not what a deed of shame and enormitie it is to
commit murder? God would not that any man should touch Caine himself, who had
murdered his own brother: and commanded that if any were so hardy as to kill
him, that he should be severely punished: Genes. 4.
Omnis qui occiderit Caine, septuplum punietur, Whosoever shall kill Caine,
shall be punished seven sold. If thou do know this, why do thou not keep
the commandments of God eternal? The good works (I say not of Saints, nor of
Christians) but even of Idolaters which having no knowledge of the true light,
do follow only the simple law of Nature, do they not work any shame in
thee? Do thou not remember what the Romans did when Pyrrhus Pyrrhus.
his Physician did offer Fabricius Fabritius.
to poison him? And how they handled the Schoole-maister to the children of the
Fuliscians, which came to betray to them to Camillus? Lucius Florus Pompo.
Mela. Lucas Tudensis, Paulus C^sirus, and many others.
If thou think that these Examples be nothing to the purpose, learn what
sentence they gave against Seruilius Caepio, who returning to Rome with
victory, and demanding that he may triumph, in recompense of his service done
to the commonwealth, by the death of Viriatus (whom he had caused to be slain
by treason) and for that he had subdued a great part of Spain to the Roman
Empire: they pronounced this judgment against him; that both the said Caepio,
and the murderers of Viriatus were more worthy to be chastised then to be
recompensed: and that there was no reason they should allow any reward for the
destroying of their enemies, and the victories gotten against them by money and
through corruption. Quae victoria empta erat a Senatu, and percussores indigni
praemio iudicati.

By this then that has been said, may be seen, as in a mirror, the
cruelty of this malign and perverse tyrant, whom many will not believe to
be such a one as in very deed and in truth he is: but contrariewise, without
all consideration, as people blinded, perverse, and obstinate, they will strive
and contend to gratify him, be it well or ill done. And that which does make
me most out of patience in this behalf, is to see and hear some, who moved
with an indiscreet zeal: or else being wickedly inclined, and (it may be)
guided and seduced by the devil, do hold any man whomsoever a most lewd and
vile man, and in manner of an heretic, who being drawn by a true and just
zeal, shall publish this much for a truth and certainty: in so much, that
whether it be for fear or for gain, or for hatred, or of a disordinate love
and charity, they do esteem it a far worser deed to accuse and to reprove
such open and known iniquities, then the very act of doing them. All of you in
a manner will confess and can not deny, but that all this which has been
spoken touching the malice of this tyrant is most true and certain: and yet
nevertheless, they themselves will not for all that stick to say, that
notwithstanding it be so, yet it is ill done, so to report of a Prince, that is
so great a Catholic. See, I pray you, what a blindness, and how strange a
matter this is, most unworthy and unbeseeming any man, that would be counted
either a Christian, or a just and honest man. Nefarium est and maleficum
cognitam veritatem damnare.

It is as the sin of witchcraft, to condemn the known truth.

Objections or allegations of reasons to justify or excuse K. Philip.


If it be true and publicly known, wherefore then do you contradict it,
even against your own conscience, and to the hurt and detriment of others? Do
you not know, that it is a most wicked and cursed thing, and a manifest
sinful crime to condemn the known and notorious truth? and especially in
such things, which by the commandment of God; and in holy and pure religion
we are bounden to reprove and reprehend? But you will say unto me; that there
is reason Princes should be excused in some faults, when they are otherwise
endowed with any notable and excellent virtues. And that there did never reign
in Spain any Prince, which has given bett^r trial, nor made such evident
demonstration of him self to be a good Catholic, as his Catholic Majesty,
of whom now we are in question. There is no Prince that has so much
enlarged, and augmented the Catholic faith as he. There was never any that
did use the Clergy, and all, both Ecclesiastical and Regular persons with
greater love, nor greater reverence. And in brief, there is not any has
builded more Monasteries, nor edified so many Churches, nor exercised so great
bounty and liberality toward the Church as he has done; for besides the
great and excessive costs and expenses which he has been at in building them,
he has founded them with most great and rich rents and revenues, and has
honored them with most ample and beneficial privileges. This is well said.
Believe me my masters, I am infinitely sorry, that I may not briefly answer
to these propositions, for that every one of them does require a more ample
treatise then this work which we have in hand: nevertheless, I will not
leave by the way (as it were) to say something touching the same, An answer to
the former objections, or allegations.
and to show you how you do abuse your selves in all these matters. And
first, to answer to the former of your allegations; I confess that you say
nothing but reason: when a Prince shall be a good Catholiste, just, honest, and
valiant, without being liberal: it is great reason he should be pardoned of
this defect; and so do I think also, when any of those virtues shall be wanting
in a Prince, which are convenient and fit for the royal person and dignity:
so as notwithstanding he be furnished and adorned with the residue. Howbeit I
do not forget what the commandment of God is, touching this point: Quicunque
totam legem seruauerit, James. 2. v. 10.
in vno autem offenderit, factus est omnium reus: whosoever shall keep the
whole law, and yet fails in one point, he is guilty of all. But I speak now
as touching man, and in respect of men only, and not of God: and I am of this
opinion, that if a Prince be touched with some notable vice: as if he be
unjust, or cruel, or a tyrant, or an ill or loose liver, etc. yet being
accompanied and furnished with other virtues, we ought not nevertheless, for
any one of those vices above mentioned, (how great and heinous so ever it be)
neither to revolt from him, nor yet so to complot or conspire against him, as
to procure his ruin and d^struction (for as much as in seeking his ruin, we
shall sooner find our own, which France has w^ll p^ooued of to her cost.)
But we are bound to have our recourse to God, by hearty prayer, fasting, and
abstinence, and to pray to his divine Majesty, Good and wholesome counsel for
the demeanor of subjects toward their Princes.
to turn his mercy toward him, and to pardon him, and to give him grace and
understanding to avoid that which is evil, and judgment and wisedoome, to
choose that which is good: that he would give him a concrite and humble heart,
and would deal with him according to his mercies, to the intent the sweet
smelling sacrifice may ascend up to heaven, and that of his clemency it would
please him to receive his prayers and oblations made unto his divine Majesty.
By such means did the people of Loraine obtain by the mercy and favor of
God so much grace for their Duke Thierri, the son of William, the brother of
Godfrey and Balawin Kings of Jerusalem, a most cruel and tyrannical Prince,
and one that was a persecuter of the Church of God, and an oppresser of his
subjects and vassals, in so much as he did not only come to himself and
amended his wick^d life, (but also restoring that which he had wrong^ully
taken) he withdrew and shut himself up in a Monastery, where by the space of
four years before his death, he led a perfect and holy life. O that it would
please God, that your great friend Philip the Catholic (in whom are wanting
all the virtues which are fit and decent for a good and just Prince) would do
the like, and would restore unto others, the goods and livings taken from them,
after the example of Duke Thierri, and not as did Charles the fifth his father.
And let this suffice for an answer to the first proposition alleged by you.

As touching the second: true it is, that Philip has greatly advanced the
Christian faith in the West Indies: in so much that this does serve him
greatly as a cloak or mantle to cover, and to augment his usurped power and
tyranny: but this good work ought to be imputed to such devout and religious
persons, both of his subjects and others, as have been the instruments thereof,
rather then to him. See, I pray you, and consider well, how he has extended
Religion in Affrique: he has even of late, against the institutions of the
order of the Knights of the Religion of Jesus Christ, and others, concluded and
made peace in Barbary with the Infidels, to the intent he might with the more
commodity make war in Europe against the Christians. And what does he at
this day against the Turk, but only dally and trifle with him?

Touching the third of your propositions: histories do well recount, and all
men may assure themselves, how much he loves the Ecclesiastical persons, and
what reverence he bears to them that are religious. In times past, it was
never seen, that any Ecclesiastical or religious person has been put to
death in Spain, for any matters concerning the estate. The greatest cruelty,
and most rigorous severe justice, that the Arrian Princes showed upon them for
being contrary to their opinions, was to imprison them, and to keep them
enclosed within Monasteries. True it is, that of some of them they did put out
the eyes, and afterward, some Princes did cause them to be put to death
secretly in prison: but as for the gallows, and such like infamous deaths,
they knew not what it meant, save only since the reign of his Majesty, that
will be held for so great and so good a Catholic. And I for my part do
believe, that he is no less: and yet I know he is but a very bad Christian:
for I make no doubt but he believes all that which the holy Catholic,
Apostolic Roman Church our mother teaches, and instructs us: howbeit I
know full well, that he does not observe any of the precepts commanded in the
Decalogue.

And as concerning the rest of your allegations made in his excuse; although
that Philip has builded up a great number of Monasteries, and many Churches,
endowing them with rich revenues, yet all this will not make me, but that I
must needs take him and acknowledge him for a notable tyrant, and a most
cruel Prince. Historiographers have written largely of the cruelty of
Brunhault, Brunhault caused ten kings of France to be put to death.
(howbeit, that some would excuse her, and do attribute this fault unto the
first Writers) and they do affirm, that she caused to be put to death ten
several Kings in France, and many other persons of great quality. Also they
write of her, that she caused a great number of Churches to be builded, and
did provide them of so great goods and riches, that it is a very strange thing
to be reported. See what Gaguin Gaguin.
writes thereof: in so much, that if a man would compare the charge and
expenses of Brunhault, with the means she had, he would greatly marvel, how
this woman was able in one age to build so many Temples, and assign unto them
also so good and large revenues. Now Brunhault has deserved another manner of
praise and commendation, for using so great liberality toward the Church, then
does Philip, because she gave of her own, and Philip gives of other men's. In
Spain they find great fault with those that will steal a sheep, and will
give the feet for Gods sake: and so does his Catholic Majesty; he draws
from the Clergy Tercias, Subsidio, Pila, Escusado: in so much, See the meaning
of these words a little after.
that of ten he takes at the least five: and one Prelate pays more unto him
then 2000 laborers, or 4000 Gentlemen. See then how liberal he is to the
Clergy: and by the means of these feet of his sheep, he builds up
Monasteries and other Churches, and endoweth them with great revenues.
Moreover, who is he that has meddled with setting to sale the Towns and
Castles which were of the jurisdiction and vassals of the Church? It is your
great friend Philip, whom you account so virtuous and so Catholic.

The Translator.
Tercias, is the third part of the rent which a Prelate receives yearly out
of his Benefice or Spiritual living.

Subsidio: is an overplus and certain sum which he pays out of the two
third parts which remain, and of other revenues appertaining to his estate.

Pila: is that sum, which he takes of all the Parish Churches in Spain:
namely of every Parishioner, that is of them that are of any wealth, he takes
the tithes or tenth part. And some of the regular persons, who do possess an^
h^ritages in the same Parish, do help to pay this tribute after the rate. The
Regulars themselves do pay tithe also of all that which they possess, even to
the Apples, Oranges, and other fruits of their Gardens.

Escusado: is a certain sum which the Clergy, both Ecclesiastical and
Regular persons, because they may not bear arms, do pay unto the King
Catholic, to be excused in that behalf.

that which is given them, for the causes and reasons by us alleged, he
commits fraud and sacrilege, which may be an occasion, that he himself
may happen ere he die, or his successors for him to repay the same again. For
this cause did Nebuchadnezzar wander up and down for many years in the fields
in the shape of a brute beast: Daniel 4.
and Balthazar his son saw that horrible vision of a hand writing upon a wall
his future death and destruction. Daniel 5. Acts 5.
Ananias and Saphira his wife fell down dead at the feet of Saint Peter. We
have many examples touching this matter in the holy Scriptures, and many more
in p^ophane Writers: and there is a great number of them even in Spain,
especially in Castile. The Queen Dame Viraca, the Daughter of Alphonsus the
sixth Emperor, The common Histories of Spain.
going out of the Church of S. Isidore with the riches which she had taken
thence, fell down dead at the Church door. Don Alphonsus the warrior her
Husband, for the like matter was vanquished by the Moors in the battle of
Fraga, and was never more seen nor heard of after that time, neither alive nor
dead. The King Don Henry brother germane to the mother of Saint Jews, being
but a ladde, was slain by the hazard of a brick or tile falling upon him
within Placentia. Some do attribute this his death to the carelessness of the
said Henry, for not providing a remedy (albeit he were in his tender and
younger years,) against the extortions done upon the Churches, by the children
of the Count Don Nugno de Lara, who were Tutors to the said Henry, and
Governors of his Realm: and they do affirm, that all those disasters and
mishaps which Histories do write of, did happen by the occasion of those his
Tutors. These examples may suffice to prove unto you the abuse and inualidity
of your reply, and to show that your Philip by laying of his hands upon the
Ecclesiastical livings, (as he has done) cannot excuse himself of fraud,
sacrilege, and tyranny; and so by this means (with an ill conscience) he
steals the sheep of another man, notwithstanding that he give again the
feet for God sake. And yet over and above all this, I do assure you even in
the faith of an honest man, that if there were no other vices the person of
King Philip save only these two, to wit, tyranny and cruelty, and if he were
a true obseruer of the rest of the Law and faith Catholic, I would excuse you
of your blindness and inueiglement: but you may hold this for a certainty,
that his abominable works will prove any man whomsoever to be an egregious
liar, that shall be so hardy as to defend that he is no such manner of man.
For this enemy and general persecuter, under the cloak and shadow of a
Catholic, has done more mischief, and committed more insolences against the
Church of Rome, then all the other persecuters that ever went before him. Will
you see the proof how you are abused, and how bad and vile a Christian he is?
Open your eye liddes, and you shall see how he bewrays it, even as if a man
should with his finger point at it. In the year 1575, this King Catholic
being advertised that the late Monsieur did make great preparation to enter
with a mighty Army into Flaunders, he began very secretly to sound certain
of the principal Lords and chief heads of the p^etended reformed Religion,
within the Provinces of Languedoc, Foix, Bearne, Bigorre, and of the Country
de la Bort, near to Guipuscua, over against Fontaraby, to know if they would
under his protection defend their liberty, promising them, that he would cause
an Army of Almaines to descend against the most Christian King, Offers made for
King Philip to those of the reformed Religion, to make war against the late
French King.
and that he would give them five hundred thousand crowns yearly to that
effect, and for the entertainment of the Ministers of their Churches: beating
into their ears, and making them believe, that the enterprise of Flaunders,
which the Duke of Alanson had undertaken, did not tend to any other end, but
only to entrap, and to make another massacre of them, as had lately been done
under the King Charles the ninth his brother, when the Lord de la Noue was
taken, and the Lord de Iuoy was put to death between two Tables, with many
other Lords and Gentlemen. He had the better means and opportunity to treat
with the said Churches, by reason there were many Catholics mingled amongst
the Huguenots: all of which did govern, and demean themselves according to
the conuentions and agreements made between them: and a great Lord of France,
and the Lord Mounsieur de Chastillion, howbeit that afterward this union was
broken. Some of their chief heads did give ear unto those perswasio^s of
Philip, insomuch that there were great preparations made for a strong and
mighty war against them, which succeeded not long after, when Brouage was
taken. Besides, the said Lords and heads of the reformed Religion, with some of
their Ministers, being entered into a great jealousy of the most Christian King
now reigning, (who was then King of Navarre) and of the late Monsieur the
Prince of Condy, they resolved secretly within the Town of Montauban, to call
in strangers of their Religion to be their Protectours and defenders. And to
that effect, they sent one of their Ministers into Almaine, feining that they
sent him unto the pretended reformed Church of Metz. Notwithstanding the matter
was discovered by one of the principal Lords, newly drawn to be of their
Religion, who had taken great indignation against a Minister of his own, and
because he had been an assistant at the same Council, he thought he had been
of the same mind also: and did therefore reprove him, saying: that he greatly
marvelled how he could suffer such a quill to be thrust through his nose,
without laughing at it. But the Minister excused himself, assuring him that he
knew nothing of that matter. But that was an occasion, that the practice brake
off: besides, that they were not well agreed amongst themselves, whom they
should choose to be their chief and protector: some of them desired the Duke
Casimier: others would have England: and some others the Duke of Sauoy: who all
that time did not know any thing at all of that which passed between him and
the Ministers. But after that, at such time as the young Duke (now presently
ruling) came to succeed his Father, he being advertised thereof, sent unto the
King of Navarre, to demand the Lady his sister for his wife: one named Seruin
was dispatched as the messenger to that effect, and after him a Viscount; who
seeing great difficulty in the demand, went by Bearne into Spain, where he
treated the marriage of the Infant D. Katherine, at this day Duchess of Sauoy:
which marriage Don Amadis the bastard brother of the said Duke afterward
effected. This marriage came well to purpose for Philip, because by this means
he assured himself of the Duke, that he should attempt nothing in Portugal:
where he knew full well, that after the death of King Henry, there was great
division amongst the Portugals, for that some would have had the Lady Katherine
Duchess of Bragancia: others the Lord Don Anthonio: and in a manner all well
near not liking to have any of those which were named, would have had the said
Duke of Sauoy, being the Graund-childe of a Daughter of Portugal, who (as the
report is) if he had gone thither during the inter-raigne in Portugal, at the
time of that dissension, and by reason of their unwillingness to admit the one
or the other of those above named, he had without doubt been received of all
the Portugals.

To proceed, and to show you yet more plainly what manner of man this is, for
whose love you do even seek your own destruction, and in whose service you
are so forward and so diligent: I will add here somewhat more touching this
matter, for it is not possible to utter all that may be spoken to that effect.
It is not long since, that for to follow the steps of some other good and
godly Catholics as himself is, he rendered the City of Arzile to Muley Hamet
King of Marocco, against the will and liking of the Portugals which did inhabit
it, who had bound themselves without his aid to defend it. It was supposed by
all the Christians, that Philip surrendered the City, because he was assured
that he should not be able to defend it against the puissance of Infidels, for
so did he himself cause it to be given out, saying: The reason why Philip
rendered that City of Arzil to Muley Hamet.
That it was a less mischief to render it without hazarding the lives and
goods of the Inhabitants, then by keeping it, to put them all in danger. But
therein he abused them most maliciously, for the true cause why this good
Catholic rendered this City of Christians unto the Moors, was because he had
promised it unto their King, upon condition he should not lend two hundred
thousand Crowns to Don Anthonio his cousin german, King of Portugal. The
which sum the Moore had before promised to lend him at the intercession of
England: and for this reason had the said Don Anthonio sent his son Don
Christopher to Marocco to be there in hostage for the said sum of money, who
remained there by the space of four years. You see now what a good and
Catholic Christian deed this man did, whom you do so defend for a most
singular Christian and Catholic, who to hinder a King, a far better
Catholic then himself, from recovering of his own, does not only
tyrannically detain another right, but does make it away from Christians, to
give it unto Infidels. What answer do you make hereunto? I make your selves
the Judges: wherefore then will you not acknowledge the irreligion of this man,
to whom you are so affectionate, and the great malice and perverseness of him,
whom you love so well? Consider and know, that you are taken and bound with a
gross chain: Psalm 41.
and that abissus abissum inuocat: One depth calls another. And I say to you,
one fault draws on an hundred thousand after it. Of the maintaining and
defending of an evil and wicked man, ensues commonly a sinister and perverse
judgment of them which are good. This was well seen to be true and verified
in the life time of Don Anthonio, and is yet still even at this day. It is a
shame to hear the abominations which the favorers of this pretended King
Catholic have heretofore spoken and given out, and do not yet cease to speak
of this poor Prince deceased. Some call him rebel, others term him a
runni-gate, and a fugitive from place to place, and from Country to Country:
and some others call him a seditious person, an enemy to Christendom, an
Infidel, and an heretic. Can there be any thing more grievous, more
sensible, more unjust, and more unworthy of a Christian? How dare you (against
all Laws both divine and humane) handle and use so ill, a Prince, the son of
the greatest Prince of his age: the graund-child of that great Emanuel, from
whom the Princes of Europe do glory to draw their descent and original: a
Prince sore pressed and turmoyled with afflictions, trouble and perplexity. He
has well showed even in his exile and banishment, that he was a better
Catholic then your Philip his cousin: less ambitious, without choler,
without hatred, and full of charity. For if he would have been content to
recover his Realm of Portugal, with more honorable means then your tyrant
has tyrannized over it, and does yet tyrannously detain it, he might well
have done it. If he would have accorded, that the English should have had
exercise of their Religion in Portugal, only within their own Houses and
lodgings, the Earl of Leicester (whom some call the Count of Lest) would have
undertaken to set him again in possession of his Realms and Seigniories. In
the year one thousand five hundred eighty nine, when he passed into Portugal
with the English, amongst other Articles of agreement made between them, there
was no other thing granted nor yielded unto them, but only a license or
liberty for them to live in Portugal, without being bound or compelled by the
Ecclesiastical Prelates, to repair to the Churches to the service and
exercise of the Catholics. And in the same manner, as the Queen of England
did then entertain the strangers Catholics, inhabiting within her Realm of
England: even so did he accord and ordain that the English should find the
like usage and entertainment in Portugal. And it may be, that if he would
have enlarged their liberty in this respect, the English would again have
enforced their aboade in that Country. But he proceeded so like a Catholic
with them, that they had a kind of distrust, and took occasion to suspect
him. The king of Marocco at this day now reigning, (of whom we have lately
spoken) sent an Ambassador into England, to entreat him, touching the
delivering of Portugal from her tyranny: offering him to make present payment
of 100 thousand Crowns at London, for the prouyding of 100 sail of ships to
pass into Barbary, from whence he promised to embarke, and to pass with him
in person, and also to set at liberty about seven or eight thousand Portugalls,
whom he held in captivity, and which were good soldiers, and with them and the
principal horse of Barbary, to take land and set foot in Spain, and to put
him in possession of his Realm. But Don Anthonio would not accept those his
offers, because he would give no occasion to the Moors, (namely those Moors
that are baptized and live as Christians in Arragon, Valentia, Murcia, The
cause why Don Anthonio refused the means to recover his Realm.
and other quarters of Spain, where the Moore did assure himself to find 60
thousand men at his devotion) there to rebel, and to work the misery and
calamity of the Christians. This was a more dangerous matter, and would have
been more burdensome and chargeable to King Pbilip, then to the King Don
Anthonio, with whom Muley Hamet desired to have made a peace very beneficial
and aduantageous to the Realms of Portugal: but Don Anthonio refused all,
only moved thereunto of a godly Catholic zeal. Now show me (my Masters)
where or when your Don Philip ever did as much: He has made great promises to
Don Anthonio, to the intent he might cause him to renounce his right, which he
had in Portugal, by reason of his election. He offered to make him Viceroy of
Naples, Offers of king Philip to Don Anthonio.
with 400 thousand Crowns of yearly rent, and the collation of the officers
and benefices of that kingdom. Moreruer he would have given him 500 thousand
Crowns to pay his debts, and to defray the charge of going to take that
Government upon him: And that he would be bound to restore all those
Portugals to their former estates, whose goods he had taken and confiscated for
following of his party. And that he would advance and recompense such as did
serve and attend him actually: and that he would pardon all in general.
Whereunto Don Anthonio made him this answer: God defend that he should commit
so great a fault: Don Anthonio full of conscience.
and that he had rather die in an hospital, then to do a thing so heinous,
wicked, unjust, and against his conscience, for that the laws had taught him
thus much, that he might not contract for that which appertained to another.
For, when he was chosen at Sautaren, he had then sworn, and afterward again
at Lisbon (when he was confirmed King by the deputies of the cities and towns
of Portugal, which came thither to take their oath for their allegiance, and
to do him homage) that he should never accord nor fall to any agreement with
the enemy, without leaving Portugal in her full and perfect liberty. This may
serve to show how much better a Catholic, and how less ambitious the King Don
Anthonio was then King Philip. And as touching his choler and his hatred or
charity, that may appear by this which follows, in that there have been
many men who have oftentimes offered to Don Anthonio to kill Philip:
nevertheless he would never give them any entertainment, Most christian
speeches of D. Anthonio.
alleging that Kings are the anointed of the Lord: and although (quoth he) my
cousin King Philip blinded by ambition and tyranny, do persecute me, and do
seek to take my life from me, yet will not I be content nor consent for all
that, that any man for the love of me, should attempt to take his life. And
whosoever shall dare or adventure to do it, let him look to himself that he
come not into my hands. For though his sins do so blind and bewitch him, as
that they make him show himself a Saul against me yet I for my part do protest
before God, to show my self a David toward him. A certain man on a day
demanding of him a favor for the good news which he brought him (for he had
assured him that King Philip was dead) he answered him half in choler; My
good friend, do thou not know who it is of whom thou speak unto me? he
is my cousin germane, bring me news that I have eight or ten thousand
faithful men, and well armed with good and sage Captains, and all things
necessary to restore Portugal to liberty, and I promise thee in the word of
an honest man, to make thee so rich and so honorable in my Realm, as no
Gentleman shall go beyond thee: go, go, learn to know the disposition of
Princes Now my masters, what think you of these examples? do you now see what
reason I have to say, that the King Don Anthonio was more Catholic, and less
ambitious then the king Philip, and that he was a man without choler and
hatred, but contrariwise full of charity? I pray you therefore for the love of
God, that from henceforth you would resolve your selves, with a sound and
uncorrupted judgment, and a pure conscience, and without any inueiglement or
indiscreet zeal, to embrace the good, and to reject the evil. If he be
dishonest, luxurious and licentious, I say nothing in that behalf: for that is
not the butt or end of our treatise: and I believe, that the Prince of Orange
in his Apology, has said something touching that matter: and the infamous
rumor and detestable report which has run, and does yet run throughout
the world, does say much to that effect. God give him the grace to know
himself, and to convert, and to render to every man his own before his death,
better then he has restored that which (as is reported) his father at the
hour of his death commanded him to render and to restore again.

Now, most humbly I beseech your Majesty's to hold me excused, for having been
so large in this matter: because I have not done it without good cause, knowing
that to come to the butte and end of my purpose, it was very needful, and did
much import me, to have said that which I have done. This is a thing proper and
conformable to the law of God, and agreeable to the nature of charity, to
bring them into the right way, that wander and go astray, and to discharge and
clear the innocent, though it be to the damage and displeasure of the wicked.

Most excellent Princes,

If the reasons which I have alleged, and the histories which I have quoted,
be not sufficient to persuade you, and to urge you speedily with one accord,
and consent to make a good and gallant army, and to send it into Spain, not
only to make present resistance against the force of the Castillian, to break
the course of his desseignes, to beat down his pride, and to ruinate his
puissance: but also to bridle him in the time to come, I shall be enforced to
believe, that God has forsaken and abandoned you, because of your sins, both
public and particular: and that he has deprived you of all judgment, and
understanding, to the intent you should not see that which concerns you so
near and which is above all things, most needful and necessary for your
safety. In such sort that being fo inueigled, and (as it were) wholly amazed,
you will come to fall into a bottomless gulf of most blind darkness, and
consequently into utter destruction and total ruin: Conceive (I beseech you)
and comprehend that which I say unto you, and consider it intentiuely, for in
that you have within these few years past contemned or neglected to make a
voyage into Portugal, and have not vouchsafed to yield neither succor nor
favor unto the Portugals your friends, you have therefore at this time in
France the Castillians your enemies. From henceforth it shall be better for
you and more expedient, that the war be made in Spain, and not in France:
and you shall receive far less discommoditie in destroying the territories
of the Castillians with fire and sword, then to see the towns and territories
of your own taken, wasted, and spoiled.

The Translators encouragement to these most worthy Princes.
The inward affection which I have unto your Majesty's the loyalty which J owe
unto your services, and the desire which J have to see the augmentation of the
good and prosperity of France: besides my age, and long experience in matters
of estate, do give me the assurance and hardiness to advertise, you by the way
of something concerning the matter here spoken of by the Author. I had of late
certain intelligence by letters from some of my friends, that the King of
Tartaria now reigning (whom the ancient Historiographers and Cosmographers do
call, Magnum Can, Regem regum, and Dominum dominantium, that is, The great
Cham, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords) who is said to be a most prudent,
brave, ard warlike Prince, has determined for the great devotion which he
bears to his great Prophet Mahomet (whose sect he professes) to pass with
great forces to Mecha in Arabia, and there to seize upon the body of his said
Prophet. This Sophie of Persia being ascertained of this enterprise (whom the
Author in this his treatise names Xatama) presently dispatched away certain
Ambassadors to Constantinople, to the great Seignior of the Turks, with whom
for these many years of late he has had great wars, and continual
enmity, to pray him that he would join his forces with his, to the end they
might both of them jointly resist and withstand the puissance of the Tartarian,
showing him also the danger which both the one and the other of them might
incur to the loss of their estates, by having to their neighbor an enemy so
sage and puissant. I would to God your Majesty's would now consider, that if
these considerations do fall into the understanding of a Barbarian, how much
more ought they not to be wanting in men of iudgemeot and understanding: and I
would your Majesty's would ponder advisedly, how much it imports you not to
suffer the greatness of the Castillian your next and nearest neighbor. Join
your forces with your Confederates, and take in hand this enterprise, in such
sort as you may divide the power and monarchy of the enemy, I do not say
that you should send to pill and ransacke them which are under the yoke and
command of the enemy, God forbid: for this would turn as much to his good
and profit^, as to our hurt and damage, because by our pilling and sacking of
them, we shall give them cause (who now hate him deadly, and can not abide
not only him, nor so much as to hear him named) for the defense of
themselves, and to be revenged of their domages, and our extorsions done upon
them, to join themselves with our enemy, and to serve him with love and
fidelity: and contrariwise, to prosecute and pursue us with extreme hatred,
doing their worst that they may against us: in such sort, that we losing our
friends, who now desire to assist us, shall purchase them for our enemies; and
they will aspire nor seek nothing more then our ruin and destruction. On the
contrary, in steed of mortal enemies which he has now of them, shall find
them to be his friends to aid and assist him, to the maintenance of his
ambition and tyranny. And this is that which he does seek and desire
(showing himself in the mean while like a most wily Fox) and to this effect
he will not spare to give money liberally, because of the good that may redound
thereof unto him. This is a thing most certain, that he desires extremely to
see them made poor and ruinated whom he fears, etc. I am fully persuaded
that fewer words then these will suffice, to give your Majesty's to understand,
how much it imports you to preserve and desend people that are malcontent and
afflicted in misery, and how much mischief may ensue by giving them cause of
scandal and offense. That which we ought to do in this case, is to travel by
all means possible to set foot in Spain, and to fortify our selves within
it, gathering and drawing unto us such as are scandalized and ill handled by
the enemy, and to receive them with humanity and courtesy: so did William the
Conqueror gain the Realm of England; the which also in the same manner
Henry the seventh did afterward get likewise. Many others have done the like:
yea, and your Majesty's also, who if you shall seize upon some places in
Spain, you shall make your own peace with honor, profit and advantage. This
which I say, is not to contradict that which many desire, without considering
what is expedient and necessary to a matter of so great importance? but rather
to show, how your Majesty's may do without any loss and detriment, and to the
best profit and advantage of your Realms, yea and of all the common weal of
Christendom. The holy King and Prophet David, as a most politic and wise man,
counsels us to pray to God for those things which are needful to the peace
of Jerusalem, that is, the Church militant, and consequently, we are
commanded to do it. Primo, rogate quae ad pacem sunt Jerusalem: Pray for the
peace of Jerusalem. Secundo, Fiat pax. Secondly, Let peace be (but the world
shall never have peace till Spain be divided) in virtute tua. That is to say,
in such sort, as we may not loose one jot of our estate, honor, reputation
and integrity, and other things of like nature and quality, whereof I will
surcease to speak any further, because I will not trouble the discourse of the
Author.

And for my part, surely and in my conscience I am half in a doubt whether I
should laugh or weep at this so great and extreme a blindness: neither more
nor less then Hanniball did seeing the destruction of Carthage. And if it be
well considered, that this laughter proceeds not but of the great grief and
sorrow which I have at my heart, I believe assuredly that it would be to more
purpose then all your tears, cries, and lamentations: and I will then say of
you as Hanniball said of the Carthagenians: You weep, you sigh, and you lament
to see your towns taken, your country ransacked and spoiled, your children,
brethren, kinsfolks, countrymen and friends, slain and killed, and your goods
wasted and lost: you know all of you how to remedy it, and confess that you
know it: and yet there is none of you that will resolve, nor show himself
forward, for the public and common good, as well as for the particular good of
every one: and there is none that either speaks or talks of it, saying,
let us free our country, let us succor our friends, let us cast out and drive
away our enemies: I will do this or that, I will give thus much for the
public and common good of my country. Are you so straight laced for so small
a matter, which should redeem you, and set you altogether in peace, rest, and
quietness? and which should deliver your friends, who will serve you as a
rampire or bulwark, and will cast your enemies out of your provinces, and will
drive them into a corner, where they shall fear you more then they do now
scorn and contemn you? I am sore afraid, that before many days be past, you
will confess you wept hitherto but for trifles, in comparison of that which is
to come. I pray God you do not follow the steps of Antiochus, who seeing
himself vanquished by the Romans for want of following the counsel of
Hanniball, was greatly astonished, but all too late. And he then esteemed
Hanniball not only sage and prudent, but also, even as a Prophet; for that he
had foretold him all that which afterward happened unto him. Awake therefore I
pray you, and consider well upon that which I counsel you for your good: and
that he which does advise you to it, does desire it as your poor seruitour
and friend, who has as great a care of your safeties and preservation, as of
his own: and who has often foretold, and (as it were) prophesied (as the
prin^ipall counselors of estate, both in France and in England can well
testify) both all this which is come to pass in this behalf, and has also
foreshewed all that which has been lost in France, and to what end and issue
things will grow at the last, if there be not some better order taken in these
affairs. And I believe, that if they were demanded the question, they will
tell you, how I have passed away my time with as great grief and
coffeehouse, as a man possibly might do, to see the enemy daily to prosper,
and to wax more proud and arrogant by your own proper sufferance, consent,
and wilfulness: and for this cause, I am in a manner wholly resolved, to leave
and abandon the conversation of men, and to retire and withdraw my self into
some solitary mountain. Notwithstanding, because I know and am acquainted with
all that has befalne for these 50 years last past in the greatest part of
Europe; I do therefore tell you, as one that has had experience of these
matters, that as yet you may recover (if you will) all that which hitherto you
have lost, and both deliver your friends and bridle your enemies. And you may
take such order, that the time to come shall be more happy and fortunate unto
you, then the time already past has been. And moreover, I do assure you,
that since the loss of great part of Christendom won by the Turk, the
late loss of the most part of Germany, the hereditary possession of the King
of Bohemia, all Switzerland, with the great hazard of losing all the
Netherlands, who are now striving for breath against the King of Spaines mighty
powers now in the field, (which I for my part do think to have proceeded from
the very hand of God, as of your loving Father, who by a fatherly love does
chastise you, to the end you should awaken you out of your security and
negligence) I have been ever since resolved to set down in writing, that
which I have so often pronounced by word of mouth, to so many persons of
special mark and quality, before that ever they did entreat me thereunto. And
this is the cause, that if this my writing do not produce that public good,
and that effect which I desire, I protest that from henceforth I will for ever
hold my peace and be silent. Nevertheless, I most humbly beseech your
Christian Majesty's and all the Princes and Potentates of Europe, and all the
great Lords and Officers of the Crowns of England and of France, that it
would please you to descend into your selves, and at your leisure according to
your accustomed prudence and wisdom, to consider that good fortune and
felicity does not consist so much in the conquest and subduing of great
Seigniories and large dominions, for the time present, with an intent to leave
the same to your successors: but rather to assure, confirm, and preserve them
for the time to come to your children and posterity: to the intent that when it
shall please God to call you hence, they may quietly and peaceably enjoy them
in peace and tranquillity, without any trouble, disquiet, or hinderance. For it
is a far greater virtue, to preserve and keep that which is gotten, then to
get and purchase new things daily.

Non minor est virtus quam quarere, parta tueri. The poor Pilgrim beaten by
Time, and pesecuted by Fortune.
P. Ol.
I am resolved to make war upon the Castillian: wherein if you also will
bear a part, assure your self, you may account me as one of your most
faithful and surest friends. But if you once grow to any terms of peace and
amity with him, then seek you some other, with whom ye may deliberate upon
that matter.



AN EXPLICATION OF THE PILGRIM UPON THE PROVERB: IF THE COCKErell had not
come, the Cock had not been taken. And of the loyalty of Auila and Simanchas
in Castile: and of Celorico, and the Castle of Coimbre in Portugal.
Item, What the diversity is between the King of Castile and of Spain: and
who they be, whom we call Castillians, and what is understood by Cities and
Towns.
HEnry the fourth, King of Castile, (of whom we have before spoken) being at
the point of death, If the Cockerel had not come, the Cock had not been taken.
named four Executors of his Testament, to govern the Realm after his death,
and to marry his daughter the Lady Jane: two of which Executors (to wit) Don
Aluaro de Estugniga Duke de Areualo: and Don Diego Lapez Pacheco, Marquis de
V^llena, joining with the Archbishop of Toledo, named Don Alphonso Carrillo,
Don Bertrand de la Cueua, Duke de Albuquerke, the Master of Calatraua: Don
Rodrigo Tells Giron County de V^egne: Don John Tells Giron hif brother,
Marquisse of Calis, Don Alphonso de Aguilar, and many other great Lords, with
fourteen Cities of Castile, sent unto Don Alphonso the Affrican King of
Portugal, praying him, that he would take to wife the said Queen Dame Jane:
the which the King of Portugal accepted, against the wills and good liking of
many of his Realms, who would not by any manner of means have to do nor
meddle with the Castillians. By reason of this marriage, in the year 1475, Don
Alphonso went into the Lands and Country of his said wife, where he had many
encounters and combats with Fernand King of Arragon, the Husband of Jsabel the
pretended Queen of Castile, and with his people, till such time as they
encountered in the battle which was foughten near the City of Toro, The
battle of Toro.
in March 1476, which was ordered in this manner: the King Alphonso had made
one Camp of the Lords and Nobles of the Realms of Castile and Leon, with some
Portugals: the Prince Don Juan his son, (who was come to the succors of his
Father) had made another Camp of his Portugals, without any Castillians
mingled amongst them: The King Fernand made also two camps, the one of the
Castillians, which took his part and his wives: and the other of Arragonois,
the Catalans, the Valencians, and such other peoples and Nations, as were the
subjects of his own Realms and Seigniories, whereof himself was Lord and
commander. Fernand encountering with Alphonso, defeated and overcame him: and
having taken his Guidon royal, made him forsake the field, and to betake
himself to flight. But the Prince Don Iuan gave in and charged so resolutely
upon the Castillians, that he made them to fly, and having slain many of them
upon the place, he took a great number of prisoners; and himself remaining
whole and entire with his Forces, did with singular hardiness and magnanimity
assail Ferdinand also, the vanquisher of his Father, and making him to fly,
did recover again the Guydon royal, which the said Alphonso his Father had
lost The History of Portugal says, that the Prince did great honor unto a
Knight which saved the said Guydon, and gave him an yearly rent or annuity of
five thousand Marauedis, (which was at that time no small revenue, in
comparison of that it is at this pay) being about 12 ducats and a half,
allowing 400 Marauedis to each duckat, and gratified him with sundry other
gifts and great honors. Fernand wrote unto Jsabel the success of this
battle, giving her to understand, that if the Prince had not come, the King
his Father had been taken. Whereupon he returned him this answer: that, if the
Cockerell had not come, the Cock had been taken; and hereof came that
proverb which we told you Guaribay s^tteth down these last words, and
confesses the very truth. Nevertheless, touching the residue of the History,
he reports a thousand untruths, which may be verified by the History which
Damian de Goyes has written of this Prince Don Juan; in the which he says,
Damianus de Goyes in the life of the Prince Don Iuan.
that the Prince would have kept and remained in the field where the battle
was foughten, by the space of three days, if the Archbishop of Toledo had not
dissuaded him, who with great instance and earnest entreaty caused him to
retire into the City, because the weather was extreme cold, and his men were
sore traveled and wearied, and had been ouer-watched for want of sleep. And
he said unto him: Sir, your Highness has kept the Field long enough, these
three hours you have stayed here, are as good as three days, and one hour is
as much as three. Some write, that in memory of this victory, King Edward the
fourth of England, sent unto this Prince the order of the Garter. And the
Castillians had such ill success continually against the Portugals, that (to
grace themselves, because the King Alphonso was defeated and forsook the
field: (though his son held the field, and remained vanquisher) yet they
shame not to attribute unto themselves the honor and victory of this battle.

Alphonsus Raymond the only son of Vrraca, the daughter of Alphonsus the
sixth, surnamed the Emperor, was borne in Auila, Auila.
a City of Castile, and was nourished and kept by them of the City, during the
reign of Alphonsus King of Aragon, called the warrior, together with his wife
Vrraca Queen of Castile, Mother of the said Raymond. Now there were great
reuolts and troubles in Castile, in the which they of Auila following the party
of Raymond against the said Alphonsus his Father in Law, did so much, that the
Father in Law was dispossessed of the government, and the Son in Law was
installed in the siege royal. And for this cause, this word has passed for a
common proverb: The fidelity of Auila: and, Auila is for the King.

Simancas.
Touching Simancas, you are to understand, that in the year 1463, Henry the 4
reigning in Castile, at the persuasion of some of the Princes, many other
Cities and Towns did revolt from him, and grew into a rebellion, which they
called, The league of the Princes: and they entitled themselves, Princes of
the League. And in imitation hereof did Philip King of Castile, in the year
1582, baptize the League, which has been the occasion of so many mischiefs
and afflictions, of which France has especially tasted, and had experience
for these nine years last past. This is that League which has wrought so
great damage to the Church of Rome, and has so ruinated and pulled it down,
as it shall need many hundreds of years to restore it again. But to our
matter: in process of time, the Soldiers of the Kings Army, being greatly
augmented, and their puissance much increased, they came to the City of Toro:
and the King having advertisement, that they of the League were issued out of
Valladolid, and that having broken down and razed the walls of Begnafleur,
they were gone to Simancas, he sent presently John Hernandes Galiude his
Captain General, with 3000 Horses, for the succors of the Town: which being
entered into Simancas, were besieged by them of the League, who notwithstanding,
were more afraid then those whom they had besieged. The Lackies within the
Town (who showed themselves to be of a wonderful good courage) having
assembled themselves one day in a great number, and mocking those that had
besieged them, did make a picture, which represented the Archbishop of Toledo;
whom (because he was a Rebel against his King and Lord) they called Don Opas,
the brother of the Count Julian, who caused the Moors to enter into Spain
against the King Rodericke. After which, one of the Lackies being appointed for
a Judge, Judgment given by the Lackies against the Archbishop of Toledo.
sat himself down on the judgment seat, commanding the prisoner to be
brought before him, (which was the picture of the Archbishop) and he gave
judgment upon him in this manner: For as much as Don Alphonso Carillo
Archbishop of Toledo, Guar. lib. 17. cap. 14.
following the steps of the Bishop Don Opas the destroyer of Spain, has
been a Traitor to his King and natural Lord, rebelling against him with his
places and Fortresses, and with the money which he put into his hands to do
him service. For these causes, having seen and considered of his deserts by
his trial, wherein has appeared his wicked practices, and felonious offenses,
we do therefore condemn him to be burned; and that he be first trayled and
drawn through the streets and public places of Simancas: and that in the
execution thereof, the common crier shall cry and proclaim with a loud voice:
This is the justice commanded to be done, namely, that this cruel Don Opas
shall be burnt for his offense and trespass; because having received diverse
places, fortresses, and moneys of his King, he has notwithstanding revolted
and rebelled against him.

Quien tal haze, que tal pague.
That is to say,
So do, so have.
The judgment being pronounced: another Lackey taking the picture between his
arms with an open cry, threw it forth of the Town, having in his company more
then three hundred Lackies, and immediately two of their company made a great
fire to burn it, not far from the camp of the enemy, who looked on whilst
they were doing of it; and whilst the picture was in burning, all the Lackies
together with open throat cried and sang: Esta es Simancas,
Don Opas Trahidor,
Y no Penaflor.


Which is to say: This is Simancas,
(Don Opas, O thou Traitor)
And not Pegnastor.
With many other speeches to that purpose. Which song of theirs was for a long
time after used in Castile, and was commonly sung both in the Court, and
throughout all that Realm.

Celorico.
After that the Portugals had deposed Don Sancho, surnamed Capelo, from his
Realm and Kingdom, Don Alphonso his brother (who was then County of Bologne
upon the Sea) was chosen Governor of Portugal by the same Portugals. This
election (which they made, together with the deposition of the said Sancho, was
approved and confirmed by Pope Innocent the 4, in a Council held at Lions:
which was the cause that the said Alphonso went from thence into Portugal with
Letters of favor from the said Innocent the fourth, to the peoples of
Portugal, praying and requiring them, that they would obey and submit
themselves unto him, and deliver unto him all the Cities, Towns, and Castles
of the Realm in general. Nevertheless some special persons there were, who
(notwithstanding the commandment of the Pope, or the force of Alphonso)
because they supposed that this did derogate from the loyalty which they ought
unto their King, would not yield thereunto, but opposed themselves against the
said Alphonso, and would not render unto him the Towns and Castles which had
been committed to their custody by their King Sancho, Fernand Ruis Pach^co
Lord of Ferreyra was one of those, who being besieged by Don Alphonso within
the Town of Celorico, and seeing himself in extreme necessity of victuals,
there happened by great chance a Trowt to fall within the Castle from the
talents of an Eagle, flying over the place: of the which he made a present to
Don Alphonso with two fine white manchets, to the intent he might make him
believe that he was very well provided of victuals, seeing he was not as yet
without such delicates and dainties. In so much that the Governor Alphonso
believing that he had victuals secretly conveyed unto him, raised his siege and
departed. This devise was imputed to Fernand Ruis, as a notable point of
fidelity in the service of his Lord and master: after whose death he did
immediately yield up the said town to the said Alphonso, then elected and
chosen King of Portugal (for that Sancho his brother had left no issue behind
him) without any other accord or condition.

The said Alphonsus for the same reason besieged the Castle of the city of
Coimbre, The Castle o Coimbre.
the Captain whereof was called Martin de Freytas; who was brought to that
necessity, that both bread and water failed him, notwithstanding neither his
own wants, nor the great promises which Alphonsus made unto his Captain could
draw him to render the Castle unto him. Don Alphonso considering the loyalty
and constancy of his Captain, and being desirous to save his life, as soon as
tidings were brought him that the King Sancho his brother was dead (who died
during the siege) he sent from his army to the besieged, both bread, flesh,
and other victuals necessary for their sustenance; and he wrote unto the
Captain that the King Sancho was dead and buried in the town of Toledo; and
he promised to give him great honor and preferment, praying him that he would
not any longer trouble himself, but render up the castle unto him, seeing now
his King was deceased, and that he was chosen King by the Portugals, and had
been received and confirmed in the kingdom by the oath of fidelity and
allegiance throughout the realm. The Captain seeing the letter, demanded of
the King only so long time of truce, as was needful for him to go into
Castile, and to see with his own eyes, if that report were true or not: which
the King having granted him, he took his journey, and coming to Toledo,
caused the sepulcher of King Sancho to be opened, and having taken good notice
and knowledge of him, he bound the keys of the Castle to his right arm, of
the which he caused an act and record to be made by a public Notarie, whom he
had there of purpose to that effect: And so returning from thence into
Portugal, he rendered the castle to the King Alphonsus. The King in token of so
rare a constancy and fidelity, restored to him again the keeping of the said
castle, and gave him the place freely to him and to the heirs of his body for
ever, with this prerogative, that neither he, nor any of his posterity, should
be bounden to do homage for the same, either to himself or to the Kings his
successors. Freytas having kissed the Kings hand, and yielded most humble
thanks to his Majesty for so great a favor, did not only refuse to accept of
the Kings gift, but forbad his sons, and all the issue that should descend of
him, upon pain of his curse, never to take charge, nor to undertake the
custody and guard of any town or castle, for which they should be bounden to
do fealty and homage unto any Prince whatsoever. Thus you see, what is meant
by Auila, Simancas, Celorico, and the castle of Coimbre, all which are notable
examples most worthy to be considered, and may be a shame to many men in this
our age, wherein they make so small account and reckening of a virtue so rare
and commendable. My masters, put your hands, I pray you, into your bosoms, and
see how they are full of leprosy: return and consider well with your selves,
and acknowledge your faults, for God has always his ears open to hear them
that seek unto him for mercy.

The title of the King of Castile, and of Spain.
Now as concerning the king of Castile, I would be very glad, that you would
well understand and conceive what the meaning of this is, and whereof we have
already spoken somewhat; and is at large handled in that book which Friar
Joseph Texere (a religious person of the order of S. Dominicke has In the
year 1594 at Paris.
made concerning the Genealogy of the most christian king: who is the very
same person, that did preach, how we are bound to love all men of whatsoever
religion, sect or nation that they be, even the Castilians themselves: which
Monk being a Portugal (it may be) does not fully know how much the Spanish
nation is agreeued to see and hear, that kin Philip should entitle himself
king of Spain (we speak nor mean not in this number the vulgar and rascal
sort of Castilians, because they are persuaded that their king being so, they
alone shall have all the rule and government of the world.) For there be
diverse other reasons besides those which he alleges, which are of no small
importance to let you know: that as they of Arragon and Navarre are not
altogether out of hope to see themselves yet one day delivered from the tyrant
(which may be also said of Portugal,) so they have a desire likewise to
preserve their monarchies entire, that is to say, the privileges,
preheminences, prerogatives, dignities, offices, customs, and language of
their realms: and it may be, that God of his divine goodness and mercy will
permit one day, that there shall be raised up some Moses for the restoring of
them to their liberty, for so also some have written touching the children of
Israel; that after their entry into Egypt, they did continually keep 3 things
especially uncorrupted and in their first integrity: to wit, their language,
which was the Hebrew tongue, one self same fashion of apparelling themselves,
and the propriety of the surnames of their Families. And in case his Christian
Majesty would resolve to draw and deliver that realm of Navarre from the
tyranny of the Castilian, he should find a Constable and all other officers
of the said realm, who would assist him, and do their uttermost endeavors to
serve him faithfully: to the intent they might remain in their country with
their charges and offices, under the obeissance of a natural king, and not of
a Castilian. And if the most excellent Duke of Lorraine, were disposed to
restore, Arragon, Valentia, Catalonia, etc. he should have an Admiral, and
many officers of those realms to accompany him: and they would hold and esteem
themselves for most happy and fortunate, to deliver their cuntry from the
tyranny and yoke of a stranger, and to redeliuer it to a natural and lawful
Prince. If the Portugals likewise would determine and resolve themselves to
choose by election (as they have right so to do) some Prince or some other of
the people either white, or negro (for it is most certain, that to deliver
themselves of the tyranny of Philip, they would be content to receive to their
King the meanest negro of Guinee, if he be a Christian, and will live in the
Realm with them) they are fully persuaded, and they have reason, that this
would be a great help and furtherance to the accomplishment of their desires,
to find for their defense and preservation, a Constable of Portugal, a
Marshall, and Admiral, and all other such like officers of the Realm: and
their records and writings done in their own tongue, the fashions of their
garments, and the surnames of their families. Contrariwise, if it be granted
and yielded unto Philip, that he may once take upon him this title of King of
Spain, it is most certain and sure, that he will make only one house royal
of all Spain, with a Constable, Marshall, or Marshals, and Admiral, graund
Master, great Chamberlain, master of the Horse, and all other such like
officers of the Realm, all which shall be called of Spain generally, and they
will call themselves also by the name only of Spaniards, and so will unite all
of them into one only body, which will turn to the great damage and
prejudice of the particular states and kingdoms of Spain, and to the great
profit and surety of Philip and his posterity. Full little do strangers know
of what importance this matter is: and thereof it comes that they speak so
fondly and foolishly when they talk thereof, which is a thing greatly to be
blamed and reprehended in them: considering that it is against the law, which
says, Inciuile est de re incognita iudicare.
that it is a great inciuility for any man to judge of that which he does not
understand. The nations of Spain do see very well what mischief this may
bring upon them: and therefore they do resist and withstand it with so great
force and vehemency. The Castillian knows full well the great advancement
and assurance, which would hereof ensue to his estate, if he could reach so
far: and that is the cause, he is so earnest to get himself entitled king of
Spain. He is (as we have before said) very expert and well seen in histories,
as his predecessors were also before him: and by reading of them he has
learned that this is the most easy mean and ready way to command peaceably,
and to gain the affection of all the Spaniards. Histories do show us, Egbert
king of West Saxon^ in England.
how Egbert a valiant and magnanimous Prince, being chosen king of the realm
of West Saxons in great Britain (which Realm contained the provinces of
Cornwall, Deuon, Sommerset, Wiltshire, Dorsetshire, Hampshire, and Barkeshire:
and trusting upon his skill and knowledge in the art military, which he had
learned in France under Charlemaigne, where he had been banished for many
years, he resolved to make himself King and Lord of all great Britain,
leaving Scotland apart. And beginning his enterprise, he first subdued the
province of Wales, which is the strongest of all the rest. After which he wanne
the Realms of Kent, Mercia, Northumberland, and the Realm of the East Saxons,
called Essex: Or rather North Saxon in Norfolk.
having gotten this province, and those four realms, Egbert seeing himself
now Lord of five, and that there now rested no more to conquer but the Realm
of Sussex, so called of the South Saxons, and that of the East Saxons, called
East Anglia, of whose forces he made no great reckening. And bethinking with
himself how he might assure and secure these dominions and Seigniories unto
himself, he determined not only to root out and extinguish the name and
memory of the Britains the ancient inhabitants of that I Will, but also gain
the good wills and affections of his subjects, by a new name, and so by that
means to draw unto himself the residue which remained yet unconquered. To
this effect and purpose he ordained and appointed, and by a perpetual edict
commanded, that from that day forwards all those seven Realms should be
named by one only name England: and that all the inhabitants should name
themselves Englishmen. Egbert the first king of England.
And by this means he came readily and fully to the end of his desire. In
imitation of this Egbert, Fernand the second king of Arragon, and the fifth of
that name, king of Castile, seeing himself Lord of the greatest part of
Spain: and that there rested no more for him to gain save only Navarre and
Portugal, he employed all his forces and endeauours to obtain from the
Princes realms, and provinces of Spain, that which they refused, to wit, that
he might entitle and write himself King of Spain. With the like ambition and
desire, Philip his great graund-child, pretends that the Realms of Spain,
and now of late Portugal have constantly resolutely denied him, and which you
do give him so readily and so liberally. So that now I think you will
perfectly understand the cause wherefore Philip does write himself King of
Castile and of Leon, Castillians and Castilo what it means.

New Castile all those kingdoms, which the kings of Castile have gotten from
the Moors. The particular names of the kingdoms of new Castile: and when they
were recovered from the Moors.

Toledo first set at liberty, anno. 1086.


etc. For so the nations of Spain, and the Castillians themselves call him,
howbeit that you do make a jest and toy of it, not knowing how much it does
import them so to do, and therefore I hope that from henceforth you will by
these instructions both know your own ignorance and correct this your fault
and oversight.

We call them Castilians, which are natural and borne in the Realm of
Castile, and in those Realms which the kings of Castile (with the aid of the
Kings of Navarre, Arragon, and Portugal, and other Sovereign Lords of Spain)
have gotten and wrested out of the hands and possession of the Moors: all
which Realms we name ^y one only name, new Castile. Of these Realms, that
which was the shortest time in the power and puissance of the Moors was the
kingdom of Toledo, which was restored to liberty by Alphonsus the 6, called
the Emperor, in the year 1086, having bin left unto them, when Spain was
lost by King Roderick, in the year 714, so that by this account Toledo the
chief and metropolitan City of Spain, The reason wherefore Braga entitleth
her self Primate of Spain.
was in the possession of the Infidels by the space of 372 years. For this
cause the City of Braga in Portugal, Metropolitan of the Realm of Galicia,
and having been always maintained against the Moors by the Portugals, the
Inhabitants thereof (who at the time when they builded it, were called Galli
Bracchati) and where there have been Bishops successively from the beginning
of the primitive Church even till this time, did heretofore obtain the primacy
of Spain, and she does yet so entitle her self, against the consent and
liking of the Church of Toledo, which after it came to be restored to her
liberty, did again begin to revive and take her former title, and the
Archbishops of those places do yet at this day dispute and contend, whether of
them should have the pre-eminence.

Cordua was in the power of the Moors by the space of 522 years, for it was
restored in the year 1236, Cordua 2.
the 29 of June, on the Feast of the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul.

Murcia was in their possession by the space of 527 years. Murcia 3. University
of Salamancha founded, Anno 2141. Iaen 4.
For it was recovered in the year 1241, on which year also the University of
Salamanca was founded.

Iaen was under the Moors 529 years, and was restored in the year 1243.

Seuill having been held by them for the space of 535 years, was set at
liberty in the year 1248. Seuil 5.


Calis was under their command by the space of 555 years, and was
reestablished in the year 1269, Calis 6.
in the time of Jacob Aben Juceph King of Marocco.

Algizira having been in their subjection for 630 years, Algizira 7.
was delivered in the year 1344. For the recovery of this City, the people of
the Realms of Castile and of Leon, did grant and accord to give unto the King
Alphonsus the Iusticier as long as the siege should endure, the tribute which
is called Alca vala: which is a shilling upon the pound of all the Merchandise
which should be sold. The which tribute Alphonsus most unjustly and ambitiously
against the will of those peoples, did exact as long as he lived. In so much as
the kings his successors have not only ever since continued it, but they have
also augmented it, and they make them pay at this day one upon ten.

Gibraltar. 8.
Gibraltar, was held by the Moors for 748 years, and was recovered in the
year 1462.

Malega. 9.
Malega was under them 773 years, and was reconquered in the year 1487.

Granada was regained in the year 1492, and was the last city and realm
taken from the Mores, Granada. 10.
who had enjoyed it the space of 778.

This being known, it is no marvel, as I have written in this Treatise, that
the Castilians are descended of the Mores and Jews, (for these two peoples
live mingled pell mell together) and that the pronunciation of their language
is after the Morish fashion: seeing that the Mores have inhabited in that
country so many hundred of years, and do yet at this present possess and
occupy a great part of Castile.

Cities: the meaning thereof.
Cities in Spain, are those peoples wherein Bishops Seas are established. These
be also some cities which by particular privilege (albeit they be not
Metropolitanes nor heads of Bishoprics) do use this title and prerogative:
howbeit there be very few of them. Between a City and a Town, there is a
great difference, as well in authority, as in prerogatives, honors and
privileges. In Cities there are commonly Corrigidores, specially in Portugal,
who may be resembled to the Pretours and Governors of the ancient Romans,
which governed the provinces. One city has many towns, peoples, and
villages, which are subjects unto it, as well in temporal as spiritual
matters. In such sort, that the cities are as the heads, and the towns as the
members. For this cause when there happens any great affairs or common
revolt in Spain, the towns do always follow the party of that city whereunto
they are dependant, And to reduce any people into a city, the antiquity of
the place is more required then the greatness of it. There be many Cities
which are but meanly peopled, and Towns which are full and thick of people.
Valladolid, Medina del Campo, Madril, and Caceles in Castile, Santaren,
Abrantes, Setuuall, and Oliuenea in Portugal, are very great Towns, and
notably well peopled, and yet they surpass in greatness many of the Cities:
nevertheless, they are not for all that endowed with all these prerogatives,
neither are they called Cities. Valladolid and Santaren are so full of people,
that when in Spain we make comparison of the greatness of Cities and of
Towns, we say; Ciudad par ciudad, Lisbona en Portugal: Villa par villa,
Valladolid en Castilla: si quieres otra tal, busca Sentaren en Portugal, that
is to say: City for City, Lisbon in Portugal: Town for Town: Valladolid in
Castile: if you will find any other the like, seek Santaren in Portugal. It
is not many years since that King Philip has honored the said Town of
Val^adolid with the title of a City, Valladolid made a City, and Bishops Sea by
K. Philip.
and has made it an Episcopal Sea: and that was, both because Valladolid was
wonderful well peopled (as has been said) as also because it is one of the
most noble and chiefest Towns of Castile, full of great and rich buildings,
Churches, King Philip borne in Valladolid. The time of his nativity.
Monasteries, Colleges, principal Houses, and general Studies: and also
because his Majesty was borne in that Town the 22 day of May 1527, on a
Tuesday about four hours after noone.

The Towns in Spain are best peopled, Towns in Spain which they be.
which have within their limits and territories many Villages, hamlets, and
Houses, and have their jurisdiction limited and subjected to the Cities. True
it is, that there be some Towns, which are the heads of Baylife-wikes and
gouernements, as in Portugal, the Town of Santaren, of the which we spoke
before, and the Town of Tomar, which has 42 Towns depending of her
jurisdiction. These two Towns in Portugal do precede and have the
pre-eminence of the place before many Cities, in the public Assemblies of the
Estates of that Kingdom. The Town of Santaren precedeth and goes before 13
Cities, and is preceeded only of four, to wit, Lisbon, Coimbi^, Ebora, and
Puerto, which in Latin is called Ciuitas Portugallensis. Santaren in the time
of the Romans was called Julium Praesidium, and was a Court Royal, or (as
they call it in France, a Court of Parliament) and was a Colonie of the
Romans. Tomar also at the same time was called Nabantia, and was an ancient
City.

Now I suppose that I have sufficiently performed my promise, and satisfied
your desire, and so fare you well.

FINIS.

