To the right worshipful Master Christopher Hatton Esquier, Captain of the
Queens Majesty's Guard, and Gentleman of bir highness privy Chamber.
THAT noble Stoicke Seneca (right worshipful) to whom all the ancients past
yielded place and principality for Moral Philosophy, shut up in this short
sentence reasons of great substance, saying: Fortune is ever fleting, for she
never gives joy without heaviness, svveete without bitterness, rest
without travel, renoume without envy, and generally, no felicity without
some sequel of adversity. This I presently find verefied in myself, while
motioned by glad mind and duetifull good will to shroude this little labor
under the protection of your worships favor, I feel double fear to front
my proceeding: your noble worthy nesse and my bashful rudeness, which both
are repugnant to my humble desire: yet matching the first with the goodness
of your nature (compelled to encounter force with force) and mating the last
with the profoundnesse of my Author, I presume to present the same unto you,
entitled the Philosopber of the Court, and dedicated to his Lady a lover of
virtue. The name and dedicatio^ seems of some credit, but the circumstance
and conclusion I can not sufficiently commend. Great volumes have large
fields to march in, and so much the more laborsome to peruse: but if it
please your worship to tread over this little Treatise, I dare aduouch, you
shall find in it, both flowers and fruit (not to supply the scarcetie, but to
increase the plenty and pleasant purposes) of Courtly Philosophy. Wherein
as my ignorance shall eclipse or shadovve the vvorthynesse of the work:
Spread (I humbly pray) the gladsome beams of your favorable and well liking
cheer upon it: so shall you render to the reader my Author much betterd, make
him of other gentlemen Courtiers more accepted, my pen to further travel
encouraged, and my self in this enterprise most glad and pleased. Here some
curious man may control me for presuming to translate, professing (as
necessity compels) a harder condition, and say: a writer of a Soldier?
why? the pen and pyke do differ, Mars and Minerua are contrary, Bellona is
nothing pleased with books: yet Poets have often painted Pallas that Academicall
Gods to be armed with spear and shield. Time, and the intent well
employed, is not to be reproved. And Cicero pleading pro Planco says: Otij
non minus quam negotij ratio extare debet. Therefore to encounter any such
callendge, I enforce my best endeuer with the assured supply of your noble
favor, and remain for ever (in either fortune) proposse, your worships
humble Soldier.

George North.

10. Daniell.
THE buzzing Be and Spyder eke, forth of one bud done find
Both healthsome juice and venom vile, yet each contents his (...)
And among all things men choose the best, and done them daily use,
But good men vsen good things well, bad men done them abuse.
We know that fire and water bo^^, no ^retu^e can forbear,
And yet often times we see them both, how e they abused are.
By fiery flames and flowing floudes, we see much mischief fall.
As countries drownde, and cities burnd, my self have known them all:
And yet the Be, and best men eke, which use good things aright,
Deseruen praise by judgment mine, in spite of spiteful spite.
And now George North compare may well, with good men and with Be ^,
For he the worse does hate, and best does praise, as we may see
By book of his, which here we may, peruse and eke behold:
A frenchman strange, by North his t^yle an english tale has told,
To show what Philosophus is, if it be taken right,
And how by corrupt worldlymen, it is abused quite.
But N. I. knew his meaning is, that all things would be better,
If taken right, Philosophus, were from the greekish letter:
And that is, as I understand, divine wisdom to love,
And leave such wisdom as the world does daily to us move.
Wherefore O North my friendly friend, I must needs yield thee praise,
For that in virtue such I see thee seek to spend thy days.
William Hitchockes Gent.
THE pricking spur does keep the trampling steed in awa,
The haling horse is driven, with lashing whi^ to draw,
The ^earing Ass is forced, by brusing bat to toil,
The pearcing goade does make the painful Ox to moyle:
The goade, the whip, the bat, and spur, which only drive
To tend the painful path where virtue wonts to live,
Is praise: why then give praise (which is the good and spur,
The whip and bat whereby each does in virtue stur)
To him that did translate: thy self shall thereby gain
To force him for thy sake, to take much greater pain.
The Argument of the Book.
GReat strife has grown with elders sage in search of sovereign good,
The vviser sort deemd Nature it, but naught they understood:
Our Sovereign good framd Nature base, to him we thanks must yield,
We wrought self thrall, yet he in love made gracious Christ our shield.
But since they erred, and seeming grave mistoke good on this sort,
Give young men seaue for learnings sake to speak their minds in sport.
I take our sovereign good to be, to live in Court aright,
With prudent care to seek our gaints, of arts to have some sight*
In Justice to do no man vvrong, to give great thanks to vvin,
For Fame to crouch, or fight for right, shift poor, shift friend, shift kin,
To temper talk and deeds with such as further may our fetch,
With haughty lokes to shun the laws, and grasp within our reach*
Philosophers would think it nevve, but reason wills them stay,
For they have spoke: indifferent doom must bear the bell away.
The Prologue, or Authors Epistle, to his Lady, a lover of virtue.
I Shall now see most noble Lady, whither the doubtful opinion that you have
long time had of me: which I have neither been hythertoo able by reasons or
excuse to remove, may by the troth it self make you of a contrary judgment.
For it is not once, twice, or thrice that you have reproved me, to be a
promiser, a deceyuer, and such a one as ye perceived (as you told me your
self) to be worthy of little or no credit at all: Notwithstanding that in all
my promises, or any other ways without promise, wherein my humble service
might be most agreeable and best liked of you, I have not failed, either in
desire, or execution. But this is none other than the natural disposition of
you Gentlewomen, still to pick such quarrels: when (according to your good
custom) you desire any thing, be it never so wayghtie, weak, or daungerouse:
your longing for the same is so great, that without consideration, of the
oportunitye, the easiness, or the possibility, you think on nothing else,
but on the necessity to have it done. And if the end succeed not as you
wish, you lay the fault upon your servants, whom afterward you call liars
and promisers. Yet whatsoever I say, though it be reported to be a common
fault in women, I will not mainteyne the same to be in you: For knowing your
noble mind above others, settled in so lofty a seat, as seeing and vewing a
far off the small faults, errors, and abuses, wherein their Ignorance may
be wrapped: your wisdom I nothing doubt, is able well enough to avoid it:
being exempted from the common sort, and contrary too such waywarde
conditions. I will then persuade my felfe, that such reproach (if it may so
be called) comes from a good mind, and of good will, being sure that you
know me otherwise toward you. And therefore by the way have said it,
rather to advertise me, tha^ that I should seem such to you, or you account
so of me, but rather because I should become such a one, even as it often
fares with those, that being in fear, commonly complain before they feel
any grief. Yet can I not content my self with this persuasion, seeing that my
affection seems not to be so entier lie known unto you, while ye make so
little account of it. Therefore to give you better testimony of that you are so
doubtful to believe, and to the end that by this argument, you may hope for
better assurance hereafter, of that which (it may be) ye suspect. For (I
desire rather to satisfy you, than my self, though I have iuster cause too
suspect you, than you me) after my departure from Paris, expelling and chasing
from me sundry fantasies, by the absent remembrance of your so good a will,
which ordinary presence would not suffer: I enterprised this travel, to
write this little treatise unto you, packing up in this so small a volume, the
delightful instructions of Philosophy, and manner how to live: in the which
we passed this melancholic time of winter, where, and in what company you
know: mingling our other common pastimes, with this Noble discourse. I am not
ignorant of the ferue^tnesse of your desire, to understand the troth in all
things: for when as sometimes being with you, between our selves, I would
assaye to be come a good Orator: you by importunate mean, have constrained me
to become a Philosopher. Young years meetest for the study of Philosophy.
And I pray you who are meeter to Philosophy: that is to search the knowledge
of God, and of man, to know who we are, where we are, wherefore we are, and
how we should govern and guide our lives one with another, than our
younger people? Who by reason of green years and small experience, having not
yet their judgments certain or settled, but wild and rash, and till the scum
and filth of youthful heat be boiled out of them, are but little profitable
to the common wealth. O what a laudable custom were it, and commodious to any
country, if the administration of common wealth, were not committed and put on
such as are young, rude, and of no experience: and that such in no wise should
govern or give counsel, till they were thoroughly tried and approved. Then the
people should not endure so much danger, and they in applying some pain to
discretion, should in the end, be most profitable to themselves: For it would
be a great contentment to their life (after experience had) and specially,
their old age would not be so melancholy, angry, impacient, and waywarde, in
digesting all things evil. For Experience n aches age ^asie.
what made Cato the elder, as Cicero in his book de Senectute, says, to bear
his years so patiently, too be so pleasant. and well disposed an old man,
and (which is more marvelous) to be joyful and merry in young and youthful
company, but the great knowledge, and experience he had in all things? I feel
my self to stray from my first intent, and by little and little to fall from
my purpose: It is then requisite for youth, to use and acquaint themselves to a
solitary and contemplate life, not as Hermites in the wilderness, or like
Monks in the Cloisters: but such a sure and diligent mean, as they may be
capable, to inform, and instruct themselves in time to all good things: So
that when the spirit is thus framed and taught, and the furious flame of youth
put out: they may the sooner and better exercise the life active, and then take
upon them, to travel for the common wealth of their Country. If my head and
bearde were somewhat gray in silver show answerable to this cause, I would
make an inuectiue, and declame against this foolish, brutish, and unbridled
youth, which delights not but in unprofitable matters, and void of reason,
never regarding nor following other guide than Carelessness, accounting it
shame, and reproach to be seen or thought to do any thing for good purpose.
And (if you will noble Lady, pardon me privately to reprove you) I cannot
wonder enough to see, that among you worthy Damsels, being (as you are) the
judges, Ladies are the patrons and preseruers of the privileges of youth.
patrones and preseruers of the privileges of youth: how you can commonly
approve and allow those unprofitable actions, in doltes and beasts of no
courage, sometime proceeding of an evil nature: and yet they have such place
with you, that being in your Court men lawded and glorious flatterers, you
rejoice with them, and equally favor them, as pleasant and worthy servant.
It would very well become (as it seems unto me) young men, to employ this
liberty, and pleasant time of youthful years, in the knowledge of virtue,
and in other commendable exercises of the body, as wrestling, wherein is showed
both valor and virtue: To the end that being so experimented, feeling their
own strength, and coming too man's state, they need not any longer to learn
how they ought to live. For so soon as a man commes either to serve the common
wealth, or to have care of his household: he should no more be a scholar, but
rather an instructor. Who if he will after break his brains about
Philosophy, neglecting his charge, and regarding not his family, Plato
wills, he should be turned to play with nuttes among boys, and whipped with
rods among children. And for this purpose, I desire you noble Damsel, to
read one piece in Plato of Gorgias, beginning with this sentence (for there he
teaches, why, how, where, and when Philosophy is to be used,) Philosophy
says he, is an excellent thing and very seemly, so that it be used
moderately, soberly, and in due time of years: wherein if any plunge
themselves too deep, it destroys them utterly. It may seem by this, that
Plato reproues indifferently, the perfect knowledge of Philosophy: yet truly he
neither despises nor disprayseth it, but so far as it is unprofitable and
hinders us from our other needful affairs. For since that all sciences were
invented for the help of man, and as much for the conservation of the Soul,
the body and goods, as consequently to intertayne a society, company, and
fellowship among men: To what purpose then, do any break their brains in
their studies, if it be not for profit to themselves, or benefit to some
others? Considering therefore that you have your wit at liberty, rouing at
will, and treading your pleasant steps at randon, where best likes your
youthful years to carry you (though it somewhat yeldeth to natural affection)
follow I pray you your first intent, and there shall want no good will in me,
seeing I prepare my self to matters of greater importance than this, and other
matters also, but that your desire shall be satisfied. Yet I know that this
word Philosophy does sound so hateful in the ears of many, though some
false and evil opinion they have of Philosophy too them unknown: that they
will think it strange and absurd to pervert or mar (for so ^hey term it) so
excellent a perfection of nature, as is in you, with so melancholic opini^ns.
Therefore this I will say: seeing they neither know nor hate Philosophy, but
only for ^he name, let us leave the word, and speak no more of it: but let
us say, that you do learn how to live in the world: which all persons do
covet too know, and yet too live in the world is no other thing than the same
which we call or term Philosophy, as we will prove hereafter, wherein, it
would grieve me, (following my purpose) if you and I, should so much use our
judgments, and with such hot affection, that we forget to know our selves,
and so make us mockeries and laughingstockes to the world. I think it not
good to have my house of a tun as Diogenes had: nor to scratch out my eyes as
Democritus did: or die for hunger as he that had his Malissa, the better too
know and understand Philosophy. But I commend and praise him, who making good
ohere, loving good wine, and seeking good fellowship, can by the way
contemplate and mark the manner and living of every one: and consider of those
that do both good and evil, the vantage of either. In thus using the mother of
all Sciences, Philosophy the mother of Sciences.
she will never make any heavy nor angry or as (some report) by inordinate
study melancholy: but she may draw them from many and sundry follies, that
smell more brutishe than manly. And if any will say that without this, every
man may live: I dare affirm, that he is so far from reason, as his opinion
deserves no answer. As for the pleasure, desire, and co^tentment that comes of
it, thus much may be said: that if in the morning, when you attire your self
among your maidens, the clear crystal, and good looking glass, delights
you, in showing the perfect Image of your outward proportion: how much more
should you rejoice to behold and see your self in this Science, to know
what is your life, what it ought too be, what you are, and what is the
substance of eue^ie thing? Hereby you shall learn, how the wife ought too
govern and behave her self, with her husband: it shows how you shall well
instruct and guide your householde: your ^ittle private common wealth shall be
so neat and polished, as nothing better: you shall know ^owe to use your self
toward strangers: and ^ou may be assured by this, without reproof ^o do any
thing freely, for infamy and slaun^er shall no way torment you. What would
^ou wish or desire more? On the contrary, without this knowledge, you
remain in suspense and doubt, like too a traueler being in the open field
and pressed on his journey, not knowing his way: you have no other guide, than
that blind beast of common and popular judgment, who (as ignorant and
inexpert in all things) says and does one while one thing and an other while
an other. For what is more inconstant than Ignorance? Thus being bound to this
foolish, variable, and common opinion, and having no other reason or council,
but to follow others: you shall soon understand in what miseries and care you
live. Knowing therefore your so good affection, and to the end to deliver you
out of his prison and miserable darkness of Ignorance, I have written to you
this little treatise, altogether rude and impolished, as a w^nderer through the
country: In the which you shall breefely see the sum of that I ever thought
in Philosophy: wherein the ancient and Sages past reposed their sovereign
bounty: Then how it is in these days disguised and masked, grounded only on
man's opinions and not on Nature: And last, you shall amply find (yet not so
much as I gladly would) what I think of this new Philosophy, which is the
order and manner of living in these days* In writing whereof I have played
Democrates, and applied the whole too a pleasant conclusion. Therefore when you
understand the one and the other, you will use it (I know) so discretely, that
it shall not let you from your necessary causes, of more importance. And if in
the discourse of the book, I speak more uncivilly and boldly than is meet or
convenient to your excellency: It may please you payse those words and
sentences, in the balance apt and convenient to the matter here treated,
which has often and in many places made me forget the sweet and gentle style
that ye might desire. To conclude, I humbly request you to receive this my
little labor, as the fruit of your own possession and inheritance: whereby I
shall seem to have gained great profit, if it please you to preserve it and
close it in the coffer of your gracious favor: wherewith I have nothing too
wish or desire, but the immortality of the same.

The Philosophy of the Court.
THe ancient Philosophers past whose moral judgments were allowed for
doctrine in their time, did all affirm that nature has given us nothing evil:
and if in our life we would follow, or do no more than we are naturally
inclined unto, and that which she prescribes, we should never do any thing
but well. But if we grow deeper into consideration of the cause, and come
nearer the quick, which they could not so well attain to, as we may (who
have our eyes open and cleared by him from whence proceeds this nature, of
which they speak so much, and which took that name through ignorance of him:
For who is it else that we should call Nature, if we believe God to be the
creator of all things?) It will manifestly appear, that thi^ ^entence is truer
than they think for. They say, the instinct of nature, suffices only to live
will: and we likewise affirm the sam^: yet they know not that the well living
whereof we speak, is perfiter than their Philosophical living, which in
respect of ours is most unlike well living. Notwithstanding we affirm as
they, and agree with them, that nature has given us sufficient aid and help
too live well. But to the end we enter not intoo error, or seem to deprave
God of due glory which I speak for his honor: I will not say that this
nature which I now speak of, and the philosophical reason is all one. For the
nature whereof I now write, is the first nature, not corrupt or filthy, or
blind, but such as knew no sin, nor tasted of any other thing, than the
blessing of God. This I am sure has no part in evil: I call that evil
according to the balance and measure wherewyth we try good and evil at
these days, which is much iuster and harder than the trial of Philosophers.
But since it bath been corrupted and touched by our enimye, it still abides
lame and imperfect: And (that is worse) it cannot acknowledge what it was at
the first, nor conceive from whence it took beginning, except it bell ightned
by a spiritual clearness, which these Philosophers had not. Even so this
second Nature soyled in fylthe as she is, is the same that the Philosophers
so much speak of and mean (for they knew no better) but this is nothing to
satisfy Gods justice, or the good life required of us by him: but is rather a
hurt and hinderance too the same. Yet otherwise to make a man just, wise,
grave, and virtuous, among men, which is the accomplishing of the precepts of
Philosophy, nature can do all. For the spirit of man can perceive no
imperfitenesse in this nature being so spoiled, ignorant and weak: yet having
this understanding and judgment (which is abiding in this second Nature)
that God has not made any thing evil: and believing that this second
Nature is the first, not corrupted but made of God as in deed it is, and that
there is no other: he weenes all to be well, and supposes all operations
proceeding from this to be perfect good, and estemes whatsoever is done by the
same for virtue. This is (as I conjecture) all the science and ignorance of the
Philosophers. This is the knowledge of our grave and sage fellows of the
world, that have so arrogantly vaunted of this great dame virtue. These are
the causes that y^ laws civil, which is part of their Philosophy, do suffer
some things repugnant to gods ro^mandeme^t, as keeping of Co^cubines, to repel
by foree, (which they say is natural) any prescriptio^ with brech of faith, and
such like We will therefore speak as they, and with them, but with an other
intent: not entreating so much of their true virtue, as of any other disguised
and masking virtue, which men do follow and honor in stead of the right: to
the end the world may know their double folly and ignorance: for having found
this last and new virtue, they have not that they suppose: and though they
had it, yet should they have nothing.

Nature therefore (to speak as a Philosopher) Nature is the mother of all good
things.
is the mother of all good things, and the same which prouokes us to virtue.
Then it must needs follow, that we are naturally borne to do good, and that
she sows in our minds, certain small sparckles of good will: which if we
quench by wicked custom of doing evil, we ought not to imputo the same to
nature, for none can justly say that naturally any is evil. These small
sparks are stirring sharp pricks, that still do move and encourage us, to do
those things which are good of themselves. So that after the first provoking
motion which comes of nature, the alone and only goodness of those causes,
is the final end which draws ^s thereunto. This is the same that Aristotle
treates of in the first of his Ethikes, who persuades what virtue is, and how
it may be known, saying: Si quispiam rerum agendarum est finis, quem nos
propter seipsam expetimus, constat hunc talem finem summum bonum, ipsumque,
optimum esse. If there be in our doings any end, the which we desire for it
self: it confirms that this end is the sovereign good, and that in the same
consists virtue. Wherefore we must believe that if any other intent or
cause make us to do any act, than such as beseems honesty, and
notwythstanding the same seem lawful and laudable, yet is it not good. Virtue
will be loved only for her own sake, which is a point wherein many (but of
mean understanding) though of sufficient judgment, are often deceived: when
they see a man of good courage, enforce himself with great pain to do any
thing that seems good in itself: as to help his neighbor, or well to serve
his master: or to defend his subjects: so soon as they know it done, they
straight esteem him an honest man: nothing considering why he did it: either
for reputation to be a good man, or to be better recompensed than be deserved,
whereby he might defraude another well deseruer, or for fear of reproach if he
should not do it: by which it may appear unto us, that those works which to us
seem best are nothing worth, we must not judge any work according to ye show,
but according to the cause and intent of the doer. For (as Aristotle says)
virtue and vice consist in the intent, and not in the work. Therefore we must
be more careful to beware that ye show of good deceive us no more, tha^ the
appearance of evil. For a masked evil, is a double mischief: and no evil is so
dangerous, as prefered and well seeming goodness which is called hypocrisy.
Wherein Cicero took some pain in the first book of his Offices, at the end
of the Chapter, beginning: Sed ea animi elatio, etc. speaking of magnani^itie,
where he says, that it is rashly and tauntingly spoken* that we should take
in hand and interprise any hard, dangerous and worthy attempt, without desire
of glory: for that there are few found (as he affirms) who after they have
done any thing valiantly or worthily, are not glad to be praised, esteeming
this pomp^ of rural brute, a triumphant reward of their well doing. But I
believe Cicero then thought of him self: for supposing that some knew him very
covetous of honor, and yet would seem neble minded and virtuous, he would not
altegither separat this desire of glory from magnani^ity.

The hope of prai se should encourage the evil to do well, and to exercise the
same, by which exercise they may accustom themselves to virtue, that by little
and little they may become good men: and when they are become such, the love of
virtue only will make them do well, and no cause else. We desire and love many
other things, not for y^ love of themselves but for ye love of others, as money
to be merry with, and health to be at our ease: so that having both money and
health, and wanting our ease, we should not be satisfied. But virtue is of
greater value, and of more price with us: for she alone pleases us: and we
desire to do well, only for that it is good to do well, and to none other end.
Nature the^ makes us love such things as ar good* and this love by her, is so
firmly fixed in us, yt howsoever nature is corrupted and altered, yet is she
still inclined and drawn to yt which seems to her best: and this sembla^ce
daily follows the quality and condition of nature. For as long as she is
sound and not corrupted, so long good things in their perfection seem also
good, and follow her. On the contrary part, when nature is corrupted, reason
and judgment sleep, lust and ape^it govern, black seems white, and evil good:
the wickedst works seem to her good, she catches hold on them, she follows
them and does as much mischief as may be, and so makes a virtue of that which
in deed is vice. This is the same that the Poet meant, saying: Decipimur specie
recti, The appearance of good deceyueth us, not for that the good changes, or
shows it self at any time otherwise than it is: but our natural judgment
being corrupt and blind, so mistakes it. Since therefore the fragilitie and
weakness of our nature is so great, that unawares to us, sleepingly, and as in
a dream, she changes hirselfe: if we have not diligent regard (for this
world is no other than full of allurements to vice) she being once altered,
the semblance and opinion likewise alters, and new affections enter, to serve
this new appetite, as it fares with some king entering into his new kingdom,
where prowess is not used, and the wandering mind carried indifferently either
one way or other: and therefore it is commonly said that virtue is the center
or midst of vice: for none can so little decline to any side, but falls into
one vice or other. We ought then to be very careful to nourish and maintain
this nature in her simplicity, eue^ as she is, before she be more decayed, and
to prop her up on every side, lea^t she reele bither or thither. I call it
reeling or staggring, when by our negligence and ignorance, we suffer our
selves to be overcome with every fond opinion, conceyt or manner of life that
takes us in the head, and to give her armor and weapons, as well to defend as
to vanquish her enemies that seek to make her yield, which we may easily do by
ye true knowledge of good from evil, and not by fraud and frequentation of the
world. Or rather (if it be tolerable in me to tread a little out of the
Philosophers tract, and speak the truth) we ought to enforce our selves, to
deface and extinguish the vice of the second nature by faith, and to reenter
into y^ pureness and cleanness of the first: which the Philosophers (as I
have said before) knew not, as we do, and better may, if we open the gate to him
that says unto us: Behold I am at your door and knock thereat, to them that
open I will enter, and eat with them and they with me.

There is nothing that does sooner change the affection and condition of man's
life: or (to speak more plainly) our nature, tha^ company. This similitude and
resemblance, that all men take one of another by the capable conceyt of reason,
is of so great force that like as ye more sort be, the rest will seek to be like
unto them. And though some delight to be contrary in manner of living, to the
place and country they are in, the reason is, they have seen others do the
same where they have been, which they follow: I deny not, but among many there
are found, that without the example of others, do strange things of
themselves, not accustomed any where: and if such acts ^ honest and not
repugnant to reason, they are to be commended though the multitude millike
them: who esteem that only to be well and wisely done, which is most common
among them, and most people use: counterpaysing virtue and wisdom, with small
trifles, supposing such as govern themselves contrary to their order of life,
to be fools: not considering which government is best. To eschew this public
reproufe, the auncientes have said, we must live according to the manner of the
Country that we are in, which is to be understood only in outward gesture
and indifferent causes. For they will us not, if in what Country soever we be,
is used any custom contrary to virtue or reason, to approve and allow the
same. Therefore we desire still to follow others in their actions, as though
virtue remained in the vulgar peoples doings, when there is nothing in ye world
so ignorant, so blind, and so indiscreet, as the people: who without judgment,
wanting all consideration, and clean void of reason, do pursue and approve
their first determinations: and that if their doings, orenterpryses fall out
well, it is fortune: even as a blind man should wander in a dark unknown
place, none would say he did it by clearenesse of his sight, but at adventure.
For this cause, the laws have forbidden seditious companying and unlawful
assemblies, for that the most part of men are evil, perverse, and subject to
their appetites and foolish affections, so as the terrible and monstrous
meeting of the vulgar sort, do commonly conspyre, and debate of mischeenous
matters. Cicero pleading for Cn. Plancus, was accused of public bryberie, for
that in the election of the Ediles, his part was preferred before one named
Lateranensus, a man notable virtuous, and of an honorable house: after he had
showed in popular election, the favor of the people to be more of value than
the dignity of y^ person, which they regard not: there is (says he) neither
counsel, judgment, reason, or discretion in the people: and our predecessors
were ever of this opinion, that the devices, determinations, and deliberations
of the common multitude should rather be dissimuled tha^ allowed. Bring then
c^nuersant in the world, and familiar in worldly causes, approving the vulgar
opinion of others, we shall easily accustom our selves to do that is evil.
For so soon as the small sparks of virtue be extinguished in us, and that we
abandon or leave to follow the fashion of the Court, we shall become expert
masters in evil: so apt and capable we are to learn it (as Iuuenal says)
Quoniam dociles imitandis Turpibus ac praais omnes sumus.

This custom to do evil, and thus to live, so changes and alters our
nature, not knowing good from evil, as it makes us neither to covet the one or
shun the other: we account good, and prefer to be the sovereign good, that
which best pleases us, and is allowed good in the world: and in the felicity
and delight of men, we repose and determine our virtue. For the v^rtue of man
consi^^eth not in that which is only good of itself, following the opinion of
Philosophy: but in that which seems to them good, and is no other than a
certain manner of living, or rule in life. And since it is diverse, according to
the diversity of Countries and people, as in times past were sundry sects of
Philosophers, we will treat of that which is most allowed, and embraced (for
that it is more masked and disguised than the others) which is Courtly life.
The knowledge whereof, we may aptly call in these days Philosophy. And this I
mind to treat of, because that they that know it and can use it, are counted
wise men and Philosophers.

The definition of this Philosophy.
Our new and moral Philosophy may thus be defined: A certain and sound
judgment, how to live according to the good grace and fashion of the Court. I
am sure this definition cannot be pleasing to every one: for some professers
of Arts, which peradventure more subtiller and according to the Stoikes manner,
touch things nearer, will say unto me, that the same order of living can be
nothing less, or farther unlike to the property of Philosophy: for all
Philosophy consists in the knowledge of secret and hidden causes, and in
that which no ^ye can discern. But to live Courtly, or according to the manner
of the Court, consists in certain small humanities, and chiefly in outward
apparances: whereunto I will answer, that the minor is not true: for though a
Courtier may be known by his countenance gesture, and behavior (which is our
Philosopher) as they may all other kind of people, yet the true science
consists not only in the same. But rather it is impossible for any to govern
themselves so well, to have a Courtly grace and entertainment, if they
perfectlye understand not the opinions of the Court. For (as their master
Aristotle says) all actions and operations proceed of true understanding and
knowledge: and how may we be singular in that which we understand not? None
therefore ca^ be a good Courtier, unless he understand what pleases best and
is most liked at ye Court: and to give Beso los manos, after the Spanishe
manner, to embrace with low reverence, and to make a brave countenance, with
other such like, suffiseth not: as I may aptly apply for example, our
masters of Arts, who have mouths to kiss, arms to embrace, and faces to
countenance, and can do all this well: yet were it strange to see one of them
in his old girded gown furred with white, his burnt pantofles, and his night
cap of freese, to fall on dancing and sporting among fair Ladies. How he
would court it with them, how he would please and entertain them, and how he
would ravish their bartes or allure them? when neither his wanton look, or
smiling cheer, his humble courtesy, nor low embracing, (though they would
suffer it) would serve him among them* if he be reputed wise, or well learned.
And why so? Because those reuere^ces are not well pleased* and beseem not a man
of judgment and knowledge, too please such company. For if he did, he
would be otherwise apparelled, and muster in gallanter manner: he would
frame a courtly countenance, and seem gentle, modest and pleasante, preparing
his sprightes to speak and understand nothing but merry and gladsome purposes.
And thus finely furnished with his little Page in place of his poor and ragged
scholar, he might peradventure be welcome. Let us then mayneteyne and hold
this for a maxim or principle, that to govern our selves according to the
Court, we ought and must have the true understanding of the opinions of the
Court, and virtues of the same, which obtained, will make us in all our
actions to be comely, honest, and ventuouse, and to be esteemed grave, wise,
and sound of judgment: from the which proceeds this Decorum generale,
general comeliness, that Cicero speaks so much of in his Offices: and
says, that it may better be conceived in imagination, than uttered by
cunning: which we may now term the good grace of every one, whereof we
will treat more hereafter. So that if any would indeuer them selves to do
such things, and want the true knowledge hereof, they shall fail of their
purpose, while supposing to win honor and praise, they may cause themselves
to be derided of every man, as is commonly seen in these rude youths, and
skillesse minions of the Court, great companions and woers of the City,
Counterfaite Courtiers which simper it in outward show, making pretty
mouths, and marching with a stalking pace like Cranes, spetting over their own
shoulder, speaking lispingly, and answering singingly, with perfumed gloves
under their girdels their buskins pinkt and cut, their short clokes, their
little cappes, their hear curled after y^ manner of Cesarea, sometimes a little
long lock turned up like a pigs tail between their temples and the ear: And
in this attire, with a word or two of French, Italian, or Spanish, which they
carry in their budgettes, they dare devise with any noble person of the affairs
of the realm, and pronou^cing with a majesty, how the king has showed great
favor to such a gentleman. Of these it may be said, as heretofore was said
of the Philosopher, he has a fair bearde* shave him, and take away all his
wisdom. So take from these minions these kind of habits or apparel which I
have described, and you shall find them beasts, doltes, loutes and clownes.
But though ye do not, those, whose eyes are of reasonable judgment, can
discern them well enough.

AFter we have thus given the definition of our Philosophy: and showed both
the argument and reasons, we have to call these causes so defined Philosophy:
It seems very meet, to speak of the effect thereof, which is virtue. For the
end of Moral Philosophy, is grounded only on virtue: whereunto none can
attain, but by the mean of this science. And I believe without searching any
further, or making so many distinctions of Genus and Species, as the over
scrupulous and curious have done, that in taking one part of our former
definition, we have the same of our virtue. The which by a certain and short
division, in form of a description we shall plainelyer and better show
hereafter. Virtue is a manner of living according too the manner of the Court,
and differs from the Philosophy of the Auncientes, in that their virtue (as
I have said before) is to live according to the iustinct of Nature: and ours is
too live according too the manner of the Court. And even as it was aunciently
affirmed, that if we follow Nature and do no more than our natural reason
shows us, we should never do evil: so, if we follow the manner and
customs, in due and true order of the Court, we shall ever do that is
seemelye, good, and well. For who is so rash, foolish, or mad, that will
say any thing is euylidoone, which is done by a Gentleman Courtier, well
instructed. May we not then call them beasts, and doltes, which are ignorant
of the price and valewe of our Courtly virtue? It makes me remember the old
Atticque, who understood not the phrases of an eloquente Orator, when he
spoke a word most meet and well placed too the behoof of the poor beast:
he scroned him for his labor. The property of ignorance is too brutishe and
intolerable, who as they are not content with that they cannot do or devise
any thing of themselves: so will they not regard or esteem that for well which
the wise and learned do say. Hereof it is that Cicero speaks so much in his
oration pro A. Cluen. nighe too the myddest. Therefore seeing the Court and
Courtlye countenance is the only rule whereby and whereupon we must guide
and frame our life, it is not to be marvelled at, if good wits wellborne,
and desirous too attain to this perfection of virtue. do earnestlye ask, and
diligently inquire of comers and goers from and too the Court for news:
What do they? What say they? What manner of living is there now among them?
What sorts of apparel, what sportes, what fashyons newlye forged? who is
best welcome, most regarded, and in greatest estimation? who is most brave?
who is the trimmest dauncer, the pleasantest deuyser, and the best vawter?
what authors are most allowed, what books read they, what songs carries the
brute? And a thowsande other like demaundes. For how should we else now
know the mean of living with the good precepts and doctrine of the ancient
Philosophers paste, and chiefly of those that are not written, or of such
whose books are partlye lost, as Pythagoras, Socrates, Cratippus, and others,
and of the Noble and valiant Romans: if it were not had from tellers of tales
and caryers of news. Leave of then to reprove our English men, and to say,
that it were requisite and needeful to place certain persons in highwaies,
that should have none other occupation, but to report and tell news too those
that pass by: why should their vehement desire (not curiosity) to understand
news, which I greatly allow, be any way reproved or touched? And even as the
good and famous lives of our elders, whose examples do greatly stir us up
to virtue, would be profitable for us, if by writing we should know them,
(which is the principal argument whereby Cicero shows the benefit and
utility of letters, in pleading for the Poet Archias) so how could so many
wise and honest Philosophers of the Court, serve too the example of those that
never saw them: were it not for the reporters and blasers of news? And
further such reports encourages, even those that are spoken of too endeavor
themselves too do better: for the Philosophye whereof we treat, imports
not the same that the Auncientes doothe: who would have us, without any hope
of honor too embrace and follow virtue for the love of her self: but that
we should or ought too live virtuously, to the end to obtain* honor and
reputation, as well too our selves, as to our posterity, whereof it is said
Virtutis merces gloria: Honor is the guerdon and reward of Virtue. And
truly I believe, if other testimony might have bin had of Ciceros conscience
(whom I name so often for the excellency of the man) than by his own writings:
we should find, that in troth honor made him attempt and execute many things,
especially he above all the other Romans: which it appears he could not
altogether so covertly conceal, by this place last alleged. What shall I say
of poor Ovid, when he was in exile in that barbarous country of Scythia near
the Sea coast? having there no company that would commend him when he had made
any verses, as they did when he was at Rome in his bravery and full of prche
conceytes? he had there no longer courage to do any thing, for his pleasant
vain left him, as he does excellently write to Seuerus de Ponto.

Impetus ille sacer, qui vatum pectoranutrit
Qui prius in nobis esse solebat, abest
The heavenly force that fraughtes with store
of skill, each Poets prudent head
(Which homely harbor eft before
was wont with me to take) is fled.
The reason hereof follows after.
Excitat auditor st^dium, laudataque virtu^
Crescit, and immensum gloriacalcar habet.
Hi^ m^^ cui recitem? etc.
The ear to study sturres,
Each virtue praised grows,
Each glory gayneth spurs
As gained glory flows.
Let us conclude, that the ^ommoditie of true reporters and faithful cou^ters
of news, is great, necessary and profitable to good life. But to return to
our purpose, the virtue whereof we speak, is wholly set and placed in the
court: even as the same of the au^cients is placed in nature: which we may
more better and perfitlier understand, if in following the precepts and order
of such Philosophers as are least scrupulous or preci^e, we divide it into
four hyndes* as Wisdom, Justice, Magnanimiste, and Temperance, which are
the four fountains or springs from whence proceeds the perfection of
^onestie. And though they be so well lincked together, that the one can not go
without the other (for who will call any virtuous, be they never so profounde
and wise, if they be not true and just?) and that the four together and not one
alone, make a man to be accounted wise: yet the division and particion is not
altogether unprofitable, to the end that by ^ certain disposition so framed,
we may the easilyer judge to what part or place of bonestie every action
ought to be referred, to instruct the rude and learners. For in all sciences,
it suffices not alone to understand the Art: but also we ought to have the
Method to teach as Cicero says, de le gibus. Non fol^^ scire (...) est, sed
quaedant est ars etiam docendi* It is better therefore to speak distinctly,
and by order of every one of these several kinds (whereof virtue is composi^
^s of an harmony) than by indiscreet order or rash confusion, to speak
generally of virtue.

Yet before we enter into private or particular judgment of virtue, and the
better to findethe ^ay^ into this pleasant Garden, where grosset^ that great
and fair tree in whose top ^^^ is placed: it shall be very (...) we keep one
pathe, as upon a planke or brooge, and ^olde this for a principal poyute that
follows. The Auncientes among other precepts of their Philosophy: the
^^silyer to set forth and make known their virtue, would at the beginning
give this for a maxim, Nos^^^^ ipsum: know thy self, affirming, that if by
this mean a man once knew himself, the should find something in him like
to the Gods: the which participation with the deity, ought to bridle him
with shame from doing evil, and prick him forward to do well. And there is in
this short sentence, and under these two words, much matter of great efficacy
and force: for the better understanding whereof, I will discharge myself by
Cicero, in the end of his first book of laws. And whereas ours Philosophy
springs from an other fountain than theirs which proceeds only out of
nature, and ours of the contentmente and pleasure of men: So are the ways
sundry to find the diversity of these two. I think it good therefore that to
come to this perfection of our virtue, in stead of knowing ourselves, we ought
to see and know the world* for after a p^rfite judgment of the whole, we
shall the better understand one part. And when we have the knowledge of sundry
fashions of living* the contrariety of some, and the di^orsitie of others, it
gives an entire and true understanding of this: and further, amongst all other
the excellency of this will s^ mightily draw, and so strongly allure good
wits and gentle courages, that all other orders of life l^^t and shaken off,
they only will follow this, which is the fashions of the Court. But to the
^nde it may be understood, what I call seeing of the world, it is not to
mount on horseback^, and ride from hence to Paris, and from thence to Rome,
from Rome to Mount Synay, from Mount Synay to seek S. Patrikes Purgatory,
and from thence to the Antipodes, and so to the Canibales. For to see the
world, is not to see many buildings or countries, or to pass sundry Seas,
though it be some what to the purpose, and that by it may partly be known the
same I speak of: yet I mean, seeing of the world is to understand the
custom, living, and manners of sundry nations, with their properties and
faculties, and the conversation they use one to the other. And thus may we do
and not travel far for it, as being in some famous and notable City
(whereunto is great resort of diverse stra^ngers) we may make a perfect
impression in our myn^^s of that we^ see, and sometimes, it is otherwise
attained unto by reading in books. The proof whereof is perceived by sundry,
whereof some have past most part of the world, and mustred in all the Ca^pes
that have bin in many years, they an accounted to us the platfor^es of
Castles, ^arts, and Churches, ^he situation of (...), the dis^^iption of
countries, and other notable things, as much as is possible to ^^ t^ld^, and as
the eye may at any ^i^^ f^^: others that h^^s their whole life time remaynes
at the Court, at London, at Paris, at V^nice, at R^ome, at Lions, at ^ntwery,
and such frequented Cities, celebrated with mest resort of people: are
notwithstanding very beasts, and have no more knowledge than a poor peasant,
which never was ^^t of the sight of his parish steeple, saving that they can
play on the bytte a little better, and march more delicately and stately. The
reason is, for that the one sort are so abashed and astonished at the sudden
change of those neweities and rare devises they see in strange countries,
which seems to alter in a moment, that the judgment of their ^^rightes is
thereby so troubled, as it cannot conc^^^e the perfection of any thing right:
where at they are so lightly moved, as they resemble brainelesse fools, that
run so fast through the ^^reat they regard not what they see, where they are,
nor what place it is they be in. And the others are so accustomed with y^ sight
of ^ne only thing, that this custom and familiarity of daily seeing it, does
so weary and dull their minds, that they take no he de of them, (...) or
accounting more of it any way at all, than of that they never saw, Hereof it
is, that Cicero speaks so much in the. 11. book de Natura Deoru^, giving
this reason, why the Atheistes did not acknowledge y^ there was but one God by
his works, seeing the heavens, the planets and stars, the earth, the elements,
and other wonderful works of his, saying: Sed assiduitate quotidiana and
consuetudine oculorum assuescunt animi, neque admirantur, neque requirunt
rations earum rerum, quas semper viderunt, perinde quasi nouitas ipsa nos
magis, quam magnitudo reru^ debeat ad exquirendas causas excitare. Which is to
say: that our senses are so dull and glutted, with that our eyes do daily see
and behold, as it is no marvel to us, neither do we consider how it co^mes
to pass, or how it was made, nor who is the cause, as though the rareness
rather than the greatness or excellency of any thing should make us the
more to wonder. It is then the mind and imagination of man only, that sees
and understands any thing in his perfect kind: the which we should daily
stir up, and so accustom with good purposes, that it decay or ruste not in
us: whereby seeing and discerning with judgment the manners and living of all
nations, we may the easilier and truelyer knows ours: And by the same
understanding come to the perfection of our virtue. For the good credit and
praise whereof, I may boldly say and affirm, that there is no easier mean,
nor pleasanter manner of living than in dure Philosophy: As for the world past
I list not to meddle withal, nor search how the ancient Philosophers (whose
doctrine serves little to our purpose) found or liked it in their days. But sure
I am, that time has ever since, brought his alteration. And as touching death
the dissoluer of their Philosophy, to expel the fear of him, they have
spoken maruallously, and in most of their works have prescribed the despising
of death unto us: yet in my opynion it could not but greatly gree^e them: for
the ground and foundation of their profession, which is nature, was clean put
out and cut off by it. I report to Moni^pus in Lucian, who viewed all that
past the flood Acheron to bell: and saw none but that bashed and were astonished
in the going in, except Diogenes, which did nothing but se^ffs and jest at all
things: who as he ever conte^ned life, so was he never seen fearful of death
at any time. Most true it is that Socrates far off, had a good courage and
seemed to despise it, but when he came to the wicke^, he changed color as
well as others. Let us now proceed to the purpose, and speak of our virtue
in her several kynds by order, without confusion.

Of Prudence or wisdom.
THis noble Troy wherein (as I have ^aide) our virtue is seated, has four
arms or branches, whereby we must ascend and elimb up unto her: the first
principal and chief branch we call Prudence, which consists in a skilful
judgment and knowledge of true things. For it is v^ possible that by our daily
doings, we can well please the world, if we know not thoroughly what we do. From
this knowledge proceeds the understanding of all Arts and liberal Sciences,
whereby we become right Courtiers: As of Music, the playing on the (...), the
(...), the Citrone, the Harp, the Corne^, the Flute, the Virginals, the Vial,
and other sweet musical instruments Also to dance all manner of dau^ces: as
the double and simple bra^les of Burg^n^e, Po^^owe and Champanay, the ba^e
dance, the Almayne, the ^allyard* the (...), and infinite others, The (...) to
compose devices, Posts, pleasant purposes, Songs, So^^e to, and (...), or
a^^orous Lame^ factot^^, in pro^^, verse, or ryme, very (...) and in ^ragie all
(...), as (...) the languishing pain^ of a servant (...) in ^^pleasure, and
evil* ^warded of his (...): Further, it is singular good, to have some pretty
sprinkled judgment in the common places and practizes of all the liberal
sciences, chapt up in hot^hpot together, out of the which we may still help
ourselves in talk, with apt devises at assayes, to have substance and matter
to treat of, and encounter with all manner of things, and no mo^e. Also to have
store of histories, to pass the time meet for any company, and with the more
assured cunning to couche our credit, it shall not be amiss to enterlace our
discourses with certain sudden lies and inventions of our own forging.
Likewise the knowledge of diverse and sundry languages* as the spanish, the
French, the Italian* the Dutche, and others: to the end that in all these
several tongues, we may salute, reioy^e, wonder a^, exclayme upon, disdain,
sk^rne, and ^^o^te whom we will. The knowledge of Fence, of va^ting, of
Tennis, of dancing, and other sportes of exercise: And some understanding of
the state and affairs of the Realm^, as of wars, of practizes, of
marchandice, and how we may honestly robb^, deceive, and make our best
profit. And withal, ^ertayne other small petty practizes and traffiques,
that are used in the world, in which every one cou^ts to excel, for the
co^^^n^able consideration that co^mes of it. On the contrary, such as are
ignorant in these faculties, and will not endeuer themselves to have some
smacke or smell in every one of them, are beas^es, doltes, and ^alues. And for
that Virtue is the mean between ^wo bites, as it is commonly in c^ntrarie
occurrences: when the two extremities are known, the midst is easily found,
which is our vert^e. Prudence then (as we have said) is the perfect ^ath way
and judgment to all the arts before spoken of, wherein is to be understood,
that I measure this perfection, (...) to the ^i^^ure, but reputation of the
Court. And he, who is so thoroughly expert in the sciences, that ^e knows
thereby how to advance his credit and honor, is po^^^te, and wort^y to be
called wife. But this mean (that I speak of) is so hard to keep, that there
are few which declyne not to the one side or the other. Some believing well of
them selves, that they are singular in these arts, and yet want the true tra^e
to begin, weigh things lightly, regarding neither place time, nor counsel:
whereupon they are accounted wilful and ra^^. Others that would be esteemed more
grave and sage the the rest, do muse and break their brains with trifling
folli^s which serve to no purpose, and there aboutes spend inestimable pain
and time: and these are too curious. Take therefore the mean between both,
and you shall come to the true and entire knowledge of things honest and
necessary: and so you have our virtue. From temeritie and rashness it is not
needful to disuade any by moral reasons: for there are so many infected with
this folly, and their wilfulness winnes them such contempts in the world, as
they are noted and scoffed at of all men: and I believe the wife beware by them
since they know the remedy. Walk one night through Paris, and you shall
find a compani^ of young gallants, some brave and in good order, and others
smothly combed for the purpose, courting and woing their Ladies: and for that
they are so unskillful how the knowledge of this Philosophy may bring them
into their mistres fa^our, believe of themselves to be passing excellent and
singular good players on the Lute and Gitterne, and do nightly walk the
streates before their lovers gates, tearing the poor strings of their
instruments, as it were in despite of Mercury. Their mistresses ^^ of ^o
^ylde nature (some such there are) that they account this the greatest glory
and most delight in the world, to hear how their amorous servants, with
sundry sorts of music present their loving obedience. As it is said of a
Dame in Rhoane, who to try the loyalty of her Lover, made a cross with
chaulke on her chamber door, and enjoined him penance, nightly to come and
kiss it, who was so devout that he thought it sacrilege to break ty^e with
his mistres: till some merry mate spying and pitying his incessant pain, to
further his devotion, mending the workmanship of this relic with such supple
substance a^ the poor penitent, having both his nose and lips par^ell gilt
withal, gave over his Pilgrimage for ever. So these pigions holde^ thus by the
nose, and fed peradventure with a farewell from some kind Mistress, who
knows how to continue their folly: do now and then meet with odd
remembrances. As when their ha^nt happens to be where dwells some brave
philosopher of the court, whose delicate ears cannot endure so great iuiurie
done to Orpheus, by their disordred ser a pi^g and crouding, do bliss them out
at their windows with a pifpet, perfuming both the players and their
instruments, in such sweet manner, as the gallantes are not heard of in a
month after. Some other supposing themselves perfect dau^cers, for that they
have heard say it is an excellent grace not to seem to have care or to think
of their dance, do in dancing before noble damsels, frame their countenance
with a counterfeit modesty, and letting their cape slip off the one shoulder in
show their gay ierkins or dublets, keeping ever this good mean, that it may be
supposed they deliver their trippes and tricks easily, without labor or
regard of their dance, by little and little lets it fall off on the chamber
flower: And thus the gallants glorying in their own shadows, tread their two
simples with a double trick, and believe they have done singular lywell, I
leave to common conjecture, how the lookers on do laugh at it. Another poor
fool, yet a Gentleman of countenance, who thinks him self learned in
languages, traveling by the way, and taking up his lodging where lies a
Gentleman Italian, for that he will seem to have language, salutes him with
Bonne iourne, although it be v^ry late: the Italian supposing him in a mockery
to pronounce Bougeronne, without demanding any more, draws out his r^pler:
our mynion mated to see this sudden fury, not knowing the cause, is
compelled to defend himself: and so they are does in danger the one to maime
or mar the other upon this fond and foolish quarrel. Poor souls have
patience. and consider how your ignorance makes you no better than brute
beasts. And if I durst speak of Orators, who suppose of themselves to have
double judgments in all manner of sciences, for one little word that they would
perfectly to be understand and eloquently utter, being of small consequence,
will travel so far about for it, that some of them are never able to come to
their matter again. And touching Advocates and lawyers, who will seem with
their store of law to carry al before them, when they understand neither y^
point, but, nor mark of the cause whereunto they should tend their talk: which
y^ good scholemaster Quintilia^ does declare: for after (says he) they have
gravely with a long preface pleaded in latin and french iu^bled together,
their clients case, in y^ end Parturiunt mentes. etc. that is, Huge mountains
travel with young, and at length bring forth a silly Mouse. They open the
principal places, and after compare the laws, doctors, chapters, and ca^nons
together: yet commonly they fortefie that part most which is least assaulted,
and suddenly sometimes overthrow themselves. Cepasius mayor a Roman, who^
Cicero painteth so gallantly pleading for Cluencus, was a cunning doer herein.

None can sufficiently declare the great injuries and other inconveniences that
chances in enterprises of importance, as in the feats of war and policy,
in merchandise, in physic, and divinity it self, through this rashness:
for example, rash Tylers often break their own necks. And to conclude, there
are so many examples of rash, brainesicke, and headstrong people, that their
vice is so noted, as it needs no more reproof. The remedy to avoyde the
falling into the fault of rashenesse, is to consider of all causes not
suddenly, but with discretion, deliberation, and good council.

The other vice and extremity of Prudence, is Curiosity (as we have said
before) which is no less dangerous than this last we have treated of, yet is
it much more painful: for the rash man executes his determinations and
purposes without study or judgment, the curious man with great circumstaunce
torments himself day and night, and both of like substance and profit. The
great Philosopher Plutarch in a certain treatise, wherhe defines what
Curiosity is: compares the curious man to a householder a very evil husband,
who has ever his nose out at his window, viewing and noting the doings and
government of other men, and not regarding nor having eye to his own family,
whose servants and varlettesin the mean time do spoil and rob him within
his doors. That man is double blind in his own evil, that kills himself
with others rares, trauelles, and toils: and yet his business no whit the
sooner done. We will call him Curious in our Courtlye Philosophy, that
breaks his brains in searching the secrets of such Arts and Scyences, as
serve too no purpose for the instruction of our life according too virtue,
that is too say, according too the manner of the Court. Let us then
consider how far such a one swarueth from Prudence or wisdom: yet there
are many in these days that tread the steps of the ancient Sages, and
thereby seek too attain to this true and perfect virtue (as they call it)
which is lodged so hyghlie and stately, and in a place so hard and
dangerous to come too. You shall see some such curiouse men in the Court,
solemn, sad, and melancholic, that will not eat but at prescribed hours,
they will not speak but when it pleases them, they will not laughe for the
Pope, nor be subject too any Prince or Lord, be he never so great: ever
co^trarying and misliking of that which others do: and to conclude, they are
not pleasante to any person. To what end or purpose serves this great
curiosity, onelesse it gives occasion too the world, too call them precyse
fools and servants to Signour Monarche? when shall they with their glosed
hypocrisy obtain the favor and good reputation of honest Gentlemen and civil
Courtiers? never. If another Diogenes should come among them, with his staff
and his wallet, blowing and supping his wortes in his tun, would not the
Pages roll him up and down? But if he were a Minippus, or Friar John of
Saint Anthonies order, they would praise him better. There are to be found
infinite numbers very curiouse in thousands of small follies, most
unprofitable and serving to no purpose, and yet will seem great wise men and
of singular knowledge: as prognosticators, Southsayers, Magiciens, and
Alkumistes, notwithstanding these last have been of late, and yet are welcome
and well allowed of some for the time. But I believe their credit will not have
place long. It suffiseth to know so much of their s^iences, as may serve too
pass pleasante discourses among company, and no more. For the rest, it is
nothing to our virtue, but rather hinders and lets from attayning the true
and honest mean that should bring us to the perfection thereof. And thus you
have the sum of that which in our Philosophy is called Prudence, or
Wisdom.

Of Justice.
Justice being next and aduauncing her self in her order, is the same unto the
which we must refer all our other conclusions, and without the which the
whole has no part in virtue. For to what end or purpose does the knowledge of
any art or science profit us, if the same be learned only for fraud and
deceyte? How may we justly call or account any of a noble heart and
invincible mind, able too frounte all fortunes, if he employ and endeavor
himself to harm and injury others? Are not modeste men and those that dawnte
their appetites, and subdue their affections to reason, worthy to be termed
Just? without Justice no virtue could continue, stand, or should be supported
Therefore we ought to take great pain, and employ all our studies too the true
knowledge of her. And for that she is of so mighty a majesty as her branches
cannot in brief definition be co^prehe^ded, we will in some sort describe
the^. I am not altogether ignorant that ye vulgar opinion of Justice is a sure
and perfect mind, to give and do to every man, that belongs unto him: which
truly is meet and very requisite. But since it seems unto me, either that
it co^prehe^deth much more, or else that it ought not (which belo^gs unto it)
to be understood so generally, as the same shall need more exposition or
explication tha^ Justice her self, I mean not to use it for a definition. For
a beginning or principle it is a true maxim, as Cicero says, and to be
considered of, in the whole deduction of Justice: That it is very good, not to
injury or wrong any. and I think for the perfect acco^plishment of this
virtue, it suffiseth not only to injury no person (as we will show herafter)
but we must also endeavor our selves to do good to others: yet must we not
understand, that in doing no good where we ought, though we take nothing
from him that is his, we do him wrong: that were a suttell supposer, and such
captious opinions are damnable. For we say not that to leave pleasuring of him
whom we very well might pleasure, is doing him any wrong The Justice whereof we
write, may be divided, though hardly, into Legal and Moral: whose difference
cannot without great difficulty be known, for the neernesse of affinity
that is between them, unless we make some division, and treat of them
seuerallye, to the end it may be discerned wherein they be contrary, and
wherein they agree. All Justice be it Legal or Moral, is divided in two kinds:
whereof the one property or kind is Commutatiue, and the other Distributive:
And I believe in my opinion, that out of this last Distributive, Cicero has
drawn liberality, which he makes and affirms to be one part or member of
Justice, in his offices. Under these two kinds of Justice, is confirmed,
included, and consists the whole acts and doings in ye mutual society of
man's life. This is the same virtue that is said to be the theater or place of
human fellowship, under the which all people are bound and joined one with the
other, and by the which every one is warned from dividing and separating
themselves asunder out of this company. Notwithstanding, after the time that
the good disposition and affection of men, proceeding only of nature, was
overthrown and corrupted (as I have said at the beginning) and that the
Goddess Astrea had left the world, for that mankind began to divide,
scatter, and leave the one the other (as Ouide does excellently describe in his
Metamorphosis) and that this society and conuersante co^panying of men lost
familiar fellowship, clean contrary to the will and intent of him that placed
them here: It has been and is needful to give them reins, and bits, to
bridle, bind, hold in, and entertain them together: which are the laws
Civil, whereby such men as at the first of their own natural accord, were
good, just, and loyal, are now constrained to follow Justice, not her self,
for she has left and forsaken the earth, but one so like her as may be.
And those that live and govern themselves in such orderly sort, as the laws
cannot reprehend them, nor any way touch them, we say, to have in them Justice
Legal: the which how much it is different from this first Justice, which
was before the gyuing and constituting of laws, and that which is the same of
the Ancient Philosophers, in whose place ours is succeeded, I leave for this
time too think of. Notwithstanding I may say thus much, that the laws
Civil forbid all offices, so far only as they are borne, nourished, and
reign among men. But the Philosophers forbid all that they imagine in their
mynds too be contrary too reason: which commandments are over strayghte
and rygorous. This argument is Ciceros (and therefore I will not seem too
deceive him) in his Offices, where he says: Aliter leges, aliter Philosophi
tollunt astutias: Leges, quatenusmanus tenere possunt, Philosophi, quatenus
ratione and intelligentia. Now further to our purpose.

Of Justice Legal, and of the Laws Civil.
Legal Justice, comes of observing the civil laws, the keepers whereof are
called just, and good: which has been heeretoofore diuyded in Commutatiue
and Distributive: wherein we have followed the opinion of the auncientes, and
also of Melancton, that Noble personage and best Philosopher in our time, as
appears in one Epitome, which he made of Moral Philosophy, which
notwithstanding is contrary to this. In this division is comprised all that
our Counselors and law makers have written: whose volumes, studies,
trauelles, and works being gathered together, have made an entyer and perfect
body: yet there have been many good doctors, that have written sundry matters,
which smell neither of Co^mutatiue nor Distributive. The Commutatiue consysteth
in causes touching contractes, titles, obligations, and actions: and
consequently in the right of any, too know who uses or enjoys that he has
rightfully or no: who may contract or bargayne, and wherefore we may contract
or no: Of contractes, some are voluntary, as buying, selling, ^^ring, lending,
gyuing, and others, of the which does also proceed supposed contractes, whence
comes the right of succession. The others are compelled or constrained: as
all crimes and offenses: so that most part of the Civil laws are
comprehended in Commutatiue. And it is called Commutatiue, for that the first
kind of contracting and bargayning, which was then in custom and usage, was
com^^tation or exchange: For at the beginning, before this poysened infection
of money was forged, the good people of the world did change that which they
might spare, for that they wanted, (and as Homer says) there was no talk of
buying nor selling, for the price and estimation of profit that grew by the
customable increase of co^tracting and bargayning was not yet known to them:
but after they had entered the entrayles of the earth, and broken up the bowels
of their first mother, and that this thrice mischievous, insaciable, execrable,
and greedy famine of Gold and Silver had assaulted and vanquished the hearts
of men, straight way was found the glutted gain of practice by traffic, that
exchange, permutation, and election, had no more place among them: for there
was nothing so worthy, holy, godly, or religious, that could then save it
self from the devouring hurlepitte of greedy gayners.

The other part of Justice legal, is Distributive, so called, for that it
consists in distributing of honors, dignities, magistrateships, personages,
offices benefices, immunities, exemptions, privileges, franchises, and
liberties, and of all other profits bestowed on persons worthy and well
deserving in public causes: and also, the institution how such people should
govern and bear themselves in these estates and dignities. The which
Distributive, for that it is no other tha^ the reward of virtue, I esteem to
be worthy so great commendation and praise, as nothing more, and therefore at
this time will touch it no further, but repose my self on that which the
noble Orator Demosthenes has said, in the Oration he made of Immunitie
against Leptinus, (who would have disanulled and taken it away:) where he has
so sagely and profoundly set it out, and with such wise and grave modesty
showed how we should recompense and regard worthy persons and well
deseruers. And I among the rest of the opinions, do best allow of this: for it
is (says he) a most fair and commendable thing, not by flattery or fraud,
nor by reproach and tyranny: but rightly and justly, with our companions,
familiars and like, in the laws and the City, to show our selves among
others to have deserved some dignity: which estimation and credit if you take
away, take also away your Commonwealth, for so will it be without gouerners and
government. Thus have you of the laws Civil and Legal justice, so much as
serves to our purpose.

Of moral Justice.
Our justice, whereby we must attain to our virtue, that is to say, to be
weltome and well liked every where, accounted wise, and good livers, according
to the manner of the Court, is much otherwise than the same we have yet spoken
of: as in some places, alowing more liberty, and in some other more strictness
and scrupulousness. And for y^ it does extend further than the other virtues
(as we have said before) so much is it the harder to show and name her
extremities: wherein I can say no more, but affirm that whatsoever is not done
according to our virtue, how, in what sort, or whose act soever it be, is no
other than manifest wrong and injury. And to speak of Commutatiue, as
concerning contractes and bargayning one with an other: this must ever be the
principle or maxim, that we ought not to abuse or wrong any: yet by this is to
be understood if the injury be not covered, or hild with some show, or
likelihood of reason (for we are not accustomed to consider of causes so near)
as what he is, or whether he be honest or no, that takes away or withholdeth
the goods of an other: For it is not only sufferable in bargaynyng, in
buying, and sellyng, for every man to make his most profit, be it by fraud or
otherwise, but also very commendable. For (the Lawyers say) Licet
contrabentibus, inuicem se d^cipere. It is lawful in buyers, sellers, and
marchantes, one to deceive the other. Is not that man worthy then to be noted
an Idiot, and to be banished a commonwealth, who has apt occasion to deceive
or beguile his companion and mate by any honest mean, and will not do it? he
learneth it not by our Philosophy, nor by the Court. We hold this generally
as a great argument of our virtue: that it is tolerable to beguile, filch, and
cogge, and do the worst we can, so that neither law, Judge, nor justice may
touch or catch hold of us for it. Nemini enim facit iniuriam, qui suo iure
vtitur. He that makes the best of his own, and mainteynes his own right, does
wrong to none. And this pretert to maintain our own right, we give as a
license to do all things: wherein those that are most subtle, crafty and
ouer-reaching, are the best allowed and most esteemed of. Of whom it is said,
if they owe any thing they will pay it, and if any owe them, they will likewise
look to be well paid. And touching stryfes, contentions and offenses: they
are accustomed with this destinction to be defined. Such as blade out their
brawles manfully by arms, (whatsoever they be, or the cause they fight for)
are not only to be excused, but rather to be commended: for commonly those that
mainteyne their matters by the sword, either defend their persons, or their
honor, or they are provoked and constreyned unto it, so that they have ever
such pretectes, or likely cloakes, under which the truth of their faults and
contentions lies hidden, and is couched so cunningly, that we see them not:
also we never regard but the superficial part of any thing, and that which
shows it self unto us. As for other offenses, as robberies, civil injuries,
and such like private faults, they are much more reproved and condemned than
the rest, for that they have not these foresaid cloakes and ordinary
shadows, without the which, all crimes and offenses are more damnable, by our
Philosophy, than by the laws: For Philosophers ever desired a justice more
strict, and a life more just, than the Laws do: likewise Gentlemen, Courtiers,
and others of the Court, are not content with a prescribed life, according to
the Civil law: But they will yet add thereto more. For an evil doer or
guilty person, at the least fault that he commits, touches the honor of
him that is offended, which is in these days the most odious and hatefullest
offense that may be. For none can so slenderly harm or hurt the honor of a
Gentleman or Courtier, but the combat must strait be challenged for want of
further proof, so that for giving of one lie, it is permitted lawful and just
to kill a man: for the reproufe of vanity, and the lie, is the greatest scarre
and mayme, that they may give to our honor. Whereby it appears what
estimation we have of our honor: seeing we are allowed as well to defend our
honor, as the auncientes and laws themselves have allowed us to defend our
lives, and not without reason: for honor and reputation is the final
conclusion of our virtue, without the which our virtue were of no value. All
other offenses therefore are lightlyer regarded of us, than of the Laws, by
reason of their cunning coueryngs, and pretty pretertes, whereof I have spoken
before: except our reputation be touched, for in that crime we are nearer
grieved than at any other, wherein I must needs say the Laws have been too
favorable. For too know what things they are that do stayne our honor, they
may better be thought off than spoken: yet I will say thus much before I
pass any further, that touching loyalty in word, or humanity in deed
toward our equalles or inferi^urs, it is nothing so requisite in our justice
as in the Auncientes, where upon they made their first and firm foundation:
for it suffices us to hold and keep our word so far as the Judge and
Law may compel us to perform it. But to promise without the compass and
danger of action, is no other than a bravery, in well promising: whereunto is
applied the common Preuerbe, that the promise of a Gentleman is holy water of
the Court.

Of the second part of Justice which is Distributive, and of Liberality.
THe other part of our Justice is Distributive, which Cice^o properly calls
liberality, (and reason good:) for what else is liberality, than the
bestowing and distributing of honors and goods to well deserving persons?
wherein the aunetents did flourish, and made famous their common welthes: and
surely in these days, I know no virtue so agreeable to our Philosophy, as this
same. For (as I have often said) the sum of our science, and end of our
virtue her self, is the glory and reputation of any man: and he which
desires it, and seeks it, is worthily accounted wise, but he that has it
may be renowned the happyest man in this world, who shall likewise live for
ever here in this world. On the contrary, they that are careless, and account
not what is said of them, are to be thought either blockish or careless.
Pithagoras letter could not in these days help us to this happiness: neither
needs Seneca now to break our br^ynes any more with this song,

Illi mors gra^is incubat,
Qui notus nimis omnibus,
Ignotus moritur sibi.
Whom all men tooto well do know,
a heavy end he makes:
Himself yet to himself unknown
this present life ^orsakes.
For if we be not ^^ous and known, we cannot attain to the perfection of our
virtue: as Claudian shows in his Country discourse, and this gallant Ovid,
that became so wise, after he had received correction. Creed mibi, been
quilatuit, been vixit, and intia Fortunam debet quisque maneresuam.

Believe me who so lives within
his reach, he lives well:
For each man ought within the bonds
of his own hap to dwell.
And further.
Viue sine inuidia, molesque inglorius annos
Exige, amicitias and tibi iunge pares.
Seek life that envy lackes
Mixed landlesse life with pleasant years,
No friendship join with lackes,
Yet friendship frame, but with thy peers.
I leave therefore this to those that are so deeply plunged in wisdom, who
agree all with one common voice, saying that they are most sage and wise, which
show themselves most meek and humble: for it is directly repugnant and
contrary to our Courtly virtue. Then since honor is the mark whereat we all
should tend our desire: is there any readier mean to good reputation, than
by liberality to destribute our treasure too all the world: to show
pleasure to all that come: to be favorable and courteous to every one: to
rescue some from the Provost and Marshals, and to free others from being
Gallislaues: and to keep and feed v. or vj. pore knaves as ravening as woolues:
to make feasts, triumphs, and bankets with open house? no truly.

Of liberality.
THis virtue consists in the distributing of three things in te^porall goods,
and this belongs to great Lords. In reuerences and honor, and that is the
duty of inferior companions: and in spiritual gifts, which is the office of
those that are learned. As touching y^ first, the principle which we ought to
regard, is to use no liberality, but to such as deserve it: by whose means
we may be accounted Philosophers* of the Court, and worthy of this
reputation: To good souldidurs and men of war that know their obedience to
their Captain (and to such as I have spoken of before)* brave Gentlemen,
gallant, courteous and civil, that have their hand never from their Cap, and one
knee on the ground, so serviceable, so obedient* with a thousand courtesies,
and as manys reuerences: such are worthy the liberality of Princes: And not
those churlish repyners, unto whom when you have given the one half of your
goods, they will think still you are beholden unto them, and by circumstaunce
refuse your courtesse, to confirm the more their glowming gravity: and as
for receiving any honor or reverence of them, it is as much as nothing: yet
will they not stick too malaperly to check you, and say you live ^uill, and
will speak to you as to their servants. To be beneficial or do good to these
surly sort, is evil done, and is an extremity of our virtue: which we call
prodigality, whereof we may say with the good Ennius, Benefacta male
locata, male facta arbitror. A good turn evil bestowed, is evil employed: or
a pleasure done to one unworthy, is a hateful vice.

The other maxim of our virtue is, too measure liberality according to our
faculty or abilitye: For none ought too give so much, as he ^ee compelled to
beg himself after: yet there are some of sundry opinions* that say
without respect or regard of goods and worldly wealth, we should not
lock up our liberality, for they go and come and increase daily, and that
it is better to be poor with honor and estimation, than rich with villanye
and reproute* But I am not of their opinion. For the Auncientes would not,
that in pleasuring of any, we should so ^nable our^ own state, that we
should take away the ^eane and benefit from ourselves, to be able to be
friendly still: we must then govern our bounty in such sort, as he does which
shows the way to a stranger, or he that lights an other man's candell at
his: for the teacher leseth not his knowledge, nor the candel his clearness:
and I think the grauest and wisest sort of our Philosophers, will sonest agree
with me in this. And further, he that is faln^ in decay, although by the same
he have deserved honor, and is esteemed liberal: yet will it be hard for him in
his poverty, to continue that credit, and maintain that reputation: for we
ordinarily disdain the poor, and those that be in necessity.

Our third Maxim is to join liberality with justice: for it is neither
good, commendable nor decent, to be bountiful of that belongs to others, and
(as they say) of an other man's leather to cut large thongs: wherein we must
consider of that we have spoken of Justice, that to withholde, or violently
too keep any man's goods from him, is no other then a gentle bravery, so
that the same be cloaked and covered with some likelyhoode of reason. For (as
we have often say^ before) the semblances and apparaunces of all things cunningly
couched, are the p^yncipall supporters of our Philosophy: for such as we
seem, such are we judged here: for by shifts and some charge we may pervert
judgments and informations with cunning conueyance, but this is strange to
such as have not felt the sweetness thereof, for we keep this geere close in
our budgets.

Also we ought to regard, that in the use of liberality either we do the
first pleasure, or we acquit such good turns and pleasures as we have before
received: wherein when we render and restore, we must not in any wise show our
selves niggards, nere and sparing: for those obligations of thankfulness are
no less with us, than if it were in a Civil cause. This is a great Argument
to be observed that where we are liberal, it should be done so voluntarily,
and with so francke a mind, as the name it self imports: having regard too
consider the conclusion of every Diuisi^n, to the end the better too use our
virtue: what we are, how able we are, and what they be upon whom we
bestow any bounty or pleasure: either our Parent, Neighbor, familiar or
friend, or any other such like. In all the Circumstaunces there is one pretexed
point, that seems of so great efficacy, as it were a perfect and good love
grounded on virtue: which we see to be finely flourished in Gentlemen to
Gentlemen, and soldiers to soldiers, when they are all Courtiers, or of our
Courtly crew, wherein it is not needful* nearely to regard or search the
occasion, and causes of such friendship or friendly amity. For it suffices
that upon this foundation of honesty, and Courtly civility, there be certain
shadowed graces and countenances of weak love, and faint favor: which may
well be called (if the term were tolerable) a fawing flattery, that tyeth
them together with mutual courtesy.

Of the two other parts of Liberality.
THe other two parts of our liberalitie^ consist in distributing, and host
wing of Duties, Honors, and Reuerances* which belongs to inferior
followers, and to the good fellowship of Courtly companions* And as for gyuing
of aduic^ and counsel* that belongs to the learned and lettered men, be they
superiors, equalles, or inferiors. Touching the first, they must ^ar^full^
regard that they be not sparing, slanke or negligent, in low ^ointing and
humbly reu^rencing* such as des^ru^ it* For then men might call them either
arrogant, proud, or ignorant: neither must they be prodigal to every man with
their salutations, in words or deeds: for so they may be accounted deep
dissemblers, flatterers, or very simple souls. As for y^ learned, they should
have care, and partly enforce themselves to give counsel to others: yet not
always with the truth, but a^^ording to the appet^^e, and pleasure of shose,
they speak and give advice unto: for if they hold, follow, and affirm their
own judgments and opinions, how true and good so ever they be, they shall
be called obstinate fools and wilful headstrong: and so they can never come
is the perfection of our virtue This is very much used in consulting with
Lawyers of our right, wh^ commonly frame their council according to the humor
of the party who^ they counsel. This is not only used at these days, but in
times past Cicero did ye same in his pleadings, as himself does witness, in
his oration for Plancus. In causis (says he) adhibemur, vt ea dicamus, non
quae nost^a auctoritate coastituantur, sed quae ex reipsa causaque due an^ur.
They will have us in pleading, not to say at all times what seems to us good:
but to speak that only which serves y^ t^me, place, and persons belonging to
our purpose. And furthermore: Non solum meo consilio vti consueui, sed multum
etiam eius, quem defendo, and consilio and voluntati obtempero. I have not
(says he) been accustomed to do all after my own head or judgment, but
rather applied my self to the counsel, will, and opinion of my clyent. I see
none please me more in this respect, than holy mother Church men: and not
without cause, for most of them take great pain to attain to our virtue.
And it should seem great injury too learning, if the ignorant and
unlettered should have this virtue, too restrain their affections, to frame
and accommodate themselves to the quality and condition of those they talk
too, better than the learned: much like the needy Norman, that procured him
self a Prebendshippe, and yet so ignorant for learning, as he could not
read: kept his Hymns, Hours, and times of Service with the best: who when a
friend of his saw him chaunting in the Chauncel, and knew his ignorance, asked
him how he prayed, and what he said: I have (quoth he) learned the Alphabet
or.xxiiij. letters, whereof all prayers are made, and them I daily and wholly
deliver, in my singing and saying to God, who I know may make what prayers he
will of them: But for the ignorant, we will speak more when we write of
modesty. And that which we have said of the liberal in their temporal
goods, may serve well for example to the Clergy, in their spiritual devotions.
Therefore it is needeles to recyte it any more. And now to the two
extremities of this our virtue.

Prodigality and Covetousness.
THe distributing of goods and magnificall expe^ces, is toward us so gracious,
honest, and favorable, that I know no way how to avoid the fear of excess in
this virtue, which is prodigality. And on the other side, the auaricious
nigarde and miser is so hateful and reproachful to all men: that to shun and
fly the evil opinion of the world, touching this vice, we must recoyle
back so far, that we become as it were somewhat prodigal. And if it be
tolerable too mingle golden gain and profitee of money, with honesty (which
the best and wisest Philosophers past would not do) we shall prove and find
the covetous and nigarde to loose more of their goods by their misery, than
they keep or get by their wretched policye. Therefore when we see a churl
welthy or rich, we ought not to say that his avarice or neerenesse has
gathered it: For if he were like liberal to use it, as he is pining to
preserve it, he should by the same (without comparison) increase his cofers
with treble gain. For as by his over much care and diligence he has gotten
it, so by his endless follye and fear to loose i^, he leaves to employ it to
his greter profit* As when he says,

Fertilior seges est alieno semper in aruo:
Vicinumque pecus grandius vber babet.
The fruit more fertile seems, that grows within my neighbors ground^*
The vdder of my neighbors beast, with milk does more abound.
This is the cou^touse cause, he will buy no more lan^s nor beasts, but
miserably horde and bide his money in the ground, or lock it up for
allurement to Thieves. For even as the jealous fear of fond and foolish
husbands, makes their wives the more sought unto, showing by their suspicion
sign of some occasion, either y^ she is willing, or y^ she loves nothir
husband, or else some other cause which makes and mou^s young men to enter in
assured hope of obtaining their desire. So likewise, the pyning pain, and so
nudging solitariness, which we see the myser and covetous endure too keep
and guard his goods and treasure, with his head still in his cubbarde, and his
nose ever in his coffer: stirs up the hungry thief, and shows him, where
plentye is to be purchased by his pyking policy. Whereof it is commonly
spoken: Malus est custos diuturnit atis metus, He that fears, loses. And
Ouide writing to the ielious, which watch their wives so narowly, does
properly say:

Quicquid seruatur, cupimus magis, ipsaque furem
Praedafacit: quod sinit alter: amant.
The harder kept, the more is sought, the price does make each thing a pray,
The thing that others way as naught, who seeks? we wyshe not what we may.
For the better example of this, I may allege the cunning varlet Strophilus
in Plautus: who seeing the great pain and toil that the most unfortunate
Erili^s had, in hiding his gold, carrying it sometime into one place, and
sometime into another, fraughte with continual fear least he shoude be
spyed, supposing there was good too be done, sought the cause, and fynding
the money, robbed him of it. Likewise, the filth of this vice is such, that
there is non^ which hates not a nigarde, and are glad and desirous too do him
all the displeasure that may be: so that he lacks the grace and good will of
others, whereby he might make a more profit. For (as Cicero says) Rerum omnium
nec aptius quicquam est ad opes tuendas as tenendas, quam diligi, nec alienius
quam timere. There is no mean more profitable to man to make him rich, and
better to guard his goods, than to deserve the favor and love of every one: nor
any thing more contrary, than to have few friends, and be in continual fear.
We read amongst the Romans of one named Mamercus, a rich man and of great
credit, who for that he did nothing magnifically or sumptuously, whilst he was
Edile, (according too their custom) fell into the slander and reproach of
avarice and covetousness: for the which he was so evil beloved of the people,
that after, he following the dignity of the Consulship, for this only cause
they refused him. And if we will consider from the beginning to our time, what
estimation was ther^uer had of a covetous man? what says all the world of a
miser? the villain will not give a glass of wine to any of credit or
honesty: or (as our proverb is,) he will not parts from the dropping of his
nose: he dare keep no company for fear of spending: he does no good to
himself, nor to any other: he eats his otes in his own sack: he never
fedeth but in his bosom: and many other such like hateful reproaches. In so
much, that there is no Gentleman, how noble-borne ^o ever he be, that is not
reputed and accounted a villain, if he give at any time never so little
occasion to be seen in any thing miserable or pinching. So that I rather
allow, and better agree with them, who have their hearts so noble, their
minds so frank, and their sprightes so glorious, that they will sooner consume
their goods in braueries, pomps, and magnificall expenses, than to be
slaunderouslye touched with nigardnesse or misery. Covetousness commonly is
hated in all persons, but cheefely in Princes and great Lords, to whom it is
most convenient and seeming of all others, to exercise bounty and
liberality, where otherwise, the continual taking and receiving of their
right from their Subjects, without giving, dispersing, and distributing
again, in process of time they shall find themselves to have neither tribute
to receive, nor subject to pay it. For who ca^ better dispose of goods (which
that nobleman Plato would have had common) tha^ those that have them? How
shall men of virtue and valor, good companions, and small mates, come by any
part or por^ion, if there be not bountiful giuers? following this opinion,
some will say and mainteyne, that the rich and covetous are thieves, in making
that pryuate and their proper own, which should be common to all men. It is
not then without cause, that this vice is so much hated of us, and banished
from our company, wherein there is nothing so displeasant, as not to be glad
and willing to do pleasure. And therefore, how much the infamy of it is
great, so much the rather should we withdraw our selves, and shun the
chance of such extremities, eue^ with y^ less of our goods, or rather (as I
have said) to be reputed prodigal. For ye prodigal are more excusable,
without co^pariso^, in our virtue, then ye covetous. And if we will well
consider of it, we shall find none so prodigal (and therefore the more
reprouable) as the auaricious. For what may be greater prodigality, than to
gather together, and lay up the goods of this commonaltie: and to take away
from a common wealth the faculty to use it, and by that mean to lose it, and
(as it is said) cast it into the Sea? for if the goods of a myser be not
lost from the profiting of a common wealth, at the least for his life, I
cannot tell what may be accounted more lost. For he pleasureth his friends,
and benefiteth himself as much with that he has, as with that he has not,
and his riches are to him as to others, no riches at all* Whereby it is spoken:
Tam deest auaro quod habet, quam quod non habet: The auaricious has no less
need of that he has, than of that he has not. Then if his goods serve too no
purpose, neither too himself, nor in the fellowshippe of men: we must account
it lost, and being lost, we may cleerelie perceive, that the auaricious and
miser, is the true and perfect prodigal. But to the end we will not seem to
allow unmeasurable expe^ces, we will give bounds, confines, and limits to
liberality. Cicero in his offices says, We ought not to give any thing,
except it be either profitable or necessary. So that profit and necessity be
the two bounds of this virtue, which ouerpassed any way, we become presently
prodigal. But truly if we should thus strictly comprehend all, we s^al make
most part of our courtiers, and ye best praised, wilful wasters, who^ we not
withstanding esteem very wise. For not only those which consume their wealth, or
make so^times magnificencie without profit, cause, or necessity, are not
alone pronounced prodigal: But this vnquenche able heat, and insatiable
desire of glory, the which without all judgment and consideration
constraynes them to do it, is honest, ^^d comes of so good a nature, that
there is attributed unto them, a virtue more great than liberality, which is
called Magnificencie, whereof comes this title so excellent of magnicall. And
most truly when the intention and good will of any person does find and
feel that which he doothe good or evil, such magnificencie is much to be
praised, proceeding from ^o great a love of our virtue, and from such
affection too pleasure others, that they have no leisure too think of nor
consyd^r all the maxims and circumstances: the which ferupulouslye the
Auncientes would have us observe and keep in this liberality. And further,
we that do long look or much muse on things secret and hydden, but
regarding the superficial part and the outward appearance of their deeds,
seeing that by such magnificencie they show them selves of mind the
liberalleste that may be: not considering the vtilitye, profit, or
necessity, cunningly couched, and well covered over: how can we but judge of
such people all good and all honor? leave we the^ that same Valerie the great
talker of liberality, when he says, that the two fountains from whence she
co^mes, is true judgment and honest good will: for the ardent affection and
hot desire to be praised of all men, can not discern this, nor will not be so
scrupulous, to consider of circumstances so far off. Let us compare in
semblable cases, the mutual love between the father and his children, and we
shall see sometime the feruencie thereof to be so great, that without
consideration (meaning them well,) they do mar and spoil them, not having
their judgment certain by reason of this overmuch affection, to discern what
is good or evil for them. Is such love and friendship to be blamed with us? Is
it not true affection? yes verily, although some others call it a cockering: So
that if any will nearer regard the profit of the one or the other, if this
amity do not earnestly appear therein, it can not be perfect. Even so let us
judge of the magnificall man, who if he should consider with himself, how
profitable it were for him to do that he determines: would they not say, his
deliberation smelt of miser is? and how he had great ^^are to lose that he
mean^ to lay out? It is not at this time only, or in these days, y^ our virtue
has bin so measured. For do not the noble and ancient Romans glory to be
atrbu^ted magnificall? Was it need full or profitable, to cut mountains, and
to make of (...) in the s^a a fyrme land? Was it requisite every morning to
^^^ that came and said, god more ow my Lord, to give and distribute such great
s^^mes of money as they did? whereof ^^^^^all does well report. What should I
speak particularly of Pomp, of the Th^aters, the Triumphant Gates and Temples
that he builded? Is not the magnific^ncie of (...) known by his ^ump^u^^s
gardens and galleries? For this cause only we have them as a president of
perpetual memory, and there is none of our Philosophers that does not with
great diligence endeuer him s^^^e to imitate and follow them, chiefly in th^yr
Antiquities. The honor of the Romans was so great for their haught courages
and magnificall minds: as all Italy is yet proud of it. And if we may after
them speak of our selves, shall we not find among us in our time, some whose
sumptuous expenses have gained them great ^ame? Let us consider of the noble
doctors and professed masters in our Philosophy, whom we have before our eyes
for example, whom we must follow and allow in all, whose authority ought to
satisfy us for reason, as well as that same of Pithagoras did satisfy h^s
Disciples: he said it even so of these: they have done it, i^ ought not to be
argued or doubted, whether it be well or seemly done. We must understand*
that in their liberalities, they many times consider not what is most meet,
profitable, or necessary, but that their magnificencie may be the more
extolled. And notwithstanding that such sumptuousness are not ever good;
commendable, and according to virtue: yet have they great reason so to do. For
(as Theophrastes says in his book of Riches) such magnificalnesse, is the
profit and reuenewe, that we receive of the goods we have, without the which
(the necessity to live excepted) I esteem and allow as well of pouertye as
of riches. Notwithstanding, I know very well, that Cicero, in his second
Book of Offices, lyked not of it: nor Aristotle, who d^ryding us, for that we
wonder to hear how that in the wars, sometimes in a besyeged Town or
City, we will give a ^esterne for a small vessel of water, and consider not
that without necessity (having both body and mind at liberty) we account not
to consume much money for nothing. So eueryone has his own opinion, and they
be not altogether allowed and approved of us: for there is not so mean a
Courtier that delights not to make some idle expenses, to the end to appear
magnificall. And whereas in love matters every one principally endeuers him
self to seem wise, civil, and best worthy, and such we will here take him. Let
us imagine the representing of two Lovers of some continuance before us, and
consider among* all others, touching this our virtue, how they govern and
behave them selves. We shall see the young gallant, that (without any
consideration of profit or necessity) can not find robes richynough, nor
sufficient sumpt^ous apparel for to pranke himself withal* neither rings
new made, or jewels new fashioned for his mistres: nor dainty meats exquisit
and delicate though to bancket her. And she for her part, in every paynt
indeuers her self to do the same. And though peradventure neither the one nor
the other can accomplish their whole desire, for their poor purse ruthfully
plenished: yet they will so do, that their talk shall not taste or smell of any
thing but all of magnificalnesse, for in this virtue consists their honor or
dignity. I remember me of poor Clitipho in Terence who had a sumptuous lover
and of a haughty heart, and could not wring from his father, being old,
covetous, and hard, sufficient money to furnishe her, used privately to
complain, and would often debate alone, how he should govern with credit, the
countenannce of his love, concluded thus in himself, saying: Ni^il essemihi,
religio est dicere. I make it (says he) conscience to tell her that I have
nothing for her. Whereby we may see, hol^^ (...) was it seem covetous or
needy, and yet had no mean to show himself magnificall: so much is this
virtue commendable. The old miserable lover in the Comedy of Intronati, did
not so, for he was bountiful in perfuming his gray bea^de, when he was at the
cost to bestow a penny worth of Ce^it, to besmeere himself withal: But God
knows how his Varlet mocked and laughed at him. And as Ovid, writing to a
covetous damfell, showing her how he could no longer love her, for that she
was subject to gain and luker, says:

Turpe thori reditu census augere pate^no^,
Et facient lucro prostitu^sse suum.
With beastly gain begot in bed,
To enlarge the Dowre thy (...) gave,
And set thy face with curled head,
To show and sale to every slave*
Hereby you may perfectly perceive, what vigor or force there is in
liberality and magnificencie, to win the grace and favor of every body: yet
I know there are mercinarie mynions, which make no little luker of their
lechery: but this must not be thought to be love, that is* thus lodged in
their laciuious hearts. It is not evil seeming to a woman to receive gifts
of her lover, though it be ill seeming for her to demand: as their good Master
Ovid declares.

Nec dare, s^d pretium poscided ignor, and odi*

It offends me not (says he) to give, but it greeueth me when they ask, and
that mislikes me most. Was Lays of Corinth, either wife or of good grace, to
demand so many Crounes of Demosthenes. he allows of it so well, that he
would not after hear her speak, nor give him self to great occasion of
repentance. Notwithstanding the danger is great, (and especially to persons of
noble minds, and affected to our Philosophy,) that the Laws civil have
provided for it: Considering that it is a great interest to the common weal,
to have many poor and needy Citizens: and that the riches of the Prince,
consists not so much in his coffers, as in the riches of his subjects, they
would that he who is seen or supposed to govern him self riot^ously, or to
live so disorderly as he might thereby after become needy, shoude have an
ouerseer, and not accordingly or indistinctly of him y^ magnifically makes
unprofitable expenses: for if it were so, there would not be found in all
France overseers sufficient. Thus we ought to understand this sentence,
Interest Reipub ne quis re suamale vtatur. It behoues the common weal to see,
that none apply his goods evil. For we must think that otherwise the Laws
or Princes would forbid these magnifycall expenses, as evil of it self, and
not according to virtue.

Even as one named Marcus Opius made a Law, that the Roman Ladies should use
no superfluous apparel, nor wear at their ears any King or Gemme of gold,
weying more than an ounce, as recyteth Pomponius Letus, of the laws of Rome:
this law was ma^e for fear the Romans had, least by such sundry ornaments
their wives should be come lascivious. It may be also considered, of that the
Emperor Justinian did forbid to some sort of persons, that they should not
wear certain colored and wrought clothes: ^s of late, the french king
prohibited gentle women and Citizens* wives from wearing certain ornaments
and attire of gold (the which the Dames of Lions did much murmr and grudge
at) and all is but for the causes before mentioned: for order and policy in
the distinction and difference of apparel, according to the majesty* and
qu^litie ^^ the person* (...) of great authority and force.

Of Magnanimity.
WE are now mounted very high, and attained near to the throne where our
virtue is seated: and for that she has reposed her self in a place hard to
come to; according to this good sentence of ISocrates: Vintutis radix anara,
fructus vero dulces: The root of Virtue is bitter, but the fruits are sweet
and good: therefore is it, that the nearer we approach unto her, the more evil,
untoward and sharp do we find the way, until we obtain the perfect place i^
self: which when we have w^nne, nothing will be hard and wearisome unto us. I
say this, meaning to speak of magnanimity, wh^^h is the same that makes us so
strong and assu^ed, that nothing in the world (be it never so deficile or
difficate,) can force or drive our (...) to declyne from the way of virtue. It
is not then without cause called Magnanimity, and those that profess it and
embrace it magnificall: which is to say, of a noble, bountiful, and honorable
heart: For what greater excellency can the spirit possess or e^idye, t^an to
be still accompanied with (...) like it self* And for any accident,
inconvenience, or misfortune that shall happen, not to be troubled or
unquieted, but so to remain and abide ever firm and constant? One great
argument of the precious value of this virtue is, that amongst all other things
which are common as well to man as to woman, this is only made proper and
incident to men, and contrari wise, sicklenesse and inconstancy to women: Of
the which common opinion many men are proud, and so content* that for this
cause alone they suppose the better of themselves, and will be accounted wise:
dis^ayning and contemning to hear the argument of a woman, as though she were
a brutishe and unreasonable creature: condemning their sundr^e follies, as
subduers and vang^ishers of reason in themselves, when such defectes of nature
be in both the one and the other. The daughter of Hortensiu^ a Roman Orator,
has by her singular virtues well moved, that women are capable of reason* ^owe
he it* that by mean of a natural* weakness, which is feebled in them for
want of instructions and doctri^es, they have not the use of it so familiarly.
Man chalenging magnanimity then as proper to him self should ^anot esteem
it a great iniuris* that be should be so delicate, effeminate, variable, and
inconstant? If we should see a man march through the streate at noone days,
in the habites and attire of a woman, would not the world mock him? And yet
to know a man, without the same outward show and appearance to be a woman in
deed, as was Hermaphrodites, there is nothing said of him. Wherefore do we
reprove Hercules, when he shrouded himself among handmaydes, but only for
that he left his manly courage, and yielded to womanly weakness: with the
which attire, he could never frame himself to any thing or other purpose, but
to bear the distaffe? It is not po^^ible for those, who have then spirits
weak and feeble in following this virtue, to attain good renown, or ^^e any
valiant a^e of value, what countenance or braucrie ^o ever they make. This is
she answer that Helen made to Paris, when he persuaded her to go to Troy with
him, and to fear nothing, vaunting him self to be the valia^ntest and noblest
warrior in the world. She seeing him so lapt and lin^kt in love, and
enchaunted so far from that he would seem or professed* that he had no more
the countenance of (...), sa^ de to him*

Quod been te iactes, and fortia facta recenses, a verbis facies dissidet ista
tuis,
Aptamagis V^neri quam sunt tua corpora Mart^. bella gerant alij, ^u Pari
semper ama.
For that in bravery you your maritall deeds recyte,
The truth is thus, that from your words your features differs quite,
For Venus fitter then, than Mars does seem to be*
Love Paris, and let men of force, go fight in field forthee.
I would gladly esteem and regard love, if it were not the ground and cause
of all this evil, and that it would not force and constrain the courage of
man, to serve and become vassal to feminine fragilitie: or would praise
greatly women, if they loved more, and delighted more in the virtues of their
friends and lovers, rather than in a forte of counterfeit curiosities. But the
doctrine of this great Courtisane in his Art of love can not lie: Parua leaves
capiunt animos: Houering minds have no hold, and light spirits are best
pleased with trifling follies. There is nothing more indecent or unsitting to a
man, than to be no man. I know notwithstanding, ou^ Philosophy, and that good
grace whereof we will speak hereafter, will not suffer us that among women we
should be still Platons: nor likewise have us in every place to govern our
selves, as it were still in the company o^ women. The considerations of the
circumstances, as of the time, the place, the persons, and others (which is
proper to prudence) will keep us from this evil, wherein it is necessary to
have this good grace. And the larglier to treat of this kind, to the end
more clearly to show what she is: we must repeat the same so often spoken of
before, that the end of all our Philosophy and virtue (that is to live
according to the manner of the Court) is honor and good reputation: without
the which, I see nothing that should so much stir or provoke us to great
travel, and so torment us in this world, as that. For (as Cicero faith which
was not still Academious) Nullam aliam periculorum and labo^um mercedem* virtus
desiderat, quam laudis and gloriae: qua quadetractat^, quid est, quod in hoc
breuissimo vitae curriculo tammiserenos exerceamus? Virtue will have no other
recompense for her pains and dangers, than praise and honor, without the which
why should we endeuer so great travel, in this short and fleeting time of our
most w^etched and unhappie life? Leave therefore such as speak otherwise of
Virtue. Seeing honor then is the butte and mark whereunto the Sages tended
their desire, and the only cause that makes man happy, should we not contemn
all, neglect, despise, and forsake all other things to come to this? Yes
truly. Behold here the definition of our Magnanimity to do good to parent or
friend, further than the same is honorable unto us. And to fear no danger be
it never so great, that should hinder any actions, whereby it may attain to
this perfection. By this I mean not, that no pain should be taken to get
goods, or that we should not use our pleasure, or reverence our parents,
entertain our friends* love God, and hate the Devil: But I say and affirm,
that if any of these be to hinder or less our honor, we should leave them
and not regard them: for that man is not magnifycall that prefers the
slendes pleasure of such small try^^^ng things, to the great value and ^yches
of honor. In this the Romans excelled, whose haughty hearts and lofty
courages so much imprinted this virtue in the minds and spyrites of all the
Country, that yet to this day to their posterity it is a great pleasure and
glory, as it may easilye be (...) by the^^ ^oun^^naunces, that smells still
of liberty, a contemning of all things, a desire to atchieue virtuous acts,
and an incredible patience. There is no judgment of the affections and inward
dispositions of any, more certain than by the outward countenance and open
show of our living. For as it is said, Abeunt studia in mores: Our studies
and affections are transformed into manners. Whereof comes our ordinary
graces, gestures, and countenaunces, which is easylye seen and known in all
our acts. And though particularly e^^rye one does enforce him self to
dissemble and disg^i^e his proper affections, as much for the ignorance of
those he is conuersaun^ with, as sometimes for his own imperfections which
he would have secret or ^^d (wherein principallye consists a good grace,
as we will show hereafter) notwythstanding this dissimnlation is no practy^e
of the affectious and opynions, common to any one Nation, Province, or
Country, or to any one certain state of persons what so ever. For such
affections causes in us one certain manner of (...) (^(...) I have said) by
the which cou^n^onlye every one in his countenance will be known what he
is, and from whence he is. Whereby we may well discerue the Italyan, the
French man, and the Almayne, one from the other, and by their gestures and
countenaunces only.

And for as much as such opynions and manners of living generally, are the
more hard to be taken from us, being so deep rooted in, us by continuance,
as they are turned into nature: So much the more ought they to be esteemed,
that according to the e^igent of every cause, for their honor or profit, can
seem to be of any other nation, estate or condition than they are. The which
we daily see do attain great reputation; and atchieue their enterprises
worthyly: as may perfectly be perceived, in those that are spies in the wars,
an example meet and sufficient for this purpose, though they in the execution
be not regarded nor esteemed as they ought. On the contrary, the most^ part of
people, albeit they have the wisdoms to know where and when to dissemble, and
that they are so magnificall and modest, as they think: to do well: yet are
they masked in so many follies and fond love of their countries, and are in so
great a gealosy of their doings, that notwithstanding any honor, reputation, or
profit, might happen them by this dissimulation, they will still be like
themselves: esteeming it a great offense, to use any fashion not in custom
among them, for fear to be judged of any other nation than they are: And will
be offended, if by them the stranger know not the vices and imperfectious of
his country. But to return to our purpose, the Roma^ines have so flourished
in this virtue, that they esteemed nothing for evil but dishonor: and regarded
nothing for good, but honor and reputation. And although there were many
Philosophers that spoke otherwise of this virtue than we do, saying that
goodness and honesty consists else where, which we allow no^* let them know
that the most part are with us, and of ours, affirming the only bounty and
virtue her self to be in the good reputation of men: for the which the
greatest pains, trauelles, and torments, were most delyghtfull pleasures unto
them. And not without cause. For if we have care too keep clean, neat, and
orderlye, our outward body, regarding that it be not bound ^o any (...):
we should be much more vigilante, to see that our inward spright receive no
villainy touched with dishonor. Among all the remembered histories of noble and
famous Ladies, I will speak but of one, named Lucrece, who to deface the
little dishonor she had suffered by her rauishment, killed her self. What heart
of a woman had she? was it not virtuously done in regard of her honor, to leave
life, and despise death, nothing remebring the will of God? who would not (as
she knew, and as the world was the^ of opinion) y^ the soul should pass out
of the ^^die, without leave of him that placed it there: no ^ore than a
Soldier may depart from under his ensighe ^^ out of the Camp, without
license of his Captain. It is (...) to be (...) at, ie ielious fowls, and
s^spicious pa^es do commonly give their wives the picture of Lu^r^ce killing
hi^ self. For the example* (as they suppose) may strongly and straungely move
them* and also their wives themselves have great delight to behold the same.

We must not forget one notable point, in this virtue: For Cicero in his
first book of Offices says, that commonly haught y^ minds and invincible
courages, fall into deep desire* of glory, and g^^^^^ affection of
gouernmen^e, whereby they be provoked, stirred, and occasioned to do evil*
so as incontinent they leave and forsake this virtue. For (as we have fay^e
a^ore) if she become strange, and con^rarie too Iustic^^* she is ^o better
than ^y^^, boldness and (...): yet for that we measure not Justice to
strictly as they have done, so much the less we ought, or ^ee^^ ^oo fear
this consequent^* And further, if the ^^^de of man be no^ ^^ftye and (...) he
^^^ll very hardlye and with (...), ^ecome magnificall* For what is ^t that
^^^ld encourage us too contemn so many things* and too be strong and
constante in enduring all* if it were not the desire and hope of glory* which
is the only end of our Philosophy? Also who is too be found so
senseless* blockishe or void of reason* that having achieved any valiant
act, or worthilye* performed any notable enterprise is not glad and
desirous of renewmed praise? The Gods be so ielous of themselves* that they
will and command to be incessantly* honored: As Ovid writes to C^s^^ in his
second book de Tristibus:

Fama Iouis superest, tamen hunc sua factareferri* (...) esse iuicat.
Aye lasting is the fame of love, and yet he does delyght*
To give the trumpe new matter still, his praises to recyte.
Cicero likewise thinking of himself, and applying virtue according too his
affection* changed his opinion* and acknowledged the debte: as we have noted
at the beginning of this work. The desire of glory is so naturallye bo^ne* an^
nourished ^ithin our minds* that we ma^e well maintain and approoue^, that
th^^ Philosophye is in some soote grounded on Nature, as well as the same of
the auncy^ntes. There is none* who have occasion to be praised for any
excellency, either by nature, accident, education, or industry, that is not
wylling and desirous to be spoken of. It may be aptlye seen in women, who
although they be naturally bashefull, shame* fast* and modeste, and that they
dare not so boldlye show their affections as men: yet they cannot so
dissemble, but that they seem glad, and rejoice too be called fair, and
for the same are not a little glorious. As the Poet that knew them so well,
affirms of them,

Fastus inest pulchris* se^uiturque super ^ia forman.
Disdain does still depend upon dame beauties train*
And pride to her always* as handmayde does remain*
And after in his Art of Love:
Delectant etiam cast as praeconia formae: Virginibus curae, grataque forma sua
est.
The praise of beauty virtuous maids do like and love full well:
They like the name, they love the form^* wherein they do excel*
This desire of* glory notwithstanding should not be inordinate, for so might
it blind* the judgment in such vain sort, that the true use and knowledge
of it would leave us: whereby it commonly happens, that those which are
sottes in deed, and not gloriouse, supposing too do worthilye and honestlye,
(whereof might proceed a kind of praise and glory) do it so foolishly, that
they are as they deserve, mo^ked of the people. And surely I do not a little
lamente, too see this error so common in all men. Therefore we describe
such gallauntes by the glorious Soldiers, in the Poets Com^dies, who were so
meshed in this kind of folly, that they knew neither what they said* nor
what they did* As he that vaunted the King could no way he without him, how
he governed all, and that there was none but loved and reverenced him, saying
thus to his servant*

Est istuc datum
Profecto mihi, grata sint quae facio omnia.
The Gods in birth to me assignde this glorious gift from heaven above,
Tha^ all things yield unto my mind, my words and deeds all men approve.
And he yet more fool in Plautus, whom his malapar^e ^q^^^e made too believe
that all women accomp^ed him so fair, as they ran in every place after him.
The patche supposing it to be true, said: Nimia est miseria pulchru^ esse
homine^ nimis. It is (says he) a great pain to be an over fair man.
Hereby we perceive y^ to be glorious is not evil, so ye use of it be not
matched with folly. Cicero in his Offices shows, how the magnificall man
should not be mela^choly or angry, and that magnanimity does principally
consist in y^ brideling of this affection, for because (as he affirms in his
T^s^ulans) it troubles and ^^reth y^ min^ more tha^ an other passion. And
Plutarche in his treatise of Te^perance declares y^ those which are
delicatlye nourished, are most subject to fre and (...) ^s, and sonest angr^.
The fury of this passion was well seen by Hec^ba in Eurypides, and by Progne
and P^i^omela in Quids Me^amorphosis* Notwithstanding this argument whatsoever
it pleased them to say, we are of contrary opinion: that i^ any Gentleman or
Courtyer be wronged, chiefly when the outrage touches his honor or
reputation, and he seem no^ to take the matter in great greese, although
(...) can dissemble, he is not valiant nor mag^^^icall. And those that most
(...) ^e fume in any such quarrel, are men of mo^^ courage, and thought
ha^^yest of heart. So that sundry are proud to say, I am choleric of Nature,
and account of this as a virtue.

Of Temperance.
THe last fountain from whence flows the perfeaction of ^onestie, is that
that gives force and light to others, without which nothing can be well
done* And is called Tempera^ce, which is a moderation of perturbations and
troubles of the mind, and a measurable mildness or mean in all things*
Whereof I can particulie speak no more, but that it very ^^re co^prehendeth all
the rest, and is the principal spring from whence (...) all gold behau^our.
The modest man is he that pleases ^uery man, who tak^th nothing in malice or
displeasure, and frames his quietness to all purposes. On the contrary, he
that does arrogantlye impresse in his sprightes his first opinions and
imaginations, and will not any way yield to reasonable change, is hated of all
men* And of him it is said: Malum consilium quod mutori non potest* The
counsel of that man is evil, which may not be alter^d: For although such
aduyce be good and reasonable* yet it must be moderated, and masked,
according to the pleasure of others. These kind of people we should not
accompany our selves with, as wilful men, hedstro^g* hasty, and such as are
subject to their own affections: for since each one, hath^ his proper
imperfections, if we should still be obstinate or stout, and would not yield
nor apply our selves one to another, nor supporte and footh one the other,
there should be nothing but devotion, contention, and particularity among
men. Therefore is it most proper to Prudence, to know the persons, place, and
time, with the rest of their circumstances. And this being known, Temperance
enters our hearts, and mollifieth all the parts of it* (...) it not to ta^ke
^^ill, or be offended at any thing though the same be imperse^^, in such
sort, that part^ye it dissembleth, and partly it applies, and obeyeeth to
all these cir^^^^^ances. So we may know, that those offenders are vexed with
t^^ v^ees, with Ignorance, and that is ^^^^sable when it is alone: and with
natural presumption, engendered and b^^ne in our ^yndes, ^^y this second
Nature* whe^^ ^^ treat: which opre^umption (...) h^^det (...) mildness, and
^o mak^^^ us (...) ^^^ogant, and stubborn against others* and causes our
anger to be obstinate, furious, and spightfull in opinion. But this virtue
expulseth these vices, and makes our hearts ^^eke, lowly, humble, and
obedient. As touching those that offend but of ignorance, they are (as I have
said) excusable, when the mind is tractable, the desire good, and the heart
mild, gentle, and not stubborn: for though good natural people are ignorant
of those sircu^stances, and know nothing, nor have seen^ any thing to purpose:
yet we may then perceive them to have good entrance and beginning of knowledge,
when they do not wylfully stand in their ignorance. And for that we daily
frequen^ and (...) company, as are neither found in our Philosophy* nor good
Courtiers: to find out such we must note, that of all the four virtues we
have spoken of, this is the same which makes us perfitely to understand and
know, when any are civil, honest, and Courtiers to be lyked. Some are seen
very sumptuous, and magnificall in most of their doings, and others attempt
great matters of a lofty* heart, to show a desire to r^uenge their honora ^^d
yet ^^ste of nothinglesse than of our Philosophy* (...) that is modest,
^^ractable and temperate, is not without the other* virtues also And to y^ end
that the force of this virtue may be the better perceived, we will proceed to
speak of a good grace which chiefly amongst al y^ rest springs out of this
virtue.

Of a good Grace.
These four virtues, that we have treated of before, are the assured and
certain causes, and very springs from whence proceeds honesty, which we like
wise call Courtly civility. Of the which civility well framed, and according
to the circumstances (that we have mentioned of) applied, is formed, borne, and
nourished this a^^ grace* which Cice^o in his Offices calls ^^coru^^
genezale. And for that the m^tter to him seems so confused, as it is not yet
framed into direct and right rules: he said, it might be better co^c^^ed in
imagination* than set forth* in writing: we will after him declare that little
we know, as well by writing, as by experience. And to the end, th^^ the
difference* between Civility and good grace*(...) be discerned and
understood* All causes pr^^eeding from the virtues before mentioned (...)
Civil actions, though they a^e (...) to all persons: for the use ^^everie
(...) tion should be digested, and moderated, according to the circumstances.
This agreement and good grace commes of civility and honesty: whereby we
know, that nothing should precisely be called good grace, unless it be
honest* And honesty should be measured, according to our virtues before
showed. Notwithstanding, oftentimes abusing the term, we attribute it to
villainous and dishonest acts* as when we say that a theft or pick^ric is done
with a good grace, when the fr^^bes, ^^^^els, and subtilties of thieves and
theeuing is well observed. Cicero says there are two kinds of good graces:
one special, which (...) to every one of the virtue (...) as that which we
(...), does smell or taste of any particular virtue: The other general,
proceeding from all the virtues, which is a certain framing and agreeing ^^
(...), to the pleesing of the world, where of we now speak Whereby we may
pertey^^ and judge that they are much ab^sed, and are not of the number of our
Philosophers that will ever have their countenance (...) of great
understanding* and also they that will not make other (...) or (...), but as
magnificall and liberal: For (...) cheer and our countenance must taste of
Prudence, Justice, Magnanimity, and above all of Temperance or Modesty. Of
the which four so assembled and united, is perfitely seen and proved to come
a good grace. Where are now out l^stie youths, that are so lively and brave,
and take so great pain to be gallant, that speak friendlye, march
delicately, and look loftily* counterfey^ing countenances in all, and
supposing by this to have a good grace: and yet are merely ignorant of our
virtues, whereof that good grace springs. Then these pleasant apparances,
that proceed from the honest acts of good Courtiers, is this good grace?
which cannot be divided (...) from (...) virtue, nor our virtue from her. And
wherein is so great force to come to this perfection of honor, as nothing
more: so that you may see our Gentlemen to ^a^e mo^^ honor and reputation among
Citizens and Merchants, and con^ent them better with their borrowing
persuasions, than any of these rude and rustickes can do with gifts.

Socrates the first moral Philosopher, gave one precepte among others, whereby
we might easily come to honor* which is, that we should not mask, or
disguise our selves, and that we should be ashamed to seem otherwise in deed
than we are. For (says he) when any show themselves other than they be, it is
a plain argument they are of no value. And further their sayning and ypocrisie
cannot but be spyed. For glory gotten in such subtle sort will perish. And
there is nothing so finely feyned, cunningly couched, nor craftily covered, but
time will reveal the same: and all causes conveyed by dissimulation, are
subject to time, and are of substance like white blossoms: whereas true virtue
increases daily, and grows with time to immortal perfection.

To the end that this appear not contrary to that we have s^yde of
Dissimulation, which we affirm to be of so great force in our Philosophy: we
must better understand the sentence of Socrates: for we follow him in this,
and his opinion is very good. True it is, that he that shows himself other
than he is indeed, dissembleth: and he that dissembleth, shows himself
otherwise than he is. But we must consider the end of dissimulation, which
will agree with us easily. Socrates forbidd^s such masking and general (...) by
cause ^e should not appear to be others tha^ we are and we also allow the
s^on^* For it were very foolish and rashly spoken, to say that a Gentlemen
Courtier has a mind to be seen or accounted too show him self contrary to
that he seems: or to do any thing to that end. But Socrates lets us not,
that having no desire to show ourselves contrary to that we would be esteemed,
notwithstanding we dissemble, and accommodate our selves to the imperfections
of every one, when the same does present us danger, and is prejudicial unto
us. For such dissembling is not evil, and in it is neither deceyte nor fraud:
but all good faith, as it were done not of purpose to show our selves
otherwise than we be: but to the end to please the world. Himself does
serve us for example, for although he was ever like unto himself, constant and
not variable, and desirous not to be seen other than he seemed: yet was he the
greatest dissembler in the world. It is therefore worthy great praise to
moderate our affections, that they appear not any way to others: and so to
dissemble and accommodate our selves to every one: For this is an easy mean
to win and draw to us the good wills of all men, whereof comes honor and
reputation. And although sometimes, in dissimulation is found an evil intent,
as in those that under their fair and fawning cheer do covertly hyde hatred:
yet for all that they do not leave to be good men and virtuous, so that their
evil will appear not too much: for it suffices to us, if the means ^e good,
under the which, he that deceyueth his companion most cunningly and subtlely,
is most wise. We see the like in love, which is a place where our virtue and
god grace is most allowed and best proved, as we have said. And is not then
this dissimulation requisite and necessary to gain by the deceyuing of one
another: as Ovid makes mention in his third Book de art (...)

Saepe virifallunt, tenere non saepe puell^,
Paucaque si queras, crimina fraudis habent.
G^ile is most part graft in men,
in maidens rare to find:
Most maids are full of faith,
most men have faith resignde.
And further,
Non tamen expositas mensa deprendat Amator,
Pyxidas, ars fac^em dissimul^ta iuuet.
In place when thou thy mystresse spies,
her best to please ^hy countenance frame,
The easiest art to bear her eyes,
well to dissemble is the same,
Sometimes we must dissemble, to blind the world, and to shadow our hot
affections with cold regard and countenances, or otherwise: as Helen
admonished Paris, fearing least his love should be suspected, which he made to
her in the absence of her husband Menelaus: when she cunningly counseled him
saying:

At tu dissimula, nisi tu desistere mauis:
Sed cur desistas? dissimulare licet.
Unless thou mind to cease,
dissemble thou therefore:
But why should thou now stint thy suit?
thou can dissemble sore.
And on the contrary, to be open and simple, is meet for beasts and ydiotes:
for this presumption being still among us, that is, every one to deceive other
that most cunninglye can: Those that with open heart declare and show
themselves not willing to use fraud, are reputed ignorant, and have not the
courage to speak to a man. For this the Almaynes are best esteemed, as
sometimes heretofore we the French men were: yet now (God be thanked) they
have pretily learned to live: And further, when the sutteltie of dissimulation,
is subject to reprehension. We should not therefore generally blame
dissimulation. For evil people do makeseuill their profit in all things: As
O^d says de Tristibus, d^^laring to Caesar, that although some women had
evil* ^^^d his Art of love, the book was not therefore the worse: For (says
he) evil persons abuse the goodness of fire, which is notwithstanding good.
And so of all other good things.

And more:
Quodcunque attig^rit* si q^^est studiese smistri^
^d vitium mores instruit ind^ suos.
This facility of the Spirit is not therefore to be blamed which snakes man
according to the pleasure of others, to chatinge and transform himself* For
in so doing he shall be accounted wise* win honor, and be free of
repre^ension every where: which Proteus knew very well, to whom his diverse
Metamorphosis and often transfiguration was very commodious. Thus have you
principally the profit, which Temperance brings us, for the better obteyning
of this good grace.

We have declared how particularly we should govern our selves in obeying
others* now we must know how we shall generally use our acts of good
grace, without regard of the complexions, conditions, and private
imperfections of any: A^ amongst ^^aungers, and* i^ an unknown companys* or
in a multitude or great assemblye where diverse are of sundry ^^inions, which
will not be content nor think it good that we should frame our following
more to the one than to the other, i^ it be not to some noble person above the
rest, wherein it is lawful without offense to the company, to serve and obey*
his pleasure* I cannot here forget the ignorance and brutishness of the
people, who in feasts, banquettes, and assembli^s, govern and order
themselves, not according to the manner of the Court which is the best rule:
but according to their particular pleasures and opinions. Wherefore it is not
to be marueyled at, if out of such a company many come discontented: when
every one of the assistaunces having their proper imperfections, contrary the
one t^^ the other, it were impossyble, but in pleasing of one, we should* and
must offend the other. So that if any frame themselves to observe their rule
and common manner* every one will constrayne his desire* ^^^ like well of it.
And for that the Spirit is the principal part of man, having is cert ayne
mouyngs, which are the affections, even as the body has. It is then the same
we should most care of. For if the mouinges be honest, and according* too
virtue, which is too say, if the affections are not contrary too the four
kinds, whereof we have spoken before, but are united, concorded, and ruled by
them, the gesture of the body will easilye follow, and nothing shall pass
before the eyes of men, which shall not be well done and of a good grace. For
the body is the Organe and Instrument of the Spirit, by the which it does
show it self, and makes known what it is. It was not without cause, that
certain Philosophers said home that the Spirit is ever like it self, and
never commes with more cunning, nor better learned from the Schools than she
was before: For those that are Tutours and Teachers, do not instruct the
Spirits of Infants: But only open, and stretch out the cunduytes of the body,
to the end, that the Spirit being delivered, may know and show her self,
whereby we see that men of weak and feeble Spirits, cannot become learned:
What pain and studys soever they take, what time and charge so ever they
spend, and what master or learner, so ever they have. The reason is, that the
Vessels and powers of the body being once opened, nothing more can be
done: and no cunnyng industry or labor, can any way alter or change the
condition of the Spirit. Wherein it seems too me needelesse, in a master
and case so clear, too use any Argument, for too show whether the qualitye
of the Spirit of man, be virtuous or no, when it is too be known by the
gesture and outward countenance of the body: as it were impossible for the
body, to serve for a mask or false Visarde to the Spright, which is even so.
For where as sundry ssi^gular good Authors, have desired to make us
understand the conditions and propertyes of persons paste, either how they
were learned, wise, magnificall, or such like, and would perfitely represent
them and descrybe them unto us: they could not otherwise make them better
known than by their acts, gestures, and manner of living: As we may see in
Salust, who does so lively counterfeyte Cateline: and in the Poets, who had
great delyghte in such descriptions. And we our selves, when we see a man still busy without purpose or reason, we say he is wavering and
inconstant: and when we hear one speak much and like or allow of his talk,
we say he is wise, and of a good judgment. And so we commonly judge others
by their outward signs. For too speak a truth, how should we otherwise
have the knowledge of things invisible, secret and hidden: if not by the
exterior apparaunces that be presented to some one of our senses? Then we
must needs conclude, that the countenance of man reuealeth and bewrays
the knowledge of his Spirit: the which can be no other in outward show,
than she does form them. Wherefore we ought not to blame the manner of living
of a learned man, wise, bountyfull or liberal: though he have not doctrine,
prudence, liberality, and other qualities of the Spirit. And for that there
are many which have not the true knowledge of her propertyes, (which is no
other but virtue or vice) and consequently understand not that it is part of
our Philosophy: this is the cause, that knowing nothing of the manners,
gesture, and living of men, we commonly judge of them otherwise than they
are. As of a young sotte or fool braynlesse and full of prattling, they will
esteem, wise, pleasant, and a good speaker* and on the contrary, of one
prudent, modest, and a civil Courtier, they will regard as proud, glorious,
and of no understanding. These kind of noddies be of the number of the
ignorant multitude, which are nothing certain, but so blinded, that they
follow in judgment of all things their first opinion whatsoever it be. Of
whom it is said, Quot capita, tot sensus. As many heads so many wits. Against
whom whosoever will contend, is like Hercules fighting with the Serpent Hidra,
having many heads, who as soon as he had cut of one, there presently sprang
out in his place five or six more, as evil or worse than the first. The mind
of man has two governors reason and appetite: Reason is the same whereby he
wills nothing contrary too virtue: and appetite is that which makes us desire
all things, without regard or cheyse of good or evil, and seeks no other
thing, but only for pleasure. Therefore we should in all our life, have
great regard that we take nothing in hand without some honest intent. It is
a maxim or principle, that the Sages in times past left for us to follow:
Nihilfrustra, Nothing in vain. If in all our doings before the execution, we
hold this consideration, to think of* wherefore we do it, and to what end:
surely there shall not be so many repentaunces, as there is. And for this
cause is it remembered that the wise man never says, I thought it not, or it
repents me* not for that he ought or should not repent him, when he has done
evil* but for that he atte^peth nothing, without consideration wherefore and to
what end: after ye which consideration, repentance co^mes never or seldom.
Therefore we must have great sore sight that in all our a^s and deeds, we
execute nothing rashly, and without advice: which if we do, reason shall rule
and govern so well, y^ the spirit will not deliver from her, any thing but
virtue: from whence this good grace shall then be seen to proceed. Even so the
appetite yelding to discretion, will enterprise nothing in us, but be obedient
in executing the decree and commission of reason. Then these immoderate
affections, which are so blinded and insolent, that they make us subject and
slaves to our own proper opinions: shall be banished from us, as an ^uill
contrary to our Philosophy: which is not but too please and be gracious to
others, whereby is obtained honor and reputation. A man thus ruled and
governed shall have his whole senses free, to study the best mean how he
ought to live: and when we shall once understand and know our virtue to he
such as we have showed before, he will address all his thoughts toward her,
and will do nothing which shall not be agreeable to every man, whereby be may
receive praise and estimation of the world: which is the accomplishment of our
desired enterprise.

See here the happy way we must hold: and whereupon is grounded the perfect
glory of our Philosophy. See how the true and right Courtiers live: which
bend and bow their own proper affections to follow our virtue, and he
pleasing to all men. Behold the true fountain from whence springs the good
grace, which consists principally (as we see) in modesty and temperance.
Where are now these glorious vaunters, that triumph in their imperfections and
good heads? which will not (as they say) for any man living, do otherwise than
after their own brains? We must send them to Tymon Misantrope that enemy
of mankind, and exclude them clean from our company.

The Gentleman Courtyer is none of those, nor so addicted to his own desires,
or so subject to himself, but plyant like wax, ready to receive any honest or
friendly impression. For if it be needful to laughe, he rejoices: If to be
sad, he lowreth: If to be angry, he frowneth: If to feed, he eats: If to
fast, he pyneth. And to conclude, he is ready to do whatsoever it be,
according to the humors and complexions of his fellowship and Courtly company,
although his affections are clean contrary. Yet in all these actions, he
must use a prudence, that he do not any thing lightly, but so gravely and with
such a modest mean, as if he had double consideration in it, regarding why,
how, where and when, with all other circumstances. And that he have ever in
his mouth not to do wrong to any, but to guard and defend the right of all
men. And if it be needful to be magnificall, so to use it, as it seem to
be done not nigardlye, but bountifullye: that he have his heart firm, fast,
and assured, not moved or bashful at any sudden motion, how strange or
stately soever it be. That he so moderate and bridle his private affections,
as nothing be seen to come from him, but courtesy, gentleness, and humanity.
And doing this, there will presently appear in him so good a grace, that he
shall easily draw unto him the favor and benevolence of every man. And as all
the world may perfectly perceive, that by the exterior and outward acts, one
cannot so well deceive, or so easily beguyle the simplest of judgment that
is, if he have not these instructions in his mind, without the which none
can attain too this perfection of knowledge. Therefore let us follow and
rule our selves by others, accustoming too do as they do, and make a good
foundation* For the first praise consists in inuenting and executing in
himself somewhat that is good: the second too prove it good, and too follow
the same that others have done good by. And in so directing our dooyngs,
besides that many will account of us as great Philosophers, and being
known of the best in our virtue not to have the whole understanding of it: yet
at the least they will commend and praise our desire to know the ground of
it: which by little and little will so polish and burnishe our countenance,
that in the end we may well come too the perfection of this good grace. Let
us mark the Italian his Civility and courtesy. For ancient Rome the mother
and nourse of many of our Philosophy (although they have written of others)
have sown and spredde in all the country certain countenances and gestures,
which are daily practiced in such sort, as, though some have not their
minds perfectly instructed, yet they have their chere and gestures so framed,
by a custom of following it, that they seem to us the best for Courtly grace
in the world. The Italian will not appear in any his acts rash or heady,
but so coldely and so soberly seems to consider all circumstances, as thougeh
he tasted the sap and substance of our best virtue; which proceeds of
Prudence. And in doing wrong to any, whereby the law may touch him, or the
Judge byte him (as we have said speaking of Justice) he is so circumspecte,
as he commonly keeps and conueyes himself out of bondage ever. And if it
be needful too play Sienor Magnifico, God knows how he will do his
endeavor. Touching y^ haughtiness of heart and nobleness of mind, there are
none in ye world do better or with more majesty represent it tha^ they. They
blush or bash at nothing: for if you suppose suddenly to move them, with a
shrink of their shoulder they shake it of, and make a good appara^ce. If you
suppose to make them laughe, they will not change countenance: And for the
rest, it is needelesse to tell, how they cover, hyde, and repress their
affections with their great, patience and dissimulation. So that to conclude,
they are borne and bredde in their country Courtiers. By this example, such as
cannot well instruct their minds in our Philosophy, shall do singularly well
to endeavor and accustom themselves, to imitate, follow, and represent the
best liked and most allowed in the same. I was of opinion too proceed in this
matter more particularly, but I feel my pen blu^t and weery: and I am willing
to recreate my self in this country where I am newly come.

The Conclusion.
I Will content myself too have opened thus much, by the which such as have
good eyesight, may as in a turrette or prospectiue place, regard a far off,
and see many things touching the variety of man's life, whereof we have no whit
spoken. We may also perceive that this Philosophy moral, that commaundes us
to do all things which is good faithfully and truly, how it has made us to
gather together this, whereof we have treated: which wills us to do the same,
that seems good to men. And this error is not to be wondered at, since it coms
of the corruption and deprauation of our minds, who accounts that good which
is evil according to the judgment of other men some what perfect. For we
have so many spies and enemies, that seek no other than to entrappe and meshe
us in these follies and vanities, to the end we should not know the true way
we ought to take: that it is impossible for this second nature (wherein the
Sages and worldly wise have set their only good and felicity) to resist or
withstand them: whereby most part of men are deceived, supposing to have this
Philosophy, which they have not. And others that are said too be more wise,
are most abused: believing that in the same which they have, consists the
only good and happy state of man, whereas in deed there is nothing more
contrary to the sovereign bounty than their Science alone: which does no
other, but puff and lift up these our minds against the alone and only
omnipotent puyssance. Wherefore I affirm that true Philosophy is the despising
and contemning of Philosophy and his foundation, which is this second nature,
that God has not made. For by the fault of man it is become so corrupted. If
we will be Philosophers, we must shake from us and unfold the darkness
and impedimentes of this second nature, and her consequence: (what this
consequence is, I leave to others judgment) and endeavor our selves to
reknowledge the first, which is the same that God made: who will give us his
blessing and grace so to do, if we open the gate unto him who seeks us,
saying, I stand at your door and knock thereat, if any will receive me, I will
come in and eat with him, and he with me.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
CO^tente thy self for the present (gentle Reader) with that I have opened
unto thee the gate of my thoughts, and brought thee into the Cabinet of my
contemplations: hoping (if thou take it pleasauntly) that I will show thee
piece after piece, the remnant of the little Treasure that I have there.

Imprinted at London by Henry Binneman, for Lucas Harison and George Bishop.
Anno Domini. 1575.


