TO THE NOBLE AND worthy Knight, Sir Philip Stanhope of Shelford, in the County
of Nottingham.
Noble Sir,
KNowing a good CONSCIENCE to be every honorable, and (indeed) every honest
man's Saint and Mistress (in both which attributes, I assure my self you have
a large and plentiful interest) I have ventured here to present to such men's
viewes in general, a poor and rough draught of her perfection; and in
special, to you as one, to whom it shall be no disgrace, that I account you
amongst her principal servants: which belief in your affection, and devotion
to her, draws me to a confidence in your inclination to pardon, and withal to
accept this (in truth unskillful) picture that here I send you, though it be
as far from the life, as earth is from heaven. I shall happily be censured for
not selecting othermore specious servants, and favorites of hers, which boast
and make a face of great atte^pts and endeavors, and employments of their
valor, and integrity, in the full maintenance and preservation of her noble
and God-like temper, and in advancing of her deserved honor and reputation:
but certainly, I have ever found (in that weak discovery, which my feeble
understanding could make of men) those which excel in bravery, and number of
words and profession, to fall short in deeds and execution, and on the
contrary, least proserers, best performers.

And therefore as notwithstanding the want of glorious and flourishing
Protestations (commonly faltring in performance) and maugre the spite and
devilish devises of your enemies (in whom it is a hard question, whether their
malice or folly be greater) seeking to auile and minish your hearts
faithfulness and integrity: I yet do firmly credit the unfeigned respect you
bear to that heavenly Mistress of yours: so I despair not of fair
interpretation and acceptance at your hands of this her purtraiture: though (as
I told you) done so ruggedly. The poverty of which offering, I have no means to
relieve, but by praying almighty God long to continue your health and
prospertey; to bless both your outward and inward estate: and that therein you
may daily indeed manifest your self, to be what I fully believe you are;
namely, a preserver and a patron to a good conscience. So with the
signification of that duty and service, which I am justly tied to tender both
you and your worthy and excellent Lady, I remain

At your command, THOMAS PESTELL:

THE GOOD CONSCIENCE.
PROVE: 15.15. A good Conscience is a continual Feast.


IN this Text is mention of two things, which (it seems) the world has quite
forgotten; at least left off, and disaccustomed. It may be we have heard our
Fathers, or Grandfathers report strange things, of Lords, and Knights, and
great Men, keeping bountiful houses and continual Feasts, and they perchance
heard their Fathers before them speak of keeping a good Conscience. But in
this Rotten, Woodden-Age, wherein we live, these two are perished, at least
traueld and gone out of the Land together, which together we find as fast
friends in the text, A good conscience, and a continual Feast. All I hope to
gain is, that the discourse of such things will not be unwelcome to us,
because we are fallen upon those times, indeed miserable: wherein men are
merely nothing but discourse and talk of these matters.

In opening the Text, four several things are to be enquired of, and stood
upon.

1. First, what Conscience is in general.

2. What a good Conscience is, and the contrary.

3. The main intendment of Solomon in this place, or the general Doctrine
hence obserueable, having two branches, one implicit, which is, that wicked
souls are most anguished, and wheeled, and tempested with affliction, most
grieved and galled in mind: another explicit, to wit, that good and honest
men are more mirthfull, joyous, receive more true solace and contentment, then
the former.

4. How this comparison here urged by Solomon may be fitted and applied;
proving first that the wicked conscience is no feast, or if one, not
continual. Secondly, in the righteous, that theyrs is one, and a continual
one. A good Consc: is a etc.

1. First, what Conscience is in general.

It is defined to be a certain natural understanding of the Law, approving
honest and good actions, and disallowing or detesting such as be ill: Or it is
a judgment of the soul, fetched from the Law of God, upon which ensues
either a ioyfulnes, or a trembling in the soul. And it consists (says
Melancthon,) of a practicke Syllogism in man's understanding, and the hearts
motion that ensues it. The Mayor whereof is the rule of certainty and truth,
to which the deed is laid, and weighed in the Minor: and the conclusion is
the souls Judgment, or reflection on it self, procuring either quietness or
vexation.

Aquinas defines it to be: Ordo scientiae ad aliquid, an Act by which we
apply our knowledge to some-particular thing. And Calvin says, it is Medium
quid dam, a certain thing of a middle nature twixt God and man, not suffering
a man to suppress in himself what he knows offensive to God. Lypsius calls
it Sointillam: A sparckle of rectified reason, left still in man, of his good
and evil actions, both Iudex and Iudex, both Judge and witness. To which
purpose it has been named, the Pulse, the Spur, the Monitor, the watchman,
the clock or Laerum to the soul; the good Cassandra, foretelling dangers, Gods
special Bayliffe and Secretary, to arrest us, to register our offenses, of
which that is true of Tullie, Magnum vim habet in vtrumque partem, etc. It has
great force on both sides, either to free them from fear, who have done
nothing, or to present ever to their face due punishment that be offenders,
whereunto agrees that description of Conscience in the scriptures, that it is
our own Thoughts, either accusing or excusing us.

2. Hence we may easily descend to the second particular, and gain the
understanding of a good Conscience, which yet will be hard to do: in regard a
good oue is indeed the very Peace of GOD, which passes all understanding; yet
thus far they have cleared us, who define it to be a joyful remembrance of
a well-led de life, joined with hope, in the expectation of a Comfortable
event: or a joyous motion of the soul, joined cum scientia, with knowledge of
her own right actions, (in which regard it is named concertly, Conscience, not
merely Science, for without this conjunction it is (...) a Conscience
nicknamed, or miscalled:) and we are eased by such, who hold a Conscience
then to be free or good when it is at peace, either concerning pardon of
sin, or concerning our pleasing God, notwithstanding all imperfections: or
when the question is of things in their own nature indifferent, and it being
in such a choice, neither Asinina, nor Lupina; neither straining at strawes,
nor swallowing logges. But then specially, when it is calm and quiet upon the
first ground, namely, upon the sense of sin forgiven, and the soul made
free and reconciled to God, an estate, neither befalling the proud Pharisee,
swollen, and pufft up with a false conception and tympany, a deceiuable
confidence, and ouer-weening of his own righteousness, nor the dull and stony
sinner, who drunk with sins sweetness, is made insensible, and remains
seemingly vndisquieted. In sum, it is nothing else but that inward integrity
of the heart, whereof S. Paul speaking, says, The end and complement of the
Law, is Charity in a pure heart, with faith unfeigned. 1. Tim. 1.5. And
presently after, Verse. 19. differencing it from a mere understanding, he says,
Some have made a shipwreck of Faith, by forsaking a good Conscience: Wherein
(says Calvin) he shows it to be a lively ardor of serving God, with the
entire affection of his soul; and a sincere endeavor, to live godly and
honestly among men, respecting properly and precisely God, as the maine end
and object thereof; but less principally men, because the effects and fruits of
it extend even to them also. This thus opened, brings us (I hope) some light to
find and see what an evil Conscience is, which is, whatsoever the former is
not. A remembrance of an ill-led-life, joined with fear of punishment, or a
grievous and racking motion of the soul, mixed with knowledge and sight of her
own wickedness, and by consequence, with a foresight of her own misery. But
in handling the next part of the Text, we shall obtain a manifold discovery
of them both, and be made to descry as well the comfortable nature of the one,
as the poor and wretched condition of the other.

Come we then to that which I called the maine intendment of Solomon, or the
general Doctrine hence obserueable; The first part whereof is, that there is
no peace to the wicked, as God speaks by Esaias, No joy, no comfort, in an ill
soul. And the second, That the good man, is the only merry man alive. For so
much is veiled and covered here, under these words. A continual Feast.

3 For the first, as Saint Paul speaks of the good man that he is afflicted:
yet always merry. So Solomon of the wicked just contrary, even in laughter
the heart is sorrowful, Pro. 14.13. The world then (it seems) is cousened and
gulled with shows and shadows, and outward semblances, thinking such a man
sick that is in perfect health, esteeming an other in great iollity, of an
able lusty body, when it is but a languishing carcass. For the full worldling
sets out, and paints and struts like a huge Colossus of gold (peradventure) or
Iuory without, but stuffed with clay and stones within: all their happiness
affoording no more comfort, then for a thief to be hanged on a painted
Gallows. Therefore Seneca calls it Foelicitatem bracteatam, and capsulam
totam: gilded felicity, all cover and shell, and bark, straw without grain,
or gilded sheathes with leaden weapons: nor yet so merely? It Is not a froath or
wind, or emptiness, but a burning, a corrosion, a sting, a poison, a secret
malignity withal: For so Solomon implies, where speaking of all outward
things, he says, They are not only vanity, but vexation of the spirit. So
that worldlings may complain of all earthly matters, as Agarnemnon does of
honor in the Tragedy: (...). T's sweet (in show and semblance a far off) but
it sads a man at heart when it comes. The maine reason whereof is, that of
Senecaes, because all folly and vanity laborat fastidio sui, grows in the end
weary of it self. Et maximam sui veneni partem bibit, drinks up the greater
part of her own poison, occasioned by a gnawn wormeaten, a wicked guilty
conscience. For as the Cruciaeries in Rome bore that Cross which should
afterward bear them: so God has laid this conscience as a cross on every
sinful wretch, wherein he suffers before before time of his full and final
suffering.

A thing which the Heathens felt and discovered, Sua quemque fraus and suus
terror maxim vexat (says Tullie) Each man's own fraud, and his own
affrightment most disquiets him, and those Furies (says he) do anguish and
pursue wicked men, not with burning firebrands, as we see in Tragedies, sed
angore conscientiae, but with the trouble of their conscience. And Seneca most
divinely, Nihil prod st inclusam habere conscientiam, patemus Deo. Quid
quaeris? quid machinaris? quid abscondis? custos tuus te sequitur? Quid locum
abdictum legis? arbitros remoues? Putas tibi contigisse, vt oculos ouium
effugias? To what end (says he) Does a sinner choose secrecy, or
solitariness? Demens quid prodest non habere conscium, cum habes conscientiam?
Madman, what auayles to have no witness of thy wickedness, thou having a
conscience which is a thousand witnesses.

A thing which every sinner would shun and cannot, whose state is therefore
resembled to the stricken Bear, which running per syluas, saltusque, through
woods and groves, yet still haeret lateri laethalis arundo, the deadly arrow
sticks still in her side; so runs and rowles the perplexed sinner like Lucans
Bear, Se rotat in vulnus, and secum fugientem circuit hastam, though he
wheel and turn round (as the Wiseman says Impij ambulant in circuitu:) yet
the Spear that wounded him falls not out. Such men, says Plutarch are like
men sea-sicke, who being in the ship, think they should do better in the
boat, and thence back again to the ship: nihil agunt, etc. They do
nothing (says he) nothing to any purpose, so long as their choler remains in
the stomach: So the Sinner, no shift of place, no change of air relieues him,
being dogged and tended on by Erynnis Conscientiae, the Hellish Hagge, or fury
of his conscience, that euer-gaping Cerberus, that euer-waking blood hound;
either barking eager, and so disturbs his rest, which is bad enough: or if it
chance to sleep, it is far worse: if it wakes, it makes him like a madman;
when it sleeps; a Lethargique dull and senseless: if it speak, a thousand
wild Chymaeraes and winged furies, and spirting serpents ride upon the tongue
of it: but when it is dumb, it casts him into a stony deadnes, which is an
estate so damnable, as we are wont to express it by resemblance to a Patient,
on whom Physic works not, or that seeles not himself sick, when both
Physicians and friends know him desperate. It Is- Austines, Quid miserius misero
non miserante seipsum? What more miserable then a wretch, not to take
compassion on himself? Nor can it be thought a pleasure for a sinner, that
his soul is grown over with a filme or cataract, that he becomes obdurate,
seared and remorselesse, and so secure like Jonas under hatches, a sleep: for
such a sleep of the conscience is but a dogs sleep, as God told Cain, in
Genesis 4. If thou do ill, Sin lies at the door, lies like a dog at the
door, upon a sudden to rise and pluck out his throat. Tandemista tranquilitas
tempestas est (says Saint Jerome) This seeming calm proves in the end a most
cruel storm: as a wheel seems not at all to move when it is whirled about
with greatest violence.

Which if we would have proved or exemplified (beside profane stories and
daily trial) the scripture is plenteous in furnishing us with examples and
testimonies: Joseph's brethren, Genesis 50.15. It may be he will hate us, and pay
us again the evil we did him. A fuller example, is Herod in Mat. 14. who
when Christ came to offer mercy; out of the hell of his heart imagined John
Baptist had bin risen again to take vengeance. So the Scribes and Pharisees in
that judgment of our Savior, concerning the woman taken in adultery, accused
of their own conscience, went out one by one, John 8.9. The same sting it was
made Baltazers countenance change, and his joints to be loosed, and his knees
to knock one against onother, Dan. 5.6. So when Paul disputed of
righteousness and temperance, and the judgment to come: the Text says,
Foelix trembled, Act. 24.26. The time would fail me to speak of Adam, of
Saul, of Judas, and six hundred more: for it is in all wicked souls, either
the first part of hell, a fire that burns and consumes speedily; or the second
part, a worm that closely frets and eats away, and rots the soul, and shall
never die, says Esaias, 66 24. Such a man is like him the Apostle speaks of,
Tit. 3.11. Who is damned of himself, his own Judge, witness, hangman: at least
finds himself guilty, and nothing remains, but a fearful looking for of
judgment, and a violent fire, Heb. 10.27.

2 The second branch of the doctrine, and that which is here expressed, is, that
how ever the world rashly conceit good men's estate wretched and tempestuous,
yet they are the only merry men alive. It is thought religion duls their wits,
and daunts their spirits, as if mirth and mischief ever met together. But the
Heathens have been able to tell us, that all bliss lies not in a giddy
lightness. There is (says Statius) hilaris cum pondere virtus, Virtue with
mirth, and weight in it: and Tully could say: Non hilaritate modo, nec
lascinia, nec ioco comite lenitatis, sed saepe etiam tristes firmitate and
constantia sunt beati: Men many times seeming sad, are blessed in the
firmness and constancy of their temper. For the true Christian man, though
he run still away: yet his joys are deeper, then the rushing noise of
shallow worldlings; as Claudius speaks of Nilus: Lene fluit, sed cunctis
omnibus exit vtilior, nullas confessus murmr vireis: though it show no
strength in his murmr and rattling, yet it is more useful then other rivers.
This is true of a good conscience, in the general, because it is in every
disease a Physician, in strife a Lawyer, in doubt a Preacher, in griese a
counselor, in sin a confessor; like a sweet persume, at once taking away the
noisome smell, and leaving a sweet savor for it, or like the Unicorns horn in
water, driving poison out of any estate. This we shall in like manner find true,
if we take into our consideration those things which most afflict and travel
men in this life, and wherewith the best men are oftentimes shaken and
disturbed, and theit evennes interrupted and en combred, which be SIN and
Affliction. For we shall find that which Iuvenal speaks of virtue; Semita
tranquillae per virtutem patet vnica vitae, applyable more fitly to a good
conscience, that the way out of the forenamed difficulties, and the path to
arrive at quietness is no other.

And for SIN first, the daily wrastlings and combats against those relics of
sin, are best known to them that have experienced them: Such will cry out in
the bitterness of their souls, with S. Paul, I feel another law in my members,
rebelling against the law of my flesh, and leading me captive into the law of
sin. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?
Romans 7.23.24. Now a good conscience does not only preserve men from committing
some sin, as Pride and envy (that Saw of the soul, and pain of the damned,
and so works a peaceful innocence that way: but it likewise cleares him from
the guilt and horror of all sin: For first, it is a procurer, at least, a
fast friend, to a bold and lively faith in God. So the Author to the
Hebrews, Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near in assurance of our faith with a true
heart, sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience; and then in the next
place it makes a man confident to come with boldness to the throne of grace: for
if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God, 1. John.
3.21. In which regard David ftiles God the God of his praise, and the God of
his righteousness: and the Apostle calls integrity of life, and a good
conscience, arma institiae, armor of righteousness on the right hand, and on
the left, 2. Cor. 6.7. which preserues him safe from all assaults, and snares,
and temptations of the devil: nay, the righteous man gains by every such
attempt of Satan: Doemones tentando nobis coronas fabricant, every temptation
anoyded, as it is a Crown to a man; so it is a curse to his enemy. And Origin
imagined, that it should increase the tormentors punishment. In the mean time,
the righteous soul lies covered under his buckler of Faith, like little Teucer
under the shield of Ajax, secure from danger. Nay, Sin indeed has now no
further power to endamage him: for as the spirit of God becoming his bosom
friend, does like a new Hercules kill that ravening vulture, which tyres upon
the liver of his poor soul, and when he is in greatest anguish, that he
prays and sighs, and groans, then that prays for him, sighs, groans for him
with such sighs, such groans so oppressed, as they cannot be expressed: Romans
8.26. So Christ Jesus his savior and mighty Redeemer, has pulled out the
sting of it, the poison and virulency, and malignity is taken away by him. For
the strength of sin is the Law; now such men, says the Apostle, are no longer
under the Law, but under grace. And therefore Saint John is bold to say of such
a man: He does no sin, nor can do none: a strange speech; yet most true;
he cannot sin fearfully, finally, with the whole sway and bent of his mind
and affections, or does no sin which shall be imputed to him, or laid to
his charge, as Saint Paul, Romans 8.33.34. where he seems to give out a
general callenge against all comers: to do their worst, to urge the utmost
they can. It Is etc. (says he) Who is that man so hardy as dare tax the
children of God? Who shall lay anything to the charge of Gods elect? It is God
that iustifies, who shall condemn? etc. So that in such men, sin though it
remain, yet it does not reign there, but is only like a languishing carcass
in the grave, daily rotting and consuming away: they shall sin so long as
they bear about flesh and blood, wherein dwells corruption: they that fall,
cannot but be subject to many weaknesses: yet if they have a good Conscience,
their fall is not like the fall of the Elephant, which being down, cannot rise
again; but contrary, their falls teach them better how to stand, and their
infirmity serves to confirm the virtue of their Constancy: And (which is the
sovereign joy of Gods people) in every sinful tentation, they do like
Hercules, exire maiores, grow greater, which S. Paul means, where he says
Become more then Conquerours.

2. And as thus they are not depressed by this enemy, so neither do they
stoop or stand in sear of the other, which is affliction. It is a bitter
thing to look into the manifold distresses and incombiances, to be met and
encountered; yet a good Consciences abides the injury and assault and battery
of them all, unmoved and unappalled, -- Illisos fluctus rupes, vt vasta
refundit, Like a rock, against which a thousand Billows rise and roar, yet the
stone for all their chasing and foaming keeps his place, and beats them in
pieces. So the soul of such a man is like Socrates, who was ever in one
countenance: nay, it is in affliction, like fire in wind, more enflamed: as a
Traveler meeting in hindrance, will be more eager on his journey: like gold in
the furnace, neither lessened in his weight, through difference or distrust of
Gods goodness: Though he kill me, yet still I will trust in him: nor
evaporates, or goes away in fume and impatient folly. In all these things did
not Job sin with his mouth, nor charge God foolishly, but shines out fresher
and purer then before, in an holy life and conversation. And after he has
stood the shocke, and passed the storm of many afflictions, he can yet
encourage and cheer his sorrowful Fortunes, speaking of his good conscience,
as Hecuba of Polixena, when the rest were dead. (...), etc. Good men indeed
seem the poorest and most wretched things on earth; and are counted as S. Paul
speaks of himself, the very off-scowring of all things. David and Job, and
he, had pretty shares in affliction: And a man that should read Jobs book, and
David's Psalms, and S Paul's Epistles, would marvel to hear that these men
were so merry. There is plenteous mention of fasting, of tears, of bonds, of
cold imprisonment, nakedness, etc: But where is this joy, this continual feast we
talk of? Let the man that moves such questions, know for certain, that he
understands not such men's estates aright: For the true Christian man is a
bundle and world of wonders, running contrary courses, like the Antipodes,
strong when they are weak, as the Moon waining to the earthward, waxes
toward heaven: Therefore ( S. Paul says) I take pleasure in infirmities, in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions in anguish, etc. 2. Cor. 12.10.
Indeed the comfort of the wicked is like a compound Medicine: There must be
p^^ing, and dancing, and dallying, or they cannot seem merry, but the godly
man's pleasure is of another strain, a new kind, like a light shining in the
air, when no matter is seen to nourish it. We are mistaken then, if we think
such men upon earth, it is true, we see them hear, as we see the Moon and
stars in water, but they are in heaven: S. Paul says plainly, our
conversation is in Heaven already: Their soul is where it would be; as
Gregory of Mary Magdalene: Maria ubi nos erat, vbi erat, etc. She was not
where she was for she was wholly where her Master was. Hence is it, that when
the worldlings shrinks, and sinkes under a little trouble, they bear it out
bravely, and with a kind of heavenly scorn trample on all encombrances: So
Paul speaks disdainefully of tribulation: Who shall separate us from the love
of Christ? shall tribulation, etc. as though he thought it unworthy the naming.

And the reason of this is nothing but the testimony of these men's souls and
consciences, assuring them first, that all afflictions are momentany for a
night, joy returning in the morning: or if they last longer, yet the Prophet
Osee tells us:After two days he will revive us, and the third day he will
raise us up. Ose. 6.2. Secondly, their conscience tells them how justly these
things are inflicted; that the store of corruption in them deserves not only
this fire of affliction to purge them, but even hell fire to consume them: that
as God always rewards supra meritum, above man's desert: so he punishes citra
iustitiam, on this side his justice: and then thirdly makes them know that they
are needful (for wiping away all tears in heaven, does necessarily ptesuppose
wet eyes on earth, resting their toil and labor here) and also good for them:
Dona Dei admonentis, the good gift of God admonishing us, says Austin: It is
good for me (says David) Nay they are not only (...), medidicines of their
health and safety; but (...), special tokens of Gods fatherly love and
kindness, as the Apostle reasons, Heb. 12.8. If ye be without correction,
then are ye bastards and not sons.

So that men being once armed with this armor and strength of a sound heart
and good conscience, like David with his stone and sling, no uncircumcised
Philistine can dismay him, nothing in the world can sound to his discomfort.
Vbi in altum delati sumus, when we are carried into the deep of calamity and
trouble, it is then the anchor of a good conscience, (says Calvin) that keeps
us fuse, that preserues our souls from perishing in the waters. If afflictions
atise like a spring of bitter waters: yet the salt of a good conscience will
season this spring, and the waters shall be healed: or is thy grief yet
greater, and risen to a flood, even as the flood of Iordane, that thou may
cry with the Psalmist; The waters are come in (Lord) even to my very soul; yet
faint not, for the virtue of a good conscience, like the spirit of God in
Elias will cut this Iordane, and thou shall go over it in safety; or yet more,
if the course and confluence of thy afflictions be swollen and risen to a sea;
whose waves are mad, and rage horribly; yet thy good conscience, shall like
the Arc of Noah bear thee above the pride and power of all those surges, over
whose backs thou shall ride like another Arion in mirth and triumph: or last
of all, if it come to the worst of all terrible afflictions, that they increase
to a red and bloody sea of tribulation and persecution: why? yet fear not,
stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord: the spirit of God in the
testimony of thy good conscience, will speak peace to thy affrighted soul;
nay, like Moses will stretch his hand and his rod over this sea, and divide
it, and thou shall pass on dry ground through the midst thereof.

And as thus afflictions in general do not endammage the true and righteous
servants of God, but that they are bulwarks and defenced against them; so we
shall find it true by running over some particulars.

Let there be war and deuastation, sacking and burning of towns, rauishing
of Matrones and Virgins, and all the retinue of rage and horror enter upon a
land with noise of weapons, and tumbling of garments in blood, as the Prophet
describes it: yet all this will not break his truce with heaven; he shall in
the midst of war enjoy that peace which Christ left his Disciples, That peace
of God which passes all understanding. Let it be rumorde that all the brave
and daring men in the world are coming on: nay, let him be assured, (as
undoubtedly he is from the word of God) that all the Peers and Princes of
Hell are up in Arms; Principalities and powers, and worldly governors,
Princes of the darkness of this world spiritual wickedness in hie places,
are banded and leagued against him: yet he will be able, not only to resist
in the evil day, but having finished all things to stand fast, Ephesians. 6.12.13.
And where the Apostle there mentions a girdle of verity, and shoes of
preparation, a breast plate of righteousness, and a shield of faith, an helmet
of salvation, and a sword of the spirit, we must know that he which has a
good conscience, has all this furniture, this complete harness of a Christian
altogether. For that alone is the armor of righteousness on the right hand,
and on the left, which makes a good man, as Solomon speaks bold as a Lion,
valiant as Gedeon, or Sampson, afraid neither of the arrow (says David) that
flies by night, nor the plague which destroys at noon day. Nothing, nothing
can dismay the resolute Christian, Stelliger mundus sonet, flammas and hic and
ille iaculetur polus: Let the earth be moved (says David) and the foundation
of it shake, and the mountains be cast into the midst of the sea, I will not
fear, Si fractus illabatur orbis, impauidum ferient ruinae, though the world
crack and fly off the hindges, yet this shall nor apall him, but his heart will
be still like the heart of the Leuiathan, firm as a stone, and as hard as a
piece of the neither millstone, Job. 41.15.

Let such a man be defamed, causelessly traduced in his good Name: yet Tullie
was able to say Conscientia virtuti satis amplum Theatrum: A good Conscience is
a Theater large enough for virtue: and the man that is not guilty, or
conscious to himself, of deserving infamy, has (says Horace) Murum aheneum,
a wall of brass, to retort and shoot into their own bosoms, all these fiery
darts of the wicked.

It seems indeed that this scourge of Tongues, is no mean vexation, for David
calls such detraction by the names of Swords, and spears, and sharp
arrows, and poisoned darts: and complains miserably in his Psalms, an 100.
times at least, how cruelly he was galled and infested with such weapons: yet
both he and all the children of God from time to time have used no other
rampire, but this of a good conscience, which they have ever sound so firm and
solid, that it has been able in midst of the hottest assaults, not to
preserve from danger only, but to power into them, a noble contempt of their
assailers, and a spiritual complacency, in this kind of calamity, as we
heard from Saint Paul's testimony of himself, I take pleasure in infirmities
(and next adds) in reproaches, in persecutions, etc.

Let it be poverty; to him it is an estate full of pleasure, Christ Jesus
himself has made it glorious; and the Heathen has told him, Facile
consolatur honestas egestatem: Poverty is soon cheared up with honesty: if
hunger or thirst assail him, he has a good conscience to feed him, which is
a continual Feast, assuring him the Kingdom of Heaven, stands not in meat
and drink. Nay, the righteous man is so far from affrightment at such trifles,
that Elihu tells us, When famine comes, then comes his joy, his delight: a
destruction and famine, he shall laugh, and though death be to wicked men
vltimum terribilium, a dampe, a dampe that puts out all their light, and marres
their music: yet to an honest heart, and a good conscience, it brings rather
an affluence of comfort and rejoicing, a thing, the children of God wish and
long for; Cupio dissolui, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ
Jesus. So that in all afflictions, how great, how grievous soever the
conscience of a godly man is not distracted; it may perchance slacken it self,
and be scattered or dissolved at the first encounter: but when it returns
into it self, and arrests on the holy spirit of God, and strength of his
grace, it does not only settle from all such wauerings and weaknesses; but it
grows so firm and bold, as to take joy and solace therein, when that which
before was sour and distasteful, becomes sweet and gracious.

And this must needs be so, it needs no proof; for how can it be otherwise;
but that Gods children should be men of joy; glad men, as David speaks; Psalm.
68.3. Leaping for joy; when we are taught by God himself, that his Kingdom
is the place of joy; nay, nothing else but peace and joy in the holy Ghost;
Romans 14.17. and his Gospel the matter of joy, as the Angel proclaims from
heaven: Behold I bring you tidings of great joy, that shall be to all people.
To this purpose we have plentiful testimonies in scripture, that God will ever
keep and defend his chosen servants tenderly, as the apple of his eye: bears
them safe from danger, as he did the Israelites upon his wings: as upon a
featherbed, soft and secure; he gives his Angels charge over them, that they
dash not their foot against a stone; or if any one chance to fall, Siceciderit,
says David, yet he shall not perish; for the Lord puts under his hand. The
Lions do lack, and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall want no
manner of thing that is good, Psalm. 34.10. Many sorrows to the wicked, but he
that trusts in the Lord, mercy imbraceth him on every side. Be glad, o ice
righteous, showt for joy, all ye that are true of heart. Psalm. 32.10.11. The
voice of joy and rejoicing, and salvation, shall be in the tabernacles of the
righteous. Psalm. 118.15. (says Solomon) answers a good man in the joy of his
heart, Eccles. 5. vlt. They that obey and serve him shall spend and end their
days in prosperity, and their days in prosperity, and their years in
pleasure, Job. 36.11. God gives such (says Esaie) beauty for ashes, the oil
of joy for mourning, the garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness. And
as we have it in promise from God; so in example of godly men that have ever
found it so, as David, who out of his experience, began many Psalms with
prayer, and ends them with thanksgiving. And the blessed Virgin, My Soul does
magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. And Saint
Paul is exemplum exemplorum: all his speech of himself is but a comment on
this Text, and a large exposition of this point in hand. He confesses it. Our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, and in the 2. Cor. 7.4. I
ouerflow exceedingly, I abound with all joy amidst our tribulations; and that
it is the general condition of all Gods servants: Saint Peter tells us, where
he says, that though they see him not, yet believing, rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and glorious.

This might easily be proved, by showing that such men have all the true
grounds and foundations of joy and contentment; As first, that they have
remission of sins in Christ: and secondly, adoption to become the Sons of
God: and in the third place, have ^ight and title to Heaven: but it is Horaces
counsel, quaedam dicenda remittere, not to amasse and heap up all that might
be said to any one point; and therefore we come to the last part; namely, the
fitting and applying of this resemblance, here urged by Solomon, wherein
following the former Method, I will first present to your consideration how
the wicked conscience is no Feast, or if one, not a continual one: and next,
that the good Conscience is one, and secondly, a continual one. A good
Conscience is a continual Feast.

First, wicked men have no feast: For such men have lost all taste of good and
heavenly things: They do not relish or savor the things that be of God,
says the Apostle, as we see Swine neglect pasture and eat draffe; So these men
banquet, but it is with poison, like Tereus feast, or rather it is Scilicornium,
a funeral Feast, for such a man (as S. Paul speaks of a widow) that lives in
the pleasure of sin, is dead while he lives. Their food breeds only wind,
and froath, and inflation, no perfect, or pure blood: So that we mistake
judging such a man full, because Rich, it is true, he has enough, his bellyful,
but it is with wind, Eccles: 5.16. or else their eating procures a corrosion and
convulsion, privy gripings, and qualmes, stitches and aches, worms, and
distortion of the stotion of the stomach, that they cannot sleep or take rest
upon it. The satietie of the Rich will not suffer him to sleep. Or if he do,
he shall spue soon after it, (as Job says) he has devoured substance, and
shall vomit it: for God shall draw it out of his belly. Job. 20. Or if it
settle and stay with him, then it inflames his soul, and hart-burnes him: For
a practiced sinner is said to have his soul singed and seared, his Conscience
burnt with an hot iron. 1. Tim. 4.2. or lastly, as poison, if it kill not
presently, breaks out in tumors and byles: so his wickedness does occasion
diseases, and his bones are full of the sin of his Youth. Job, 20.11. and as
he goes on, in verse. 12. Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, and though he
hide it under his tongue, and keep it (like a delicate Epicure) in the midst
of his palate; yet his meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of Aspes
within him. And this is their viandes, their cates, their delicates: of which
David desires to eat no part, Psalm. 141. If we desire to know what they
drink at such a feast, Job tells us they drink iniquity like water: Job:
15.16. and their wine the scripture says, is the wine of astonishment; or else
a certain kind of compounded stuff, that David speaks of: ps: 75.8. In the
hand of the Lord, there is a cup, and it is red wine: it is full mixed, and he
powers out of the same: Surely all the wicked of the earth shall wring out, and
drink thereof, and in Psalm: 11. he describes their burnt wine, which seems the
very same that the Devils drink in hell. God will rain snares, fire and
brimstone, and an horrible tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup. As
for the company of these men, what can it be, but a noise and set of
Devils: for Satan returning (says our Savior) returning, and finding such
men's hearts, like houses swept and garnished, prepared for him, enters with
seven worse then himself, and the end of that man is worse then the
beginning. It is not strange then, that profane and lewd men will fancy and
conceit themselves the only flourishing people upon earth: when we see that
their very banqueting stuff is but gall and poison, their drink vengeance,
and their company Devils. But let us grant them that their seeming mirth and
iollity they live in, may be termed a feast (which is their portion upon
earth; and all they can look for,) yet alas, it is not a continual feast,
but exceeding fleet and momentanie. Even in laughter, the heart is sorrowful;
at that very instant. They banquet as thieves in a cave or a wood, always in
fear. Esaias tells us that the Harp, the Violl, the Tabret and Pipe are in their
feasts, Esaias, 5.12. But this will not hold: for he adds in ver. 14 Therefore
Hell has enlarged her self, and opened her mouth w^de. And their pomp, and
he that rejoices shall descend into it: So soon they are gone. They break
off, as it were in the midst of their meal, and sink into hell. Nor can the
damned soul think to take it out, when he comes there. Indeed as he in his
life time made a feast of his soul to the Devil, and dressed it for him to make
his Helship merry: (for as the good Angels rejoice at a sinners conversion: so
we must think the Devils mirth is his rebellion.) So now Satan to be quiet
with him, prepares him a feast, a black banquet, only two dishes, weeping
served in for the first course, and gnashing of teeth, for the second: It is
true, it shall be a continual feast: but worse to him then any feast: for he
shall be so far from receiving pleasure in it, that he shall howl and
roar out with Dives, for some drink to his hot meat, even for a drop of
water to cool his tongue: And this for the first part of the comparison.

The second is, that the goodman has in his conscience a feast, and not so
only, but a continual Feast.

First, he has a Feast: for a godly man (like that ungodly one in the
Gospel) fares deliciously every day; keeps a spiritual Christmas always,
drinks deep in the Wine-sellar, as it seems by the Spouse in Canticles,
2.4.5. He brought me into the Wine-seller, and love was his banner over me.
Stay me with flaggons, and comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love. So
it is in that song of the blessed Virgin; He filles the hungry with good
things: fills them, gives them enough, feasts them: Like a noble Lord God, with
his proper gifts and graces. And in examining, we shall find that they have
all things, which make up a sumptuous Feast, and a BANQVET Royal.

1. Plenty and variety of meat and drink, 2. Good company. 3. Lights, and 4.
Music.

1. They have plenty and change of dishes; and they are all good solid meats.
One maine service is their service of God, their good work: for it is a joy to
the just to do justice, Prou. 21.15. David found it so. Psalm. 122.1. and in
Psalm 84. My soul longs, yea, and faints for the Courts of the Lord; And our
blessed Savior confesses it, John 4. My meat is to do the will of him that
sent me, and finish his work: yet this to the most holy man alive, is but a
faint food in respect of the second mess or service, whereupon they feed, and
that is their faith in God: which is nourishing meat indeed: so says the
Scripture, The just man shall live by his faith: It is his Viaticum, his meat,
his maintenance, and this feeds him thicke-fat: He that puts his sure trust in
the Lord shall be fat, Prou. 28.25. To which meat, his bread and drink are
hearty sorrow and repentance for his sin: So says David, God gives his people
bread of tears, and tears to drink in great measure whole healthes, Psalm.
80.5. In the third place, the righteous soul contemplates and feeds upon God
himself, all the three persons in the thrice blessed Trinity: First, she
feasts upon God her Creator, tastes and sees how gracious the Lord is, that not
only provided a world to entertain her, and under a starry cloth of State,
did place a thousand creatures, and distill a thousand dewes for the refection
of her body; but also feeds and fattes her self with his grace and goodness:
and this dish, (if we will believe Saint Bernard) is a wondrous sweet one:
Reuera, illudsolum est gaudium quod de creatore concipitur; cui comparata omnis
aliunde iucunditas moeror est, omnis suanitas dolor est, omne dulce amarum est:
Indeed that is is only true delight which we conceive of our Creator: in
regard whereof all other pleasure is a very bitterness. And this made Austine
cry out; O luxuriose, vbi mayor delectatio quam insummi dulcissime deo? Where
can thou find more sweetness, then in the most sweet God himself? Secondly,
the soul takes a sweet repast on the second Person Christ Jesus, from whose
fulness we do all receive grace. John 1.16. Whose flesh is meat indeed, and his
blood is drink indeed: of which whosoever eats and drinks (says our
Savior, has eternal life: John 6.54. Who testifies also, that he is the true
bread which came down from heaven to strengthen man's heart, and wine to
comfort it* no adulterate or sophistocate mixture, but (...) the true vine.
John. 15. to temper which heavenly liquor, the soul in the thi^d place mixes
it, with the water of the holy spirit, which is not merely water; but (...):
Sweet and living water, springing up into everlasting life. John 4.14.

A fourth service, is a maine standing dish, and a delicate one, named the
Mercy of God; therefore called by David, not only plenteous mercy, but sweet
and tender mercy, which is not merely food, but a kind of restoratiue, as we
may see in Psa. 79.8. where David speaks, as if he were in a consumption;
make haste, and prevent us with thy tender mercies: For we are brought very
low. And in the fifth course comes in the Grace of God, whereof (as in
Philosophy they say, we are nourished by the same things, of which we are
begotten,) we are both borne and maintained, both bred and fed: Saint Paul
says plainly: By the grace of God I am that I am, both in root and height:
and this also is a standing dish, and tastes like the barrel of meal, and
cruise of oil 1. Reg. 17.16 or like that lake and pot of water, which the
Angel gave Elias, after which he arose, and did walk in the strength of that
meat forty days, and forty nights, 1. Reg. 19.8. It is indeed a whole Feast of
it self. So God told Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for
thee: sufficient enough, and enough (we say) is as good as a Feast. Next to
make up our meal are served in the word of God, and the Sacrament of Christ's
most blessed body and blood, on which the first the soul does feed and feast:
for it is a strong meat to fasten and confirm the righteous soul in faith, a
medicine of immortality: An Antidote (says Ignatius) assuring us, we shall not
die but live in Jesus Christ: So for the word of God, it is called bread, Deuteronomy.
8. Amos threatens a famine of it, Amos. 8. And in Hebrews 5. It is said to
be milk for Babes, and strong meat for men of riper age: and therefore God
bade the Prophet eat the roll: and Saint John says, he took the Book out
of the Angels hand, and eat it up: and to prove it more then ordinary food, S.
Paul calls it wholesome doctrine, and comfortable, that we through patience and
comfort of the scriptures might have hope. To. 15.4. So comfortable, that in
the opening they make men's heart to burn within them. Luc: 24.32. and filles
them with joy. These things haus I spoken unto you, that your joy might be
full: Job: 15.11. Therefore cries S. Austine, Domine Jesus, sint castae delitiae
mea scripturae tuae: and David Eloquia, etc. Thy word is sweet unto my mouth,
yea sweeter then the honey and honey comb: And if it be of this nature, read
what is it when the bread is broken and divided, then we have the pure marrow,
the Manna, and meaning of it. So that at every sermon we have lautas epulas,
plenty and change of dishes.

Thus you have heard the meat at this feast. Nor must you think that drink
is wanting, for they have (which I named before,) water of Tears, which let
none despise; For upon such eyes as stand brim-full of repentant tears, Christ
works a miracle, and turns their sorrow into the wine of gladness and heavenly
consolation. They have secondly David's cup of Gods salvation, which
ouerflowes: For as the violl of his wrath runs out for fierceness, so the
cup of his salvation runs over for fulness. Again, they have the love of
Christ, which the Spouse says, is better then wine. Cant: 1.1. And last of
all, David tells us that God will make such to drink out of the river of his
pleasures. Psalm. 36.8. If you demand what sauce the children of God have at
this feast of a good conscience? I must answer, crosses and afflictions,
troubles, and tribulations, which (as Physicians roll pills in sugar, and make
that Vehiculum medicinae,) God so wisely mixes, and tempers with their wholesome
food, that they are not able to distinguish twixt meat and sauce, but nourish
their growth in grace, as well with the one as with the other. So that they
find no tartnes, no sharpnes, no bitterness in these afflictions, no, not in
death it self, for as God sweetly disposes and pleasantly compounds the rest:
so Christ Jesus is their taster in this. He has tasted death for all. Hebr.
2.9. This is their maine cheer: To this, Sage, and Succory, Marioram gentle,
Patience and Honesty, and Hartsease, and Hearb-grace, are sprinkled in for
salades. And all this before the banquet. For that comes after, wherein as we
see at feasts, the same things serve for the Banquet too, but otherwise cooked,
and disguised: so it may happily fall out in this, for remission of sins, and
hope of everlasting glory, are (says Latimer, the sweetmeats to the feast of
a good conscience; And as for fruits, as we are called in scripture, the first
fruits of his creatures: so (if we be of S. Paul's company) we have the first
fruits of his spirit, Rom: 8.23. where of S. Paul serves in often a brace:
Grace and peace in God the Father, etc. And oftentimes a lease, Grace, mercy,
and truth, etc. And we find almost a douzen in a dish, Galath. 5.22.23. The
fruits of the spirit, is love, joy peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness,
Faith, meekenes, temperance, etc. After these come in all choice and rare
dainties, mentioned in Isay: 11.2. Wisdom, and understanding, council, and
strength, Knowledge, and the fear of the Lord, which are called in Esaias, 55.
by the names of Water milk, and wine, saturitie, Fatnes, etc. In other places,
they are jointly named the Annoynting, the oil of gladness, where with as
Christ Jesus was anointed above his fellows, so being (as S. Peter styles
him) the Bishop of our souls: he does therewith anoint and consecrate us,
Priests unto God, even an holy, and a Royal Priesthood. 1.2.9. which is an
oynement, most sauory and redolent, The savor of thine ointment is better then
all spices: Cant. 4.10, which heavenly Oil is shead in our hearts, by the holy
Ghost that is given us. Rom 5.5. There Is an other banqueting dish of love and
knowledge mine together, For knowledge of it self is too windy; it swell a man
like puff past, and show him up, but love modefies and allayes it, and makes
it wholesome.

Then comes in the loving kindness of the Lord, making the Good-mans estate
equal with that of Kings, as Saint Paul told Agrippa, in which regard God is
said to crown us with loving kindness and tender mercy, Psa. 103.4. So that
righteous me^ are so many crowned Kings. Nay, faieth the Apostle, more then
conquerours, Romans 8. What Is more then conquerours? Why, Triumphers: for he
makes us to triumph in Christ, 2. Cor. 2.14. Next the good and faithful soul
receives in this banquet, a Crystal belly, made of the blood of Christ; not
Sanguis Draconis, but Leonis, of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, or rather; of
the Lamb of God, a strange and strong restoratiue, more then all their
pectorall rowles, or Mythridate, or aurum potabile; that will fetch life again
sooner then all their cordial waters: for this indeed is the true Aqua
Coelestis, and Rosa Solis, of the Sun of righteousness, one drop whereof,
is sufficient for a thousand worlds. After this comes that (...), that full
assurance of faith in Christ, which is the true Manus Christi: that passes all
their Marmelade, Succate. And last of all is that food of Angels: hidden Manna,
so called, Apos. 2.17. which is a kind of secret consolation, which the Lord
infuseth into the hearts of his faiththfull servants: such as keep a good
conscience, which farres exceeds all the stellifyed meats of Alchymists and
Coniurers, transports and rauisheth the soul of man, as S. Peter having a
taste of it, talks of building Tabernacles, and Saint Paul it seems, had some
relish of it, where he says, I ouerflow exceedingly, I abound with all joy,
amidst our tribulation: This it makes a man forget all sensual pleasure, and
is not only food, but a river of spiritual drink to the soul, which prouokes
Austin to cry; Pota me Domine torrente volupt atis, vt nil iam mundanorum
libeat degustare veneualae dulcedimis. Give me of this drink, Lord, that I
desire not the poisonous delights of the world. This occasioned the same Father
to entitle a good conscience, a paradise abounding with graces and delights:
And Hugo, to style it a garden of delight, and the golden diuing Chamber of the
holy Ghost. And so much for the meat and drink.

The second thing that commends a feast, is the Company. It is a speech of a
Roman in Plutarch, that he had only eaten, not supped when he wanted company.
Now company are either guests or attendants: both these magnify the feasts of
a good conscience: for the guests are the blessed and glorious Trinity: For a
good conscience (we have heard) has the spirit his bosom-friend; such a foul
the Temple, the closet of the Holy Ghost, and for his father, our Savior tells
us, John: 14. to the man that loves him, his Father will come, and dwell with
him: And of himself. Rerel: 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door, and knock, if
any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and will suppe
with him, and he with me. Our best friends use to be best welcome; and can a
man have a dearer Guest, a better friend then Christ Jesus: for he vouchsafes
to call good men his friends, Ioh: 15.13. his kinsmen* in other places his
brethren, his children, his mother, his Spowse, to show that he loves us, with
all these loves: the friends, the kinsmans; the brothers, the fathers, the
wifes: Nay, his is as high above these, as is Heaven above earth, and therefore
having him our guest, we have him in the knot, and ring, and pack of all our
frinds together. As for the Attendants at this feast, they are no common
wayters, ordinary Serving men: but the blessed Angels of heaven. Are they not
all ministering Spirits, sent out to minister for their sakes, that shall be
heirs of salvation? Hebr. 1. vlt: who as they ministered to Christ, as soon as
the devil forsook him, so when we are once rid of the devil of hell, of an
evil conscience, they presently be our servants; and as they ministered to him
in his hunger: for the Angels to all his in thyrst and hunger, are (as Luther
is bold to say) Cooks and Butlers.

3. The third circumstance of a feast, is light, it is therefore a plague (says
Ecclesiastes) to a covetous wretch, that always he eats in darkness: And
indeed what is a feast without light? so it is in the soul: therefore the wicked
heart or conscience is described in scripture to be void of light, full of
darkness, having their cogitations darkened: Ephesians: 4.18. Their foolish heart is
full of darkness. Rom: 1.21. And all they can do, all their works are deeds of
darkness. Rom: 13.12. But the children of God, like the land of Goshen, have
light enough: they walk in the light, and are children of the day, translated
from the kingdom of darkness into his meruellous light. So as the righteous
soul needs no taper or torch-light at his feast, specially if we remember
what company is therefore. First, there is the comforter, the bright and
glorious spirit, which makes him that is spiritual to discern all things, 1.
Cor. 2.15. There is also God the Father in company, who is Pater luminum: the
Father of Light. James, 1.17. and Christ Jesus, who is (...), The Light of the
world, the dayspring from on high, a Light to be revealed to the Gentiles,
and the glory of his people Israel.

4 As for the last circumstance of Music, the good conscience has enough;
every string of his heart sounds out a pleasant melody, pleasing in the cares
of Almighty God himself. First, God plays on the heart strings of his
children, Vt sila cordaram, sic corda filioram tangit, and moves them easily,
then they sound forth his praise in Psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs,
making melody in their hearts unto God: at which Music, the envious devil
fta^ds without the door, like the elder brother in the Parable, fretting and
discontent at the noise he hears within: Secondly, the very afflictions here
endured, as they are music to a good conscience, according to that of
Prudencius; Tormenta, carcer, vngulae stridenque flammis, etc. All kind of
tortures are pleasant to a Christian. Thy rod (says David) comforts me. So
likewise do they serve as so many musical iustruments to praise God withal:
as it was said of Romanus the Martyr; Tot ecce laudant ora, quet sunt vuinera,
That all his gaping wounds were so many mouths to celebrate Gods glory. And
as their suffering, so their prayers and tears are sweeter music in the
ears of God, then Spheres, or the harmony of Angels. Especially, the
repentant tears of a sad soul, are an excellent Music in voices, that is
heard as hie as heaven; So God tells Manasses, Thou have wept before me, and I
have heard it; and it seems the Angels hear it too: for it is said of them,
that they rejoice at a weeping sinners conversion. And yet here is not all: For
it is not only a feast, but a continual feast. The royal feast of Assuerus,
in Est. 1. lasted but a 100. and 80. days: but this is everlasting. A good
conscience then holds out in all weathers, which made Pindar call it the sweet
nurse of a man's old age. The comfort of profane worldlings, like a torrent
soon runs it self dry and away, but the godly man's peace is like a
perpetual spring, he grows and goes on in grace. Therefore in Ezechiel,
only the stayres of the Temple were left vnnumbered, unmeasured, intimating,
that the ascension to God grace, and so to his glory is endless. Therefore
Gods mercy and his grace, are styled a rich grace; a great mercy, a
superabundant grace, a lasting mercy, better then all conserues and preserues,
of which the Poet says; Inamarescunt epulae sine fine petitae, They will grow
bitter, if common: but this is as sweet, and tender, and delicate to a man in
his age, as in his youth, nay sweeter and sweeter, like that wine in John 2.
best at last. So that the good man's feast begins at All Saints, at our
sanctity and holiness here; and lasts till the great general Purification, till
our bodies be deputed of all earthly dross, and our fowls of sin, that is,
till we arrive at Heaven. It is true, the godly man's condition, in respect of
death is all one with the wicked; he must die: but when death, like a Voyder,
comes to take away, he does not then rise from his banquet discontent, as the
wicked soul; Vitaque cum gemita fugie indignata sub vmbras: with noise and
murmuring, but he departs, Cedit vticonuiua satur, like a full guest satissied,
to sleep, to rest, till supper. For so death, to a man that has this feast of
a good conscience, is but a Feast of slumber till supper time, till he come to
that Marriage Supper of the Lamb, spoken of in Reu. 19.9. Where for plenty and
variety of meat and drink, he shall be better then before: for it is said, in
Gods presence is fulness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures for
evermore. psalm: 16.11. where for his Banquet of grace, he shall have one of
glory; for the fruits of the spirit here, he shall there feed on the fruits
of the Tree of life, which bears 12. manner of fruits, Revel: 22.2. And for
Light he shall need none there: neither Sun, nor Moon to lighten that holy
City. For the glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light of it.
And for company, beside man^ that shall come from the East and from the west,
and shall sit down at table, with Abrah: Isack and Jacob, in the kingdom of
heaven. Mat. 8.11. and a huge number in Reu: 7 9. which no man can number, of
all nations and kindreds, which shall stand before the Lamb, clothed with long
white robes, and palms in their hands, and besides the fellowship of Saints
and Angels, the soul shall there enjoy her old company of the Glorious and
blessed Trinity, and then shall see GOD; not any longer in aenigmate, but see
him face to face, and know even as she is known. As also she shall still
retain her ancient attendants of the blessed Angels, and our blessed Savior
tells us, he will wayt upon us. In the Saturnals (says Macrobius) masters
serve their servants, and at this high ba^quet, our Lord and M. Cor. Ies. will
gyrd himself, and be our seruitour. And lastly, for Music. All the Angels
shall loudly sound their Clarions. The Prophets shall bring their harpes of gold
and Iuory. And the glorious army of Martyrs shall bring their trumpets of
silver, and all the whole Quire and Chorus of heaven, shall sing Huleluiah,
that song of 3. parts, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Saboath, Amen, blessing
and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power be unto our God
for ever and over, Amen. In a word, to resolve this speculation into use and
practice: Let us learn, not to love the world, or the vain profit and foolish
pleasures of this life: we see there is no true mirth, no sound joy to be found
in the^: let therefore vain worldlings pamper, and fill themselves with such
painted food, and so obtain perhaps a painted tomb, or a partial flourishing
Epitaph after death: But let us labor for the meat that perishes not, the
food that lasts ever, as graces, abundance of content: namely, a good
conscience, which is both a feast in this life, and a preparatiue to a banquet
in the life to come, Amen.

Gloria Deo in Excelsis.
FINIS.

