Vt hora, sic fugit vita.

A Commemoration on the life and death of the right Honorable, Sir Christopher
Hatton, Knight, late Lord Chauncellor of England.

Wherein triumphant Truth reuiueth his memory from the grave: exhorting
Nobility, Gentry, and duetifull Subjects, to continue their obedience to God
and her Majesty, and to prevent by policy the perilous practices of every
civil and foreign enemy.

Published by John Phillips.

Fidenti sperata cedunt.

LONDON Printed for Edward White. 1591.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir William Hatton Knight, Son adopted and Heir
to the right honorable Sir Christopher Hatton, late Lord Chaunceller of
England, John Phillips wishes the fear of God, continuance of health, with
increase of worship and virtue.
IT has been in all times (right worshipful) a princiciple observed, that
public and apparent virtues in persons deceased, have never been buried in
oblivion, but have always been recorded and left to posterities: the end only
this, that they who still live, by apt imitation, might be practisers of like
virtues. Which in my self considered, I concluded, that great unkindness to
God, and injury to remaining Subjects should be offered, if the virtuous life
and death of this right honorable deceased Lord, should not be emblazoned. To
God unkind, if he, as the author, should not be acknowledged, the cause
efficient of all these rich graces, wherewith he was invested: and injury to
suruiuing subjects, if there should not be commemoration of his (more then
natural virtues) as by recordation whereof, they might walk and tread the
same way and path. My self I confess, am the least of others, and most unable
to perform what I wish, yet will I not be the last that shall use endeavor to
effect what I may. (With hoping that you would accept) I presumed to thrust
forth this small Pinnace, fraught with simple merchandise, into the harbor of
your worships protection: assuring my self, that as the purest Emerauld
shines brightest when it has no oil, so Truth will delight you, though
basely apparrelled. The shortest and most clowdie day, is a day as well as the
longest and brightest, when the sun is in the height of his Horizon. Pardon
then I beeseech you, wherein I have presumed, and accept (I most humbly crave)
what herc I have presented: which if your worship vouchsafe, Truth concludes,
her self sufficiently graced, and my self most happy which have been her
penman. Of this resting my self assured, I shall continually pray for the
increase of your worship, that both in this life you may have your hearts
desire, and in the end, fruition of those joys that are endless.

Tour worships most duetifull to cmmaund

I. Phillips.

A COMMEMORATION OF THE life and death of Sir Christopher Hatton, knight, Lord
Chancellor of England.
YOu noble Peers, my native Countrymen,
I need not show to you my blood nor birth:
As dust I was, I turn to dust again,
I go before, but you must to the earth.
Yet when, or how, to you it is unknown:
For be you sure the earth does claim her own.
It is not gold, nor treasures that are vain, can you preserve when that the
time is come:
Your houses gay wherein you do remain, can you not shield from Gods decreed
doom.
As I am dead, so like wise you shall die:
But learn by death with me to live on hie.
Though gaping grave enclose my Corpse in clay, and silent I rest covered close
in mould:
Yet from my shrine Truth strives both night and day, to you my mind (good
Lords) for to unfold.
Whereto if case you vouch to yield reg^rd:
Your selves with right, I trust, will me reward.
Which of you could with Hatton find a clause, or say that he unjust or
faithless was?
Did he not live according to the laws? and on the earth his days in duty
pass?
Was not his care set on his God for aye?
And did not he his sovereign Queen obey?
Was not his heart bent for his Countries weal? did he not still even from his
tender youth
With rich and poor upright and justly deal, and cloth himself in robes of
tried truth?
If this be true, as no man can deny:
Fame says he lives, although our Hatton die,
Where he might help he would be helping still, where he might hurt he never
would do harm:
His chiefest care was to do good for ill, thus God with grace did gentle
Hatton arm.
No treacherous thought could harbor in his breast:
The fruits offaith in him were aye expressed.
The world knows well Truth tells a tale most true, the heavens above of this
do witness bear:
Though Momus mates, and Zoilus do pursue scandals with scorn against the just
to rear.
But such do weaue themselves a web of woe:
For Truth triumphs, who works their overthrow.
In lusty youth he loved the barbed steed, and Hector-like would break the
manly lance:
For martial acts surnamed Mars indeed was Hatton sweet, that manhood did
advance.
At tilt the prize and praise he duly wan:
His might in arms they felt that with him ran.
At turney he and barriers did excel, some peers in arms have borne his
battring blows
In court and town he was beloved well, a scourge he was unto his Sovereigns
foes.
Faith was the shield that worthy Hatton bare:
Whose like scarce lives, his virtues were so rare.
Should Truth then dread to spread his virtues out, that for his deeds has
won deserved praise?
Her cheareful voice, with courage bold and stout, throughout the world his
lasting laud shall raise.
And move thereby the minds of noble men
To high attempts, to win them honor then.
Where might the sick, the sore, the halt and blind, reap more relief then
happy Hatton gave?
To suitors poor he ever was most kind, he sought dispatch that they with
Prince might have
Then Lordings learn his steady steps to trace:
With God and Prince you thus shall purchase grace.
Thus for his love, his faith and tried truth, he of the Guard, by our most
gracious Queen
Was chieftaine made, who firmly held his oath, from Hattons heart faiths
fruits to flow were seen.
A chieftaine kind he to the Guard was found:
Whose want, with grief their tender hearts does wound
He sought all means to wish and work their weal, to do them good he took no
small delight:
In their cause he with our good Queen did deal, t'augment their wage he did
all that he might.
From sixteen pence, to twenty pence a day:
Whilst world does last he did reduce their pay.
And by the day three months in the year, two shillings he for them obtaind
indeed:
Such fervent love in him did still appear, that they him found a fort in time
of need.
Their wrongs he sought by skill for to redress:
His love with tears Truth shows they can express.
In wisdoms bower he did obtayn his seat, whose lore to learn he did his time
employ:
And God from heaven with his graces most great, in mercies mild sought to
augment his joy.
For virtues use wherein he took delight:
Our gracious Queen did dub our Hatton knight.
Discreet he was, and wary in his ways, rashly to speak at no time he thought
fit:
In faith and fear he spent his Pilgrims days, for common weal he did employ
his wit.
Where Syno sought his treasons to inure:
His censures grave convinced the impure.
And as from Truth at no time he did err, but truly sought the Truth for to
uphold:
He had a care his servants to prefer, the good found grace, the wicked he
controld.
The poor oppressed he wisely did defend:
And on the poor a portion he did spend.
Beloved of all he was for virtues use, the grafts of grace in Hattons breast
did grow:
By wisdoms lore he brideled all abuse, and did himself a loyal Subject show.
Thus he with God did grace and favor find:
Whose sacred truth he planted in his mind.
And with our Queen that princely Phoenix rare, whose like on earth has sildome
times bin seen,
He was esteemd and set by for his care, as noble Peers that aie have trusty
been.
Vizcechamberlain her Highness Hatton made:
Whose tried truth could never fail ne fade.
The cursed curres of Catalin unkind, that did conspire against her Royal
Grace:
And to subvert the State did bear in mind, with might and maine he sought for
to displace.
Those wily Wolves untrusty to the Crown:
By Justice he threw topsie turuie down.
Our princely Queen whom God from danger save, of Counsel hirs, did Hatton
sure elect:
Who Solon-like did use his censures grave, the good to shield, the wicked to
correct.
And as he was adornd with graces great:
So sat he safe in honors blisfull seat.
Lord Chanceler then her Grace did him ordain,
Which charge with care he wisely did discharge,
For succor sweet none came to him in vain, good conscience had her scope to
go at large.
The right of might need not to stand in awe:
Ne would he truth should be defast by law.
Affection could in Hatton bear no sway,
No gifts nor gold might once corrupt his mind:
Fraud to subvert, he studied night and day,
To equity his heart was aye enclinde.
Where conscience was corrupt and found unclean, to vanquish he, by wisdom
sought the mean.
Oppressed men from danger he did shield,
Their woeful wrongs he wisely did redress?
In deep despair sweet comfort he did yield,
To ease their grief that languisht in distress.
And where as Truth durst scarcely show her face,
Fraud was subdude, and foiled with disgrace.
The Laws he sought, with conscience for to use,
Triumphant Truth, he seated in her throne:
To hear the poor he never did refuse,
Right glad he was to help them to their own.
Wrongs went to wrack, Craft could no harbor find,
To maintain truth our Hatton was enclinde.
Thus Lordings all his life you may behold,
That living hear has won deserved fame:
And though his Corpse lie covered close in molde,
In Court and town shall live his spotless name.
Death dies in him, his virtues death has slain,
And he by death eternal life does gain.
Yet from his grave, Truth does you all exhort,
To lincke your hearts and minds in loyal love:
Let faith in you build such a famous fort,
That nothing may from truth your minds remove.
Though Pope and Spain, against your peace do jar,
Withstand their rage, prepare your your selves to war.
Clap Corslets on, your standerds take in hand,
Your barbed steedes bestride with courage stout:
Brandish your swords, fight for your native land,
By Seas and shores beset your foes about.
Now is the time where honor may be found.
Think on the acts, your Ancestors have done.
Haste to your ships, hoyse sails in name of God,
Man you your coast, march after warlike Drum:
Your Ensigns brave, each where display abroad,
Down with your foes, that for your spoils do come.
Take Lions hearts, fear not your hateful foes;
But let them feel, your manly battering blows.
They come to sack, your Cities, Fortes, and Towers,
Your Wives and maids they purpose to deflowre:
Stand to it then, and crack those crakers crowns,
That think to win your wealth, within an hour.
Be bold in God, and never turn your backs,
But beard those braues, that mind to work your wracks.
You are, and have been feared over all,
England's an I Will, of stout and hardy men:
Be strong in faith, your foes down right shall fall,
For one of you, in arms shall vanquish ten.
You fight for God, and God your guide shall be,
And from the hands of enemies set you free.
Richard the first, of England famous King,
Good Lordings vouch, to call unto your mind:
Whose Martial acts, throughout the World does ring.
The Heathen rout, of Pagans most unkind
His force have felt; whose manly conquering hand,
No Pagan proud was able to withstand.
And then shall Spain, a sincke of deadly sin,
Or raging Rome, a cage of Birds unclean:
Be bane of you and yours, as they begin?
Or from your heads, the crest of glory gleane.
As yerst of yore, pluck up those rotten weeds;
Let heaven and earth, record those conquering deeds.
Edward the third, your King of rich renown,
Against the French did use his conquering sword:
Mauger their beardes, he did possess their Crown,
The French were feign, to serve him as their Lord.
Take courage then, maintain your Countries right,
Against Rabsica, in Gods name enter fight.
Henry the fifth, I wish you not forget,
At Agent Court, think what a field he fought:
When all the power of France him round beset,
Ten thousand men, them to subjection brought.
Though night before, they Bonfires great did make,
And made their boastes, what prisoners they would take.
But they that brag of conquest and renown,
Before the field be fought, or trust their strength:
We see the Lord in moment can cast down,
And give the weak'st the victory at length,
Though Englands King, and his, they bought and sold,
The French were slain, though they to brag were bold.
Then though to Spain, the Pope have given your land,
And your good Queen deposed from her Crown:
A conquest win, your weapons take in hand,
The pelting pope, and Spaniards proud beat down.
As erst to fore, you Conquerers have been
Through world, now let, your co^quering deeds be seen.
What Nation yet, that menac'st you with war,
But you have met, and given the utter foil:
Snaffle those Coultes, that at your peace do jar,
And beard those braues that labor for your spoil.
Fight for your selves, your wives and Children now,
To strangers Yoakes, your necks do never bow.
Thus Truth her charge, to rich and poor has told,
From this good Lord, whose life to you is known:
And Truth to you such tidings will unfold,
As may enforce both young and old to moan.
Mark Hattons end, whom death from us has reft,
Yet he good name to conquer death has left.
Thus as in health, in truth he God did praise,
In sickness his, he did extol his name,
His hope was heaven, by faith on Christ he stays,
And battle does against sin and hell proclaim.
Rebelling flesh he manly did subdue,
And in sweet Christ his health he did renew.
Most like a Lamb amidst his grievous pain,
He bears the Cross that God upon him laid:
With patience he his anguishes sustaines,
In extreamst grief most faithfully he praide.
Christ was the rock, whereon he sought to build,
All other means this Christian Lord exilde.
Thus in Gods truth his heart and mind was staide,
He studied still to exercise his Law:
By-pathes to tread he ever was affraide,
Of judgment he did always stand in awe.
His Lord and God, right glad he was to serve,
He from his heasts, of purpose would not swerue.
Thus spent this Lord his time in his distress,
On Gods sweet will he always did depend:
To handfast Christ by faith he forth did prease,
And he through grace, did sweet releife him send.
Though body his, were feeble, faint, and weak;
His soul was strong, Christ kept the same from wreake.
When physic sought, his health for to recure,
He held Gods word the physic for the Spirit:
From thence he drank such precious water pure,
As in the heavens augmented his delight.
Yet physic showed on him her wonted skill,
But all in vain, for God must have his will.
Our gracious Queen, of courtesy the flower,
Fair Englands Gem: of lasting bliss and joy:
Whom God long shield with arm of might and power,
From all her foes that would work her annoye.
From Rich mount came, this Lord for to relieve;
Whose Princely sight, great comfort did him give.
All means she sought to work her Hattons ease,
Most loving words she gave the sick and weak:
Her Highness voice his griefs did much appease,
His heat reuiu'de to hear her Highness speak.
Physicians then, had charge to show their skill
Upon this Lord, as they would win good will.
And they with care, (as subjects to her Grace)
Obedient were, to wait upon their cure:
On whom they wrought, God knows a certain space,
Devising how, their health he might procure.
Five days our Queen remained with the destrest,
Who thought himself through her for to be blessed.
She took her leave and bad this Lord farewell,
And he to heaven with hands outstretched hie:
Calls unto him, that in the heavens does dwell,
With grace from heaven her Highness to supply.
Long live said he, most gracious Queen in peace,
God make thee strong, the rage of foes to cease.
Thus praide our Queen to God to send him health,
And he to heaven for her safeguard does call:
That long she might live in the common wealth,
To shield the good and bring the bad to thrall.
He took his leave of his most gracious Queen,
And praised God she had his comfort been.
Physicians then did on this Lord attend,
And grave divines were ever at his hand:
But that which God does mind to bring to end,
Its vain for man to gain say or withstand.
His hope was heaven, his trust was in Gods son;
Small was the ease, that he by physic won.
Time passes on, and calls this Lord away,
The Sexten waights to ring his doleful Knell:
But he prepares himself to watch and pray,
He leaves the world, and hopes with Christ to dwell.
And as by Christ in truth this Lord was taught,
With th'oyle of faith his Lamp was fully fraught.
Securely he, to sleep thought it not meet,
The sleep of sin, he did abandon quite:
He looked for Christ, his Lord and Savior sweet,
His hope and trust in his dear death was pight.
His wedding Roabes with joy he did provide,
In hope to feast with Christ and his sweet Bride.
What were the words he to the world did leave?
He by his will all things in order set:
He sought no man of duty to deceive;
His hope was Christ, from him he comfort fet.
And as he had been every poor man's friend,
So he in mind the poor had to his end.
The Schools of skill, where science does abound,
He thought upon: and daily had in mind
Poor Captives that in clogs of care are bound,
To ease their grief he some releife assignde.
His servants all, whose love to him was tender,
For service done, he duly did remember.
But waxing faint, and drawing to his end,
He leaves his Queen unto the Lord of might:
Desiring him, from grief her to defend;
And all her foes to foil and put to flight,
From treasons vilde, and Traitors, Lord her save,
And let thy Truth, through world her passage have.
Farewell my Peers, the Lord God be your guide,
Her Counsel grant, with thy grace to direct:
That they a salve may day by day provide,
To shield the good, and cut off the infect.
Her Highness weal, God make them still to mind,
And to root up rebellious plants unkind.
You manly Knights and Gentlemen adue,
Be strong in Truth, and constant to your Queen:
Farewell to you good Subjects just and true,
Now from your hearts let loyal^ (...)
Uphold the state, be Pillars found (...):
False not your faith, to God and Prince be just.
Be not seduc'st, by any popish mean;
Abhor and hate their doctrine most vnpure:
Those rascal Priests, as Traitors hold unclean,
That would you from obeisance due allure.
Cleave you to Christ, let Pope and blind guides go,
They speak of peace, but mind your overthrow.
Thus time in Truth run over fast away,
And sickness sharp gave more and more increase:
And death does wait, to close his corpse in clay,
But he for grace, to call does never cease.
Sweet Christ I sue, for mercy unto thee;
Bow down thine ear, from hell my soul set free.
His son adopt, Sir William Hatton Knight,
He does exhort obediently to live:
In God and Truth he wills him to delight,
And to his Prince her honor due to give.
Thus shall thou win deserved praise and fame,
And spotless keep for ever Hattons name.
And thanks to you my Servants for your pain,
Henceforth for me you may take ease and rest:
I see with you I shall not long remain,
For death to sack my life is present pressed.
But pray my faith in Christ may never fail,
Life is no loss, death works for mine avail.
And now sweet death most welcome unto me,
Thy strokes ne can, ne shall me once dismay:
No grief but joy, I shall obtain by thee,
Although thou come to take my life away.
Yet Christ to me a Crown of life will give,
Death dies (...) ^ith him shall live.
I call to t^ (...) Savior come,
My silly (...):
And in the (...) of doom,
A (...) Lord me make.
I come (...), thy (...) Lord receive,
My (...) to (...), (...) soul to thee I le^.
O happy (...) that made so good an end,
Thy Queen thy want, with noble Peers does wail:
Thy (...) adopt, laments his dearest friend,
Dry dumpes of dole, constraines his joy to fail.
Poor Suitors weep, thy servants pensive are;
The needy poor with tears, their woes declare.
Thus Truth the truth has set before your eyes,
His life and death most truly is set down:
And let the truth both rich and poor suffice,
Who spreades his praise, in every Port and Town.
A godly life he led upon the earth,
And in Gods fear did render up his breath.
Then Lordings yield in weeds of wailefull woe,
To bring his corpse unto the gaping grave:
He Is gone before, the way he does you show,
And you your selves of life no charter have.
Then think on death, which way so ere you wend,
He follows you, your pilgrimage to end.
Thus though this Lord unto the world be dead,
His faith in Christ the joys of heaven has won:
Sin, Hell, and Death, he under feet does tread,
And lives in bliss, with Christ; Gods only son.
Then Lordings change your griefs to joy again,
For Hatton lines and death in him is slain.
FINIS.

