DEVOREVX. Virtues tears for the loss of the most christian King Henry, third
of that name, King of France; and the untimely death, of the most noble and
heroical Gentleman, Walter Deuoreux, who was slain before Roan in France.
First written in French, by the most excellent and learned Gentlewoman, Madam
Geneuuefue, Petau Maulette. And paraphrastically translated into English.
Ieruis Markham.

Bramo assaj, poco spe^^ nulla chieggio. AT LONDON, Printed by I. Roberts, for
Thomas Millington, and are to be sold at his shop in Cornhill, under Saint
Peter's Church, 1597.

To the Right Honorable, and most virtuous Ladies and Sisters, Dorithie,
Countess of Northumberland, and the Lady Penelope Rich.
THE virtue of your perfections (most excellent Madams) which draws not alone
our Clime, but even all the Nations of Europe to wonder; has now diuinelie
brought forth one issue of their admiration; (I mean this Monument of your
euer-worthy to be living Brother,) the Mother of it (a most rare French
spirit,) first created and brought it forth in England, (the^ a quiet
fauster-mother to her thoughts) after took it over with her, to acquaint with
her own Nation; and since, sent it to me to apparel in our English fashions,
desirous (for his sake whom it most adoreth) that it might principally do your
Ladyships service. It was when I received it, exceeding rich in French
imbroderie, and if now, either by my want or dulnes, it seem patched, or too
homely: with the beams of your gracious eyes, (most rare creatures) shine upon
it, and then the worst of my penns earthines doubtless shall be stellified.
Our Realm boasts not naturally of silks, which are gaudie and soon vanishe,
but of her plain broad-cloth, which is comlie and durable; if such like be my
Paraphras upon this French ground, I am all I would be, since I desire nothing
more then to give his living name Poets eternity. To you is due this tribute,
and to you most humbly I tender it, vowing to live best pleased, when I am
either able, or can do your Honors service: being (though a worm) as great
an adorer of your virtues, as the mightiest whosoever.

Ieruis Markham.
In praise of the work.
FAme houering in her threefold Region,
Beheld how Aretea did complain
In tragic tunes, th'vntimely rape of one,
Whom froward Fate, and forward Zeal had ^laine.
But when she heard the noble Deuoreux named,
Unto his grave she made a speedy flight,
Where base Oblivion sat, who now ashamed
Hides her foul head in shades of endless Night.
Then not content her valarous Palladine
Should be interred in so small a room;
That after time may think his Stem divine,
She makes the spacious world his glorious Toomb,
And bad this Lady do the obsequies,
Who offers holy tears for sacrifice.
R. Allott.
To my most affectionate friend, Ieruis Markham.
TO worthy Deuoreux, Arms, and after Age,
A wondrous Colosse does thy Muse inhaunce,
His boistrous feet are fixed on the stage
Of peaceful Albions strond, and fruitful France,
Under whose forked Arch whole Nauies ride
Filling their empty sails with Deuoreux Fame,
That France, Spain, Flaunders, and the world beside
Amazed stands to hear great Essex Name.
From out his eyes he darts the golden beams
Of perfect Honors neuer^ s^tting Sun,
Whose influence in each soul fresh courage streams
All this, nay more, thy sacred tears have done,
Winged by thy fieri^ Muse they mount the skies,
And move to weeping ruth heavens twinkling eyes.
R. Allott.
In praise of the work.
ONce borne of mortal Parents, mortally
Earth turns to earth in noble Deuoreux:
A second life immortal wits infuse,
And crown him now with immortality:
His Mother French, for he in France did die,
And Ph^nix of his ashes there renues;
His Father is a gentle English Muse,
From whence he challenges nobility:
English and French thus enter-married,
Have issue double Fame: his fame, their own:
As gold of that Great-worke, that powrefull Stone,
So Fame of Virtue, and it self are bred;
His first birth night to this, this a true morn;
May his noble Brother be as well twise-borne.
E. Guilpin.
To his dear friend Ieruis Markham.
NO longer let dismembered Italy
Think scorn of our (thought dull for colder) clime,
We are not so frost-bitten in the prime,
But blessed from heaven with as great wealth as she:
With all her Cities shall one, our City
Compare for all the wealth of this rich time;
Thames shall with Po vie Swanns, Swanns music chime,
London with subtle Venice, policy;
She shall drop beauties with fair Genoa,
Though humorous trauailers repine thereat:
But not with glorious Florence will they say,
So farrefam'd for her wits triumuirat;
To that proud brag thou Ieruis shall reply,
Whose Muse in this song gives them all the Lie.
E. Guilpin.
ARETEAE Lachrimae.
1.
WOe-wearied with the euer-weeping woe
That breaks the aged raines of withered France,
And thinking how those thoughts to ouer-goe
That give eternal memory to mischaunce,
Or willing to deceive th'vnwilling foe,
Of euer-springing tears, by some dead trance,
Early before the early Sun could rise,
I rose from rest, when rest rose from mine eyes:
2
And freed from that which frees it self from care,
(For quiet nere was consort with complaynt)
Led by Hopes hand, though drawn on by Despair,
(The Factor for improuident constraint)
I walked along a stream, for pureness rare,
Brighter then sunshine, for it did acquaint
The dullest sight with all the glorious pray
That in the pibble-paued channel lay.
3
No moulten Crystal, but a richer Mine,
Even Natures rarest Alcumie ran there,
Diamonds resolud, or substance more divine,
Through whose bright-gliding current might appear
A thousand naked Nymphs, whose Iuory shine
Enamoling the banks, made them more dear
Then ever was that glorious Palace gate
Where the day-shyning Sun in triumph sat.
4
Upon the brym, the Eglantine and Rose,
The Tamoriske, Olive, and the Almond-tree,
As kind companions in one union gro^s,
Foulding their twinding arms, as often we see
Turtle-taught Lovers either other close,
Lending to dulnes feeling sympathy.
And as a costly Vallance ore a bed,
So did their garland-tops the Brook ore-spred.
5
Their leaves, that differd both in shape and show,
(Though all were green, yet difference such in green)
Like to the checkerd bent of Iris bow,
Prided the running Mine, as it had been
The bower of Beauty; whence alone did flow
More heavenly streams then former age had seen,
Taking their current from that learned Hill
Where lodge the Mothers of admire and skill.
6
Amongst the Summer blossoms of their bows
A thousand several colored Birds was set,
Who moved (as seemed) by charitable vows,
Or excellent compassion, ever wet
With honorable tears, (for Fates allows
That sencible, from senseless, still shall fet
Models of pity,) came there with melody,
To cheer men's minds, fore-done with misery.
7
And with the murmring cadence of the wave
That made a pretty wrangling as it went,
Chiding the banks which no more lymit gave,
They joined their well-tuned throats with such consent,
That even mad grief at sight thereof grew grave;
And as inchaunted, stayed from languishment,
Proving, then there, delight was never greater,
And grief how much the more, so much the better.
8
Thither came I to seek out lost Delight,
(Delight that was in Eden banished man)
But presently appeard unto my sight
A soule-sad Nymph, griefe-tortur'd, pale and wan;
Upon whose countenance rigorous Despite
Registered much, or more then Mischief can:
All that she was, was pitiful and ill,
Such as to lymne, my weak wit wants skill.
9
With balefull Cypress was her for-head crowned,
And fatal Yewgh made bracelets for her hands;
A shole of night-Crowes with a deadly sound,
And dismal Shrike-owles round about her stands:
Her eyes within a woeful Ocean drowned,
Oyle-like increast new fire on dollours brands,
And with a dym blew burning Lamp she bare,
She offered sacrifice unto Despair.
10
Those curious rich abylliments which once
Pleased all the world, because they pleased her well,
Now torn and staynd, disparadg'd for the nonce,
Like Autumn leaves too negligently fell:
And falling, in disorder all a-tonce,
With less respect then least regard can tell,
Carelessly trail'd after her as she went,
To prove she loved no vesture but lament.
11
And yet for all this Chronicle of shame,
This ample Legend of misfortunes worst,
This boundless volume of de^ertlesse blame,
This figure of despite, this Map accursed;
Well might I know her now ill ruind frame
Had even sometimes the rarest features nursed,
And beauties abstracts still were le^t so claire,
That wilful blind must say, once she was fair.
12
Once was she fair, and that her mangled gown
Which half forsook to shroude her sacred skin,
Was of a stuff immortal, as Jove's crown,
Rich-seeming Azure-Veluet, wrought within,
Without, and every part; all wauing down
With golden Flower-deluces, that had bin
Charms from dishonor, and despite mischaunce
Brought ten times thousand Tropheys into France.
13
All this I knew, yet knew not what mishap,
What life-confounding grief, wasting good thought,
Her heavy soul in agony should wrap:
Nor could the mean by any mean be sought
Why her eternal sighs (clowd-like) did lap
Her joys in mourning garments, sadly wrought,
Nor why she tore her flame downe-burning hair;
Yet still she sighed, and still her locks did taire.
14
Till with a knee-bow'd humble low salute,
(For who will not do reverence to admire)
Approaching near her, I made humble (...)
Her godhead would give grace to my desire,
And tell me what woe murdered her repute,
Making her sighs to set her tears on fire;
And she whose grief could not surprise her glory,
Set her sad tongue in tune to tell the story.
15
O you immortal Daughters of delight,
Admired alone, triple triplicitie,
Fair Thespyan Goddesses, whose only might,
With holy fire inspires our memory;
Even you dear Muses, aid me to recite
Her doleful accents, and her agony:
Bathe my cold temples in some blessed spring,
That dare not else dream of so great a thing.
16
But you! o you, you that alone are you, The Countess of Northumberland and
the Lady Rich.

Whom nothing but your selves your selves can match,
From whom, and to whom, all the Virtues flew:
For ere high I^^e the worlds work did dispatch,
Your curious moulds within himself he drew,
Making his Dietie thereon to watch,
Vowing, Beauty and Virtue, till your birth
Should not be seen, or known upon the earth.
17
You, Sisters both in nature and admire,
The golden typ of every praising tongue,
That make one I Will boue all the world aspire.
(O think not France this fury does thee wrong,
For who that speaks, speaks not with double fire
If but one thought of them glaunce in his song?
Then pardon mine in^oke, and let me ring
Justly on them that teach all Swannes to sing:)
18
Hear me, o holy ones, and help my style,
Glorious adopted fair Northumberland,
And thou rich Rich, richest did ere compile,
The Only history shall eternal stand
When ruin else shall all records defile,
And burn out memory with Obliuions brand;
Aid you those Muses that should aid my pen,
For you are adored of Muses, Gods, and men.
19
Even for his souls sake whom your souls loved dear,
Fair Ladies lighten favor on my lay,
And him behold, though me you will not hear,
Him, whose omnipotence of fame bears sway
Farther then from the high Alps highest staire
The worlds great eye has power to see by day:
You that live aye in him, he in your thought,
Exhalt my Muse, vntuterd, not untaught.
20
Be you, you glorious Angels of his praise,
(Whose but report lends earth a heavenly soul)
The first beholders of my tragic lays,
Whom if you bless, there is none dares to control,
(For cursed is he that what you say, gaine-sayes)
Or chyde me for your Brother I enroule
Above the host of former liui^g men;
A noble work, fit for a golden pen.
21
Bovv then your ears (the Adamants of love)
Unto the song that wounded Honor sange,
And let her teare-steept words some pity move,
For thus she sighed, and thus her tale began.
Know (said this Nymph, that's reuerenst all above)
I am the same on whom sometimes did hang
The rule of France, her sway, her Emperie,
Her type of state, her Kingdoms dignity.
22
It Was I that bent their backs with laden wealth,
That gave them laws to govern gloriously,
It Was I that made them breathe et^rnall health,
And gave them names, Nations to (...):
I brought them vvonder by desert, not stealth,
And lodged them in the books of memory;
In brief, it was I, that with their neighbors store
Made them more rich then ere was Realm before.
23
But see alas, a left hand chance of ill
Madding their brains made lunatic with pride,
Has turned this Turret down, valleyd this Hill,
All topsie-turuie thrown on every side:
Thus have they torn my vesture, broake my will,
Doomed me in endless banishment to bide,
All things are out of order, woe alas,
I am not ARETEA, as I was.
24
Now does the father hate his living son,
The neighbor loathes his neighbor bounds him in,
The married pair would have their knot undone,
Laws serve for naught, but baits to draw on sin,
After religion painted zeal does run
Mocking his moanes, that ending, new begin;
And like the ruind batteries of a wall,
Things shapt, unto their vnshapt Chaos fall.
25
Adder-deafe ears they have when wisdom charms,
VVilfull in ill, illness beyond conceit,
Foolish to shun, wise to draw on their harms,
Rich to deceive themselves by self deceit:
All they desire is civil home alarmes,
Burning the houses of their own receite;
VVracking the vessels that transport their good,
Within the Ocean of their own hearts blood.
26
Eight times have I given end to their unrest,
And sealed up discords gates with wealthy peace,
Their streets and Temples all with Olives dressed,
As often has testified their wars surcease:
But woe, I dye that this should be expressed.
Mars giving blood-drunk Ate new release,
Has at this present set fresh brands on fire
To kindle those old wars Time did expire.
27
For as a mighty Deludge after rain
Gliding with fury from the hills desent,
Finding all bounds too strait for his remain,
With roaring clamors (as the earth did rent)
Bursts through the Meads, and ouer-flowes the plain,
Chiding the rocks in which his waves were pent:
Then drownes the Plough-mans profit in his fall,
His house, his hay, his labors, hope and all.
28
Briefly, so like a Tyrant does it rage,
Madder, since unresisted being mad,
When an incountring bridge seeks to aswage
The thunder-d^a^^ing current proudly glad:
As these stern men (borne in this iron age)
Have done, who making all my pleasures sad,
Are nor content to tear their Countries bones,
And spoil her life and ^oule, with bedridden groans:
29
But being Paracids, abortiue borne,
In whom old Nature chalengeth no right,
Bring in their murdrous hands (to France forlorn)
The minatours of shame, engines of spite:
As pride, inchastitie, horror, blood, and scorn,
Monsters of hell-black suns unto the night;
Thinking to stop that royal Champions breath,
Whose life preserved Divinity from death.
30
Even him whom I had planted strong and hie,
(High in the world, strong in the hearts of Kings)
To be a scourge unto their tyranny:
Bating the fury of their envious wings,
By means of that almighty Henry;
Henry de Val^is, on whom virtue rings:
Under whose gracious aspect, I did hope,
My laws should take new virtue, larger scope.
31
And the all white, pure Virgin-colour'd faith,
Of souls eternal quiet, lodged in skies,
That turns the dying pangs to joys in death,
Should to the height of heights aspire and rise:
Hence sprang it, and for this my true heart says,
I joined to him, the man most stout, most wise
The Other all great Henry: whose in-sight,
Might guide, support, and govern him in right.
32
But o, these monstrous men, Monsters, not men:
Whom the earth-shaking heavens in thunder framed,
To make my ruin boundless; they, even then
Have raised their blood-bath'd hands, yet vnasham'd,
Against the Lords anointed: (Weep my pen)
For they have slain their King, (brute beasts untamed)
Their sacred King, their worlds God, whose true care,
Made their great names flourish on earth so fare.
33
But he, too excellent to know what is ill,
(The gooddest holy one that breathed this air)
Troubling no thoughts to think what others will,
Neglected what they meant, what hearts they bear,
Neither ambition, palme-like growing still,
Nor looks, nor policies, nor nightly fear,
Made him beware, which each day growing on,
Double each day afflicted me with moan.
34
At the end of this sad memorable story,
Crossing her arms as one in desperate case,
There broke from her two eyes (the stars of glory)
Two bloody ^^reames of tears, that ran a pace,
Which her immortal sighs (woes oratorie)
Straue both to interrupt and to disgrace,
So mightily, that pity did not stint
To place him self in hearts of iron and flint.
35
Here, here, said she (as soon as say she could,
Or that her woes gave words leave how to speak)
Here may thou see my sorrows flood unfold,
The deludge of my care, hence, hence does break,
The tumult of my sighs, the heat, the cold,
Of my flame-burning thoughts, benumbed and weak:
This is the cause of my first borne lament,
And the true grief which does my soul torment.
36
And yet it is but the first step to my care,
Or but the superficies of my pain;
A preface to my moan, an Index to despair,
A little thread, lending a mighty mean
To search the Laborinth where languors are,
A rising cloud against a storm of rain:
For mount on mount was thrown, mass upon mass,
Till greatest grief grew greater then it was.
37
This woe, that spread it self from East to West,
Bounding the Artick and Antartick pole,
Ambitiously envied he was suppressed
Within the circute of the worlds control;
Wherefore as if all tremor, all unrest,
Were insufficient richly to condole
My starre-crost misaduentures in disdain,
Adds a new grief, to make new worlds complain.
38
Even now affliction heaues her heavy arm,
And spreads black sorrows Ensign through our land;
Calamity braues all the world with harm,
And burns up peace with wars worst fier-^^and:
Tempests, no calmes, men's ears do rudely charm,
And all prepostrous things in tumult stand:
All fortunes draw us to infortunes gates,
(Fortune, the first and last that ruin^ states.)
39
O Fortune, thou great Amorite of Kings,
Opinions breath, thou Epicurian air,
Invention of man's soul, falsest of things,
A step beyond our judgment, and a stayre
Higher then men can reach with reasons wings;
Thou blindfold Archeresse, thou that wilt not hear,
Thou foe to persons, manners, times and all,
That raysest worthless, whilst the worthiest fall.
40
O thou, whom all may find, but none avoid,
Deceitful Queen of mutabilitie,
Swift are thy feathered feet, still vnanoyde,
Lofty thy mind, thy hopes to heaven fly,
Thy wings are light, like flames never destroyed,
Upon a Globe thou stand'st, turning our misery:
Of thee must I complain, dread Nurse of woe,
From whom, both heaven and earthly things do floe.
41
Thou thrall to none but to Philosophy,
That Monarchies and states turn'st at thy will,
Leaving no more marks of their dignity,
Then ships in water leave, or feathered quill
Leaves in the liquid air, when speedily
It glides through it, scaling the starry hill:
Monster-bearing Mother, why did thou long,
Having done thy worst, yet to do greater wrong?
42
But why of this great nothing do I plain,
Stoning to death these shadows with my tears?
And rather do not with their drops constrain
The substance to lament for my dispaires?
Why does not this salt Ocean of my brain
Convey my mournings to more better ears?
Beating the marble-skye for this offense,
Chiding no more Fortune, but Providence.
43
O Providence, the conduct to our life,
The ground of virtue, hostile foe to sin,
That rearest Towers, and appeasest strife,
That gatherst all disperced exiles in:
Thou, that inuentedst laws, gave man his wife,
Thou Mistress unto ancient discipline,
Thou, that bear heaven and nature round about thee,
That make all things, nothing being without thee.
44
O why art thou grown blind? leading astray?
Confounding virtue? making vice thy friend?
Sacking the sunshine Towers of the day?
Prefixing wandering misery no end?
Why have thou given Barbarizme sway,
And wilt not let Order on thee attend?
Why art thou fled from us? whither art thou gone?
Leaving both men, and all things else alone.
45
Tell me, thou Architectresse of this frame,
Thou, that upon the great booke-firmament
VVritest in golden star^es each creatures name,
Their lives, their fortunes, and intendiment,
Why dain'st thou not that we may read the same,
And spelder our misdeeds why we be shent?
If to behold the letters be thy will,
Teach us to read, that we may rid our ill.
46
Lend us divine eyes to our heavenly part,
To read on that almighty Chronicle:
So shall the date of virtue never part,
But double wonder with more miracle,
(Ay me) against the wind breathes my poor heart:
Vain is my wish, vain every article,
Of mine enraged desire, my wrath boots not,
Men must be men, and must not know their lot.
47
Then on thou saddest Muse of my sad thought,
Or what besides more sad then sadness is,
You Goddesses for earths sole wonder wrought, The two Ladies.

Ladies of my plaint, creators of all bliss,
In whose aspects virtue is chastely taught:
You hearers of mine inuocations wish,
Hallow my song with Diamonds from your eyes,
Since woe is god-like, falling from such skies,
48
And thou that have grownd-sharpe mine ore-worne moan,
Adding new fire to cinders of my grief,
Make thine ears plya^t to receive my groan,
(Thine ears, the Consestorie of belief,)
Exhalt thine heart (perfect afflictions throne)
Cancel th'accounts of pleasure: and in brief,
Make every office of receite in thee,
A storehouse of this greatest misery.
49
After the sons of mischief and misdeed
(These tyrannous blood-drinking miscreants)
Had slain their King; An act which did exceed
The worst that Time notes in recreants:
When they had banished Virtue, torn her weed,
And sworn themselves, Shames devoted tennants,
Fell deadly loue-sicke with Ambitions face,
Whose Fever, naught could cure but my disgrace.
50
Ambition, fie upon thy painted cheek,
(VVoe worth the beauty sleeps not with the face)
For thou art hateful, foul, vnfaire, vnmeeke,
A poyson-painted pleasure mad men chase:
Thou reasonlesse desire, that make men seek
To kiss the S^nne, whilst fire does them embrace,
Thou only strong, disorderd, rulelesse passion,
That marr'st men's minds, and putt'st the^ out of fashion.
51
Thou angry house-(...) guest
That begg'st, and yet loath'st Hospitality,
Thou murderer of the mind that gives thee rest,
Rewarding kindness with indignity;
Thou element to mischiefs shape digest,
False Propher, teaching naught but heresy:
Thou robb'st the rich of gold, alms from the poor,
And gyu'st them back but hope to mend^their store.
52
Thou, that in Rome within a hundred years
Raysd and ore-threw seauenty-three Emperors:
Mother of civil discord, homebred tears*
Thou infinite great ill no end deuoures,
Prides Minion, and the ladder to dispaires,
A day eternal, ended by no hours:
It Was thou that taught'st them all the ways to sin,
And ending, how new mischiefs should begin.
53
By this Lieuetenant-generall of hell
Conducted to assault all holy things,
They racst my buildings, burnt my virgin-Cell,
Defacst my Temples, spoyld mine offerings;
Brake all my statues Fame had carved so well,
And quenched my burning Lamps in bloody springs:
All the bright Censors round about my shrine,
Are dampt, and smoard up with forgetful Time.
54
This inauspitious star, this fatal ill,
This messenger of Majesty's low fall,
Having subjected all things to his will,
And bound me everlastingly to thrall;
Great grife, which grows by use to greatest skill,
Raisd royal passions to a civil brall,
And by strong arguments, approved this true,
That leaden thoughts, then earth nere higher flew.
55
Thence came it, that mine all-forsaken Fame,
Full of sicke-feathers, weak, and desperate,
Impt her broake plumes, and like a iealious flame,
With envious have mounting the highest gate,
And striving to out-goe in swift-pac'd game
Clowd-fashond Smoke, (the Usher to his state)
I heau'd my head above a sea of tears,
And through the world sought aid for my dispaires.
56
Was nere a corner (if there corners be
As some imagine) in this gloabie round,
VVhither Fame bore not mine indignity,
Comenting stories of my bleeding wound.
Fair Sien, whose face saw their impiety,
Bore through her channel to the Oceans bound
My huge infortune, thence the salt-Seas course,
To all the world my miseries discourse.
57
Yet pitiful vnpitty'd, pitying eyes
Suruayd me, but with common charity:
This customary, usual sacrifice,
Silly God-helpe, verbal integrity;
Camelion alms, a food which does suffice
Hardly the ear: though air most commonly
Is all his sustenaunce. O this was that
Which poorest made, made poorer mine estate.
58
At length, (though bedridden with perpetual grief,
And Mountaine-laden with my misery)
By Fame instructed, (she that is the chief,
And great all-teller what great'st wonders be)
I heard of thee fair ENGLAND, where relief
Is stored in a Silver Treasury*
That placed alone, rul'st others, ruling many,
Too good by much to be conioynd with any.
59
Of thee sang Fame a glorious golden story.
Oh not that prodigal praise: spending Fame
Which like a bubble, rayseth up his glory,
That shadow-like continues in the same:
And in the end; whi^^t no we^ eye is sorry,
Dies in Times bosom, which forgets his name.
Nor that vain Fame which turns more quick the eyes,
Soon witherd fruit, bright flame, that early dies.
60
But that pure Fame, which is the soul of Kings,
(Much better for that better residence)
The true discouerer of all worthy things,
The honny-tast, and pleasure of our sense
That bears eternity upon her wings:
That borne ere Time, shall live when Time is hence.
This holy Fame, o England, spoke of thee,
More praise then I can write, less then I see.
61
Fame told me thou were ^o^es delightful ^eat,
His Oliue-garden, walled with Iuorie,
Whose spring, wars canker durst not dare to eat,
An Eden, full of quiet dignity:
Thy people rest when others broyle in sweat:
She drew thy line from immortality,
And bad me fly to thee for my redress.
He that torments, can make all torments less.
62
Unto the faire-shapt body of this praise
Fame adds a head, more beauteous, more divine;
She tells me then; Pallas thine Empire swayes.
( Pallas, said I) nay one of better line:
She that mounts others, but whom none can raise
By any title, figure, or in fine,
Higher then her own height; because it is
The highest step in all the scale to bliss.
63
She has no like; and therefore no comp^re
Is excellent enough to fort^ with her:
To say she is best, were to say others are*
And there is no other whom I may prefer
To such celest'all hono^: O who dare
In any Name but hers, her Name inter*
(Then thus says Fame) ELIZA from that Land
Controules the world, with an unconquered hand.
64
It Is she, that whilst Confusions smoakie cloud
(Stirred from the raging fires of civil wars)
The heads of all her neighbour-Kings does shroud,
Infranchising Oppression by those i^rrs,
Does, with an host of heavenly thoughts endowed
Preserve her Countries face from bloody scarrs:
So that no fogge of putrified wounds
Is seen within the circute of her bounds.
65
It Is she that taught, teaches Philosophy
To be more excellent then heere-to-fore:
It others, but she, it does ornefi^,
Unto all Arts she is the sacred door.
She, heales Afflictions-vlcers with her eye,
And unto those which tortious wrongs deplore,
She gives pr^pitious Balm, such as they crave,
Or such as Justice wronged deserves to have.
66
Fame told me further, that by nature there,
In thee o England, (o all-peace-full I Will)
Courage grows up, and best resolves appear:
The ancient Her^es, whom old Time did file
Upon record, to live when he should wear,
Justly compared, no sense ca^reconcile
Or match with them, whose actions vnoutgone,
Breathe at this day about ELIZAS throne.
67
An endless bead-roule of deceased Kings,
As many Princes, Nobles, Generals,
Golden-spurd Knights, (the plumes of Honors wings)
Fame reckond up, and called them Principalls.
But Death, the cert^in'st of uncertain things,
Long since had reueld at their burialls;
So that I beat my breast with desperate pain,
Least Nature could not make the like again.
67
But Fame, (the happy Herrauld of Desire,)
Chyd the weak humor of my vain mistrust:
And told me, Englands praise was never hier.
For though her houshold-Armes lay long to rust,
And want of use made many souls ^etyre
From what they would, to what perforce they must,
Yet Soldiers borne they have continued still,
As good by nature, as the best by skill.
69
But those whom others harms have called abroad,
And Armed to guard the innocent from wrong,
They, Demy-god-like, from his vast abode
Have chaste Oppression, and made Tyrants throng
In heaps to hell, and Charons boat ore-load,
All which to name, would make my story long:
And dull thine ears, though it content thy mind,
Since sweetest things do soonest cloy by kind.
70
O Norris, Sir John Norris.
I could live upon thy name,
And wear more penns then ere were made to write,
I could each hour draw stanzaes of thy fame,
And make my brains perpetually indite;
But o! thy virtues shall inspire a flame
Better then mine, much better to recite
Thy noble Gests, which gallantly shall stand,
Whilst Ireland is, Spain, or the Netherland.
71
Vere, I could breathe a spirit in thy praise, Sir Frauncis Vere.

(Thou Father to a most oppressed Land)
But that I know, Honor intends to raise
Miraculously from that frozen strand
A wit; which set on fire to see thy days,
Shall register the glories of thy hand:
And, for that all my praises are too few
For him; to whom I, and all praise are dew.
72
For thee o Essex and thy noble line,
Ever most great, yet greater then it was,
Thou sunshine, drying widows teared eyne,
The Columb which supports a royal mass;
Thou excellent, derived from most divine,
The work ELIZAS power has brought to pass:
To thee am I deuote, and from thy deeds,
I draw this breath, on which my spyrit feeds.
73
Yet (Princely Lord) imagine not I dare
To take in hand the legend of thy deeds:
I hold the best conceit too poor and bare,
To aim at that, which all our aim exceeds*
Who lives, shall see the rarest wits that are,
Contend to memorize the growing seeds
Of those ripe virtues which are graft in thee,
More then in any like posterity.
74
Suffice it; I, as silly Palmers use,
That seek to shorten day-long laboring way,
Among rude discourses, oftentimes infuse
The Acts of Kings and Princes, and alay
Labor with labor: so my trauail'd Muse
Fordone, and ravished with this sweet assay,
Glaunceth upon thy Name, thy Name does then
Beget thy deeds, thy deeds the maze of men.
75
Yet if pure zeal could tune delicious lines,
Or calmes would re^t ^ithin my troubled brain,
Then would I task my spyrit, which inclines
To sing of thee, and with those notes constrain
Envy to burst; and as thou brighter shines,
So would I raise my thoughts, and so far strain
My high-pitcht notes to make the world resound,
Till I grown horce, loose life, loose skill and sound.
76
But o fair fury; Mistress of my wit,
VVhither do thou exhale me? flag a while,
Thou for such glorious accents art unfit:
These sweet imaginary hopes beguile
My quick-inchaunted soul; come sadly sit,
Enough is thee, if thou in tears compile
A woeful tale, that they which hear the same,
In ruth may say: our fortunes were too blame.
77
Thus then it was. This Nations sacred praise,
From ear to ear, through all the world conuayde,
Quickend my spyrits, and my mind assayes
To beg some pity there, where Angels said,
Commiseration like a Monarch swayes:
Thence came it, that thus torn and ill arayd
I thither went. O I shall ever think,
What Nectar of delight mine eyes did drink.
78
The Sun^e I saw, was well, the worlds fair eye,
For by ELIZAS light, all Nations see,
Her throne, like to her self, most gloriously
Amazed beholders: round about it be
Troops of deere-breathing stars, which whilst she is by,
Shine dim, yet sweetly gracing their degree,
But when to make light dearer, she is unseen,
They shine as bright as they all Suns had been.
79
Round about these, as Planets in their spheres,
Predominant to rule all other men,
Sages, and Princes, Knights and Squires appears,
Ever almighty: most almighty then
Is he, whom her life-giuing grace endeares,
And lends a leave to search through Dangers den
For all the praisefull Honors: or beside,
What ought or should with Knighthoods fame abide.
80
Before her Majesty thus fell I down,
Forsaken, comfortless, and most oppressed,
And ere I spoke, I oftentimes did swoune,
(Grief hardly parts from a care-filled breast)
My tears her foote-steps pittiously did crown;
And on the ground whilst I my sight inuest,
Despite the interruptions of my bale
I echoed forth a sorrow-broken tale.
81
More were my plaints then I have power to tell;
For when clear Majesty with gracious look
Lends a mild ^aret' Afflictions passing bell,
Conceit redoubles, and what power forsook,
Makes it self powrefull; nothing thinks he well
Which is not often repeated. Thence I took
Courage to bare my wounds, and evermore,
Begd aid to heal th'apostumes of my sore.
82
I vowed, if she would pity my distress,
(Since but in her ruth has no dwelling place)
All France should wish her endless happiness,
Sing her good Name, and daily interlace
Her praise with Angels of best worthiness.
Nor should excelling wits white paper grace
With speaking lines, if those lines do no^ speak,
ELIZAS honor, strengthening us, grown weak.
83
ELIZA, which her Nation does adorn
With all the bridall-garments of the best,
Within whose Cli^e, the Muses high are borne,
Arts in esteem, most honorably blessed;
Where Error, like a Fury, lives forlorn,
Consumed, and banished from conceit of rest,
That all those Kings admire beyond the flood,
So small an I Will can hold so great a good*
84
I hoped, by her assist, this fourth Henry
Which I oppose against these wicked ones,
Should in revenge for their impiety
Rain sharp destruction, and upon their bones,
Heap Mountains of tormenting agony,
To quittance my most undeserved groans:
And for they made my cheeks unjustly take
The shameful blush they never can forsake.
85
I told her* that the power which gives her power,
(The most almighty-Maister of her thought)
Would from his throne, thunder and lightning shower,
Till all my foes to hated dust were brought:
Furies I knew from nights black-shades would scower,
And haunt their bosoms, making them distraught,
Rage and consume the pleasure of their lives,
Ha^ing them ^^lues, their child^en, and their wives.
86
Only her Name, (the terror of her foes)
Must patronize the actions of the just:
A Knight of hers, that other Knights out-goes,
Must lead the legions of mine only trust;
For France grown weak, fails in her own dispose,
The purest minds are canker-eate with rust:
Lady I cried, aid my distressed plight,
Often did thou help; yet nere a better right.
87
Here ceast my s^te, and with a pitteous voice,
Of faling tears I murmurd hidden woe,
(Dumb plaints in feeling hearts makes greatest noise)
When least I spoke, most was my sorrows shoe,
Liberall-tongu'd care, is care which does rejoice,
For vent of grief, eases the ouer-floe:
And when I nothing said, then did I find
Sorrow most eloquent; relief most kind.
88
For instantly with bowing of her head,
Which sign makes all knees bend before her chair,
She test^fi'd, prevailing tears were shed;
For proof whereof, her melting heart did rear
A holy dew into her sovereign head,
Which thence from her clear eyesight did appear:
And though she for her self no sorrow knew,
Yet did she weep, to hear how others rue.
89
Then with her hand ELIZA lifts me up,
Cheeres my poor soul, repaires my ruined mind,
Makes me drink comfort from the flowing cup
Of her most sacred breath; then does she bind
My ^^ares to exile, which till then did sup
The i^yce of my wast life, consumed and pined:
And tells me; she will partake of my distress,
Making it nothing, or then nothing, less.
90
Which to atchiue, she bids me there select
A princely Champion, for^unate and strong,
One whom my thoughts assures me will effect
As great designs, and right as worthy wrong.
Many there were, that many would elect,
Not one unworthy person in the throng:
But in my choice, I was deliberate,
For rash respect repents when it is too late.
91
On every person ceaz'd my ravished sight,
Contemplating the beauty of their frames,
That Prince, me thought, was finely shapt, upright,
Such as was Marops at the Olympic games:
Another, seemed broad set, yet passing light,
Like wild Hypolitus, eschewing shames;
This was like Ajax, that like Hector was,
All did exceed, the meanest did surpass.
92
This universal excellence set out
(As if Perfection knew no other soil)
Astonished me, for all a like borne stout,
How could I choose, but reason would recoyle
Blame to my choice? Since who does from a rout
Cull forth a principal, leaves for a foil
Th'vnchosen rest, when all I did behold
Were Iewels-like, of one weight, and one gold.
93
But o, the eye that never apprehends
The truth of objects by a slight suruay,
With grauer judgment busily extends
His nimble sight, and what it does suruay,
Notes not alone, but whereat others tends,
And in whose eyes all other eye-sights lay:
And then I might behold one Prince alone,
Upon whose beauty all men's eyes were thrown.
94
Higher then others his clear countenance s^oode,
For he was taller much, more straight, more strong,
Like to the Forrests-King boue under wood,
Or like an Ensign in a battles throng;
His eye, like that which guides men in the flood,
Had all eyes fixed on it which went not wrong:
Even in his looks, Nature me thought had laid
Some excellence too rare for men too read.
95
Yet not so mystical, but blindest sights
Might prophecy, if his dread Sovereign would,
(To whom is due the honor of his fights)
The world from her should all their glories hold.
And those which yet deny our Saviors rights,
By him for her subdued, thence be in^old:
Amongst converted Saints; Lady bewa^e,
This power thou have, and this is holy war.
96
Me thought he was not fashond in the mould
Of common men; th'accustomd work of Nature:
Nor in the worlds first models, (now grown ou^d)
But, as it seemed by his external feature,
Surpassing her great self, Nature grew bold,
And made him of some special temprature:
Then grown in love with what her power could frame,
Obtaynd a spirit worthy of the same.
97
Essex, it was thee I mean, thou did surprise
All my desires to seek my help by thee,
My sad petition-making tears suffice,
Thy sovereign Goddess did accord to me:
The brute whereof no sooner could arise,
But all that ever were, or hoped to be
Great in the world, with Eagles speedy flight
Flew unto thee, and offered up their might.
98
My state, which until then hunge doubtful strange,
And wounded government past all recure,
From whom all hope of help far of did range,
Of nothing but of cross infortunes sure,
(Now in a moment see a sudden change)
When thou were known mine aid* could the^ endure
No more such thoughts of fear* infants could tell,
Where ere thou went, there would best for^une dwell.
99
You memorable worthy Gentlemen
That in these great occurrents tryde your chance,
For whose dear sakes we hold all Englishmen
In reverent regard, and will advance
Your fames before all other Noblemen,
Whilst France has power to hold the name of France.
If your peculier names I not reveal,
Blame want of knowledge: not my want of zeal.
100
Forgive me, thou right habit of the wars,
Resolved VVilli^ms, (...) Roger Williams.
all too soon dissolved,
Which raysd thine honor from thy Countries iarrs.
Forgive me Clyff^rd, Sir Conyers Clyfford.
s^th I have reuolu'd
Of thy well purchased glory by thy scarrs,
And yet conceal it: you dear rest resolved,
Morgan Sir Math^w Morgan.
and Brook, Sir Edw^rde Brook.
pardon my sparing song*
Least poor in praise, I prove too rich in wrong.
101
Gallant men say, (and less you will not say)
That he which leads a world of hands to fight,
Them to a world of blows ought to convey:
So he that many fames in praise would dight
To many rare conceits, must run astray,
And garnish each one with a several light:
But since I want that wi^^ie treasures store,
One two, two one I Will write of, and no more.
102
A spacious field are they for royal brains
To run cariers in: the air of them is great,
Wherein high-soaring thoughts may hold remains,
And try their towering Sarcells if they'^e seat
Their ^lie-inchaunting notes, above the beams
Of other suns, and like Times teeth, out-eate
Foregoing memory; bewitching Fame,
To sing of theirs, and of no other name.
103
Essex to thee, (who then was part of thee)
In this great business was thy brother joined,
Had thou had more but him, then should he be
Thy best, thy dearest; but since vnconioynd,
Since all were worthless of such fame, but he,
Where thy name is, there let his name reioynd,
Be ever chaynd in Fames best lyncks of gold,
Borne of one mind, created of one mold.
104
And now I come to thee most blessed Saint,
Thou sweetest Nightingall in th'heau'nly quire,
Noble-borne Walter Deuor^x, I faint
And tremble, least my new inkindled fire
Mount thee not hie enough; yet shal't acquaint
All the worlds ears how much I do desire.
O heavenly soul, think not I do thee wrong,
Intending thy praise first, to stay so long.
105
I^ was but that (...) mind
(...) those though (...) delight,
(...) the wind,
S^^ with (...)
Save (...) did bind
Within thy (...) and how (...) despite
Bryb^d Death to (...) the earth
Poor by thy (...) ^hy birth.
106
I did but as the (...)
Who winn^^g (...) their speech,
First (...)
(Delight, (...))
Then, (...) asswadge,
And with (...) breach:
So, if I did (...) of glory shoe*
T^was but a (...)
107
And now to Comba^^ (...)
(...) events,
My harsh Muse does (...) harmonies
Of (...), pitching Tents;
Of fires, and swords, and (...),
Valors true edge, (...),
My soule^^^ (...),
Figures to life true (...) true designs
108
O thou Almightie-power which did infuse M. Walter (...)

Spirit into my spirit, to dare to do
This act of memory, (which they refu^e
Whom both desert and worth have called thereto)
Breathe endless life into my fainting Muse,
That I may write, and by my writing woo
Saints to displeasure, when ungrateful men
Suffers thee sleep so long in darkness den.
109
No sooner had ELIZA given leave
To princely Essex, De^^rax and their power,
To help the oppressed, and from their backs to heave
Tyrannies burden, which does states devour;
When easeful thoughts Wars summons did receive,
And gave adieu to Loves fantastic hour,
Then every one prepared themselves to sea,
Prayed for fair gales, and for a prosperous day*
110
A North-west wind then gently did beget
Their swelling sails with child of Honors course:
Their steele-shod keeles, the rough-seas entrails slit,
And unto France conuay'd fair E^glands force.
And then disburdning them, on land did set
Rebels dismay; just scourges of their worse:
And though their powers and Ensigns dreadful shoes,
Yet bred their Names most terror in their fo^s.
111
But to their Be^d^men, whose continual prayers,
Flew into heaven from their breathing hearts,
Whose wishes, in Ieho^as eyes appears,
To them, and to the torrents of their smarts,
They brought delitious Balm^, and newly reares
Their down (...) b^oken hopes: such happy parts
Plays Virtues sight* and such delight we have,
When we behold Revenge we most do crave.
112
Re^enge, the (...) of a fiery mind,
Which euer-more succeedes a noble thought,
The food whereon re^olues do feed by kind,
Nourishing Honor when its captive brought;
The All from whence we any help can find
For our disparadg'd Names, to scandal brought:
For it in blood does purify disgrace,
Purging her stains, and making smooth her face.
113
The mind by wrongs is made a malcontent,
And clouds her shine in please-lesse melancholy:
Her holy humors are in passions spent,
Till by (...) she is ^et at liberty,
And bravely to her first creation sent;
Even from Re^e^ge got Justice liberty.
For it is (...), and S^^is-^action brings
To injured minds, and to oppressed things*
114
The soul is like a boystrous working sea,
Swelling in billows for disdain of wrongs:
And tumbling up and down from bay to bay,
Proves great with child of indignations;
Yet with Revenge is brought to calm alay,
Disburdend of the pain there-to belongs,
Her lowers are turned to bright-fac'd sunshine braues,
And fair Content plays gently on her waves.
115
This truest Iusticer, this upright Lord,
(Wished R^ueng^) the wronged persons hope,
With this deu^ded Nation does accord
So sweetly, and does lend so large a soope
Unto Redress, that every breathing word
The gates of their contentments does set open:
And albe nothing's well, ye^ for i^ may,
They l^ue content, and make a holy day*
116
There ^^ands a Town close by the Oceans ^ide,
Whose (...) are often washed with the ^^ood,
Well sen^^d, and full of Wars most ancient pride,
A common harbor for his neighbors good:
Within whose channel, safe securely ride
Many tall shyps, that many storms with (...)
Thither (...)
Landing (...).
117
Deep, I imagine now how blessed thou was
Which had the mayden-head of their first sight,
How did thy wish and fortunes come to pass?
Making thee shine more cleerer by their light
Then all the Towns in France. Thou did surpass,
Those ancient Mother-Citties held so bright:
I do not mean thy neighbor Cities by,
For they were staind with blood and perjury.
118
But those whose streets were guiltless of their ills,
That made not zeal a cloak for damned deeds,
Whose power could bridle unrestrained wills:
Even these, at that time thou by much exceeds
As Mountains do the little sandy Hills,
Or well-growne Cedars marish-shaken Reeds,
Both for they first arrived on thy strand,
And thou first gau^st them welcome to the Land.
119
Short time with thee (though long with the oppressed)
These worthy Chiefetaines breathed within thy walls,
None could perceive, much less say they did rest
Their waking harts-honor from slumber-calls.
And (then in ease) knowing no worse unrest,
Speedy prepares they make for these new bralls:
And from thee Deep departing, marched along
To Ro^^, both too ^^^hlesse, and too strong.
120
Roan, Roan be^^^g'd.
(that falsefi'd the holy oath,
She owed unto the lawful Kings of France,
That tumults raised by her divided troath,
Upon religions wounds, looking a ska^nce)
Shuts her late-opend gates against them both,
And vows to have no Sovereign but Mischaunce,
Which she bought dearly, and more dearly should,
If Valor might have done, what Valonr would.
121
Roan, me thinks I see thy palie face,
Thy Towers ready ere their time to fall*
Me thinks I see thy Sons run in each place
Madly afrighted, and for succors call,
Thy guilty conscience blaming thy disgrace:
And from the loope-holes of thy ruind wall,
How many teare-fild eyes stood gazing round,
VVishing them selves away, or under ground.
122
O Villiers, Villiers, Governor of Roan.
thou thy self, (though then in thee
Was worthy courage; much to ill applied)
Wept in thy soul, that thou perforce must be
A Chiefetaine over sin, and often had tried
To welcome peace, and shun calamity,
But that these arguments made thee abide:
Fear of the misreporting multitude,
And fame to war, against best fortitude.
123
These were the chains that bound thee to defame,
And blinded thee from seeing what was best:
This Siren o^^ Opini^^, wind-borne la^e,
Seeking to ease ^s (...) us to unrest;
This, shu^ning-shame, ^^ought thee to greater shame,
Thou could not harbor ^ more thanklesse guest,
For it adiugeth nothing it does see,
By what it is, but what it seems to be.
124
So help me truth, as I do truly think,
Opinion, the only tor^^re of (...) mind,
Alas tha^ any ^^ing so v^ine should sink,
With muddy barbarizme, vnrefinde,
Into our hearts deepe^losse^s, and there link
All our beliefes to him, whose auntie^^ kind
Is to deceive us, promising the rest,
Which neue^ was, or ere shall be posse^^.
125
The many Prodigies were hourly borne,
From the distempred womb of th^^e amaze,
Thy Countries beauty by thine own hands torn,
Thy dignities; which thy defaults did raze,
Thy guilty faintnes, thy obprobrious scorn,
The golden Crown on which thine eyes did g^ze,
Might have been Orators, for they could tell,
Thou did all ill, in doing nothing well.
126
And you, which were his sinews, and his force,
The fatal hands to this ill plotting head;
You, that made nothing better, all things worse,
You are not blameless, you must I obrayd,
As petty springs from whose poluted source,
This stream became a Deludge. Be it said,
Under control; this doubt does still remain,
Whether was worse, the Leaders, or the train.
127
But howsoever, ever this is true,
You both repented what you undertook,
Thorough your eyes into your bossomes flew
VVounds vnrecurable: often in your look
When painted smiles lay public in our view,
We might behold how much your joys forsook,
Your vndisguised hearts; for they said still,
The waking heavens will plague the sleeping ill.
128
Even as cold Hemblock nums the vital sense,
Or juice of Mandrakes ouer-comes the brain,
Even so your fear, wedded to your offense,
Inforcst a trembling through every vain:
Naught but mistrust kept fatal residence
Within your breasts, the state-houses of pain.
And after you beheld the English bands,
Scarce could you hold your weapons in your hands.
129
But yet dear Countrymen, mistake me not,
(Dear I may call you, since by lives more dear,
Our peace, and your contentment was begot)
I do not mean this while a dastard fear:
Far from the bounds of France has been such blot,
But a taynt soul, seeing those Princes there,
Who hated to vnsheath their swords in fight
If not for lawful Kings, and Gods pure right.
130
This was th'afflicting corsiue of your hearts,
And howerly reno^ator of your ills,
This drew all your hard chances from deserts,
Yet made no l^sse the mischee^es of your wills;
Why do I seek to color your foul parts,
That knowing truth, no p^rt of truth fulfills?
Therefore i will say as your deeds witnest then,
You were, what you were borne, most sinful men.
131
By this time warreon both sides was prepared,
And Fury like a strumpet runs about,
First the one, and then the others mind she squared,
And casts her venom over every rout;
Scorn upon scorns, and dares at them which dared,
Were banded first within, and then without,
Combats were chaleng'd, taken, and then put off,
Cuffes were repaid with cuffes, and scoff with scoff.
132
As often as day beheld them, and as long
Were fallies made, beat back, and new infor^st,
Night, Nurse of ease, to whom calm rests belong,
Saw there no closed eye, VVarres waking worst,
Made night, as day, in vprores fatal strong:
What in the day by counsel was discourst,
The night did execute; what in the night,
Was in the day effected by his light.
133
And thus this weighty business, busy kept
Suruiuing great ones, and their following train,
None slumberd, but such as eternal slept,
Their souls sent hence to joys, or endless pain,
And of their names an endless count was swept,
Into forgetful Lethe, where they rain
Secure from scandals on the living hurld,
Lost from men's thoughts, forgotten of the world.
134
In all the conflicts, battles, tournaments,
And dreadful clamors of affrighting Arms.
O Walter Deu^r^x, thy souls blandishments,
(Not guilt, but guilding Honors choice alar'mes)
Were to all spyrits sprightly presidents,
As far as Neptune flows, or Phoebus warmes:
Thy ^rowesse shall extend that in VVarres ^ire
Did ever first assail, and last retire.
135
There never fled before the Tigers face*
Poor L^mb so fast (o^^-taken in his game)
As Frenchmen fled from thee with winged pace,
After they had approved thy virtues flame.
Like fire and water, pen^ up in one place
With thunder-renting all the heavenly frame,
Such were thy deeds: and more by much then so,
If more could be, or more from man could go.
136
Even as the fearful Le^orit in the wood,
Viewing the dreadful Lion full of rage,
Murder his dame, and feed upon her blood,
Renting her limbs, his rigor to assuage:
With silent pace, and tr^mbling in her mood,
Flies from the rancour of the beasts outrage,
And every step bethinks of what was done,
And every hour ^dreads to be undone.
137
So did the troops where starre-eyed De^rax went
With fearful admiration see his ire,
One to another w^^ a President
To seek their scapes by some more safe retire;
And yet their flights was no true banishment
Of their dispayres: for still his Valors fire,
Shined in their hearts, and though he was not nigh,
Yet Furie-like his deed^ w^^e (...) their eye.
138
But what was it (o perfect man) which thus
Got power in thy dear thoughts, and haled thee on,
To tear from Dangers gates the dangerous,
Exposing still thy person often alone,
In spite of hazard most miraculous?
VVast Hon^^rs love, hard gotten, and soon gone?
VVas't En^ie? or was it neither which thee led,
It Was both, it was both, and En^ie nobly bred.
139
O Soldiers- Envy, near alie to Kings,
Maiestick humor, careful iealious thought,
Thou, which awak'st us from ignoble things,
A passion nearest to a Godhead brought,
Only indefinite; to whom none brings,
Limit or bound: thou greater then our thought,
Who holds thee, holds a power to make him able,
Who looses thee, becomes most miserable.
140
And yet forgive me (fair one) it was not this,
Was never any thing how good so ere,
Which has so rough a name as Envy is,
That could live in thy heart: for Angels there,
Keep solemn revels, and by power dismiss,
The earthie passions which our natures bear:
Without thee, well might human rarenes rest,
But holy things lived only in thy breast.
141
Upon thy helm, (...) Conquest re^dy dressed,
Delighting to behold thy sacred deeds,
And swore that Temple m^^e her ^^^ly ble^^,
For by thine acts, her actions praise exceeds.
Thou not her fair, but she thy fair possessed,
Thy looks the tables whereon honor reeds
Instructions for her laud, inchaunted all,
And like thy sword, made best resolved fall.
142
That Engine of defense and punishment,
Which well could chastise, who could well do ill,
With thee was but a needless instrument,
Nature had given thee darts could better kill;
Thy hart-inchaunting looks, had they been bent,
In bitter frowns, or showd displeased will:
The strength of strengths, had humbly fa^^e before thee
So much thy beauty made the world adore thee.
143
If Hercules by Hylas was subdude,
And chaynd in golden fetters to his love,
And if Patrocles held in servitude,
Stix-washt Achilles: then I will approve,
And in thy power, all power, all love include:
Making thy fame sit stars, and heaven above.
For thou have courage greater then the one,
And beauty morethen in the other shone.
144
Thy cheeks were ^illy-fields where Roses grew,
Thine eyes two L^^ps, which lent the day his light,
Thy breath the (...) in which choice pleasures flew,
Per^uming all things n^^re unto thy sight;
Thy dangling tresses (hanging in our view,)
The^ Phoebu^ sounding (...) were much more bright.
Thy lips, which kiss each other when they meet,
Taught them to kiss, which thought no kisses sweet.
145
Love in thy looks hung forth a conquering sign,
Sharpning his arrows on thy dainty brow,
I saw him light his Torches at thine eyne.
Often have I heard him for thy sake a-vow
He would no more among men be held divine,
But for thy favor his great tytles bow
To do thee service, and become thy Squire,
Begging no more but count'naunce for his hire.
146
What wonder is it then if mortal bred
Fell at thy feet? when such a sacred power,
Who at the tables of the Gods has fed,
He which has made Jove tremble at his lowre,
Stoopes vassaile-like, and humbles his proud head,
Begging the pleasures of a happy hour.
O great insearchable, almighty Fate,
This was your will, and you thus formed his state.
147
Even you sad (...)
Which in you^ (...)
What has, or (...) light,
Whose Stories none (...) less recite.
You Rulers of the (...) gave might,
That our great (...) should unite
All her best tre^^ures in (...) Essex and De^^rax.
,
That after-age might say* Thus could she do.
148
Nature, in (...),
Lively presenting (...)
Is that same Spi^^^ of (...) divine,
Which causes every n^^^rall work to be.
All things she does preserve, and can re^ine
Muddy pollusions from impuritie.
Philosophy can teach no Art nor ground
Which Nature (elder borne) had first not found.
149
Nature, the effect of Order, or (...),
Was never known so rich, ^o prodigal,
As when she took in h^nd the blessed frame
Of this most famous work; this General,
Delight of those that do behold the same.
Which to renown and make more special,
She to her-selfe, Learning and Use combinds,
And then all three sleep sweetly in their minds.
150
This not to be disioyn'd tryumuerate,
From any mind that will be per^it taught,
Possessed in them an endless during state,
By no frail passion to distemper brought:
All what they could, to them they dedicate.
Nature is Lear^ings eyes, She, Natures thought,
Use, wanting ^yther, is imp^rfect made:
They without Use, no better then a shade.
151
The finest Orpheus touches no more strings
Then the unskillful man which nere saw Lute,
Yet the one by Use and Knowledge, sweetly brings
To the ear delight, the other harsh repute.
So Natures perfect man, (the best of things)
Tryes but what fitt'st with Natures gyfts will suit,
Till taught by Use and Reasons holy skill,
He brings unto perfection what he will.
152
Why on creation lives my Muse thus long?
All the world knows they are the best can be.
Contrary matter must be in my song,
No life but death, no birth but tragedy.
In tears, worn pen, write dissolution,
That accent better fits my melody.
Deuorax, thy death is my desire to frame,
My prayer; thy Brother will but hear the same.
153
But woe alas, thi^ (...) vp^ r^ayding Muse
Which tells me what tho^ were when thou were here,
Does with the memory thereof, in^use
Into th'impou'risht (...), (which held thee dear)
Matter of endless mou^^ing; Horr^^^ news,
Showing it self how ^ilde it does appear,
Who seuerd from the glory which it h^d,
Is now a widow, woeful, desperate, sad*
154
Look how the Sea swells br^^ely in her pride
Whilst two fair Nauies daun^^ upon her stream,
Seeming the starre-set heavens to deride,
But when lean Envy with her poys^ning b^ame
Amongst them does her venomd hate divide,
Leaving no memory of theirs or them,
Mournes in black-smoaks, in clamors, and in blood,
Saying she is not, which has now no good.
155
Or as the gallant Tyltyards kingly dressed
With royal eyes, and famous Conquerours,
Boasts that no place can be more richly blessed,
No, not the Courts of greatest Emperors:
When night appears, and calls them thence to rest,
Which him of all his happy load deuours,
Becomes vnfaire, subject to vild abuse,
Serving for base, and most respectlesse use.
156
Such was the widdow-world when thou were gone,
An honor-loosing sea, in blood adrest,
A Realm dispeopl'd, a deposed throne,
A witherd garland, where no flowers rest,
A crown not made of gold, nor rich'd with stone,
It Was altogether vild, wholly oppressed.
But whether does this sorrow bear my breath?
I yet should write thy life, anon thy death.
157
A lingering siege, Calamities best friend,
The wealthy harvest, gathering store of woes,
The work where Deaths work never finds an end,
The purchase got by blood, and lost by blows,
Increasing, made the walls of Roan bend;
Famine an infant, past his childhood grows,
And comd to riper strength, begins then,
Stern Tyrant-like, to reign ore feeble men.
158
His government, from exile calls Dispair^,
Which straight accuses H^pe of perjury,
Affliction, for a witness does appear,
And adds beside more worse impiety.
H^pe seeks to plead, but no man gives him care*
Then banished, he departs from misery,
And taking with him all content of minds,
Flies to the Camp, and better welcome finds.
159
Souldiorly tryumphs gi^es him entertain,
All hearts are open set to take him in,
Like an imperious Prince, through every vain
He rides tryumphant. What before had bin
Low brought by War, rises to life again.
Those which had thought to end, do new begin;
Nothing is held impossible, but this,
To fail of conquest, which incertaine is.
160
The new made King, (whose title, holy, just,
Was by some Rebels yet debard their streets)
Warring in other parts (as needs he must)
With the report of their approches meets,
Which making complete his long-wished trust,
(Turning feares-gall, to conquests honny-sweets)
Inspyr'd him with desire to bless his eyes,
With sight of them from whom his bliss must rise.
161
A special day both parties do propose,
(And news thereof by Herralds published)
In which these two almighty powers dispose,
Like seu'rall Oceans jointly married,
To meet each other; and in sight of those
Which knew th'ones right, how it was injured,
And how the others aid might save the weak,
To knit that loue-knot time should never break.
162
Days which beget days, naturally begot,
This blessed day (worthy some holy Name)
And brought it purely forth, without one spot,
Spreading most universally his flame:
When France, that had not all old pomp forgot,
(Though she vsd little since she was fa^ne lame)
Now pranks her self, like an old widdow-bride,
And strives t'out-goe her youths admired pride.
163
England as much, (and by so much the more
As her long peace taught how she might be brave)
Adorns herself, and as her birthday, wore
What ever curious was, and did ingraue
Admire in such as saw her: stars before
Rode twinkling, like heavens spangles on the wave,
Some marched behind; but in the mid-poynt went
Two Suns, which made, made one Sun excellent.
164
In selfe-like order France directs her state:
And then, like two great elements conioynd,
But not propostrous, as distemperate,
Their joyful clamors note a blessed reioyne:
This Plannet-like conjunction, soon begat
The faith which Times exchange shall nere disioyne.
Thus French with English mixed, they marched together
Hope seen in both, and sworn to part from neither.
165
What better Emperor can the body hold
Then sacred Hope? the element from whence
Virtue is drawn, fresh-looking, never old,
Matter most worthy of a strong defense:
It animates young men, and makes them bold,
Arming their hearts with holy influence,
It like a seal, in tender thoughts does press
The perfect Image of all worthiness.
166
This Hope is double, and has double power,
As being mortal, and immortal framed,
In the one she is mouelesse, certain every hour,
In the other, doubtful, and incertaine named.
The Immortal Hope reigns in a holy bower,
In earthie closurs is the mortal tamed:
And these two contraries, where ere they meet,
Double delight, and make our thoughts more sweet.
167
He that hopes least, leaves not to hope at all,
But hopes the most, hoping so little hope,
Augmenting of our hope, makes hope grow small,
And taking from it, gives it greater scope.
The desperate man which in despair does fall,
Hopes by that end ill-fortunes to revoke.
And to this hope belongs a second part,
Which we call Confidence, that rules the heart.
168
This second part of hope, this Confidence,
Which Tully calls a virtue that does guide
The spyrit to an honest residence,
Without whose aid no pleasure will abide
In our world-wearied flesh: This strong defense
Against our adverse Fate: now full of pride,
Persuades the English Legions, that it is
Impossible their chance should run amiss.
169
O Hope, thou Nurse of aged feeblenes,
Thou common good which bid'st when naught is left,
Thou best maintaynour of life's happiness,
Excluding from our hearts misfortunes theft:
How art thou made the cause to wretchedness,
Of all thy proper nature quite bereft?
What, can thou err? I passing wondrous well,
Chiefly, when Hope and Love together dwell.
170
You men tormentors, Hope, and foolish Love,
(The last our guide, the first is our consort)
The one to execute our thoughts does prove,
The other of success gives good report:
Nothing in minds does greater mischiefs move,
Then where you hold your howerly resort.
And though to sights you never public be,
Yet are you plagues, much worse then eyes can see*
171
For you are they which feed the mighty mind
With swee^^^^ poison of d^^^red praise,
You make us trust for that we shall not find,
And like the looks which only should displease:
For did not love of dangers inly bind
Our hearts to hazard, and the painted case
Of our own hopes, arm all our Spirits breath,
We should not seek, nor gain vn^imely death.
172
Thou euill-good, I would exclaim on thee,
Did thine own self, not others guide thy will,
But being least thin^ own, what injury
By thee was done, shall live in others ill.
The French and English now joined faithfully,
Do eythers ^ares, with others glory fill,
And th'aduerse part felt daily by their blows,
That though their hearts were friends, their fames were foes.
173
One strives to go more faster then the rest,
Saying, the buis'ne^ craved a winged pace:
Another, seeing his dear friend oppressed,
For loves sake will d^pose him of that place.
Thus under zeal, by e^ch it is expressed,
To what a crow^^ of wonder aims their race:
And what for love they did; were truly known,
VVo^^d p^^oue (...) to be ou^-gone.
174
This happy, E^^lation (God of (...))
Which oftest comes vnconquerd from the field,
This which makes Monarchies s^retch out so far,
Not made to ^aynt, because it cannot yield,
Well wot I, would have mad^ a fatal scarre,
(Such as all France would tremble yet to weild)
If it had gone, whither it would have flowne.
But ill he spoils, which spoils naught but his own.
175
O Policy, scarce known in times tha^'s past*
Or being known, yet least of most (...)*
Thy providence most worthily shall last*
And in these latter days be better deemed,
Because thou sauedst, what Fury might have wast.
Though much thou have done ill, yet this act (...)
Better then any; and so much more far
As calme-facst Peace, exceeds bloodshedding War.
176
O, had thou loved thy neighbor friends as well,
And taught them how to shun pursuing harms,
Then had not I sat sadly in my Cell,
For woe inuoking words, for ears strong charms:
None yet had seen this Tomb, none heard this Bell,
This paper-noyse, this Epitaph alarmes:
But best content with res^, vntas^t to write,
I had admired what others could indite*
177
But leaving this, no helpe-attayning Plaint,
(Because great Natures work must still be so)
My Muse hence-forward shall no more acquaint
Men with th'imagin'd causes of our woe,
But even with feeling plainenes barely paint,
Our sorrows day. Saying, it was thus, and so,
For then are griefs Tones, most best ordered,
When they are with plainenes truly uttered.
178
A day was borne, o would it had not been,
Or ere it was, I would the general domb
Which shall dissolve this mass, might have been seen,
That then these sorrows from a timelesse tomb,
Exhaled by zeal, made by our passions keen,
Might full have lodged in an unsearched womb:
But since that cannot be, because it was,
Report what that days ilnes brought to pass.
179
Upon this day, this day that followed fast,
Foregoing days, full of contagious chance,
Mishap, which by degrees did howerly wast
The force of Rebels, and the blot of France,
Right like her self, (that long well will not last)
Upon good things casts a dispightfull glaunce.
And to approve how ill in well would shoe,
Flies from the bad, and to the good does go.
180
Unwelcome Fury, thou were ill advised,
Hell would become thee better then their Tents:
Could not some vast unknown place have suffis'd
For receptacle to thy vild intents,
But even where H^nour was imparadis'd?
Must thou of force go thither? what repents
Can cleanse thy faults? no tears of thine prevail,
For they are showers of spite, no streams of zeal.
181
Mishap, i will curse thee with a bitter curse,
(Yet it will not help me: then as good undone)
Then the most vildest, I will make thee worse,
(Why so thou were before) what shall be done
To make men loathe thee, (common mischieues Nurse)
By thee i will say, the best b^ame of our sun,
As much as half his light, Deuorax I mean,
Was by thy hand unseen, shamefully slain.
182
If any then (for all will be displeased,
Chiefly those blessed ones which knew him well,
And also those upon whose ears have ceased,
Rumor of his renown, Fames loudest bell,
Busy to have their iealious thoughts appeased)
Ask how it was done, and bid my story tell
How he was slain, then will I thus begin,
And paynt with truth his death, with shame thy sin.
183
I will report in that abo^tiue day
When thou vncha^it^bly left'st thine own,
Those that well knew thee, those that did obey
Thy lamentable power* and all alone,
Disguised with Virtues vizard, brought decay
To those that never saw thee, or thy throne.
Thine old acquaintance, by thine absence eased,
Began to smile, which long had been displeased.
184
Those minds which-had been worthy, had they held
An aw^ull (...) to their lawful King,
Whose hands (...) good, if they could rightly weld
Their (...) should, or did not bring
Upon th^^ guiltless blood. Often times re^eld
And beaten with continu^^^ ski^^ishing,
Whether grown^ now more strong o^ desperate,
I know not; but they will once more try their fate.
185
Once more they will tempt their fortunes with their swo^d^
Or make more speed to Deaths vnwelcom Inn*
Occasion, and the day, fit time affords,
Debating counsel holds it means to win;
Vulgar unto the mighty still accords,
And do their wills, be it lawful, or a sin:
Wherefore the flowers of all the Cities p^ide,
Well armed, in a fair Batalion ^ide.
186
But what is it so private can be meant
But VVarres intellegencer, Rum^r knows?
And if not for dispight, yet to the intent
He may be still him self, in fury goes:
And unto what the one side's fully bent,
Maliciously unto the other shoes;
This now well-prating Parat, tells the end
VVhereto the Cities issues do intend.
187
Forthwith (o Essex) thou a counsel took,
Though none could utter what thou knewst not well,
(For all experience, lodged within thy look)
And there agreed, that force their force should quell,
Like number, against like number undertook
To bate the pride which now began to swell:
And Deu'rax, who was Honors daily guest,
Would guide them to their fame, or to their rest.
188
What in the heavenly Parliament above
Is written by the finger of the first,
Mortals may feel, but never can remove,
For they are subjects to the heavens worst.
Hence came it Deu'rax, that no prayres, no love
Could stay thy forward course, thine youths flame bur^^
Into impatience, when Advise, thy friend,
Sought to protract the hasting of thine end.
189
Even as the sun in all his royalti^
At noone-tide casts his looks upon the ground,
And wooes the fruits with eye-cleare Majesty,
Curing the VVinters vlcerated wound,
So Deu'rax look, such beams of dignity
From him upon the Army did rebound:
And from his beams all gazers took that fire,
Which mounting up, would never more retire*
190
When Hect^r wore the purest roabes of war,
And louer-like would have no blemish spide,
Courting bright Glory, all his hopes dear star,
Famed then to be Achilles promised bride,
Was not so rich, nor shined his praise so far
As Deuorax did: which in the troop did ride,
Before all others, like the break of day,
which through nights shadows makes his burnisht way.
191
I think his soul (for often it happens so)
Like a dear Prophetess by holy flame
Had a foreknowledge, or some sacred shoe
Of what should after happen: For this same,
Which we call death (the souls release from woe
The work which brings our bliss to happy frame)
Sildome arests the body, but we find
Some notice of it written in our mind.
192
I know his blessed Genius, sacred bred,
Which in a moment, by her thoughts suruaies
All the celestial houses, and does spread
Over the earth, and through the va^test Seas;
This day, (by some deuiner humor led,)
Does apprehend the changes of his days:
For he was not himself, (though ever best)
But stranger, with strange honor, strangely dressed.
193
Never rode Bride-grome to salute his Bride,
With such delight as he to his unrest:
All speed was leaden-footed; often he cryde,
By dallying time, our hopes will be deprest.
Then straight he notes how swift the day does slide,
And fears it will not last till he be blessed.
At length, in all points fitted as he would,
He marches on, encouraging the bold.
194
Armed was he royally through every part,
His head except, which had no steely guard:
Those Angell-lookes, which could enchaunt a heart,
Flint-moulded, or in iron closurs bard,
Nakedly borne, unpolished by Art,
Like the attracting Sun, with his beams, snard
The vapors of the war to fly unto him,
Whose mists of death, in touching did undo him.
195
The vapors of the war, the clowdie smoke,
The mantles to that winged messenger,
Which from the Cannons intrailes rudely broke,
Or from a lesser hand deliverer,
Kills where it comes, wounds the hardest Oak,
Batters stone walls, and leaves no register
Of any comely work, this ayrie devil,
Became in love with good, it self all evil.
196
With him it was in love, (or fayn'd to be)
For even as hayle-stones fall upon the ground,
Or in the Sun plays little Attomie,
Even so flew bullets, with a music sound
Of whistling notes, Death charming melody
About each part of him, yet made no wound;
So that those living, and that dying lay,
Thought him Wars self, with who^ War seemed to play.
197
And well it might be so, if War, like men,
Had been created with a sickly soul,
Full of our melting passion; I would then
Have so imagined, but because it is foul
And most deformed, (if some mournful pen,
With inck not full so black, did not control
The rugged iestures of his hateful face)
I would not think him guilty of such grace.
198
War, of one matter made, has but one thought,
Barbarous obduracie, conceiting blood,
Yet from those unions infinits are brought,
But all of one like humor, and one good:
War, simply is but spoil, till Virtue taught
How it might be refined, and understood
A better thing; reporting it was the Sire
Of H^nour, which all mortal men desire.
199
This thin-leau'd Gold upon a Copper link,
This Venice ceres on an Ethiops face,
This Di'mond set in Lead, this faire-pau'd sink,
Cheats the whole world, and under show of grace,
Depriues us of more joys then we can think:
This robs us of the riches we embrace.
Me thinks, the losses which we find by it,
Should make men loathe, and vildly spet at it.
200
But fie; this fury is too vehement,
(Many dead boughs hang on a soueraigne-tree,)
War, rightly handled, is most excellent,
And easy makes impossibility:
It mounts the Alps, and through vast Seas does rent,
By it in blood a way to heaven we see:
And even by it, (though long before thy time)
Deu'rax thou did into the heavens clime.
200
Look how a gust of wind upon the flood,
Comes scouring, and ore-takes the Sailors eye,
Or as a tempest, renting up a wood,
Seems swifter then the nimblest thought to fly:
With speed as great, or more in likelihood,
This worthy Deuorax to the charge does hie;
And as the thunder rents the heavenly frame,
So tears his Lance the ranks in which he came.
201
As earths great wealth falls by the Reapers hand,
So fell his foes by his devouring sword,
The Parragons and Minions of that Land,
Buying their proof too dearly, do accord,
That his renownes pre-eminence shall stand
Above all former Princes: and afford
Matter for greater marvel then has been,
Or had he lived, should els-where have been seen.
202
But what auailes it to say this he did,
When it was but shows to that he would have done?
What better am I to say thus he rid?
Thus he tryumph'd, thus did his foe-men run?
When what he was, from present is, is hid,
Remembrance, by such memory undone;
Who knew him, knew he was the best of any,
Who knew him not, may learn by me and many.
204
But lo, the battle grew by this time old,
And yet the worst of it was still unborn,
Many a life was dearly bought and sold,
But now in happy state, and now forlorn:
Contagious changes every one behold,
The Rebels first, since vanquished and ore-borne:
The English next, who having slain their foes,
Came weeping back, but could not tell their woes.
205
The Fountain whence these miseries did spring,
(O noble Deuorax) flowed from thy great thought,
Thy sacred resolutions towering wing,
A step above Fames height entirely sought:
And if to do enough, were that sweet thing
Which thou aspyr'dst to; it was fully wrought:
Thou did enough, if conquest might content,
And who does more, is worthy to be shent.
206
But this false-painted Dietie, called Laud,
Which makes us thirst for vain Eternity,
Twixt our Desires and Hope, a cunning Bawd,
Vshers the soul unto Extremity:
And helped by sly insinuating Fraud,
Couers her deeds in scrowles of Piety;
This has led others, but it led not thee,
For thou esteem'st no such vain Imagrie.
207
A most religious humor was thy guide,
A fervent zeal to raise up Majesty,
A hate unto this hell-bred Monster Pride,
A loathe thou took'st against vp-start Tyranny.
Religion, Love, and Honor sanctifide,
With all the other beams of Piety,
Gave light unto thy footsteps, and brought forth
Thy mind to dare to do these acts of worth.
208
No Idoll-beautie in thy heart was seen
To govern what thou vnder-took'st in this,
Thou had no Mistres, but thy sovereign Queen,
And she, of all men's praise most worthy is:
Her beams, (I do confess) made the beams keen
Of thy best mettald Spirit; what is amiss
That she makes perfect? what can perfect die,
If first it be not molded in her eye?
209
Thou lively work of her great excellence,
VVel-worthy Matter for her power to frame,
I could attache thee of a high offense,
In being too regardlesse, what became
Of thine excelling fortunes; what defense
But was too little to begirt thy Name?
For her works sake, though not thine own respect,
Thou should have banished far this wars defect.
210
But woe unto this too late counsayling,
VVoe that I have a cause to counsel thus,
VVoe of all woes, conscience perpetual sting,
Alive and dead, haunt him that injured us,
In curses would I name him, would shame ring
His name, and hold it meritorious:
But hell, for more-great mischief still does hide it,
Because if known, no creature would abide it.
211
An unknown villain, for he was unseen
The while the skirmish heat continued,
With others, like himself, (which monsters been,)
In a remoted place were ambushed,
And viewing all the battles irefull teene,
And how Fames beauty was imbellished
In Deu'rax deeds; grown envious of the stain,
Sent from his piece a bullet through his brain.
212
Most damned wretch, thou have most vildly done,
The Musket back recoyling told as much.
The glass of Honor now was fully run,
What heart but this base dastard-blow will touch?
Ungracious engine which eclip^st our Sun,
For ever be thou cursed: and let all such
As hear thee, hate thee; let thy stinking breath,
Be loathed, and held the savor of foul Death.
213
Now from his hands fell down the golden raynes,
And gave the Horse that liberty he sought;
The remnant of his senses, which remains,
Fled from their Palace; all to ruin brought.
The blood ran freshly from his weeping veins,
His bodies King a heavenly Empire caught.
But all his virtues, to his brother fled,
And vowed to live with him, since he was dead.
214
Look how a shole of Ravens for a bait,
Tangle their lives in danger of the snare,
Or starued Wolves, (that wanting what to eat)
Seeing a pray, pursues it without care;
So those, which nothing but their deaths awaite,
Seeing the falling of this noble Star,
(I mean the Rebels, re^t of all defense)
Hazard new deaths to steal the body thence.
215
But they whose hearts had long time lived therein,
(For it was a little kingdom of their loves)
Seeing this reprobate, and damned sin,
Both for revenge and honor, stoutly proves
To beat them back: so that new fights begin.
The fight of fights, which stones to wonder moves.
One would feign get, the other will not loose,
Both hang in doubt, and can nor will nor choose.
216
At last, Impatience coniures up Resolve,
Which (like a Spirit raised) thundreth about,
Rents Towers, and trees, and Mountains does dissolve;
Even so like raged the English, when base Doubt
Made question of their chance, straight they absolve
Themselves from fear, then through the damned rout,
Made thousand several ways, and by main strength,
(Got where he was) recou'red him at length.
217
From the sad ground they heau'd his wounded head,
(VVedded too soon unto devouring dust)
His saddle for a Bear, supplies the stead,
His Horse his breathing joy, his valors trust,
Which boar him living, now must bear him dead:
All things were quite transformed to what they must,
As soft as foot could fall, (o Snaile-pacst mones)
They brought him to his Tent, with sighs, with groans.
218
But when this object in the middle way
Incounterd with his noble Brothers sight,
What tears, what vows, what plaints, what shall I say,
What every thing that can but shape the plight
Of insupportable distress. O day,
Blacker then hell, more desolate then night,
What not to be imagined care, did thou
View in his face, and read upon his brow?
219
France, thou might this day praise the King of Kings,
Which raised thee up a King of thine own seed,
Who like a brooding Hen, under his wings
Nourisht thee kindly, wept to see thee bleed,
And lost him self, to gain thee quiet things:
For had thy haps been other-wise, this deed
Had been thine utter ruin, and decay,
Thy Glories last known hour; and Shames first day.
220
O R^an, thou ayme-cryer to this woe,
Be proud, thy fortunes by thy King was blessed,
Else, thou which now art high, had then layne lo,
As low as leueld plains by fire deprest:
What thou were then, now had been nothing so:
Infants yet hanging on their Mothers breast,
Should have come far thy mem'ries to have seen,
But missing thee, not known where thou had been.
221
Nor so contented had great Essex stayde,
But brought an other name unto thy Land,
Yet better fortune thy worse chance alayde,
He which did lift it up, now slay'd his hand:
Had he been for him self, not others aid,
His strange revenge by all tongues had been scand,
And for each drop his Brothers wound did shed,
A million of French Gallants had layne dead.
222
Nor came he home wholly vnsatisfide,
Witness thy widows yet within thy street,
Thy walls, and houses scarce reedifide,
The Orphants wayling at their Grandams feet,
Thy Churches vselesse, and vnsanctifide,
These records with revenge in part do meet,
But greater had it been, and better would,
If Might did what it might, not what it should.
223
France, that were beauteous, o be comely still,
Be not a Vassaile, that an Empire was,
Love thy dread Lord, be gouernd by his will,
Thy ruling of thy self brings ills to pass,
Confound his foes, and thine own mischiefs kill:
Be you your selves helpers in your ill case,
Least your ingratitudes do draw perforce
From you his love, on you your neighbors force.
224
And then again, Essex return again,
Yoaking your untamed necks, making you bow,
In whose almighty mind cannot be slain,
The mem'rie of his Brother. I auow,
And here presage, if ever your disdain,
And forfet troaths of such sad days allow,
You will accurse your selves, and banne your breath,
And pray the Mountains to bring speedy death.
225
But unto those yet uncreated times,
O Muse bequeath these secret Prophecies,
And let his end draw to an end thy rimes,
Dye with his death, and in his obsequies
Intomb thy soul: thy soul which weary climes,
And falls with faintnes as he seeks to rise;
And seat his numbers in their sweetened ears
Where best delights, and best wits fire appears.
226
Thus ARETEA with a heavy look,
Ending with sighs, what was with tears begun,
Turns from my presence: and with woe for-sooke
Further discourse. But I that swift did run
Upon Desires feet, with reverence took
Hold of her garment, and cried, stay dear Sun,
Thou which have taken prisoner all my thought,
Ransom my mind, let his release be bought.
227
If thus thou do depart; from me will part
My ravished sense; for charritie (fair Saint)
Stay; and as thou have banqueted my heart,
So glut mine eyes, o holy Maid, acquaint
My sight (yet drowned with ouer-flow of smart)
With those rare miracles which Art does paint
Upon his famous Tomb: for twere a shame
Forgetfulness should sleep upon his Name.
228
I do assure my self, religious France,
Which loves the laws of Hospitality,
Will not ingratefully forget his chance,
Or for a world forgo his memory:
I know her eyes with tribute-teares do glaunce
Daily upon his Tomb, his valiancie,
Which for her sake brought him to earthly mold,
Lives writ in Iet, in Marble, Brass, or gold.
229
Or if twere so that her distempred mind
Filld with her own grief, should forget her friend,
I know his Countries spirit (most refinde)
And those whom Nature binds to such an end,
Will raise a Piramed of some strange kind,
Upon whose Colombs every with shall spend
The fire of his best Muse; that who succeeds,
Shall beg form him, or wear no witty weeds,
230
It may be so (the heavenly one replide)
And fear of that, I fear, keeps him obscure,
Or else for that experience late has tried,
That handy works do never ever dure,
They are content to let him unknown bide,
Till they may frame the work more certain sure.
Or Time that can dissolve these holy things,
Has taught us now to doe^lesse holy things.
231
Yet least thou should too much complain, and fret
The world, by telling wherein she offends:
(For what we do amiss, behind we set,
Few to their faults reprove, with patience tends)
Come, and i will carry thee where Time has set
His Tropheys up, to last when all things ends,
Earth has them not, nor Sea, nor here, nor there,
But no where, some where, some where, every where.
232
With that me thought the power of Amaze
Carried my Soul far from my common sense,
VVonder me thought, with a starre-shyning blaze,
Lighted her to some sacred residence:
Earths eyes were closed, only my mind did gaze,
Much I beheld, yet knew not what, nor whence
Any thing issued: Sight of many things
Confounds the sight, and not true judgment brings.
233
A world of worlds I saw, yet no worlds there,
Abundance of delights bathing in tears,
Passion, and stoic dulnes every where,
Vassailes, and Kings: Kings as no Kings appears,
A thousand hands, a thousand Towers do rear,
As many more the walls in sunder tears,
Beauties stood thicker much the^ spotted stars,
But double more defects which faces^marrs.
234
When I saw all things, I saw nothing well,
Millions about me now, but straightway gone;
I numberd much, and yet could nothing tell,
Infinets when I summed them, were but one;
Desirous for to know this heavenly hell,
I saw it was mere Imagination,
For by the hourly changes it did bring,
I saw it was no euer-during thing.
235
About this great imaginary round,
This Kingdom of the vnrestrayned thought,
Where all things are, which are not to be found,
I made a long large progress: then she brought
My tired conceits to a more holy ground,
Where many curious molds were rarely wrought,
Of all the Worthies, which were nobly bred,
Sleeping secure in Honors quiet bed.
236
Not far from them was built a Monument
Of sparkling Di'monds fast bound in with gold,
And round about it for an ornament,
Laurel I might, and Cipresse Groves behold;
The gates were of the days best blandishment,
And every Pillar wrought, seemed to uphold
A singing Angel, and a weeping Saint;
The strangest mixture Thought did ever paint.
237
This place delightlesse, had me thought Delight,
And filld his emptines with rare conceit,
This nothing, me thought, all things did dispight,
And seem, more rich then the most rich receite
Of Edens excellence: there thoughts did wright
Happy content, contented with deceit.
And as me thought I viewed these glorious gates,
I read these lines written in golden Plates.
THE TOMB.
You which desire to open this dead man's door,
Or you that pass by it without regard,
Rest here your eyes, and filling them with gore,
Behold this Tomb of words, and lines prepared:
On Marble, Iet, and Jasper, may thou po're
Till thou pour out thy sight, yet be debard
To read the sacred heau'n-out-lyuing scroule,
Which has the deeds of this almighty soul.
238
Drawn by the charming Music of these roes,
And guided by the strength of my desire,
I pressed into this ayrie house of woes,
Praising the thoughts which made me to aspire:
The sights I saw, seemed not me thought like shoes
Of earths invention, they bore-brighter fire,
But looking long, they vanished: then appear,
Nothing but lines; and these me thought they were.
THE STATVE.
O thou new Age, appareld with desire,
To know them whom the liberal powers create,
Of most heroic spirits sacred fire,
Raising their deeds to heavens starre-spotted gate:
Behold this Empire-meriting young Prince,
Closed with his virtues in this Tombs black shade,
Who fought for France, and those which ever since
Should not for shame see his great glory fade:
And if a fair desire thou take to spread
Through this worlds Theater (which sings his deeds)
His glorious praise, and with it raise the dead,
Name but his name, for it all names exceeds,
The sound of Deu'rax borne through thousand Lands,
Eternally on Mem'ries Altar stands.
239
With this last word the lines were vanished,
And by some sacred hand taken from my sight,
By that great loss my joys were banished,
For yet my longings were not orderd right,
This unseen seen, this tale half uttered
Drive me from ill, into a worser plight:
Then to my Guide, thinking to make my moan,
She was departed to, I all alone.
240
Even ARETEA was departed thence:
No sign was left of any thing but woe,
Mine ancient woe, my thinkings recompense,
Delight, me thought, was changed to nothing so.
Now stood my feet in their old residence,
Painefully moving, taught by Care to go,
But now in heaven, and now in hell I range,
So swift out thoughts are, and so apt to change.
241
Vast solitarines bounded my sight,
(For all is desolate, where not selfe-kinde
Unto selfe-kind affords a mutual right)
Of^patious trees, of flowers, and fruits I find,
Millions of consorts pitying my plight:
But their dumb eloquence wound more the mind,
And in their silent listening, seem to say,
We are Griefs hearers, why does Griefs tongue stay?
242
This heavy summons to my wounded heart,
Awakt the sleeping sparks of my best zeal,
Which mixed with my Countries fatal smart,
(Both cause, and mourner, of this early peale)
Compeld me play Calamities sad part,
And strive thy praise, o Deu'rax to reveal,
Affliction in my bosom long deprest,
Broke from my lips, and thus flew from my breast.
243
Alas, mine eyes that these your falling tears
Should make two Rivers, and yet not erect
Their Funerals above the moving spheres,
But sadly on these flowers, with sighs defect
Paint lamentable verses, pittious fears,
The witnesses of thousand Griefs respect:
O now exhalt these fountaynes of my brain,
They happy are which for good Chance complain.
244
Nor eyes, nor verse, filled with this tearie source,
Which with pale colors ploughs my furrowed face,
Can us suffice, till my sad tongues discourse,
Relent obdurate Pity, mourn Disgrace,
All pains, all mortal anguishes, all worse
Then pain or anguish, or the wofulst case
Can be imagined, o what pain have I
To see again, a new Achilles die?
245
VVoe me, mine eyes, seek shadows for your sight,
To sounding Rocks recount your miseries,
The Sun is not for you, seek lasting Night,
Long not for Day, place galling agonies,
And fore-knowne mischiefs next thy heavy plight,
Of woes, and wrongs, found new societies,
Weep, weep, poor France, this loss by Fate down hurld,
Is not alone to thee, but all the world.
246
Alas fair Nimphs, you Ladies of clear springs,
If either love or pity (which still dwells
In femall hearts) lament those heavy things,
Which press our fortunes down to many hells,
Why do you let these flowers which dumbly sings,
Weep ere you weep, and with tormenting yells,
Sigh long before you. O great powers decline:
Tears shed for Virtues sake, are tears divine.
247
You VVood-Gods; hence leave haunting of your Caves,
Come weep with me this lamentable cross,
Which fatal Death, (the Emperor of graves)
Has heapt upon our days; o bare-bon'd gloss,
Of what we all must be; what nothing saues:
Can there alas then this be surer loss
To see all virtue in a forgotten Tomb?
Of Fortune o inevitable dombe.
248
O Fate, thou faithless measurer of times,
Most vnindiffrent Mistress to young years,
Which have the purest souls: now note thy crimes,
Tell us who caused thee hasten our dispaires,
Inroling Deu'rax in these burial rimes?
Why did thou bandie mischief against the spheres,
Taking away what heaven to earth did lend,
And bringing rarest things to quickest end.
249
In spite of thee, and Death; his gentle Name,
His glorious Name under his soul shall shine,
It from the skies shall take the days bright flame,
And on the heavenly stage his deeds divine
Shall sacredly be read, and by the same
Eternity shall live, his virtues Mine,
Shall be a rich example unto Kings:
It Is praise, not shame to follow virtuous things.
250
Daughters of Jove, since happy Memory
Inroles the deeds, are worthy of record,
In golden letters (lasting Charractrie)
Upon a pollisht Marble; o accord,
And in that Book, heavens royal Lybrarie,
Write down his Praises: then that Praise afford,
Limits beyond all earth, or seas proud rage,
Leaving their beams to guide this iron age.
251
You Sisters of Apollo, sacred nine,
O through all worlds, within your living Arts,
Bear his renown, and grave within your shryne
The honor of his great almighty parts,
Let it fly farther much then Sun can shine:
For he was even a Monarke of all hearts,
Nor ever did the VVarriours in times past
Attain more honor then his Time imbra^st.
252
O tryple crowned Diana, o great Queen,
Latonas Daughter, Sister to the Sun,
Thou Delphian Lamp, Lady of every green,
With that sad Crystal water which does run
From thy celestial eyes, sadly be seen,
To wet this Tomb where Englands fame does won*
Make it a living spring, think there remaynes,
What ere the earth, or rich, or fair contaynes.
253
What ere on earth is rich, delightsome, fair,
Holy, or virtuous, which the rare right hand
Of that most great, most infinite, most dear,
Father of all eternity makes stand
Upon this mold, under the tryple air,
Which bounds the boundless circute of the Land,
Upon his soules-brow think thou see the same,
The dear Conseruatour of his best Name.
254
France, which has caused the loss of all this best,
Come offer tears and sighs for sacrifice,
And (though too late) by it know thy unrest.
Goddess ELIZA, Queen of hearts and eyes,
That lost this Name I love, wish it good rest,
Say Deu'rax live in peace, and it will suffice:
I dare not beg a tear; yet Deu'rax gone,
You lost one of the best beams bout your Throne.
255
And you great Lord, greatest of all that is great,
Loosing your Brother whom most worthily
The earth adores, your breasts fair Palace beat;
Dear Essex praise his new Nativity.
You Sovereign Ladies throned in my hearts seat,
Northumberland, and Rich, for charritie
Aid his rare praise, and sweeten my poor rhyme
Which strives to make him conquer Death and Time.
256
Lastly, you English people, Pallas Squires,
Faithfully wall this Saint-like Tomb about,
And make his virtues grow from your desires,
Report by Valures tongue the world throughout:
That though the Fates incenst with envious fires,
Break Natrues thread, and captiuate the stout,
Yet shall his Name, the badge of Piety,
Live both in heaven, and earth eternally.
257
And thus arest thy pace poor heavy Muse,
Do thy last service, end thy weary tale,
And on this well built holy Tomb, infuse
The large derived currents of thy bale;
Say (as to say all holy powers use)
Glory adue, Honor, and Virtues pale:
The drowned Meads again regaine their green,
What not in him, is in his Brother seen.
FINIS.

