GODS General Summons to his last Parliament.

By George Phillips,

Revel. 20. verse 12. And I saw the dead, both great and small stand before
God: and the books were opened, and another book was opened which is the book
of life, and the dead were judged of those things, which were written in the
book^, according to their works.

printer's device? VERITAS TVA ET USQVE AD NVBES

Printed for William Leake, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard
at the sign of the Crane: 1595.

Gods general Summons to his last parliament.
The text read in the 2. Epistle of S. Paul to the Corin. 5. Chap. 10 verse.
We must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ. That every man may
receive the things which are done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or evil.
THis Text is the general Summons of God, whose dominion reaches from Sea to
Sea, Psalm, 72, 8 Apoc, 4, 10
and from the flood unto the worlds end, in sign whereof the Elders threw
down their Crowns before him saying: Thou O Lord art worthy to receive all
glory, honor, and power. In this general convocation we meet with these
matters: The first, that our assembly shall be general, for We shall all
appear, etc. Secondly, before the judgment seat of Christ, and last of al,
why we must appear: That every man may receive the things which he has done
in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil. In
remembrance of this day of appearance, the saints do encourage themselves in
the midst of al their miseries. Psalm. 119 52
As David said, I have remembered thine everlasting judgments (O Lord) and have
received comfort. Whereas if there were no judgment day, 1 King, 21, 2
as Ahab sold himself to work wickedness, so every one would give himself to
follow vanity, like those epicures which said: Wisdo, 2, 6 Job, 1, 19.
Come let us enjoy the pleasures that are present, and take our fill of the
creatures in our youth feasting securely til judgment comes upon them, as
the house fell upon Jobs children.

There is no shifting off from this day, for we must al appear, Genes, 3, 8 2
Reg, 21, 20 Exodus, 14, 28 Number, 2^, 24
If we would seek to hide us (like Adam) we cannot: for Gods summoner will
either find us out as Elias found Ahab, or overtake us as the waters did
Pharao, or meet us, as ye angel did Balaam. If Sion were sure that their
captivity should not fail, but be turned into liberty, Psalm. 137, 2
then it is like that they would not sit down and weep rivers of tears by
Babilons rivers of water, nor so much as hang up their harps in sign of
sorrow, as heretofore they have done. Therefore the day of our appearance is
set before us as the time of Syons captivity: Genes, 3 24 Gene, 19 26
or as the cherubins with the shaken blade of a sword, or as the Pillar of salt
that was Lots wife. Romans 13, 3
Therefore as Paul said of the temporal magistrate, If ye will not fear him
do well,: so if ye will stand before the spiritual Judge Jesus Christ without
trembling, live well: If ye pray, 2 king, 20, 2
pray zelouslie like Hezekias: if you hear the word of God hearken unto it
attentively, like the people that pressed upon Christ to hear the word, Mark.
4, 1
and when you practice, do it fruitfully like Job. That you may say like
Ionadabs sons, Job, 31, Iere. 35, 8
Thus have we obeyed the voice of our father. As we are al summoned, so we must
al appear, Luke, 21.35
for as a snare shall that day come upon al them that are on the whole earth.
So that look how helpelesse the birds are, when they are overwhelmed with
the net, so al man's resistance shall be without a remedy at that day. Paul
speaks of a general appearance here, that every one may lay his plat before
hand, like the unfaithful Steward that said, Luke 16, 4
I know what to do, Luke 12, 18 and 19
and men must be at a point what to say, least they be taken tardie, like him
that was never so careful to provide for the world, as in the day before his
soul must leave his body, and his body and soul pack out of the world, when
Rebecca advised Jacob to steal Esawes blessing, he fell into this
consideration, If my father in handling me shall find that I am not Esaw his
elder son, Gen, 27, 12
I may have a curse in stead of a blessing: and so if we presume to present our
selves in Gods presence, without care of being either the very same, or at
least, as like the men we should be as may be: It is out of controversy, that
we shall carry away a curse, rather then a blessing. Because God will feel man,
as Isaac felt Jacob. Gene, 27, 22
Therefore as Jacob put on his elder brothers garment, Gene, 27, 15
so we must put upon us Christ Jesus his righteousness. Isaac felt the
outward garment and it was Esawes, and our mother the church bids us put on
Christ his garment, therein to come before him, that we may be sure to have a
blessing. Genes, 47, 2
God turned the selling of Joseph into a kind of saving his brethren, whilst
they must either have food from him, or be famished. It had been worth the
seeing to have beheld what passions heaven afforded to those brethren, as how
forward weeping is to quench rough words, how careful Joseph was to keep his
pledge of their return with their father and friends in that he locked up his
brother. Gene, 42, 24
And when he has them how loath he is to let them go again, for he planteth
them near himself. Gene, 47, 11
Such joy shall our appearance bring to us, to see our elder brother Jesus
Christ to be our judge: what desire he will have to plant us by him, if we
have care how we should come before him, he feeds us with his sustena^ce or
else our souls would sterue, he holds our flesh in Heaven for a pledge,
that the whole generation of the faithful may be blessed. 1 King. 14 2
Up I pray thee (said Jeroboam to his wife) and disguise thy self, that thou
be not known to be the wife of Jeroboam. Fain would Jeroboam have help for his
sick son, but loath was he to have the woman known to be his wife, least his
evil demean should make her miss of a good answer. And so would al men
willingly appear, if they might indent with the judge that they should come
only for their good and hear of no hurt. Where the scripture says that
Obediah feared God greatly: it gives a reason to prove it. For when Iezabel
destroyed the Prophets of the Lord, 1 kin, 18, 3 and 4.
Obadia took an hundredth Prophets and hid them by fifty in a cave, and he fed
them with bread and water. For whosoever does hear God does good for Gods
people like Obadiah: and God does good to him, Exodus, 9, 10
for so many of Pharaos servants as feared God, were preserved from the
dangerous hail. Our savior Christ shows the cause why the godly are so
desirous to appear, and why the ungodly are so loathe to come before Christ: Of
the first sort he says: John 3, 21
He that does truth comes to ye light, that his deeds might be made manifest,
that they are wrought acording to God. He is like the poor true meaning man
molested wrongfully, that never cease soliciting ye judge that he may have a
day of hearing, like the widow that cried, Luke 18, 3
Avenge me, (...), 20
etc. of the other he says. Every one that does evil hates the light, and
comes not to the light, least his deeds should be reproved. He is like ye
guilty defendant calling for respite of judgment, like the devils yt cried,
let us not be tormented before the time. Matthew, 8, 29
But Paul speaks not of the certeinty of any definite time, but rather of
the general appearance, and so of the impossibility of any man's exemtion, from
being accomptable in his Stewardship.

Luke, 16, 13
The scripture mentions one account of a bad Steward, but least any man should
think that that parable should only warrant the account of bad men, Paul
puts the question out of controversy that our account shall be general, for
he says flatly, we shall al appear. Acts 25, 9 Acts, 25, 10
Will thou go up to Jerusalem and there be judged of these matters before me,
said Festus to Paul. Paul might appear to Ceasars judgment seat, because
he was a Roman borne.

Therefore Festus said, Will thou, Acts 22, 28
etc. but will we, or nil we, every mothers child of us shall appear where
Christ has summoned us. Then let not the badde stand still at the weak state
they are in, Gene, 41.20
like Pharaos lean kine, nor the good cease to go on in their pilgrimage like
strangers on the earth, but like Joshua going toward Canaan say: I and my
household will serve the Lord. Joshua, 14, 15
When Solomon had seen all the inconveniences of the sluggardes Vineyarde,
Prou. 24, 32
he took it for a warning: And we are very happy men, if we have the
grace to take heed of that which is foretold us.

When Felix heard Paul dispute of his appearance to come, Acts, 24, 26
he trembled, and so do the devils with all the wicked, but few examine
themselves with Jeremy, who said, What have I done. Ierem. 8, 6 Gene, 42, 21
Except it be when it is too late like Iosephes brethren in the famine, which
said one to another we have utterly sinned against our brother in yt we saw
the anguish of his soul when he be sought us and we would not hear him,
Gen, 42, 21 Gene, 3, 1
therefore is this trouble come upon us. The serpent was justly called the
subtellest beast in the field, and sin the son is like the devil his
father, loath is it to come in his own likeness, but as the devil came to
Saul in the shape of Samuel, Sam. 1, 28 Eccle, 10, 11
so comes sin, not like a serpent, but like the subtle serpent, that
stingeth without hissing. Serpents come closely, that men may not perceive
them, so shall they first feel their sin, and then see that they have sinned,
when they cannot amend ye matter. But se how Paul's epistle coms running like
the messenger to Job, Job, 1, 14
and says he is dead, and I am escaped to tell thee: See here a message is come
from the dead Paul to admonish us to be careful to live well while we are
here, that we may meet with him in his joy elsewhere. Eccles, 10.7
The heart of a wise man is at his right hand says Solomon (vz) he is ready to
follow al good admonitions.

When men are upon the Sea (in danger) they will cast al away to keep their
life, Acts, 27, 38 Apoc, 13, 1 James 1, 8 Luke 11, 8
and we should leave al things willingly for the life to come. What is the
world, but as an inco^stant sea? what are the troubles here, but as tempests
there? what is the Church afflicted, but as a ship tossed? and what are
christian men, but careful mariners striving against storm and stream, to
ariue safe in the haven of Heaven? Acts 27, 9 Acts 14, 22
Sailing was very dangerous in Paul's long voyage by Sea, but yet he wafted on,
And we must travel through many troubles to the kingdom of Christ. Acts, 14,
21
As Paul's fellow sailers wished for ye day, so al christians desire the true
light. Psalm, 42, 2
Therefore says David, When shall I come and appear before God: as though he
thought every minute to be a month until the judgment day were come. This
makes the spouse so inquisitiue after him, Cant, 3, 3
that she is questioning with as many as meet her, Saw ye him whom my soul
loves? The church would not see Christ, Luke 19, 3 Heb, 12, 1
as Philip and Andrewe saw him, nor as Zacheus saw him, nor as ye cloud of
witnesses saw him but so in his kingdom, Math, 17, 2
as Moses and Elias, saw him in his glory upon Mount Thabor. Take heed,
watch and pray, for ye know not when the time shall be, Math, 13, 33
(says our Savior Christ to the dysciples, because we know not the day of
appearance) therefore we are often warned to watch, that we may be ready: like
the mariner that waits on the wind and tide, like the smith that smites
whiles the iron is hot: and as birds breed while summer lasts. The speech of
Abraham to the rich man in hell, concerns us now while we are out of hell Son
remember that thou in thy life time had pleasure. Luke 16, 25
Psalm, 95, 8
The Psalmist says, we must hear God while it is to day (vz) while we may,
and in another Psalm, I will pay my vows now says the prophet teaching men
to take their present opportunity, Psalm, 116, 12
to give God his duty other ways they may soothe up themselves, Psalm. 116.14
with Behold O Lord how that I am thy servant, but cannot say, and the
son of thy handmaide, while they are not at hand to do his beheastes.

Christ said watch, Math, 25, 13
for ye know not when the hour will come, because we know not at what hour
Christ will come: therefore it is reason to be ready every hour, and the last
hour is unknown to us, that we might account every hour to be the last
hour: yet as before the Wall falls down, some stones drop out of it, and
cliftes appear: as before the flame mounteth, some smoke is seen. And as
before the mighty thunderbolt, a flashe of lightning flies out, so we have
very many tokens that we might take heed of the judgment day to make us
more careful how we shall come before the judgment seat of our Savior
Christ, seeing his coming is as a thief in the night (That is) when as al are
secure and asleep in their sins, Apo, 16, 15,
for danger comes most when it is least looked for. Irrecouerable as a
stronger net the^ yt which christ made a hole in, when all the birds brake out
after him singing, Psalm, 124, 6 Luke, 21, 35
The snare is broken and we are delivered. As a snare shall it come on al them
that dwell on the earth. As Christ asked the Jews for which of his good works
they sought his death: so it would be known, which of Gods blessings have
banished us from him* for as the fuller the buckette is with water, the more
hardly it is haled up out of the well, so the more men abound in God his
blessings, the farther they are from him. John 6, 44
Therefore said Christ, No man comes unto me, except my father draws him.
And seeing (like mice in Gods barn) we are content to feed on his corn, and
enjoy his blessings here, but loath to see the Lord of the harvest. Paul
tells us, That we must all appear. Every mothers child of us. And they
needs must, that needs shall.

The second observation is, That we shall appear before a Judgment seat.
Whereby is understood that Judicial power that is given to Jesus Christ in
heaven and in earth, Matthew. 28.18.
but most specially that general Judgment, which was revealed to S. John,
whereof he says, Apoc. 20.11.
I saw a great white throne, and one that sat on it. 12. And I saw the dead
both great and small standing before God, and the books were opened, etc. Luke
17.1.
As it cannot be but offenses must come, so it cannot be but Judgment will
follow. Paul could not acquit the best of us with death: but so soon as he
had said, It is appointed for all men once to die: Heb. 9.27.
adds, and then comes the judgment. Balaam rode on till the Angel met him,
where he could not turn: and so long as men have to deal but with men, they
dare say, declare, and we will declare. They will plead their own case, but when
the matter comes in question, before Christ who will be their days man, or
take upon him to answer one thing of a thousand? We are put in mind of a
Judgment seat, that all may judge themselves, that they be not judged, that is
to say, condemned of the Lord. In this world Iezabel can get two that will say,
1. Reg 21.10.
that Naboth blasphemed God and Ahab. The Jews will bring forth false witness
that Christ said, Mat, 26.60.61
Destroy this material temple of Jerusalem, and I will build it up again in
three days. And because the law says, That in the mouth of two, or three
witnesses, every cause in controversy must be proved, therefore iniquity
has provided, Knights of the post, that are ready to swear almost to any
matter for a little money. But as when the Elders left Susannaes Susan. 50.
cause in wrong sentence, Daniel took in hand to right it: so when the mighty
have wronged the meaner sort, Christ will determine of the matter. Therefore
David made choice of his judgment before any other: first, for that God goes
wisely to work, in waying the weight of every man's matter, Ponder my cause, O
Lord. Psalm. 5.1.
And then for speedy dispatching without respite of judgment from term to
term: Psalm. 119.52
For I have remembered thine everlasting judgments (O Lord) and have received
comfort, vz. The time will come when Gods judgments shall stand, not only in
stead of all plea, but also inreuocable for ever. It is a terrible matter to
fall into the hands of the Lord: because that if he begins with a man, 1.
Sam. 4.
he will make an end with him, as he did with Eli. 1. Sam. 21.13.
David escaped the hands of Achish King of Gath, by faining himself to be mad:
but be ye sure God is not mocked. Dan. 5.27.
Nabuchadnezzar was wayed, and found too light in the balance, and his
kingdom divided to the Medes and Persians. And how can any man sooth up
himself, imagining God to be like to men, who receiving light gold, are
contented to take that in tale, which is wanting in weight? Luke 19.24.
He that abused one talent had it taken from him: much less may we profane
many blessings, and yet possess them still. If we have all received talents,
then must we al give accounts. If we all have treasure, we must all have care
that it canker not: Matthew. 6.19.
we did not receive them to lay them up idely: for it was said, Occupy till I
come. Luke 19.13.
Neither helps it, that we do render as much as we have received: Luke 19.23.
but God will have spiritual interest of all his spiritual blessings, because
he is God, Matthew. 22.21.
as Caesar had tribute because he was King. The remembrance of the judgment
seat of Christ should make men as loath to consent to sin, as Joseph was to
hearken to Putifers wife: for as he said, How can I do this great wickedness
and sin against God? So should all men scan the matter, and say, If I sin, I
sin against God: Genesis 39.9.
if I sin against GOD, I must answer it before his judgment seat another
day. Joseph was provident, and yet ouerseene in sinning: for though he would
not consent to Madam Putifer, yet would he swear by the life of his Lord
Pharao. Genesis 42.16.
See how sin pleads custom with Joseph, as Laban did with Jacob, when he
said, That it was not the manner to marry the younger before the elder. Genesis
20.25.
Because it was usual in Pharaoes Court to swear by the life of Pharao, upon
every light occasion, therefore Joseph never suspecteth it to be a sin: so
that where sin is not suspected, it is quite neglected: and where it is not
had in lothing, there in time it seems nothing.

Genesis 4 7. Eze. 18.2.
Adams Apple was like Ezekiels sower grape, whereof the fathers tasting, the
childrens teeth are set on edge: for the sons are many times tainted with
their fathers sins, as Gehazies posterity were with his leprosy. 2. Reg.
5.27.
Therefore as all are guilty in respect of nature, so all are summoned to the
seat of judgment. The devils did acknowledge against themselves a time of
torment, Matthew. 8.29.
and the guest at the wedding was speechles on a sudden: Matthew. 22.12.
so shall the wicked either in speech condemn themselves, like him that was
judged of his own mouth: Luke 19.22.
or by mute silence argue their own guiltines, Job. 9.2.
that GOD may not stand to plead with them that cannot answer to one matter
of a thousand. The guests that were called to the supper of that King which
made a marriage for his son, requited his kindness, with I pray ye hold me
excused, for I have bought oxen, and I go to try them. The second, with I
have bought a farm, and I must go and see it. And the third, with I have
married a wife, and I cannot come. If they were so loath to come when he called
them of his mercy, how unwilling will they be (think you) to appear when he
calls them of his justice, when they cannot bear him in hand, that men are
so simple to buy oxen before they try oxen, or to lay out money for the pigge
in the poke, that the money shall be told before the farm be bought and sold,
that they will first pay for it, and then survey it? no, but he said truth
that confessed, and said, I have married a wife, and I cannot come: for they
that are married to the world, as a man to his wife, they send God answer that
they cannot leave the world their wife, till their dying day.

And then neither I pray thee excuse me may serve the turn, nor I cannot
come, be taken for an answer: but corpus cum causa must be returned to the
judgment seat of Christ. They do well then who walk worthy of their calling,
by walking according to the same: like the Apostles who said, Acts. 6 4.
We will give our selves to prayer, and to the ministratio^ of the word
continually. Godliness must be as carefully kept, as it is painfully gotten,
1. Timo. 6 20.
least like ebbing waters (at full tide) we hasten to our fall. Paul tells
us of a Judgment, because thereby a difference shall be made betwixt the
better and the worse sort of people: for as there was no time when, nor
company whom the devil chose before the sons of God, Job. 1.
when they were assembled before the Lord: so it is with the wicked, who
resemble the brazen faced strumpets, who covet the company of honest women,
placing their grace in such, because themselves are graceles. For as God
blessed Laban for the love he had to Jacob, Genesis 30 27.
so they know that the worse fares well for the betters sake. Mark. 13.26.
Matthew. 13.48.
This made the tares creep up anon after the good corn. The fry to slip into
the net with the good fish, and the ungodly to sit in the sunshine with
godly, that they might have a being for a time: for when judgment comes,
they shall appear but as Satan amongst the sons of God (that is) in the
company, Job. 2.1.
but not of the company of Gods elect: and as the thief at the bar, not for
his good that he has done, but for the evil he has committed: Matthew. 17.3.
but the rest like Moses and Elias familiar with Christ. The reason of this is,
that Christ being the true light, might show himself to be so indeed, by
leaving nothing that is a deed of darkness, vndetected to the children of light,
that he may be justified in his sayings, and clear when he is judged. The
wicked must be detected of what they have been, and the ungodly must be noted
for what they are, and all this must be brought to light by the light: for as
men's sins have been smothered in the world, so have they bin buried in the
grave. You see the^ that the justice of Christ and the unrighteousness of man
does bring a judgment. Luke 23.19.
As Barrabas his insurrection, and the laws equity caused his imprisonment.

The use of this is as fit for our age, as Iethroes counsel was for his son in
law Moses, in aduising him not only to make Judges in Israel, but also
prescribed such principal qualities, as should be predomina^t in their
calling: As a good courage, Exodus 18 21.
the fear of GOD, true dealing, and cleerenes from the corruption of bribe
taking: so that if a man in the spirit of David should demand of the^ this
question: Are your minds set upon righteousness, O ye congregation, Psalm. 58
1.
and do ye judge the thing that is right, O ye sons of men? They durst
appeal to God like David, that said, Psalm. 26.1.
Be thou my Judge, O Lord, whether I have walked innocently or not. For thus
should men learn to judge as they would be judged.

Justice has both her hands full continually, in sign whereof, her right
hand gripeth a sword, and her left hand lifts up a pair of balance.
Teaching Magistrates to way every matter in the balance of a good conscience,
that they may know which cause is the lighter. So David entreats God, Psalm.
5.1.
Ponder my cause, O Lord. And then divide to each man his own as Salomons
sword ceased the strife betwixt the women that strove for the living child. 2.
King 3.25.
But if the sword be swayed before the waytes have wayed, then may you see
Annanias who should judge according to law, commanding to strike Paul against
law. Ioh. 18.10.
Then may you see Peter step in with the sword, and strike off Malcus ear.
Then do you see the Magistrate deal more hastily the^ wisely. The^ receives
the very law it self a maime at the hand of the Magistrate. David commending
the flourishing state of Jerusalem, said: There is the seat of judgment, even
the seat of the house of David. This seat David calls the seat for
justice, to show the right use of the judgment seat, and the house of David,
noting what men should sit there: even just men like the seed of David: Luke
23.22.24
or else as Pilate judged Christ faultles, Acts 24.28.
and yet put him to death. And as Felix to please the Jews, left Paul in
prison: so they will set their consciences on the tainter hooks, Susan. 52.
and be as old in evil, as in age, like the unjust Judge reproved by Daniel.
But the good Magistrate is like the munition that ouerpeereth the cities walls
in time of war, threatening the enemies that are without, and comforting the
inhabita^s which are within: or such a preservative as the pitch was to Noas
Arc, sticking fast unto the sides without, and within: or like a hedge to the
vine to keep it from the destroyer: Exodus 6.14.
or like the tree that Nabucadnezzar saw refreshing such as came under his
shadow: or like Moses, Exodus 2.13.
seeking to set them at one that strive: or like Job, helping them that lie at
the gate, Job. 31.21.
and are not able to help themselves: or like Dorcas, making clothes at his
own cost for the poor, Acts 9.39.
that such may lament the loss of him when he is gone, as rejoiced by him when
he was here. But if he be not such a one as has a godly care of those that
are committed to his charge, there is such a fault in the chosers as was in the
trees of the wood, who anointed a bra^ble in stead of a better tree. Judge.
9.14.
But this has been an old oversight in the most assemblies, that they forget
that maxim or special principle given by almighty God, Whom the Lord shall
choose, him thou shall make governor. None are ignorant, that the judgment
seat was Moses seat, who have read or heard that saying of our Savior
Christ, Matthew.
The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses seat, etc. Moses was a man that
would both say, and do well, and therefore was called faithful in all Gods
house. But as the Scribes (that would say what they must, but do what they
list) succeeded Moses in the seat of Magistracy: Matthew. 24.15.
so wicked men like that abomination of desolation, do sit where they ought
not: and this is that unseemly sight that Solomon saw some times, Eccle. 10.7.
When servants were set on horseback, and Magistrates made to go on foot.
When Christ was gloriously upon Mount Thabor, it is witnessed that his very
raiment was as white as the light, Matthew. 17.2.
which shows that there is an intent in causing your Magistrates to differ
from other men in the excellency of his very garment: for as he offends in
life by his evil example, so he spotteth his garment, that is scarlet or
purple: and then Esaias tells him, Esaias. 1.18.
Sir your sins are as red as scarlet. And Ezra his messengers spoke plainly:
The hand of the Ruler is chief in this trespass. Ezra. 9.2.
These men are more unmeet to rule then Zedechias, 2. King. 25.7.
that had his eyes put out, for they will not see: and Adony Bezecke, 1. Iud. 6.
that had his fingers cut off, for they may, but will not gird the^ with their
sword upon the thigh. Psalm. 45.4.
And therefore Solomon complains grievously: Eccle. 3.16.
I have seen wickedness in the place of judgment, and iniquity in the place
of equity.

That every one may receive the things that are done in his body, etc. BY
every one is meant, that none can escape, Matthew 22 11.
no more the^ that guest at the Wedding could be unspied when the house was
full, so that no man may sooth up himself to pass: for as the King came in to
see the guests, so he came to judge them to. And as Peter said, Acts 10.35.
All that work righteousness are accepted with God: so all that work
unrighteousness, are rejected from God: and because every one shall be
judged, therefore Paul makes private application of his exhortation, and
says, 1. Cor. 11.28.
Let a man examine himself. Like as in the riddle that Christ propounded,
Matthew. 29.21.
I tell you, that one of you shall betray me: every man fell into examination
of himself, Master is it I? 22.
Eleven of them could not expound it, and the twelfth would not. So they that
will not reprove themselves now, must look to be reproved another day to
their shame. Would not a man be ashamed to have his faults written in his
forehead? Saint John saw a book open, and that was the consciences of all men,
Apoc. 20.22.
wherein our selves shall as plain remember our faults, as if they were laid
down in writing before us. Then that prophecy is fulfilled, Psalm 50.24.
I will reprove thee, and set before thee the things which thou have done.
These words (every one) do include the shortness of the judgment day: for as
the little cloud that Elias his servant saw upon Mount Carmell (though it
were but of the bigness of a hand) contained much rain in it: 1. King. 18.44.
as the little penny contained the Princes picture. Matthew. 22.19.
And as David's little stone that carried great Goliaths present death in it. 1.
Sam. 17.50.
And as the lightning coming from the East, Matthew. 24.27.
is immediately in the West, so shall a short time, and a few words comprehend a
great and swift judgment. Romans 9.28.
Therefore said Paul, A short word shall the Lord make upon earth: For why
should GOD dispute with men, Job. 9.2.
that cannot answer one thing of a thousand? says Job.

May receive the things that are done in his body. Seeing our body must
receive the things that it has done, that is, Matthew. 22.13.
This body that we now carry. That was but a seducing doctrine of the
Sadduces, who affirmed that there is no resurrection of the dead: for as Paul
says, 2. Cor. 15.19.
If our hope ends with our life, we were most miserable of all men. This was
the opinion of such, as grounding upon reason, were outreached by faith: for
where reason ends, there faith begins. Therefore (says Paul) By faith we
understand that the world was made by the word of God, and that the things
which are, Heb. 11.3.
were not made of things which did appear.

Now if we turn faith into reason, or rather if we do reason in faith, we
shall find the truth of this doctrine confirmed by reason and common sense:
for if we believe that God created man of nothing (which the Scripture calls
creation) then must we much more believe that he can raise man up again when
he is some thing that created him of nothing. Genesis 1.1.
But if any Saduce will say that he denies not a resurrection of Gods people,
in respect of any want of Gods power, but thinking it needeles, because the
badde go imediatlie in soul to hell, and good souls to God that gave them. I
answer, that it is as requisite that there be a resurrection as that there
should be a God, otherwise the body and soul should never meet and be
joined to the head Christ Jesus: for as Paul said, Behold I show you a
mystery, 1. Cor. 15.51.
so I say, and he meant that our conjunction with our head Christ must be done
mistically by the working of the Godhead, or else we shall still be like the
kerchief that was by it self, Ioh. 20.7.
(that is) as it was wrapped up in a place by it self, severed from the rest
of the linen clothes that were about his body: so we the members should be
parted from Christ our head in heaven, and should remain on earth by our
selves. And Christ himself says, that if he should not raise up all at the
last day, then he should not do the work of a Savior. Ioh. 6.39.
This is the Fathers will that has sent me, that of all which he has given
me, I should loose nothing, but should raise it up at the last day: for it is
all one as if he had said, if there were no resurrection, then were I no
Savior, for if I raise them not, then I save them not. Therefore first he
threatens death, 1. Cor. 15.55.
and then conquireth death: Paul concludes this as a necessary point in
divinity to say: Christ is risen: ergo, we shall rise too, for you see he
thinks no argument better, then to say, If it be preached that Christ is
risen, 1. Cor. 15.12.
how say some among you, that there is no resurrection of the dead. It is the
best argument that ever was made, to prove a resurrection, not only in
particular, that for so much as Christ is risen, it must be confessed that
there is a resurrection, if no more should rise but he: but seeing Christ is
risen as the head, how shall the members stick by him, no, but the members
must follow the head, for as when a man takes a fall the head rises first,
and then all the body comes after it. Mark. 16.6.
So Christ having risen from the grave where he lay, is lifted up into heaven,
as our spiritual head, and tells us in his word, that he will not send any
other, saving the comforter to cherrish us, but to fetch us, he will come
himself, that where he is, there may we be also. John 14.3.
The Jews that buried Christ, laid a heavy stone upon the grave, Matthew.
27.66.
to have kept him there, if it had been possible. And now he is risen: all the
christians they lay hold upon him by faith. And as Jacob said to the Angel:
Genesis 32.26.
I will not part from thee till thou have blessed me. So the Church says, 1.
Cant. 3.
draw me unto thee, 2. King. 2.6.
for we will run after thee: they mean as Elisha said to Elias, I will not
leave thee, that is, Matthew. 11.12.
I will go to heaven, and therefore let me go, and then the kingdom of God
suffers violence among them. Herein lies the whole burden of a christian:
1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
if ye believe that Jesus dyed, and is risen again, even so them that sleep
with Jesus, shall GOD bring with him. 1. Cor. 15.20.
All must be assured of this, Christ is risen from the dead, and is become the
fruit of them that sleep, that is, as by the offering of the fruits, all the
rest had a blessing, so in christ his resurrection ours is confirmed. This made
Paul so carefully to advertise Timothy of this point of doctrine, remember
that Jesus Christ made of the seed of David was raised again the third day,
2. Tim. 2.8.
according to my Gospel, remember it, that is, forget it not while thou
live, but remember it even when thou die, and then as he is of that power,
that in very death he raised the dead, and sent them out of their hollow
sepulchers into the holy city to be seen of such as were alive. Matthew. 27.52.
And as while he lived, he called things that were not, Romans 4.17.
as though they were, Ioh. 11.34.
as he did Lazarus carkesse by the name of Lazarus, and the body of the
widows son, Luk 7.14.
by name of young man. So the hour shall come, Luke 7.14. Ioh. 5.28.
that the dead shall hear the voice of the son of man, and then we shall
all stand up like the bones that Ezechiel saw. Ezec. 37.10.
According to that he has done, whether it be good or evil. 2. King. 20.1.
Therefore abe at vnusquisque in domum suam: Let every one go into his own
house, vz. look into himself, that he may reform what is amiss, as Esaias
said to Ezechia, Set thine house in an order. If ye do possess your souls in
patience, have care to keep them still. Luke 21, 19.
As Rahab had a red thread tied in her window: so give the Lord a sign to
remember you when the destroyer comes, Joshua. 2.18.
that GOD may have mercy on you, as you have showed mercy to other. Look how
you will be rewarded, so do your work: for you wait for the day of the
Lord, Job. 14.6.
as the hireling for the evening, to receive his reward. He that knows of
what spirit ye are better then your selves, (...). 14.6.
must needs know you well. Luke 9 55.
He that has made the eye sees you when ye see not him. He that made the
heart, fore knows your conceit; be where ye will, he finds you when you
think least upon him, 1. Sam. 24.5.
as David found Saul a sleep in a cave. Say what you will, he knows what
you speak. As Elisha could tell what the King of Asseria spoke in his privy
chamber. 2. King. 6.12.
As no virtue shall be unrewarded with God, Job. 14.17.
so no sin shall be unpunished with him. For he seals up your sins in a
bag, Psalm. 56.8.
as duly as he puts your tears in his bottle: that is, as he regards
the sorrow of them that repent like Ezekia, so he retains the sin of such
as sorrow truly, Matthew. 13.30.
like as Pharao did not. That the scripture may be true: the cockle must
continue among the corn until harvest, and no longer. Ecclesiastes.
Therefore said Solomon, There is a time for all things, etc. As the ungodly
have had a time to be like the rich man on earth, Luke 16.25.
so they shall have a time to be like the rich man in hell. As they have been
like the bush that was burning, Exodus 3.3.
so in time they shall be like the Sun shining. Matthew. 13.43.
The Church is like John Baptist, John. 5.35.
and John Baptist was like a candle burning, John. 3.20.
and shining: consuming himself to give light to other. Exodus 14.20
But for so much as there are some that love not the light, the Judge must
deal with the^ according to their darkness, making a separation betwixt them,
as the pillar of a cloud did betwixt the Israelites and Egyptians in the
wilderness.

FINIS.
AT LONDON Printed for William Leake, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Crane. 1595.


