THE EMBASSAGE OF Gods Angel.

By George Phillips.

Malachi. cap. 3. verse 1: Behold I will send my Messenger, and he shall
prepare the way before me.

VERITAS TVA ET VSQVE AD NVBES printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON Printed for William Leake, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Greyhound. 1597.

The Embassage of Gods Angel.
The Text is in the 5. Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, the 20. verse,
etc. 20 Go your way, and stand in the Temple, and speak unto the people, all the words of this life.

21 So when they heard it, they entered into the Temple early in the Morning,
and taught. And the chief priest came, and they which were with him, and
called the counsel together, and all the elders of the children of Israel, and
sent to the prison, to cause them to be brought.


IN this speech, we must observe the charge that was given to the Apostles by
the Angel, and then how the Apostles executed the same. If we consider these
things more particularly: Go your way, is the encouragement that the Angel
gives to these apostles. Stand in the temple, admonishes to have recourse to
the ordinary place of teaching and hearing Gods word. Speak to the people, is
Gods general calling of al people to the knowledge of his truth. 1 Timothy 2, 4
All the words of this life, does signify the subject of our p^eaching, viz.
the Gospel of Jesus Christ which brings eternal life. But when the angel
calls them the words of this life, he has relation to a life, which the
apostles had preached before their imprisonment, as in Acts the 4, and 12.
verse.

Text. Go your ways.
God says of the wicked (viae meae, non sunt viae vestrae) My ways are not
your ways. But here the Angel says, Go your ways. etc. which was a notable
argument to these men that their authority was good. This must needs concern
us of the Ministry very neerelie, Psalm. 39.1
that we look to our ways like David, whether they be such as may encourage
us to proceed therein with a safe conscience. For it is questionless, that
because the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: 1 Cor. 14, 32
therefore saint John wills us to try the spirits, teaching us like wise
to know, what spirits we must acknovvledge for fit leaders of Gods people.
Acts. 8.9
In Simon the Sorcerer was the spirit of inchauntment, wherewith he seduced
the Samaritanes.

In Jason the high priest, 2 Maca. 4, 7
was the spirit of Briberie, whilst he corrupted (for that office of the
priest hoode) Antiochus, who was corrupted again by Menelaus. Our savior
Christ himself tells us, John 10, 1
That every one that comes not in by him the door, Neh. 13, 29
enters in by a wrong way. And zealous Nehemia curses such, as profane
polluters of Gods holy house, and defilers of his sacred Priesthood. And yet
some have taken this calling upon them, before they could discharge it any
better then Nicodemus could reason of regeneration: John 3, 9
and other have gone the wrong way to discharge their charge: Jonas. 1, 3.
as Jonas fled to Tarshish, when he should have gone to Niniue. And the
Grandbishop of our souls, 1 Pet. 2, 25
has ordained this for a perpetual and an infallible note of a true minister
of Jesus Christ: John 10, 9
By me if any man enter, he shall go in and out, and shall find pasture, and
shall be safe: meaning, that they whose pastures are bare, like the mountain
of Gilboa, 2 Samuel 1.21
have climed over the hurdles, or come in by some by-waie, and not by the right
door. And as no learning has let them in, so a lawful authority might shut
them out, that they might return to their old occupations again, whereof
they have more skill, 2 Timothy 4, 10
and wherein they have most delight (as Demas in this World) who have taken so
large a leap, as it is from the shop board, to the sheepefold. They only must
build in Gods house, whom he has commanded so to do, and enabled thereunto,
as when he said to the apostles: Math. 28, 18 19
All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth: Go therefore and teach
all Nations, etc. for God ever indueth them with a greater measure of his
grace, then the common sort of his people: (As Jacob said of his elder son
Joseph, when he blessed him: moreover, Genesis 40, 22
I give to thee one portion above thy brethren, which I gate from the Amorites
with my sword and bow) That the minister may be a leg to the lame, an eye to
the blind, a staff to the aged, a teacher of the ignorant, and a guide to
the wandering: else, how shall he lift my feet out of the mire that is as
deeply plunged in it as I am? What hope have I to escape the pit, when my
guide is as blind as a beetle? How shall he uphold and strengthen my
weakness, who is an unstaid man himself? how shall other be taught by him whom
God himself under the person of Nicodemus reproved for his ignorance long
since? John 3, 10
Thus did the people wander in that maze of popery, as in a midnight of
ignorance in the days past. But (blessed be God) we may now see how truly
Paul said sometimes to the saints at Ephesus, Ephesians. 5, 8
ye were darkness, but now are you light in the Lord, meaning yt when they were
gentiles they walked ignorantly as they that were in darkness, but it pleased
God to give them his son, who is the true light to inlighten every one that
comes into the world.

John 1.9
John the Baptist being asked of the priests and Levites, what he was, John 1.23
said not I am a crier, but he ansvvered: I am the voice of a crier. Many
have taken the title of the Lords criers upon them, whose voices have sildom
been employed in preparing the paths of the Lord. Who (if they omitted their
duty of ignorance) might learn of Esaias to inquire of the Lord: What shall I
cry? Esaias 40.6
And they which know it might imitate the same Prophets example, who said
that For Sions sake he would not be silent, that Jacob may know Gods
judgments, and Israel his Laws. Romans 10, 14 15
For how shall the people hear without a preacher, and how shall they
preach except they be sent? Lord, how many were there possessed with dumb
Diuelles, vvhilest ignorance was the reputed mother of Devotion! but in this
our soul saving knowledge of Jesus CHRIST'S Gospel, it has pleased him to
open the mouths of such as soundly teach us, yt to know the true God and
Jesus Christ, whom he has sent to save us, is eternal life. Wherefore we are as
greatly bound to praise God, Mark 7.31
for opening ye mouths of such men, as those Galileans who said: He has done
all things well, he has made the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak. 2
Chr. 13, 9
Blessed be God, the days which Ahia ye Prophet complained of, are worn out
of date: who said, We have such priests as the Nations that be Idolatrous
round about us, as though we should sacrifice with a bullock and seven Rams,
to them which are no Gods. Then could men be contented to see and suffer Gods
sanctuary to be a stable for the ignorant ass. Surely it argues that men
could be contented to profes well, whatsoever they performed: and to have all
things well, so that it were not effected by their means. For had they
regarded Gods true religion, then should not a company of unworthy men, have
carried away the churches revenues for an old song, as Baals priests
consumed the kings cost, for saying O Ball hear us: 1 Reg. 18, 26
blind Prophets should not lead the blinded people (hand in hand) unto hell, nor
the Devil lead captive both the seducers, and the seduced, as the Philistines
ruled Samson, Judge. 16.21
having cut off his hair, and bored out his eyes.

Text. And stand in the Temple.
This is added, to prove that God has appointed a settled and certain place,
wherein he will have his name called upon of his people: Deu. 12, 5, 6
and it has been so ever sithence that Temple at Jerusalem was first builded
by king Solomon. 1 Reg. 6
As the Psalmist meant when he said: Thither the tribes go up, Psalm. 122, 4
even the tribes of the Lord, etc. And it seems, that in diverse ages, there
were ordinary places of assembly, as well to the sacrilege committed with
Idols, as for the service of the true god. For as the woman of Samaria says,
yt her predecessors worshipped upon the mount of Samaria, John 4, 20
and Christ said, that Jerusalem was the ordinary place where Israel should
worship: 2 Reg. 5.18
So Naaman the Syrian, worshipped in the house of Rymmon, and Jeroboam
sometimes at Bethel, 1 Reg. 12
and otherwhiles at Dan. But it is said here unto the Apostles, stand in the
Temple: for that the Christian Religion being an open faced Religion, does
likewise require a public profession. According as our Savior Christ said to
the Disciples, Math. 10.27
Quod dico vobis in tenebris, praedicate in luce. What I teach to you
privately, that preach you publikelie. For it is not enough, says saint
Paul, that your heart does believe unto salvation, Romans 10, 10
but your mouth must also make confession to justification. Ne coelico fallaci
venerentur numina cultu, least all (like Saul) should worship God for a
fashion, and not of Devotion. Supra Math. cap. 21, 12


Saint Gregory in his Morals upon Christ's going into the Temple, so soon as
he came into the City says, yt this true reformer of his church, had two
special respects therein. The first, to show that the negligence of the
people does much arise of the carelessness of the Pastor, who comes not
there so often as he ought. And therefore was it a part of Paul's care to say
to the Colossians, Admonish Archippus to look to his charge. Colos. 4.17


Next, to advertise all higher powers, to procure the good of GODS house by all
the lawful means they may: and in this sense Esaias said, that Kings should
be nurcing fathers, Esaias 49, 23
and Queens nurcing mothers unto it.

Text. And speak unto the people.
As the Apostles mighty deliverance out of the common prison, was a
demonstration of Zorobabels conclusion, 1 Esdr. 4, 41
viz. that truth is strongest: So this fresh charge and new commission given
to them, must teach us, that we prise not the word of God by that estimation
that men of sin do value it. Math. 7, 6 Matt. 15.25
For as swine cannot prize pearls, so the crumbs of this food, are sought for
by such, as know what it is worth. When the Apostles answered the counsel at
Jerusalem with, Acts. 4, 19
Whether it is better to obey God or man, judge you; their speech has relation
to the commandment of God (we see) as to a rule and compass, whereby his
ship the Church is safe conducted in the sea of this world. For right so as God
said to Moses: Exodus 5, 40
See that thou make the Arc, according to the pattern that I showed thee on
the Mount: In like manner, ought all the enterprises of a Christian life, to
be leuelled by the word of Gods prescription. Christ says, that when the
shepherd is stricken, the flock flies and is scattered. 1 Reg. 22, 17
And so Micaia did prophecy against Ahab the wicked king of Israel. But
Christ never said: that the good shepherd does fly from the flock, though
himself be stricken: but that he ventureth his own life, John. 10, 11
to save theirs, as appears by these apostles, who cease not to do that
which God commands, though it be with danger of life. As the two good
midwiues of Egypt would not kill the infantes, because GOD has said, Thou
shall do no murder. It was said to the sinful man in the Gospel, John 5, 14
Go thy way and sin no more, least a worse thing befall thee. But when the
Apostles are enlarged by the Angel of the Lord, they are bidden to do again
as they did before. Then this is the cause why GOD is so present a help in
our troubles, Psalm 46, 1 Psalm. 50, 15
in delivering us when we call upon him, even that we might magnify him the
more. Acts. 4, 18
We charge you that you speak no more in this name, says the counsel of
Jerusalem to these Apostles: But I command you, that ye speak the more in
this name, says the angel of the Lord (now ye are at liberty.) Therefore
is the zeal of GODS Saints figured in the sacrificing fire, which might not
go out but must burn both day and night (by the Leuiticall Law) and as our
service of GOD must be perpetual, Leuit. 6, 13
so must it be without fear or doubting.

Should such a man as I am fly? Nehe. 6, 11
(said Nehemiah.) If the husbandman should wait until there were no vvinde,
Eccles. 11.4
he should never sovve. Or if he would not reap, till there be no clouds
that threaten rain, he should never have harvest while he lives. In that
these Apostles are commanded to speak unto the people; occasion is offered to
say something of those simples whereof gods catholic church is compound: viz.
of the people. New Jerusalem had twelve gates, not only to signify the xii.
Tribes of Israel, Apoc. 21.12.
but further to teach that GOD would choose his church from all parts of the
world. And this is that which our savior said long sithence: I have other
sheep which are not of this fold, John 10, 16
them also must I bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one
sheepfold and one sheep heard. Whereby he meant, that he would be one day as
common to the Gentiles (thorough the preaching of his gospel) as then he was
proper to the first elected Jews. For S. John's vision must be effected (or
else the scriptures are not fulfilled) he says: he saw an angel flying
thorough the Apoc. 14, 6
midst of heaven, having an everlasting gospel to preach to them that dwell
on the earth, and to every Nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. So that
howsoever that be true, that the Israelites were the peculiar people of God,
to whom only pertained the promise, the adoption, and the covenant of God (as
saint Paul says) yet now God vouchsafing a new covenant, Romans 9, 4 Iere. 5,
31
has comprehended all Nations therein, Acts. 2, 39
as saint Peter says, Unto you is the promise made and unto your seed, and
unto all that are yet a far off, Ose. 2, 23
even so many as God will call. And as Ose the Prophet said: god calls the^
his people who were not his people heretofore, and they (now) do call him their
God, whose God he was not in times past: For we were as sheep going astraie, 1
Pet. 2, 25
but now returned to the sheepeheard and bishop of our souls, etc. Acts 10, 15
So that Saint Peter's vision being accomplished, that which God has cleansed,
manne may not count it unclean: Acts 10, 28
for (now) GOD has showed me that I should not count any man polluted, or
unclean, says he.

Text. All the words of this life.
This does subscribe to the truth of him, who being the life it self, John
14, 6 Matthew. 4, 3
said sometimes, that There is not one word in the book of God, but it has
his Emphasis, or powerful effect unto eternal life.

Therefore, as Saint Paul found by his own experience, Romans 1, 16
that the words of the Gospel tend all to the saving of Faithful believers:
so he protests to the Church of Ephesus, that he kept not back any part
of the Counsel of GOD, that was fit for their salvation, Acts. 20, 20
but delivered unto them all that Counsel of GOD. Yet we, who are the
Gentiles, must say like Jeremy ye prophet: Thy words were found by me, Iere.
15, 16
and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy and reioicing of my
heart. Or as David said: Psalm. 132.6
Lo we heard of the same at Ephrata, and found it in the Wood. When we come
to Gods house, we must attend rather what is spoken, then who speaks,
because if we regard who teaches, we shall often hear the successors of the
Scribes and Pharisees, who only would say well: and because they hold in
capite (so long as they teach the truth) we must hear them, Matthew. 23, 2
and hold with them in that. Ei parti fauendum est quae rectum sentit in
veritate. We must lean to that side, which relieth upon the truth: Therefore
said Christ: Quod dicunt facite, You must do as they say. If you attend what
they say, you shall find them like the Apostles, for they speak unto you all the
words of this life. And it is not only the word of life, because it is spoken
as from the Author of life, or because it tends to eternal life, but (quia
creditur) because it is believed. And therefore says Paul: Romans 1, 16
It is the power of God able to save every believer And when Esaias said, Esaias
53, 1
Lord who believes our preaching? he meant, that the want of belief is want
of life. The words of the Gospel are also called the words of life, John 14, 6
because they treat of Jesus Christ, who is the life of life: for in him we
live, move, Acts 4, 12
and have our being. And not only Peter says: Acts 10, 43
Non est salus in vllo alio, but huic testa^tur omnes prophetae. To him do all
the Prophets bear witness, that through his name all that believe in him, shall
receive remission of sins. The words of the Gospel are called the words of
life also, because the subject of the gospel is to beget souls to everlasting
life: as our Savior himself says, John 20, 31
These things were written that you might believe, and in believing ye might
have life through Christ's name.

Text. So when they heard it, they entered into the temple early in the morning
and taught.
This sequel shows how faithfully the Apostles did execute the Angels
commandment; First they do hear it, Ezec. 33, 7
then they teach it: like that rule of God to Ezechiel, Son of man thou shall
hear the word at my mouth, and thou shall give the people warning from me. 1
Pet. 4, 11
Or that of S. Peter, If any man minister, let him do it as of the ability
that God ministers to him. For our savior says, Math. 13.52
Every Scribe learned in the kingdom of God, is like a good householder that
brings out of his treasure, things both new and old. Thus the means are
directed to the end, as Moses received the law, to deliver it to the people.
The ear to hear, and the eye to see, the Lord has made them both says the
Wise man. Prou. 20, 12
Solomon teaches us both the use and the author of our senses: by both ye
which he affirms that we are gods factors upon earth, and that the gifts of
God are talents committed to us, to trade them over in our life, to the honor
of the right owner of them. Luke 4, 16
The Evangelist Luke says, that when our Lord came into ye synagogue of
Nazareth, (according to his custom) he gave them a sermon: And so does he
say likewise of ye Apostles, Luke 24, 53
that they were usually conuersing in the Temple, in the time of their
liberty, and now also after their imprisonment. This is one great comfort to
the man of god, that howsoever men may be bound for the word of God, 2 Timothy
2, 9
yet the word of God it self is not bound.

And let them further understand, that as Gods judgments are compared to a
great deep, Psalm. 36, 6
so he will not make it known unto us, why he suffers me^ to ride over our
heads, but only thus far forth, that we may find him most helpefull, when we
feel our selves to be most helpless, Psalm. 37, 25
and say like David, I never saw the righteous forsaken. And thereby learn,
that because God is merciful, therefore he ought to be feared more then men,
who are for the most part cruel.

When it is said, that the Apostles Entered early into the temple and taught.
This is spoken for the imitation of their successors: for even as the sun
imparteth his light unto the moon and stars, so these moving candlesticks
be not put under a bushel, but set in an open place, to inlighten all that
are in Gods house. John 5.35
According as the scripture says of S. John, That he was a burning and a
shining light: meaning that he consumed himself to give light to other. In
some place the minister early is up, but the people never the nearer: yet
these apostles enter betimes into the temple, and do teach. Jesus Christ is
called the day spring, or the break of the day. Luke 1, 78
And so is his word comparable to the star that conducted the wise men unto
him. Math. 2, 9
Cant. 3, 1
The church wanted this light in Salomons time, 1 Samuel 3, 1
but specially in the days of Samuel. Miserable is their state who live in
ignorance, for the blind eats many a fly, as the Pharisees are said to
swallowe whole Camels. Mat. 23, 24
Wherefore we are very happy men, 2 Titus 21
to whom the grace of GOD has appeared.

Text. And taught.
Because the word of God has parted the whole world into a vineyarde of
work, and a market place of Idleness, Mat. 20.1, 3
and God has as well forbid loytering as commanded laboring: 2 These. 3, 10
therefore he takes men from Idleness, Math. 20, 7
and sends them to their occupation, to teach that they only are worthy of
their calling which walk according to the same: as Esaias said, Esaias 50, 4
The Lord has given me a tongue of the learned, that I should kno how to
minister a word in due season to him that is weary. And as Paul commanded yt
he which will drink wine, should help to plant the vine, 2 Cor. 9
and him that lives of the altar, to minister at the altar: and him that will
eat the milk, to feed the flock. I allege not this, as though I thought them
to be ignorant of this point of Discipline, to whom it specially pertains,
but as knowing that they which should specially remember it, do chiefly
forgette it.

There is one lesson in the scripture that many one in the ministry
remembers one half of it, and forgets the other half: and it was spoken
by our Savior to his Disciples, immediately after that he heard of the death of
John the Baptist. The words are Come aside, Mark. 6, 31
and rest a while. Every one upon the least occasion, very readily comes
apart from labor to loiter, and is pressed to take his rest: but they either
forget that it is said, Rest a while, or else think a whole years ease to be
but a while. But they should rest as Christ did, John 4, 6
sitting upon Jacobs well: viz. until they are refreshed, John 5, 17
and then to it again by Christ's example: for my father works hitherto and I
work, says he. And by Jacobs sleeping in the land of Haran: for he laid a
stone under his head, in steed of a soft pillow, Genesis 28, 11
and in ye next morning was packing on toward Bethel: teaching men to measure
their ease, as well as their pains. So God allows intermission, for he will
have line after line, Esaias 28, 10
and precept after precept, but allows no Idleness: and therefore he said
to those loyterers in the market place: Math. 20, 6
Why stand ye idle? And therefore Paul calls the Office of a bishop a good
work, 1 Timothy 3, 1
in that they taught the people. It makes as much to our folks condemnation,
as for their peoples commendation, even as Christ says yt Sabaes coming to
hear Salomons wisdom shall condemn the Jews in the judgment day. Math. 12, 42
Our Savior has also taught, what is the cause of our slow assemblies, Luke
12, 34
when he tells that men's hearts are only there, where their treasure is. But
yet even in policy, we know that wise merchants will traffike into diverse
countries, yea and send their chiefest wares into those parts where there is
like to be longest peace and safest travail: Why then should not the
spiritual merchant lay up treasure in heaven, where is all good hope of
endless happiness, seeing the scripture says (and therefore ye truth says)
that there thieves cannot break through and steal, Matthew. 6, 19 20
and by stealing make us bankerout of everlasting blessedness?

Text. Then the chief priest came, and they that were with him, and called the
council together, and all the Elders of the children of Israel, and sent to
the prison to cause them to be brought.
If we regard the outward persons in this assembly, it may seem that it was
very lawful: but if we consider the condition of their coming together, we
shall find it most ungodly: for it is a consu^mation of king David's
prophecy, Psalm. 2, 2
who said that mighty men should assemble themselves against the Lord, and
his anointed, which is his Christ. The scripture gives instance of diverse
assemblies, whereof some have come together for good ends, and some have
mustered for bad intents. The godly assemblies are expressed in that of
Cornelius and his company, Acts. 10.33
Acts 2, 1
and in that cloud of witnesses, the apostles assemble at Jerusalem, being al
together with one accord, in one place. Unhallowed assemblies, are such as
those in ye book of Numbers, when Korah Leuies son, Number. 16, 1
conspired with Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, against Moses and
Aaron. Numb. 14, 2
And when the whole congregation of Israel assembled against these two at
another time. Five kings against Captain Iosuah, Joshua 10
and these counselors at Jerusalem against the men of God. Then out of this
place we are advertised, how little hope there is of concluding any good,
when the assembly has neither fear nor knowledge of God. For as men in
chiefest seats do commit the chiefest sins, so may we think that
Commonwealth to be in the afternoon of her age, viz. in a declining state
where judgment is committed unto such, as should rather be judged. It is
neither here nor there, Psalm. 58, 1
who are assembled, except their minds are set upon righteousness, to
judge the thing that is equal. The greatness of the assembly proves not
the goodness of it, for then the five kings had foiled Iosuah, Iosuah 10
and the Council of Jerusalem must needs have swallovved up these silly
Apostles. But it is true, that thorough Gods permission, the mighty often
times surprise the meaner sort: and that made the Philosopher laughe in his
sleeue, to see great thieves lead little thieves to prison. Christ must be
crucified to the worlds end, Amos 2.13
even as carts are pressed with sheaues so long as there is any harvest. Ask
the shower of the Saints blood else, Mat. 23, 35
which began with the blood of Abell, and held on to the blood of Zacharias
the son of Barachias. Ask the river of blood, which the enemies of Gods
truth have shed in war. And ask the word of truth, Matthew. 2, 16
how much innocent blood hypocrisy has broached, and it will answer you
like Saul: Act 22, 4
I persecuted this way unto the death, etc. Howbeit, whenever (thorough GODS
grace) we change our nature, he also vouchsafes us a new name, as he did
turn Saul into Paul, Abram into Abraham, and Jacob into Israel. But that
which is here said, That the chief priest came and they that were with him,
gives us warning, how we come in company with evil associates, like Peter
with the high priests servants. Luke 22, 55
But specially that we consent not to their evils, as accessaries thereto, as
Saul did to Stephens death, Acts 8, 1 Luke 22, 4
and Judas to that treason against Christ's person, and Herod with Pilate to his
arraignment. Luke 23, 12
If we have intent to do it, it is even as bad as if we had done it. Christ
says, that who so lusts after a woman has sinned in his heart. And he
calls the Pharisees murderers, John 8, 44
when they only intended his death (and had not crucified him) because although
their power could not perform his death as soon as they would, yet their will
was not wanting: and so are all they no less guilty of evil, who willingly
give consent to it, although they act it not in their own persons. When old
Jacob blessed his sons he said of Simeon and Levy: Genesis 49, 6 Acts. 8, 1
Into their counsel come not my soul. Paul cast not one stone at Stephen: but
yet in consenting to his death, he sinned as grievously. Ahab stoned not
Naboth, but yet he consented thereto, and sealed the proclamation of his
death, which was as bad. So the carpenters made the Cross, the Jews received
it, Simon bare it, but Christ was crucified upon it, and so they made an end
of him, and them. Magnis magni malis, sunt obnoxii great men do offend in great
matters. Therefore be wise O Kings, Psalm. 2, 10
and learned ye judges of the earth, says the wise kings father. God refuses
zeal without knowledge, al your good intents are but as blind men, that will
venture to go without a guide. Romans 10, 2
If you set good meaning before knowledge; you set the blind to lead the
seeing, or the cart to dravv the horse. These magistrates consult again and
again, against the messengers of GOD, for wickedness labors the downfall of
goodness, as the Jews hacked at the green tree. Luke 23, 31
The scripture avouches, that a man's death may be sought six ways. First
by deceiving him in a case concerning his life, as the devil did Adam.
Secondly, by offering violence to himself, Genesis 3, 1
as Saul and Judas did. Thirdly, by denying nourishment, to hold life and
soul together, as the rich man did to Lazarus. 4. By forbearing to comfort the
weak, as the Leuite did not regard the wounded Samaritane. 5. By commanding,
as Iesabel to put Naboth to death for his Vineyard. And lastly, by giving
counsel, as Herodias daughter being advised by her mother, begged John the
Baptistes head: and as the high priest and Saduces held a council against the
Apostles. The proverb says, that the fiercest lightenings do beat upon the
loftiest towers. And the author to the Hebrews, Heb. 1, 7 Acts 5, 19
That God makes his Angels spirits: as is proved by the spiritual
deliverance of these men of god, by the angel of God. And further, that God
makes his ministers a flame of fire, and it is dangerous to deal with fire:
Yet these magistrates muster together, as to the putting out of a dangerous
fire: and are as much troubled in resisting the truth, Math. 2.3
as Herod was to hear of Christ's kingdom and all Jerusalem with him. Well,
they were deceived: for this fire is none other but that which was figured in
the Leuitical law, and must burn unquenched. Leuit. 6, 13
For so Christ says: Luke 12, 49
I am come to set fire on the earth, and what is my desire, but that it should
burn. As the emptiest vessels make the loudest lumbring, so the most
irreligious are ever most officious: but as it is error to affirm an untruth,
and heresy to uphold it: so is it cruelty to imprison without just cause, and
tyranny to prosecute that suit: and as Thorns were the matter whereof
Christ's crown was platted, Math. 23, 29
so affliction is the crown wherevvith our mother the church honoreth us her
children. Spina Christi corona nostri, Cant. 3, 11
Christ's thorn is our Crown.

Text. And sent to the prison, to cause them to be brought, etc.
The voice which stroke Saul to, the ground, Acts. 9, 3, 1
came not until he was near to Damascus, where he meant to make havoc of
the church. And the words were, verse 4, 5
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, etc. First to signify, that there is
no more honorable victory, then to vanquish when men are in the very pitch of
their purpose: and secondly, to signify how bootles that battle is, that is
waged against God. Quid me persequeris? Why persecutest thou me? Is as much as
God had said: That there is no reason to be angry with God, the author of our
good. It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks: signifies, the mere
folly of such, as enterprise so bootelesse attempts, as do hurt themselves
more then harm them whom they resist. For he that kicketh against a prick,
hurts himself, and not the goade: Like the mad man that did cut himself
with flintes. Exo. 14, 27
While Pharao pursues Israel, he perishes. Absolon hunting after his father,
2 Samuel 18, 9
is hanged up in an Oak. Arams host laboring to get Elisha the prophet, are
led into Samaria by Elisha himself, 2 Reg. 6.
where (of all the places of the world) they would not be. Prou. 21, 30
There is no consulting against God, says the wise man, for he overcomes
the wise in his own wit. Therefore says Solomon, Pro. 26, 27
He that diggeth a pit shall fall therein.

1 Esd. 14, 16
We see, that it is true that Esdras has said, That the world will increase in
evil as it grows in age. Susan. 52
Like the Judge to whom Daniel said: So thou that art old in evil. The
council had first imprisoned these Apostles, and then they proceed to judge
them, that they may grow from one wickedness into another. Genesis 19, 33
Like Antiochus Elephants, Maca. 6, 34
that at the sight of blood were moved to seek blood: Or as Herod, who seeing
that the death of James delighted the Jews, proceeded to serve Peter so to: Or
like the Foxes, Acts 12, 3
which for desire of blood, kill more carcases then they can devour. The
scripture mentions three Herod's, and they were al murderers. For the first
killed the infantes at the birth of Christ, the second (in his cups) beheaded
John the Baptist, and the third (to curry favor with the Jews) slew James
with the sword, and intended the death of Peter to, but God did prevent him
therein, as he did these in their purpose. There be too many such Herod's, who
had rather pleasure men by committing evil, the^ please God by doing good.

I speak it not to declaime against impiety, for that (I fear) were
bootlesse, but to reclaim al to pity. God grant it may not be fruitless.
We have many demonstrations of Gods snaky pace to revenge, who suffers his
own to be (as David says) evil entreated of Tyrants, and yet yt God that
threw down the Angels when they abused their good state, Jude 6
as saint Jude witnesses, is patient with men, whetting his sword as
threatening to strike us, and bending his bow, Psalm. 64.7
as intending to shoot at us with a very swift arrow, so that we shall be
wounded, if we return not in time. He seeeth Saul while he is not contented
to persecute at Jerusalem, Acts. 9.1
but proceeds to Damascus too. This, I say, God sees, and yet he suffers
it. But a^ the scripture says of Saul, first yt Seruauit vestes, he held
their clothes who were the tormentors, meaning that he would play small
game, rather then want a part in such actions. Secondly, that he consented to
Steeuens death: signifying, that then he came to sin in a second degree
against the Saints: and thirdly, that he made havoc of the Church of God.
Acts 9, 4
Thus showing how he sinned by degrees. So when God called him, he fell down
in have, Luke 19, 6
as Zacheus posted down from the wild Fig tree.

FINIS.

