A Commemoration of the life and death of the Right Worshipful and virtuous
Lady; Dame Helen Branch (late Wife to the Right worshipful Sir John Branch
Knight, sometime Lord Mayor of the famous City of London): by whose godly and
virtuous life, Virgins are insinuated to virtue, wives to faithfulness, and
widows to Christian contemplation, and charitable devotion, etc. Which godly
Lady left this mortal life (to live with Christ Ihesus) the 10. of April
last: and lies interred in the Parish Church of Saint Marie Abchurch, nigh
unto Canwicke street, the 29. day of the same month. 1594.

Fidenti sperata cedunt. I. P.

A Commemoration of the life and death of the Right worshipful and virtuous
Lady Dame Helen Branch, late wife to the Right Worshipful Knight Sir John
Branch, sometime Lord Mayor of the famous City of London. etc.
IF virtuous deeds do merit praise, and penetrate the sky,
Why should not we record their lives, that Godly live and die:
To the end that such as now do live and on the earth remain,
Might learn to pace sweet virtues paths, and viscious ways disdain,
And that by them posterities, to come might learned be
To serve the Lord when as the lives, of his dear Saints they see.
Here Uirgins young are taught the way, to famous wisdoms bower,
Here may they feed to their contents, upon the finest flower.
Here married wives a loadstarre have, to lead them from abuse,
Here Widows are instructed still* virtue to put in use.
Here justice sits to give her doom, here truth her cause does plead,
Who does revive our Helens name, though she to world be dead.
I speak not I of Helena that fickle Gretian Dame,
That causd the Greeks for Paris rape, to set all Troy on flame:
But I a virtuous Helen mind, whose life when you behold,
Deserves for to be regestred in letters writ with gold.
The stock from whence she sprang, She was the Daughter of M. William
Nicolson and Ioane his wife Citizen and Draper of London.
God garnished with grace,
Her Parents were right godly bent, to virtue they gave place,
And as she grew in years the Lord her wisdom did increase,
Whose name to praise and magnify, his servant did not cease.
To Uirgins Helen Nicolson did give a golden light,
She by her deeds did stir them up in goodness to delight,
First unto God her honor due, most reverently she gave,
And to her Parents as a child her self she did behave.
She was not stout nor stubborn found, but gentle, meek and mild,
All vain and wanton idle words, were from her lips exilde,
That Monster pride within her breast, could never harbor find,
Humillitie bare sovereign sway, within her heart and mind,
She bragd not of her beauty brave, although it did excel,
She knew as God had given it her, to grace her body well,
So beauty should in future time, through crooked age decay,
And that the wounes should her consume, when flesh should shroud in clay
The beauty of her silly soul, therefore by faith she sought,
Her hope was set on Jesus Christ, that with his blood her bought,
And he of love did beautify, her conscience with his Grace,
Because she fixte his sacred fear, all times before her face.
Thus thus she led her virgins life, to her increase of fame,
Would Uirgins all in these our days, would exercise the same,
Then wantonness and lust should die, and pride should fall down quite.
And maidens by virginity, would never set so light.
But God the Lord of life and time for Helen did provide,
And she upon his providence, did constantly abide.
Her parents wills she (willingly) at no time would gainsay,
Nor rashly seek (as some do now) to cast themselves away.
Their will they hold a law no doubt, their parents may not mell:
For wed they will without consent, beside them ill or well*
Our Helen was not of this crew, reason did rule her mind,
Unto her parents wills, her will, was evermore inclinde.
In wedlock they their daughter gave, unto a worthy wight,
A Citizen of London fair, John Minors he was hight.
And of the Drapers Company, a man discreet and wise,
And such a one as firmly fixed Gods fear before his eyes.
Our Helen was his only joy, and he her hearts delight,
He loved her, and she with love, her Minors did requight.
And though this young new wedded wife, were but of tender age,
She showed her self to husband hers, a courteous Sara sage.
Obedient unto his hests, she was at every beck,
With modesty her self she clad, she feared to have a check.
A godly life she always led, uprightly she did deal,
Her cheifest care was bent to wish, and work her Minors weal.
And God beholding how that they in love did spend their time,
Indeuoring to praise his name, and shun each sinful crime.
From heaven the sweet deaw^s of his grace did on them both distill,
He blessed them with health and wealth, tha^ did obey his will.
And in his mercies mild and sweet, their joys for to increase,
One son and daughters three to them, he gave as pledge of peace.
Which in Gods fear to foster up they were right willing found,
As thereunto by Gods command, and Nature they were bound.
A g^lden mean our Helen kept, her drink was sm^llest beer,
Sweet Temprance was the misteres and foundres of her cheer.
With wine she was at deadly war, excess she did disdain,
Content was taster of her ^ates, his guest she did remain.
Yet plenty sweet within her house did bear the sovereign sway,
At no time empty from her gates, the hungry went away.
Her servants had their meat and drink, in time and season dew,
Here wedded wives a Ph^nix rare, for virtues use may vewe.
Penellope, Ulysses wife, more constant could not be,
Then Helen was to Minors kind, the world did plainly see.
But that great God that gives life, has set down his decree,
That unto death both young and old, in time should subject be.
Clotho the distaffe loathes to hold, L^che^is will not spin,
And Parchas for to cut lives thread in sunder does begin.
Their children he from them does take, their hour glass was run,
They murmerd not, but were content, with that which God had done.
For well they know that God that gives, can also take away,
For King and Duke, yea rich and poor, are Subjects unto clay.
But lo when that these lovers true, had forty years bin wed,
And vndefilde ^^sacred sort, had held their marriage bed.
The enemy of life prepares, the fatal stroke to strike,
He spares not one, for all estates, to Atrapos are like.
The husband from his wedded wife in time he did bercaue,
And for to wail his death with tears, his Helena does leave.
But though that death did life subdue, his faith in Christ Gods son,
Has given him life with Jesus Christ, though death his worst has done.
Yet in her secret heart she does her gentle Minors shrine.
And wets her cheeks with brinish tears, from conduits of her eyne.
But on the living Lord of hoasts, she made her only stay,
And unto him for mercy sweet most constantly did pray,
And God the mighty Lord of hoasts, his hand maid did behold,
And unto her the gifts of Grace, did lovingly unfold.
For unto Sir John Branch sometimes Lord Mayor of this City,
Our happy Helen wedded was being full of love and pity,
As he by justice ready was to work fair Londons weal,
So to the poor this Lady had a fervent love and zeal.
In fruitful love this gentle Knight, with Lady his did live,
And unto God both they and theirs, did daily glory give,
But fading time that runs forth right and never stands at stay,
From this good Lady took her Knight, and closed him in clay,
But death in Sir John Branch good Knight, no doubt remains dead,
For Jesus Christ above the skies with glory crowns his head.
A woeful Lady Helen lives, to heaven she makes her moan,
And prostrate falls for comfort sweet, before Gods glorious throne,
To watch to fast and pray she settled her delight,
And at her book did use to sit from morning until night.
She to the Drapers company in her life time did give
A stock of fifty pounds no doubt* pore youngmen to relieve,
One man for to enjoy the same, for term of four years space.
And intrest none at all to pay, but praise God for his Grace:
And then the money rendered, two young men of that trade
Shall have that fifty pound in use, on hands sufficient made.
And thus this money shall no doubt from man to man be lent,
According to this ladies mind, her meaning and intent.
She generally unto the poor, her large alms deeds extended,
The pore distraught in Bethlem, she has often times befrended,
Saint Marie Abchurch well can tell the love to them she bare
With money, coals, and cloth, she did relieve poor peoples care.
Where were the sick that she refusde to comfort in distress,
This Lady helped the widows want, and fed the fatherless*
Where were the blind, the sore, and lame, that had not of her coin,
Where sought she not to stay their mood, that would from pore purloine,
Where was her heart, her hand, and purse, at any time found slack,
To comfort those that wanted aid, and cloth the naked back?
Then Ladies all example take, by this most virtuous Dame,
And learn by her whilst life you have, to conquer death by fame.
Gods fear was fixed in her sight, her honor still she sought,
Against the world sin, death and hell, a battle she has fought,
Faith was her shield, Christ was the rock, on whom she sought to build
And he by grace has made her clean, that was with sin defilde,
Thus wisdom in her bore the sway, virtue did rule the rain,
Who taught her still that worldly pomp and worship was but vain,
Thus being mindful of her end as one that needs must die,
She her last will in perfect mind did make right orderly,
Wherein to Marie Abchurch she a legacy did give,
And of a long continuance to such as there do live.
The famous universities this Lady had in mind,
To students poor that virtuous be, sweet comfort she assignd,
To prisoners poor in London she, and Southwarke here and there,
Has money given to help their grief, as plainly may appear,
The hospitalles in general, this Lady did remember,
And poor maids marriages to mend, her care was not found slender,
Unto her friends and servants all this kind and loving Lady,
Has left a portion of her store, as orderly as may be.
She gowns to men and women poor, bequeathed by her will,
And ready rests the excecutor her meaning to fulfill.
This was a steward of the Lord, ordained for the poor,
Whom she in soul and spirit still, did reverently adore,
Where might she help, that once to hurt, she ever gave consent*
When she receeued ill for good, to do good she was bent.
But God the mighty God of grace, that gave her life and breath,
Arrested her with sickness sharp, and sickness wrought her death.
But as in health in sickness she, the Lord of hoasts did praise,
And in true faith and fear of him, she sought to end her days,
Her Lamp was fully fraught with Oil she builded on the rock,
And at the glorious gates of grace, for mercy she did knock.
And that eternal spotles Lamb, of graces his most good,
From all her sins has cleansed her, in his dear death and blood.
^on Ladies all behold her life, and mark her virtuous end,
And whilst you live vouchsafe in time, to make sweet Christ your friend
For when that death began forthwith, his pageant for to play,
She humbly gave her soul to Christ, and left her corpse to clay,
Her friends do wail, her kinsfolk weep, her neighbors all lament,
Her servants sob, the pore cry out, but tears in vain are spent.
Then cease your plaints this Lady lives, though death have cut her down
Sweet Christ in heaven with glory great, her happy head does crown*
Four score ten years she lived here, in credit praise and fame,
And dying to the world she left, no doubt a spotles name.
And thus good Lady from thy friend, receive thy last farewell,
Thou leauste this world to live with Christ, with whom thy soul does dwell.
Virtutis Laus Actio.

