Three Godly and notable Sermons, of the most honorable and blessed sacrament
of the Altar.

Preached in the Hospital of S. Antony in London, by Wyllya^ Peryn priest,
bachelar of divinity, and now set forth for the auaunceme^t of gods honor:
the truth of his word, and edification of good christen people.

Vos fratres prescie^tes custodite: ne insipientiu^ errore traducti. etc^.

2. Pe. vlti 1546.

Unto the right reverend father in god, and his special good lord and master,
Edmund (by the grace of God) bysshope of London, Wyllyam Peryn priest, wysheth
grace, peace, and health in God.
AL though yt ye corrupt state and malingnytie, of this present time (right
honorable Lord) be a spur, sharp and quick enough, to stir up and to
provoke, a christane heart (in whom is any spark of love and zeal, eather
toward the sincere christian faith, either toward the spiritual or goostly
weal of this our natural contraye) to bend and force him self in the
defense of the faith catholycke, with a^^wyt and study against the vyolent,
and manyfold pestyferous storms of heresy. Yet I having also in
consideracyo^, ye great account, that I have to render unto my lord Christ,
for the little talent delivered unto me, to employ (no doubt) to the edyfyenge
of his mystical body, ye church, here unto added also, the importune
postulacyon, and request, of certain catholyque parsons, my friends I am (in
manner) forced, to dyuulgate, and set forth, a part of my small and slender
study, taken here before abought certain sermons, that I made of ye most
blessed and venerable sacrament of the altar. Where unto I was moved, by a
certain rumor delated, and brought very often time, unto my ears, (which at the
length I fered and found it to be, to true) that the horrible heresy, of
Berrengary and Wykclyfe (sacramentaryes abhomynable) was raised again, of
late, and by means of evil and pestyferous books, crepte secretly in to the
hearts of many of the younger and carnal sort. The which heryse, I had well
hoped to have bynne, to deapelye buried (with the ashes of Frythe, and
Nicolson) to have been reuyued and raised up again, in this realm. Wherefore
I, fearyng the encresse of that mischeuous (...) lady (among the unstable and
vulgar people) thought some what to break, ye great vyolens, of such
pestilent blastes (among the unlearned sort) as much as lay, in the weak
power, and tenuyte, of my simple and small talent: until more better reskew,
and resystens, (by great learned men) should come. And thus I preched in four
days, four several sermons, only, and specially, of the most venerable
and blessed sacrament. Intendyng here by, (among many) either to reclaim, and
recover, such as were not to far gone, or irreuocable, (if there were any
such in mine auditory), eather to corroborate, and strength the weaker, and
such as seemed to staggar, with ye huge storms, of these craftye persuasyons,
in the synceryte of the catholyke faith. Remembrynge with what sedulyte and
indeuore, they (that are presently poysioned all redye) go a bought craftily,
to breath, and to blow their venomus contagion (where they may and dare) in to
the bosom, of such that will secreatly receive, and abide their smoky
communycacyon, to the infection (I fear) of a great number. And for as much
as I stood in fear, that this dangerous contagyon drew toward none end, but
rather seemed to take secretly force, and strengt^^ and was lykely to faste^
daily, upon moo and moo (as this time does declare to euydently) I was the
sonner and the rather entreated, to communicate this my small industrye, and
slender labor unto al such yt would vouchsafe to read, this my rude (yet
sincere and catholyke) doctrines, and lessons. The which I have compyled, in
homely and plain sentens, by cause that I have cheflye prepared them (all
only) for the unlearned. And the veryte (being delectable and bewtifull of
herself) needs not, the gorgius ornaments, of eloquens. Also the matters of
our faith, has much less need of rethoricall perswacyons, having their
grond, and fundacyon, upon the infallyble verite, of gods holy word Thus I
have now enterprysed (my special good lord) to set forth three sermons ye
which I preched. Not by cause that I would think so basse, and weak a thing,
to be a sufficient defense, and a very present remedy, against ye great
vyolens, of so pestylent a poysone, mynistred of so craftye wits, or that I
would hope, here by, to recover every man, that is or has been, infected, for
there be some so obstinate, that they seem, and be irrecouerable. But that I
trust, by this simple (yet catholyke) thyng^^ there to comfort, and stablyshe
eather to recover, or stay some, among so many. Or else it might stand in use
and in stead, (among the busy readers) of the venomous book, of Fryeth, or
the blasphemus book, of frear Bale, upon the reuelacions of John^. And of al
such other pestilent books, which were daily, and very often had in hand,
secreatly where they durst, that delyghted, in such sweet poison. Wherefore (my
special good lord) I have dedicate this simple and rude thing, unto your good
lordeshype. That such rude thing (of it self vere base) might take, (by the
title of your good lordeshypes fauore and auctoryte) not only acceptacyon and
place, with the catholyke people, but also, no small ornament and dignite of so
godly and catholyke a patron, whom they may, and do right well perceive, to
favor tenderly the sincere catholyke faith and pure word of God, detestinge
heresies. And also with that a most charitable exhorter, reformer, and
recouerer (where is any hope of reformacyon) of such, as are infected with
these evil errors and horrible heresies. Most humbly besckynge your bounteful
goodness, to take in god part this my slender and small industry, that has
proceeds (undoubtedly) of a single and a sincere mind. And if that I shall
perceive, that this my talent (in this manner put forth unto spiritual use tie)
do grow to any advantage of my lords goodness glory (in winning and lucre of
mine eue^ cristiane) I shall most louly give thanks unto god (the auctor of all
goodness) and take the more audacyte and corrage, to employe my industrye and
labor, to set forth here after (having like occasyon) some other thing, to
the glory of almyghtie God, who have you now and for ever, in his most
gracyous tuition.

Unto the Christian reader.
I Have enterprysed (most dear reader) among the great rich me^ (I mean
of learning and eloque^s) of this our time, to offer (with the poor wydow)
this my simple and rude myte into gods cheste, toward the repayrynge and
reedifyinge of Christ's church. Sygnifying and declarynge herein, how heartily
I wyshe and desire, to have ye church of Christ (that is to say) the christen
people repaired and reedifyed in the catholyke and sincere faith. Namelye
such, as of late are fallen into ruin and great decay in matters of our
faith, with the huge storms and tempests of heresies, that the dyuell has
araysed, specially against the blessed sacrament of thaulter, as well by the
vehement storms of pestilent books, as also by the venomous wyndes and blastes
of secret deuelyshe doctrines. Where ^^e I shall most heartily desire the
christian reader (if he be learned) of his most gentle and charitable censure
and judgment. And if eather letter, eather word has escaped me or the
printer (as there has some) let the same with his pen gentlye correct it. If
he be unlearned, let him take the fruits and commodities there of, gyuyng the
praise and thanks there of to God, because I have labored it cheftly for him.
And if ye same shall find any word or sentence here, that seems unto him
obscure or dark, let the same judge that eather such words has escaped me
vnwarelye, eather that I could not openly and conveniently set such matter so
breuely, in playner sentence.

And for as much as an order in things not only delyghteth the beholder (as
the bewty thereof) but also (making the matter more sensible and plain) it
causes the reader to bear away and retain the better, that which he has
read, therefore have I here, set forth breuely, the order that I have taken, in
the process of this rude thing. Where the cristiane reader shall understand,
that the former part of the first Sermon, she with that ye admyrable works of
god, were wrought of God to manifest the glory of his synguler power, and to
build faith in us. And upon this ground, I have proved, the possibility of
the miracles (wrought by God) in the blessed sacrament of the Altar, by the
other myraculous works, that the scripture tells us, to have been wrought, by
the power of God. And because we believe such miracles and yet se the^ not, we
ought also (of like reason) to believe ye miracles in the holy sacrament,
though we se them not, because, that ye scripture affyrmeth them to be true,
and says (in the voice of Christ.) This is my body. For upon the verity of
these words, depends the verity, of all the other miracles, wroughte in the
blessed sacrament. And finally, I do apply the miracles of the blessed
sacrament, unto the other miracles of God, to show them to be of equal
possibility and impossibility.

In the second Sermon I have first declared certain fygures, of the old
law, to appertain unto the sacrament. And then I have brought in, diverse
places of scripture, to prove that thing, to be so in deed, which I showed (in
the first sermon possible.) For like as I showed in the former sermon, the
real presens of Christ's body in the sacrament (with all the miracles)
possible, by the other myraculous works of God, so do I in this sermon prove
it, by the scriptures, to be s^ of a treuth.

In the third, I have set in place, first the promyses, that Christ made unto
the Church. Whereof I have iustlye collected, that (standing the verity of
those promyses) that thing must needs be of infallible truth, the which the
church has believed, and taught so many hundred years. In the second place, I
have brought in, the conselles, and after them the testimonies of the ancient
writers, to prove that the church has, always retained, this same faith of
the sacrament, that we now do hold, sith the apostles time. Yet here I have not
recyted, all the writers of al times, (for who can so do?) but I have selected
and chosen only such, as I have thought, of most antiquity, and authority,
and that from.vii. or.viii. hundred years and upward, and have not mentioned,
nether alleged, any that writ within these vii. hundred years, because, that
they are in manner innumerable, and most of the^ so familiar, that their faith
in this matter, is very manifest, unto ye mean learned. Thyrdlye, I have
answered, to the most come^ reasons (that seemed unto me most strongest) that
are made for the contrary. And where I have not handeled, this most excellent
mystery of our faith, with so exquisite lerning, and exact judgment, as a man
of great lytterature and learning would have done, I shall most humblye and
hertelye desire the christian reader, to esteem and way, not how homelye,
base, and rude thing is here co^pyled, but rather, to judge, from how sincere
mind, and good will it has proceeded, and to what end, and intent, I thus
enterprysed, to dyuulgate and set it forth. where in, I have sought chefly, the
setting forth of the sincere and catholyke faith of the church of Christ,
and the spiritual lucre and gain of my christian brother to the honor of
almighty god. Unto whom be immortal glory laud and praise world with out
end. Amen.

ij. Petri vltimo. VOS fratres prescientes, custodite: ne insipientium errore
traducti, exidatis a propria firmitate.


A Prayer unto the Sacrament, in the Mass time.
O Most myghtyfull Lord, and most merciful redemer and savior Jesus son
of the eternal living god) which of thine own nature being most invisible and
immortal) have (of thine ineffable mercy, and incomparable beninguitie)
vouchsafe in the end of the world, to appear visibly under the garment of our
frail and temporal nature, amongst mortal men, and by most mortal passion
and paynfull death have redeemed us mortal sinners from the perpetual death and
mortal dampnation of hell. For the merytes of thy paynfull death preserve us
(by thy special grace) this day and evermore from ye danger of al mortal
offense. And most blessed bishop, our high priest, which have most devoutly
offered visibly upon the cross, by death, this thy most blessed body and
most precious blood for our redemption, and have also most graciously
ordained the very same real and natural body and blood to be offered of thy
catholyke church inuisibly in ye blessed sacrament, (as a memory of the
crewell oblation made upon the cross) until that thou shall come to judgment.
Vouchsafe (most gracious God) that this blessed sacrifice of thy body and
blood (now offered unto the in the blessed sacrament) may be (in the virtue
and merits of thy blessed death) increase of grace and virtue in the good: and
strength unto the frail, purchase of repentance unto sinners, help and
comfort both to quycke and dead. And most loving sheparde of our souls,
which of thy most intyre love, haste bestowed thy precious life for us thy
wreched wa^dering sheep, vouchsafe (gracious and good keeper of our souls) to
colect and to gather to gether in to one sincere faith catholyke, all
christian people, and colected together (good lord) rail and enclose them
strongly within thy church catholyke, with the rail of louelye and godly
fear, that they straye not, neither in belefe, neither in life (good Lord)
out of thy sweet pastures of sincere faith and Godlynes. And such as are
astraye and divided from thy flock, by error or herysye (most petyful pastor)
draw and force them, out of the blind hedges of herysye, and forth of the
high way, that ledeth to perdycion, into thine own fold, and make one
flock of us all, as thou art but one sheparde, that we may have ye merciful
grace, to stand at the day of judgment (as thy very true sheep) on thy right
hand, and to enter, with the our sheparde, into the perpetual pastures of
eternal life. Amen.

HOC EST COR PVS MEVM. Math. 26 Marc. 14. Luce. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
This is my body.
WHere our most omnipote^t Lord God and father celestial, of might and power
invincible and infinite, of goodness most ineffable, is, therefore most worthy,
of all faith, love and fear, as he, that is all only most myghtyest,
most beniuolent, and bountefull Lord God. Yet, lest that he, so myghtyfull
and good Lord, should be at any time or season, forgotten, vnloued and
vnfeared, of his noble creature man. And so, by obliuio^ and ignorance of his
divine power, his godly honor, to be alienate and transferred from him, unto
either inconstant and fatal fortune, either unto his minister and handmayde^
Dame nature. He of his divine providence, has left here unto us, his
wonderful benefits, and his beneficial wonders, The myraculus works of God
are tokens of his divine might and godly power and they do exercise our faith.
the very monumentes, of his divine might and goodness ineffable. The which
are, not only, the superexcellent miracle of the creation, and conservation of
al this wide world, but also, the great multitude of the wonderful signs,
mo^struus portentes, et miraculus works, that he has wrought, sith the
creation, reported by the holy scripture.

That our faith in these excercysed, might take increme^t, and stabilite, our
love, might be daily incensed and inflammed, toward him, when we, earnestly
do behold, and seryusly bear in mind, the exceeding great, and innumerable
benefytes, that he has, of his mere and syngulate goodness, given unto man. And
therefore has he set before our eyes, the myrrour and spectacle, of this huge
and wonderful world, where in is to behold, a uniform order, and continual
succession of things, (the special monument; and memorial, of his godly
power and might) to remain in our cottidiane use and sight, as well against
that detestable heresye, that ascribed all thing to fortune, as also, against
the injury and dyspleasure, of unkind forgetfulness, and blind wicked
infidelity, of his omnipotent power and divine might. Therefore where his
incomprehensible divine nature, is a substance immaterial and spiritual, and
therefore invisible, and can not be seen, of us blind inhabitauntes of the
earth, 1. Ioh. 4.
(as saint John^ witnesses) in his epistle canonical. No man has seen God
at any season. Yet (as saint Paul teaches the Romans) by a diligent and
just vewe, Roma. 1.
of the wonderful fabricature, and workemanshyp, of this world, we may come
unto, an understanding and an intellectual syghte, of his dyuine power and
imcomprehensible nature, so that no excuse, or pretense of ignorance can be
sufficient for us, if we lack or want, the faith and love of so myghtyfull
and merciful Lord God. What else, unto us declares the high and huge heaven
the regument and covert, of all mundiall things, so thycke painted and
poudered, with so many coruscant sterres?

What the moble spheres, with their continual motions, and lively influens,
causynge generation and corruption, in all things subject unto mutabilitie?
But (as the prophet says). The heavens shewyth forth the glory of God,
Psalm. 18.
and the firmament declares the works of his hands. What does to us
signifye, the delectable harmonye of all things, in course continual, and
order certain? Save only, the magnificent power, and inuestigable wisdom,
of their creator and maker, as the wyseman says. Sapi. 13.
By the great and wonderful pulchritude and beauty of the creature, might
plainly and euidentlye, be perceived and known, the creator and maker of them.
Breuely to conclude, where is any more manifest token, of the divine power,
then (the wonder of the world.) Man, who alone is a whole world of miracles,
and has almost as many wonders in him self, as he has powers and parts.
Yet such is ye malignitie, of our recheles nature, prone and proclyue, unto
obcecate and blind ignorance, Augustinus super Iohe^m ait. Miracula que fecit
dn^s Jesus su^t quide^ diuina opera, and ad diligendu^ deum de visibilibus
admone^t humana^ mentem Quia eni^ ille no^ est talis substantia q^ videri
oculis possit, et miracula eius quibus totum mundum regit, vniuersa^que
creaturam administrat, assiduitate viluerunt, ita vt pene nemo dignetur
atte^dere opera dei mira et stupenda. etc.
that, notwythstandynge, that both, within us, and also without us, there is
almost nothing void, of gods synguler power and miracle; (the whole world
replete with wonders,) yet necglygent ignorans, and ignorant necglige^s, does
grow so fast upon us, that the admirable wonder of the creation, conservation,
and administration of all the broad world is all most (as saint Augustine
says) by assyduite and cottidiane custom, out of all estimation and meruell,
and the power of God here in, wypyd out of memory. And thus consequently our
faith and love, toward our creator and conseruer, is little or nothing,
noryshed, or enkyndled, by any of these wonderful works of God. Wherefore, the
most inuestigable wisdom of God, to resuscytate and stir up our dremye
and and drousye hearts, out of this dedly lethargy, forgetfulness and unbelief,
of the divine power and his omnipotent might, and to strength specially our
imbecyl and weak faith has (sithe ye creacion) wrought a great number of
diverse and sundry signs, portentes, wonders, and miracles, manyfestly set
forth, before the former people, as well under the old law, as under the law
eua^gelicall, where with he has in them, both enkyndled and stablyshed their
faith and love, toward him, and also he has, terriblye set forth, the
glory of his mighty and magnificent power, unto all blasphemous infideles. Of
the which wonderful and myraculous works, the infallible and most just
report, herfore is left unto us, in the sacrate, and most holy scripture,
that likewise as the former people our predecessors, (before whom God has
vouchesafed to set forth these his wonderful works) the faithful (among
them) were greatly confirmed, and strengthed in their faith of the word and of
all ye promyses of god, and ye unbelievers, either were convinced, either
reformed of their unbelief. Even so we (reading the same that they did se) such
as does believe, may take no little strength in their faith, and such as
stagger, may also be, very fermely stablysshed. For what else does the
portentuus wonders, the monstruus works, and the myraculus wonders of God? But
specially set forth the glory of God (as I have said) and the magnificent
power divine, declarynge all things to be subject unto God, conuincynge also
and rebukynge, the rude, gross, and blind reason of man. The miracles of God
conuinceth man's reason, and shows such things, in the word of God (that
semys impossible unto man's wit and reason) to be very easy and possible
unto god, as is this wonderful mysterye of the blessed sacrament.
Also buyldeth and confirms the faith, and treuth, of gods word, and
promise. For where any thing, in the word or promise of god, semyth unto our
weak wit and blind reason, impossible, because that reason can not reach,
wysedo^e or wit attayneth not, the senses lacks experiens, and the carnal
or natural man believes not, there miracle shewyth it possible and easy to
God, and faith teaches us, to lead captive and to subdue al wit and reason,
unto the word and power of God, unto whom there is nothing impossible. For
we must understand, that the miraculus works of god, were not wrought before
the former people, and left truly and faithfully, reported unto us, in ye
holy scriptures, to teach and persuade only, the possibilite of the^ selfs,
(for they were to evident to be dowbted of.) But they were wrought and written
to declare and set forth, ye possibility and verite of al things, yt the word
of god, teaches us to believe. As for example. Exodi. 4. Ait Moydn^o. Non
credent mihi neque audie^t vocem meaz, sed dicent non appa ruit tibi dn^o.
Dixit ergo ad ^n^. Quid est quod tenes in manu tua. Respondit. Virga. Dixit
dn^s Proi^ce i^ terra^. Pro iecit etc. Vt creda^t quod apparu it tibi dn^s deus
tuus etc.

Ioh. 10. Et si mihi non vultis credere, operibus credit, vt cognoscatis. etc.


The wonderful works, that God almighty wroughte, by Moses his dear and
faithful servant, before the children of Israel, and before the Egiptians,
did not only declare, that God almighty was hable to show such wonders,
signs, and miracles. But they manyfestly declared, both the might and power
of the Lord God, that sent unto them Moses his servant, and also confirmed
and ratifyed, the veryte of all such promyses and commandments, that Moses
brought unto them, from the mouth of God. For this cause had Moses power of
miracles, that these wonders (which they se him do, before their eyes,) might
teach and persuade the^ the veryte and possibilite, of his tidings and
message, which seemed both untrue and impossible. Not that they should believe,
only the myraculous works, that they did see, but yt, they (by the euydens of
these works) should believe, the word of God, ye Moses ministered and brought
unto the^. The holy fathers prophets ratifyed and persuaded, the verite of
gods message, sent by them unto ye people, with like testimonye of miracles.
Our savior Christ, and (after him) his disciples, confyrmed and did
corroborate, the verite and possibility of his holy gospel, with the wytnes,
of his wonderful works. Wherefore I think it an argument of no small
efficatie and strength, to persuade and prove (by ye experiens of gods power
in the former miracles) the possibility, of the exceeding great miracles, in
the most blessed sacrament of the Altar, the which gods word teaches us
to believe, seem they (unto man's reason) never so untrue and impossible. For
these myraculus works, left unto us in the sacrat scripture, are none other,
then the very plain experimentes; and evident trial, of gods mighty power,
and registered in the bible, to corroborate and stablyshe (as I have said) our
faith, and the doctrine of gods holy word, to conuynce and reprehende, all
unbelief and heresye. But specially such gross and stubburne blyndnesse, that
would not have reason subiugate and obedient, unto gods myghtie word and
power, but would that the omnipotent word and power of God, should take such
authority and place, as their blind carnal wit will give leave, as our
gross, froward, and obstinate caphernaites does now a days about the
most sacrate and blessed Sacrament of the Altar, the blessed monument and
memorial both of the death and also of the might and power of our savior and
Lord God Christ. The sacrament besides yt it contains yt vyry body and
blood of Christ, is also a memorial of Christ's death and therefore stereth up
our charity toward him. And in that, that it is inuisibly myraculus, it
excercyseth our faith.
For whiles they deny, the real and very presens of Christ's body and
blood in the sacrament (contendynge against the scripture by reason, to be
impossible that it should be so) they extenuate, and imbecyl, the power of God,
and also they (here in) deny and subuerte, the verite of Gods word,
ratifyed and confirmed, (by Christ and his disciples) with innumerable signs,
wonders, and miracles. And why seems this incredible? Plainly for this cause
only, that in this most holy sacrament, nature is altered and loses her
common course, and order, reason can show no persuasion. The senses has
contrary experiens, Therefore these carnal infideles (void of ye spirit of
God) for want of faith, says and think it impossible. For manifest
scriptures (truly taken and understand) to prove their heresy, they have
none. Save yt where ye scripture, in his native sense, will not sustain,
either help, their horrible heresy and detestable blasphemye, they vyolently
wrynge it and wreste it, they toose it and rugge it, with tropes and fygures,
catacreses, alligories, and metaphers, to force it to bow unto their
phanaticall frensye, and frantyke heresye. And although that, the blind
obstinacy, of these blasphemous heretykes be such, that there seems little
remedy, to recover them, Titu^. 5.
sithe they subverted, are (as saint Paul says) conde^pned in their own
judgment. Yet for the confirmation and comfort of the faithful, I shall set
forth and prove (by gods adiutorie) the possibility, of such miracles, as
the faith catholic, does teach and shows us, to be wrought (by the infinite
power of gods mighty word in the holy sacrament of the Altar.

This shall I do by ye testimony, of these myraculus works, that the scripture
reports unto us. That whiles we perceive ye scripture, to set forth before
us, so evident, open, and plain demonstratio^s and experime^tes, of the
oi^potent power divine, that they can not be denied (save only of an infidele)
it may euidentlye apere, unto every faithful christian, how lykely and
possible it is, that almyghtie God can, and does, (by the power of his mighty
word) these wonderful miracles in the holy sacrament. And this manner of
argument, may not seem strange unto any man, in that, that the verity and
possibility of this mysterye and archane of our faith, by proved and
declared, by other miracles written (whom we believe) in the holy scripture,
for there in, I have mine example of saint Paul, 1. Cor. 15.
who writing unto the Corinthians and dysputynge the article of the general
resurrection, proves, by the myraculous resurrection of Christ, (the which
they had received and believed, by the preaching of saint Paul) the verytie
and possibility, of the general resurrection. Our savior Christ also,
persuaded, and prouyd, unto the Jews, the presens of his godhead, and that he
(by authority of his godhead) did, and might forgive and remytte sins (the
which godhead invisible, they could not see, neither the remyssyon of sins)
by the euidens of the health, that he gave unto the man dyseased with the
palsye. That where, the forgiveness of sins, and the gift of health unto
that man so vncurably dyseased, were both of equal dyfficultie, and the one
they might see, the other they could not see, whiles they se him do the one,
they might believe the other. Wherefore then, should not the testymonye, of the
former miracles, most faythfullye set forth unto us in the holy word of God
whom our predecessors also did see before their eyes, perpetrate and
wroughte of God (by the hands, as well of the fathers prophets as by our
master Christ and his Apostles) give evidence and proof, of the miracles of
this sacrament, since both these and the other, be of equal facility unto God,
and of equal dyfficultie unto nature. If we believe the one, why should not we
believe ye other, sith that God is auctour of al. Yet perhaps thou will say, the
other miracles were evidently seen, and so were these in the sacrament never.
Here unto I answer First that though our fathers did se ye other done before
their eyes, yet did not we se them, but we believe them because that the holy
scripture reports them to us, as of a truth to have been such done in deed.
Eue^ so, the holy gospel of Christ, reports to us the words of Christ (who
can not lie) which says: Math. 26.
This is my body. Wherefore we ought to believe these words, though we se not
the deed. Moreover I answer that the other miracles were wrought to persuade
faith and credyte, unto such as lacks faith, and therefore were they manifest
and evident, that the unfaithful might be edifyed, by the miracles openly
seen, unto such mysteries of our faith, that can not be seen, or apprehended by
reason. 1. Cor. 11.
As saint Paul says of the miracles of tongues, writing to the Corinthians.
The gift or miracle of tongues was given to edifye the unbeliever, but the gift
of understanding or interpretacion, was given to edifye the congregation of
the faithful. Even so I say, that the other were given, to edifye the
unfaithful. Augustinus de vera innocentia capi. 134. Visibile miraculu^ ad
illuminationem vocat, inuisibile autem, cum qui vocatus venit, illuminat.
But this Sacrament is not ordained to edifye the unbelievers, but is ordained
and instituted to increase, exercise, and to certify the true and faithful
beleuers of their unfeigned faith, and also for the comfort of the faithful
christen people.

Wherefore it is not necessary yt it should be myraculus openly. This miracle in
this Sacrament, is not wrought (as I have said) to persuade faith (as the other
were) but this does presuppose and require a constant faith. And (as S. Paul
says unto the Hebrews. Hebre. 11.
) Faith is of things that appear not and can not be seen, therefore are these
miracles wrought of God inuisiblye, that faith might (here in) have place, and
that all the wits and senses of man might be tried, subiugate and obedient
unto faith. Plainly if the faith of the thief on the right side of Christ,
were acceptable, (as in deed i^ was) that he (seeing Christ as a thief, in like
torment and pain with him) and yet believed that he was most myghtest king of
heaven and earth both God and man. Ioh. 2^. Christus dixit. Thome. Beati qui
no^ viderunt et crediderfit
I say, that the faith of them, is very acceptable, that constantly, (against
the course and guyse of nature) do believe in this holy sacrament, the word
and witness of Christ (which says.) This is my body.

For, from the thief upon the cross, was hyd only the Godhead or divinity of
Christ, but in this sacrament, unto us is hydden from our syghte, our
sensible feeling, tastynge and touching, both the dyuinitie and also the
humanity, that our faith might be so much the more acceptable, as it lacks
experience and trial, of that thing, that we obedientlye believe. For in this
sacrament, natural experience co^tendith openly against faith, and not only
reason, but also, all our senses are led captyue, against al natural
experience, unto the sole and only word of God. And that not in one miracle,
but in many, which are deprehended, only by constant faith. Wherefore no
wonder though the natural man, that wa^teth faith, and believes no more, then
flesh and blood (that is to say, natural reason or sense) reuelyth to him,
be offendyd (as the Caphernaites were) at this most myraculous and holy
sacrament, where in are wroughte, so many wondrous works of God. For first
in this holy sacrament the substance of bread and wine, Ciprianus de cena
d^mini. Panis iste coi^s in carnem et sanguinem mutatus, procurat vitam et
incrementum corporibus
by the admyrable power of gods mighty word, are converted (by
transubstantiacion) into the very body and blood of Christ, so that after
the consecration there remains, not the substance of bread or wine, nether
any other substance, save only the substance of the real and very body and
blood of Christ God and man.

Secondly the whole and perfect body, with all the lymmes and members are in
both the kinds, Ite^ Thomas aquinas citat hec Eusebii Niseni verba. No (...)
tibi and impossible esse non debet quod xp^i substa^tiam terre na et mortalia
conuertu^tur. hec ille in tertia sum. q. 75. articulo. 4
and in every portion of either of them as well a part, as together, and
consequently in every sensyble portion of either of the kinds, is the
parfecte body and whole blood of Christ, and is in so many places, as any
kind, or portion of this sacrament, is. Thyrdlye, Christ is immediatlye
present reallye in the sacrament, as soon as the words of consecration are
duelye spoken of the priest at mass, and that without any bodily passage,
through the clouds from heaven, and so to descend upon the altar.
Fourthlye, the qualities and the other accidenttall properties of bread,
remain in this sacrament, and yet there is not the substance of bread,
neither any other, save only the substance of Christ.

Ite^ Augustinus in libro sententiarum Prosperi dicit Nos in speciebus panis
vini quas videmus, res in visibiles.i. carnem et sanguine^ honeramus
Fyfthly the qualities of bread, are subsystant by them self myraculouslye with
out any stay or aid, of any substance (where in naturally they should be)
and that by the synguler power of God.

Syxtly God almyghtye gives myraculously unto these qualities and accidental
properties, power in all natural operations, and passions, as well as though the
substance of bread were there. And therefore does the consecrate host,
norysshe, augmente, when it is received, as well as though ye substance of
bread or wine were there. Ide^ Thomas in.4.5. 6 7. articulis.
Yea also, the consecrate host may be broken, it may be burnte, it may be
molded, as the very bread may. And yet is not there the substance of
bread, nether is the fraccion, the mouldnes, another the burning, executed or
done, in the body of Christ, for that is impassyble and can suffer no such
passions. But it is only the properties of bread, that is broken molded, or
burnt. These myraculus secrets and secreat miracles be (as I have said)
deprehe^ded only by faith, not only because, they surmounte and excede the
altitude and compass, of man's wit and reason, (as the other visible
miracles do.) But also they are directlye contrary unto our sensible
experiens. Wherefore they bring, no small doubt unto us, and specially unto
all such, that leans more unto their natural experiens, then they do unto
the infallible verite of gods word, which affirms nothing to be impossible
with God. Namely, Luce. 1.
when they presume to be curious serchers of the archane and secret works of
gods singular power, with the blind lantern and light of natural reason,
and calls impotent and blind nature to counsel, in the peculiar works of
God, appropriated only to his divine power, and excedyngly passing, the
prospecte and power, both of nature and man's natural wits.

For what can only nature show, or barren reason of man, see, or understand,
in that thing, that is out of the lymyttes and order of all nature
surmountynge incomperably all wit and reason of man. Save only, of a doubt
to collecte an error and out af an error, to fall into an heresye blasphemous.

For the presumpcion, of the carnal man that preaseth and contendeth by
natural reason, to compryse the inuestigable and incomprehensible wisdom of
god, in his myraculus works, he wrappyth and intricateth him self, in more
error, then other. For the more that he by reason, ransacketh and sercheth for
reason, in those things that passes reason, ye less reason he fyndeth, and
into the further doubt he falls and asks with the murmeryng Caphernaites.
How? Unto the which question, for as much as nature can make no answer, and
reason can not perceive neither understand, such as are void of faith (as
our Iewyshe and gross sacramentaries have well declared them self of late)
answers and concludes openly, such things to be impossible, and therefore
unworthy to be believed. But if that such slender faythed christians would, in
such inscrutable questions, leave fleshly judgment unto the carnal
Caphernaites, (for the flesh, Ioh. 6.
here in (as Christ says) avails nothing) and would counsel with the
spirit of God, which gives the lively and plain understanding of all
verytie, without doubt they should be induced, through out faith, into ye clear
and sincere verite, of these myraculous works in this most sacrate sacrament
and that according to the holy scriptures, the which in most manifest and
plain sentence approves, not only the verite of the real presence of the
body and blood of Christ, in the sacrament of the altar (as it shall be
largely declared in the next sermon) but also with a great number of miracles
(the monumentes of the power of God) declares and sets forth most
sufficiently unto a dilygent and a faithful reader, the possibilite of all
such wonderful miracles, that the Church catholyke believes and teaches to
be wrought in this holy sacrament, as I shall breuelye make manifest
declaration in this sermon.

And first as concerning the transubstanciation, Cipriande cena domini. Panis
iste, que^ dn^s discipulis porrigebat, no^ effigy, sed natura mutatus,
oi^potentia vervi, factus est raro.
wherein the mighty word of God, does of bread make the very substance of
the body of Christ, as every true christian is wholly persuaded and believes.
For all such believes it, to be little dyfficultie unto almyghtye God, (unto
whom there is nothing impossible) to create, to bring to naught, to make, to
destroy, to continue, to maintain, to alter, to change, how and when and
what he list. Wherefore they believe that it is not only possible, but very
facile and easy unto God omnipotent, of bread to make his very body, (...) of
wine to make his very blood. The which thing, may apere very apertlye, by the
works of nature, who (by her natyue power) alters bread (by masticatio^s,
decoction, Saint Ambrose also in the 5. book of his exameron the.23 chapter.
and digestions) into blood, and consequently into flesh, much more able is
almyghtye God, (which gave this power unto nature) by the infinite might, of
his power, of bread to make his very body, and that without intermeane
alterations, The wonderful change of the Phoenix of whom when she is dead,
there succedeth another, in this manner. Afterter that she has made her neest
of Genesis xix Myrre and Frank insense and with o-Ex. iiii. there sweet spices,
she therein dy-Exo. vii. eth, and of ye moystnes of her flesh there comes a
worm, yt which in co^tinua^ce grows unto the nature of a very Phenyx.
as mastication and digestion, the which nature must needs have, ear she can
alter and convert, one substance into an other. And like as nature does, with
her powers, change the substance of bread and wine, unto blood, and flesh,
with much more facility, does God, (by the power of his mighty word) of
bread (by tra^substanciation) makes his uery natural flesh, and of wine his
uery, and natural blood. This is made very credyble, if we remember with what
facility, God almyghtye altered and changed, the flesh of Lothis wife, into
the nature of salt, and there, of flesh made a salt stone. If we also
consider how wonderfully the rod of Aaron, was changed, into a very serpent,
and again, that serpente into the natural rod. How meruelously the waters of
Egypt were turned into very blood, and ye water, in Cana of Galile, turned
into very wine? And though al things be, of equal facilite unto God, yet ye
things in them self considered, one is of more facility then the other.
Because yt, there is more or less dystans, betwyxte their natures, and therefore
require they, the more or less alteration. Wherefore sithe yt we believe, that
God did change flesh into salt, and wood into a serpence, we shall a great
deal the rather believe, that he can of bread make his flesh, for there is
less distance between the nature of bread and flesh, then between the
natures of flesh and salt, or of flesh and wood. For nature can not alter,
flesh into salt, or wood into flesh, without (almost) innumerable mean
alterations, yet with very few, she alters bread, into the nature of
flesh. Wherefore then, should it not seem credible and possible, that the
mighty word of God, makes (by transubstanciation) of bread, his body, and
of wine, his very blood, sithe he works so wonderfully in nature, by many
mean alterations, and has wrought more unlikely things, without all mean
alterations, and above al natural course, as in ye admirable change, of Lothis
wit into salt, of the rod of Moses into a Serpente, the water of Egypt into
blood, the water in Cana into wine.

Except that we will show our selves to have less faith, then the devil
expresses unto Christ in deserte, when he offered him stones, to make thereof
bread For he, there believed, Math. 4.
that Christ (being the son of god) was able, to make of stones bread,
which is much more unlikely, then of bread to make flesh. Furthermore the
catholyke faith teaches and believes, Tho. Aq^. in su^ma q. 76. arti. 3.
Totus xp^s est sub part qua libet specie vl vini vel panis. Augustinus i^
sermon Singuli accipimus dn^m xp^m et in singulis portionibus ro^us est, no^
per singulas minuitur, sed in^egrum se prebet singulis.
that in this holy sacrament, is, not only the real body of our savior
christ, but also, there are all the dystyncte members and natural lymmes, as
perfectly, in every part or portion of the host severally, as in the whoole,
altogether. And this body is really there, where ever any consecrate host is,
or portion thereof. And therefore all the co^municantes or receauers thereof,
receive but one thing, and every man receaueth as much, as the whole
multitude. And again, as much is received in the least sensible portion, as is
received in i^numerable hoostes and no less, for Christ is whoole in the
whole, and in every portion thereof. This may we somewhat perceive, by the
natural example of the soul, which is in the hoole body, and yet is never the
less in all, and in every part of the body. For the soul is as well in the
little fyngar, as in the heart, or in the whole body, and there no more nether
any less, the^ in ye whole body, and no more in the whole body, then in the least part of the body, for the soul is al whole, in ye whole body, and all
whole in every part. But perhaps, he, that will be more curious, the^
faithful, will say. That the soul is a spiritual thing, but ye body of
Chrst is material. Yet let the same remember that ye body of Christ is now
glorified, A glass, or myrror broken, resembles and represents as many
faces, when it is looked in, as it has pieces, for in every piece we may se our
face, and while it is whole we se but one face.
and therefore also is it now a spiritual body, and has left the material
co^dycions, for it is deputyd and clarefyed from al material grossnes, and is
in much more noble estate and dignite, then is any other passyble body: for
as much the^ as the soul may be whole in the body and whole, and altogether,
in every part of the body, by gods work and institucion. Why should it seem
unto us impossible, that the glorefyed body of Christ, god and man, (by gods
synguler handy work) should be in ye whole, and in every part of the host,
and there also, where ever there is any consecrate host or sensible portion
thereof. And that really, after a supernatural and ineffable manner of being,
the which manner of being, is appropriate and peculiar, unto ye most precious
body only, given unto that body, by specyal prerogative, and to none other
body, either passible, either impassyble, neither unto angel, neither spirit,
as unto the body of God and man, and most excellent creature, and most
worthyest. And although that we can not bring forth, the like miracle in the
scriptures, for the confyrmacyon of the same, yet we shall bring some, as
far excydi^ge and above nature as this is. And first let us consider, how
incessauntly, swyftly and uniformly, the Son and Moon has their mocio^ by
nature, without ceassynge which is the vegetation and in manner the life of all
things, and there ceassyng, seems the dyssolution and corruption of al
things. Joshua. 10.
Yet at one word of Joshua (as gods pleasure was) the Son and the Moon
stood still ceasynge their natural mocions, and yet the inferior creatures
were preserved from dissolutio^ or unnatural alteration. More over how
mo^struous unto nature was it, that in the time of king Ezechie, 4. reg. 20.
2. par. 32. Esa. 38.
the Son should go back, (against her natural and perpetual course.x.
degrees. And how myraculous was it, that at the noone tide, Math. 28. Mat. 15.
Luce. 22.
(when Christ was upon the cross) the Moon should (against the uniformity
of her motion) come sodeinly out from the East into the southe, and so setting
her self, dyrectly between the earth and the Son, cause an unnatural and
an universal eclyps of the Son, Dionisius in epistola ad policarpum.
as saint Denyse says. For he (being in Egypt) did see, when the Moon with
wondrous celerite arose from the East, and entered between the Son and the
earth, causynge ye great Eclyps, which continued six hours. The monstrous
wonders, and myraculous works of God, showed in these incorrupt bodies above,
(that is to say the Son and Moon) are, as impossible and as incredible unto
nature, as is the myraculous being, of Christ's body in the sacrament.
Wherefore if we believe the one, let us then believe the other, for he that
wrought the one, has also wrought the other. Moreover, immediately after, yt
the words of consecration are duly spoken (by the priest) over the bread,
then, that which was bread before, is now the very body of Christ, which
takes his myraculous being in that glorious sacrament, not leuynge heaven,
and yet is really and verily in the sacrament. Now we must not grossly
ymagyne, that he should descend from heaven, passing corpulentlye or bodily
through the clouds, and so to enter and convey him self under the lykenes of
bread, or into the sacrament, and so to be there. Thomas Aq^i is in su^ma q.
75. arti. 7. Hec co^uersio fit virtute infinita cuius est subito operari.
But we must understand, and believe with the catholyke church, that in one
instaunt, and time vnperceaueable, he is present ineffablye, in that glorious
sacrament, without bodily motion out of heaven, and yet still remayninge in
heaven, is also, verily and really in the sacrament. As we may be taught, by
the spedye motion of the Son, which in time imperceptible spredeth her
beams, from the East unto the Weste ouerthwarte all the earth Even so
spedelye, is the natural body of Christ in the holy sacrament, and is not
let, by the great dystance, between heaven and earth. For the plain
demonstracion, of the possibility of this verite, we can ask no stronger or
more euidente example then the myraculous works, that Christ showed. even in
that very same body of his. First in an instaunt, and time imperceptable,
that precious and divine body, took perfect form, shape, and life, in the
virgineal womb. And yet with more miracle, that same blessed babe, was borne,
of his immaculate mother Marye, into this world, not vnloosinge the virgineal
gyrdel, or clausure, of her pure maidenhed.

Secondlye how soon and suddenly, was the ship at the shoore, when the
disciples, Ioh. 6.
would have received christ walking on the sea, (as saint John^ reports in
his syxte chapter) there we may perceive, how spedye and myraculous mocyon,
the ship, and also the body of Christ, had (yet being passible and
mortal.) How may we doubt then, Mathei Marci ^ltimo.
that this body, may be here suddenly, without any mean passage, or
corporally penetratyng the clouds, or other mean places, sithe that also the
same body slain, Angelus au^t dn^i descendit de celo and accedens reuoluit
lapide^.
and dead) did arise, the third day from death, and passed out, from the
grave of stone, covered; sealed and watched with soldyers, and that not
breaking the stone, neither vnsealyng neither uncovering, the grave. For we may
not think that the angel (yt descended from heaven and rolled ye stone) did
let out Christ. For certainly he was myraculusly risen ear ye angel apered.
And ye same day, the same body entered in, among the dysciples, where all the
doors were shut. Why should we think it, vnbeleueable or impossible then,
Ioh. 20.
that the same glorified body, should so sodeynlye be reallye and verallye
present, in the holy sacrament, sithe that we read and believe (by the holy
scripture) these myraculous mocions, of the very same body. Furthermore, the
faithful and catholyke cristiane ought, to retain as an article catholyke,
and as an ineffallible verity, (as the church of Christ teaches) that in
this most holy blessed sacrament, are the natural quantity, qualities,
and the other accydentary properties of bread, subsystant, or alone by the^
selves, myraculouslye, without any stay, or aid, of the substance of bread,
where in, they were before the consecration. For that substance is not there
(as we have said) neither any other substance is there, (where in these
accydentall propertes should be) save only the substance, of the body of
Christ, the which body, is not subject unto them, but they are subsistente,
with out the stay of any substance, by the might and omnipotent power of God.
Not wythstandynge, that the faithful are fully persuaded in this verite, and
with constant faith, ledeth captyue all their senses, unto the service of
Christ, in this miracle, and says with David, (against all reason) made to the
contrary. All things (what ever he would) God has wrought, Psalm. 134
both in heaven and in earth, Yet for lake of faith and true believe, of this
one article, many of weak faith do often staggar. And many of late days are
prostrate, and fallen flat down (which is to be lamented) in to detestable
du^geon of herises, for whiles they grossly stycke unto ye principles of
nature, considering, that nature has given unto bread and flesh, and unto
every substance, his dystincte and peculyar qua^tite, qualytes, as color,
figure, taste, with other accydentall properties, and where ever are found, all
such natural properties together, is naturally found the substance, whose
properties these are, such gross reasonars, finding also in this blessed
sacrament, al ye properties of bread, as coler, quantite figure, taste, with
all other, and on the other side, finding in the sacrament no manner of
property of flesh, they collecte and conclude that there is only the
substance of bread and not the body of Christ, of the which number Frythe
was one, as it aperethe in his book. This is the chief and only cause of their
error. But unto this argument, and unto al such carnal, and blasphemous
dyscussers and dysputers of the myraculous works of God I shall make answer
in the end of my third sermon. And though that this article seems, and is,
impossible and incredible by nature, yet shall I show it very credible and
possible, unto the power of God, and that by these examples, which al ready
are credyble. It is as an unnatural a thing that the Son (whose) chief and
most natural property is, to give light, being created for that purpose)
should, at the myddaye (having no interposition or let) give no manner of
light, but rather horrible and palpable darkness.

Yet the scripture teaches, that when God plaged Egypt, the space of three
days, the Son and the Moon gave no light unto the Egyptians, but there
remained Huge and horrible darkness for, by the mighty power of God, the
propertye of illuminacyon was with holden and suspended, not only, in the
Son, Moon, and Stars, but also in all other things that naturally should
have showed light, for neither candel, neither fire, gave them light, no more
then the fire of hell, gives light unto ye dampened spirits there. Forthermore
is it not the natural propertye of fire to bourne, to incynerate and bring to
ashes, Dani. 3.
all thing combustyble, sparynge none. And yet we read in Danyell, that when
ye.iii. young men (fast bound) were cast, in to the whote burning furnesse of
fire, there ye fire burnt a sonder their bonds, and burned not their bodies,
nether did it, any molestacyon unto them, but they walked up and down in the
myddest of the flammynge furnesse, as it had been in a fresshe cold dew.
Behold then. In Egypt ye son gives no light. In Caldey, the fire (an
element of most actiuitie) and yet it burns not. Like as in these myraculus
works of god, the natural propertes of things, were suspended against nature,
even so, in the holy sacrament, are the natural propertyes of bread and wine,
myraculously sustained, with out any sustentacyon of any substance either of
bread or wine, either of any other, for there is not the substance of bread,
neither any other, but only the substance of the natural body and blood of
Christ, which is under, and with, these properties of bread and wine, and yet
these propretyes are not in that (most impassible substance) and, precious
body. Moreover the faith catholyke affyrmeth, yt these accide^tarie
properties of bread, and wine (though there be not the substance of bread or
wine) yet have they (by the power of God) all the natural operacyons of bread,
and sustayneth all the natural passions of bread, and therefore these
propertes, Thomas Aq^nas Citas her gregorii verba. Species sacramentales sunt
^^aru^ rerum vocabula, q^ antea fue ru^^.sz. panis et vini. In su^ma q. 77.
^^i. primo.
do norysshe, they do replete, satisfye, they are broken, eaten, they are
dygestyd, they may be mouldye, burnt, and generally sustain al ye other
corruptions as though, ye very substance of bread were there. Therefore it is
not bread, yt is so broken, eaten, digested norisheth satisfyeth and repleieth,
and is burnt, moldy, or suffers any other corruptions, for there is no
substance of bread, (as I have said) neither, in the body of Christ, are
any of these accio^s or passions. For that body is impassible and can suffer
none such, but like as ye soul of man (which is spiritual) is neither burnt,
slain, neither corrupt, when the body (wherein the soul is) is burnt, slain,
or corrupted, even so all these accions and passions are in the accidentarye
properties of bread only, and the body of Christ, (which is verily under
those properties) suffers none of all those corruptible accions or passions.
Yet to convince the heresies and blasphemes (about this blessed sacrament)
there has been seen, very blood to issue out of an host consecrate, when it
has been violently stryke^ cut, or broken, and that by miracle.

Yet yt blood has not issued out of that i^passible body, but god almighty
has declared by that miracle, the presens of his blood. It is a very facile
and an easy thing unto the infinite power divine, to give unto the accidental
properties of bread, might, and power, to do al natural operations and
accio^s and to sustain all the passions, that very bread should. For the same
Lord God, gave power unto the dry wa^, or rode of Aaron, (without sap or
iuyse) in one night, Nume. 17.
to budde, to spring, and to bring forth leaves, flowers and almondes.

Therefore, like as god gave the natural accions of sap or iuyse unto a dry
staff or rod, even so he gives (by miracle (to the properties of bread, the
accions of very bread. Furthermore why should we maruayll, to se the
accidental properties of bread, eaten, broken, cut, burnt, or corrupted,
and yet the body of Christ under these qualyties, unharmed for nature
teachethe (almooste as much) in the soul of man, for when the body of man is
eaten, cut, broken or brunt, yet is the soul voyed and free from all those
passions, by cause it is impassible. So is also, the i^passible body of Christ
in this sacrament, free and void of all these passions, that are suffered in
the sacrament. Exodi. 3.
Like as the busshe (out of whom God spoke to Moses) was not perisshed,
though the fire were in it, and round a boute it, yet the bushe remained both
grene and fresh, the beutye thereof vnpayred, even so the body of Christ in
the sacrament, sustayneth no passions, that are wrought in ye properties of
bread, though that the body be really and verelly there. That omnipotent Lord
God gave power, Sara, Anna, Elizabeth. Maria matter xp^t
unto ye barre^, (above ye course of nature) to be with child, and unto a
virgin his mother, (which is much more myraculous) to bring forth a child,
she remaining maiden immaculate, and most pure virgin. What is more
unnatural, the^ out of the hard stony rock the water to gushe and flow, in
wonderful perle^ tie. Exo. 17.
Yet (at the touch of Moses rod) this was wrought (by God) that out of a
rock, issued an exceeding stream of water. Is yt not monstrous to see, the
great lo^pyshe gravity of yro^, Reg. 2.
to swymme. And yet so did the Axe, at Helyseus commandment, as we read in
the book of Kings. And like as these are unto nature monstruus and impossible,
and yet very easy and facile, unto the infinite power of the lord of nature,
even so it is incredible and impossible unto nature, that the properties
accidental, should stand and be subsistent without any substance, and yet to
be subject unto all passions, and to execute all natural actions of their
natural substance.

Yet unto gods omnipotent might, it is very possible and easy. We must not
then seek, the institution and order of nature, where ye auctour of nature
lysteth, myraculously to make transposition and alteration. And in such
alteration supernatural and divine works, the blind reason and fond fantysie
of man, should leave his presumptuous search and scrutacion, of the cause of
gods archaue works, and suffer faith to take place, subduynge all wit and
reason, unto gods mighty will and pleasure.

And not to be so curious and inquisitiue, how, or what ways, God may do
this or that. Neither in such myraculous works, to counsel nature, no more
then the most blessed and faithful fathers Patriarchs and prophets Whose
most excellent faith and credulity (in all things that God spoke unto them)
may be, a most perfect president and example unto us. The which faithful
fathers, (in the myraculous works and promises of god) consellyd not with
nature, neither serched neither skanned them, with blind reason But with most
humble and obedient faith they received them, constantlye beleuynge, that he
(that had spoken the word) was able also, to perform the same, unto whom
there is nothing impossible. For that thing (which nature can not) that can
the omnipotent power divine. Yea nature must give place, unto gods power. Did
Abram counsel with nature, how it might come to pass, that which God did
promise? No truly. For scripture says, that he reasoned not with nature,
(considering that he was aged and Sara baren. But was strong in faith, Romans
4.
(and gave glory unto God) beleuynge that he, was able to perform it, that
had made the promise. Did Moses reason with God, in the innumerable wonders,
and monstrous plages that God wroughte by his hand? No. But when he was
commanded, he deuyde the red wild Sea, with one stroke of his rod. How
redely believed this holy prophet, ye promise of God, when yt rayned Manna and
quayles, from heaven, to satisfye the glottonous and murmuryng Jews. The
valyant captain Joshua, set a part al natural power and reason, and (by
strong faith) divided ye ruff and stormious floode of Jordan, and by faith,
he did se, the sturdye and strong walls of Ieryco (with the only blaste of the
trompets) over thrown, he see also, the stones rain from heaven, upon his
enemies, and in his time he vanquyshed.xxxi. kings. What should I, or need I,
report any moo, of the innumerable wonders, that almighty god has wrought,
(by the hands of ye most faithful fathers the prophets) sithe that the
breuenes of a sermon, can not contain, so great a number of things. Except
that I would, of a quere make a just volume. Yet may I not pass over with
sylens, all the infinite number of miracles, yt our master Christ wrought
here. The which were a plain euydence and an euydent trial, of the
possibylitie of the miracles, that ye christia^e faith believes, God to work,
in the most holy sacrament of the altar.

How possible is it to him, of bread to make his body, sith yt he, (with five
loves and.ii. fyshes) fed.v. thousand. Why ca^ not he of wine, Ioh ^.
make his blood which of water made wine. Why should not he be hable to set,
the very presens of his own natural body, under the shape of bread, and yet
not seen of us, sith he made the same body inuysyble unto the Jews, John^. 8.
that would have stoned him, passing through the thyckest of them unseen, and
also showed, upon the mount of Thabor, Mat. 17.
the same passyble body, unto Peter, James, and Johan, in an heavenly shape,
and in a glorified form. How can it be impossyble unto Christ, to give
(against all natural phylosphye, unto accydental qualytes, perfect subsystens,
sithe he, (against al natural power) gave life to ye dead, sight to the blind
borne, heryng to the deaffe, and health, unto all incurable deseases. This
little nu^bre of miracles (most dear reader) that I have collected, out of the
most sacrate bible, are suffcyent to induce and led a christian heart, (in
whom is any spark of faith remaining, unto a believe and faith, of the
miracles and supernatural works of God, the which the catholyke faith has
ever believed, to be wroughte in this most sacrate sacrament, and to confess
faithfully, that the unmeasurable might of Gods power, infynytlye can do
more, then ye in fyrme and weak inbecilitie of nature can do. And the wisdom
of God, infinitely excedeth, the small and narrow compass and capacity, of
man's wit or reason. Wherefore faith is it, that makes these things credyble.
Esaye the prophet says Nisi credideritis non intelligetis. Esaias. 7.
Except you believe, you can not understand. Let us then, believe them, not only
possible, (lest we should derogate the infinite power of God) but also, to be
of a very truethe, so wrought of God. For this faith, has the catholyke
church of Christ retained, continually, from the apostles time, hitherto.
Also here unto, both the scriptures gives testymonye and wytnes, and also the
most ancient writers, most apertlye and evidently testifyeth the same, as
shall be manyfestlye declared in the next two sermons (by Gods adiutorye and
assystans.) To whom be immortal glory, power, raygne, and impyre world with
out end Amen.

HOC EST COR PVS MEVM, Math. 36 Marc. 14 Luce. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
This is my body.
Among many things, appertaynynge and concerning the sublimitie and dignite,
of this most venerable and holy sacrament, this makes not a little for the
worthynes, and the catholyke verity hereof. That there are more fygures, left
unto us written, under the law natural, and the law Moysaical (ye which
prefigured this blessed sacrament) the^ are of any of ye other sacraments. The
which figures (by the synguler wysedo^ of god) were preordeyned and set in use,
long before the institution of this holy sacrament, as a prea^ble, and an
introductio^, toward the coming of the more holy, and more perfect
sacrament, Three causes, why there were so many figures of the blessed sacrament.
and that for.iij. causes. The first is, that where, the wonderful excellency,
and manifold virtues of this blessed sacrament, could not be sufficiently
expressed, by one figure, it was, therefore necessary, that in many and so^dry
figures, they should be signified.

The second is, by cause that there be in this holy sacrament, many moo harder
things to be believed, then are in any of the other sacraments. Therefore the
high wisdom of god, of his merciful clemencye, has sent before, very many
fygures, to in structe ye stubburne and rude heart of man, toward ye faith and
believe of this most wonderful, and sacrate sacrament. The third cause is,
that where almyghtye God, by his fore knowledge, seeing a far of, ye great and
manyfolde assautes, that the devil (by his false preachers, and lewd prophets)
should make against the treuth, and verity, of this holy sacrament, he preparyd
therefore, that, by these (as by very propheties) the people, might be
stablyshed against the great number, of those detestable heresies, that
should be styrted up, by indurate Jews, and obstynate herytykes, against the
true and catholyke faith, of this most sacrate, and venerable sacrament. For
whiles we, se, and read (in the holy scryptures) so many fygures, of this holy
sacrament, we are led, and trained to the believe of the very thing it self,
which must needs excel these figures, as the body does ye shadow, and the
verytie ye figure. Wherefore this is, as manifest, as the son, yt they swerue
clean out of ye way of the faith of Christ, yt say, or beleaue, that in this
sacrament, is not yt very body of Christ, but (as it were) in a figure: For
so should not, the verytie excel the figure, and Manna, should be as good as ye
sacrament of thaluter. The red sea, as good as baptysme. Thus should we
equal the synagoge, with the church of Christ. For the body of Christ was in
Manna, as in ye figure, and baptism in ye red sea, as in ye figure. But
certainly the fygures are passyd and abolyshed, and their verites are
substituted, and set in their place. Except yt we will (I say) make equal,
(and not rather prefer) the sacraments of Christ's church, above ye
fyguratyue sacrifices, of Moses sinagoge, as ye erroneous germanians does. But
against ye error, I will set saint Paul, who, writing unto ye Hebrews,
puts an euydent discriminacyon and differens (in few words) between the
old figurative sacrifices of ye sinagoge and the effectual sacraments of
Christ's church, sayng. Heb. 10.
The law having ye shadow, of ye good things to come and not ye very image
or fashyo^, of ye things the^ self: Here saint Paul says, yt the sinagoge
had nothing but ye only shadow, and not ye very image of ye good things. But
ye church of christ, has ye good things, in their own fasshyon. By ye which
good things, paul meant not, only ye effusio^ of Christ's blood (yt one most
perfect sacrifice) but also, all the other holy sacraments, ye which, in ye
virtue of that sacryfice, works ye remission of sins, or conferryth grace,
and the benyfyttes of god unto us. These saint Paul calls the good things
to come. Also, upon this text of saint Paul unto the corinthia^s. 1. Cor. 10.
Al these things hapened unto them in a figure. The golden and eloquent mouth
Crysostome, Crisostomus in primam Pauli, epi^tola^ ad Cyrinthi.
says, yt we readinge how seuerly and regorously, god has punyshed, the
abusers of the fygures, should stand in fear, of a greatter plage and
punyshme^t, if we mysuse ye verities, as those, yt have received, ye greatter
and more excellent gifts and benifities. It appears most clearelye, by
these words of Crisostome, yt ye sinagoge had only ye barren figures, (which
are now abolyshed) and the spouse of Christ, ye catholyke church, possesses
the verities. In this matter, Origenes 7. homilia super numeros.
also with us Origene records, upon ye book of numbers, sayng Moses and his
were baptized in ye red sea, ye figure of baptysme, but we chrystya^s are
baptized in ye water and spirit, ye verite of ye figure. The israellites dronk
of ye water, yt the rock and stone did minister myraculously, unto the^, but
we receive ye water of eternal life which gusshed out of the side of Christ:
as out of ye meritorious welhead, the very true chosen corner stone. The Jews
were fed with angelical Ma^na, Ioh. 1.
the figure of Chrstes body, but the church of Christ has his very body in
the sacrament of ye altar. For as saint Ioh. says. The law was given by
Moses (the which law had only the shadow of the good things that should
follow) but grace and verite by Jesus Christ. The which was aminister and the
intercessor of the new testament, as Moses was of the old law. Wherefore the
sacraments, which were instituted by Christ, are so much more worthy and
excellent, as ye ministry of Christ, excels ye mynisterie of Moses: and
as ye gospel (which is ye clear light and open verite) does excel ye
mosaycall law, which was but in manner of a shadow prefiguratyue, of the
verities to come. Under ye typical or fyguratyue law, the carnal and gross
Jews were taught and led, by shadows and fygures, toward christ, but in ye
spiritual law of ye holy gospel, ye veil is taken a way, ye shadows and
figures are al passed, and ye verities are set in place Such is ye perfection
of christis church, above ye sinagoge of moises That ye excelle^ce and verity
of this blessed sacrament, might somewhat be, more manifest and credible, I
purpose (among many fygures, that prefigured this excellent sacrament, long
time before the institution hereof) to recite.iii. or four of them, that these
fygures might show them selves, to argue and prove some verity, to be
correspondent unto their signification. And whiles I show, their signification
to be fulfillyd and accomplished, in this most venerable sacrament, as in
their verity, it may soon apere most evidently, that this holy sacrament,
is not only a figure, but rather contains the verytie it self, Genes. 14
signified by these fygures. The first is, (which we read in Genesis) the
oblation of Melchisedech, under ye law of nature. This Melchisedech, the pressed
of the Highest, offered bread and wine, as the scripture says. This oblation
of bread and wine, was an evident and a manifest figure, of the oblatio^, that
our savior Christ made, upon mau^dy thursdaye. among his apostles, when he
gave unto them, his very body and blood in ye blessed sacrament, under ye
kinds of bread and wine. For we read not, that he made any other offering,
in bread and wine, where in he should answer so expressly, unto the oblation
of Melchisedech, as he did in that. The holy prophet David sygnified no less
unto us. And in manifest words declared, that the preesthode of Melchisedech
prefigured, the perpetual presthode of Christ, saying, in the person of God
the father, unto Christ his eternal son. Psalm. 109.
Thou art a pressed for ever, after the order of Melchisedech. And the very same
saying of David, (for the same purpose) is alleged also, of the holy apostle s.
Paul, in the epistle unto ye Hebrews. Hebre. 7.
Where he, (dysputynge with ye Jews, for the excellent perfection and dignity
of Christ's Presthode, above the Aaronical and Leuitical presthode) says, in
this manner. This priest, (meaning Christ) after the order of Melchisedech,
remains a priest for ever. Sygnifying, that the preesthode of Christ was
perpetual, which was so prefygured by the presthode of Melchisedech. By these
words of the prophet David, and of saint Paul, it is manifest, that ye
preesthode of Melchisedech prefygured the preesthode of Christ. And for as
much, as the office of preesthode consysteth, in offering unto God oblations
and sacrifices, (as saint Paul is wytnes.) Every bishop, Hebre. 8.
taken from among men, is ordined to offer gifts and sacrifices, it is
necessary, that Christ have, some oblation or sacrifyce to offer, the which
oblation or sacrifice was prefigured also, by the oblation of Melchisedech,
sith he is a priest after that order. And for as much as, there is none other
oblacyon (where in he answers unto ye sacrifice of Melchisedech) save only,
ye sacrifice of his body and blood, in ye form of bread and wine, ye which is
ye venerable sacrament. The^ it follows right well, that the offryng of
Melchisedech, was a very evident figure of the holy sacrament. And where, a
subtyl and a crafty Caphernaite might judge, this argument to be of no force
or strength, because he will think, that I have reasoned, upon a false ground.

For where I said, that there was none other sacrifyce, that answered to the
fyguratyue sacryfice of Melchisedech, Leui. 16. Hebre. 10.
save only the sacrifice, of Christ's body and blood in the forms of bread
and wine. This, (will he say) is very false. For the body and blood of Christ,
(which was the end of al figuratyue sacryfyces) offered upon the cross, by
death and passion, were prefygured and were the verity of ye tipical oblacio^
of Melchisedech. But to this I answer, and plainly say, ye, Christ, in ye
oblatio^ made upon the cross, by the effusion of his precious blood, fulfilled
rather ye bloody sacryfices of the old law, which were ye effusyo^ of
beasts blood, and in ye crewel slaughter of calves and gootes (offered up
yearly in the feast of expiacyon) was very evidently prefygured Christ's
sacrifice upon ye cross and that much more plainly, then cold the offrynge of
bread and wine by Melchisedech. And thus there is no more reason, why Christ
(by this sacryfice) should be called a priest according to the order of
Melchisedech, then after the order of Aaron. Yeas certainly, (will he say) for
saint Paul shows reason why. For in yt he was king of sale^, (yt is to say
of peace) he figured Christ, Hebre. 8.
our only peace maker. Again like as melchisedech had neither father neither
mother, beginning neither endyng, (expressed in scripture), is likened (as
saint Paul says) unto the sone of god, which remains for ever. Eue^ so
Christ, (as concerning his godhed) has no beginning neither endyng, but
remains for ever. For these causes (says he) he was called a priest after ye
order of melchisedech. But I beseech ye (dilligent reader) expe^d and way well ye
words of David, whereupon ye dysputacio^ of saint Paul is grounded, there by
thou shall perceive, yt the simylitude and comparisio^ between Melchisedech and
Christ (as between the figure and the verity) lies not only in these
points, that Melchisedech was king of Salem, and had no beginning neither
ending and so seems to be everlasting, for Melchisedech fygured Christ, not
only in that he was king of salem (that is to say of peace) and in that he was
eternal, but he fygured also, the preesthode of Christ. And this may plainly
apere, by the words of David. For he said not only. Thou art everlasting or
eternal, according unto the order of Melchisedech, but he said.

Thou art a Preeste for ever, according unto the order of melchisedech. The
appostle Paul, in that place, in tends to prove, the cessacion and
necessary translation, both of the law, and of the leuity call presthod, in
to the new eua^gelycal and perpetual preesthod, according to the order of
melchistedech. Certainly it appertains nothing, unto the presthode, of
Melchisedech, to be king of Salem, either to have, neither father or mother,
neither beginning neither endyng.

For it folowyth not. By cause ye Melchisedech was king of Salem, and had,
neither father or mother, neither begynnyg neither ending, therefore he was a
priest. Wherefore, in these things, Melchisedech fygured the perpetuite and
eternite of Christ's person, who has, neither beginning neither ending (as
concerning his diuynitie) rather, then the preisthode of Christ, and therefore
saint Paul says, these express words. He is compared unto ye son of God,
Hebre. 7.
sygnifying the divinity of Christ, which is eternal. And thus saint Paul
proves Christ to be eternally a priest according to the order of
Melchisedech, and yt this preesthod should not be for a time, as the other
leuiticall preesthod was, but should remain for ever. But here saint Paul
left out, the declaracio^, how the sacrifice of Melchisedech, prefigured the
sacrifice of christ, which cheflye appertains, unto the preesthod of Christ.
The cause hereof, he shows in ye fyft chaptur of this epistle, where he
declares, Hebre 5.
how Christ was promised of god, to be a priest according to ye order of
Melchisedech of who^ (says he) we have many things to say, which are hard
to be uttered, by cause ye are dull of hearing. For where, (as concerning the
time) ye ought to be teachers, yet have you need again, that we teach you,
the first precepts of ye word of God, and are become such, as have neade of
milk and not strong meat, for every one, yt is fed yet with milk, is imperfect
in ye word of ryghtwysnes, for he is but a babe. But strong meat, belongs
unto them, yt are perfect, which through custom, have their wits excercysed
to judge, both good and evil.

By cause (therefore) that the hebrews were weak in faith, and lacked
excercised wits, the apostle Paul let pass and would not entreat so high
and hard a mystery, among such baby she people. And for this cause, the holy
apostle thought it sufficient for the purpose, in that place to prove, the
preesthode of Christ perpetual, by the prophecy of David, and though it also
convenient, among such lewd and ignorant people, to leave the declaration,
of so high a matter. For undoubtedly, like as Melchisedech, having no
beginning neither ending, fygured Christ's eternity (whereof thappostle
entreated) even so did he also, prefigure Chrestes preesthode in his figurative
sacrifice of bread and wine, of the which thapostle spoke no thing, because of
the weakness of their capacity and the hardness of so high and matter. And yet
certainly, Christ fulfilled the fyguratiue sacrifice of Melchisedech upon
mau^dye thursday, when he (eating the paschall la^be with his disciples) made
an end, both of ye pass over and preesthode, and set in place the perfect
sacrifice of his body and blood in the forms of bread and wine, and the
perpetual preesthode, according to the order of Melchisedech. And as Christ,
in this, vncrewell sacrifice; fulfilled the figurative sacrifice of
Melchisedech, even so, in the sacrifice (that he made, by the crewell effusion
of his blood (upon the cross) he fulfilled, all the bloody sacrifices of the
Mosaical law, and thus was one Christ, the end of all fygures, and his
sacrifice, the end and verity of all fyguratiue sacrifices. Wherefore I
conclude, that Melchisedech offered bread and wine (the figure) of Christ's
body and blood, and Christ (in his supper instituted and offered, his very body
and blood, in form of bread and wine, ye sacrifice yt the church of christ
retayneth, and offers for ever, according to the order of Melchisedech. The
second figure is, Exodi. 12.
yt (which we read of in Exodo) the Paschal lamb, whom god did give in
commandment unto Moises, to be offered, of all the people, and that yearly, in
memory and remembrance, of the most happy, and myraculous deliuerye, from
the fearful plage of god, when the a^gel of god, went through al. Egypt by
night, sleyng the first begotten, both of man and beast, where god mercyfully
delivered the people of Israel, from yt horible plage. And as ye eskape fygured
our most blessed delyuery, (by ye death of Christ) from the spiritual Pharao,
ye deuel, sin, death, and hell. In like sort also, the paschal la^be (offered
yearly) did figure and sygnifie, the very true and innocent lamb Christ,
Ioh. 2.
ye takes away the sins of ye world, who was ones offered by death and
passion, and there by delivered he, us christianes, from the tyranny of the
dyuell, sin, death and hell. And in memory of this our most blessed
delyuery, the same Christ is offered vncrewelly (in the blessed sacrament)
yearly and daily, for the true and faithful christian people, as their
Paschal lamb (as saint Paul witnesses unto the Corinthia^s). 1. Cor. 5.
Christ is offered up for our passover or paschall Lamb. Ieronimus super
Mat. 26 ait. Fine^ carnali ce^^nitati volens impouere, vmbraque ^ra^scunie
pasc^^e read re veritatem, dixit. Desiderio desidera^^ hoc pascha ma^^ucare
vovis cu^ anteque patiar, eten^m pascha n^^um immola^us est xp^s, si tamen
co^medimus illud in azi mis sinceritatis et veritatis.
Wherefore our savior Christ, (who came to fulfill and make perfect the
law,) after that, he had eaten (with his disciples) the figurative lamb,
(according to the prescript of Moses law) eft soon after the washing of
their feet, at the same supper, he instituted this holy sacrament. And there
in, he signified, that the Paschal lamb of Moses: there took an end, and the
more perfect sacrament, was set in place, the figure was abolyshed, for the
verity was come. And therefore saint Paul remembrynge the excellent dignity,
and worthynes, of this blessed sacrament, exhorts diligently the Corinthians,
to the condign and worthy eating and receyuynge of the same, And says.
That it should not be eaten, either received, with the old leaven, neither with
the leaven of malice, neither with the leaven of wycke ones. That is to say, in
obstinate Iewyshnes or froward heresy, neither with wicked mind, or vnpure
life.

But with sweet flower of synceritie and verity. That is, with sincere faith
and catholyke verity, with godly life and pure mind. The third figure, Exo.
16.
is Manna, of whom we read in Exodo, that God therewith fed, the people in
desert fortye years. This Manna resembled the blessed sacrament, and that,
Sapt. 16. Panem de celo prestit^sti eis sine labor, oe^ delectamentu^ in se
habentem. etc. Iero. super Malachi. Number. 21. Locutus est populus co^tra dn^m.
ai^a nt^a. etc Exodus 16. Nec amplius q^ a^plius parauerat, nec minus q^ minus.
in many things. First this manna contained and had the delitiusnes and taist
of al manner of delicate meat, and sauerered (unto the good people) most
pleasa^tlye according unto their desire, and appetyte. Even so this, blessed
sacrament contains (as saint Jerome says) the virtue and power, of al other
sacrifices, and the abundaunt plenty, of all grace and virtue. Secondly, this
(which was sweet and delicate meat, unto the good) was also loathsome and
unsavory unto the bad and wicked people. In like manner, this blessed bread
(which is life unto the good people,) unto ye wicked people, and obstinate
heritikes, it is loathsome and unsavory, and unto the^ it is nothing but bread,
yea it is present death, unto the unworthy receivers. Thirdly, this manna was
measured equally by miracle unto every man. For every one had, no less neither
any more, then one gomer, gathered he never so little, or never so much, and
this gomer was sufficient for every man. In like sort it is; in receiving of
this blessed sacrament. For he that receives innumerable hoostes, receives no
more; then he yt receives, the least host. Neither he receives less, yt
receives the least portion, the^ he does, yt receives innumerable. For all
and every one, receives the whole body and blood of Christ god and man.
Fourthly this ma^na ceased and fell not down, on the sabbath day, neither
after yt they had eaten, of ye fruits of the land of promise. Joshua. 5.
In like manner, when we come unto the kyngdo^e of heaven (which is our land of
promise) and have made holy day in ye blessed rest, from out of this barren
desert, then shall this blessed sacrament cease. For there we shall se openly,
ye blessed body, eue^ as he is. Fyfthly, like as there were of the people, many
wicked persons yt did eat of this ma^na, and died both bodily and ghost lie.
(As Christ said). Your fathers eat ma^na in the desert and they are dead.
Eue^ so, Ioh. 6.
as many as do receive this blessed sacrament unworthily (as S. Paul records)
they eat and drink their own judgment. 1. Cori. 11.
These things were sufficient, to prove this Manna to be a figure, of this
blessed sacrament, save that, our master Christ also, in the syxt of John^,
lays them both together, and says. Moses gave you not, Ioh. 6.
ye true very bread from heaven, but my father gives you, the very or true
bread, from heaven. For I am ye bread of life, yt gives life to the world. And
in the same chapter. And the bread, that I will give it is my flesh, yt I will
give for the life of ye world. Here we have, yt Moses gave not ye very bread,
but only ye figure But the father and christ, gives the very true bread of
life. The father gave this bread, in the shape of ma^hed, and christ gave the
same very bread of life, under the shape of bread and wine. Exodi. 26.
The fourth figure was, the show bread of the temple, this figured also, this
blessed sacrament in this. That like as it was not lawful for the unclean, to
eat of that, no more is it lawful (without great danger) to eat of this
blessed sacrament, with unclean soul, or corrupt conscience. This bread was
always standing warm, upon the altar in the temple. Even so, this glorious
sacrament, is reserved always ready (by the in fynte charytye, of Christ our
savior) upon the altar to be received in our vrgente necessytyes. Here unto
appertains ye bread, 3. Reg. 19.
that the angel brought unto Elyas, which was a very figure, of this blessed
sacrament. And in this, it bears ye figure. That like as Elyas eating that
bread, walked in the strength hereof, fortye days with out any other food,
until he came unto the hyl of God called Oreb. So does the holy sacrament (as
our viatycall and wayfarynge vytaill) strength us, until we come unto, the
high hill of heaven, the mountain of perpetual felicyte. Thus did the holy
ghost signify, to the former fathers of the old law, the excellent dignity
of this most blessed sacrament, and that by these (and many other) a
dumbracyons and figures. And by diverse and so^drie figures, did signify,
sondrye and diverse things herein. As in the sacryfice of bread and wine of
Melchisedech, was fygured, the kinds, or outward apparens of this blessed
sacrament, which bearyth ye shape of bread and wine. In the paschal lamb, was
figured, the very substance, that is contained in the sacrament, which is ye
substance of Jesus Christ, ye very lamb of God, that takes away the sins
of the world. And in the Manna, which was excedyng delectable and sweet, was
figured the ineffable swetnes and suauitie, that the soul (of the worthy
receyuer) takes, by the blessed presens of Christ, the fountain of al goostly
swetnes. In the bread, (ministered by the angel) unto Elias, was figured, the
end and effect of this blessed sacrament, which is, to strength us, in the
tedyus pylgrimage and iurney, of this present and troble some life, until we
be brought unto the hye hill of everlasting bless.

After the fygures, we will subnect and join here unto, the testymonies of the
scriptures. That where (in the former sermon) we have proved the verities of
this sacrament, possible, by the examples of holy scripture. And also now, we
have showed ye same, to be lykelye, by the fygures in the scripture, it is
necessary, that we do prove that same possible and lykely thing, to be so in
very deed, by the scryptures. And this will we do, by gods merciful
adiutorie and help. First we take to witness, the prophitycal sayng, of pacient
Job, written in the thyrtye and one chaptre.

The men of my house said. Who can give us of his flesh yt we might be
satysfied. The which authority, Job. 31.
though Ecolampadius derydeth and laugheth to scorn, the allegacyon hereof,
for this matter. Yet I think yt it makes very evidently for this purpose. And
by cause that holy Crisostome recityth it, as a plain and an euyde^t
testimony, in this matter, we, (leauyng the erronyus judgment of an herityke)
will follow the sinceare judgment of an holy catholyke and excellent doctor,
who shall declare, how much, this place of Job, makes for this verity.
Crisosto^e writing upon the gospel of saint Ioha^, and entreatynge of this
blessed sacrament, says. Crysosto. supper Ihe^m Home. 45
One body we are with him, and members of his flesh and bones, wherefore,
such as ben instructed in his precepts or comau^deme^tes, ought to obey, That
we might be turned and converted, in to his flesh, not only by love, but in
very deed. This same is done and brought to pass, through out the meat, yt we
do eat, yt he has given us. And by cause yt he would extend and set forth, his
exceeding great love toward us, by his body he has mengled him self with us,
and has made and browght all in to one with us, that ye body might be made one,
with the head. For that is the special property of iouers. And this same thing,
did holy Job signyfie, by his servants, which loved him very intyrelye, and
these servants, willing to express, there vehemente and ardente love
toward him said. Who can give us, of his flesh that we might be satysfyed.
The which request, Christ has performed. For, by cause yt he would bind us
with more arde^t and vehement love, unto him self, and because he would show his
most lovely desire toward us, he has, suffered him self, not only to be sen
(of such that longs after him) but also, to be towched to be eaten, and also,
there teth to be set in to his flesh, yt they al might be satisfied with the
desire or love of him. By these words of Crisostome we may redely perceive
that, these words of Job, were a very prophicie, of ye blessed sacrament. The
which prophicye Christ has fullfyllyd, in that he has fulfilled this request
of Iobes servants, sufferyng and permyttyng us, his servants, to be satisfied
of his flesh, not by faith only, but as Crysostome says, in that we eat and
set our teath in to his flesh. Next unto Job I place the prophet Malachie,
who, after that he had rebuked (in the voice of God) the old ieweshe
sacrafyces, and auaricie, as well of the prestes as of the people, showing
them how, they had poluted the name of God, in that they had offered, poluted
bread, upon the altar of God, said. Mala. 1.
I have no mind or will toward you, nether will I receive any offering at your
hands, from the east unto the weast, my name is great among ye heathen. And in
every place, a clean and pure sacrifi ce or oblatio^ is sacrificed and offered
unto my name, for my name is great among the heathen, says our lord of
hoostes. This sacryfice, that the prophet speaks of in this place, can be
none other, then ye blessed sacrifice of the altar. For there is no man
(being of mean learning and judgment) that will understand it, of any of
the sacryfices of the old law of Moses. But rather will understand it thus.
That the holy prophet prophicied the end, of all the imperfect carnal
sacrifices, of the leuiticall law, and the institucyon, of one most perfect
and holy sacrifice, of the body and blood of Christ. But here a subtyl
sacrame^tarie will say, that this prophecy ought to be understand, of ye
oblacyon only, that was made upon the cross. But this manner of understanding,
will not stand with the verity of the letter. For that oblacyo^ made on the
cross, was offered but in one place only, and that was, upon the mount of
caluarie But the sacrifice, that ye prophet speaks of here, (as he says,)
should be offered and sacrificed, in every place, sygnifyenge (with out doubt) ye
sacrifice of the altar, sacrificed every where in the church of Christ,
which is the very body and blood of Christ. Now, by cause that Christ should
seclude, and abrogate, the old and imperfect sacrifyces of the leuitical law,
and should set, one most purest, perfect and sempiternall sacrifice of his
body and blood, in place, as ye end and perfection, of the former sacrifices,
therefore the prophet called the blessed sacrament, a pure and a clean
sacrifyce offered in every place unto his name.

Certainly this could not be, so pure and clean a sacrifice, that it should be
preferred, and set in place, of all the other mosaicall sacrifices, if it were
nothing else, then bare bread. For the devout fatheres of the old testament,
did offer up as pure and as clean bread, and as devoutly, as we do. And then
also should ye bread of proposition, in the mosaycall temple, have been as
clean and as pure a sacrifice, as is the sacrament. If it were so, the^ what
neadeth the exchang and permutacyon. Wherefore, we must needs understand in
this sacrifice the presens of the blessed, most pure and immaculate body and
blood of Christ sacryfised and offered up, in the blessed sacrament, unto the
name of god every where. But yet a craftye herytike will understand, (or
rather wreast) this prophecye, unto the oblacyon or sacrifice of faith, of
prayer, and of al other godli deeds. That can not be so, after Luthers opinion,
for all our good deeds (with him) are sinful, which is a detestable heresye,
wherefore (diligent reader) remember well yt ye prophet (in these his words)
does promise here, that a sacrifice should come, that should succeed in the
place, of the old mosaical sacrifices (whom he rebuked as unclean) but ye
sacrifice, cannot be faith, prayer, eather, such other good deeds. For these
were not ordained to take the place of ye old sacrifices, for these were under
ye old law and sacrifices who doubts, but yt, the old faithful fathers,
offered up busily, most perfect faith, most deuote prayers, and godly deeds
innumerable. wherefore it is manifest, that this prophecy was spoken and meant
of the blessed sacrament, which if it were but only bread (as I have said)
it cold not be the pure and clean sacrifice yt the prophet promyseth here.
Because therefore, yt it co^tayneth ye very immaculate and pure body and blood
of Christ, therefore it is ye pure and clean sacrifice which is offered i^
every place, because ye name of Christ, is great among ye heathen. Yet least,
our obstinate adversaries might say, yt these auctorites of scripture be to
far fet, to give any evident proof, of ye real presens, of ye body of Christ,
in ye holy sacrament* we will therefore, bring in, to confirm, and ratify this
verytie, more euyde^t and more playner testymonies of ye scripture. And we call
first to record with us, ye words of ye promise, yt our savior Christ, had unto
his disciples, written in ye sixth of saint Johan, where christ, most plainly
made this promise. Ioh. 6.
And ye bread (says he) yt I will give, it is my flesh, for ye life of ye
world. And in ye same chap My flesh (says he) is verily meat, and my blod is
verily dri^ke. But ye i^uincible strength of this place of scripture, ye great
crafty and subtle wit, of herytikes, would feign escape, by a false gloss,
(rather by an openly and manifest lie) sayng, yt our master christ me^t
nothing in these words of ye blessed sacrament. Where, I would ye christane
reader should well way and consider diligently (for ye true intellection of this
place) how this place of the scripture has been understood, of the church
of Christ, (who is only ye true interpreter of the scryptures) and not, to give
credens, to rashely, unto the erronyus expositours and very corruptures of ye
scriptures, as are al such Iewyshe Caphernaites, and obstinate sacramentaries,
which are void of the truth, lackyng the spirit of Christ, by cause that
they are separated, from the church by their detestable herysies. But rather,
leave unto the exposition, and understanding, of ye catholic church of ye
lyui^g god which is (as saint Paul says) 1. Tim. 3.
ye pyller and ground of verity and truth. How the church has understand
it, from the beginning, we shall soue gather and perceive, by ye au^cie^t
catholyke writers, and interpretours. Who wryt, in their time, not contrary
unto the church, but as the holy ghost instructed them, specially, Clemens in
libro 10. recogn^. Ad Iaco. fratre^ dn^i Oportet, ab eo intelligentiam discere
scriptutaru^, qui eam a maioribus, secundum veritatem sibi traditam, etnat.
in so weyghtye a matter. And we may be sure, that the church has always,
the true understanding of the scripture, for as much it is always governed, by
the spirit of verity. Wherefore the expositions of such catholyke and
ancient writers, are to be thought, of much more truth, then are the false
and new fangled expositions, of those that (with their gaye gloses)
confounds the text, and swarueth from the whole church of Christ. The
ancient writers, uniformly does understand this place of saint John^, to be
meant of the blessed sacrament, as you shall see (that lysteth to read, and can
judge) in their works. And for the trial hereof, I shall recyte here some of
the most ancient of them. Origenes super numeru^. Homilia. 7.
Origene writing upon the numbers, allegeth the same text of S, Ioh.
understanding it, of the holy sacrament, whose words be these. Those things
that were done before, were done obscurelye, but now are they, in their own
nature and verity accomplished, before baptism was obscurely, in the cloud
and in the sea, but now the generation is, in the own nature, in water and the
holy ghost. Then was the meat obscurely i^ ma^na, but now it is in ye own
nature, and the flesh of the sempiternall word of God, is very meat
according as Christ said. My flesh is verily meat and my blood is verily
drink. Crisostome also says upon the.vi. of s. John^, in this wise. Ioh. 6.
Crisost^^e in Iohe^z.
Christ (says he) in these words. I am the bread of life, spoke of the
bread of his divinity or Godhed, but by and by he will entreat of the
mysteries (sygnifinge the sacrament, for so does Criosostome call it) Yet. First
he here disputith of his divinity, sayng. I am the bread of life. For this
was not spoken of that body, of whom about the end of this chapter, he
speaks of, sayng. And ye bread, that I will give, it is my flesh. For ye
diuini^ie of him, was bread because it was god the word (or the second person
in trinitye) even as this bread is made by (coming thereunto of the holy
ghost,) the celestial bread. Now be hold (good reader) how diligently and
apertly, Criosostome makes distinction and puttyth differe^s between the
words, that were spoken, of the divinity of Christ, and the words, that
Christ spoke, appertayning-vnto his body under the mystery of ye holy
sacrament. And says, that from these words (in the syxt of saint John^, And
the bread that I will give it is. etc. and so unto ye end of the chaptre,
Christ speaks of ye blessed sacrament. Now where our perverse herytikes
denies, that any word, in this chapter, apperteynyth, or was meant of the
sacrament, they have here Crisostome (an ancient writer) there adversary, who
expo^dith the latter part of this chapter, understanding it, of the blessed
sacrament.

Cyrillus in Iohe^z.
Cyrill upon saint John^ declaryng the vi. chap. vnderstandyth it also of ye
blessed sacrament, whom he names, ye mystical benedictyon, and says, upon
thse words of Christ. Except you eat ye flesh of ye son of man, and drink
his blood, you shall have no life in you. And how he will give (says Cyrill)
his flesh to be eaten, he teachith them not, for they cold not perceive yet,
how great benefits they should obtain, if they eat it in faith. He
declares ones or twyse, that by the love and desire of eternal life, they
might be forced unto faith, whereby they might be the easelyer and sooner
taught. For thus says, Esaie the prophet. If you will not believe, you shall not
understand. Wherefore it was neccesarye first to radicate faith, in the mind,
and the^ to ask the things that a man ought to seek and inquire. But they,
before they believed, inquired and asked importunely. For this cause our Lord
(how it should come to pass) did not declare, but exhorted the^ to enquire it
by faith But when his disciples had firm faith then he brake bread, and gave
them saying. Take, and eat, this is my body, the cup also, he gave about
saying. Drink of this al, this is the cup of my blood, that shall be shede in
remission of sins. Now thou perceauist, that he declared not, ye difficulty
of the mystery unto them, askyng without faith.

But when they had faith, he declared unto them without askyng. These are
Civil words. Saint Cipriane, Ciprianus super orationem dominicam.
the martyr, expou^ding the pater noster, upon this peticio^. Give us this day,
our daily bread, says, Christ, whose body we do touch, is our cottidiane
bread, this bread, we do desire, to be given to us, every day, lest we, yt are
in ye church and, do receive often times, ye holy sacrament of ye altar, for ye
bread of our health, by any great, or notorius crime abstaini^g and separated
from ye celestial bread, should be separated from ye bodi of christ, (he
preachi^ge and warning us him self). I am ye bread of life, yt came from
heaven, if any eat of this, he shall live ever. The bread that I will give, it
is my flesh, for the life of the world. Then where he says that he shall live
ever, that eats that bread, it is manifest, that he speaks of them that
touches, Hyllarii de trinita te lib. 8.
his body. And after the manner of communion receyuith the blessed sacrament.
Hillarie in his eight book (De trinitate) vnderstandith this sixth chapter of
John^, to be spoken, of the sacrament, and so does he allege it. I would have
brought in, saint Augustine, with many moo holy writers, but the breuenes of a
sermon will not suffer, so long matter. Wherefore I refer ye reader, unto
saint Augustines first book, against Cresconium, the.xxv chapter, also to ye
first book (De precatoru^ meritis, et Remissione) the.xxx. and.xxiiij.
chapters, and unto many other of his works, wherein, he plainly declares him
self, to understand this syxt chapter of John^, of the blessed sacrament. And
so does all the catholyke writers upon the scriptures, take and understand
uniformly, this place of scrrpture. For they expound and interpret the same,
of the blessed sacrament. Unto whose expositio^s, any cristyane man (if he be
not besides him self) will give more credit, then unto the erronyous, and
false gloses, of blasphemus apostataes from Christ's faith. For in such
serious matters of the faith, Augustinus post Ire. Eligo in bis verbis hoc
intelligere quod oi^s, vel pe ne oi^s freque^tat ecclesia.
ye fathers would neither flater, neither feign but (in the fear of God, speak
the verite of scripture, according as they believed, to be the truth, their
conscience berynge witness. Whose faith and understanding, was none other, but
ye faith and the vnderstanyng of the church of Christ, which cold not err.
Wherefore firmly stands ye verity of this text, and makes most evidently,
for the real presens of the body and blod of Christ in ye sacrament, by cause
that christ him self said. Ioh. 6. Theophilactus supper Iohe^z.
The bread that I will give it is my flesh And as Theophilact says He says
not, that it is, a figure of my flesh, but it is my flesh, for the life of ye
world. More over, let the indyfferent reader examine well, and consider
diligently, the process of the text, and circumstans of the matter, and there
by shall he, evidently perceive, that this place of saint John^, is not wreasted
or detorted, unto the sacrament, (as ye heretykes does falsely charge us with al)
but is most justly applied unto ye same thing, whereof it was both meant and
spoken. In ye process of this chapter, we have first declared unto us, ye
great meracle, of ye.v. loffes of bread. And sone after follows, as great a
meracle, how ye Christ by might walked upon the unstable water, of the sea of
Tyber, and that in a storm tide. Thyrdlye, how suddenly (by miracle) the
ship, and they all with Christ, were at the shore, when they were.xxv. or
thyrtye furlonge of from the shore, and would have received him, into their
ship. And the next day after these wonderful factes, when the people, yt
had fed and eaten, of his myraculus bread, were come into Caphernau^ unto
him, then began he, his disputation of this blessed sacrament. And he him
self offered, Ioh. 6.
the first occasion of the same, and said. You follow me, by cause you have
eaten of my bread. He mynistred not this communication, unto the people, by
chance or fortune, but of certain sciens, foreknowledge, and purpose. And
therefore he wrought, these miracles before, to give e^tre, by one miracle and
wonder, unto a more miracle, and a greater wonder. Therefore also, he wrought
this miracle purposely in bread, hereby, to make preparation and introduccion,
toward the faith, and credulity of the wonderful and most necessary
doctrine, that he intended to open, and to declare unto the^, of the bread of
his body, that should be eaten, in the holy sacrament. That they, seeing so late
(with their eyes) such experime^tes of his divine power, they might yt rather
give credit unto his doctrine, and believe ye miraculus bread of his body. For
he yt could feed, such a great multitude, with so small a no^bre of loffes, and
with his blessed word cause the few lofes to increase, and to be multiplied, unto
such great habu^da^s, ye.v. thousand me^, (besides women and children) were
fully satisfied, and yet to remain.xii. baskets full of ye fragmentes. How much
more was, and is he able, to make of bread his flesh, and to give it, to be
eaten without any diminutio^ of it. The miracle of the multiplied bread, they se
wrought before their eyes, because they should believe the other, which they
should not se Wherefore, Cyril rebukes the Caphernaites, in this manner. 1. Cor.
10. Cyrillus in Iohe^z.
Where as those (yt had seen euide^tlye, the divine power of our savior, and
yt might of his signs and miracles) ought to have received, redely and
wyllingly, and have believed his word, and if there had apered there in, any
difficile or hard thing, they should have inquired of him, the resolution
thereof. Now all in the contrary, they, all together, cry out upon god, and
that, not without great wickedness. How can this fellow, give us his flesh, to
eat. Nether remembered they yt there is nothing impossible to God. Luce. 1.
But because they were beastly, or carnal (as Paul says) they could not
understand, the spiritual thing, but so great a mystery, seemed unto them a
very folyshnes. But let us, (I pray you) collecte and take, no small profit,
by the example of their offenses, retaynynge a firm and stable faith. And in
these (so high and sublimius mysteries) let us never, eather think, eather
speak, that word. How. For it is a Iewyshe word. Crysostome also gives
like reproach, unto those people, that had seen Christ's former miracle, in the
multiplication of the bread, and asked no question there in, and yet would be
so inquisitiue, in this miracle of his body, in the blessed sacrament, saying
unto them. If thou (says he) doiste inquire and ask this question in this
thing. Why dydest not thou ask the same, in the former miracle of ye five
lofes. How could he, increase the lofes, to so great a quantity, (perhaps
the people had more mind, of their bellyes, then of the miracle.) But yet was,
the thing it self, very plain, and did teach you evidently. The^ by that
miracle, thou should have believed these things, to be very facile, and easy
for him to do. And thefore, did he these miracles, because yt the people should
not, be unfaithful, in such things, that he ente^ded to preach and teach,
unto them afterward. It is then very evident and plain (by the order of the
fact done of Christ) that, in this dysputation with the Caphernaites, he mente
of the hye mystery, of the myraculous bread, of his body and blood in the
sacrament, and with the other miracle of the five lofes of bread, he made (as
it had be^) a prea^ble or a preparation, unto the belefe of the doctrine, that
he ente^ded to give unto them, as concerning ye very heavenly bread of his
body, myraculously in the holy sacrament. Yet the sentence that cheffely
makes, for the verity of the sacrament, (among many other) is this. Ioh. 6.
The bread that I will give, it is my flesh, the which I will give, for the
life of the world. (Thus has the greek text.) Wherefore if we diligently do
mark well, and iustelye way these words, we shall perceive very redely and
plainly, that they were, (and must needs) be spoken, and meant of the
sacrament. In this text we have these words twyse spoken. I will give. And
for as much as, Christ spoke no word vaynly, nether any title in the
scripture, can be frustrate. Then was there some cause, why Christ should say
twyse. I will give. And plainlye so was there. For Christ, in these words,
made promise to give twyse, his flesh for us. First he promised yt he would
give it, as bread unto us. Therefore he said. The bread yt I will give, it is
my flesh. Secondly, he promised to give his flesh, for the life of the world
upon the cross, to death. And therefore he added and said. The which flesh I
will give, for ye life of the world. Christ can not be false in his promise,
therefore has he (without doubt) given us his flesh twyse.

Ones on ye cross unto death, for our life, And the other (as our cotidiane
and supper substanciall bread) in the sacrament of the Altar. For we have not
read, that he gave his flesh for us, any were else, as bread, saving only
upon Mau^dy thursdaye, when he gave his flesh for us, in ye sacrament, where
he gave to his apostles, not bread only (as the sacramentaries do say) but as
he made promise, the same time twelve month before, that the bread that he
would give, should be he his flesh. For plainly in these words, Christ made
a promise of his blessed body, to be eaten as bread, in the holy sacrament.
The which promise, the Evangelists S. Matthew, S. Mark, and s. Luke, shows
how it was performed at ye latter supper of Christ. And thus does the one place
of scripture open the other. Unto this sense and understanding of this place of
S. Ioh. all the ancient writers subscribeth co^corda^tly (as I have said)
understanding it, of the corporal eating, of ye body of Christ, in ye holy
sacrament. For if we should understand it, We must not understand the promise
of Christ, to be me^t only of i. Cor. x. the spiritual eating of his flesh
in the sacrament.
only of the spiritual eating of ye body of Christ, by faith, then had Christ
made unto us christanes, no greater promise, the^ Moses made unto ye Jews,
when he promised the^ Manna. For they did eat, in Ma^na, ye body of christ
spiritually by faith (as saint Paul records. All they did eat (says he)
the same meat etc. To what purpose should the^ christ, prefer ye bread, yt he
promised to give above ye bread yt Moises gave unto the^ sith the Jews (in
Manna) did eat ye body of Christ, as well, as we, and we no more the^ they, as
concerning ye spiritual eating. It aperith the^ (by these premises) ye christ
speaks, in this chapter, of ye eating of his flesh and body corporally in
ye sacrament Who^ they should eat, not only spiritually, in faith, but verily
and really, even as his, flesh is there that very same that should be given,
for ye life of ye world. For so he promised, to give it, unto us to be eaten.
The which promise, he has performed as three of the Eua^gelistes, with S. Paul,
records. And yt, ye thing may apere clearly, I will recyte the narrations of
ye Eua^gelistes, and thereby we shall perceive, how plai^ly and openly, they
affirm, this promis of christ, to be accomplished. Thus ye evangelist S. Math.
declares the matter. As they were (says he) at supper, Jesus took ye bread and
when he had given thanks he brake it and gave it unto his disciples, and said.
Math. 26.
This is my body. And taking ye cup, he gave thanks, and gave it unto them
and said. Drink you all thereof This is my blood of the new testament, that
shall be shede for the remyssion of sins. What more plain, and more evident
words, can there be spoken, to signifye and declare the presens of his blessed
body and blood, in the holy sacrament. He could not spoke more plainly in so
few words. Saint Mark also (with as plain words) concordantly settith
forth the same verytie. Mar. 14.
Read (good crystiane) and mark how agreably and concordantly, the
narracions and histories of these evangelists agreyth, and are corespo^dent,
unto ye promises, that Christ made, in the syxte of saint John. Where he
promised (as thou have hard) yt the bread that he would give, was his flesh
or body. And here, he says unto his dysciples, (when he had taken bread and
blessed it.) Take, and eat, this is my body. As who would say. This is the
bread, that I promised, when I said. The bread that I will give, it is my
flesh, for the life of the world. And again. My flesh verily is meat, and
my blood verily is drink. This he promised before. And now in fact and deed,
taking bread and giving thanks he gives it, to his discyples, and says.
This is my body. Here he geuith the^ his flesh as meat. And taking the cup
he geuyth it the^, sayng. This is my blood, and here he gave also his blod, as
drink. Does not this fact and deed of Christ, Luce. 21.
plainly accomplish ye promise of Christ. And (on ye other side) does not the
promysse of Christ, when he said. The bread yt I will give, it is my flesh,
ratifye these words of Christ. Take eat this is my body. Yes plai^ly. What
neade we then, to seek any other sense or understanding, of these places of
scripture, since yt the one so plainly, openyth and declares the other. The
evangelist saint Luke confirms, ye testimonies of saint Matthew and Mark, in
this wise. And he took ye bread, and gave thanks brake it and gave it them,
and said. Luce. 22.
This is my body, which shall be given for you. This perticle, (which shall be
given for you) was added, for none other cause, then to signyfie and show, that
the same body, that he gave unto them, should (ye same night) be given for
them, into the hands of ye Jews, unto death. And after he had supped, he took
the cup in like manner, and said. This cup is the testament, in my blood,
which shall be shed, for you. Here we have other words, the^ saint Mathwe or
saint Mark had. Yet certai^ly all is but one meani^g, and vnderstadyng. For
where they said This is my blood of the new testament, and saint luke says.
This cup is ye new testament in my blood. Both he, and they says and
singnifieth. That ye same cup contaynith, ye very same blood, wherewith ye
new testament should be, and was (the next day) ratifyed and co^firmid. And
this was none other blood, but the most precious blood, Exo. 24. Hebre. 9.
of the innocent and immaculate lamb Christ. For like as Moses, when he had
read, the commandments of the law, unto the people, he took the blood of
calffes and gotes with water, purpull wol, and ysope and sprynkled the book and
all the people, sayng. This is the blod of the testament, whche God has a
poynted unto you. Athanasius in prima^ ad Corinthios. 10. Sanguis enun iste qui
calice co^tinetur, ille est qui Christi latere pro^lux it etc.
And so confirmed he, the old testament. Even so has our savior christ
ratifyed and confirmed, this the new testament, with his blood, and ye same
blood, that was shede upon ye altar of the cross, and sprenkeled upon us, to
ratyfy the new testament, that very same he gave unto his appostles, at ye
supper Therefore the euangelystes saint Mathewe and saint Mark calls it, the
blood of the new testamente, And saint Luke calls it, the new testament.
Saint Johan the euangelyste, Similia habet, et Crisostomus.
(who wrote last of the four) does pass over and speaks nothing of this,
our lords supper. No meruel hereof. For so does he, the most things, that
any of the other evangelists does speak of, as things sufficientlye
declared by them. Therefore this thing he touched not. For it was sufficientlye
declared before, by the other three euangelystes. Now think I long, or I here,
the testimony of the appostle Paul, in who^e christ spoke. And therefore in
this matter he spoke none other, the^ he received of our lord. This same holy
apostle, writing unto the Corinthians, (after that he had rebuked their
uncharitable mysuse of our Lords supper) declares this matter, in this wise.
1. Cor. 11.
That which I received (says he) of our Lord, I delivered unto you. For our
lord Jesus, the same night, that he was betrayed, took bread and gave
thanks, and brake it and said. This is my body which is broken for you, this
same do you in the remembrance of me. In like manner when he had supped, he
took the cup and said. This cup is the new testament in my blood.

The same do you (as often as you shall drink here of) in the remembrance of
me. Here saint Paul yt was instructed and received his doctrine and learning
of no man, ^ala. 1. Augustinus ad Ianuariu^ epist. 117. Co^tinuo (quippe) cu^
dixis^ et Iudicium sibi ma^ducat, et vibit, addidit, vt diceret. No^ d^iudica^s
corpus, domini quod satis toto ipso loco in epistola ad Cor. 1. si diligenter
atienbatur, apparet.
but by ye reuelacion of our lord Jesus Christ, and therefore taught he no other
(in this matter) then he had received of Christ, affirms plainly in these
words, the very real presens of Christ's body and blood, to be in the
sacrament. And names it, at no time, eather figure, mystery or sacrament, but
twyse (in the same chapter) he calls it, the body of our Lord. And if our
Lord and master Christ, would have had any fyguratiue speech, to be
understood in these his words, and had not meant, that his body should be in
the sacrament, (but as in ye figure) certainly he would have sygnifyed, by some
other words, that he spoke fyguratiuelye, as he did in all such like
fyguratiue, and parabolycall speches, or else certainly he would have instructed
Paul the apostle, more largely and clearly hereof. Or else at the least, Paul
(who was so ware and circumspecte) that he would not leave, any ambiguous
sentens, in his wrytynges rawlye) would not have left, so necessary a lesson
untouched, but would have rather opened, the plain and clear understanding
and sense hereof, least any thing should have escaped him, whereby any occasion
of error, might have be^ taken of his words. Neither is it to be thought,
that so necessary, and also so dangerous a lesson (in so weyghty a matter, of
our salvation) should be left untaught, both of Christ and of the appostles,
and also (hitherto) of the holy ghost, who came to teach the appostles, and
the church, all verytie and vndoughtedly so he did, and still does, and shall,
until the worlds end. For what offense were it unto god, and horrible error
in ye church of Christ (and has been sith the appostles time, hitherto) that
the church of christ should worship ye creature of bread instead of god there
creator (for so does the church now, and has done this fyftyne hundredth year
and above) if ye under the shape and form of bread and wine, be not verily
and ryally the body of Christ God and man. There was no such fearful
threatenynge, for the unworthy receauyng or of Ma^na, eather of the paschal
la^be rather of of any of the Mosaical sacrifices. For they were but only bare
figures
Forthermore where Paul in ye same place thretneth dampnatio^ unto ye unworthy
receauers of this sacrament. If there be nothing else there in, but bare bread,
it were to severe and rygorus sentens, and hard Judgment to thretten or
execute dampnacion, for eating of a peace of bread. But verily ye holy
appostle Paul makes, a more worthyer thing of this, then bread. For he
says, that he that eatith of this bread and drynketh of this cup
unworthily, eatyth and drynketh his one Judgment, or dampnacion. Not Not by
cause yt he does mysuse a peace of bread or a cup of wine. But because, he
puts no differens, between bread, and the body of christ. Therefore says
saint Paul, he eats and drynketh his own dampnacyon, because he puts no
dyfferens, (he says not, between bread and bread) but, between the bread
(that is but only and very bread and) the bread that is the very body of our
lord. By these it may manyfestly appear, how plainly the holy apostle Paul
affirms, with the euangelystes, the very and real presens of Christ's body
in holy sacrament.

1. Cor. 10.
Moreover in the same epistle in the x. chapter, the appostle Paul, after ye he
had set forth, the terryble plages of God, executed upon the mysusers of the
mosaycall figures, he says. That all those things happened unto them, for an
example, and are left written in ye scriptures, to be a warnyng for us. In this
wise, the apostle Paul exhorts the corynthians, and in them, al faithful
chrystians, by these terryble and severe punyshmentes, to be warned and ware
that we (mysusynge the greater benefits of God) show not our selves
unthankful, unto so liberal a lord, lest we (provoking him unto wrath)
sustain at his hand more worser and more grievous plages, then did the Jews,
whose fearful examples, we may cede of, in scripture. By causse that we have
received, the more excellent and greater benefytes. And in this part of this
chapter, he does specially auocate and call the Corynthes, from the
partycypacion of the table of ydols. Which was none other, then to eat ydoll
offerynges (meat or flesh offered up, unto ydolles) and that for relygion or
devotion, and in honor of the ydoll, hopyng thereby, to attain holiness. From
this enormyte, the appostle fears them, by the examples of ye plages of God,
executed upon his elect people, the Israellites and says that.

These ware written to warn us And at the length he showed a just cause why,
they should leave false religion of ydolles, in partakynge of the table of the
deuylles, saying. Is not the cup of thanks geuynge, 1. Cor. 10.
wherewyth we give thanks, the partakynge of the blood Christ? Is not the
bread that we do break, the partakynge of the boodye of Christ? In these,
clear and most in manyfeste words, saint Paul speaks nothing, of any
figure or sygnyfycacyon only, that should be in this bread or cup. For he
says not, that the bread or cup signifies, or is, only a figure, of the
partakynge of Christ's body and blood. But in most plain and manyfeste
words he says, that it is the partakyng of Christ's body and blood. As who
would say.

why seek you to communicate, and to eat, of the sacrifices offered up unto
ydols, and to partake the table of deuelles, for religion and sanctimonie. Have
ye not the table of Christ? which is not the partakinge of the flesh and
blood of beasts. But the partakinge of the flesh, and the innocent blood of
Christ, offered upon the altar, unto the living God, the father, And in the
partakyng of this table, is the true religion and possession of sanctimonie.
That this, is the true sense of the Appostles words, in this place,
Chrysostom shall wytnes with me. Crisosto. in Paulu^
Who writing upon the same place has these words. That which is in the cup,
is the same, which flowed out of Christ's side. And thereof are we partakers.
Therefore he calls it also the cup of thanks geuynge. For because that,
when we have it in our hands, (with admiration and trembling fear: of so
ineffable gift) we laud and thank him, that he has shede his blood for us,
to deliver us out of error, and has not only shede his blood for us, but he
has made us thereof pertakers. And therefore if thou desyrest blood (says
Christ) seek not, the altar of the slaughter of brute beasts. But seek my
altar and be springleth with my blood. Saint Paul (in this place) rebukes
the Corinthia^s because they did participate or partake, ye ydoll offeringes,
and that for religion and holiness, the which could give no such holiness, unto
the eaters hereof, as saint Paul in the same place prouyth unto them. For
there is no such divinity (says he) in the ydolle, as the heathen falsely
supposes, but that which is offered, is offered unto deuels, who can co^ferre
no sanctimonie, unto the eaters of the ydoll offerynges. Crisosto. ibidem.
As yet (Crysostome says) when the Jews (in time paste) were so weak and
ready to seek (by ydolatrye) such falfe religion and sanctimonye, god
permytted and ordained (for the time) the blood of beasts, and carnal
sacrifices, to be done unto him. But now he has called us, not only from
ydolatrye, by the institucyon of the blessed sacrament. But also from al carnal
sacryfyces, and blood of brute beasts, unto the communyon and partakynge of
the body and blood of Christ. Which (as Crisostome says) is a more admirable
and magnifice^t sacrifice, the^ ever was, the slaughter of beasts in the old
law. And it is a more noble and worthier exchaung and permutacyon, to call us
thus, from the blood of beasts, unto ye perticipacion of his own blood. The^
when he called the Jews, from ydoll offerynges, unto ye carnal sacrifices, in
slaughter of beasts. For now (as S. Paul says) he has taken away, Hebre. 10.
the former and imperfect (legal sacrifices) and has placed in there rowme,
the new and very perfect sacrifice of his body and blood. Plainly it were,
but a simple permutation and exchange, to call us, from pertakyng of the flesh
and blood of beasts, unto the pertakynge, of a peace of bread and of a cup of
wine. And also if there be nothing in ye sacrament, the^ bread and wine. What
needs Paul to make so much, of the table and cup of our Lord. For ye table
of ma^na in deserte, was the table of god. Yea and if yt, in this our table of
christ be set before us, no other delicates then bare bread and wine, the^ may
we say, that ye table of Moises in desert, was a more noble and costlier
feast, a great deal, the^ is this. Psalm. 77. Panem celi dedit eis Pane^
angeloru^ man durauit homo.
For yt was myraculus, for ma^na came, from god by miracle, mynistred by
angels, and therefore it is called angels food, it had the taiste of al
swetnesse, according to every good and faithful ma^s apetite. Every one had
like, and equal measure thereof, gathered he never so much, or never so little.
And where it putrified, on the other days in the weak (if it were reserved
above a day) yet on the sabbath day, it did not putrifye, it was kept many
years after, and did never putrifye. Is not this a much more gorgious and
more noble banquet, then to feast us with bare bread and wine? For (as our
Caphernaites says) there is nothing done myraculously, in the supper of our
Lord. But because that they can bring, no evident nether plain scriptures,
(as they require of us) to prove this error, therefore we (as redely and as
sone) deny it, as they do affirm it. Yet perhaps they will say, that in the
supper of Christ, is had the special memory of Christ's death, and in that
co^memoration of Christ's passion, we do perticipate or partake (in faith) the
body and blood of Christ. And in this consystith the excellency of the supper
of Christ. Even so were also the other oblacio^s of the mosaicall law, the
memory of the passion of Christ, whom they in faith looked, for. As ye Manna,
put them in remembrance of Christ the lyuelye bread. The slaughter and
shedynge of the brutall blood, put them in mind of the effusio^ of ye blod of
Christ, which should make perfect expiacio^ of sin. And ye pascal lamb slain
and eaten, with his blod painted upon the posts of ye door, warned them, of ye
death of the innocent la^be Christ, slain for us, whose blood was painted upon
the posts of the Cross. Plainly if the sacrament be but a memoryall figure,
of Christ's death (as the herytykes sayen) then were the figure of Moses (of
ye sheding and offering of the blood of the pascal lamb) much more evident
figure and apter sacrament of Christ's death, then bread and wine And as
concerning the spiritual eating and participation, of the body and blood of
Christ by faith in ye sacrament. If yt be al. There is no cause why, that this
sacrament should excel, the other figures. For who doubts yt the faithful
fathers of the other testament did receive (in faith) eue^ as much as we. For S
Paul wyttnesseth no less for them, sayng. They al eat of one spiritual
meat, and they all did drink of one spiritual drink. And were thus
spiritually, the partakers of the body and blood of Christ, 1. Cor. 11.
whom they believed, should be ye very sacryfice for their sins.

Thus it apperith yt the exchau^ge of the old sacraments mosaical, for ye
sacraments of ye new testament, brought unto us, no avail neither
auauncemente and consequentlye the institution of them by Christ, was in
vain. For he has not permuted and changed for the better. For as good and as
profitable it had been for us, to have kept the old pascall lamb, as to have
the sacrament of the altar, except you will say, that there is less charge,
to provide for a peace of bread, the^ to bye, a whole la^be God for bid, that a
Christen man should think, that our savior Christ (so wise and so loving a
lord god) should do any thing frustrate, and not rather, for our great and
inestimable co^modite. But certainly this most fortunable exchau^g, of the
pascal la^be, for this blessed sacrament, was unto us, an inestimable perfect,
and auau^ceme^t. For as much as we have, not such a sacrament, which is only
the figure, of the body of Christ, but it contains really and verily, the
natural body of Christ, and therefore when this our sacrament is eaten
worthily, it does incorporate us not only unto ye mystycall body of Christ by
faith, but it does also, incorporate us unto the natural body of Christ.

In the same.x. chapter the holy appostle has also, these words. We many
(says he) are but one bread, and one body, even as many as, partake of one
bread. In these words the appostle shows, that as many as, does partake of
that one bread, so many are one body in Christ. If the apostle should
understand, by this one bread, material bread, it had neade to be, an
exceadynge great loffe, that should feed corporally, all the whole body of
Christ, spread and sparkeled abroad, in so many and sundry places of the
world. It can not therefore be any one material bread, whereof, all the
lymmes and members of Christ, do partake, and are (thereby) made one body. But
it is one celestial bread, the very body and blood of Christ, whom all
the whole congregation of Christ, does partake in every place, and this is but
one bread, but one (and the very same) body of Christ, partaken of so many in
so many places, and is whole (and is received, of every man) every where. And
this bread (whorthely eaten) makes them all (by that partakynge) but one,
where ever they eat it. And it incorporateth the^ unto Christ, and makes them
the members of his body, and to be of his flesh and of his bones. And that (I
say) by this corporal eating and receyuynge of his body and blood in the
holy sacrament. And certainly (most christen reader) it makes not a little,
for the verity of the real presence, of Christ's body in the sacrament, that
it is not sufficient for us, to believe, that we (receiving this sacrament) are
fed, with the body and blood of Christ, only by faith, spiritually
partakynge it. But we must believe also, that we (receyuynge it worthelye) are
fed, and are partakers corporally, of the body and blood of Christ. For there
by are we incorporated unto ye very natural body of Christ, as we are (by
faith) spiritually incorporated unto his mystical body. But if there be, none
other thing in the blessed sacrament, then only bare bread, then could
not we be thus incorporated, unto the natural body of Christ. For there is
no material meat, that ca^ give unto us that in corporation, but only the
very body and blood of our savior Christ. The which (being eaten) is not
converted, into our flesh and blood, as other our material meats are, but
(by his super-excellent power) he alters, and conuerteth our flesh and blod,
i^to his. And yet nevertheless ye natural properties of bread and wine,
norysheth us also, as well as though ye very substance of bread and wine were
there. Thus by the worthy receyuyng of this blessed sacrament, the body and
blood of Criste our savior, conuerteth our flesh into his flesh, and the
qualities of bread, in the sacrament (myraculouslye) nevertheless norysheth
our bodies.

This corporal eating, and incorporacyon of us, unto Christ's very natural
body, is not newly fantysed, of late years, but it has been taught, written, and
believed, sith the time of S. Paul. whom I call first unto wyttnes with me, in
this matter. For he, writing unto the Ephesia^s, says these plain words. No
man ever yet, hated his own flesh, but chereshith and noryshyth it, even as
our Lord, does the church. For we are members of his body of flesh and of
his bones. By these words, saint Paul teachith us, that Christ does feade
and cherysheth his church, not only spiritually, but also corporally, and that
may well appear, by the words of S. Paul. For he norysheth his church (says
he) as every man cherishes naturally, his own flesh. But every man does not
cheryshe naturally, his own flesh, with spiritual food (for the flesh is
not fed with ymaginations and believe of good meat) but rather with the
corporal receate and eating, of very and natural meat. Then does not
Christ fead his church only with spiritual food, but also he feadeth
corporally his church, with the very meat of his flesh and blood.
Furthermore, ye process of ye letre, ledeth us directly: thus to understand
this text For S. Paul (in this place) exhortith the men to love their wyfes,
as Christ loves his church, and to noryshe and cheryshe them, as there one
flesh, and as Christ does also, his spouse ye church But it is out of doubt
that saint Paul did not intend here, to exhort the men, to cheryshe and
noryshe their wyffes, only in soul, instructyng them the faith and dewty
unto God and man (as they are also bound) other, yt they should cheryshe their
bodies with imagynacyons or thoughts of necessary food. But rather he exhorted
ye men to cherishe corporally, their wyffes, provydyng for them, not only
spiritual, but also corporal, meat and necessaryes even so, as Christ does
also, for the congregacyon. Not only feadynge the church, with spiritual
food of faith and charytie, and such other graces, and virtues, but he also,
feadeth and cherysheth it, with the very meat, of his natural body and blood in
the blessed sacrament. For (as it follows there in the letter) we are (says
saint Paul) the me^bres of his body (not of his mystical body only) but of
his natural body, of that body, that has flesh and bones. And that comes
to pass (without doubt) by the eating of that meat, ye Christ does noryshe
us with all, for yt is the effect of that mighty meat, and most delectable
food, to transform the eater, into his most blessed flesh and bones. And
certaynely it is, not bread (as I have said) eather any other meat, wherewith
Christ fedeth, and cherishes us corporally, and that can (by eating thereof)
incorporate us, unto the natural body of Christ, and make us of his bones,
saving only, the natural body and blod of our savior Christ. And this we
receive not corporally, in any other thing save only in the blessed sacrament.
The^ must we needs grant, that the natural body of Christ, is in the
sacrament, wherewyth, that most loving lord, and dear husband of the
church, norysheth and cherysheth his i^terely beloved spouse the church, and
with this most precious and most delycious meat of his very and natural body
and blood, incorporateth her and unto his very natural body And thus is made
of the blessed man Christ, and his holy wyffe, the church, one body. And be
made (as saint Paul says) two in one flesh. For this is the great mystery,
Ephesi. 5.
(that Paul speaks of in that place) of Christ, and the church. Like as
Christ of his infinite goodness, and inestimable charity, Chrisosto^e in
Iohannem.
became a member, of our corupt nature, receiving our flesh, which was a
great knot of love, Yet in toke^, of a greater union, Vester ego frater esse
volul, coi^caui carne propter vos et sanguine^. Hoc est, vestra^ carnem et
sauguine^ curaui mi hi vobiscu^ fieri co^munem. Et per q^vobis co^iunctus su^,
ea russus vobiserhi hui.

Yreneus lib. 5. aduersus hereses.


and knot of his love, he would that we should be also, of his flesh and
bones, (as saint Paul says) we are members of his body and of his flesh
and bones.

And this most blessed union and incorporation we do attain, only (as I
said) by eating, of his very body and dryn king of his very blood, in the
blessed sacrament, wherewyth he feadeth and norysheth us.

Yreneus that holy and ancient writer records also, with us, in this matter,
in his fyft book (aduersus hereses) where he speaks very manifestly of this
our incorporacyon unto Christ by receuyng the sacrament, and says. The
mengled cup and the bread broken, when they have received the word of God,
then be they made the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. Of the which
body and blood, the substance of our flesh, is augmented and subsistent.
How can they deny, that our flesh, is not partaker, of the gift of God, which
is eternal life, for as much as our flesh is fed, with the body and
blood of Christ, and made the membre of him, even as the appostle says, in
the epistle unto ye Ephesians. We are ye me^bres of his body and of his flesh
and of his bones Se now (good cristiane) how this holy catholyke, and very
ancient writer, plainly affirms with apostle Paul, that our flesh is fed
with the body and blood of our savior Christ, and by that, we are made the
me^bres of his body, not spiritual members only, but of his flesh and of
his bones. Cyrel also shall record with us, which affirms the same,
writing against a certain heretyke, Cyrillus in Ioh. 15
upon the.xv. of saint Ioh. We do not deny, (says he) yt we (by true faith
and sincere charity) are united and knytte to Christ. But that we have no
manner of conjunction with him corporally, that, we utterly deny, and that
saying is besides, and contrary to all scripture. For who ever doubted,
Christ to be (in such sort) the vine tree, that we be branches, which receive
life thereby. Herke even the same of Paul. We are all one body (says he) in
Christ, and though we be many, yet in him we are but one, for we do partake
all one bread. Does he think that we know not the power, of the mystical
blessing, the which is done or received among us? Does it not cause Christ
corporally to dwell in us, by the communion or common receauynge of Christ's
flesh? Wherefore else be the me^bres of christen men, the members of Christ.
Know you not, (faith he) that out me^bres be the members of Christ) shall I
make then the members of Christ the members of an harlot? God for bid.

Our savior also, says. Ioh. 6.
He that eats my flesh, and drynketh my blood dwells in me, and in I him.
In eodem
This is the wytnes of Cyril. Wherein you here plainly, how that, (he sides
the spiritual conjunction of us, unto Christ (as his members by faith and by
charity) there is, a another union, by the which, Christ is joined, and vnytyd
unto us corporally, and we are made here by, ye members of him corporally. A
similitude of ware, where by Cyrill proves, the corporal conjunction of us,
unto the natural body of Christ. Crysosto, in Iohe^n Home. 46
And yet Cyrill says moreover. Wherefore we must consider, that Christ is not
in us spiritually only, by charity. But also he is in us, by a certain
natural and corporal particypatyon. For like as if a man should take wax,
and melt it and myngle the same, with other wax melted, there should be made,
but one ware, of them both, even so, by receauynge of the body and blod of
christ he is in us, and we in him. Unto ye same subscrybeth Crysostome, upon
John^. After that he had said, that we are one body with him, and the members
of his body and of his flesh, and of his bones, he laid the reason thereof,
by and by sayng. By cause that we might be converted and turned (not only by
love) into his flesh but in very deed, that same is done and brought to
effect, by ye meat, which he has given unto us.

And by cause he would set forth, or declare, unto us his i^tyre love. He (by
his own body) has mi^gled him self, with us. How plain a thing is this, to
confyrme our sentence or sayng. For he says that, the meat that Christ gave
unto us, (that is the body of Christ in ye blessed sacrament) is that same,
where by, he has mengled him self, with us And that same makes us, one body
corporally with him. Not only spiritually (for that does faith and charity
cause) but by this, we are made members of his body, and of his bones.

Hereby this, we are may perceive, that be sides the spiritual coniuncyon
(which faith and charytie causes and thereby makes us spiritual members of
his mystical body) how necessary it is, to be knyt also unto christ
corperally, by ye eating of his body in the blessed sacrament. Whereby we do
not only, participall Christ spiritually for so do we partake Christ, as often
as we (with perfect faith and charity) remember the death of Christ. But
also we do partake Christ's flesh corporally, and verily we be come the
members of his body and be of his flesh and of his bones. And in this point
we are in better state and in more blessed co^dytyon, then were the people,
under the former laws, eather of nature either of Moses. Though the faith
full and holy (among them) were in graffed, and knyt, unto Christ's mystycall
body (as all other are) that retayneth, perfect faith and charytye, (without
receyuyng of the sacrament) yet none of them, did partake the very flesh and
blood of Christ. For as yet the eternal and omnipotent word was not in
flesh. But because these faythefull people believed, that this flesh should
come, and be their redemptyon, by there faith, they received and did
spiritually eat, this flesh, and where (thereby) partakers of the merytes
thereof, and so counyted and knyt, unto Christ's mystical body, as members
spiritual thereof. Christ had a mystical body, before that he took upon him,
our nature, and he has now also (by his incarnatyon) a natural body. And
now he has two bodies, a spiritual body or a mystycall body, and also a
natural body. It was sufficient (to salvation) before his death and passion (by
faith and charity) to appertain, and to be knyt unto his mystycal body, and so
to partake his merytes. But now out savior Christ says unto all (of
sufficient age, and discretion, having no impediment. Ioh. 6.
) Except that you eat my flesh, and drink my blood, you can have no life,
in you, So that now, we must be connexed, and joined, (not only unto his
spiritual and mystical body) but also unto his natural body, by the
corporal, receyuynge and eating, of the same flesh and blood. There in (as
I have said) stands the great worthynes, preferment and dygnitie of the
table of Christ, above the table of Moses. For Moses set on his table, only
the myraculous bread Manna, the figure of Christ's body. But Christ sets
before us, upon his table, the real and very presens of his natural body and
blood, Theophi. in Iohe^z. Quomodo (inquit) no^ apparet nobis cato sed panis?
Vt no^ abhorreamus ab eius esu. Nam si q^ them caro apparuisset, insuauiter
affecti essemus erga co^^onem. Nu^c autem condescende^te dn^o nr^e in
firmitati. Talis apparet nobis mistiens tibus quali alioqui assue ti sumus.
in the shape and form of bread and wine, condesce^dyng herein (as
Theophilact says) unto our infirmity and the custom of our nature, the
which delyteth in bread (as in the convenient and customed food and abhors
raw flesh and blood, as a token of no table cruelnes and uncustomed, unto
our manner of fedynge. Therefore this necessary food (to our soul) of his
blessed flesh and blood, Christ has vouchesafe to give unto us, not in
their own likeness and form, but in the form and lykenes, of our cotidyane
fode of bread and wine. And here by, he most gracyously, mynystreth unto us
the life eternal of the which he said. Except ye eat the flesh of the
son of man, and drink his blood, you can have no life in you. For like as
the earthely Adam our carnal parent, (in that we partake his synnefull and
corrupt flesh (is cause and occasyon of death unto us.

Even so is, the celestial Adam Christ, causse of life in us, by that, that
we partake his blessed body and flesh.

For look as Eve was formed, of ye flesh of Adam, even so are we (that are
the uery church of Christ) by eating of his flesh in the blessed sacrament,
made of his flesh, and members of his body. And thus of two (of the church
and christ is made one body and flesh) as I have said. Ephese. 5.
The which words though they be written of the first Adam and Eve.

Yet in this place (of this his epistle) saint Paul allegeth and applyethe
them, unto Christ and the church, for as soon as he had spoken, these words
unto the Ephesians. And thus of two persons is made but one flesh, he puts
thereto these words. This is (says he) a great mysterye I speak or mean
it, in Christ and the church. How the Church and Christ be come one
flesh, Ephe. 5.
is not to be understood by the incarnatyon. For Christ (by his incarnatyon)
received flesh of us, and not we of him, as Eve did of adam.

For we must understand, that he is, the heavenly Adam, and we (his church) are
ye spiritual Eve. As Adam and Eve were of one flesh, because that Eve was
formed out of the body of Adam, and not Adam formed of ye flesh of Eve Even
so Christ and the church, be come one flesh, by cause that Eve (that is ye
church) takes flesh of Christ that heavenly Adame. And therefore S. Paul
refers this mystery, of the coniuntion of Adam and Eve, not unto the
incarnatyon of Christ, whereby he took flesh of us. But refers it, unto ye
eating and communion of the blessed sacrament, wherein (Christ) gives his
flesh and he norysheth us, and feadeth us with it, and so we take flesh of
him Such is the most gracyous and merciful restitutyon (that God has made
for us) unto life, through our Lord Jesus Christ, that where as Adam by
eating of the forbedden fruit of the tree, has procured and mynystred
death, unto all his posterytie. Even so (as Ruperte says) it was very
congruente, Rupertus
that by the eating of the fruit, of another tree, life might be procured,
and mynistred again, unto the posterity of Ada^. Certainly, there is none
other fruit, that mynystreth and restores life again, unto ye posterity of
Adam, but only the fruit that ho^ge on ye tree of the cross, (which is Jesus
Christ) the blessed fruit, of the immaculate womb of Marye. This fruit must
be eaten corporallye, for Adam did eat corporally, of the fruit, that brought
death unto us, so (of co^grue^ce) we must eat corporally, this fruit, that
rendereth, and restores again, life. Not only the life of grace, whereby
the soul of man lives, and is strengthed to godwardes, in this present
mortality, and most miserable life. But also, it mynistreth unto us, Cyrillus
in Iohe^z. Dedit vobis Moses ma^na sed qui comederunt, russum esu ri^tu^t,
produrit copiosa, de lapide flumina, sed qui bibebant russus sitlebant.
the life eternal, both of body and soul, as Christ says. He that eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him
up at the latter day. By eating and dryngking, this body and blood, the
celestyall Adam Jesus, works in us, eternal life, unto our souls, and at
the latter day he will work, and bring, everlasting life unto the bodies
also. That, as we have eaten, that blessed fruit in soul (by sincere faith,
perfect hope, and charity) and in body, by the corporal receite, of that
blessed flesh. Quid ergo rp^s policetur: Quid credentibus adferi? Corruptibile
certe nihil, sed benedictionem qua^ co^municatione corporis et sa^guinie
assequimur, vnde ad came incorruptione^ integre reducemur, vt cibo et potu
corporali no^ indigeamus Viuificat enim corpus Christi, et ad in corruptionem,
sua participatione reducit. etc.
Even so shall it work lyffe perpetual, as well in the body, (as Cyrill says)
as in the soul. That, by this Adame celestial, might be no less restored,
then by the other Adam was lost. The earthely Adam lost for us, life, both of
body and soul And so has, ye heavenly Adam, rendered unto us, life of grace in
this present world. And in the world to come, the life, of perpetual glory,
both of the body and soul. The which he grant us, that therein reygueth,
with the father and ye holy gooste, one God most glorious, now and for ever
Amen.

Sit deo gratia.
HOC EST COR PVS MEVM. Vbi supra
This is my body.
THe catholyke verity, of ye real presens of Christ's body in the holy
sacrament, takes no little corroboratio^ and strength, of the promises, yt
our savior Christ made, unto his dear beloved spouse the church, (which is)
as saint Paul says. The pyller and ground of trenth. 1. Tim. 3.
The which promyses, if theybe infallible and true, (as undoubtedly they be)
the^ may we iustelye collect this, for a most assured verity. That our
Lord and master Christ, has not suffered his church, so many hundred
years, to err so blyndlye, in so weyghtye a matter of ye faith, and to remain
so long, in so detestable blasphemy, as to worship the creature, in the stead
of the maker and creator.

If the church of Christ has not erred, in that she believes, the real and
very presens of Christ in the sacrament, and therein worshyppeth verily
Christ, as ye infallible promyses of Christ shall declare, then are they
abominable and in tolerable, that believes the contrary. The constant
believe, and infallible faith of the church, is ratifyed, by these promyses of
Christ. First Christ promised, that he would not leave the church, unto the
worlds end. Math. vltimo.
Behold (says Christ) I am with you for ever, until the consu^mation of the
world.

How has he ben, so many years with his church, and has not reformede so
great an error. And sith that he (of all other enormities) hates and detesteth
most, the nepharious crime of ydolatrye. Why has he, or how could be, suffer,
his church (whom he washed from all spotte and wryncle, Ephe. 5.
with his most precious blood) to be so fylthelye all arrayed, with the
fylthery of ydolatry. Secondlye Christ made promise unto his church, that the
holy ghost should come, and remain with her for ever, and teach her all
verity, saying.

Ioh, 14.
I will entreat my father, and he will give you, another comforter, the
spirit of verity, and he shall remain with you for ever. And again, he
says. Ibidem.
When he shall come, (that is the spirit of verite) he shall lead you, into
all verity. Also in another place.

The comforter, Ioh. 16.
which is the holy ghost (whom the father will send, in my name) he shall
teach you all verity, and bring into your remembrance all things, that I
have spoken unto you. If Christ be true, of these his promyses (as certenlye
he is and will be) then has, and does, the holy ghost, the spirit of verity,
abide with the church, for ever, and has taught her al verity, and brings
her, into the knowledge and understanding of all things that Christ spoke,
were they never so ambiguous and doubtful. Now for as much as this text.
Mar. 14.
This is my body was spoken of Christ, therefore (by Christ's promise) the
spirit of verity has taught the church, the true understanding hereof.
And the church has, and does, understand it, of the very real presens of
Christ's body in the sacrament, then is that a verity, and the contrary an
heresye.

Thyrdlye, Christ promised, Luce. 22.
that the faith of the church, should never be extincte, nether fail. And
that the yates of hell should not prevail against it. Math. 16.
There can no man think the contrary, but that the faith of the holy church,
has failed greatly, in retaynynge so long time, so open an error, if the
body of Christ, be not verily and really in the sacrament sithe the church
has allway so believed. And the yates of hell, has grealy prevailed against
her, and that so mygytely, that they have overthrown her, into so great and
most pestilent an herysy (or eather a blasphemy) as to honor bread, for her
spouse Chrst, that dougther so dearly, and herein to commyt such a detestable
fornycatyon of ydolatry, most hated and detested with, her husband and lord
God Christ.

By these promyses of Christ (well pondered and expended) we may easily
perceive, that the faith (the which the church ever has, and does retain,
as concerning this blessed sacrament) is ye most assured verity. And by
cause that the church (governed and taught by the holy ghost) has and does
retain, for a verity in fallyble, that the body of our savior Christ, is
verily and really, in the blessed sacrament, therefore ought we to take the
same, for a catholic and a true verity, and to refuse the contrary eas an
heresy most detestable and odyus. That the church has retained this, for a
catholyke verytie, that shall we show most many festly, both by the general
consells (wherein ye holy ghost was president) and also, by ye testimonies of ye
fathers, in whom the same holy ghost spoke, as in his peculiar orgaynes or
instruments. For where shall we collect and learn, the faith of the church
in such ambiguous and doubtful matters, but of the conselles, wherein
lernedly were dyscussed and determined, all matters of doubt, by the presidens
and regiment, of the holy ghost. And of the ancient writers, whose wrytynges
and works, spyreth and breaths out, the very pure and sincere faith, that
the church had, in there time. For they (as true and faithful members of the
church) would in no wise, willyngly swerue, from the true faith of the church,
but brought great illustratyon, and dignytie there unto, by their most godly
life, and conversation, and many of them sustained great torments and death,
in the defense hereof. Wherefore the auctoritye of them ought to be, Igna. ad
Herone^. Ois igitur qui direrit, preter ea que tradita sunt, tam etsi ieiunet,
virgiginitatem fernat, sig^a face at, prophete^, lupus tibi appareati grege
ouium corruptio^em faciens.

The counsel of Ephesus.


not only equalled, but to be preferred much, above the authority of our
seditious, and new writers now a days, by cause that these new writers are, not
only me^ (as ye fathers were) but also they are much worser men (then they
were) in godlynes, not only being void of good life but they are also, divided
from the church of Christ, by their heresies.

And therefore I would, that men should suspecte, all that comes from out of
their hands, yea though they were never so holy, in their outward appare^s.

These conselles following, does ratifye our faith, as concerning the real
presens, of Christ's body and blood in the sacrament. First the holy consell
of Ephesus, where unto were gathered together, two hundred fathers, for the
condempnation of Nestorius heresies, who denied, that ye flesh of Christ (in
the sacrament) was not able to give life. For he plainly affirmed Christ, to be
but pure man, and therefore the flesh of him could give no life. Against this
(with other mo his heresies). Cyril the bishop of Alexandria, called a synod
of two hundred bishops. This counsel was, and is, of great estimation and
authority, with the anncient fathers, in so much that saint Gregory allowed
and approved this, wych the counsel of Nyce, Constance, and Calcedone as the
four Gospelles. In this counsel it was defyned, that we do receive in the
sacrament, the very flesh, the which gives life.

The counsel of Vercellis.
In the counsel, whom Lion (the nynthe of that name) called and caused to be
celebrate in the city of Vercellis, against ye same pestiferous heresy, the^
by one Bere^garius peruitiously taught, the same heresye was utterly
condemned as Platina also witnesses. The counsel of Turone.


The counsel also of Turone, celebrated under Victor (the second of that
name.) In the which counsel one Hill debrandus (then Archedecon of Rome) was
president, who (with great learned men) did convince Berengarius, the auctour
of this habominable heresy, who remained still, obstynatlye in this his
detestable error.

Then Nicholas (the second) conuocated a counsel unto Rome, The counsel of
Rome by Nicolas the second.
of a hundredth and thyrtye bishops, and sent for this Berengarius thither,
and there he (with aduysed and express words) abiured this heresye. The form
of his abiuration, ye may read in the decrees, the second dystinctio^, De
consecra. Yet after this he fell efte sone, (not to that heresye) but unto the
heresye, that Luther does hold, affirmyng, that in ye sacrament of the Altar,
with the real presens of Christ's body, there is also, The counsel of Rome
under Gregory the.vii.
the substance of bread still remaining. Then was there a consell called,
unto ye city of Rome by Gregory (the.vii.) whereunto also came Bere^garius,
and openly revoked this his heresye, as Sabellicus witnesses in his third
book, the.ix. Eneades.

Pretereo concilium sub innocentio tertio celebratum.
Fynallye, the counsel of Basyll, and also the counsel of Constaunce, (whom I
do pass over) did most openly, condemn this heresye. Thus many counsels
have we, that ratifieth the verity of Christ's body in the sacrament, and
condemns the contrary, as an horrible heresye, where the sacramentaries (for
their side) can not show one, that eather ratifyed their opinion, eather
condemned our faith, as an error or heresye. Wherefore it is most manyfeste,
that they have framed, and fashioned this new faith, of their own blind and
fond fantasye (or rather) they have new furbushed old heresies and thus
deluded and deceived by the spirit of pride and error, are now brought
clean, from the true catholyke faith of the church of Christ, down into
the dark dongion and hell, of error and heresye.)

Yet I have thought it somewhat necessary, (for the more credit to be given
unto the auctorities, and sayings, of these most holy and catholyke writers,
(whom we shall cite and allege, in this present sermon) to prevent the
christian reader, with these three verities following.

The first verity.
The first is, yt none of all these ancient fathers (whom I shall name here for
testimony of this blessed sacrament) (with innumerable moo catholyke writers)
but that constantly believed, that the blessed body and blood of christ was
really in the blessed sacrament. The second verity.
The second is that none of all these (neither any other, catholyke writer)
eather taught, eather wryt, ye contrary of this believe and verity, of the holy
sacramet The third (which I collecte of both these) is, that whatsoever he
be, The third verity.
that receyuith not, or believes not, this article of you blessed sacrament,
that same is none, of the church of Christ, and therefore is the same, in
ieoberdy of da^pnacio^. The certaynte of these verities is very manifest, unto
such, as has diligently seen and red their lucubratio^s and works, where is
to be gathered ye faith yt they were of, for it were, more the^ sacrilege to
think yt so faithful fathers (void of al flattery of man) should wright
contrary to their own conscience and belefe. Forthermore who ca^ justly
think, that these (so gelous favorers and ernest friends of the true honor
of God) would have suffered, (and not resysted rather, with word, pen, and
blood) such an heinous and horrible heresy, as this were (if Christ's body
were not, really in the sacrament) whereby, men should be led, not only into
an open heresy, but also, i^to ye detestable enormitie of ydolatry, the which
had been impossyble, to have been wynked at, or borne with all, among so many,
and so dylygent, vehement, and most circumspecte defenders, of the Christen
faith. Who would judge, that so great and pernytious an error, should have been
noryshed, and escaped the taxation and controlement, of so eloque^t and
catholyke writers, and namely, forasmoche as, certain of them, laid and
employed there chefest labor, and industry, to convince hereses, as it may
appear by their works, wherein, is little matter else, then ye confutatyon of
hereses of their time. For there could no man, ons stere up an heresy, but as soon as he was perceived to put forth his head, the same was dysputed with all,
convinced, and confuted, and his heresy abolyshed. Example of these same, we
have, of Theodoritus in the tripertitie history, who writes, that there a
rose, certain heretics, (in valentiniane ye Emperors time) called The
Massians, ye which erred in ye blessed sacrament, and affyrmed (says he (yt
ye deuyne meat, of whom Christ said. He yt eatyth my flesh and drynketh my
blod, shall live ever, does neither profect, neither harm at all, and ye same,
denied yt ye sacrament of baptysme was profitable for christian people, and ye
prayer only, was suffice^t. The which hereses were immediately (of ye excellent
learned me^ byshopes at ye time co^uinced and co^de^ped. After this, Nestor
stered up an error, against ye verytie of Christ's flesh in ye sacrament, and
in ye consel of Ephe. (of who^ we spoke before) he was charged, by.CC. fathers,
to leave his abominable heresye, or else he should be accursed, out of the
church of Christ. Then came Berengarius. This Bere^garius (as platina writes)
(as I said before) was condemned by Leo, the.ix. bys. of Rome, After whose
death, Berengarius continued obstinate in his heresy, until yt, at the synod
of Turone, one Lanfranke bysh. of Cantorbury co^uinced him. Yet peruersly
continued he in yt opinion. And at ye length, Berengarius abiured openly his
heresye. After this Berengarius, followed Petrus Halebardus, a man of an halt
mind, and luciferyne pride, who^ S. Barnard accused and confuted, of ye
heresy about this sacrament. The^ succeeded wicked wycclyf, yt taught openly
this heresy abominable, of ye sacrament, and he was co^de^pned, by two general
counsels as ye cronicles of that time reports. Thus these apostolyke fathers,
most ernestly, and most assiduously wresteled, against the hateful enemies of
the euangelical and catholyke faith. Wherefore, if they had believed, that the
body and blood of Christ, had not been really in the blessed sacrament, they
would not have co^tended, and labored so vehemently, to conuicte and to confute
the contrary opynion. Nether would they in open synod, and general consell,
have condemned it, for an horible heresye. Wherefore it is then, very
manifest, that they believed, the very real presens of Christ's body and
blood, in the sacrament.

The second verity is, ye none of these fathers, nether any of the other
catholyke writers, either taught, either wryt, that the body and blood of
Christ was not really in the sacrament, and yt we ought not, so to believe, but
paynly they write the contrary, as shall appear here after.

If we well ponder, way, and consider, what careful fear, and what assyduous
dilygens they had toward the pure reading, and true teaching, of the flock
of Christ, commended unto their charge by the holy ghost, we shall soon
perceive that they would not, eather teach, eather wryhgt, that thing whereby
the flock of Christ, should be led from the pure and synceare faith of
Christ's church. For I suppose that there is no honest cristiane heart, yt can
Justly judge the^, either neclige^t without regard, either remysse and void of
care, but rather, mindeful of the great charge, very vigilant and circumspect
what they taught, and how they led the christian flock (whom Christ bought
with his most precious blod) Specially, for as much as, Actuu^. 20.
they were not ygnorant, of the great and most straight account, that they
shall give and render for them, at the day of judgment. Wherefore, without
doubt they, right prudently pondred and considered, what great danger, and
ieoberdy it should be, chefely unto their own souls, and also unto ye
christian flock if by their perverse preaching or teaching or by their
wicked writing, ye christen people should be brought, into so great an error,
as to beleaue that thing, which is very false, and to fall (thereby) into so
detestable blasphemy that they should worshype, and honor bread, in the stead
of christ. But certainly we may be well asswered, that they would not
preach, teach, neither write, any other thing, then they thought most
assuredly true. For undoubtedly, these wise and most circu^spect fathers, had
inco^sideracyo^, yt, if they should have taught ye people, yt they ought not to
believe, ye real very prese^s of ye body and blood of christ, in ye sacrament
(sith that it is there in deed, Augustinus in psalm 88 Suscepit enim de ter ^a
terram quia caro de terra est and de carne, marie car nem accepit, et quia in
ipsa car ne hic ambulauit, et ipsam car nem nobis ma^ducanda^ dedit.

Nemo au^t illam carnem manducat nisi prius ado cauerit, inuentum est
que^admodum adore tur tale scabellum pedum dn^i: et no^ (...).


verily and really, the^ by this their doctrine, they should have led the
people, not only into an heresye, but also into ye syn of co^te^pt of gods
gift and work, and into ye sin of excedyng great unthankfulness, in yt, they
so little regarded, so noble a gift, and ye specially, given of so magnificent
and in co^parable lord god, and would not rather receive ye same, with al honor,
worship, admiration, and thanks geuyng unto God. And on the other side they
considered, yt if they taught ye people, to believe yt the body and blood of
Christ, were in ye sacrament verily and really, and if it were untrue and not
so, then should the people have benled, (by them) into the detestable crime,
and abominable enormitie, of ydolatrie, in worshippynge ye creature of bread,
in stead of Christ. Wherefore, it is unmeet (truly) and far from christian
charity, to think, these most reuere^de and godly fathers, to be so rude,
dull, and vncircu^spect, that they could not se and perceive, these great
peryls to arise, among the christian flock. And would not, either with all
cautele and wysedo^e, deuyte and exchewe them, either with al policy industry
and celeritie withstand the^. Lest that these heresies and blasphemies, should,
or might be imputed, unto their ouersyght or necgligens. But without doubt they
were full well ware, what they eather taught, or wryt, lest any word, eather in
their preachynges or teachinges, should escape the^, whereby ye rude people
(prone and ready to superstition and ydolatry) should take, any notable occasion,
unto so great an heresye. Moreover, where the history of our lords supper,
was often time red in ye church openly, yt which history, is set forth by ye
eua^gelistes and by S. Paul, in wonderful plain words, of ye real presens of
Christ's body and blood, in ye sacrament. It had been very necessary, for these
learned me^, to have expounded these words, in their true sense, (if they were
not to be under sta^ded as they sou^ded and were spoken) lest ye unlearned
people, by occasion of so plai^ words, might have fallen, into mysbeleue, of
this blessed sacrament, and co^seque^tly into abominable ydolatrye. But
certainly, they never gave other exposition unto ye text, (This is my body, as
ye sacrame^taries does) but as a sente^s most plain of it self, they
understood it, as it lay and was spoken. These fathers also, in their time,
oftimes openly celebrated, sacrificed and adored, worshipping ye very presens
of Christ's body and blood in ye sacrament. And in this their fact and example
they taught the people, to honor Christ in the sacrament. Even as saint
Augustine teaches, upon this verse of the.lxxxviii. psalm. Adore and worship
his foot stole, for it is holy. This I have noted before in the margyn.

Wauerynge or doubtful (says saint Augustyne) I convert and turn unto
Christ, for him I do seek. And here I find, how without impiety or
wyckydnes, his foot stole is worshypped with godly honor. For he took earth
of earth (for flesh is but earth) and of the flesh of Marye, he took flesh.
And in the same flesh, he was here co^uersa^t, and gave us the same flesh to
eat, for our health. There is no man, that eats that flesh, but will first
worship it with godly honor. And thus is it found and perceived, how the
footestole of our Lord, is honored with godly honor. And not only, we do
not offend, in so honourynge it, but we do offend, if we do not so honor it.
Thus did, these most godly and devout fathers, teach the people, where in
they plainly signified and showed, that they believed, the real presens of the
blessed body and blood of Christ in the sacrament. And it is not to be
thought that they taught colorablye one thing, and wryt another, neither can
any man read, in any of their monumentes or wrytinges, that they either taught
or wryt the contrary, of the catholic faith, of the very real presens of
Christ in the sacrament. But that they wryt most manyfestlye, for the same
verity, (as shall appear here following. Then stands this verity, as an
unfeigned truth, that none of al these ancient writers, either wryt, or
taught, the contrary of our catholyke faith.

The third verity is, that what so ever he be, that believes not, the real
and very presens, of Christ's body and blood, in the sacrament, that same
pertayneth not, unto ye true church of Christ, but is, rather of the synagoge
of satan, and therefore in the state and peril of dampnation, for he that
retayneth not, the whole faith catholyke of Christ, ye same is none, of the
true members of Christ's church. And he that believes not this article,
retayneth not ye whole faith of Christ, for he fails in this, and
consequentlye, he believes none of the other, how can such a one be the member
of Christ's church. Whereof, if he be not, undoubtedly the same is, in the
peril of da^pnation. Furthermore, who that believes not this article, believes
not as ye church has, and does believe, sith the Apostles time, but he that
beleuyth not as the church does, and has belyued always in this article,
that same pertayneth not to the churthe of Christ, and therefore can he not
hope, of any salvation (for without the church there is no salvation) but his
part is to be looked for among infideles and ypocrites, except that he be
reconcyled, unto the church unfeignedly, and do constantlye receive, and
retain, the catholyke faith. If any man will desire to know how that the
church does, and has believed, or what is the faith, that the church has, and
does retain, (as concerning this article) let this same understand, that the
faith of the ancient church, is to be collected, of ye most ancient writers
of each time, from the apostles, unto our time, who wryt (in matters of faith)
undoubtedly, according unto the catholyke faith, of the church, at their
time. And all they wryt most apertly, and most plainly with, and for this
article, as it may appear here after. The^ has the church believed, and
received this article, sith Christ's time. The^ who that receives not this
article, is separated and divided from the church, and consequently (as I have
said) he is in ieoberdye, of perpetual perdition and dampnation.

Yet (good christian) here thou art to be admonysshed and instructed (where
by thou may with more facility, and ease, and without perplexity, and
doubt, perceive and more redely understand, these auctorities and saynges, of
these ancient writers,) yt thou shalt, find and read, sondrye and diverse
names, given unto the blessed sacrament, yet shall thou not suspecte, the
vnifourme faith, and opynyo^, of these cathholyke fathers, to swerue, either
from them selfs, either from ye church For though they name it dyuersly, yet
they mean al one thing The cause, of so many and sondrye names, and dystincte
appellacyons, of this blessed sacrament, is. That like (as saint Dyonyse
says) God has many names, yet the great varyete of so many names, can not
suffycyentlye, express unto us, the infynyte profundite, of so great a
majesty, power, wisdom, goodness, beningnite and marcye, in like manner, the
infynyte and ineffable riches, of the deuyne goodness, and the most precious
treasure, of the innumerable graces, contained and hydden, in this blessed
sacrament, can not be sufficyentlye explycate, and laid forth, unto us by one
name, therefore these holy and blessed fathers (having respect and
consideratyon, unto diverse and sondrye things in this sacrament) they gave it
sondrye names. And not because, that they had diverse beleffes, or any other,
then the church has now, (as Ecola^padius falsely ascrybeth unto them) and
more falslye understanding them, he most falslye allegeth them, to maintain
and ratifye, his detestable and blasphemous heresye.

The sacrament is called (and co^tayneth in very deed) the body and blood. of
our lord.
This blessed sacrament is very oftymes (of the fathers) called, the body and
blood of our Lord, and this, have not they inverted, them selves, but because
that it, verelye and really, contains, the body and blood of Christ. And
this they have received, at the mouth of Christ, which said of the
sacrament. This is my body, and this is my blood, and of saint Paul who
says. Who that eats and drynketh of that bread and cup unworthily.
shall be gyltye of the body and blood of our Lord. And again. He that eats
and drynketh unworthily, eats, and drynketh his own judgment, not putting
difference, or not decernynge, the lords body. This sacrament is named
bread. 1. Cor. 10. et. 11.
The blessed sacrament is named also, bread. Saint Paul, in the first epistle
to the Corinthians so names it. Not because that it is any material, or
corporal bread. For so does not he name it. If that he had named it bread,
with this addition, corporal or material, or any such like, the^ had he made
somewhat, for ye sacrame^taries. But saint Paul called it bread, as our
savior Christ did call him self, which said. I am the bread of life. Ioh. 6.
Also saint Augustine, and the fathers also, do sometime call it bread, not yt,
which passes through the belie (as saint Augustyne says) but the super
substa^cyal, Ciprianus. In sermon de cena Et sicut panis comunio, que^
quottidie edimus vita est corporis ita panis iste supersubsta^tialis vita est
ai^e et sanitas mentis. Cyprianus in eodme
the mystical, or celestial bread, such additions the ancient writers do
often times use. And saint Cipria^ says, that Christ does call the sacrament,
sometime his body, sometime his flesh, and sometime bread. Therefore does
saint Cyprian him self, name it bread. And in so namynge it, both he, and S.
Paul, with the other, do observe, the manner of the scripture, which, in such
mutations and chau^ges of things, uses to give, unto the thing (so changed)
the former name. As for example. The rod of Aaron, when it was cast on the
ground, and changed in to a serpent, the scripture calls it a rod still, as
it was called, Exodi. 4.
by fore the miraculous mutacyon. For the scripture says. The rod of Aaron
deuowted, the rods of Pharoes incha^uters. In like phrase the wine, ye Christ
made of water, is called water, after yt it was made wine, as we read in ye
gospel of saint John^. After yt, Ioh. 2.
ye master of the feast had tasted, the water made or turned in to wine. Like
as the rodd which was changed in to a serpent, and yet was called a rod still.
And like as ye water, being changed (by miracle) in to wine was called water.
Even so the blessed sacrament (where in, of bread is made the blessed body of
our savior Christ) is called still bread, though it be not now bread, but the
very and real body of Christ. The blessed sacrament is called also, a sign or
a sacrament, of the body and blood of Christ. Not (as ye sacrame^taries says)
only, or but, a sign of the body of Christ. For ye only a sign or but a
sign, they can never read, neither in ye scripture, neither in any, of ye
catholic writers. Therefore, this only is a lie, of their own, ye calls ye
holy sacrament, only a sign. Saint Auguste^ (with many other) does frequent
and use often time, to name ye sacrament, a sign or sacrament. Yet they never
name it, only a sign. And undoubtedly, it is a most sacrate and blessed
sacrament, yt is to say. A sign or a token of an holy thing. This blessed
sacrament (godly reader) has too significations, or it signifies unto us too
things. The one is, ye very body and blod of our savior Christ which verily
and really is contained i^ ye sacrament. For ye blessed dody and blood
underneath ye kinds of bread and wine sinigfyeth and representyth unto us (by
those two dystynct kinds of bread and wine) ye death and passion of Christ,
where in, ye body, hong upon the cross wan and pale without blood, and the blood
was (by crewell effusion) dyuided, from ye body of our savior. The body and
blood of Christ, under ye shape or kind of bread, represe^teth unto us, ye
self same body, as it hong dead upon the cross, from who^ al ye precius blood
was severed and divided, by mortal pain and passion. And ye same body and
blood, under ye kind or shape of wine, represe^teth unto us, ye same very
blood, as it was diuyded and parted, out of the blessed body, in ye time of
his passion. Thus, this blessed body and blood of Christ under the kind and
shape of bread and lyfted up over the prestes head (at ye mass) into ye air,
calls us unto remembrans, how Christ was lyfted upon the cross, and hong in
the air, until all his blood was spente. And the blood and body of
Christ, under the form of wine, lyfted up (also at the mass) admonyssheth us
to remember, the effusyon of the same blood, upon the cross.

And thus very lyuelye, it sygnyfyeth and represents unto us in the
sacryfyce of the mass, the holy memorial of the precious death and passion of
Christ. The other significacyon of the sacrament, is the mystical body of
Christ, that is to say, ye whole church of Christ For in the form or shape of
bread, is represented unto us, the union and conjunction of all the menbres of
Christ, unto their head Christ, and the union and conexion of each membre unto
other, in that mystical body. For like as, of many granes of where arises
one lofe and of many grapes, ysseweth one lyquore of wine, so of many distynct
persons of Christen men and women resulteth and comes but one mystical body of
Christ (as saint Paul says) we many are but one bread and one body, 1.
Cori. 10.
in that we al be partakers of one bread This mystical body of Christ, is
not only signified and represented unto us, in the blessed sacrament, (for so
might, any other profane bread, be a sacrament or sign) and such a sacrament
was the show bread, of the temple but also this blessed sacrament (worthily
received) does effectually cause ye union and keeps that body, for it knytteth
and keeps to gether the lively membrers of Christ, and knytteth the^ also.
unto the head christ, and combynyng the members together with the head, it makes
but one body of christ and his church Not only, spiritually (for yt does also
faith and charity, without the receauynge of this sacrament) but also (by ye
admirable power of God) it co^uerteth out nature in to the natural body of
Christ, and so makes us, Ephe. 5.
the me^bres of his body (as saint Paul says) and of his flesh and of his
bones.

These are ye two sygnifycatyons of the blessed sacrament. The one (that is the
real body of Christ) is not only signyfyed, but is also contained, in the
sacrament. The other (that is the mystycall body of Christ) is not only
sygnified but is also (in manner) caused and continuyd by the worthy receauynge
of this holy sacrament. Thus is the blessed sacrament, a sign or a sacrament,
but yet, a great deal more worthier and a more excellent sacrament, then were
any of the old sacraments, of the old law, for they neither contained,
neither wrought, that thing that they signyfied. August. de 17. ciuitate dei.
cap. 20.
The fathers also having respect unto the thing that is chestye sygnifyed, in
the sacrament, which is the natural body and blood of Christ) they named
ye sacrament (as they might right well) a sacrafice. This sacrament is named,
and is a sacrifice.
By cause it is, the only sacryfice, that succeeded in place, of all the
figurative sacrifes (which were offered up in figure and significacio^ of this
most perfect sacrifice yt was offered upon the cross and redeemed the world.
And the very same now also is, the, busy, contynual and dailye sacrifice of
the church. Ciprianus 2. lib. epist. epistola. 3. ad Ceciliu^
Saint Cipriane, in many places, (but specially in his second book of epistles)
callyth it a sacrifice, whose words are those in the second epistle ad
Cecilium. The sacrament, of the sacrifyce of our lord, was prefigured, in
Melchisedech the priest, according unto the scripture, which says. Gene. 14.
And Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine, for he was the preiste of the
highest, and he blessed Abraham. And that he bears ye figure of Christ, the
holy ghost declares, in the Psalms, by the person of the father unto ye son
sayng. Be for lucifer I have begotten the. Our Lord did swear and he
repents not). Thou art a pressed for ever, according unto the order of
Melchisedech. The which order, commyth by the same offering. For hereof it
proceeds, and comyth. By cause that Melchisedech (being the preeist of the
highest) offered bread, and wine, and because yt he blessed Abraham. For who is
more rather, or more aptly ye preeist of ye highest then our lord Jesus Christ.
The which offered sacrifice unto his father, and he offered ye same, yt
Meschisedech did offer, yt is, bread and wine (yt is to say) his body and
blood. I do omyt (of purpose) Crisostome and diverse other, by cause I would be
breue. Collect now (dilligent reader) of these former things, what we do honor
and what we do offer, in this blessed sacrament. Note what thing we do honor
and what it is that we do offer in the blessed sacrament.
We do not properly honor ye outewarde aparens of ye sacrament, which is ye
form and shape of bread, and wine, but we do honor ye thing covered and
verily contained under ye forms and shapes of bread and wine, which is none
other, the^ ye very and real body and blod of our savior christ We do not
offer (at the mass) proprely those forms or shapes of bread and wine as a
sacrifice (for they are no sacrfyce neither do we call or name the^ a sacryfice)
but we offer up unto God ye father (at ye mass) ye very blessed body and blod
of our savior christ (not crewelly sleyng him, for so he was offered but ones
(but with a lively and lovely memory of chirstes death and passion, we present)
in manner of an oblatyon, ye same very body and blood (now impassible) geuynge
thanks unto him, for that inestymable and ineffable mercy, that he has
showed unto us mysers and sinners, in reconsylynge us (his ennymyes) unto him
self, by the death and passion, of his only sone Jesus Christ our Lord.
And with this body and blood of our savior Christ (our head) we offer up also,
unto our father celestial, the whoole body mystycall, of Christ's church,
geuynge unto him thanks also, for the creatyo^ redemptyon; and iustificatyon
hereof. Committing it, unto his most godly and mercyful tuition, besekynge
him that he vouchsafe, to pacify, to keep, to knyt to gether, and to govern
and rule it thoroughout all the hoole world.

The sacrament is named Dynaxis.
Saint dyonyse the grecyan namyth this sacrament synaxis that is, communyon, or
common pertakyng, by cause there is sygnifyed, and effectuously wroughte (by
this blessed sacrament) not only, the union and knot of Christ's me^bres, unto
the head Christ, but also there is sygnyfyed, and in very deed there is (by it)
a common partakynge, of al gostly goodness, which is in each of the members, or
in the hoole. For as much as by the condign and worthy receauynge, of this
blessed sacrament, we are made one with Christ, and incorporated unto him,
therefore by this coniunctio^ and incorporatyon, we are made commen partakers
(with the other members) of the grace and goodness, as well of the whole body,
as of the head Christ. And hear unto agreyth, the article of our faith, where
in, we say, and believe, the communion of saints.

Trewly this commen partakynhe, of the graces and gifts of God, can not be
better, or more effectuously exibyted, or given to us, then by the receauynge
of this blessed sacrament, for by it, we be incorporated unto Christ, from
whom descends, and comes, (as from the welhed) all grace and goodness, in to
every membre, and that which is given unto the membre, does not a veil and
profyt only that member, but it is for the profyt and help of all the, other
me^bres. Therefore is this sacrament justly called the commen partycipatyon, for
as much as, by it, the members are knit to ye head, and each unto other where by
they all partake of ye head, and each of other.

Of some of the fathers this sacrament is named, Eucharistia, The sacrament is
called Eusharistia.
whom Orygene against Celsus, does expond The good grace, and plainly it may
be called, the good grace, and that congruently, for as much as, it does
contain in it self the plenitude and well of all grace (that is Christ) of
whom John^ wyttneshethe. Full of grace and verity, and of his plentyfullnes
we all have received. Where (devout Bernard says) we do receive not one grace,
but we receive all grace.

And some do interpret Eucharstia. Thankefulnes, or, geuynge thanks, and this
is not ilico^gruent. For there is no thing, that we have a greater cause to
give thanks to God, then for this our daily, and most necessary
celestial food. Nether can we give unto God, more acceptable thanks, then
by the frequent and of receyuynge of this most blessed sacrament, the blessed
memoryall of Christ's death and passion. The sacrament is called our Lords
food or meat.
But among al other) saint Hyllary callyth it, the meat of our lord, or
our lords food, and plainly he affyrmeth, that we eat and receive (in this
our Lords fode) the flesh that is ye sempiternall word of God, by the which
meat, he collecte the, that we are made one with God the father, for by
eating of this meat, we are (says he) incorporated, and made one with
Christ, and Christ and the father be one, therefore we being (by this meat)
made one, The sacrament is called our vytayll or waifaring meat.
with Christ, we must needs be made one with the father. Saint augustyne, in
his second look entitled (of the uisitacyon of the sick) names it our
vitayll or wayfarynge meat, because, that this blessed vytayll, gives,
incomparable strenghe, unto us trauelynge, in the tedious iornaye, of this
miserable life, and helps us, unto a most perfeete and fortunable
consummatyon, and end, of so werye a iornye. Wherefore this is, the consell of
saint Augustine. O my sone, refuse not to receive, that heavenly supplement, of
our Lords body, but rather, most gredely, and most ernestly speak for
it, and eat it most faithfully for it is meat incomparable, meat inestable
and it shall be, to the, thy vyatycall or wayfarynge vytall, a meat most
helthsome, the price of thy redemptyon, the monument or memory of thy redemer.
Hitherto appertains, The sacrament is called the banquet or feast.
that Jerome calls ye blessed sacrament the banquet or feast, for thus,
wryttynge, to Hedibian he says. Moses gave you not the very or true bread
from heaven, but our lord Jesus. He is both the geaste and the feast, he
eats and is eaten. Thus saint Jerome names this most sacrate mysterye, in
the which he plainly shows, that we do eat, the heavenly delicates, that is
our very lord Jesus, and there can be no meat, more delitious, more pleasant,
or more plentyful of suauitie and swetnes, the^ this is. For if Manna (the
shadow of this heavenly meat) had (in it) al delitiousnes and comprised (in
it self) all manner of suauitie and swetnes, how much more, has the verity
it self (which is the well ^^grace, and all goodness) super aboundantlye, all
manner of delectable swetnes. The sacrament is named the mystical benedictio^
Cyrill, (among the rest, of the names) peculiarly names it, ye mystical
benediction, or the spiritual blessing, because that Christ with his divine
benediction, at his supper, iustituted, the blessed sacrament. And therefore
(also Paul) does call it the cup of benediction Upon the which place of
Paul, Crysostome writing says. It is no little or small thing, ye Paul names,
it the benediction, for when I name. Benedictio^, I name the good grace (which
is the sacrament) and in namynge that, I open all the treasure, of the
benignity and goodness of God. And I also do remember (with the cup) the
great, and innumerable gifts, and benefits, and what so ever, that we have
received, at the hand of God. It may right well be called the spiritual
blessing. For vndoughtedlye, God almyghtye does bless, ye worthy receyuers
hereof, with all spiritual blessing, that is, he replenysheth them, with
inestimable gifts of his grace, and augme^teth the former virtues and graces,
and will bring them, at the length, unto the blessing of eternal life. For
this is the blessing, that Christ promised (the which Manna could not bring,
nether give the eaters thereof.) For they that did eat thereof, dyed in
deserte, but if any eat of this bread, he shall not dye for ever. Now
(gentle reader) thou haste herd a part of ye inestimable treasure of grace,
that lies hydden, in this blessed sacrament, sygnifyed by these diverse and
sondrye names, that these ancient and holy fathers gave, unto this ineffable
sacrament; Yet of the variety and dyuersitie of ye names thou must not judge
diversity of opinion, (as concerning this sacrament) among them, but (as I
have said) they having diverse respects, and considerations, gave (according,
to their considerations) to this blessed sacrament diverse names. And thus they
(meanynyge one thing, and beleuyng vnyformely one thing, in expressing their
faith, in that one thing) used diverse names. And certainly that one thing,
that they believed of this sacrament, was none other, then that the catholyke
faith of the church (which in their time and sithe) has and does yet
believe, that is, the real presens, of the natural boodye and blood of
Christ, in the blessed sacrament, as shall apere most euydently, by the
testymonyes, of the said auctient and holy writers, that I shall recyte here
foloynge, to the number of.xxiiij. and he ye wryt lateast of them lived not
this.vi. C. year. These have I brought in, for wytnes with me, not by cause,
that their were no me writers, in all the other time of these.vi. hundred
year sith, but by cause, that I have not seen their works, and they are not
(so commenly) had, as these are, whose works I have named, I left out also
all the wrytters that has been in the church this.vi. hundred year, because,
that they be so well known and be so many of them, that I might be tedyous,
to the reader, in recytynge only their names.

Ireneus.
Ireneus, in his first book, that he writes against heresies, says.

When the chalice (with water and wine myngled) and the bread broken,
receaueth the word of God, it is made the blessed sacrament, of the body and
blood of Christ. Of the which, the substance of our flesh, increases, and
consists. How can they, then deny, yt the flesh is partaker of the gift
of God (which is everlasting life) sith that it is noryshed, with the blood
and body of Christ and is made, the member of the same, as the apostle says,
in the epistle unto the Ephesians. For we be members of his body, and of his
flesh, and bones. Not speaking these things, of the spiritu all and
invisible man. For the spirit has, nether flesh, nether bones, but
speaking of the connection and disposition of the natural body, the which
consysteth of flesh and bones, the which natural disposition of ye body, is
fed and increased, with the cup, which is his blood, and with the bread
which is his body, There can be, no playned words spoken, for the verity of
the real presens of Christ, in the blessed sacrament.

Ignatius, Ignatius. In episto. ad Roma.
that glorious martyr the disciple of saint John^ Evangelist and the third
bishop of Antioche after saint Peter, In episto. ad Ephe.
in his epistle that he writes unto ye Romans has these most devout
words. I will not eat (says he) corruptible meat. I desire not the
voluptuousnes of this world. But I desire the bread of God, the bread
celestial, the bread of life, which is the flesh of Jesus Christ, the son
of the living God (the which was borne of the seed of David and Abraham in the
latter time) and I desire the drink, which is his blood. Therefore he exhorts
the Ephesia^s in this wise. Make you have (says he) to approach often time unto
the sacrament of the Altar, the glory of God. For when that, is often
frequented then are the powers of satan expelled. And in the end of the same
epistle. Breaking the bread, the which is the medicine of immortality, the
tryacle, not of dyenge, but of the living in god by Jesus Christ. These are
words plain enough to perceive what believe he had of the blessed sacrament.

Tertullian in his book, entitled (de Resurrectione carnis) writes, in this
manner. Tertullianus.
Now let us see, and behold, the form and beauty of a christian man, what,
and how great prerogative has, this, our frail and filthy flesh with God.
Although that this, were dignity enough, there can no soul at all, attain
health or salvation, except that (whiles yt it is, in flesh) it believe, or
receive the faith. The flesh is so necessary thing of our salvation.

When the soul of the flesh, is knyt to God, it is ye flesh that makes,
that ye soul, may be so knytte. For the flesh is washed, that the soul may
be purifyed. The flesh is anointed, that the soul might be consecrated. The
flesh is signed, that the soul might be strengthed. The flesh is shadowed
with laing on of hands, that the soul might be illumined with the holy ghost.
The flesh eareth, the body and blood of Christ, that the soul might be
fed, with god

Here we may right well perceive, the belefe of Tertullian, of this sacrament,
which confesses openly here, that the flesh does eat the body and blood of
Christ, and not the figure of the body and blood. And because that, saint
Cyprian was so dilligent a reader, of Tertulia^, I shall place him, Ciprianus
lib 2. epistola. 3.
next unto Tertullian. That blessed martyr saint Ciprian, writing unto Cecilium
in his second book the third epistle says.

That the blessyng of Abraham, (by Melchisedech the priest) might by dewly
celebrated, the figure of ye sacrifice, went before, in bread and wine. The
which thing, our lord, accomplyshynge and fulfyllynge, offered bread, and
the cup (myxt with wine) and he, that was the fulness, has fulfilled the
figure prefygured. Behold, there went before in Melchesedech, the figure of the
sacryfice of bread and wine, but Christ (which is the plenitude it self)
fulfilled the verity, of the figure prefigured, namelye in the supper. And
after, he says also, De cena domini.
upon ye lords supper. Our lord Christ (whose body we do touch) is bread
That this bread, might be given unto us, we pray daily, lest we that are in
christ, and receive the sacrament of the altar daily, as the meat of our
salvation, (by mean of any great offense) abstaynynge, being forbidden, from
the hauenly bread, we should be separated in deed, from the body of Christ,
he preaching and mouyshynge us. I am the bread of life, that came from heaven,
if any eat of this bread, the same shall live ever. The bread that I will give,
it is my flesh, for the life of the world. Therefore when he says, that he
shall live for ever, if he eat of his bread, it is manifest and plain, that
they shall live, which touches his body, and receaueth the sacrament of the
Altar, after the manner of communion.

Origenes comes ^elsum.
Origene witnesses (writing against Celsus) and says. Let Celsus (ignorant
of God) give thanks unto beuels But we thank, the creator of al things for
the benefits yt he has given to us. When we (geuynge thanks) do eat ye
bread, the which bread (by oration, supplication and prayers) is made a more
holyer body, the which body also verily makes us, more holy, ye receaueth
the same, with a whole and pure heart.

Origenes super Numeros vt supra.
And in the seventh homily (upon the book of Numbres) he more plainly writes,
and says. Those things which before time were done in figure, now are they
accomplyshed in the verity and in deed. Before baptism was in the sea and in
the cloud, but now the generation is in very deed, in water and in the holy
ghost. Then was Manna the meat, as in the figure, but now the flesh of the
word of God is in deed is very meat, as he him self says. My flesh is
very meat, and my blood is very drink. By these his words we may perceive
that the Jews had ye figure, but we christians have now the thing it self,
that is, the very body and blood, in very deed,

Iuue^cus also (in his verses) says. As soon as he, had spoken, Inuencus in
carminibus.
he (with his own hands) brake the bread, and geuynge thanks, he taught and
told, his disciples, that he gave his own proper body. And then he took the
cup, replete with wine, he sanctified it (geuynge thanks) and gave it, and
taught them also, yt he had divided unto them. his precious blood, and said.
This blood shall remytte, the sin of ye people. Drink it, and believe now
these true and unfeigned words.

Hyllary (whom saint Jerome calls the trompe of the latin tongue against the
Arrians) agreyth fully with this catholic verity, Hyllarius in lib. 8. de
Trinitate.
and says (in the eight book of the Trinity.) We may not speak, or common
in the matters of God, after the manlyke or worldly manner. Nether ought there,
peruersitie eather unhonest preaching to be extorted by violence (unto a
wicked and ungodly intelligence or understanding) out of the helthesome, and
celestial saynges, let us read the scriptures, but let us understand, those
that we read.

Then shall we do, the office of a perfect christian. For, as concerning the
natural verity of Christ in us, the thing yt we hereof do learn, except we
learn of him, we, both folyshely and wyckedly, do learn. For he him self
says.

My flesh verily is meat, and my blood is verily drink, and he yt eats my
flesh and drynkyth my blood, dwells in me and I in him. As concerning then
the verite of the flesh and blood of Christ, there is no place left, to
doubt at. For now, both by the words of our lord him self, and also by
our faith, it is very flesh and blood. And these (received, and dronken
does cause, that we be in Christ, and that Christ is, in us.

What can be more evidently and manyfestly spoken, then these words. Saint
Basyll (who not only, Basilius in regulis monachotum.
led him self, a monastical and Godly life but also he taught a certain
trade of such sort of life) in that book where he entreats, of the ^^ules
of monastycall life, he is demanded of his brethren. With what manner of fear,
faith, and affectyon, the grace of the body and blood of Christ, ought to be
received. Verey (says he) the apostle saint Paul teaches us, with what
fear, saying. He that eats and drynketh unworthily, he eatheth and drynketh
his own judgment, or condempnacyon, not puttyng dyfferens between ye body of
our lord and other common meats. But ye words of our savior Christ
teaches us faith, which says. This is my body the which is given for many
do this in ye remembrans of me.

This is the faith that faint Basyll would that his brethren should retain as
concerning the blessed sacrament.

Gregory Nysene, the brother of saint Basyll, who (for his excellent learning
and Godlynes) was called the divine, Intreatynge the life moysaycall,
mystically, or spiritually, he gives consel, that we should receive (with a
pure and clean mind) the celestyall bread, whom (says he) no sowynge nor
tyllage, has brought, forth, but it is bread, which is prepared, for us,
wtoute tyllage, and without any help of man. This is found flowynge, from
above upon the earth. For ye bread yt came from heaven, (the which is very
meat) which is fygured also by this hystore of Manna, is no spiritual or
vncorporall thing. For how can, an vncorporall thing be come meat? and the
thing, which is not vncorporall must needs he a very body. And surely the
bread of his body, neither plowynge, neither tyllyng, nether housbandmanes
work has brought this forth. But an earth remainyng undefiled, and yet was
ye earthful, of this bread, with the which ye hu^gry, (yt knows ye misterius
birth of a dgin) may sone be satysfyed. These words of this dyuine doctor,
were plainly meant, of ye sacrament, as it may appear in ye process of ye same,
yt he there entreated

Ambrosius in primam Pauli Ep stola ad Corinthios.
Saint Ambrose, writing upon ye first epistle of saint Paul unto ye
Corinthyans the.xi. chapitre, says. For because that we are redeemed with the
death of our lord, we bear in reme^brans ye same thing, in eating and
drynkinge, the flesh and blood, ye which he offered up for us: And we do
singnifie ye death of our lord Christ, in these things, obtaining now ye new
testament, (the which is the new law; yt bri^geth unto heaven, every one yt
cruely is obedient to it, Here apertely saint Ambrose affirmyth ye verytie of
ye body and blood of Christ in the blessed sacrament and says yt we do eat
and drink ye flesh and blood of christ. And in many other places, he writes
as openly, as he does here, Ieronimus in epistola^ Pauli ad Titum.
and specially in his book of the sacraments Also S. Ierom, in his
co^me^tareis upon ye epistle, at Titu^, shewi^g ye virtues, yt belongs unto a
bishop, says in this manner. If it be commanded unto ye laymen, yt they
abstain from their wylies, for prayers sake, what should we suppose, of ye
bishop, which for his own sins, and for ye sins of ye people, must offer
unto God, undefiled hoostes, let us read ye books of ye kings, and we shall
find, ye abymelech, there would not give unto David, and his servants, yt
show bread, before yt he had known, whether they were clean, from wome^s
company, or no. Not of harlotes, but of their one wives. And until, yt he had
known certainly, yt they had abstayned from ye marytall copulation, he would
not grant the^ the bread, which he denied the^ before. There is as much
dyfferens, between the show bread of ye temple, and the body of christ, as is,
between ye shadow and ye body, ye image and the verity, ye examples or
figures (of ye things to come) and ye things, which by these examples were
prefigured. And as for mekenes, pacie^s sobryetie, softenes, abstynens from
monye, hospitality, and also benignity, should chefely be in a bishop, and
should excel in him, above all the laytie. Even so, pure chastity, and (as I
might say) a preestly shamefastnes, should be in hi^. That he should, not only
abstain hi^ self, from ye unclean deed but also his mi^de (which shall
co^secrat ye body of christ) should be fre, from ye casting of his eye, and
error of evil cogitacion.

This testimonye of saint Jerome is so plain that it neadeth no monytyon.
Crisostomus in homilia de Jude tradi^ione.


Crysostome writes in this sort, in the homely of the treason of Judas.
Speak Judas (says he) whom dyddest thou sell for thyrty pences. This is the
blood, of whom thou dyddest bargayne. even now with the pharisees. O the
mercy of Christ, O the madness of Judas. He was at a point to sell him for
thyrty pences, and Christ offered unto him, the body (which he had sold) that
he moght have remission of sins And after a few words, Crisostome says
again. And now is he here present, that adorned that table, and the same
does also, consecrate this table. For it is not man, that of the things set
before the, on the consecrate table of God, makes the body and the blood of
Christ, but he which was crucified for us, Christ. The words are spoken by
the mouth of the priest and the things set forth before us, are consecrated,
by the grace of the power of God. This is (says he) my body. And like, as ye
voice, the which said (increase and multiplye) spoken ones, and yet it takes
effect, at al times in generation, where nature is workyng. Even so, this
voice This is my body, was ones spoken, and yet, at al tables or aulters of ye
church of Christ, unto this day (and shall unto Christ's coming) give, unto
this sacrifice, strength. These words of Crisostome are to plain, to be
detorted or wreasted, from their true meani^g, which is that when the words of
Christ, are duelye spoken by the priest at mass, the^ are the bread and wine
consecrated and made the very body and blood of Christ by the secret might
and power of god and so is Christ's body and blood really, in ye sacrament.
Saint Augustine, Augustinus ad Cresconicu^ gramancum.
thought that he has, innumerable, plain and evident testimonies, for this
verity, yet, among many, I will recyte one or two. First he says in his
first book (ad cresconicu^ gramaticu^ (what shall we say, of the very body
and blood of our lord, the only sacrifice for our health. For though that he
him self says. Except that a man eat my flesh, and drink my blood, he
shall have no life in him. Yet does not the apostle Paul also, teach, that
the same is pernicious and dedly, unto such as misuseth it. For the apostle
Paul says. Whosoever eats ye bread, and drynketh of that cup of our
lord unworthily, he shall be gyltye, of the body and blood of our Lord.

Again, saint Augustine (ad Iulianum comite^) writes these words. The mercy
of our lord Jesus Christ, deliver us from these things. And he grant or give
unto us him self to be eaten, which said. I am the lively bread, which came
from heaven. And he that eatythe my flesh, and drynketh my blood, has
eternal life in him self. But let every man examyne him self (according
unto the precept of the apostle) before that he receive the body and blood of
our lord Jesus Christ and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of ye
cup. For he that eatith the body and blood of our lord unworthily, he eats
and drynketh it, unto his own judgment, making no differens, of the body of
our lord.

For when we shall receive him, we ought to have recourse unto confession, and
penans, and to dyscusse curiously, all our acts, and if we perceive mortal
sins in us, we ought speadely to make haste to wash them a way, by
confession and penans, lest we (like Judas that traitor hyding the devil with in
us, do perish. These are the words of S. Augustyne. The which shewith very
plainly, Cyrillus in Iohe^z.
what believe he had, as concerning ye blessed sacrament. Cyrill the patriarche
of Alexandria, upon ye syxt of John^, writes very plainly for this verity.
Whose words are these. They can not be pertakers (in holiness) of ye life
et^nal, which has not received Jesus, by the mistical benediction. And again
he says. Christ is not with his word only, but also with his touching, he
araiseth up the dead, that he might show and declare that his body could
also, raise up the dead. If then by only towchynge, the corrupt are restored
and the dead araysed How should not we live, or receive life, which does taste,
and eat, his flesh. For plainly he will reform, unto his immortalytie,
such, as be the pertakers of him, and after a few words he says. For it must
needs come to pass, that not only, the soul of man (by ye holy ghost should
assend unto blessed life) but also yt this rude and terrenal body) by like taste
and touchi^g, of like meat (as it is it self) should be brought, unto
immortalytie. Damascene in his.iiii. book, of the catholic faith in the.xiiii.
Damascenus lib. 4. cap. 14.
chapter says these words. As concerning the veritye of ye body and blood of
Christ, in ye sacrament. That body verily, is joined unto the divinity, the
which body he took of ye immaculate virgin. And not yt the body assumpted,
should come down from heaven. But that the bread and wine, are tra^smuted and
changed, into the body and blod of god. Thou wylt ask ye manner how that may
be? let it suffyce ye to hear, how that by the holy ghost, in a most Godly
vyrgyne he, (by him self and in him self) received flesh, and we can say
no more, but that, the word of God, is true, effectuous, and omnipotent, but
the manner how it is. That is intractable or unsearchable. Neither can this be
redely told, how bread (by eating) and wine and water (by drinking) are
changed naturally, into the natural body of the eater and drynker, and not
into a another body, but into the very same body that the eater or drynker had
before.

Even so, the purposed bread, wine and water (by invocation and coming of the
holy ghost) are changed supernaturally, into the body and blood of Christ and
there are not two bodies but only one, and the very same.

Iohe^s Cassianus collatione ^2. capi. 12
John^ Casiane, has these words in the.xxii. collation the.xii. chapter. With
so great dilygens of humylytie we ought to keep our heart, yt we keep al way
this one thing stable and constantly in our remembrans. That we cannot
attain, to so great purity and cleanes, al though that by ye great gift of
God, we do al these things, that I have spoken of before. Yet let us Judge our
selves, much unworthy, to communicate or receive, that holy and sacrate
body. For first, the majesty of that heavenly Manna, is so great, that no man
(compassed abought with this claye and flesh) can worthily, and condyngly,
receive that meat, but only of the mere and benefycyall gift of Gods grace.
Here in these words Cassian confesses, the majesty of the celestial Manna,
and the veryte of the body of Christ, whom no man can receive worthily,
Athanasi. ad prima^ Pauli ad Corin.
but only he that thinks him self unworthy.

Athanasius upon the first epistle unto the Corinthians, confyrmeth the veritye
of the real presens of Christ's body and blood in the sacrament.

For we (says he) having that cup in our hands, we give thanks (without
doubt) unto him, that shed his blood for us, and have uoutchsaf to indew us
with ineffable gifts. He said not only, yt it is the partakyng, but rather
ye communion, because he would express some greater thing. That is the
wonderful very nigh coniu^ction, And this is the sense of that which he spoke.
This same blood, which is contained in the cup, is the same, that floued
out, of the side of Christ, and (when we receive it) we do partake it. yt is
to say, we be co^nexed, and knyt unto Christ. And the bread that we break, is
it not the communion of the body of Christ? That body, which our lord did
not suffer, to be broken upon the cross, (for there was no bone broken of him)
that same (for our sake) he suffers now to be broken. Athanasius in these
words manyfestly shows yt the blessed sacrament broken for us, is the same
body yt honge on the cross and had no bone broken thereof. Cassiodorus says
upon this text, Cassiodorus i^ psalmum. 110.
of ye psalm. Thou art a priest for ever according to ye order of
melchisedech. This thing (says he) does the prophet tell, yt the father has
promised to his son. For unto whom, can this be truly and plainly applied,
saving only unto our Lord and savior. The which, most helthsomly has
consecrated, his body and blood in the gift or erogation of bread and wine
Even as he, in the gospel, says. Except that you eat, the flesh of the son
of man, and drink his blood, ye can have no life in you. But in this flesh
and in this blood, let not man's mind ymagyne, any thing crewell or
corruptible. Lest, as the apostle says, he that eats the body of our
Lord, unworthily, he eats and drinks it to his judgment. But let the
mind of man think, ymagyne, and understand the same substance, that gives
life, and health. That same (I say) which is made the very body and propre
substance, of the word eternal, by the which both, remission of sin, and
the gift, of eternal life, are given. This blessed father Cassiodor says yt
we should not think or ymagyne, in the sacrament, to behold and see, the cruel
or mortal blood or body, in their own shape and fashion, but we must
understand (says he) the helthsome substance, that gives life, and the
substance which is Christ's substance, the which gives life, remission of
sins, and eternal life. It can not be the substance of bread, yt can give
remission of sins.

But ye substance of Christ, Fulgentius ad Monimum.
yt dyed for the sins of ye world. Fulge^tius answeryng unto a question (as
concerning the sacrifice of ye body and blood of Christ) yt one Monimus (a
friend of his) demanded, whether it were offered only to the father, or no.
Unto him thus he said (among much more matter.) This same (I say) spiritual
edification, can not be asked better, or more oportunely, the^ when in the
sacrament, of the bread, and cup, the very body and blood of Christ, is
offered up of his body, the church. For the cup yt we drink of, it is ye
communion of Christ's blood, and the bread yt we break, it is the communion
of Christ's body. Here expressly says Fulgentius yt the body and blood of
Christ is offered, in ye sacrament. S. Gregory, Gregorius primo dea logoru^,
lib capi. 58.
in his first book of his dialoges, ye.lviii. chap. writes in this sort. We
ought, with al our heart, to co^te^pne this present world, for because we may
perceive, yt it wastes and to offer daily unto God. sacrifices of tears, and
to offer daily, hoostes of his flesh and blood. For this is the sin guler and
special oblation, that saves the soul, from death eternal. The which
oblatio^, represents unto us, (in a mysterye) the death, of the only
begotten son of God. For though he (rysynge from death) dies no more, and
death has no more, dominion over him, and is immortaly, and vncorruptibly
living in him self. Yet in the mystery, of that holy sacrifice, he is offered
up for us, for there is his body received, there is, his flesh divided, for
the health of ye people, there his blood, is distributed, and powered (not into
the hands of infydells) but into the mouth, of the faythefull. Se devout
reader how expressly he shows that Christ (remaining immortal and
impassible in him self) yet he is, in the blessed sacrament really, received
of the faithful.

Cedulius presbiter in carmini bus.
Sedulyus the preeste, in his verses (of the deuyne maruayles) says.

Our lord (says he) geuynge bread unto Judas, did know before hand, his
dysceatful mind, and bewrayed his treason, by geuynge him bread, which lord
was the bread him self, after that he had stablyshed, yt two gifts of his
body and blod, he gave there, unto his dyscyples, the meat and drink, whereby
the faithful and clean souls, Beda in Lucam lib. 6.
should never thurst either hunger hereafter.

Beda, in his syxt book upon S. Luke writes thus, where it should move any,
with doubth, for asmoche, as Christ gave, his body and blood unto his
discyples, when they had supped, why we should be taught, (by the costome of
the universal church) to receive the same sacrament, fasting. Let the same
perceive, in few words. The appostles (therefore) did receive it, when they had
supped, for it was necessary, the figuratyue passover to take an end, and to
be consumed, and so to approach unto the sacrament, of the verity, of ye true
passover. It has pleased the masters of the church, in the honor of so
great and terrible a sacrament, yt we, should first be strengthed, with the
partitipacion of our lords passion. and both inwardely and outwardely, to be
sanctified with the goostly and spiritual meats, and the^ the hungry body, to
be refreshed with the vile and earthely meats.

Haymo also upon the epistle to the Corinthia^s writes in this sort. H^ymo in
Paulum Hic virit ciriter annum dn^i 832.
As ye flesh of Christ (the which he received in ye womb virginyall) is his
very body (slain for our salvation) euenso, ye bread, which Christ gave unto
his disciples, and to all that be elected to the everlasting life, the which
also, the priests daily do consecrate in ye church, by ye might and power of
the divinity (the which divinity repleteth the same bread) is the very body
of Christ. Neither are the body yt he took in ye womb virginial, and this
bread, two bodies, but they make, but one very body of Christ. In so much that
when it is broken and eaten, the^ is Christ offered a sacrifice, and eaten and
yet he remains whole, and alive. And like as the body (put upon the cross)
was offered up, for our redemption, even so daily for our health, is offered up
this bread, ye which (though it seem bread) yet is it not bread, but ye body
of Christ. For our lord and redemer (helpinge our frayltie) because he knew,
how frail we are toward sin (he has given unto us, this sacrament, that)
where he can not suffer death daily (and we daily do offend) we might have, a
very true sacrifice, whereby we might have expiacio^, and be purged And
therefore, because ye same (which was offered on the cross) and this in the
sacrament, make but one body, and are offered up for our rede^ptio^, he said.
This is my body, yt shall be given for you. These words of Haymo, are so plain,
yt any man may right sone perceive, what this blessed father, believed of this
blessed sacrament, whose authority, is not to be suspected, sith it is.vii,
hundredth year agone, sith he write. And yet sith his time there has also many
(both godly and excellent learned me^) written. As Theodore the gretian, ye
scole master of bid. Alcuinus, scole master to Charles ye great S. Bernard,
Rupert, Hugh descto^ Victore with a great nu^bre mo, who^ to name it can not
greatly profyt, the unlearned reader (for whom I have perpared specially this
homely things. Therefore, I have thought these, a sufficient testimony, to
declare the faith, of the holy church of Christ fro.vii.c. years agone and
upward until the apostles time. And as for all the time, sith the year of our
lord viii.c.xxxii. until these our days, noma^ doughtyth (no not our
adversaries) but yt the church, most co^sta^tly has retained and defended the
faith and believe of the real presens of the blessed body and blood of Christ
in the holy sacrament, and has always condemned the contrary as an heresye
horrible. I thought it therefore nether necessary nether profitable to be to
prolixe in cytynge or allegynge any auctours of so late years. For by these
few (among a great number) most godly and catholyke fathers, any honest heart
(yt is not more desirous of contention, then of the treuth) may be satisfied,
as touching the faith, that the church has retained, in their times. And he
that is not satisfied with these, that same, will not be satisfied, if I had
recyted, ten times so many mo, yea scantly, would the testimony of scripture,
satisfye such one, but that he would, eather give it his own gloss, eather
deny it to be scripture, as the property is of all heretykes.

Cyprianus sermon 5. de lapsis queda^ refert que et nouerat ipse. Ambrosius in
funebri sermon proft^e sa^yrot Item Gregorius intertio dialogorum. Augusti.
in.22. lib. de ciuitate dei capite. Beda in histo a ge^tis A glorum.
I might, in this place, bring in, for the corroboration and confirmation, of
this our faith, ye miracles, wherwyth, the special goodness of God, has
stablyshed and confirmed, this out faith, in the hearts of many devout and
faith full christians. The which miracles, are not feigned of late years, but
were written, many hundred years agone, and that by classical and ancient
writers But I can not, within the compass of a sermon, comprise without
tediousnes, so much matter. Such myraculous works can not iustlye be
thought, lies feigned by men, eather illusions of the deuell. For as much, as
the auctours that reports them, are of so great antiquite, godliness and of
so exact judgment. The auctours are these. Saint Cypriane, saint Ambrose,
saint Augustyne, saint Gregory, and venerable Beda Eusebius in the syxt book
of the ecclesiastical history. Certainly in such miracles (as at reported by
these auctors (with many moo) God has sygnyfyed unto us, how, this our faith,
of the blessed sacrament, has pleased him. Where ye sacramentaries has, not
one to show for them selves to corroborat, their new fashyoned faith. Except
they take it for a miracle, (as they, and we also may most certainly) that
such obstinate blasphemars and horrible herytykes has eskapyd so long, the
great vengeans of God. The which may right well be ascribed unto the
ineffable mercy of the dyuine benignite, which, Roma. 1.
with this long pacyens, provoke them unto repentans. I judge it no less
miracle also, that God has suffered them, to be so far divided, a monge
them selves, such as seeks and reaches, a new and a strange way of believe,
and salvation, 1 Pet. 1. Quando expectaba^t dei patientiam in diebus Noc cum
fabricaretur arca i^ qua pauci. 1. octo ale salve fact sunt Quod et vos nunc
similis form saluos facit baptisma.
other then the church of Christ, has received of Christ, and retained
always, and builds to them selves a another babylon, forsakyng, deridynge, and
contempnyng the ship, of the catholic church, whom God has ordened to
preferue us from the great stood of perdicyon. For like as almyghtie God (in
time paste) did myraculously and justly divide the tongues and languages of the
proud and presu^ptuous Babellonians, Even so has God divided these
sacramentaries, that there are (almoost) as many beleues, as there be preachers
or teacheres. There is no manner of agreement (in manner) among them, sauinge
only, that, as Sampso^tayed the foxes to gether by the tails to dystroye the
corn, even so are these vulpyne and craftye herytikes tayd to gether, to one
end and purpose, that is, ye distructyon, and subuersyon of the pure and
sincere corn, of the catholyke faith of Christ. But eaer these fradule^t foxes
shall acco^plyshe their deuelysh purpose in fyeryng all the corn, they may be
(except they repent and be converted) ince^sed and consumed to cooles them
selfs Thus Have we, on our part, (as you have hard). The fygures of the old
testament. The plain and manyfeste scriptures. The promyses of Christ made
unto the church, for the knowledge and continuans of the pure faith. The
conselles general The whole and uniform consent, of the most ancient
wrytters, for the co^firmacyon and manifest proof of our belefe, where ye
sacrame^ttareis, can show nether manifest scripture, neither classical and
catholyke writer (syncearely and treuly understood) nether general co^sel, to
maintain there detestable error. They can show no place of scripture, ye
says, yt ye body of Christ is not in ye sacrament, neither yt ye body of
Christ is only in heaven, neither yt the sacrament is but only a figure, or a
sign of Christ's body. Where we have, in manifest words, spoken by Christ.
This is my body.

Co^sel have they none where in, they ca^ show, either yt this our believe has been co^de^pned, either yt it was susspected or doughted of. Yet there herysie
has not only ben susspected and doubted of, but also, by ye general
co^selles (as you have hard) it has been openly convinced abiured and
co^de^pned. Which of all ye au^cie^t catholic writeres can they show, that
says, either yt ye body of christ is not, in yt sacrament, eather yt ye
sacrament is, but only a figure, They can find, no such se^tens, nether in ye
scriptures nether in ye ancient catholyke writers. Yet you have hard, how
plainly and co^cordantly ye ancient fathers, makes for our faith Is it not a
case, both marvelous and lamentable not only, to se, how redely ye people be
to receive this da^pnable doctrine, but also to consider how obstinatly these
heritikes does defend, and dye i^ this herisie, sith yt it is gro^ded, neither
upon manifest scripture, nether upon any authority of ye church, but took ye
origi^al fu^dacion of wylfull and wicked peruersitie, and obstinate and
sensual syngularitie.

Yeas (you will say) they bring, both the scriptures plentyfully, and also the
ancient wrytters very busely, and such reasons, that seems invincible, unto
us that are unlearned, and not acquaynted, with the craft of reasonyng, and the
dysceat of their subtyle wit. Wherefore, (you will say) though that you have
the manifest scriptures, the conselles, and the ancient wrytters, yet are we,
that are unlearned, troubled and combered in conscience, with their persuacio^s
and reasons, and also because that their opinion, seems more possible and
agreeable unto reason. For this cause (dear christian reader) I have thought it
very profitable unto the simple and rude people (for whom only I have
prepared this homlye thing) to show what scriptures, auctorities of ancient
writers, and what reasons, that they allege, for the mayntenaunce of their
heresies, and in answering unto them, to show breuely, how they disceaue,
and are disceaued. Yet I will not bring in, all such auctorities and places,
that they allege For I trust in God, so to answer and declare, such as I
shall rehearse here, yt it shall be easy, for a diligent reader, to perceive ye
craft and disceat of them in all other. For certainly, such scriptures as they
bring in, eather they serve nothing unto the purpose, eather they be glosed
with their own fa^tysed and false expositio^s. And as for the testimonies of
the ancient writers, they bring in very few. But they are alleged as
sincearely and as faithfully, as they allege ye scriptures. For eather they be
truncate and be but lompes of ye wrytters saynges lacking the part, that
should make ye rest plain and open, eather they be infarced and patched, with
their additions and lies, so that they bring not them, whole, faithfully and
sincerelye.

Yet for the more easyer and facyle understanding, both of their arguments,
and also of mine answers, I shall give unto the reader, certain necessary
instructions and documentes. Where by he shall more perfectly perceive, the
falseyt of their reasons, and hereby also, be more redyer to make answer to
other like reasons.

The first docume^t is, that we ought not to seek, to prove with reason, The
first document
the matters of our faith. For if we should be so gross and carnal, that we
would believe no more, then we can prove by natural reason, we should sone
dyscharge our selfs, of all the artycles, of our faith, and consequently we
should have no faith, for it is against the nature of faith (which is of
things yt appear not unto reason or sense) to be proved by reason. But in
such matters, a true christian heart ought obediently to receive the verytie of
Gods word, 1. Cor. 2. Non in persuasibilibus humane sapientie verbis, sed in
operation espiritus and virtutis, vt fides vr^a no^ sit in sapientia hoi^m sed
in virtute dei.
sekyng no persuasible reasons, but only to persuade to him self yt (al yt
Gods word affirms) undoubtedly to be true, by cause that God (who can not
lie) has spoken it, be it never so impossible, unto natural sense and reason.
A faithful christyane man, ought to trust more, unto the infallible verity of
gods word, then he would do, unto his sight, his felyng, tastynge, eather
any of his senses or reason for all those may dysceaue, and be disceaued But ye
word of god is more stable the^ is, eather heaven, eather earth And for as
much as, the myraculous works of God, excedyth inco^parably, the wit and
reason of man (and be therefore ineffable) therefore we ought not to be, to
inquisityue, to know how, and why, God has done this, or that. For there can
no man tell, nether give reason, of Gods unsearchable and inuestigable
works. Therefore no man can tell how, Christ's body and blood can be and is,
verylye and really in the sacrament, and in every part thereof, and also in so
many places, were this blessed sacrament is. No more then he can tell, how that
bodi was borne, of an immaculate virgyn, and yet her virgyniall clausures, kept
inuiolably shut. Or how, ye body dead, could come alive out of ye grave, the
stone unsealed and unmoved. Or how ye body cold come in, (through ye stone
walls) among the apostles. And yet ye holy word of God, teaches these things
to be true, but ye word of God shows no reason how. For God would have his
wonderful works hydden, from our wits and reason, yt our faith might have
place, and ye greatter merit The second is, yt the glorified body of Christ
is, in much more noble state, The.ii. document
and condition, then our corruptible bodies are. Therefore we must not esteem,
and judge a like, of yt spiritual and heavenly body and of our gross mortal,
and corruptible bodies, for though such gross and corruptible bodies, cannot
be invisible, vntoucheable vntastable, so that they be such, that where ever
they be really present, they may be seen, felt, touched, and tasted, yet the
glorious body of Christ can not be seen, felt, or tasted, but only when, and
where, it shall please him and may be when and where him pleases, inuysbly,
and vnpalpablye.

The body of our sauyoure Christ, in the fortye days (after his blessed
ressurection), was not seen, at al times, neither of all men, saving only such
times, and of those, to whom he would apere, visible. Wherefore, though we do,
neither see, feale, nether taste, the boodye and blood of Christ in the
sacrament, yet undoubtedly, both the body and blood, of Christ, are
verily, and really in the blessed sacrament. For that body and blood may be,
and is, there verily invisible, vnpalpable and vntouchable, for so it has
pleased Christ.

The.iii. document.
The third is, that though it be repu^gnant unto nature, that one body should
be in many places at ons, by cause that the lord of nature, did a point, unto
nature, that every natural body, where it is present, it should repleate the
place and that one body, should fulfill but one place at ones, therefore the order
of nature is broken, where there is present any natural body, and yet does
not occupy that place, or where there is any one body, whooly in sondrye
places.

Yet is not this, repu^gna^t, neither above the power of God, that the body
and blood of Christ, should be whooly and reallye present, in the sacrament,
and yet not occupy, or fulfill, that place, for the quantite, of the bread and
wine miraculously do repleate, that place, being subsiste^t alone, without ye
substa^s of bread even as well, as though the substance of bread, were there.
Therefore it is not repu^gnant, unto ye power of God, that the body of Christ,
may be verily and realy in innumerable places, after this myraculous manner of
being, which manner of being, is apropriat unto the most precious body and
blood of our savior christ, and is above the course and order of nature.
Wherefore though Christ be in heaven, yet nevertheless he is also, in the holy
sacrament for the holy scripture affirms both. And therefore we are bound to
believe both.

The fourth is that we must not, The.iiii. document
so carnally and so grossly take ye scriptures, yt teaches us, that Christ
sytteth on the right hand of the father as though we would imagyne, that God
the father, had a right hand and a left, and such other corporal members (as
it has pleased the paynters to setforth) and so Christ materially to sit, on
the right hand of the father. Thus to ymagyne of God (who is most
spiritual) it is more then, very barbarous, and heathen rudenes. Wherefore we
ought to understand, that God is (as Christ says) a spirit, and has no
such corporal me^bres, wherefore when, the scriptures at tributeth or
assigns unto God, any such corporal me^bres as namynge, the hand, ye arm,
ye eye, ye ear, or any such other, such manner of speech is Methaphoricall.
For it does not signifye unto us. any such bodily me^bres in God, but it does
signify unto us (by those members) ye invisible things of god, as his power,
knowledge, majesty and glory. As by the eyes, and ears of god, is signified,
his most open and certain knowledge, yt he has of all things. By the hand
or arm of god is signified the oi^potent and invincible might of god. After
this manner speaks Salomo^. Pro. 15.
The eyes of god beholds ye good and ye bad, every where. And in the book of
wysdo^e. Sapi. 1.
The ear, of the gelous hears al things. Esaias says in the voice of god.
Esa. 66.
Al things has my hand wrought. And the holy prophet David in the psalm.
Psalm. 118.
The right hand of our lord has wrought powerfully, the right hand of our
lord has exalted me. The right hand of God the^ signifies unto us, the
magnificent power, and the glorious majesty of God, as saint Steven said in
the acts. Behold I se the heavens open and Jesus sta^dynge on the right
hand, Actu. 8.
of the power of God. Then Christ to set, on the right hand of the father,
is none other, then that Christ (concerning his divinity) is (in every point)
of equal power, majesty, and glory, with the father. And (as concerning his
manhed) he has ye full and most perfect possession, of the superexcellent
riches, of the glory and bliss of heaven, and has also the soueraintie
preeminens, and dominion over al creatures, Ephe. 1.
as S. Paul says. God the father has set him, on his right hand, in
heavenly things, above al rule power, might, and dominatio^ and above al yt
may be named, not only in this world, but also in the world to come. The
fyfte document
And he has put al things under his feet. The fyfte is. That it lettyth
nothing at all Christ, to be verily and really in the sacrament, though he be
syttyng in heaven on the right hand of ye father. For what can it let our
savior Christ to be realy in ye sacrament, though he has (as concerning his
humanity) the superexcelle^t glory, and bliss of heaven, and vn^ion over al.
The possession of these things, are so firm and stable in him, yt where ever
he be, these be nether taken away, nether diminished in him. wherefore he
(being in the sacrament) loses nothing of his souerainte, or glory. No more
then does our angles, which are with us here, and yet nevertheless, Math. 18.
see they, the face of the father celestial which is in heaven. Or what can
it let Christ, to be verelye and really in the holy and blessed sacrament,
though he be (as concerning his divinity) of equal power, majesty and
glory with the father, for so was he, upon Easter day, when he was in earth,
and said unto his disciples. Math. 28.
All power is given unto me, in heaven and in earth. And though he were present
in earth then with his disciples, yet was he never the less, of equal power,
majesty, and glory, with the father. Even so now, though he be present
verily, in the sacrament, yet is he, nevertheless of equal power, majesty, and
glory, with the father, and therefore we worship his blessed presens in the
sacrament.

Here follows the arguments and reasons for the contrary, with their answers.
The first argument
IN the gospel of Mark we read.

Our Lord Jesus Christ after that he had spoken these words, he was
assumpted, Mar. 14.
or received, into heaven, and he sytteth on the right hand, of the father.
Luce. 24.
In Luke the.xxiiii. And it came to pass, that whiles he blessed them, he was
taken up into heaven. Math. 26
In the.xxvi. of saint Matthew. But I say to you, that here after, you shall se,
the son of man sitting on the right hand of the power of God, and coming
in the clouds of heaven. Actu. 1.
The first of the acts. And when he had spoken these words, he was lyfted up
into heaven. And in the.vii. saint Steven said. Actu. 7.
Behold I see the heavens open, and the son of man standing, on the right
hand of God. And in the eight to the Romans Christ Jesus which dyed yea and
that did rise again, Roma. 8.
the which sytteth on the right hand of the father, the which also entreats
for us. Ephe. 1.
Unto the Ephesians the first. According unto ye power of his might, the which
he has showed in Christ Jesus, raysynge him from death, and setting him, on
his right hand in heaven. Like sayng, he repeteth in the second chapter.
Hebre. 8.
And unto the Hebrews the.viii. We have such an his priest that is set on the
right hand of ye majesty in heaven.

These places of scripture (with many other like) do wonderful well prove, ye
article of our Creed, The answer.
where we say. I believe that he ascended into heaven, and sytteth on the
right hand of God the father almyghtye. And this same do we also believe with
them.

But what though Christ be ascended into heaven, and sytteth on the right
hand of God the father, (as all these places do affirm, and we do confess
and believe) is not he therefore in the sacrament? This argument is naught, for
it is builded upon a false foundation, that is this, Christ's body can not
sit, on the right hand of God in heaven and be here also. at ones. This we
have declared in the last docume^t to be false Where we showed, that it
lets Christ nothing at all, to be in the sacrament, though he be sitting
on the right hand of the father. And also the scripture affirms both. For as
these scriptures do prove, his presens in heaven, even so does these words of
Christ. (This is my body) prove his very and real presens, in the blessed
sacrament. Therefore we must believe both. In this manner of reasonyng, they show
and manifest their ignorance, and their lack of faith, and that they are
gross and carnal.

For they understand not, what it is, to sit on the right hand of God, for
they grossly ymagyne and think, that Christ should sit there materially, as a
prince does under his cloth of estate, and that God had a right, and a left
hand, as a man has, and he sitting there, they ymagyne that it were to great
dystans, to be in the sacrament, and that he could not make so great speed,
to come into the sacrament so far of, nether could not be present in the
sacrament, except he should leave heaven for the time the which is very
false. For he leaves not heaven, but still remayninge there, is also in the
blessed sacrament.

In the.xvi. Ioh. 16.
of saint John^ Christ says. I leave the world and I go to my father. In
another place. I ascend unto my father and your father, my god and your God.
Again, I go to him that sent me, and none of you asks me, whether go
thou? Again. It is expedient for you that I go. For if I go not, the conforter
will not come unto you. If I go, I will send him to you. Again. My little ones.
Yet I am a while with you. Again, Now a little you shall not se me, and again
a little you shall se me, for I go to the father.

Ye shall understand yt Christ in these words, me^t nothing less, The answer.
the^ so to take away his bodily presens from the world, or from his apostles,
yt it should not be with the^, after no manner a sort, neither visibly neither
inuisibly. But he meant yt he would change the manner of his bodily presens and
conversation, which then was temporal, visible and mortal. And after his
death and resurrection, it should be heavenly invisible, and immortal.

If Christ (faye they) have left ye world, then is not he in the world, and
consequently, he is not in the sacrament of thaulter. The true meaning of these
words of christ (I leave the world) with such other, and how Christ has
left the world, we may redely collect and gather, of ye other words, that he
spoke unto his appostles, after his resurrection, saying unto them. These be
the words which I spoke unto you, when I was yet with you. In these words
our savior Christ sygnyfyed unto his appostles that he had then left their
company and the wordlye conversation, and was gone from them, as he said
before his death. I will depart from you and I will leave the world. And after
his death being present and speakeynge with them, he says. These be the
words that I said unto you before my death and passion, when I was with you
vysible mortal and passyble Then did I tell you, that I would forsake that
corruptyble state, but now I am not with you, for now (according unto my
promise I am gone from you and from the world. Wherefore you shall
understand, that our savior Christ (before his death and resurrection) was
mortal and had a natural and a mortal life, a life as other mortal men had,
yt shall have an end, by death, so in his living and conversation, he was like
other natural and mortal men, as saint Paul says, habitu inuentus est vt
homo, having and susteynynge, all natural calamities, and pains (except
sin) for he thursted, hungered, he eat he drunk, he slept he waked, he
rested and was weary, he walked and traueled etc. Thus was he conversant with
the apostles, in all things like an other natural man, and had a body of
like condition, as the apostles had (except sin) but after his resurrection,
his life, and conversation, was changed, and his body altered clean and
deputed, from the erthly and mortal state, unto a spiritual and an heavenly
state. He was changed from mortality to immortality and can not dye from
passibilitie, to impassibilitie, he can not suffer ho^ger, thurst, cold,
heat, nether any such natural penalties. Nether neadeth he meat, drink,
sleep, nether any such like erthlye and natural necessities. He was
conversant with the apostles before visiblye, but now they can not se him,
nether feel him, but when, and where, he will.

Wherefore all this inculcation and the often rehersall, and repetition, of his
going away from the world, and from the apostles, is no more, the^ the
change of his life, and conversation, and of the state of his body, that where
that they had ye visible and mortal conversation of his body (that body
being only in earth) here after the same should be in heaven visiblye and
yet in earth also in ye sacrament inuisibly. Wherefore when he says. I leave
the world, that is to say, I will leave this wordlye life, and alter this
natural and mortal life, and take on, an heavenly life. And when he says. I
will leave you, or you shall not have me always with you. He signified this. You
shall not have me in this manner of conuersorion, and in this mortal, and
transytarye, and indigent life. This body that is now mortal, visible,
subject to al natural penalties it shall not be so always, but it shall be
altered and changed unto an heavenly life.

Now you may perceive (good christia^e reader) how Christ has left ye world,
and yet he is in ye blessed sacrament. Even as he (leuynge the world and went
from his appostles) yet was present with them, and spoke unto them. Even so
though that Christ's body, be altered and changed in to an immortal and an
heavenly manner of life, from this corruptyble, mortal, and visible life, and
has left so the world, taking from us his mortal and vysible conuersatyon,
yet it folowyth not, that he is not in the sacrament. For we say not that he
is in the sacrament, after that sort, that he was (before his passion) among
his disciples, mortal, corruptyble, passyble, and vysible. But we believe, and
say, that the natural body and blood of Christ is, in the sacrament verelye
and yet invisibly, immortally, and impassybly. For the body of Christ, now
can not be seen, or fealte, but when, and where it please him.

And where they allege this text of saint Matthew. Pore men you shall have with
you, but you shall not have me, allwaye with you.

Yet mark (gentle reader) that Christ said not, The answer.
you shall never have me, no more with you, for he said in saint John^. I go,
and I come unto you And again. I will see you and your hearts shall rejoice.
And after his resurrection he said. Behold I am with you until the worlds
end, now, by cause, that Christ said that they should not have him always, with
them, therefore (say they) he is not, in the sacrament. Here they understand
not ye words of christ for Christ, said that he should not be with them, in
that manner of life, as he was then, mortal, passible and indige^t and nedye of
bodily refreshynge, and confortes. And after such a sort, he would not be
with them always, for as that time, it was a good and a charytable deed upon
Christ to exhibit an office of charity, toward him, as to give him (or his)
meat and drink, to wash or anoint his feet. For he had then need, as other
men had, hungeryng, and thurstynge, and trauelynge, in this necessite He said
that he would not be with the^ always in the nedie and corruptible sort but he
said, that they should have poor men, with them always. And (as saint Mark
says) and you may do almys always, upon them, when you will.

And therefore Christ a lowed greatly, the fact of Mary Magdelen, that she did
exhibit to him so precious oil, before his death and resurreccion, but upon
easter day, when she offered to him, dewty and office again, he refused it,
and would not let her, anoynte him, for he was not then in such state and
indigencie, as he was before. Therefore it folowyth not, that though that Christ
be not always with us a mortal and passible man (as he was before his passion
(therefore he is not with us inuisybly immortally, impassibly in the blessed
sacrament. For both these be true. That he is not with us now, uisible,
passible, and mortal (as he was before his death and resurrection), and yet he
is with us invisible, impassible, and immortal. The argument.
Like argument they gather of the words of saint Paul, in the second epistle
to the Corynthyans, the fyft chapter. And though we have known Christ affter
ye flesh, yet now we know him no more so. By cause that saint Paul says,
that he does not know Christ after the flesh, therefore Christ (say they) is
not in the sacrament, The answer.
after the flesh. If this reason were good, then did Paul know no man,
neither the Corynthyans (unto whom he wryt that epistle) neither him self for
paul said, that he knew no man after the flesh. Then bylyke he knew not
him self, for he was then in flesh, and a man, for he knew no man. But they
are dysceaued in mistaking, and mysunderstandynge, this word.

After the flesh. (...) Which is not, as much to say, as (in the flesh).
But it is as much to say, as fleshely, or carnally, for fleshely affection,
or after any carnal sort.

Here (good christen reader). What Crisostome says, upon the same place of
saint paul. What then? (says he) Tell me. Has he cleue left the flesh? And
is he not now in ye body? God forbid. For this same Jesus, which is taken
from you, even so he shall come again. How? with a body. How says Paul then?
Though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet so do we not now. For our
being after the flesh, is to be in sin, and not to be after the flesh, is
not to be in sin. But Christ to be after the flesh, is, to be in, or to
suffer ye passions and penalites, of nature, as hunger, thurst, labor, or sleep
and such other. But he committed no syn at all, neither was there found
disceat, in his mouth. Therefore said he, which of you can rebuke or argew me
of sin?

Then, Christ not to be after the flesh, is, to be delivered from these
penalties of nature and passions of mortalytye and corruption. Not that he is
now without flesh. For with that flesh, he comes to judge the world,
having the same flesh now impassible and immortal and incorruptyble. Then
thus (with Crisostome) we may answer. That though that Paul knows not
christ now after the flesh (that is to say) passible corruptible mortal and
visible, yet he knows him, now to be incorruptyble immortal and impassible
and even so do we (with Paul) know Christ in the sacrament, not after ye flesh
carnally (as ye Carpharnaites thought) yt is, to se and to eat that flesh of
him, hewn and cut in gobbettes, and peaces as flesh is in the shambles, but
we know him verily there, inuisibly impassibly immortally, and eaten of us, is
neither harmed neither consumed.

Because that saint Paul says unto the Corythyans, The argument.
in the tenth chapter. Is not the bread that we break ye perticipatyon of the
body of Christ? And again he says in the eleventh chapter. As often as ye shall
eat of this bread and drink of this cup, you shall declare, or show his
death, until he come. Of these they collecte, and gather, that the sacrament
is nothing, but bread and wine. This manner of reasonynge is nothing worth.

For in this sort of arguyng, we might conclude, and prove, that there were
nether blood, nether wine, but only a cup. As for example, Saint Paul, in
the same tenth chapter to ye Corinthians, says. Is not ye cup, whom we do
bliss, the participatio^ of the blood of Christ? And again in the eleventh,
he says. As often as ye shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. ye
shall remember the lords death, until he come. And in the same chapter, who
so ever eat of this bread, and drynketh of the, cup, or our lord
unworthily, he shall be gyltye, of the body and blood of our lord. Here saint
Paul calls the blessed sacrament a cup, ergo there is nothing but a cup.

You shall understand therefore, that in the blessed sacrament there is not ye
substance of bread, though saint Paul do name it bread. For saint Paul do
call the same, the body of our Lord, twyse, in the same chapter. And in
namynge it bread, he does follow the manner of the scripture, the which in
such manner of transmutations, and alterations of things, does use often time,
to give unto the thing (that is altered and changed) the name, that it had
before, that alteration and change, (as I have declared before) by these
examples. First of the admirable transmutation and change of the rod of Aaron,
into a serpent. The scripture calls it a rod still, though it was turned
into a serpent. Likewise of the myraculous change of the water into wine.
There the scripture namyth that wine, water, and gives the very same name unto
the things (that were clean changed) that such things had before, they were
changed and altered from their former natures. Even so the holy apostle and,
ye fathers, often time, do call this blessed sacrament, bread, because that it
was bread, before the wonderful transmutation and change, by the power of
gods mighty word, into the very substance of Christ's blessed body and
blood.

They have also collected, out of the ancient doctors, lompes and fragme^tes
of their sayings (as well understood and taken, as they understood the
scriptures) and have left out, the chefest things, that should declare the
very true sense, of the wrytter, and there by, they go about to prove, that
these ancient wrytters should muster with them, and be on their side, and that
those fathers should believe, that in ye sacrament were not, the very body and
blood of Christ, but to be, but only a figure or a signification thereof.
Wherefore al such places, of the ancient writers, that seems to call it a
mystery, a sacrament, a figure, or signification of Christ's body* At such
places they clappe their hands, and triumph as though they had won the
feld, and that the game were theyrs. These places they bring in, and that with
their gaye painted praises, and flattering commendations of the doctoure or
wrytter, (whose authority they allege) as of saint Augustine, they will say.
That most excellent and wyttye clerk, saint Augustine.

That most golden mouth, Crysostome, the flower of the Greek eloquens etc.
But when these same be alleged, and proved manyfestly, to be their adversaries,
and contrary to their heresye, then are they (whom they praised so hyghly
before) but men and lyears, and such as were blinded, and had not the spirit
of God, therefore (say they) they are not worthy of credit, in all things.
We will have no men's authority, but only the scriptures. Yet these wicked
wretches, they can be content to take, Luther, Ecolampadius, Coralstadius, and
Melanthon, and Buzere, (with all the rabylment of such deuylyshe liars, and
leude lyuers, the which has no more of a christian man, save only the name)
to be their auctours, and that of no less authority, the^ the scriptures.
These I say, whose learning and lyffes, are as much unlike unto ye fathers as
were ye lyffes of Socrates and Sardanapalus, or ye life of Diogenes, and the
life of Epicure.

Here shall you hear some of the auctorities, that they have torn out (by
peace meal) from the monumentes, and wrytynges, of the ancient and most
catholyke doctors.

Augusti. contra Adamantu^.
First of saint Augustyne (contra Adamantum Manicheum the.xii. chapter) Our
Lord doughted not (says he) to say: This is my body, when he gave unto them
the sign of his body. Saint Augustyne calls the sacrament a sign (This is
their reason) ergo it is but only a sign. and not the body of Christ. Even
so might I argue, for Nestorius, and say, Christ is called in the scriptures,
the son of man, ergo he is only the son of man, and not the son of God.
Where you shall understand, that, saynct Augustyne dysputeth in this place,
against one of the Manichees sect, which said that the blood in man, was the
soul of man, because that he did read, in the.xii. chapter of Exodus, that
they should not eat, any blood, for the blood (says the letter) is the
life or soul of ye flesh To this saint Augustyne says, that this precepte
ought to be understood, that the blood was the token or sign of the life
or soul.

For our lord (says he) doubted not to say. This is my body, when he gave
the token of his hodye. Now let Fryth answer me, unto this. Has not the
blood of a best life in it, though it be the token of life. He must needs
say, yea. Even so the sacrament is a token of Christ's body, and yet
nevertheless it contains the same very body.

Also saint Jerome upon.xxvi. Ieronimus super Matheum.
chapter of saint Matthew says. After that the fyguratyue Passover was
co^plete and fullfylled, and he had eaten the flesh of the lamb, with his
apposteles, he takes the bread, that comfort the heart of man, and passes
over toward the sacrament, of the very true Passover, and like as Melchy
sedech did (the priest of the highest) in the figure here of, (offering bread
and wine,) he (in like sort) does represent the verite of his body and
blood. All their game lies in this word. He representyth. If he do represent,
(say they) the verytie of his body, then the very body is not there. This
argument is of no force, nether strength. For though that by the sacrament is
represented, ye body of Christ, yet nevertheless, the same very body is
there also present, which is represe^ted. But I would feign learn of them, why
saint Jerome calls this, the very sacrament or the sacrament of the veryte.
Was not the paschall lame, a very sacrament of the Passiouer, yeas treuly: But
this, he calls the very sacrament, by cause that bysydes, that it does
sygnyfye, the body and blood of Christ, it contains, also no less. Or
why does saint Jerome say. The verytie of Christ's body and blood. Did not
the paschall lamb represent the same body and blood. Yes trewly: But saint
Jerome here in, sygnified the dyfference, bytwyxte Moses lamb, and Christ's
mandye. By cause the one was but a bare figure, and nothing else but a figure,
and the other (though it were also a figure) yet it contained the veryte of the
thing, that is sygnified, by that figure.

Therefore saint Ierom said, ye Christ represented the veryte of his body
and blood. You will ask me how that the body of Christ can represent it
self or be a sign or figure of it self: To this I answer that, the body of
Christ under the two forms of bread and wine represents unto us now ye
same body, as it honge upon the cross, when the blood was dyuyded from it
for the remyssion of sins. Ambrosius
S. Ambrose, also they allege, in his book of the sacraments. Where he says
in this wise. He that dyscordyth from Christ, that same eats not his flesh
nether drynketh he his blood, all though that he takes the sacrament of so
worthy a thing, unto the judgment of his perdition.

Also Prosper has the same words in his book of sentences, Prosper.


Saint Augustyne in his book intytuled de Ciuitate dei. Augustinus de ciuitate
dei lib.xxi. capi. xv.
He that remains not in me and in whom I remain not, let not the same say,
eather think, that he eats my body. For they remain not in Christ that be
not, his me^bres. These fathers, in ye same places where we find these words,
though that they say, that the unworthy receyuers, do not receive the body
and blood of Christ. Yet they say not, that it is not, the body and blood of
Christ But certaynlye they have plainly expressed what they mente, by these
their sayenges. For (as we may right well collect of them) there are three
manner of receyuynges of the blessed sacrament.

The first is, only sacramentally (this term saint Augustine uses. The
second is only spiritually. The third is both spiritually and sacramentally.
The only sacramental receyuynge. is when we unworthily do receive the
blessed sacrament. And by this receyuynge, we are, nether incorporated unto
Christ spiritually, (partakynge the merytes of Christ's blessed passion)
nether incorporated unto his natural body, as the worthy receauers are, but
we eat it to the great dampnation of our souls. By the only spiritual
receauynge (which is by faith, as in hearing godly and deuoutlye the mass,
or else having a godly and a devout memory of Christ's death) we are
partakers of Christ's merytes and passion and made the members of his
spiritual or mystical body, yet are we not by this manner of eating)
incorporated unto ye natural body of Christ, as we are, by the worthy
receyuyng, of ye sacrament. The third manner of receauyng of this blessed
sacrament, (which is, when we worthily do receive it) does incorporat us, unto
Christ's natural body, and makes us the members of his most blessed body,
of his flesh, and of his bones, and works in us eternal life, of body and
soul. For this is the property, of that flesh and blood worthelye received,
to work everlasting life, as Christ says. He that eats my flesh, and
drynketh my blood, has everlasting life: Now for as much as in all such,
as are divided from Christ by heresye, or from god by mortal sin, the
blessed sacrament (received) works not in them, life (which is the proper
operation of the body and blood of Christ) but works dampnable death.
Therefore the blessed fathers, said that they received not, the body of
Christ. For (though) it verelye be the very body and blood of Christ, yet
unto them in such state, it seems not to be so, because that, it works not
in them life, but death. For like as, of a most excellent medicine, received
of the pacient, out of dew time and order, and thereby diminishes not the
disease, but increases it, we may say, that (unto him) this was no medicyne,
but a present poison. Even so may we say, of all such christians and
heretics, that (like Judas) unworthily receaueth, the sacrament that they
receive not, the body and blood of Christ, which (as a most helthsome
medicine) works life in ye good, and in the bad it works present death. In
the time of these blessed fathers, there were certain overthwart people (as we
also have some now a days) that hearing ye great and wonderful operation,
of this blessed sacrament, how it wrought life in the receyuers) had fallen
into a wonderful presumption, and had persuaded to them selves, that, (though
they were never so far gone in heresies, and lived never so dyssolutely and
wyckedly) if they received this sacrament (which was taught them to be the
very body and blood of Christ) that they should eskape perpetual
dampnatyon. Wherefore the fathers, to bring them out of this blind and
dampnable presumptyon, used this manner of speech, to say, that they did not
receive the body of Christ, nether drink his blod, though they did receive
the sacrament to the dampnation. Tertulliane in his in his forth book, against
Marcyon, Tertulianus aduersus Martionem. li. 4.
sayeh. Christ professynge that he had a great desire, to eat his Passover,
with them, and the bread that he took and gave to his discyples, he made it
his body, saying. This is my body that is to say (says Tertulliane) the
figure of my body. This place is recyted of Ecola^padius with no small
commendacyon and tryumphe.

In like sort, saint Augustine, in the prologe of the third Psalm, says
(speaking of Judas) Christ though he were not ignorant, of his unhappy
thoughts, yet he made him one of his geastes, of that ba^ket, where he
exhybyted and gave unto his dysciples, the figure of his body, and blood:
First dylygent reader) I pray the expende, well the words of Tertulliane, and
thou shall sone perceive, that Tertulliane co^fyrmeth our faith, and makes
nothing with the sacramentaryes? For he says Christ had a great desire to
eat his Passover, not (says he) the Passover that was the slaughter of
sheep (for yt was Moses passover) but this, he called his, by cause that in
this was his own natural flesh and blood, and in the other the flesh and
blood of a sheep If there had been nothing else, in this, then bread ye figure
of his flesh, why should he call this more his, then the other, which was
also a more express figure of his death, then the bread and wine were.
Furthermore Tertulliane, says that Christ made the bread (that he took, and
dystrybuted to his dyscyples) his body, saying. This is my body. In these
words he most apertely, shows that Christ made the bread his body. If
there be none other thing there, then bread, neither no alteracyon there, in the
sacrament, then there was before, I maruayll what thing, Christ did make. But
Tertullianes words be to plain, to be deludyd, or doubted of, for he
confesses that Christ made ye bread, his body, saying. This is my body.
But that words, that foloiuith seems to have all the dyfycultye, because
Tertulliane added, that is to say the figure of his body. And in like sort,
also saint Augustine (Tertullyanes contre man) callyth it a figure.

No dougth, but it is very true, that the sacrament is a figure, an, example, a
sign, and token of the body of Christ. For every sacrament is a figure or
example and sacrate token of an holy thing. Even so is the blessed sacrament
called a sign or a figure of the body of Christ in the wrytynges of these
ancient fathers. The cause why they so named it, I have declared before among
the names of the sacrament. And yet I will touch breuely ye same again. For as
much as, in the blessed sacrament (which is ye very sacrifice of ye church
catholyke) is contained in two dystinct forms, yt is, of bread and wine and
the same blessed body and blood yt was offered upon ye cross in there own
lyknes, yt is in lykenes of flesh and blood, ye same body and blod under ye
form of bread and at ye mass lyfted up in to ye air over ye prestes head it
is a token or a reme^branc, how yt, the same body (in the time of Christ's
passion) did hang upon the cross in ye air and was so offered up (by death)
for our redemption, and the same body and blood contained reali also under ye
shape or form of wine and lyffted up (at the sacrynge of the mass) it is a
token calling us to reme^brans how ye blessed blood was shed, on hye upon ye
cross for ye remission of our sins. And thus ye blessed body and blood of
christ under these two forms of bred and wine, in ye blessed sacrament
signifies unto us, how yt (in ye passion and death of christ) ye body of
christ hong pale and wan upon ye cross, from who^ al ye blessed blood was
dyuyded, by crewel pain and passyo^ and is thus a very lively memory and
reme^brans of his death, for this cause also S. Basyl calls it. The exemplar,
because it is so lively and so express an example and memory of ye death of
Christ Thus is the blessed sacrament (where in is contained verily the body
and blood of Christ (a sign a figure a toke^ or example of the death of
Christ. And in this consideration the fathers (some time and that very seldom)
did call it a sign or figure. And in this sort we grant no less. But that it
is, but a figure, only a figure or nothing else the^ a figure. That we utterly
deny. For neither in ye scripture, neither in any catholyke writer can they
find, that the sacrament is called, only a figure or but a figure, or any like
saying. The fathers, though they named it a figure or a token, yet they
plainly declare and show, that they believed yt very real presens of the body
and blood of Christ in the sacrament, as I have showed by their own wrytinges.
So I conclude and answer that though the sacrament be a sign or a figure, yet
nevertheless it is verily and really the very body and blood of Christ,
therefore is it not only a figure or only and nothing else then a figure, or a
sign. This answer (in my judgment) is sufficient for all such places that
they can bring in, of any of the ancient wrytters.

It is a lacrymable case, and petyous thing, that we be brought now (in matters
of our says) from all faith, and belefe, and goo a bought to skanne and to
reason, such things, as should be received, before, and above all reason,
with most humbly faith, for faith has no place, neither merit (as S.
Gregore says) where reason shows experyens, and trial of the matter, for
faith is a free and obedyent persuasyon, of man's mind, in ye veryte of such
things, that are not manifest or proved by natural reason, or experiens,
leaving only, to the infallyble veryte, of Gods treuth: For what so ever
thing, that a man believes, only because that he seyth, the natural
experyens, or natural reason thereof, this belefe is no faith, neither shall
such belefe, be regarded, eather rewarded before God: Wherefore to skanne and
search the misteryes of our faith with reason, it is none other, then a plain
subversion of the christian faith, and such curious serchers and reasoners of
our faith, are like unto the heathen grecyans, in Paul's time, of whom paul
spoke. The Jews require tokens wonders or miracles (and the heathen grecyans,
worldely wisdom, so our Ieweshe Capharnaytes require to see this miracle in
ye sacrament, or else to have it manifest by reason, or else they will not believe.
And by cause, they see not the flesh and blood in the natural shape of flesh
and blood, therefore they will not believe, such ye seeks a sight by reason,
and will not believe except they see, be void of the benediction of Christ: And
the faithful people, that obediently leaves more, unto ye infallyble word of
god, the^ they do to reason eather sense, and require nether fealynge nether
syghte, these (I say) hereth and has the benediction of Christ, that said.
Blessed be they, that has not seen yet do beleaue. Not wtstandynge yt I have
thought it almoost a wast work and lost labor, to answer to any such folysh,
fond, and unreasonable reasons (as things unworthy of reasonable answer)
because that they so unreasonably, do reason, upon that thing ye excedyth all
wit and reason. Yet one, (for an example) I will recyte here (ye best among
them all, that ever I herd) yt you may sone perceive, how folysh they be. ye
frames such fa^tisies, and how mad they are, ye, (forsakinge, ye faith
catholic and ye truth of gods word) will be overthrown with so unreasonable
reasons.

The argument.
This is their reason. We read in ye scripture that God created and made man,
but we never read, ye man could make god, if the^ in ye sacrament, be very
Christ, then the priest (consecratyng the sacrament) makyth Christ, which is
god. But it is impossible yt the priest should make god. Therefore it is not
possible, ye Christ should be in the sacrament, yt the priest co^secrateth.

This reason is grounded upon a false presupposition, The answer.
it presupposes that the priest or mynister should work all that is done in
the consecration and that is very false, for (gentyl reader) thou shalt
understand, that the priest does no more here, then he does in the sacrament
of baptism. And therefore I might make a like reason or argument, and prove
that the priest were Christ, thus. He that baptized (as saint Johan says) in
the water and gives the holy ghost, that same is Christ, but the priest
baptiseth in water and gives the holy ghost. For there is none, verelye and
truly cristined, but the same receives the holy ghost, then is the priest
Christ, then was Peter Christ. For he did not only give the holy ghost, but
he gave power to other mynisters to give the holy gooste, as Paul did also to
Tymothe and Tyte. Wherefore we must consider what and how much the priest
does. For the Corynthya^s were dysceaued much a like, about the sacrament of
baptysme, as these are (in this their argument) against the sacrament, for as
these ygnorant people and froward herytykes, falsely supposes nothing to be
wrought in the blessed sacrament, above the power and the fact or deed of the
mynister, so did these Corinthians ascribe all the virtue and power of baptysme
unto their baptistes or ministers and such as were baptized of the more
worthier ministers, there in they reioysed, as though they had optayned and
received ye better baptism. Wherefore saint Paul willing to reform this
error, he reuoketh them, unto the consyderation of the mynisters, and what
they did, in that mynisterie, and what and how much god wrought. And says
unto the^. What is Appollo, or what make you of Paul? They are but the
mynisters of him, in whom you have received your faith. And then by a
similitude of husbandry, he declares unto them, what they do in their
ministration and what almyghtye God does, and says. I have planted, and
Apollo has watered, but God gave ye increase Nether is he that planteth,
nether he that waters any thing of him self, and in comparison of God,
nether their mynistration, is any thing effectuous without god (that gives
the increase) do work with them, washyng ye soul, by the spirit, whiles they
wasshe the bodies. Even so I answer unto these, what is the priest? save only
the minister of him, that said unto his apostles Do this? That is to say: That
thing that you have seen me do now. Take the bread give thanks and say
these words upon ye bread, that I have said, and receive or eat it, in the
remembrance of me. The priest only speaks ye words (as the minister) in
the person of Christ, and he, that first of bread made his own body, that
same now, at the words and mynisterie of the priest, makes his body, and
blood. So that the priest makes, not God (which can not be made other then he
is all redye) neither the body of Christ, though it be there, in the
sacrament. No more then he does remyt syn and give the holy ghost by cause that
God workyth the forgeuenes of sins and gives the holy ghost in the mynystery
of the priest. But it is god that works these things in this mynysterye and
makyth of bread (in ye sacrament) the body of Christ, by his secret and
omnipotent power, even as he (by the same power) made that same body, in the
whom of a virgin, and as he does inuisibly wash the soul of him whom the
preeste baptyzyth: Why then (you will say) the mynisterie of ye priest is not
necessary, sithe God does al. Yet remember yt, S. Paul shows, how, we are
gods, helpers and yet (no doubt) but that god can do, and does all the
whole, yet, not without our mynisterie (not of necessity) but that there might
be an order in things. Wherefore breuely we answer that the priest makes not
God, but god almighty, in the mynisterie of the priest by the myghtyfull power
of his word, spoken by the priest, makes of bread the body and blood of
Christ. And thus ought we to believe, be it never so much against nature, and
never so far above reason. For unto him (that is omnipotent and Lord of
nature) it is possible. For he can alter nature, when him pleases, and do
wonderful things innumerable, that infynytely transendeth the blind reason of
man, of the which things, this is one. Where in God has altered and changed
ye course of nature, and that in such sort, that it passes the compass of
man's reason, to know or tell how. Yet is it is very true, and possible,
unto him (that said) these words (when he ministered the sacrament). This is
my body: as I have declared in the former two sermones. In the first, by the
like myraculous works of God, left unto us reported in the scripture. And it
is not only possible but also it is in very deed, as I have declared in the
second sermon, both by the fygures of ye old testament and also by ye plain
scriptures of the new testament. And in the third sermon I have confyrmed ye
same first by promise of Christ made unto ye church, secondly, by the faith
of the church continued from the apposteles time. And for the confyrmacyon of
the same, I have brought in the conselles, and also the testymonyes of the
most classical and ancient writers from.vii.C. years upward, unto the
appostles time, lastly I have (thus as thou haste read) answered unto such of
the arguments and reasons, (that are made to the contrary, as seemed most
craftye and lykely. Contented to make answer but to these few. For, if that I
should have answered, to all their folyshe reasons, the folly of them, would
have yrked the reader, and I should have exceded (in prolixite), ye length of a
sermon Yet by these, the diligent reader may well perceive, the great blyndnes
of the^ that sets forth so boldly such fond and folyshe reasons, as though
they were as strong as Achylles, And yet are they verey naked and of no force
or strenghe? Here may you also perceive, and lament, how little stabylyte and
slender faith, is in them, that with such slender reasons and fond
persuacyons, will be brought from the catholyke faith of ye vnniuersall
church unto so horrible and detestable herises, unto the utter and extreme
perdition of there souls Except they forsake their herises, and return by
penance unto the church catholyke, confessing one faith, one veryte, one
truth. The which, that they may do, I beseke the father omniotent grant unto
the^ the grace of the holy ghost, for ye merits of his son Jesus, unto whom
be al honor and glory, world everlasting.

I had not thought to have answered to any mo of their unreasonable reasons,
then to this one, that I have answered even now, but so to have left those
babbling brawlers, with their fond and foolyshe brablymentes. But because that
the Prynter showed me yt he lacked matter to furnyshe fullye the last leffe.
Therefore I thought to fill that which wanted, with this reason and the answer.
The reason.
How can that be the body of Christ God and man, sithe that a mouse or ratte
will eat it, and the fire does burn it. Al these things happens unto the
sacrament of the altar, therefore it can not be the very body of Christ.

I answer:
That though the mouse, The answer.
or any other beast do eat the sacrament, yet nevertheless, the same is, the
very and real body of Christ. Why then (will you say) the mowse eats the
body of Christ, which seems inconvenient, we grant that the sacrament
(wherein is the very body of Christ) is eaten of the mowse, yet that blessed
body is not digested and consumed in the mawe or stomach, nether is it
altered (after such manner) in the body of the eater (whether it be mowse or
man) as other our corruptible meats are. For so long remains, the presens
of ye blessed body, as the qualities of bread remain, where ever those
qualities be, Whether they be in the mouth or stomach, and when nature
alters ye qualities of the sacrament, then leaves the presens of the body
of Christ, those qualities so altered from their nature. But what though the
body of Christ (eaten in the sacrament) lie in the mawe of a beast? Plainly
it is no derogatio^ to the very presens of the body of Christ, no more then,
if that same blessed body should be trodden under the feet in the vile dyrte.
For that merciful Lord Christ suffered that blessed body to be torn and
crucyfied of the crewell soldiers for our sake, and yet that blessed passion
did not dyrogate the verity of that blessed body. And look as that blessed
body received of anherityke or of an unpenitent sinner is nothing the less
the very body of Christ. Though it be received of such persons unto their
dampnation. Even so I say though a mouse or any beast do eat it, yet is it
nevertheless the very body of Christ.

Though it neither profyth nether disprofyteth, ye unreasonable beast, which
is not apt to dampnation or salvation, by cause (they lacking reason and will)
can not do good another evil.

Then you will reply and say that the mouse may live, by eating the
sacrament. I grant she may. Not by cause, that body is digested and converted
in to her flesh but (as I showed in my first sermon) by cause yt the
qualities of bread and wine (in the blessed sacrament) miraculously do norishe
the eater, as well as though the substance of bread were there.

Where ye say of the burning thereof and mouldynes or any such corruptyons. To
this I say, that such actions are executed and wrought in the sacramental
qualites of bread and wine and yet remains the very body: and blood of
Christ underneath those accidental qualytes (so long as the qualytes remain)
and yet that body of Christ is unharmed, unburned, incorrupt, for that
blessed body is now glorified and is in corruptyble and impassible.

HEC est fides catholica quam nisi quisque fideliter firmiterque seruauerit,
absque dubio ineternum peribit.
Imprynted at London in S. Iohn^s street, by Nycolas Hill, at the costs and
charges of Robert Toye, dwelling in Paul's church yard, at the sign of the
Bell.


