Times journey to seek his Daughter Truth:

And Truths Letter to Fame of Englands Excellency.

(...).

AT LONDON Imprinted by F. K. for Humfrey Lownes. 1599.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MY SINGVLAR GOOD LORD, CHARLES EARL OF Notingham,
Baron of Effingham, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, Lord high
Admiral of England, Ireland and Wales, etc. and one of her Majesty's most
Honorable privy Council.
YOur late favorable intertainement (Right Honorable) vouchsafed to this my
hard favored Child, is now my encouragement again to present her to you,
clad in this new habit. She has cause to shroude her self under Honors
wing: for so rude is her habit, and so mean her parentage; that were not such
patronage a safe refuge to her, when the malicious shall persecute her: I fear
she would be accounted a rogue; and for wandering abroad in so unfavorable a
time, be scourged with the whip of disgrace, and lashed with the sharp rod of
every Critics censure.

Those many favors, which you honorably extended to my father, whilst he
lived, and still continue to his name and children; claim a far greater
testimony of gratefulnes, then the greatest of my small endeavors can afford:
notwithstanding, accept a dutiful mind, witnessed in a rude sort; and when
Time shall with some of his feathers, better cloth my scarce-feathered Muse:
she will better testify how highly she honors and admires your worth. In
mean time pardon her present unworthiness, and once again take in good worth
this mine unworthy present: whereof, having reason to rest persuaded, I leave
further to interrupt your serious affairs, and so humbly take my leave.

Your Honors in all duty, Peter Pett.

To the Reader.
TO entreat their favor that cannot be discourteous, were superfluous: to
crave favor of the churlish, were frivolous. What thou art, I know not; but
if thou meanest to peruse my Muses labor, expect no great matters, least thy
expectation be frustrated. It were folly to tell thee of my weakness, having
laid it open to every eye: neither will I excuse it to thee; because I am
ignorant of thy disposition. I am no Satyr to scourge thee, if thou snarle at
me: yet fear I not the most piercing fang of peevish envy; being sufficiently
armed against all censures, and therefore not to be harmed by thy censure.

Peter Pett.

TIMES IOVRNEY TO SEEK HIS DAVGHTER TRVETH.
AMidst some gra^er studies taking pause,
To give my tired spirits some delight,
And to refresh my weary mind, because
Sometime repose is very requisite:
That I might take a little breathing flight,
I left a while to trace Philosophy,
To please my self with harmless Poetry.
With harmless Poetry, not otherwise,
Lascivious writing does not please my vain*
For vain it is, such matters to devise,
As nothing else but note of folly gain,
A bootlesse labor, and a fruitless pain,
Offensive to the wise, and likte of none,
But those which in their hearts make Follies throne.
Disgrace to Poets commendable Art,
Making that loathed, which every man would love,
If love, and Cupids arrows wanton smart,
Were not the greatest motive that does move
Poets their wits, in sugared verse to prove.
Ah, that to prove their wits most excellent,
To such base means their wills should so be bent.
Love is too base a Subject now to write of,
Common to every ballad-makers time,
And far unfit for Scholars to indite of,
For they should hold more precious their time;
And sure there cannot be a greater crime,
Then to mispend time in so lewd a wise,
As if we did the price thereof despise.
For do not men the pretio^s time mispend,
Whilst they discourse of loves and lovers ^one?
That cannot sort to any other end,
Then make the heart of man soul Vices throne,
That of it self to lewdness is so prone:
Adding to smoking flax a burning flame,
Which at first touch does set on fire the same.
Not such was my intent or purposde drift,
Pleasing to me was always Poes^:
A soule-infused fair celestial gift,
In rauishing with ^eauenly harmony.
But Love vntunes that pleasant melody,
Makes sweetest tunes to jar and disagree,
Makes Art a thrall, but Art loves to be free.
And therefore when I meant in measured style,
To please my self and other not offend,
I thought loue-matters over base and vile,
Nor of such toys to write I did intend,
But other ways my cogitations bend,
Three special sorts of writ I then did find,
All which I well approved in my mind.
The first is moral, and that sort indeed
To carpe at Vices profitable is:
To show amongst good corn the noisome weed,
And tell the World wherein it does amiss:
For though the World does little count of this,
Yet he that herein well imployes his pen,
Well pleases God, and merits praise with men.
The second sort is called historical,
That tells of sundry lamentable fates,
Declares the life, the death, the pomp, the fall,
Of Emperors, and mghty Potentates,
Of Princes, and of other Magistrates:
And this in it much profit does contain,
By others harms to warn them that remain.
The third sort that is allegorical;
Which under Metaphors, and covert phrase,
Proposes Virtue to the view of all,
Clad in a rich attire: that whilst men gase
Upon the same, and on her beauties blase:
Unawares they learn to know fair Virtues price,
And see the foul deformity of Vice.
And he that in this kind can temper well
Profit with sweet delight: unto his praise
Well may we yield, and say he does excel,
And for his skill his fame to heaven up raise.
So may we speak of Spe^sers golden lays,
Whom never any man could equal yet,
That in our tongue has as a Poet writ.
On these three sorts whilst I did ruminate,
As taking respite which of them to choose,
That (when I should my self thus recteate)
That little time I might not vainly use,
Nor such a precious gift of God abuse:
I found my wit more dull then it was wont,
And mine (...) seemed very blunt.
Therefore I left my melancholy cell,
To set an edge on mine invention,
Straight went I to a walk that likte me well,
That I might make some disposition
In order, of those things I thought upon.
For many thoughts ( Maze-lyke) the mind enclose
Confusedly, till order them dispose.
No sooner to this walk I entered then*
But that a Subject for my Muse I found,
And presently began fit it for my pen:
For when I marked how chearefully the ground,
The herbs, the plants* the trees about me round,
Praysd their (...) in their several kind,
Thus I began to reason in my mind:
All creatures of the Eternal God but (...),
In several sorts do glorify his name^
Things dumb, and ^^^^ely senseless (as they ca^)
Yet seem to praise and magnify the same*
Is it not then an (...)
That man should be (...)
Of whom God (...) him Lord (...)
Each tree does seem ten thousand tongues to have,
With them to laud the Lord omnipotent:
Each leaf, that with Winds gentle breath does wave, Seems as a tongue to
speak to this intent,
In language admirably excellent.
Leaves better tongues, then tongues that leave their duty,
And love to talk of nothing but of beauty.
The sundry sorts of fragrant flowers do seem,
Sundry discourses God to glorify,
Far sweeter volumes may we them esteem,
Then such as handle with diversity,
The traynes and stratagems of fantasy:
For all these creatures in their several sort,
Praise God, and man unto the same exhort.
But man (his nature is so strangely dull,
And yet so prone to wickedness and sin)
As that (unless God forcibly him pull,
And pluck him from himself) h'will nere begin
To think on God, that does enclose him in
With hourly blessings, (for man is so rude,
He renders nothing but ingratitude.)
On this I thought to set my Muse on work,
And on this matter largely to dilate:
To show how in man's heart this vice does lurk,
And to vpbrayde each sort and each estate,
That for Gods benefits are so ingrate.
As thus I thought, I plain me thought did hear,
A voice that seemed to be vtterd near.
Distinct it was, and thus it plainly spoke:
Take hold of Time when Time approaches ^ye,
For time does very little tari^nce make,
With soaring wings* he soon from thee will fly.
No sooner was this spoke, but by and by
Time stood by me, and least he should be gone,
I stayed him with this sudden question.
Time whether do thou have? tell me I pray,
And (if thou will) I Will thee accompany:
No (answered he) for Time must not delay,
Thou want wings with aged Time to fly.
This said, away he turned: but suddenly,
I took fast hold upon his front of hair,
And straight he mounted me into the Air.
Wherein I was deceived: for I thought
Only by force, to make him intermit
A while his course: but that auayled naught,
Naught forces it him to enforce a whit;
For Time does always hold delay unfit.
But when I saw my self deluded so,
I prayed old Time, that he would let me go.
No (answered Time) for since I have thee here,
Thou shall be now old Times companion:
And Time shall make unto thy Muse appear,
A Subject fit for her to vary on:
Then seat thy self mine aged back upon,
And take thou note of that which thou shall see,
As in this journey thou shall pass with me.
Content (said I) and up my self I reared,
In hope to see some accident most strange:
Time had so cheard me that I no thing feared,
And therefore cared not whether Time did range:
Nor did it grieve me, that he made me change
My first intent to write in former strain,
For that I meant it to resume again
But now I mean to tell what then I saw,
(Laying aside that purpose for a while.)
Things that perhaps might admiration draw,
If I could cunningly compose my style,
Or eloquently my designements file;
Herein my want I freely do confess,
But from the matter I too much digress.
Already had we left fair Europes clyme,
And lost the sight of Englands watery sands:
Now over the Oceans main began flitter Time,
And straight we were in view of other lands,
Perceauing kenne of other sundry strands,
As Well of Islands as of continent;
The sight whereof my mind did much content.
Of sundry wonders I could make report,
That in these places Time did show to me:
Of savage men, and of a thousand sort
Of monsters, which (but that I them did see)
I would have thought impossible to be.
Some brutish beasts I saw in form of men,
Of stranger shape then can be showed by p^^.
But one thing did I mark especially:
As Time flew on with swift and winged speed,
Great multitudes, did still together (...),
With such unwonted sight their eyes to ^eede:
And many knew not what Time was in deed,
But as they gazed on him, they changed were:
The manner how you presently shall hear.
Young babes that sucked at their mothers breast,
That late in tender womb did them conceive,
Could in their laps no longer take their rest,
But presently their mothers bosom leave;
And in a moment do they strength receive,
That but even now could neither go nor stand,
And were inwrapped in their cradle band.
And straight they grow unto perfection,
In wit, in strength, and every other thing:
But this their prime is very quickly gone;
Time unto them a sudden change does bring.
For as he further flies with nimble wing,
Their glory presently begins to quail,
Their senses to decay, their strength to fail.
And then become they as they were at first:
For ere that Time was yet gone out of sight,
Children again, and fitter to be nursed;
Then otherwise they were, betest of might;
Nothing was left them for their life's delight.
And Time no sooner was quite fled away,
But presently they were transformd to clay.
Some also lost the sight of flying Time
In chiefest strength: for Time often made such have,
That when they were amidst their chiefest prime,
He left them: then their glory was disgraste,
Their life was perioded, their strength defaste.
Their springing flowers, Time cropped vncourteouslie,
As he did from them so untimely fly.
So have I seen a lillie-colonrd ro^e;
(A bud at morn, more beautiful at noone)
Clad in as glorious vest^res as are those,
That do intobe the siluer-cloathed Moon:
When as the same is plucked over soon,
The beauty fades, it withers and dies,
Though clad in Floraes fairest liueries.
And every sort of men (what ere they were,
Of what so ere condition or estate)
That thus on Time stood gazing every where,
When Time was fled, then came their dr^ery fate,
For to recall him then it was too late:
And many knew him not, till he was gone,
When for his want they made their dying moan.
This seemed strange to me, and made me ask
Of aged Time how these things came to pass:
Time answering said, it is my appointed task.
And, for all flesh is like to fading grass,
And man's state far more brittle then is glass:
In me life does begin, in me it ends,
And on me as my servant it attends.
For ever since the everliving God
Gave me beginning at the first to be,
He charged me no where to make a^od,
And charged Life that it should follow me:
Hence do proceed the changes that you see.
Time being fled, Life is concluded ever,
Longer then Time stays, Life continues never.
Yet thousand thousands are, that do not know
The mighty power God to Time does give:
Though Time be able soon to overthrow
The strongest thing, that on the earth does live.
But that which principally does me greiue
Is man's contempt of me: and this indeed
Makes me to fly from them with swifter speed.
For otherwise perhaps I would advise me,
And though I needs must have, yet would I not
Make so much have, if they did not despise me:
But when I see on them contempts foul blot,
So great a stayne, and such a graceless spot,
The hare never faster flees when she is pursude,
Then I do fly from those that are so rude,
By this, Time having left our hemispheare,
With Phoebus fiery steeds kept equal pace:
Now to mine eyes another did appear,
Wherein the Sun did take another race,
As in this our Horison he does trace:
Nor does he ever rest as Poets faigne;
That course once done, he straight returns again.
All this time, had I not of Time inquired,
Toward what place his winged course he bent:
Which thing because to know I much desired,
I began to question him of his intent,
And prayed him tell me to what place he went:
I long (said I) good father Time to know,
Whether thou flyest now, and hastest so.
I fly (said Time) and restless never cease,
About the World, and as thou see the Son,
Even so my son does Time: nor does decrease
His force, but as when first his course begone,
It shall continue till his course be done.
For time shall come, when Time himself must die,
And that time now approaches very ny.
But until then, this course I still must keep:
For to this day I nere repose did take,
Nor since the world began did ever sleep,
(For then my charge imposde I should forsake)
Until my death I ever must awake.
Thus have I done five thousand years, and more,
And till I leave to be, thus must I sore.
But when I thee did my companion take,
I meant to lead thee to the house of Fame,
Where I must shortly inquisition make,
For a pure virgin of unblemished name:
Whose great perfection (though some dare to blame)
Is admirable, and beyond ^ompare,
Most excellent, most exqu^^^te, and rare.
I mean unspotted Truth, whom many deem
My daughter: and because when she was young
I fostred her, they therefore do esteem,
(Yet falsely) that from my loins she is sprung.
But Truth (though wicked men she live among)
Is of no mortal powers borne or bred;
Bu^ called my child, cause I her nourished.
And though her foster-father Time must die,
When once his race appointed is expired;
Yet Truth shall ever live immortally.
And shortly shall her beauty be admired,
And every where the same shall be desired.
Then they which have so much profaned her name,
Shall reap disgrace, and well deserved shame.
And for I know that Fame can well declare,
To me where my supposed daugh^er is:
To her I therefore now do make repair.
And when Fame has acquainted me with this,
I think thou then wilt nothing think amiss,
Thou ca^^st with me: that thou may make it known,
Where Truth remaynes, and where her face is shown.
But lo, I now discern far of the ken,
Of Fames great castle; whence she takes her flight,
To trumpet sundry news in ears of men*
Some of great moment, others of delight,
And others tragical, which do affright.
Then began we nearer to the (...) to draw,
And I will tell you what I further saw.
Amongst the Antipodes there is a hill,
Which far beyond the clouds it self does stretch.
And far beyond that region, which still
Is filled with vapors which the Sunbeams fetch,
And from the earth exhale. That monstrous wretch,
Which against the heavens did wage persumptuous war,
Is not ore whelmd with such an hill by far.
No not Olimpus may with it compare,
Which far above the middle region goes,
And penetrates the liquid clouds that are
About the same, and do the same enclose:
Though on the same (as Pliny says) there grows,
Of tender plants, and fruitful trees great store;
That are so high, no cold can make them hoar.
On highest top of this great hill there stood,
A goodly Palace framed large and wide:
At foot of this same hill, a spacious wood,
That ^emd this mountain in on every side.
Moreover in this Palace I espyde,
A thousand windows open every way,
And many doors nere shut by night or day.
At every one of which there thrungd a prease,
Of rumors, and reports: Some of debates,
Some told of wars, and others blabd of peace.
Some talk tof Empyers, and of ruind states;
And some of men whom Fortunes malice mates,
Such a confusion never did I see,
In one conclusion did not two agree.
Upon this castles top of crystal gl^sse
Stood a fair turre^: where Fame had (...)
There sat she, and in hand a (...) of brass^
She held, and therewith to the world made known,
The sundry news, and tales of every one
Of those Reports, that to her castle came;
And as they b^ought them, she dispersed the (...).
Her trumpets sound was loud, and very (...):
Reporting every matter very clear;
Which when it once was sounded forth, did fill
The wood which to that hill adjoined near;
In which a thousand tatling Ec^h^es were,
That iterated every uttered sound,
And made the same throughout the world rebound*
And even as many streams (that join at last)
From many sundry parts do meet together,
Till all in self same current (...) on fast,
Unto the wide vast boundless Ocean* whether
Their course them leads (for they are charged (...) her)
So all reports flow swiftly unto Fame,
Who to the worlds great Sea straight sends the ^ame*
Now aged Tim^ nigh to this castle drew,
Where all these things I orderly did note,
(As in so short a ^pace I could them view,
For else I might have had more things to quote)
And now that Time about the ^ame did flote,
He asked some Reports that thronged there,
If they could tell where Truth his daughter were.
One answered, she was of late in Spay^e:
Another said, she was exilde from Fra^^ce:
Another said, she no where did remain:
Another said some her did countenance:
Another said, so tragic was her chance,
Her sacred body was of life bereauen,
And her sweet soul fled unto God in heaven.
When Time saw in them such uncertainty,
Of them no longer would he thus inquire:
But (soaring up) he unto Fame did hye,
Who at his sudden coming did admire.
But her Time earnestly did then desire,
To fly with him, because he might not stay,
And many things he must unto her say.
Straight Fame attyr'd her in her wingd array,
And from her back laid down her costly weed:
And for Time would admit of no delay,
Time flew before, Fame followed with speed;
And as she flew, it seemed she did reed,
What you shall hear anon; mean time give eat,
And what first past you shall in order hear.
At last Fame ouertooke us, and then said,
God save thee Time: what would thou Fame command?
(Regreeting made) Time instantly her prayed,
That she would make known to him out of hand,
Where Truth his daughter was, and in what land
She now remayn'd: I have not seen her long,
And I do fear (says he) she suffers wrong.
Know thou not that (then answered to him Fam^)
Which throughout every land my trumpets ro^e,
Has sounded forth, and has dispersed the same:
No accident that happened hertofore,
What ere it were, have I reported more.
Does Truth her face so much in England mask,
That Time of me should such a question ask?
No ( Time) her bea^tyes are not hid I know,
No more then is the Sun in clearest Sky:
When as no gloomy cloud lets him to show
His goulden light; but thou so swift do fly,
As that Trueths mansion thou can not descry,
Mark and I Will tell thee where thy daughter is,
And make thee glad to hear thy daughters bliss.
When Henry lived Truths farre-renowned friend,
In Englan^ highly then she honored was:
And so continued she till thou did end
His life, and worthy Edwards life alas.
Then Envy so her purpose brought to pass,
England disgraced all her glory, and
Misled by Envy banished truth her land.
All comfortless, sad and disconsolate,
Poo^e Truth oppressed to take her passage hyde:
She took her bark alone, and (scorning mate,
Where she was so abu'sd) was brought with tide.
At last into the Ocean gulf so wide:
Where many waves her little bark did cross,
And many billows bitterly it tos^e.
And feign she would swift flying Time have seen,
To him of this her sorrow to complain
(Now banished, late honored as a Queen)
But when she saw her wishes were but vain,
She left to wish, yet could not grief restrain.
At last I chauncing nigh that way to fly,
Her thus oppressed did I then espy.
Her cheeks were blubbered, her hair was torn^
Her garments ^ent, and all besprent with tears,
Her hands she wrung, and looked all forlorn,
Her heart was full of agonyes and fears,
And every while her eyes to heaven she ^eares.
Soon as she saw me, she did comfort take:
And from her passions did her self awake.
She asked if I could tell her, where Time were:
I answered, that I had not seen him long;
But that I merueiled to see her there.
Fair Lady Truth, who has done you this wrong,
(Said I) but grief then ^e^^ered her tongue.
At last she (sobbing) said she was misused,
Iniustly, and (...) abused.
Then offered I my self on her to attend,
That if I could, I might her somewhat cheer:
But on the suddayne did from heaven descend
A glorious Angel, bright and very clear,
Whom God (for that he houldeth Truth most-deare)
Did send to comfort her in this distress,
Least too much grief, would her too much oppress.
And thus he spoke: sweet Goddess without spot,
Fear not fair virgin, be not so dis^ayd:
Think not that God has sacred Truth forgot,
Or that h'will suffer thee to be betrayed:
Cheer up thy self let passion be allayd.
Most pleasing news, God now by me has sent thee,
Which when thou know, I know it will content thee.
Thine enemies in England now are dead;
(For thy sake God has made their lives but short)
And Englands crown set on a virgins head,
In whom of graces such a sort consort,
That no tongue her perfections can report.
Have thither, and though England wronged thee,
Thy wrongs redress Elizabeth will see.
This said, he takes the guiding of the helm:
And Truth reioyc'd that she such comfort had,
(Whom late a Sea of grief seemd to o^ewhelme)
And now she was as joyful, and as glad,
As she before was comfortless and sad:
She thanked God for this great benefit,
And back to Englands shore her bark does flit.
I flew before, as swift as roules the Sky:
And on my trumpet did I sound aloud,
That Truth approached* presently did hy,
To every shore, a prease, and thronging crowd,
To see where Truths bark would it self inshroude.
Elizabeth no sooner heard of this,
But that she said she had obtaynd her wish.
For when Truth was (...), this matchless Queen,
Did her embrace, and (...) graciously:
The people which not long her face had se^^e,
Witnest their joy by an applauding cry,
And fair Eliza thank't God heartily,
That T^^th again in safety was re^ou^ned,
For whose long absence she so long had mourned.
And as when Tully was recal'd again
From wrongful banishment, Rome did rejoice:
In every street there followd him a train,
To welcome him with glad and joyful voice,
Of whom they thought their Gods made special choice
To do Rome good; so England weclom'd Truth,
And made her quite forget her former ru^th.
And now with chaste Elizabeth she dwells,
Highly adored, and admired of all:
My trompe abroad her rare perfection tells,
Whereby in many lands she holds the ball,
And multitudes are subject to her call:
For though in England she has residence,
In other lands she has prehemince.
And thus good Time I unto thee have told,
Where sacred Truth thy daughter's intertayned:
No point in this my tale can be controlde;
No sentence in the same is false or feigned;
Upon sure grounds the same is all sustained.
And that no place of doubting may remain,
Behold a witness to confirm it plain.
See here a (...) from thy daughters (...):
Who for she heard of (...),
The brood of E^^y that most loathsome else,
Did spread of England in malicious sort:
That she might me from blasing it dehort:
(Least I should give them credence, to prevent me)
Of Englands Excelle^ce, this writ she sent me.
Wherein thou may confirmed plainly ^ee,
By testimony of Truths sacred pen,
All which I now have uttered to thee,
And daily sounds my trompe in ea^e^ of men.
Hear thou this letter read good Time, and then
Judge thou of Fame, as thou shall find just cause^
Fault her, if she have spoke one faul^y clause.
This was the letter which I said before,
It seemed Fame did read on as she flew,
And to over take swift-paced Time did so're:
And here in following terms it does ensue,
Declaring Fames report to be most true,
And with it witnessing the great renown.
Of glorious England* and Elizaes crown*
TRVTHS LETTER TO FAME OF ENGLANDES EXCELLENCY.
ADmired Fame, by all men honored:
Thou due rewarder of all great deserts:
Thou that do make men live when they are dead;
Thou cherisher of honour-breathing hearts:
Parent of valor: Nurse of sacred Arts;
Take thou a little truce with false surmises,
And mark what Truth thee to report aduises.
Speak thou of England, and her excellence:
Strain thou aloft thy trompets roaring blast:
Tell thou to all her great pre-eminence;
And (as through every land thou flyest fast)
Let Englands worth be never ouerpast,
That all the World may wonder much at this,
That such a wonder in the World there is.
And first declare in what an high account,
She houldeth Truths most sacred deity:
Her kindness now to me does far surmount,
Her late unkindness showed to me, when I
Was forced into banishment to fly:
The chief efficient of which direful woe,
Was cruel Envy my malicious foe.
But now, no (...)
(What ere they were in ages ^ou^^ of (...),
Amongst whom I in greatest honor (...))
Did ever prize me (...) a higher rate,
Then England does, or more increase my state.
No nation (...) more,
Then glorious Engl^nd does (...) now adore.
Thou sawst how she did welcome me, when as
Upon her shore I was again arrived:
Thou sawst how great my intertainment was,
(Though Envy late had me of right deprived,
And to disgrace me stra^agems contrived)
But I have greater arguments to prove,
The greatness of her kindness and her love.
For when my former grief was quite dispersed,
And thought of former wrong far cha'sd away,
My graces (which with clouds were hidden erst)
Began to disclose, and suddenly display
Themselves, and all their beauty to be wray
In great perfection, which when England saw,
Great admiration from her did it draw.
Astonished with my graces most divine,
(For Truth, of Truth, may justly speak the truth)
And ravished with fair Truths rare beauties shine;
It grieved her that my so grievous ruth,
She so had suffered: and to me she such,
That I no longer would retain in mind,
My late disgrace which proved her too unkind.
Which easily obtaind, she promised me,
And with a solemn oath her self she bound:
That I should presently perceive and see,
How glad she was, she had my favor found.
Immediately in self same minutes stound,
Into my hands she freely did deliver
Two elfes that were my vowed enemies ever.
Envy the one, and Superstition
The other was: both these two did procure,
Those injuries poor Truth to fall upon,
I mean those wrongs which I did late endure:
For so fair England did me then assure,
They my disastres and distresses bred,
By their sole means I so was injured.
Envy she told good England that I sought,
To circumuent her by some treachery:
And so to bring her glorious state to naught.
For sure she said (there was no remedy)
If still she intertayn'd me courteously,
Her glory of necessity must fall,
And all her pomp be perioded withal.
And Superstition she her self invested,
In a rich habit; which was not her own:
For well she knew that she should be det^sted,
If what she were indeed it should be known,
And so might all her drifts be overthrown.
She decked her self with many a precious gemme,
And on her head she set a diademme.
And thus to England came she, and to her
Said she was Truth, and Truth did but deceive her*
And she with Envy kept so foul a stir,
That England feared I would of life bereave her:
For still they told her, I nere meant to leave her,
Till I had made her stat^ most miserable,
Which only Truth makes truly admirable.
All this did England unto me declare,
And said these twain her sutly did beguile,
(For Superstition durst with me compare,
And E^uy robbed me of my rightful style,
To grace therewith her mate that wretch so vile.)
Fair Truth (says she) know surely this for truth,
Had not these been, nere should have been thy ruth.
Their subtilty simplicity abused,
And by their craft they did me over reach:
Or else thou nere should have been so misused:
But now these hellish caitifes I will ^each,
What it is t'wixt thee and me to make a breach.
For now I know them, and here captives have them,
Appoint their doomes, not all the World shall save them.
The which when I did to her self refer,
And told her Truth does not delight in blood:
She said that Envy she would quick interre,
And that same other wretch foe to my good,
Should steruing pine, and die for want of food,
Thus Truth (says she) I will revenge thy wrong,
And for my fault make full amends ere long.
This said, she plucked from Superstitions back,
My glorious ornaments, and gorgeous weeds:
For mine they were, and to supply her lack,
She stole them from me: and such lewd misdeeds
It is by which, her progeny still speeds.
Thus stripped, a foul deformed hagge she seemd,
I wondered how she could be ^o esteemd.
Then straight she led them both unto their doom,
And thus she used Truths greatest enemies:
Though Superstitions Son still live at Rome,
Yet (for my many grievous injuries,
And for she wrought me such indignities)
Her self was starved, and Envy felt such pain,
As she deserved; though still her brood remain.
Thus England dealt for me, and more then so;
Her love yet further did it self extend:
She did not only thus revenge my woe,
But also against my foes my right defend:
Listen good Fame, and with attention lend
Thine ear unto my tale, whilst I declare,
Her love to me, her kindness, and her care.
Proud Superstitions Son, soon as he knew,
His mothers death was only for my sake:
He gathered an host a mighty crew,
With which he meant against England war to make,
And forcibly me from her hands to take.
So great and puissant his forces were,
He thought her heart would be o'rewhelmd with fear.
For with him joined was his cursed sister,
That odious and notorious whore of Babet:
Her mothers death she knew, and likewise mist her
As Well as he. And with her such a ^able
Of paramours she had, as seemed able
The greatest state on earth to ru^nate,
And bring to greatest pomp a tragic fate.
Thus mand began to manage forth his war,
And proudly sent to England this defiance,
That she should look for enemies from far,
If still with Truth she kept so great alliance:
Such war in ancient times did wage those giants,
That against the heavenly powers as Poets wright,
Opposd themselves and their presuming might.
Yet (if she would deliver to his hand,
Truth that he might on her reuengement take,)
He sent her word he would not hurt her land:
But if she did this profer made forsake,
Then should his wrath it self vp-rouse and wake,
To which he thought she could make no resistance,
Though God from heaven should give her his assistance.
These menaces not feared her a whit,
She weighd them not but bid him do his worst,
In spite of him Truth should in safety sir;
(She said) nor should a monster so acucrst,
Make her to satiate his bloody thurst.
Truth love I well (says she) and well I know,
Truths champions God will shield from overthrow.
This answer made Truth^ enemies enraged,
And foming poison swore that Truth should dye,
Or England^ li^e should be for hers engaged:
Not knowing Truth ^ust live immorally,
And live to see the cu^sed progeny
Of Superstition, consumed quite,
Though now against me they are bold to fight.
Toward England straight they hye in furious have,
Intending to destroy (...),
To leave her land all desolate and wast,
And bring her self into captiuitye*
And thus resolved, i^ swarms they (...)*
The Diuill lent them (...):
But God from (...)
When England heard my foes (...),
Together gathred she her (...)
To fight for Truth whom (...)
Meaning to show no pity, ^o ^emo^e,
To them that sought (...)
Away with me she hasts my foes to (...),
In little kindness m^^ning them to greet*
At last they met in a large spacious plain,
Wholly unlike in show: their troops did pa^^e*
For multitude, the drops in showers of (...)*
The other sort was nothing so alas,
Compared to them* like some small ^idge of grass
In field of come: or more for my intent,
As seems least isle, to larg^st conti^ent.
As those small troops with which the (...)
Did brave and dare Darins in the field,
Compared to those over who^e he conquest wo^,
(When proud (...) ^as to yield,
Ma^ger the force he had himself to shield)
Such England had, compared in the power,
That now prepared was her to (...).
Or as thos^ little force^, once oppos^d
Against great Xerxes navy) which was though^
Impossible by force to be (...)
Or unto any hazard to be brought)
Such England had, compared with their^ that sough^
To bring her state to ruin for my sake;
Because she would not Truth^ defense (...).
Yet England (...),
Nor terrefide by their (...):
Courageously her (...) she forw^^d led,
And did her self midst th^ckest th^ong intrude,
That with their (...) her ha^^ (...) be imb^^de.
Strange that a (...) should so valiant be,
And such an anci^^^ (...) as is (...).
Backed with such help as I to her could yield,
At the first on ^er, and first furious shocke,
So fiercely she he^ brandisht blade did wield;
That they who first her little force did mock,
And thought, they might their hearts securely rock
On sleep, were made from (...) to run, and stray,
Her force, and feircene^ did the^ so dismay.
But ^o, a new supply did them renew*
For as they thus were da^^ted and dismayed,
An host of ^eends we might approaching view*
That toward us came with enlignes all displayed,
Fearing their kingdom should be sore decayed,
If England over Truths enmyes should prevail,
They hastened thus, to make her courage quail.
But God (which always does Truths cause defend)
Our prayers to him most benignely hard,
And down from heaven he graciously did send,
Legions of Angels, that they might me guard.
And England from all dangers safely ward.
So soon as England saw, God helped her so*
She cared nor for (...), no^ any foe,
Straight Superstitions Son she does dismou^t,
From of his palfrey where he proudly sa^e,
Commanding him to render an account
Of his presumption; and to tell her what
Made him so bold whilst this I wondered a^*
His sister managing a monstrous beast,
With murder and with blood her hate did fea^t.
Which (when I saw) to her in^ag'd I hide,
But presently she trembling turned her back*
In no wise she my presence would abide.
I followed amayne her monsters tracke,
Nor did I mean my swift pursuit to slack.
Still did she run, to shun my fierce encounter,
For well she knew I did in force surmount her.
As flees the sable Night from days approach,
Fearing to look (...) in the f^ce,
(For when (...) her silver ^oach,
Night trips apace, and leaves to her the place)
So fled this str^^pet from me in thi^ (...),
Nor durst (...) to look on me,
But posting (...)
I followed her to (...),
Thinking to overtake her, but in (...)*
Which place (...) it my (...) and hates)
Did make me presently (...)
Or else this strump^^ had not (...) vn^l^y^e.
Back I retu^^ (...) England, whom I found
Among slaughterd (...)
For Superstitions (...),
Yet wounded so that presently he dyed,
Or seemd to dye: (...)
And closely got himself (...)
Repenting that (...)
Disrobed, and naked, was he glad (...)
That (...)
His forces also all dispersed (...),
And cut in pieces, or else (...)
Nothing but bloody (...)
And thus for Truth (...)
Aided by God, (...)
To (...)
And say^ (...).
This victory thus happily obtained,
Triumphant back with Englan^ (...) I led,
Hoping she now had firmly me regained:
A crown imperial placed she on my head,
And promised I should not be (...);
Though with her blood she did revenge my wrong,
For well she knew that God would make her strong.
And now these forty years I have remained
With her in honor, and in majesty:
And as when she at first me intertayned,
(I mean first after my great misery)
She welcomd me (thou know) most lovingly;
So still her love continues the same,
And still (...) does adore Truths sacred name.
And is not this good Fame an excellence?
Did ever any nation more for me?
Or stand more stoutly to my rightes defense?
And righteous quarrel? Surely if it be
An excellence, to (...) Truth: then she
Fames approbation deserves well;
For in this excellence (...) does excel.
Of Englands matchless Queen make next report,
A matchless the ame, and (...) fitting Fame:
A matter of high m^ment, great import:
Elizabeth no sooner (...) thou name,
But Enuyes brood will hyde their heads for shame,
Not daring once her worth to fault or blame,
When worthily thou shall declare the same.
Now could I wish some sacred Muses skill,
In sugared tunes her excellence to tell:
Then should my tale with admiration fill
Thine ears, to hear how much she does excel:
For Excellence it self in her does dwell.
What should I say? Ah I want words to say,
What one she is, her graces to display.
Religion has in her such interest,
For her sake Truth entirely does she love,
And such possession in her sacred breast
Has Piety, that unto God above,
Her thoughts and her affections soaring move:
As if she did terrestrial things despise,
And scornd the world and worldly things to prise.
Strange in a Monarch of such majesty:
For humane nature is so frail by kind;
That being once advanced, by and by
God we forget, no^ will retain in mind
Those benefits from him we still do find.
But she of honor and of dignity,
Makes a step therewith to mount on hie.
As towers aloftie Eagle, still alo^^*
And does to take a lower flight d^^daine,
When as to pierce the clouds she seems (...),
As if she sought some sacred seat to gain,
Amongst the Star^es in glory to remain:
Even so Eliza strives aloft to mount,
And of these baser things makes none account.
True, prince-ennobling, faite celestial grace:
Infusde by God himself into the mind:
Enforcing nature to resign her place,
That otherwise is of her self inclinde:
Happy are they from God such favor find;
Ah happy, yea thrice happy sure are those,
Whose minds thus graciously God does dispose.
And happy England, to whom God has granted
A Princess so religiously devoted:
For else might Truth still have remained daunted,
And England still on Superstition doted.
And happily so soon had not been noted
Her sly deceit, had not Eliza been,
Whom God made chiefest means to make it seen.
But ah I faint, I find my self too weak,
To bear so great a burden, or to treat
Of such rare excellence: though Truth can speak
Nothing but truth, her task is over great,
To tell Elizaes worth, or show the seat,
That every special grace has in her heart,
In mind, in body, and in every part.
Poets of Pallas often reported much,
And would Fame know what they did mean thereby?
In ancient times never lived any such,
But they of Englands Queen did prophecy.
Compare their writings with her worth, to try
The truth hereof, then shall thou plainly see,
Never was any Pallas, if not she.
Pallas from Jove himself drew her (...),
And is not Englands-Queene (...) child?
Else sure she could not (...)
So virtuous, religious, and mild,
TO were hard if Truth should be herein beguild.
Immortal Pallas they declared to be,
This Queens immortal fallen (...) did (...).
Pallas, those (...),
For depth of wisdom, and lot (...),
And do not (...),
Waiting upon her as her handmaydes still,
To execute her pleasure and her ^ill*
Eliza they could not have (...),
Wisdom and learning both support her (...).
Her Wisdom, is as far beyond compare,
With most of weaker (...), or (...) kind:
As brightest (...), that in the heavens are,
Comparde with (...) that ever shinde:
Or smallest glo-wormes men by night do find.
What talk I of her (...)? such Wisdom can,
Be very hardly found in any man.
Witness her government this forty years,
So wonderful (...), and ra^ely wise.
Wise is the Pylot that his (...) then steeres
In safety, when as greatest storms arise,
And every billow mounteth to the Skies,
And wise Eliza, that (...) so guydes,
In spite of sternest foes, ^e (...) betydes.
Millions of billows menace the decay
Of Englands common wealth; yet not prevail,
Nor can they make her give them any way,
Or any whit to bear the lesser sail;
They can not hurt her, for their force does fail:
God teaches her, to rule the helm so well,
Her bark does break them, when they proudest swell.
And as for Learnings admirable graces,
Let Learnings self her learning testify:
That pen which in this Subject largely traces,
At full herein her worth to amplify,
In many volumes need historifie.
Her excellence in excellentest Arts,
Requires more skill, then Art to me imparts.
In sacred letters she so skillful is,
So expert, and so well experienced:
Her match to find^^ is difficult (Iwis)
(I mean a prince that is so deeply red,
In holy writ) for nere was registered,
By ancient Time in any monument,
One prince in sacred skill more excellent.
List her, but speak, or write what tongue she will,
Of sacred languages, or other wise;
Her talk, her style, appear so full of skill,
As all the Muses did the same devise.
But how alas can lines such worth comprise?
Her talk, her style, are both celestial,
Her wisdom, and her skill angelical,
Pallas moreover they declared to be
Victorious (...):
And may not one mere blind perceive and see,
They prophecide of Englands princely head?
All whose deseignes so prosp'rously have sped,
She never went without the Victory,
Since she obtaind the English monarchy.
Thus Fame (thou see) that Englands gouerness^
Is Pallas self, for Wisdom, learning, and
For fair victorious fortunate success,
In every action which she takes in hand.
Oh happy common wealth, oh happy land.
Pallas she is, and Virtues Palla^e eke,
What theme more glorious needs Fa^e to seek?
Her Fortitude, her never dauntedmind,
Contemning troubles of adversity,
(Which all that live sometime of (...))
Her worthy princely (...)
Her Temperance in calm prosperity*
Are such that no pen (...)
Express the sam^ or praise them (...).
And yet two (...) by,
More then by all these that have yet been named.
And as those two great (...),
Which for the worlds two (...) first were named,
Whose presence (...);
Even so E^iza is adorned by
Her Chastity, and (...).
Should I her Chastity strive to declare?
So pure? so matchless so immaculate?
So spotless? and so admirably rare?
Nere should I satisfy, or satiate
My thirsty pen herein; nor moderate
My wandering Muse, that would too tedious be,
And so perhaps too troublesome to thee.
This gemme of price, this ornament of worth,
This precious pearl, this ^ewell of esteem,
I leave to thee at full to set it forth:
That to the World Elizabeth may seem,
Dianaes self; and all the World may deem,
The paragon of Chastity she is,
Whom never any could excel in this.
And yet her Equity it equalleth,
And is as excellent and rare as that:
Hon'ring as much divine Elizabeth:
For this makes also her admired at,
As Much as any prince that ever sat
On Regal throne, and hard it is to name,
One living now her equal in the same.
Justice and mercy she in balance lays,
The^e equally to counterpoyse each other,
And with them all her actions wisely wayeth,
Not suffering one to ouerpoise another:
So deals with dearest children tender mother.
Her justice great, her mercy is as great,
Justice, and Mercy, both wait on her seat.
There wait they, and when she determines ought,
Both of them plead: and both their sentences
She wisely makes together to be brought,
And by them both deemes what most fitting is:
Taking away from them all diffrences;
And so in one she both of them combines,
And both together in one band conioynes.
When Justice strikes then Mercy tells her how,
And shows her whom she with her sword should smite;
Eliza made to Equity a vow,
By heavens, by earth, and by her scepters right,
Justice and mercy she would counite:
Sacred and mild is that severity,
When Justice linked is with clemency.
Can thou this Excellence Fame too much prise?
For England such a worthy prince to have?
So learned? and so admirably wise?
So virtuous? religious? and grave?
So chaste? so just? so merciful to save?
Speak what thou can, for this, Truth dares aver,
Thou can not speak too worthily of her*
And next adioyne her worthy Senators:
Declare their Wisdom, and their gravity:
I mean Elizabeth's wise Counsailours,
Supporting stays to Englands policy,
Upholding it as Atlas does the sky.
A special Excellence thou should omit,
If mention of their worth thou should forget.
For their grave wisdom, and wise gravity,
Tell thou the world that they fage Catoes are:
Nestors in Counsel, when they prudently
What best does fit for Englands good declare.
For love unto their Country, them compare
To Parents in their childrens tender love,
Which never from them will the same remove.
And well thou may to Parents love compare
Their tender love unto their nation:
So fatherly it is, so great their care;
It seems greater then the affection,
That Parents bear their best indeared Son,
A happy blessed Aristocratie,
In such a farre-excelling Monarchy.
I tell thee Fame their worthy names will grace
Thy tale, and thy discourse in every ear:
And therefore in thy swift continual race,
Forget thou not the same: but let all hear,
And let it to succeeding times appear,
(As thou through every land shall swiftly pass)
How far herein fair England does surpass.
Next speak of Englands dauntlesse Warriors,
(It Will grace thy trumpe to grace them with her sound)
Brave Martialists, victorious Conquerours,
Worthy eternally to be renound,
And with immo^tall glory to be cround.
Tell their deserts, and fame-deseruing laud,
That all the world may to their worth applaud^.
Upon their plumed crests does Honor fit
In glorious weeds, as great (...),
Instructing them as pupils what is fit,
Whilst they to her obedience profess:
In all their actions she is gouernesse,
Nor will they once from Honors precepts swer^e,
Whom whilst they serve, all honor they deserve.
On Honor still attends Victory,
To grace their deeds with prosperous event:
Directing them to wield courageously,
Their conquering blades to foes astonishment,
(Who think Revenge her self among them is sent,
Whilst Englands worthies fury they do see,
And feel their force from which they would be free.)
Their looks, as lightning dwell foemens eyes,
Their hands forge thunder to their warlike look,
Their swords from hands send foes their destinyes,
Writ by the Fates in never failing book:
And Victory their swords never yet forsook.
Their looks, their swords, make enemies to wonder,
Their looks are swords, their sword^ (...) them in sunder.
How many times Truths battles have they fought,
To tame my haughty adversaries pride?
How many times (their drifts to period brought)
Have I triumphant them returning spide,
Charged with enemies spoils on every side?
Erect thou Fame due trophies to their praise,
That meriteth to match thy self in days.
Great Rome in pride and prime of her estate,
Whom many histories do honor so,
(Though now she is become degenerate)
Was never so glorious for her Scipio,
For Caesar Pompey and for others more:
As England is for her brave warriors,
That are to these far^e far superiors.
Fame-hon'red Anniaball, that could command
Coy Fortune, and could have her at his beck.
(When as it seemed she upon him faund,
And humbled at his feet her scornful neck,
As if she feared him to counterchecke)
Made never so glorious Carthage lofty walls,
As England is for many Anniballs.
Leave then to talk of famous Scipio,
Report no more the worthy facts at all
Of Caesar, Pompey, that excelled so,
And once graced ancient Rome before her fall:
Talk nor of Carthaginian Anniball.
At least ( Fame) if thou needs their worth wilt praise,
See that above them, thou these worthies raise.
As when the radiant Sun shines in the sky,
The lesser stars give place that graced the night:
Even so ( Fame) when as thou shall worthily
Declare their worths, that Englands battails fight,
Their splendor will obscure the others light.
Eos may shine a time, but when the Sun
Guilds the Hor^son, then his light is done.
Sawst thou their valor show it self but once,
Against the enemies of Englands good,
How many of them they destroy at once,
And how they bathe their brandisht blades in blood,
Wading in gore, as in some watery flood:
Then would thou say, and boldly would auerre,
Justly before all, Truth does them prefer.
Mounted upon Bell^naes chariot,
( Honor their guide, their handmayd Victory,
Like to fierce Lions all enraged, and hot
With anger, they amongst their foes do fly,
Dispersing all their force immediately:
As often the Sun dissolues some sullen cloud,
That dares presume his beauty to inshroude.
Their feet, they still upon the necks advance
Of Englands proudest foes, and tread them down,
Enforcing them their glory to inhaunce,
And knowledge duty to Elizaes Crown:
Thus Englands Worthies spread her great renown,
Now tell me Fame, if in this excellence
England has not the sole pre-eminence.
A greater Excellence does still remain;
Englands fair daughters, (yet unmentioned)
Whose beauty no deformity does stain:
Once Learning with her nursing milk them fed,
But now by them is Learning nourished.
Their excellence makes England excellent,
For that she has so great an ornament.
But of their worth, now to make worthy mention
And every other Excellence to tuch
Of matchles England; is not my intention,
Already I have proved there is none such,
Hereafter I (perhaps) will show, how much
For every other thing she does surmount,
And all her Excellence I will recount.
In mean time, Fame (now mean I to be short)
Say bouldly, that no nation does excel
Great England: for thou bouldly may report,
What faultlesse Truth desires thee to tell:
So doing Fame thou can not do but well.
If Enuies brood affirm thy tale not true,
Tell them Truth says all this is Englands due.
FINIS.
The Conclusion.
When Fame to Time had read this letter over,
Time was well pleased, such pleasing news to hear,
Fame took her leave and back again did houer,
Time still flew on; and now began to appear
Bright Phoebus rays in this our hemispheare:
With whom we all this while our course did take,
And Fame now gone Time thus unto me spoke.
Lo how the heaven (that late so much did droupe,
For ^itans forced absence) now does clear:
How fast the gloomy clouds away do troop;
Behold how Tellus (on whose cheeks appear
Sad drops of late shed tears) her self does cheer;
And glad to see the Suns so fair vprise,
Smyleth, and seems to wipe her weeping eyes.
As joyful as these seem, so glad am I:
Yea and more joyful far beyond compare,
Then for the Suns fair light, seem Earth or Sky,
To hear that sacred Truth so well does fare.
This has disburthened my heart of care,
That lately much misdoubted her estate,
Whom well I knew the World did causeles hate.
Now well I see that all commanding Jove,
(That rules and ouer-rules in every thing)
Unspotted Truth does most entirely love.
How then can she be made an underling,
That is the dearling to so great a king?
Now sure I am she never shall decay,
Though all the World conspire her to betray.
Ah England, keep her still, and love her still,
And she will be a staff unto thine age.
Preserve her still in honor, and she will
Preserve thee safe against thine en'myes rage.
What ere they be that war against thee shall wage,
Sh'will hemme thee in as with a brazen wall,
To live secure and none shall make thee thrall.
No sorrows blemish shall thy beauty stain,
Nor Age character wrinckles on thy brow:
So long as England shall Truths right maintain,
So long to none her princely neck shall bow;
Safe shall she dwell, and this I dare auow,
( Truth countenanced) Peace, or Victory,
Shall England evermore accompany.
As Time thus spoke, (I tired with watching long,
And ouerweari'd with this wandering)
Mine eyes complaynd that they had suffered wrong,
Which had no rest in all this iourneying:
Whilst thus mine eyes their rights were chalenging,
I drousie waxing, fell at last on sleep;
Yet aged Time his passage on did keep.
What past whilst thus I slept I know not well:
But when I waked, my self I strangely found
Amidst that walk, where (as I first did tell)
I heard the voice that Times approach did sound.
Up I arose, Times absence did me wound,
At last I spide him flying yet in fight,
And home I hide these accidents to wright.
What censure pass hereon, I greatly care not:
If thou my noble Patron pardon me,
Let other readers carpe at me and spare not:
Since these unpolished lines must published be,
For every critics eye my faults to see;
Let them detract, and blame my skills defect,
And scorn my Muse, so thou will me protect.
FINIS.

