The wonderful work of God showed upon a child, whose name is William
Withers, being in the town of Walsam, within the County of Suffolk: who
being eleven years of age, lay in a Trance the space of ten days, without
taking any manner of sustenaunce, and at this present lies, and never
speaks, but once in twelve, or four and twenty hours, and when he comes
to himself, he declares most strange and rare things, which are to come,
and has continued the space of three weeks.

PSALM. 50. 1. The Lord, even the most mighty God has spoken* and called the
world from the rising up of the sun, unto the going down thereof. Imprinted
at London, by Robert Waldegraue, dwelling in the Strond, near unto Sommersette
house.

To the right worshipful and vertuou^ gentleman* M. Edward Dennye Esq^ire.
John Phillip, (...) humble well willer in the Lord, wishes the fear of God,
peace and prosperity i^ our Lord and merciful Sau^o^r Christ* Jesus.
Things that be called new things namely being of great importance and
certain true, ought not to be rejected, contemned, nor despised, but s^oul^
with great reverence be este^med, set by, and regarded of every Christian: and
chieflye when they concern such things as may rouse us up in these dangerous
days, from the secure carelesnes of our condition and calling, to the diligent
worshipping and zealous honoring of our God: from sin to purity, from hell
to h^^auen, from destruction of (...) and soul in the bottomless lake of
everlasting torments, to salvation and blessed^esse through faith in Christ
Jesus, in his kingdom of everlasting righteousness. But (alas) right
worshipful, for the most part of us, we seem though we be called by the
preaching of the Gospel. to be partakers of those ceaselesse joys prepared by
the bloody death and passion of the innocent Lamb Christ, prophaners of his
religion, faint ^earted soldiers, and readier to yield like cowardes, then to
resist or endure the skirmish against our dangerous enemies: namely, the
world, fles be and satan, who glory in our perdition. If this be not true,
the time (...) and experience openly voucheth it: How pride flourishes in all
estates, even from the highest to the lowest it is too evident, ^ow harlots are
haunted, who beholds it not, how drunke^nes is esteemed, who see it not*
how the glorious name of our God is generally blasphemed amongst us, who
bears it not? how usury the spoil of common weal is enter tayned for
pri^ate commodity in all places? who feels it not? how covetousness has
buried good conscience, who perceives it not? how charity is convinced by
cruelty, who tastes it not? ^ow neighbourly love is vanquished by
dissimulation, who finds it not? how hypocritic all flattery defaceth true
and farthfull friendship? who sees not how plain dealing is defaced, and
just dealing plucked up by the roots amongst us: and in fine, how for the
most part all goodness is quenched in a number of counterfetted Christians,
every man may plainly as it were in a glass, bebolde, it* how ready Dathan,
Coran, and Abiram, is to rebel against God and his Anointed, who bears not?
how Baals priests are ready to stand up againct Elias, the Prophets, Patriarks,
and Christ himself it is evident. God like a loving father* though he have
bent his ^ow of displeasure against us, fethered the consuming arrows of our
destruction, whet his sword, and set in the fulness of his fury a dull edge on
the same, to cut and crop us down that are wild Olives, fruitles ^igtrees,
very stubble, and no good corn. Let us humbly with Peter that have with him in
our deeds denied our master, turn back again with tears, and lo^ke
faithfully v^on Christ, and he will bring us to the blessed foulde of his
sheep, feed us with the food of life in the g^adsome pasture of his grace:
ye^, and by this present example, not far ^ence, but within the borders of
Suffolk, given by a child of x^* years of age, who with great vehemency
cry^th, that the end of al things is at ba^d, threatening our d^stru^tio^,
except we speedely repent, the which God grant for his sons sake. Thus
cea^ing further to trouble your worship, I commit you to the safe preservation
of the Almighty, b^seeching him of his infinite goodness to prosper you in all
your affairs, to send you long life, health, and great in^rease of worship in
this life, and in the world to come, life everlasting.

Your worships most humble and faithful welwiller in the Lord. JOHN PHILLIP.

The wonderful work of God, showed on a child in Walsam.
I Know not, neither yet can conjecture with my self, whereunto many of our
nation are wedded: but well I w^t, the ^ridegrom to whose heavenly banquet we
are ^idden, is utterly forgotten, the fat kidde is contemned, the delicate
dishes of endless joy and ever enduring glory are nothing esteemed, selfeloue
triu^pheth, pride vaun^es her self in her (...) is so set to sale, that the
poor common^ are deuour^d up aliu^, whoredom now fla^nteth, her minions are
given to (...) ^ile and vicious l^st, aua^ice has vtter^ly vanquished good
conscience, (...) beastly epicure delights in his darling gluttony, Dives is
not forgotten, his rules are observed, cloth of Bisse and gaye garments of
purple color, are every where, and in all places frequented, but pore and
miserable Lazarus can skantly be so much favored as to catch the crummes that
fall from the board of a number of Dives near kinsmen* and whence springs
the effect hereof, verily from selfeloue, which rather for pleasures sake will
feed a kennel of dogs, then comfort their needy brethren, which for want of
food are often times ready to perish in the streets. Pity is made an outcast,
conscience is drowned, compassion is buried in the ground of forgetfulness,
and verily for the most part (though Christians by name) yet not in deed,
great braggers, maru^ilous boasters, and yet in trial found to be most
feeble, fainte hearted, and impudent cowards, not who calls Christ a Savior,
but who armeth him self with fruitful faith, by the virtue whereof he may
enjoy the benefit of Salvation. Who is he now that will not ^aun^e of (...)
new regeneration and bege^ting again to God in Christ: bu^ w^o is he that
consi^ereth the promi^^ he has made Christ in baptism: verily to be brief
and to speak plain, we forsake Christ, couple our s^lues t^ the worl^e, (...)
our selves to sin, and of f^ee (...) ^o make our selves bondmen to the
devil, which to consider is most lamentable: how carefully the laborers of
the harvest in this (...) season, seek by the preaching of the gosp^l to (...)
the profitable grai^ of the truth, con^irmed in the bloody death of Christ
jesus amongst us, we (...), but how (...) the greatest number of us bring
forth in^^ (...) where seen and made^ evident, in stead of good grain
which is required, me bring forth (...) (...), and most (...) the great long
(...) and patience of the almighty, ^n forbearing to punish us according to
the (...) contemned, we ma^^e on as shameless in the paths of all in
impuritie, we stretch forth our necks with the stubberne Jews and stand
still in our own, conceits, we rainge from virtue to vice, we hate Christ,
and love B^liall we abhor the heavenly Manna, and lust vehemently after
quails, we (...) weary of the land that flows with milk and honey, and
have an inordinate desire to be banqueted with the filthy fleshpots of
Pharaoh, thus most miserable is our estate and condition for neither the great
mercies of God given us freely by his undeserved grace can reclayme us home to
the sheepefolde of our sheephearde, neither yet his terrible threats and
com^^^^tions pronounced against us for the continual ex^rcise of sin by the
watchmen of the house of Israel, can cause us to embrace hearty repentance,
our hearts that should be as soft as (...), and mollified by the comfortable
oil of his mercy and grace, are made far harder then the Adamant, stiffer
then steel, and stronger then is brass or iron, neither signs nor tok^ns in
the firmament, as comets, blasing stars, arms of warlike wighees, scarce and
terrible lightnings, this late (...) Star which appears at this present
(...) Gods heavy judgments against us for the use of sin, can cause us to
cry out with David, and to confess we have sinned, strange tokens are
nothing regarded, Cart! quakes are made none account off, great foods (...)
innundations of waters are accounted trifles, alas what shall I say, if ever
people desirued the fulness of Gods indignation. Let us enter into our
conscie^^ces that live past all fear, and we shall both say and how if there
be any remorce at all in us, we are worthy to ^nioye all the plagues that God
in his justice may use against us. But alas, I fear me, that security has so
blinded us with the vale of forgetfulness, that scarcely one among a thousand
has the good feeliug or motion of Gods holy spirit (...) child, to cry out
bitterly, and weep heartily for their iniquities. Nay who is it that will say
he has sinned, and is not worthy to lift up his eyes to heaven, who is it
that will say he is not worthy to be called a son by adoption and grace, and
yet scarcely may be thought fit to have the name of a hired servant.
Iniquity has gotten the primasie in such sort, that repent aunce and
amendment of life is never thought upon: all which considered, might provoke
God to power his plagues upon us: to take from us the bright shining beams of
the Gospel, to give us a pray to our enemies to scour^ us thoroughly with
famine, sword* and fire, yet he spares us, as most sorry to punish us, if
case that we would convert, for it is written, he has no pleasure in the
death of a sinner, but rather that he might live, and turn from his
wickedness and be saved in the day of destruction, though we hate him, and
abhor to walk in the way of his commandments: yet our mediator. Christ
Jesus prays for us, and for his sake he yields forth unto us wretches, the
si^uered scepter of his mercy and grace, to see if in this time of our last
calling, we will humble our selves before the throne of his majesty, and be
humbly sorry for our sins, whereunto to bring us like a gracious god, he has
raised up a second Daniel, a yo^g child of the age of xi. years, borne in the
Town of Walsam in the county of Suffolk, whose name is William Withers, his
parents living, being of good name and fame, which child is an instrument
given to us by the providence of God, if it may be to waken us out of the
perilous s^umber of our si^ne. This child about the 24. day of December lay in
a trance the space of t^nne days, to the great admira^ion of the beholders,
and the grief of his parents the space of ten days without taking any
sustenance, and then according to the good will and pleasu^e of our God, came
to him self again, and declared to the comfort of the standers by, the
glory of God, who in the fullness of his mercy ^ad diverse and sundry ways
called us home from the peril of sins, and my^ie soil of our filthi^esse,
but all i^ vain, for the rypenesse of our sins was such and so great that
without spedie repentance the day of our destruction was at hand, brotherly
love he pronounced was strangled, the vowels of compassion and pity were shut
up one toward another, neighborly affection was changed to flattery, the
widows were robbed of their dowry, the fatherless dispossessed of their
patrimonies, and inheritances, pride of heart was every where bewra^ed by too
too strange disguisings of our bodies, m^u were become monsters, and women
shameless wantons in using the ornaments of men far unseemly, if modesty
might rule or govern them, the threateninges of God he publishes by the
authority of the scriptures in such sort as though he were a learned Divine,
and when he speaks his voice seems to be of such power that all the bed
shakes, to the astonishment of the hearers, and this v^^ally does once in
twelve, or four and twenty hours. To behold this rare token of Gods
singular love and severe justice set forth in this child for the reforma^ion
of our lives, there resorted Master Gatton, a learned preacher, rema^ning at
Berrie, with diverse worshipful Gentlemen, with which child he reasoned, and
found him perfect in the Scriptures, to whom in the hearing of all that were
present he inueyghed sharply against pride, and the peoples infidelity, y^
neither would believe, nor yet learn by signs and tokens to immitate Christ,
to fly from sin, and to bring forth the fruits that belong to repentance,
which of you all says he, that remembers the late Earthquake, when the Lord
passed by you, as it were, but with one touch of his finger, the effects
whereof as yet has not taken their beginning, but assure your selves of far
greater plagues the^ ever you possessed: and if I should tell you of a far
greater Earthquake, which you shall feel and taste of shortly, unless you
repent: your hearts are so stony, and your ears so deaf* that you will neither
conceive hear nor believe the same, no not if it should presently shake the
houses on your heads, or make the earth openly to receive and swallow you up
alive, This the great handie work of God showed unto us, in and by this child
may terrify our guilty consciences, rouse us up from our sins, and enforce
us if there be any hope of salvation in us, to subdue the old Adam, to stand
at defiance with the world and manfully under the standerd of Christ Jesus, to
resist the proud prince of darkness, with all his damnable ministers, but I
fear me that our hearts are so drowned in uncleannes that in steed of
repentance, infidelity shall so abound in us, and sin be so bolstered in our
rebellious minds, that God in his justice shall utterly in the imaginations of
our hearts vanquish us, the (...) of these strange news being dispearsed
abroad. Thither came Master Ashly Esquire, a Gentleman of great credit and
worship, with certain of his men to hear and behold the child, who speaking
as before, and perceiving one Smith his man, that had been there with his
Master two times, whom he had sharply taunted for his great and monstrous
ruffes, spoke unto him very vehemently, and told him that it were better for
him to put on sackcloth and mourn for his sins, then in such abominable
pride to pranke up himself like the devils darling, the very father of pride
and lying, who sought by the exercise of that damnable sin to make himself a
pray to everlasting torments in hell fire, whereupon at the second time as
one pricked in conscience, he sorrowed and wept for his offense, rent the band
from his neck, took a knife and cut it in pieces, and vowed never to wear the
like again. God for his great mercies sake by the example of this Serving man,
make all the rest to follow his example, make them humble and meek hearted,
that this horrible sin of theirs and all others that mask like monsters, and
stage players, which are more regarded in these days, then predication is
reverenced to amend their lives. With this Child there has been (as it is
credibly reported) the right worshipful and virtuous knights: Sir William
Spring, and Sir Robert ^armine, men of great zeal to God, lovers of religion,
and loyal subjects to her Majesty: for whose prosperity let us not cease to
pray to God, who continewe her health to his gra^ious pleasure, and the
comfort of all true hearted Subjects, who power upon her the sweet smelling
deawes of his mercy and grace, confound and overthrow all her enemies,
foreign and domestical, and make us all both high and low, rich and pore,
in time whilst time does last to take time and happy happy time, to turn
from our sins, for as he tells us, the end of al things is at hand: so
let us assure our selves that gods judgment for the use of our ^innes and
iniquities, hangs over our heads, and his wrath stands at the gates of
Cities ready to enter, if we defer from day to day and delight in our
uncleanness. God for his mercies sake touch our ^artes with the finger of his
grace that with the true repentaun^^ Niniui^es, we may fast from sin, pu^
on sackcloth, and weep bitterly for our iniquities, and in so doing, God will
be our God, and we shall be his people, he will purge us from all the spots of
our deformity, in the blood of the lamb, pardon and freely forgive us all that
is past, and continue the bright shining beams of thy glorious face toward
us: which grant good Lord and dear father, for the love of thy Christ our
king Anointed: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all praise and honor,
for ever and ever. Ame^.

FINIS.
A godly and most fruitful Prayer, to be said of every fa^thfull Christian, to
obtain pardon and remission of sins in the blood of the Lamb Jesus Christ,
and to appease his heavy indignation, which threatens our destruction for the
use of our impiety.
O Heavenly God, and most gracious father, we know and confess, that wilfully
and of a set purpose, we all ingenerally even from the highest to the lowest,
have most grievously off^nded thy glorious majesty, and have by our
disobedience provoked thee to displeasure, in such sort that the coals of thy
wrath are kindled up against us, like unto hot consuming fire, wherein we for
our deserts might worthily in thy eternal Justice be overthrown and
confounded, but yet such and so aboundaunt is the love of thy son our Savior
Jesus Christ that he prays to thee without ceasing, earnestly entreating
thee to forget his anger, justly conceived against us, and to behold with the
fatherly eyes of thy compassion, those bloody and painful wounds which he
suffered on the cross for our redemp^ion, the which when thou beholdest, thy
fury is changed to love, and thou in thy me^cie layest aside the heavy
scourges of thine indignation, wherewith all we might most worthily have bin
thoroughly chastised and corrected, yet still stand we sturdie and stiff in our
own conceits, and like a most froward people, perverse and st^bber^e
generation, for all thy great and rich graces bestowed upon us, enter into
contempt of thy graces, and lie wallowing like ^ilthy ^wine in the myrie
puddell of our corruption and uncleanness: we, I say, most wretc^ed and
miserable creatures, wander wilfully from the pathwayes of thy testimonies,
despise and utterly forget the covenant that thou have made with us, neglect
the benefit of our redemption, and utterly begin to l^aue the Lord of
health, altogether delighting in the practice of sin: the use whereof both in
body and sou^e wound^th us to destruction, which is end^es in the dungeon of
hell. But alas (good Lord) who is it that in this age con^idereth how often, and
how many times he in one ho^re offen^eth thee: (alas Lord) all have decli^ed
and gone away from the sh^epefolde of thy grace, even from the hiest to the
lowest, and there is no goodness on the face of the earth, yet who prepares
to humble him self before the Lord, and to ask mercy for his offenses, we
know we are al wounded, and wretched Samaritanes, and are thoroughly spoiled of
thy grace, wherewith we were clothed as a ^esture, by our ceasselesse enemies,
namely the world, flesh, and that old Leuiathan, the ancient enemy of man's
felicity and happiness, yet good Lord, pass thou not by us, for neither the
oblation of the priest nor the Leuite can prevail us, if thou leave us, that
art no fuller wounded with sin, what shall become of us (alas) the dangerous
darte of o^r transgression has taken a deep entrance into our hearts,
wherein it cleaves so fast that it can not without their aid be removed, our
souls which thou have in the fullness of thy divine wisdom framed to thine
own similitude and likeness are become so leperous that if thou pour forth
the wine of thy eternal justice we shall be sure to smart eternally for our
offenses, and become miserable slaves and bondemen to the prince of darkness
which has robbed us of our felicities in them, our consciences corrupted with
the canker of our corrup^ion that are made most deformed thorough uncleanness,
and show in thy sight, full of all spots of impiety, fest^red ^ores, oug^e
ulcers, bo^ches, blaines, and vyles, cau never be cured without the refreshing
oil of thy mercy sweet Christ, that art the heavenly Samaritane, thou art the
Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, thou art the sweet
physicion that ministrest unto us the delightsome Nectar of thy grace, return
now unto us that have forsaken thee, we repent, we come unto thee crying out
bitterly for our manifold iniquities: think upon us, hear us, continue thy
plea to thy father, whose ears will attentively listen unto thee, pray thou
for us and we shall be sure to be preserved from those plagues that we have
constrained thy justice for our disobedience to heap up against us. Thou art
the pitiful Chirurgian, pour into our monstrous consciences ouerladen with
all kinds of sins: as pri^e, avarice, Iuxury, fornication, etc. The precious
balm of thy bountiful favor, distill into our leperous souls, the sweet
smelling drops of thy innocent blood, ^or if thou of thy goodness vouchsafe to
wash and purge us therein we shall be made safe, yea we shall be purified and as
thy dear begotten, by grace he made strong and mighty, and be able to cry
with thee Aba, Aba* O Father forsake us not, but be merciful unto us. For if
thou refuse us now whose destruc^ion by thy word: si^nes and tokens in the
heaven, unkind and most monstrous concep^ion among reasonable and brui^
creatures, is by thy justice presaged, we can not choose but perish for ever:
give us grace therefore now in this season the end of all things being at
hand, since the preachers of thy word which plentifully break forth unto us
the bread of life, can not prevail to bring us home like sorrowful sinners
and hear^ie repentaunt sons to the fold, neither by thy inestimable Leuite,
nor yet by thy threatenings, and heavy comminations pronounced against us for
our Zodomi^rie and filthiness, in time to convert unto thee, and sith all
warninges hitherto have been insufficient to pearce our ston^e stubberne and
flintie hearts, how loving or terrible soever they have been now in this last
time, wherein to our shame thou have opened the mouth of a child to fore show
unto us the fullness of thy fury, to reclayme us home unto thee, give us grace
to be warned from our ill doing, and perform in us a good work through the
fullness of thy favor, that we may learn in time, which time (...) but a small
while to bring forth the frui^s of repentance and to ^scape those most
^iserable plagues which a^e threatened to come upon ^s, and that ^pee^ily, for
his wrath hangs over our heads, as it were by a twine threade, the burden
whereof will be so intolerable ^or us to abide, that wit^out speedy amen^ment
of our lives, which God grant, we shall perish in our wickedness. Let us
therefore, from the highest to the lowest, of what degree or calling soever: we
whilst gods vndeser^ed grace profereth us for our deserved (...), a space of
repentance, deplore our sins, weep and sorrow for our sins, and then shall
we be preserved and delivered from the b^rt^en of our sins, and be made of
the vessels of wrath, the vessels of honor, and enter with him, as the
glorious members of his mystical body, to endless rest and glory eue^lasting,
the which grant good Lord we beseech thee.

FINIS.

