Spiritual exercyses and goostly meditacions, and a near way to come to
perfection and life contemplatyue, very profitable for Religyous, and generally
for all other that desire to come to the perfect love of god, and to the
contempt of the world. Collected and set forth by the help of of god, and
diligente labor of F. Wyllyam Peryn bacheler of divinity and Pryor of the
Friars preachers of great Sayncte Bartholomes in Smythfyelde.

Imprynted at London in Foster lane by Ihon Waley. Anno Domini. M.D.L.vij.

Unto the devout and very religious Suster Katherin Palmer of the order of
saint Brigit in Dermount, and Suster Dorothe Clement of the order of saint
Clare in Louaine F. Wyllyam Peryn wysheth all grace and mercy in Christ Jesus
our savior.
AFter long and much strife within my self between dred and desire, dred of
presumpcyon in so hard an enterprise, and desire to satisfy your most earnest
and most i^portune desire (dear belouid susters in Christ our savior) I have
now at the lenght set forth here in wrytinge certain spyritual meditacions or
exercyses (if I be not disceauyd) very gostly and godly, wherein as ye desire
ye may be right well and very godly exercised and occupied in the vacant times
from your divine service and just obediens. These I have gatherid and collectyd
of diverse, but specyaly of ye devout father Nycholas Eschius who set forth in
laten.xiiii. exercyses (as he namyth the) which are very godly and gostly
meditacions, ye which I have not only translatyd in to english, but I have
also co^tracted the^ in to fewer in number, of.xiiii. making ten, and have
moreover turned the same into the form and manner of peticions and prayers whom
I have named the practyses of these same exercyses, so that to every of the ten
exercises is addid one practice corresponde^t and agreeable to the exercise. I
have also joined unto every exercise certain aspyracyons or brief and burning
desires according unto the exercise. That after the devout meditacions of the
gostly exercise, ye might most earnestly ask the grace of almighty god to
comme to such points of virtue and perfection as ar taught you in the present
exercise. For (as the judgment is of al holy and goostly writers) there are
three special means to optain of almighty god the grace of perfectyon. That is
to say. Holy medytacyon, Devout prayer, and feruente desire. For ye first I
have set forth these exercyses. For the second, are the practices. And for the
thurd I have apoyntyd ye brief aspyracious. There is no mean that does so sone
opteine grace of almighty god as does these lovely, devout, and fervent
aspyracyons. And like as it is very necessary for him that purposyth and would
feign spedely and affectuously achieue or win any thing by mastry and labor,
to know what are the things that might hinder or let his purpose or
procedinges, that he might remove them and put them out of his way, even so,
that ye might spedely and and affectuously attain perfeccion by gostly travel
and spiritual industry I have discrybid unto you the most specyal and greatest
impedimentes unto perfeccion, about the remocion and taking away of the
which, shall be the greatest (yea in manner) all the busnes and labor that ye
shall have, ear ye can attain and achiue that heavenly and most blessed state
of perfeccyon. And that ye might al so se and know what speed ye make and how
near, ye draw unto that which ye seek and travel to (for that often times
helpyth much) for if we perceive our selfs to be behind, the^ we take occasyon
to make the more have, if we go forward, it encoragith us lustely to proceed.
Therefore I have describyd here also certain steps, by the which we ascend
unto perfeccyon. These are the chyefe things that I have set forth here for to
satysfie somewhat your very godly and importune desire. Other compendius I
have put unto these, not that I thought these not to suffice, but that those that
can not carry away the longer rules, they may bear away these shorter.
Notwithstanding these exercyses are so profitable to such that desire to come
unto perfection and life contemplatyue, that they only might so suffice you (if
they be earnestlye and dylygently used and practysed) that you shall not need
any other rules or instructions. For these contain the absolute doctrine, the
whole sum and trade unto perfection. Wherefore I most humblye desire you,
if ye have not as good or better, ye may thankefullye take these, geuynge all
thanks unto almyghtye god, who has of his mercy put into my heart a desire
and good will to help and further you and all other that myndeth perfection in
all that I can, because I can not, or am not worthi to attain unto it my
self. Thus I comme^d you both to almighty god, and me unto your dayelye
devout prayers. The last of December. Anno. Do. M.D.L.iiiij.

Exercises. Twelve instructions very necessary for them that will take fruit
in the use of these exercyses.
THe first is, ye must put al your trust in the special and singular mercy of
god, that he, for his mercies sake and of his only goodness, will help and bring
you to perfection, if you with hertie and feruente desire do continualy wyshe
and long for it, and with most humble devotion do daily pray unto god and
call for it, and with all diligence do busely labor and travel to come to it,
undoubtedly it shall be given to you. For ye may not think it sufficient to
use the exercyses as though they had such virtue in them, that they could
make of them self alone such that do use them perfect. For neither these,
neither any other (what soever they be) can of them selves with the only use
bring you to perfection.

But our merciful Lord God, of his merciful goodness, when you do seek
with hertie desire, and feruente syghinges, makes you to find it. When you do
ask daily with devout prayer, then he gives it to you. And when ye do
continually with infatigable labor and travel knock perseuerantly, then he
does mercifully open it unto you. And because that these exercises do teach
you to seek, ask, and to knock, yea they are none other then very deuote
peticions, seekynges and ghostly pulsacions for the merciful help of god:
therefore they are very profitable, and a very great help to come to
perfection by gods grace.

The second. Every day when ye intend to use your exercise for that day,
before you begin, ye shall deuoutely call unto almighty god for the grace of the
holy gooste, most hertelye desiringe that ye may so use that exercise, and
take such goostly fruit thereof, as it may be most to his honor, and for
your salvation, and say as deuoutely as ye can the Antheme of the holy ghost.
Veni sancte spiritus. With the collect. Deus qui cor da. And an Antheme of our
blessed Lady, what ye will. And an Antheme of the patron of your religion.
Most deuoutely desiryng them of their prayers and help in your holy purpose
and goostly travel.

The third. Ye shall read or sing your divine service with all the diligence
and devotion that ye can at the tides and times appointed, or at any other
conueniente season, so that ye be in no wise in any thing the slacker, or more
undevout therein for these exercises. For it can not be acceptable to god that
which we offer unto him, our duty undone, no more then if you should steal,
thereof to do alms.

The fourth. Ye shall not be the slacker unto the common works and deeds of
obedience where soever ye be called, by custume or by word, neither to help
your even christen when he shall desire your help: but gladlye and spedely do
that ye be desired, yea if ye be in your most devout contemplacion, ye shall
leave it of to do the deeds of charity for your even christen, and to follow
obedience. And when ye have done that which is required, than return again
to your exercise as soon as the time will serve, and go forth where ye
left. If the time will not serve, then let it pass for that day. For your
obedience or charytie shall stand you in steed of your exercise, and shall
nothing hinder you at all, but greatelye further you.

The fyfte. If in the time of your exercise you feel your self drawn by the
holy ghost to any better or to as good co^templacion as your exercise is, then
ye shall leave of your exercise, and follow the tracte of that good mocion so
long as it shall last. And then return again unto that where ye left. If
it occupy all the time of your exercise, then let it stand instead of it for
that time.

The syxte. Ye shall take to you some goostlye and discrete person to be your
guide in these exercises, to whom ye shall from time to time reuele and open how
ye do feel your self in these exercyses, and what stiryng or mocions ye do
feel in them, that he may lead you by his discrecion. Unto whom also ye shall
declare what time ye have, and how ye bestow it. Ye shall also simply and
stedfastely give credence and follow (as nigh as ye can) such godly counsel
and lessons that he shall minister unto you.

The seventh. Ye shall leave all your former voluntary exercises what soever
they be, except that your gostly guide counsel you the contrary. Therefore ye
shall declare to him what were your former exercyses, that he may the better
judge which be to be left, which be to be kept still.

The eyghte. Ye shall not say these exercyses vocall-wyth mouth, but you shall
use them with a gostly meditacion, reading them in your mind, with deep and
earnest consideracion, and in your heart with a fervent desire. That ye may
both understand very well, and printe earnestly in your mind what they do
teach you. And also ye may most earnestly long and desire to come to such
points of perfection and virtue as they teach you.

The nynthe. Ye must have discrescion in the use of these exercises, that ye
over labor not your LABELe and wits: for so may ye have harm in your
LABELe with to much vehement and violent meditacion, and specially when ye
feel your self undevout and dry of devotion. For though ye may move sometime
your self to tears or devotion, yet you may not force your self to
vehemently, but myldely and gentlye do what ye may without great violence.

The tenthe. If you can conveniently and easily you shall perform your
exercise for that day all together at one time, if ye can not, then do it by
porcions as your time will suffer, so ye do it all in one day, except (as I
have said) you be let by obedience or charity.

The eleventh. These exercyses must be used two hours of the day. The exercise
one hour in the morning before noone, and their practyse one hour after
Euensonge or toward night. Such that have not so much time, they may use the
exercyses one day, and practyse another day. The aspiracions ye must have in
your mind always: that is to say, often times in that day that ye use the
exercise, so long as ye use the exercise. Not all at once, but one or other of
them. And not continually, nor by mouth saying it, but as often as ye can call
them to remembrance, then deuoutely in your heart with very hartye affection
and desire. Ye may learn first to remember and have your aspyracions thryse a
day, and then four times and until that ye (by custume) can bear them very
often in mind. But how many days ye shall use every exercise, herein you
must counsel with your gostly guide. For at the least ye must use every one
of them seven or eight days, and the last exercise ye shall use.xxxiij. days,
so long our savior Christ was here in flesh and suffered great pain for
our redemption. And when ye have gone over them once, if ye feel not so much
fruit in them as ye would, or thought to have done, then may ye by the
counsel of your ghostlye guide begin them all again, or so many of them as ye
shall think best.

The twelfe. Ye shall put in execution and practyse in your deeds these
exercises and such lessons as are taught you in them as nygh and as well as your
frayltie will suffer. At the least you must have a very good will and an
unfeigned desire to follow and to express them in your life and deeds to your
power by gods assistence.

The Thurtenth Thouhg at the first ye feale no swettnes in these exercises, or
perceive no fruit to grow in you by the use of the^, yet shall ye in no wise be
discoraged, or leave them, but hold them steadfastly and contynew them
faithfully what temtacyon so ever or gostly trouble ye feel, for if you use
them only for the honor of god and take none other fruit of the^ yet you shall
have great merit and an excellent reward of god for your diligent labor and
travel. But plainly it is impossyble that a soul trauelynge (as dylygently
and devoutly as it can) in such excellent devout and most godly medytacyons,
holy peticyons and daily prayers should not be heard of almyghtye god, and
take wonderful fruit and increase in virtue and perfeccyon yet more one then
another, and some in shorter time then other as it shall please the
unsearchable wisdom and great mercy of god which geuyth freely unto whom he
will, how he will, and how much he will. Ye shall not be discoraged in no
wise, neither by cause that ye feel your self very far from such perfeccyon
as ye perceive and read in these exercises, nether for that ye perceive in
your self so wonderful untowardness of your corrupt nature to such things,
neither for your quotydiane and manifold imperfeccyons fautes and venials that
ye daily do commit, neither for that ye can not do as ye read that other holy
persons has done, neither for that ye are weak or sick in body. Ye shall
take no discorage nor fear for any of these which the devil often time is wont
to suggeste and to put in to the mind and the memory of the simple young
begynner either to discorage them, either to trouble the^ with fearful
scrupulousnes or to weary them with tediousenes and al to hinder or to let
their gostly and holy purpose. Only have and hold steadfastly a good will and a
full and ferent desire to have such perfeccio^ in virtue as it might please the
goodness of god of his mercyful lyberalite to give you. Yet shall ye hope
evermore the best and ask the best, but commyt it to the high pleasure of god
to give what he will. And if ye hold this good will, and do labor and do what
your weke frayltie will suffer, being sorry that ye can do no better, though
you feale no devotion, no comfort in these your goostly travel and exercyses,
yet are they a most acceptable sacryfice in the sight of god, for whose only
sake and desire, you do paynefully occupy your self without any goostlye
comfort. Observe these instruccions as much and as nyghe as ye can, but not
to scrupulously thynkyng your labor lost if ye do not keep them exactly and
streytely, but keep them as well as ye may. And when ye forget any of them,
intend to keep it better here after, and purpose evermore (by gods grace and
blessed help) to better your self, and all shall be well. And with peace and
quietness do as god shall give you grace. Unto him be given al honor and
glory. Ame^.

The first exercise to come to knoweledge of almighty god.
First thou shall exercise thy self in the perfect and deep knowledge of our
lord thy god calling humbly to remembrance how excellent and
incomprehensyble he is, as well as the grace (that thou can obtain of god)
shall assist the, this knowledge thou shall indeuer thy self to obtain rather by
fervent desire and devout prayer, then with high study and outeward labor.
It is the syngular gift of god and very precyus. Wherefore thou shalt with
most humble and lowly heart very oftentyme desire the same lord god, that thou
myghtest possess him, most devoutly praynge that he vochsafe to manifest and
show him self unto the, that thou may know him, and his high pleasure and
perfect will, saying in this manner (or like) in thy heart and secret mind with
all desire and gostly affection.

MOst glorious majesty of my lord god, whom to know is the very bliss and
felicity of man's soul, and there can no man know thee as thou art without
thou wylt open and show thy self unto him. Most humbly I be seek the (most
gracyus god and most mercyful lord) vouchesafe, of thy infynite mercy and
goodness, to lyghten at this present, and ever, my heart, my mind, and knowelege
with the very true and perfect knowelege of thine own self, and of thy most
holy and perfect will, and godly pleasure to thy most honor and glory. Amen.

Then shall thou lift up thy heart and thought and consider: not (with to
great vyolence but soberly,) the eternal everlasting and the infynite power
and might of god which has created al thing, consider his most excellent
wisdom, his unmeasurable goodness, and his incomprehensible love. Consider
what thy lord god is, who he is, what manner and how great he is, not in body,
but in might power goodness, wisdom and mercy. For he is very and only god
most gloryus, most blessed, most excellent, and most highest, above all
thing, the excellent and high verytie and truth it self, the everlasting and
unchangeable goodness, a very and sempyternall substance, a charytie infynite,
which is so great, so excellent and ineffable in him self that all dignity,
perfeccyon, and goodness that is possible to be spoken, by word, can not
suffycyently express any part of his most inconprehensible nobilytie,
dignity, perfeccio^, and goodness. Way and consider well also that god is the
very true, propre and natural place, rest, and center of thy sole, in whom thy
soul from the beginning first restyd, by the perfect resemblance and
symilitude of her, in the blessed mind of god, from whens (in the time of her
creacion) she came in to the body, whyther she must return again, and in
whom she must (by him) rest, or else she shall perish for ever, and loses
that bliss that she was creatyde to, and Justly shall be cast in to the
vnrestefull myserie and turmente of hell. After this thought then turn thy
thought unto the most holy and blessed trinity. (Not musing to much thereon)
with most devout and obedient faith most mekely and lowly adoure and worship,
laud and praise it with all the myghtes of body and soul: saing in thy heart
thus or like.

O Most blessed and most holy trynitie of persons and most sweet and most
gloryus unity in one godhed. I most humbly beseech thy myghtyfull and most
merciful majesty, that the blessed unity (which thou art in godhed) may
flow and run, by most fervent love, in to my soul and in to all creatures
that be able to laud and praise the. Amen.

THen consider the blessed parsonage of god the father, how he is the
everlasting ineffable and incomprehensible goodness which bryngyth forth
incogytably of him self and substance, an everlasting goodness coequall and of
one godhead, and substance with him self, which is his only son. Which two
(that is to say) god ye father with his sempeternall son, love together the one
the other in a charytie infinite, and with an unmeasurable and everlasting
delight, and this charity or delight is god the holy ghost. Aspyracions, to
come to the blessed knowledge of god the holy trinity thou shall find at the
end of these excersies. Thou shalt also consider in this meditacion how al
things are of this blessed trinity thy lord god, and remain and abide by him
through his might, that vpholdeth them, and are in him more perfectly the^ in
their own nature, therefore to him be all honor and glory of creatures
worlds without end.

Of the knowledge of god comes and grows in the soul of man all virtue
and goodness. And of the ignorance of god aryseth all temptacyon all bytternes
and dampnacion therefore thou owghteste to give the more dylygence and to
travel the more earnestly to have always in thy memory swetely, louyngly and
delectably, these three (if thou can) that is to say. His essence or goodness,
His presence, and his love.

First attendynge and consyderyng his infynite nobilytie, his hyghnes, his
rightwisenes, his swetenes, liberality and mercy, and other his innumerable
perfeccions the which verily so far pass, and excede so incomparably al wit
and understanding of any creature, that what so ever of any of all these
perfeccyons, all the creatures together, in all the whoole world can think or
speak, it is less in comparison of his high worthiness and perfeccion, then
one little drop of water in comparyson of the whoole main sea. And yet (mark
well) he so mighty so great, so high, and so wonderful a lord god, has
created thy soul most nobly unto his own lykenes, and made it able and mete
to be pertaker and to receive his high majesty and goodness by love of him. For
he has knytte unto thy soul three excellent myghtes or powers, that not only
in the life to come in heaven, but also in this present life and world, thou
myghtest know him by thy understanding in faith, and goostly contemplacyon. And
by thy will thou myghteste choose and love him. And by thy memory thou
might rest in him and be knyt unto him, thou myghtest remain and dwell
ever in him. And plainly (if thou weere not blyndyd by the deuell, the world
and the flesh, and the love of these) thou would be so ravished in the
pleasure and love of him, that for Joy and wonder thou should not be able to
stand, but faint and synke. The Joys and sorows of this world thou shludest
not mark, nor take any heed to them, nor pass for them any thing at all. For
thou would not suffer thy self in any wise to be seperatyd not one momente,
from the consyderacyon and love of that high and infinite goodness.

Secondlye consider and behold with great Joy, gladness and thankfulness
how so high, excellent, wonderful a lord of his everlasting love and
charytie, offreth him self every where, in every place, specially in thy soul,
very presently unto the. Yea more nearer the then thou art to thine own self,
to uphold thy life and being, to conserve, to govern the and to save the and
to bring the to eternal bliss. Wherefore thou haste more neade to be ware and
charie of thy honesty and of verteous couersacyon (if thou wylt not dissemble)
for as much as thou do all things, yea all that thou thynkest and spekest is
openly done, spoken, and thought in his very presence, which sees all
things. Take heed therefore and consider thy most dear loving lord god, thy
creator and thy very hearts love always before the present, and walk in thy
conversation) like a chaiste spouse with reverent fear, and lovely
shamefastnes mekenes obedyence and pacyence, before the eyes of so high a
majesty of god, preparing thy self always without ceassyng to please him,
syghyng and desyryng in the botome of thy heart, to have his love in thy heart
and most louyngly to enbrase him.

Oh what abundance of grace would grow in thee if thou coldest thus do. At the
least do as thou may until more grace come. Thyrdely consider that the same
so mighty and omnipotent lord of his unmeasurable charytie and of most constant
and free love turns him self and has special regard to the, so specially
and syngularly, that it passes the understanding and desire of the angels. So
great is his dignacion and goodness toward the an unclean and vile worm, that
he intendyth and takes so great head and care for the, as though there were no
mo creatures left him, neither in heaven nor in earth but thou alone. He also
has delivered the, and defendid the from many periles and dangers both of body
and of soul, and does still every moment keep the. He also vnaskyd, does give
thee, allure the, and intyse the with so many benyfytes, gifts and graces
(though thou be very unkind and most unworthy unto him again) that thou can
not number the least part of them. And of the same his charity he geuyth the
most free liberty to come to him every momente, so that with only a good
thought and a lovely desire thou may obtain and possess infinite and
everlasting goodness which he his him self. In so much that thou may
safely, surely, and most profitably open unto him (as unto thy most faithful
loving and trustye frynde) all thy necessyties. Wherefore for a special laud
and praise unto so loving and so good a lord god (among the infynite number of
these things that might be spoken or written to his honor) it shall help the
greatly, to come to his love, contynually to remember and to have meditacyon of
his infynite and perpetual goodness, wisdom, mercy, swetnes, lowelynes and
charity. That by this as by small coals of fire, thy heart may be kindled to
render some love for love again. And that thou may be transformed and made
like him in like virtues and graces. Oh would God thou could and would
exercise thy self contynually in these three, how would it delyght the to arise
early and to watch with thy lord god. How sone sholdest thou be delivered
from thy vices and passions from al betternes, and from all temptacions being
in manner dronken in the love of thy savior. Yea thou should be turned into a
new man, and be transformed in manner into almighty god. For there is no
exercise more holyer, and more fruteful the^ this, which perced the heart of
holy saint Augustine and other fryndes of god, with the darte of love, when
they with their inner eyes (lyghtened of god) did depely consider the
wonderful tokens of the love of God toward them, specially in this
incarnacion, life, and passion, with other innumerable benefits of so great
and mighty a lord god given unto them, specially when they considered
earnestly the wonderful charity of god, whereby he has given him self unto
us, by his birth, as a fellow in our nature, in the sacrament, as our food. In
his death, as the price of our redemption, and reigninge in heaven, as our
everlasting reward which he grant us of his mercy and charity Amen.

Of the consyderacyon of thy self.
AFter this done, then turn thy thought unto the profunde and deep
consideracion of thy self, and earnestly behold how noblye thy soul was
created of God, and made by his power of naught to his image and likeness. Then
consider also how miserable, fylthy and abhomynable it was made by orygynall
syne in Adam, and how mercyfully thou art redeemed throw the unspeakable love
and most hard and paynefull satysfaction of thy lord Jesus. Yet after thy
baptism thou have innumerable time defiled thy self again, by thy actual
sins, turnynge thy love and obedience from the se^piternall goodness, which is
god him self by thy froward, cursed, and noughty will and art become now more
filthye, and more vile than is the unreasonable beast. Consider well and mark
into how many euyls thou art fallen by thy own sins, from the which
euylles thou art never able to arise by thy self, but only by the help of
almyghte god, by whom thou art able to do all thing that thou can do. For by
the true turninge or conversion of thy love to god, and to all virtue, thou
may come again unto the union with god. Attend and consider earnestly, that
thou art created therefore of god, because that thou should alwaie love him
to have co^te^placion and fruicio^ of him, and should ever possess him. And
that thou art set here, that thou should faithfully serve him, thank him,
laud praise and honor him, and to know and fulfill his most blessed will and
pleasure in thy self and in all creatures. Consider also that thou art here in
this world (as concerning thy soul) in a strange country as an outlaw and a
stranger, beset round about with many grynnes and enemies in danger of
innumerable peryls. But yet if thou remain in god, there can no man heart nor
harm the. Consider how noble, how fair, how wise thy soul is created of god
to his own likeness and image, and yet nevertheless thou art created (as
concerning thy body) of the slyme of the earth, weak, miserable, vile, nedy,
ready and prone to all sins and vice, in going still toward distruccyon.
Wherefore take good head dylygently, thou compel not thy soul to serve thy
vile flesh for the most filthi and most vile pleasures and delights (which
soon passes away) of thy stynking flesh and caren, and so cast both body
and soul into everlasting pains and turmentes of hell and dampnacion.
Consider diligently all thy cogytacyons, thy works and deeds whether the end
and purpose, in the use of all thy powers and sensies be always toward god,
either toward thy self or toward creatures. And thou shall perceive that thou
can never mark nor amend thy self suffyciently. Consider also how thou of
thy self art naught, thou have naught and can naught do, but syn. Where fore
(I say) consider often times, from whens you camst, where thou art, what thou art,
and whither thou shall. Thou may see in thy self three sorts of naught. The
first, by innumerable deadely sins you art come to naught but to be turmentyd
(if it please god) perpetually in the deapth of hell like a stinking vessel and
fire meat. Secondly, by the great corrupcyon of al thy powers and senses of
thy body and soul, thou can do naught but syn and sholdest fall in to
innumerable enormyties if god did not preserve the.

And thus art thou become a botomles deapth of darkness a vessel worthy of all
contumelye and reproach, be gotten by uncleanness and syn, living in
concupiscence, and shalt die in anguyshe and agonye.

Thyrdly, in comparyson unto thy lord and sauyor Christ, thou and all
creatures, are naught, and created of naught, and should in a moment come to
naught, if thou and they were not contynually conseruyd of almighty god.
Wherefore thou should desire to be contempned, despised, and to be unknown
of all men, yet without thy fault and deseruyng it. For thou must not do any
thing sinful to be dispysed, but if the world dyspise the (god permittyng
it) thou must be glad, and think thy self very worthy thereof. Thou must also
punish thy self with thy lord Jesus (but yet with discrecion.) Fear god every
where, and always with chyldely or lovely fear. Speak few, meke and lowely
words. Think and remember always believing that the coming of thy heavenly
brydegrome and spouse is at hand, always calling and saying to the: Ecce spo^sus
venit, exite obuiam ei. And thus always returninge thy thought and consideracion
upon thy naughtynes, thou shall merueyle greatly that god does suffer the, so
foul, filthy, and unthankful a creature to abide one moment before his eyes
or sight. Thou shalt with all meekenes cry unto thy lord god from the botomles
deapth of thy mysery, deuoutelye calling for the botomlesse deapth of his
mercy with the often search of thy conscience, whereby he of his mercy, by his
grace synguler (for of it thou haste need) will vouchesafe to give thee the
clear sight and knowledge of al thy vices, imperfections, passions, and synful
inclinacions to syn, and all thy sins which cleave and lie hid within and
without thy powers and senses, and do miserablye blind thy soul, and draw
the continualy to perdicio^ and destruction. And thus must thou learn to know
thy self, and that very dilygently. For though you profit very much
continually, yet art thou not able to penetrate and perse to the botome of thy
naughtynes, the heart of man (as Esaias says) is so wicked and unsearchable:
yet by grace thou may come to a great knowledge thereof. Where fore to obtain
this special grace, thou shall make deuoutely unto god in thy heart and most
herty desire, and not with voice, this prayer which is the practyse of this
exercise that follow these few aspyracions. These brief and short prayers be
called aspyracions: for they be (as it were) syghings and longinges to obtain
of almighty god that which we ask in them: and they must be used and said in
heart and desire as often in the day as they come to mind, what ever we do, or
where ever we be every day so long as we do use this present exercise. Oh
most merciful Lord whose love is the life of my soul, lyghten my soul with
thy grace to know thee.

Oh most sweet Jesus, to know all the world, and not to know the, is but
darkness and folly, grant me grace therefore merciful lord to know the.

Oh most merciful Lord make me Ignorant and a fool in all thing so I may
know the, which is the highest wisdom of all.

Oh Gracius Jesus which art not known but of clean hearts, purge my heart
that I may see the.

My Lord Jesus which do reuele thy secrets unto the little babes, make me
perfect, meke and a babe in evil that I may know the.

Oh merciful Lord grant me to come to the knowledge of my self the ground
of all mekenes.

Grant me grace (good Lord) perfectly to contempne my self and to se the
botom less pytte of all my myseries.

Merciful savior grant me an holy hate of my self for the very pure love
of the and thy honor.

The practice of the exercise to come to some knowledge of god and of thy self.
O Most myghtyful maker and sweet savior Jesus which taughtest and saydest:
This is the life everlasting, the very high way to the bliss of heaven, that
we may know the very god thy father, and thee his son whom he has sent to
redeem the world. There can none come to the knowledge of the father, but such
to whom thou will vouchsafe of thy gracious mercy to reuele him, For it is thy
gift only, and we must receive it only at thy hand. Wherefore most merciful
mediator Jesus, by whose only merciful means, and the blessed merits of thy
holy manhead all grace is given to us wretched sinners of thy father celestial,
and thou also, as very god, doste give with thy father al mercy and grace. I
most humbly beseech thee grant me thy heavenly light and the blessed
knowledge of thy blessed godhead. Manifest and open to me thy blessed father
and thine own self, which art one god with him and the holy ghost. I
knowledge, good lord, that to know the my Lord god perfectly and profoundlye,
is the synguler gift of thee, which I cannot come unto without thy special
grace, which I most hertely and most mekely beseech thee to grant me that
thereby I may perfectly know thee and thy holy will, and most blessed and
acceptable pleasure.

Grant me good lord, now at this present and oftentimes to consider
profoundly, and perfectly to know that thou my lord god art most higheste
and most excellent above al things, most blessed wysedom, everlasting and
unchangeable goodness. A very incomprehensible and sempiternal substance, an
infinite and most blessed bryghtnes, and an everlasting and incomparable
light of bliss, which in thy self art so mighty, so glorious, so good,
and so perfect, that there can nothing be thought so good, so perfect, so
worthy, so excellent, and so glorious, but thy goodness, thy perfeccion, thy
wisdom, thy power, and thy incomprehensible love surmounteth and excels it
infinitely and incomparably. For if al power, virtue, goodness, wisdom, and
the perfeccions of all the creatures in heaven and in earth, and in all the
whole world were knytte in one, it weere not so much in comparison of thy
blessed and most excellent majesty, as is one little drop of water in
comparison of ye unmeasurable maine sea. Yea what soever the thoughts of al
men, the understanding of al angels good and bad, be able to think or
understand of any goodness or perfection, thy blessed goodness, unmeasurable
might, and infinite perfeccion passes it without comparison.

O most blessed, holy and glorious trinity, most myghtyful father
everlasting, ineffable, incomprehensible goodness, which of thine own substance
se^piternally do bring forth an everlasting, ineffable, and
incomprehensible goodness, coequal, and consubstanciall with thy self, which is
thy se^piternal and only son. And both you father and son equally the one
loving the other infinitely, in a charity and delighte infinite, are knyt
together in one holy ghost ye third person For this infinyte charytye, is none
other then the holy ghost, proceeding incogitably of the father and of the son.

Thus art thou my (Lord God) three dystincte persons in one very God, three
persons in one godhede, and one very godhed in three persons.

Most dreadful mayestye I most lowlye and most devoutly as I can I adore the,
and worshype the, with all might and powers of my body and my soul, most
sweet and blissed unite, most blessed and holy Trynitye. Oh my dear and
merciful lord and my god, show thy self unto me, and I ask no more.

Oh most mighty maker and most sweet Lord God, infunde and power into my heart
and my understanding, thy heavenly light and blessed charity, that I may know
and love the above al thing, comfort the wekenes and infyrmytie of my frail
nature with thy blessed presence, fill my heart and my delyght with the love of
the and with the goostly influe^ce of thy synguler grace, that I may know how
loving, how gracious, how good, how merciful a Lord God thou art, and have
been unto me specially, and unto all creatures.

Grant me grace most merciful lord often times louyngly and very delectably
to remember, how so myghtyful and so dreadful a lord god, have created and
made my soul most nobly unto thine own likeness and image, and have given unto
my soul three excellent powers or myghtes, that I might and should, not only in
the world to come, but also in this present life by wit and understanding,
in constant faith know the, by will I might and ought to chose and love the
above all thing, and by memory, I might rest in the, and being knytte fast
unto the, I might so faithfully remain and cleue unto the, that for the pure
delyght and love of the, I might contempne and forget all thing.

Grant me good Lord that I may be so rauyshed in the love, and the delyght
of thy blessed essence, and goodhed, that for Joy, gladness, and admyracion I
may forgette my self, I may feel nether prosperytie, neither aduersite of
this world, and that I may not fear to suffer all the pain in this world,
rather then to be pullyd or parted away from the, which art of infinite
power, wisdom, Justice, goodness, charytie, swetnes, lyberalitie, and of
infynite pytie, clemencye and mercy, whose perfeccions excedyth infinitely all
thought and understanding.

Grant me most merciful and loving Lord, grace to perceive and remember
always with gostly Joy and thankefulnes that thou so glorious, and gracious
lord god, of Infinite charity, of godly might and mercy do offer thy self
unto me every where, specially in my soul, more verylye present, then I am
with my self, being always and every where, redye to conserve, to govern, to
save me, and to bring me to thy bliss.

Wherefore (most dreadful Lord) I have a great cause if I will do my dewty, to
be circumspecte and take great head, how I do use my self in the presence of
the my lord which seist and lokest upon al my words deeds and thoughts.

Grant me therefore (most merciful Lord) grace to walk and conversant my
self before thy blessed presens, like a chaist and an holy spouse, with all
reverence, fear, shamfastnes mekenes, obedyence, and patience, contynually
preparing my self with al dilygence to please the sight of thy dreadful
majesty, and with al my heart and will, to love the above al thing, whereby al
grace and virtue may increase in me.

Grant me, o merciful savior, always in every place to remember that thou, so
mighty a Lord God berest toward me vile wretched worm of the earth, an ever
lasting, unmeasurable, most constant and fre love and charity, which passes
al thoughts and desire, so great is thy goodness toward me most vile
wretch, which am but sin and claye, that thou do vouchsafe to tend and
to take so great head, and care upon me, as though thou had no mo creatures
in heaven or earth, and have, and do deliver me, and defend me from
innumerable perels and dedly dangers both of body and soul, and have, and
do freely adorn me, indewe me, and multyplye in me most unthankful and
unworthy, with so many gifts and benefytes at al times, that I am not able to
reken the least part of them, and of thy Infinite love and charity most
lyberally, I may at all time, (yea every minute of an hour) come unto the, in
so much that with one godly thought and desire I may obtain and have the
which art everlasting felicity, and to the as unto my most nearest, derest,
most faithful and trusty friend in heaven or earth, I may safely open all my
griefs and necessytyes, and be certain and sure to have such help of ye, as
shall be most for my soul health. Wherefore, most merciful lord god, which art
the sempyternal light of heaven vochsafe for thy mercy sake to lyghten the
darkness of my sinful soul and the blindness of my heart, with the blessed
beme of grace that I may come to the perfect knowledge of thy blessed godhed,
of thy infinite charity towarwe me. And that I may contynaally remember thy
blessed presens in every place. Lyghten mine inward and goostly eyes to se and
consider effectuously the wonderful tokens of thy infinyte love and kindness to
me, and the innumerable benefits given unto me and all mankind, specially by
thy most holy Incarnacio^, thy life, death and passion, and that I may the
better perceive what thou have done for me: grant me most mercyful good lord,
grace to com to the perfect and exact knowledge of my self. First to
consider and acknowledge how noble thou haste created my soul, unto thine own
similitude and image of naught. And how miserable, how foul, fylthy and
abhomynable it was made by oryginall sin as soon as ever it entered the
sinful body and flesh. And how through thy infinite mercy, and tender
charytye it was redeemed by thy precious death and purged by vertewe of thy
blood and passion in baptysme and so restoryd unto grace and mercy again. Yet
afterward, and sith that time I have innumerable times most fylthyly defiled my
self with many a deadly sin forsakyng thee my lord god, and turnynge away
my love from the, and from thy holy commandments, following mine own
corrupt will, and beastly lust and desire, and have made my soul more filthy
feeble, and more vile in thy sight, the^ any unreasonable beast. And thus in ye
foul puddell and durtie dongio^ of sin, I must needs have sunk in unto ye
bottom of da^nacion, if thy mercy had not or would not yet help me up again
by thy Infynite mercy and blessed grace. For of my self and of mine own power
I am not able to arise by true and perfect repentance with out thy merciful
grace do help me. And yet thou art so good and gracious, that I may (if I
will) every, day hour and mynet, recover thy gracius fauer, for thou art ever
ready knocki^g at my heart continually. Oh merciful Jesus, how much need have I
of thy mercy and grace.

Grant me good Lord, grace earnestly to consider often time from whens I came,
what I am, where I am, and whether I go. First from whens I came, plainly I
came from vile and sinful flesh, begotten in fylthy concupysence and beastly
lust, in the stinkyng vylenes of oryginal sin, fed in my mothers womb with
foul menstruus vilitie. And where thou (most merciful lord god) created the
planettes and the stars of the fire, the fyshes and fowls of the water, thou
haste created me and all other beasts of the foul and vile earth, so that as
touching my body I am no better the^ a beast, created of ye earth and unto
the earth I shall again. What I am I may sone perceive, I am naught else but
dross and durte, rotten earth worms meat, and much less perceuing how I
shall depart, subject unto many necessities, full of misery, borne in sin,
living in wretchidnes and labor and must dye in pain and agonye. And if I
should earnestly and depely consider I may perceive and se, that the trees
herbs bring for the leaves, sweet flouers and fruits, and my body brings
nothing else, the foul worms, stynking sweat and corrupcion. If I would well
consider and mark what comes out of the nose, the ears, and of other yssues
of the body, I shall perceive yt there can be no fowler and more horible or
more stynking dunge hill in the world. Now where I am, plainly i^ this
wretched world the vale of mysery, as an out law and stranger and in a foren
country, beset with many galthroppes, and grinnes on every side in the mids
of innumerable dangers and perels, among my most mortal ennymies against whom,
I must fight both night and day, for they lie in wait for my dysstruction
contynually, whose mortal malice. I can not escape without thy most merciful
help. And whither I go lord, whyther else, but from whens I took mine
orygynal, that is unto earth dunge and claie. Of earth and ashes my wretched
flesh was created, and to the earth it must go first or last. But when and
how sone, thou only know most myghtyfull lord, but sure I am that thither I
go contynually where ever I be, what ever I do, wherefore (most merciful
lord) grant me grace, that the perfect knowledge and consideracion of my
wretched estate, never go from my memory. Whereby (with the help of thy grace)
I may seek earnestly and contynually the amendment of my self with thy
merciful help and favor.

Oh merciful lord were not thy exceeding great mercy, my soul (throw the
innumerable and most grievous sins) where naught else but a brand of hell fire
and a foul stynking vessel full of abhomynacio^ of sin apt to be cast into
hell and everlasting damnacion. Moreover (if thy grace were not) I cold do
nothing else but sin, and increase my damnacion, yea there were no kind of
sin so abominable, the which I should not commyt, if thy grace did not
preserve me, yea my soul should return to right naught, if thy might and
godly power did not uphold it and conserve it.

Oh mercyful Lord how many evil affectyons, crooked inclynacions, sinful
passions: noughty dysposicions and redynes to all kind of sin and myschefe,
are in the senses, wit, and power of my soul both inwardly and outwardly.
Whom I can never without thy special grace and help know nor perceive, and
much less amend reform and mortyfie: wherefore (myghtyfull gracious and most
pytyfull savior) In ye blessed merytes of thy most bitter and paynfull
passion, which thou suffer in every member part, power and might of thy
blessed body and soul, lyghten my sinful blyndnes, that I may come to the
perfect knowledge of my self, and thereby to come unto that most acceptable (the
ground of all virtue and grace) blessed mekenes, and contempt of my self and
to the very and most perfect love of the my lord God, unto whom only
belongs and ever might be all glory and honor of al creatures now and for
ever. Amen.

The second exercise to optaine remyssion of sins.
THou must have a general co^tricyon and hate of all thy sins and if thou
haste not made a general confession all ready then I would counsel the to make
one, intending with most full and constante mind to forsake and detest al
kind of sin and for the very pure love of God and deape hate of thy self
and of al sin to bewail them as heartily as god shall give the grace. And that
thou may come to the perfect hate of thy self, thou must believe that there is
no creature i^ the world that has done so great injury and showed so great
contempt to God as thou. And therefore thou shalt Judge thy self worthy of all the pain of hell and al ye shame of the world, for thy manyfold and great
sins, for thy great negligence, and thy wonderful unkindness showed unto God,
for the which cause thou shall have most fyrme and perfect will in god, to be
ready to abide and suffer al iniures, shame, mockage, reuyle, and contempt,
that all creatures in the world be able or will lay upon the, yea thou shalt
offer thy self with a ready will to suffer all the pains of hell for thy enormytes
and sins, And that thou may come to the pure and perfect sorrow for thy
sins, thou shall twyse in the day if thou be not let by obedience or
charity, set thy self in a corner conueniente, as it were before the
Judgment seat and sight of god, and adiuge thy self and think in thy mind
and conscience that thou haste deseruid everlasting death and the sentence of
god shall be pronunced against the thou can not tell how sone. Not withstanding
thou shall yet hope steadfastly, that by prayer and penance with tears and
contricion thou shall obtain both mercy and grace at the hand of thy most
mercyful lord god Thou may sorrow lamentably that thou have done so great
inuiry and dishonor unto the high majesty, wysedom, and infynite goodness of
thy lord god, who is most worthy of al laud and praise, saing in thy heart
and mind with as hearty devotion as grace will serve, this prayer following which
is the very practyse of this present exercise. But beware that thou be not to
ferefull but take comfort and have fyrme consydence and trust in the infinite
merytes of god, which is ever ready to take the to grace and mercy and to
restore the again unto thy original pureness, if thou be ready to satisfye (as
well as thou can) for thy sins. Then shall thou offer up to god thy soul
and body and what so ever thou have in this world for thy sins, desyreynge
and wyshyng in thy heart to consume and spend them all unto naught for his
honor. And that you may more effecteousely offer up in sacrifice thy soul
with all the powers and myghtes thereof unto god, thou shall pray or think thus
in thy heart.

O My most dear and most loving lord god I will have nothing in my memory
here after but the my lord god, my very orygynal, in whom I was from the
beginning and from whom I came. Nether will I have in my mind and
understanding or knowledge any thing but the only my lord god, and all
creatures in the. Neither will I have any other thing in my will and desire
but the execucion and doing of thy most pleasant and most blessed will.

Thou shall also make a sacryfyce and a lively host unto god of thy body, as
they did in the old testament layng wood upon the altar and put there on the
sacrifice or hooste and so with fire put there under they brent it upon the
altar. In like manner must thou gather to gether by contrite remembrance, thy
sins upon the altar of thy heart and thy body must be the sacryfice, for
it must be mortyfied specially from all vices and synful work and pleasure,
and be slain with discrete penance and with the fire of charytye. For thou
must lamente thy sins, for the very love of god, and thou must do penance,
and punyshe thy body and mortifye it for the pure love of god. And if it be
thus consumed and offered unto god with this fire the^ shall it be a sweet and a
sauery sacryfice in the sight of god, and thus intending to do in full mind and
purpose, thou shalt deuoutely and heartily pray in thy heart to god in this
manner.

Oh most mercyful and gracious Lord set on fire this my sacrifice of my body
and soul that all may be burnt and consumed in thy love, that it may be
acceptablye and thankfullye taken of the to thy everlasting honor and glory
Ame^. Thou shalt also offer to god thy sustentacyon temporal, desirynge in
thy heart so to be mayntained and to use thy necessaryes as it may be to his
eternal honor and thy soul health and no otherwise, lacking or having no
regard to thy commodity or any pleasure of thy self in them, but thou shall
rather desire (if yt please god) to be spoiled and to lack al necessaries and
to be very pore and nedy, as he him self was poor and nedy in this world for
thy love. Thou shalt also take upon the (by the discreate judgment of thy
father and goostly guide) some bodily penance with descrecion, and that for
the great love of god according unto ye great enormytie of thy sins. Then
shall thou turn thy heart and thought unto thy Lord Jesus as though thou
dydest stand or knele before his most blissed body hanging upon the cross with
his precious wou^des flowing out ye most precious blood freshly full of wou^des
on every side, and full of al pain and sorrow for thy sins sake. And in thy
heart and with all thy heart, if thou can, or as well as thou can, say thus.

Oh most mercyful Lord sweet sauyor Jesus, if it might please thy most
blyssed, will and be thy pleasure I would suffer my body an hundred times to be
crucyfied for my sins, I am ready (most mercyful lord) to suffer in every
joint and lyme of my body some syngulare pain and penance, for the honor of
thy blessed name.

Then shall you purpose fully in thy mind to use and to bestow, every member of
thy body, which thou haste vsyd to sin here after to the high honor of god,
and to force and to compel thy self to the same, though it be never so hard
and paynefull for the, that thou may make some amends in affliccio^ and
penance unto thy Lord God, the which labor and penance with the labors and
pains of thy state, thou shall offer to God every day with tears (if you can
have them) in the union of the most holy death and passion of thy savior
Jesus. Thou shall be very sorry in thy heart, yt thou can not be so sorry and so
heavy for thy sins as thou ought to be. And think thy self for thy great
offenses worst of all creatures and worthy the deapest pyt of hell, because
thou have crucyfyed as much as in the lay, again the son of God and have
trodden under thy feate the precious blood of eternal testament (with which
you were redeemed) and have dishonored it and haste done contumelye and reproach
unto ye spyrite of grace. And to come to a more clear knowledge of thy sinful
life thou must consider and way well how often, how much and after what sort,
how greuouslye thou have offended thy lord god in all the time of thy whole
life, yea every moment, so ye there is not one minute of thy time, nether any
good work in whom thou have purely and sincerely sought the honor of God as
thou ought to have done, but haste with a certain and secret preuy venom of
the love of thy self or thy commodity, delectacion or will, thou have defiled
it. And have (in manner contynually sinned, all thy life time) at the least
either in omission, or in the imperfect fulfyllinge that which thou art bond
to do by the order or state of thy life, if god would judge according unto his
Justice, yea though thou had commyttyd nothing that were sininful deed,
but only in omission and imperfect doing thy true duetye. Wherefore now
while he abides the most mercifully, preuente his face in humble confession
washyng the bed of thy conscynce with tears every night of thy sins, that is
to say, lament every sin with tears that comyth to thy remembrance and
humbly desire thy Lord that he will not enter into judgment with the his
servant, for there can no man that lives be Justified in his presence and
syghte. At the least consider and way depely how vnspekeably thou have
offended in these two co^maundeme^ts. Thou shalt love thy lord god with all
thy heart. etc. And thine even christen as thy self. And so more specially in
the rest sins, as thou shall find rehersyd in the prayer and practyse of this
exercise. I would thou should way and consider well there, how and after what
manner thou have offended specially when you shalt have that prayer and
meditacio^, and thou shalt lament weep and bewail thy sins earnestly,
until that the blessed spirit of adopcion of the children of God vouche safe
to descend into thy heart berynge wytnes unto thy spirit and soul that thou
art the son of god and do hear that meruelus and sweet voice of him. That
verily God the father has pleasure in the, that is to say, until thou
fealest in thy heart a persuasion that god has most mercyfully forgeuen the
thy sins and has chosen the to be his servant, and that thy state of thy
life does please him. It is but vain to take unto ye any thing of consolacyon
spiritual or te^porall, or to prese unto contemplacyon except thou do
ernestly and devoutly eat and feade of this bread of penance and sorrow for
thy sins and do receive the blessed spiritual adopcion, which vndoutly he
will most heartily grant to such that devoutly ask him to his glory and
honor. Amen.

Aspyracyons for this exercise.
Oh my most gracius lord god grant me the perfect knowledge of my synful life
and to come to perfect contricyon and hate of my sins.

Oh most mercyful sauyor Jesus lighten my heart and mind with thy grace that I
may perfectly see how enormously I have dyshonored and offendyd thee.

Dear sauyor and loving lord Jesus open the inner eye of my soul to see
clearly my noughtynes.

Most swet and kind lord Jesus open to me my great unkindness that I do and have
showed unto the, that love me so tenderly Oh my dear love my sweet lord
Jesus, for your mercy show me my vylenes and great wyckednes, the great redynes
to al kind of sins.

When shall it plase thy great goodness to give me the spyryt of true and lowely
contrycyon?

Grant me good lord Jesus the swet tears of thy true lover mary Magdalene for
my sins, that I may obtain of thy sweet mercy forgeuenes and remyssyon.

These or other like, use all the times that thou do use this exercise not
all at ons, but one or other, that which thou can beer best away and felest
most devotion in, but if any other like come in to thy mind follow that, for
that is like to be of the holy ghost.

The practyse of the second exercise for remyssyon of sins.
O Most bonteful and most loving lord god, my most merciful sauyor Jesus
the creator and redemer, of my pore synful soul and redemer of al mankind. I
am (most merciful maker) that most vile and most wicked wretch and unkind
sinner that so enormously, so bodly, so abhomynably and so often times, have
dyshonored thy highenes and, godly majesty and presence. I have offendid thy
blessid holiness thy gracyus goodness, thy great charytie. And thy loving mercy
and long suffering I have contempned and disspysyd. There is no creature
living, that has done so great injury and dishonor or has showed unto thee so
great unkindness so great contempt as I have. O mercyful lord, how often have I
prouokyd thee, with my most detestable sins and with my most foul and
fylthy life unto the most just and ryghteous dampnacyon of soul and body. I
have provoked, moved, and irritid thee which art most myghtyful, most just
dreadful lord god, which art the most just righteous and terrible judge, of me
and of all the world I have most unkindly contempned the and turned my heart and
love from the my dear and loving sauyor Jesus, in my shameful and filthy sin
for the which, thou dydest suffer so paynefull passion, so cruel and shameful
death, and most louyngly and most mercyfully shedest thy precious heart blod
and for my sake only and for thy charity yt thou bear toward me most
unkind wretch. Yea most lovingly, only to perdo^ my sinful life, and to save
me from ye most dreadful wrath and vengance of thy ryghteousnes, and from the
most horrible pains and torments of the perpetual and everlasting fire of
hell, thou leddest a most poor and painful life, full of much labor and
travel, in much sorrow and heuines of heart, sufferinge many and innumerable
rebukes, co^fusions, wrongs and iniuryes. At the length after thy most holy
and blessed conversation, you suffered most mortal heauynes, sorrow, and most
dredful envy, the which was so sore and so vehement, that for very sorrowful
pain and oppression of thy blessed heart, thy whole body brasted out in
wonderful blody swet sone after betrayed and taken and most vilany and
vyolently bond like a thief, with most shame and confusion, you wast brought
into Jerusalem where after most false accusacions most dysspitefull and cruel
injuries, mockings, scorninges, spiteful and vile words, spittinges, sore
strokes, and stripes thou wast most strongly and stoutly bound unto a pyller.
Thy blessed and most virginal and most chaste and pure flesh was cruely
torn with scurges, and rent with rods, thy glorious and holy heed, most
painfully pricked and pressed with a crown of sharp thorn. After this mortal
cruelnesse, and deadelye pains, thy torn shoulders and weke body was laden
with an inportable cross, haled, and driven forth with bylles and battes like
a beast unto ye slaughterhouse with all confusion, shame and worldely wonder,
that the wicked malice of the most crewell Jews cold deuyse.

Then most violently stryped and cast down upon the cross, most rashely with
ropes, you waste straightly and strongly stretched and rackyd til thy blessed
veins so sore strained and synewes that when thou wast heuyd upon ye cross
after thy most cruel crucifixion, they were vyolently broken, then out of thy
blessed hands, fete, and heed, thy precious blood most plentefully yssewed,
as it had been out of a lively fountain. Thus three long hours, most
desolate, most painefully, and most myserably, thou suffredst most spytefull
blasphemies reproach, reuyles, and scorns when thou should have had
compassion, and consolacion. At the length you most paynefully, most miserably,
yet most louynglye and willinglye suffer most crewel, most bitter and
most shameful death for me specially and for all ma^kynd and so well, thou
yet louyst me, that if need were, thou art ready to suffer the like, yea more
paynfull passion, and more cruel death rather then I should perysh, if I would
faithfully love and serve the.

O Most loving and merciful sauyoure Jesus, I most unkind sinner have
neglected and set at naught the, that have done so much for me, and I have
offended as unkindly and as grievously, as though thou had done nothing at
all for me. For I have contynually offendyd and sinned all my life, but
specially i^ these. N. Thou most here remember thy special dedly sins, and
one after another and be specially sorye if time will serve. And generally I
confess my innumerable enormytes, wherein I have conte^pned and offendyd the.
First in breking of thy holy.x. commandments. In the.xii. Artycles of the
catholyque faith. The statutes and commandments of holy church. In the.xii.
counsels of ye gospel. In breking such private vows as I have promised. In
the.vii. mortal sins Omytting the.vii. works of meryc gostly, and in not
doing the.vii. gifts of the holy inspiracions I have misused ye gifts of
grace lent unto me, I have mysused my v. vyttes or senses outward, and my
senses inward, I have misspent all the powers members, and myghtes of my body
and of my soul, I have mysspent the gifts of nature, the gifts of fortune,
the gifts of the holy ghost, I have not desposyd me to have constante faith,
perfect hope and burning charity which are the three theological vertewes, I
have not had in me the four cardinal virtues, Prudence, Justice, Fortytude,
and Temperaunce, I have not labored to have in me the.xii. fruits of the holy
ghost, I have not labored so ernestly to com to perfection of life and to the
perfect love of the, as I would have done, to come unto high dignity and
honor of the world. I have sinned and lived sinfully in every place, in
every state, in every office, that I have lived in, by word, by deed, and
thought in omission, in loss of my time, and in unkindness, and unthankfulness
toward ye, my Lord God, toward thy blessed mother and all thy blessed
angels and saints. And against all mine neighbors, against the good folks the
blessed frindes of god, against the weak and sinners, against my benefactours
and friends, against my superiors my egalles, and my inferiors against the
quick and the dead, against the sowles in purgatory, against all creatures,
against my own self, against both my body and my soul, for I have misvsed
these creatures to the great dyshonor of the (my lord god) to the iniurye of
mine neghbours, and to the condemnacion of mine own soul, So that there is no
gift nor benefyt that thou haste given me, nor no good thing in the which I
have sought the sincerely and purelye. For I have less or more, sought mine
own commodytie, mine own will or pleasure. Thus in all my hole life I have
either done and committed sin, either omyttyd and not done my dewty, or else
doing my dewty or any good work I have not done it so syncerelye and purely,
as I ought to have done. Wherefore I forsake here al kind of sin, and al my
deeds good and bad, and I run only unto thy great mercy and infinyte
merytes. O most merciful petyfull and most loving lord Jesus, I most humbly
and lowly beseke thy mercyful goodness, for thy most holy concepcion and
natiuitye, For thy blessed conversation and most holy life. For thy most
hard and sore labor and travel, for the great sorrow and heaviness of thy
blessed heart for thy most payneful agonye and bloody sweat, for all thy bitter
and most paynfull passion, for all the cruel effucion of thy most precious
blood, for thy most painful, most cruel, most bitter and shameful death,
grant me mercy and forgeuenes of all my unkindness and sin, and mortyfye in
me all that offends ye: work in me such virtues as most may please thy
blessed will in me, to thy honor and my salvation. Amen.

O Most gloryus mother of mercy and lady of grace, my syngular help and
comfort in heaven and in earth next unto my lord god and sauyor Jesus. I humbly
beseke the for that holy passion and death and all the pains that thy dear
son Jesus suffered in thy sorrowful sight. For all the sorrow heuines and most
bitter compassion that thou sufferedst for him and me optain for me, clean
remyssyon of al my sins, and all the pains that I have deserved for them,
and increase of al virtue and perfeccion

Here pray to thy special aduowryes.

O Most blessed and holy. N N. N. N. and al ye most holy and blessed company
of heaven, for all the pains and labors that ye suffered here, by the grace of
the holy ghost and for the very love and honor of god. I humbly beseech your
blessed charity, pray for me unto my lord and swet savior Jesus, that he
vochesaf to remyt my wickedness and sins and so to confyrme me in his grace
and love that I never return to syn again.

Here turn thy heart again unto thy Lord Jesus, saying.

And were I daily fall and am ready to syn vochesafe to grant me (oh Lord)
grace ever moore (as often as I fall) to arise again with perfect sorrow and hate
of syn, and with most lowely co^fide^ce and trust of his blessed and swet mercy.
That the multitude of my syn, and mi great frailty drive me not to disperate
sorrow and inordynatte heaviness. Nether let me mistrust the great and most
gracius redynes of thy most loving mercy, that is ever redye to forgive, as
often as we do repent, be yt never so often. Draw me not to presu^pcyon but that
I, how so ever, when so ever, and how often soever I offend the, I may most
lowly and mekely acknowelege my wretchydnes and frayltie, and repent mine
offenses and sins with a fyrme purpose to amend, and with an unfeigned trust
of remyssyon and forgeuenes in the infynyte merytes of thy most blessed blood,
payneful passion, and most precyus death, to the glory and honor of thy mercy
full charytie and most mighty majesty. Ame^

The Third exercise of reformacyon of the soul in the five wits and senses.
COnsider how thy five wits are wonderful wekened and dysorderid by the fall
of our forefather and parent Adam. But a great deal more infected and
disorderyd, by thy own actual sins, the great abuse of the^. Wherefore that
they may be redyer brought again unto there former and original pureness, wherein
they were before the fall of adam, thou must needs shut up and refrain from
all misuse of all thy senses, as thy syghte, hearing, taisting with thy tongue,
smellyng, and fealyng, in the crucyfied humanity of Christ, according to his
example with so greatte vyolence and labor (thou shall have somewhat to do
there in) as though thou were plainly dead, and all mortyfyed unto the world.
Thou must learn to have a contynualle, eye inwardely unto thy soul and
spiritual life, as thou have used here tofore to have all thy mind and regard
to owtward pleasure and worldly things. Thou must submyt and give thy self
unto the disciplyne of sweet Jesus and become his scoler, choisinge him unto thy
Lord and master, resynyng and compelling thy self al together, to obey him in
all things, so that thy willing and nyllyng, thou utterly and parfectely do
cast away from the, indeuoringe thy self most straightly to please and to
obey thy most dear god and most loving master in all things, Wherefore here
after thou must do nothing, be it never so little without his lycens. For at
every word that thou will speak, at every morsel that thou will eat, at
every styri^g or mouyng of every article or member of of thy body, thou must
ask leave of him in thy heart, that is to say, thou must examyne in thy
conscience every word and deed that thou shall speak or do whether it be to
the honor of god or no, and to what end thou wylt speak or do it, if thy
consience sincerely (not sekinge it self) do answer yt it is to the glory of
god, then have thou license to speak or to do, or else not. The necessary
things that must needs be done or spoken though it be certain that they
please god, yet shall thou do every one of them, and offer them up with a new
intencion unto god, in the union of the most holy works and blessed merits of
christ, for the soul health of al men. And as thou art doing or saying any
thing outwardely, have always one eye inwardly toward thy self and thy
conscience. And take heed and remember well when it is time for yt to cease and
leave of, and then inmediatlye leave of thy talk or doing. And to optaine this
grace, thou must accostome thy self, from thy very heart, fervently to pray
and to entreat thy lord god, every hour in manner what ever thou doist with
this manner of aspiracion, or like.

Oh Most sweet savior Christ for thine own self sake and by all thy blessed
perfections and mercyes, by thy holy and most blessed manhed and thy holy
five senses, which so perfectly obeyed reason, that they seemed swalowed up of
thy soul, which also were so sore pained and afflicted with most sorrowful
pains in thy blessed passion for my salvation, as though thou hadest had no
senses or fealyng at al, I most humbly beseech the that thou vochesafe to
swalowe up in the merytes of thy blessed senses, all the fealyng and sensacion
that I ever had, have now, or ever may have, and so knyt and sanctyfie in thy
most blessed and holy soul al my wits and senses, that I never use them
here after to any sensualytie. If thou can not bear this prayer in thy mind
take the affecte and make desire or peticio^ in thy heart as well as thou
canste. Thou must labor to come unto this union and knitting up of thy senses
in god and thy lord Jesus, and there into remain so fast unto ye cross, that
thou never starte from it, walkyng reverently with most honest and mature or
comely manners and behauoure of thy body and all thy senses, and every where in
the presence of thy lord god. And thou must so observe and keep thy lord god,
that he part not from the, and thy five wits and senses with thy whole
soul, and so use thy self, that thou may think that thou seist nothing,
thou hear, fealest, smellest tastest, touchest, thou eatest, nor drynkeste
nothing, but in all things thou seakest purely, not thy self, but only thy
Lord God, and do use the creatures, in god, and for god, with fear and
reverence to thy bare need. Thou must also in all thy necessites and perels
commyte the care of thy self and of al thine (yea of al things) with most full
confidence and trust, into the most trusty providence of thy loving lord,
which will order al things swetely and delectably and will defend the and fight
for the. Reken also al things beside him, for right naught, and thus may
thou come unto wonderful illuminacions and gostly influe^ce from thy lord
god, if thou for his love, canste crucyfie, renounce and forsake perfectlye thy
self and al thing. This exercise is the ground of al gostly life, and
therefore thou must use it and practyse it very long until thou can learn and
acostome to master and to forsake thy self in all things, and wait and keep
well thy self and thy lord god, and this blessed love, for as much as there is
no greater labor, then to observe and keep well contynually thy lord god and
his acceptable will and pleasure. Thou shall always labor to come to the deep
and exact circu^sicion, formacyon, and mortifycation of ye inner powers of thy
soul, as thy understanding, will and memory. The which (as thy sensies were, so
are these greatly corrupted and infected, by the fall of our first parent. But a
great deal worse we have corrupted them, and alienatyd them from god by our
own sins. That these also may be brought, and restored unto their former
state and perfeccion, unto the which our Lord Jesus by his death restored
them, and to ye end and purpose, that they were created and given unto thy
soul, thou must needs continually desire and entreat thy lord god and never
cease knockyng and calling with most firm trust and confidence that he can and
will help the. And that he vochsafe, for ye most blessed merytes of the most
holy myghtes and powers of his most gloryus crucified humanyty, to purify,
reform, to govern and to light ye powers of thy soul with stable knowledge,
love, and continual mind and memory that thou may flow and tend toward,
and into almighty god and in him to know and to use al other things. That thou
may come to that gift you must exercise and quyken with diligente labor, thy
understanding, to know and understand hyghly and deapely what god almighty is
and what he has. And when thou (after this manner) doist once know yt he is
the most best, most noblest, and most holiest of al, then shall thy will
(perseauing that) indeuer and desire to love him whom he perceauyth to be so
excellent and most best. But thou must circumcise, pull away and crucifye thy
will from al things yt thou may love and desire god alonly with thy bare and
whole heart, and love all other things for him and in him. Then must you also
confirm thy will in most stedefast and strong knotte and union unto the will
of god. That if he would create hell in the, and put the therein thou must offer
thy self to be ready for his eternal glory and honor and for thy sins to
suffer it by his grace. Thou shall also ryd and make ready and apt thy memory
to have the fruicio^ of thy lord god for ever, without any impedyment or mean.
These means or impedime^tes ar the fancies and the imagynacions of other
things beside god or for god. Thou must keep thy memory clean and pure (as
it were an wedloke chamber, from al strange thoughts, fantasies and
ymaginacions. And it must be trymmed and adorned with holy meditacions and
virtues of christ's holy crucified life, and passion, yt god may continually
and for ever rest there in, how often, when, and how long it shall please him
Wherefore thou must use it with often lovely and continual desires and holy
afeccions to god ward, thy loving and most kind lord and savior, that he
only may continually be shutt up in the, that is to say Thou must have
continuallye God in thy mind and memory, and that thy mind and memory may
run only upon him what ever thou do or where ever thou be. Thou must use
this exercise so^what long, as I said before, and thou must cry and pray
most heartily and continually for the special help of god, and that by hsi
mightes and powers, and by ye prayers and blessed merytes, of the gloryus
virgyn Mary his mother, and the blyssed saints in heaven thou shall ask it.
The wiche thing if thou do not optaine at the first, but abydest long, for
some are of a clammye nature, and much given to fantasies, they be therefore
the longer in labor, be not discoraged nor overthrown with tediousnes. Cease
not, only persevere and have a strong and a firm confidence and trust in our
lord which never leaves those yt puts there trust in him, and he will give
it the. For he is infinitely good and gracyous which in the simplenes of heart
is sone found, for he is won by love and with lovely and holy desires and
affeccions, he will be optayned and sone gotten. For god is infinite love it
self, use therefore often these aspiracions all the time that thou laborest in
this exercise or such as these be that follows.

Oh swet savior lyghten the blyndnes of my soul that I may know the and thy
most blessed will.

Oh mightiful lord Jesus take fro me my unkind heart and give me for it either thy
swet heart or an heart like unto thy loving heart that ever may love laud and
praise the.

Mortify i^ me, good lord, my wicked will and grant me to have no other will
the^ thine.

Oh most loving lord fyxe my mind so steadfastly upon the yt I may mind
nothing but the, or nothing so often as the.

My dear and swet savior grant me grace to come to the perfect knowledge
of the though I be ingnoraunte in all other knowelege.

The practyse of the Exercise for reformacio^ of the soul in the wit and
senses.
MOst merciful sauyor Jesus which art that petiful samarytan which (by thy holy
incarnacion) descendidst in to this world, where thou foundest all the nature of
man being in the state of dampnacion, robbid in Ada^ by the serpent (that
gostly thief) which spoilid our nature of the blessed gift and garment of
innocencye and oryginall justice, and wounded our naturales (that is to say)
all the sensies and powers of our soul, and maimed our frewyl, blyndyd and
darkened our understanding, crasyd our memory and set out of order and made
rebel al our five wits and sensualytie. And thou (most pityful Lord) taking
compassyon upon this miserable and mortal plyght of our sore wounded and maimed
nature, thou (with the bond of thy most lovely passion and charytable death)
dydst bynd up our wou^des, powryng in to them the wine of thy precyus blood,
and the oil of thy most heavenly grace, most myghtyful and blessed
physicyon and heavenly surgyon of my pore and sick soul, take compassion on my
sore and deep and innumerable wou^des. For (mercyful sauyor) all the sensies
wits and powers of my soul and body, be very sore and deadly wou^dyd, not
only by the first fall of Adam in to oryginal syn, but I also my self have more
greuusly wou^dyd them by innumerable actual sins by the long and contynual
mysuse of them daily. Wherefore I most humbly beseech the (most merciful
Jesus) grant me the syngular help of thy grace, that I may bring them to that
pureness and blessed order that they had before the fall of adam by dew and
daily refraynyg and brideling them from al misuse, and use them only for bare
necessity, according to thy most holy example, and so soberly to live, as
though I were dead utterly, and had no senses.

That I may learn now to turn inwardly al my thought and pleasure, as I have
hitherto set my pleasure and delyght in owtwarde and sensual vanytie.

Grant me grace (most blessed master) to give my self whooly to learn at the,
and to take the for my example and to my most gracyus Lord and master,
resynyng and yeldyng my self fully and whooly to obey the, so that I may cast
utterly away my own will, and in my self al together most streyghtly to obey
and please the only, that here after I may do no thing, be it never so little,
without (as it were) thy love.

Grant me grace (most gracius Jesus that at every word that I intend to speak,
at every look of mine eye, at every morsel that I shall eat, at the mouyng of
every joint or member of my body, that I shall styre, I may inwardly in my
heart ask leave of ye, the which leave, if good conscience do wytnes that I have
optayned, than I may do it, or else not.

Grant me, sweet Jesus, that I may do and offer, al and every one of my
necessary works and deeds, all and every one of my good works and deeds
with an actual and a new intent to the laud and praise of the my lord god, in
the union of thy most holy works and blessid merits, to the soul health of
al men. And while I am seking or doing any thing outwardly, grant me grace
to remember my self inwardly when I ought to leave of such talking or doing
and so to cease.

Most dear savior and most gracius good lord I most heartily and humbly
beseeke the, for thy mercy and merytes sake and by all thy holy perfeccyons and
myseracions which are in the, yea which thou art thy self, and by thy most
blessid and holy humanity, and by thy most holy five sensies which so
myghtely obeyed reason and were swalowed up of thy soul, the which also were
most paynefully and so cruelly afflicted for my salvation, as though thou
hadist had no sensies at al. Good lord vochsafe, in the merits of thy most
blessid sensies, so to swalowe up to knyte and to sanctify all my sensies in
thy most holy soul, as though I hade no sensies at all which might at any
time give place to sensualytie. Merciful Jesus for thy payneful wondes of thy
blessed hands, keep my feelyng from al unclean and unnecessary feelyng and
touching. For thy sorrowful naylyng of thy blessed feet, hold and faste^ my
feate from all steps to evil, from al unprofitable gaddyng, and make them
quick and spedye to do all deeds of charytie and obedyence to thy only honor.

Gracyus Jesus in whose mouth was never found disceat, nor nothing but al godly
and heavenly wisdom, and gave unto us most perfect example of scilence
when you most mildly and wisely didist hold thy peace when thou waste falsely
accused because thou by thy answer cold not profit them, and specially, when
thou shouldeste answer for life and death. Then (like an innocent lamb)
thou hyldyst thy peace. And all the time of thy most bitter passion, thou
did speak syldom, for thou spakest but only seven words upon the cross
which, words were spoken of most excellent charity. Grant me (good lord)
the grace of silence, that I never open my mouth to any evil or ydel words, yt
I may speak only thy words. Shut up also (good lord) mine ears with thy grace,
from al heryng of evil and vain words, for thy merytes of the pain that
thou sufferedst, when you hardest the great blasphemies, rebukes and reuyles of
the Jews.

Gracious Jesus for thy tender tears that thy most gracyous eyes shed often times
for me, keep mine eyes and sight from al syghtes of evil, and of al
unnecessary things in this world. And for the horible savor, that thou
feltest in that stynkinge place of caluarye, when thou wast crucified, keep my
smellyng from al mysuse, and for the most bitter and sour drink of gall and
vyneger that thou drankest for me.

Good Lord grant me grace to exchew all kind of glotonye and excess and
grant me perfect temperaunce, to eat for only necessary and bare need.
Most merciful savior Jesus, for thy most crewell schurgyng and all the pain
and wou^des, that you suffredst in all members and parts of thy most precious
and blessed body mortyfie in me by the power of thy mightiful grace, all the
mysuse of all the sensies and powers of my soul, and of all the lymmes and
members of my body, that (by thy grace) I may neither feel, see, hear,
taste, smell, eat, drink, nether move no member of my body, nor use no sense
of my soul but in the and for thy honor, not seeking my pleasure or my self
here in, but puerly and only the.

Gracious God and most merciful redemer of my soul Jesus, I most humblye
beseke the for all thy sorrows and pains, that you sufferedst in the inner
powers of thy most blessid and holy soul, and in the merits, and for the
merytes of thy most blessed crucified humanytie, puryfye, reform, rule, and
lyghten the inner myghtes and powers of my synful soul, specially my
understanding, my will, and my memory, where in apearyd in my creacyo^, the
holy image of ye most blessed trinitye, but by my most sinful and corrupt
life, I have all most, clean blotted and put out the image of the my lord
god, and I have fowlye defaced my soul, with the horyble image of sin. For
where I should have in my understanding the knowledge of the without ignorance
and error, I have sought to know wyckednes and syn, and so have lost the
gostly knowledge of the. And where my will and desire was created to desire and
love the above al thing, I have lost that love, in loving and desyreng
inordynatly creatures. Where my memory ought to be occupied only with the, my
most dear Lord God, I have painted it with the memories and innumerable
fanses, not only of creatures but of horrible and detestable sin and
wickedness. Wherefore, most merciful Jesus, I mekely beseke the, for the merytes
of thy most rufully and cruelly deformed face, and for the woefully wou^dyd and
sorrowful countenance, restore and reform again in me, the blessed image of
thy most blessed diuynite in my soul, that I may with most stable and
constante knowledge, love, and thought of the, desire contynually to increase
more and more in the true knowledge, the fervent love, and most blessed
remembrance of the, that I may know al things, love al things, remember al
things and use al things, only in the and for the. And I beseke thee my
savior Jesus, in the most tender love, that mouyd ye (most blessed lord) to
suffer so paynefull passion, and death for me and for ye precious heart blood
and water that yssewed out of thy most loving heart when thou hangist bare and
al naked upon the cross, grant me grace that, I may abstracte and pull
away my heart from the love of all creatures and to put utterly out of it the
love of al creatures and specially of my self, that thy bare and pure love may
fyl and occupye al my whole heart, desire and will. And that all that I shall
love desire or will I may love, desire and wyshe in the, and for the only.

Grant me grace also, so to confirm and so to knytt my whole will unto thy
most blessed and godly will, that I may have no other will then thine. And ye I
may be most heartily and fully content with what soever thou wylt do with me in
this world, and for ever, yea if thou will put me into hell, and to suffer all the pains there so that I hate not the, but retain thy love, I may be heartily
well contented, with my whole heart without any (be it never so little) gruge
inwardely. Also most merciful redemer I beseke the in the merytes of the
innumerable wounds of thy blessed head, lighte^ my understanding with perfect
and sincere knowledge of thy blessed god head, yt I may verily and truly know,
what thing thou my lord god art, and haste, that hyghly and profundly knowing
the, that thou art infynite in goodness, most noble and dreadful majesty, most
blessed and most holy lord god, my will (by thy grace) most hartelye and
earnestly may desire to be in love with ye so gracious, so good, so loving, so
kind, and merciful a father and lord god.

Grant therefore, most gracious Jesus, thy grace to me to quycken and to
sharpen my wit and understanding, yt I may come to the gostly and godly
knowledge of the, and by knowledge to come to the perfect and pure love of the.
Help also most mercyful sauyoure my busye and incomberyd memory and fansye,
yt by thy merciful grace I may cast out and purge it of al evil yea and
unnecessary fancies and imaginacio^s and from strange cogytacions, that be not
of the, that I may keep my memory clean and pure, as a wedlock chamber, from
al worldly and unprofitable thoughts and to deck and tryme it with all kind
of heavenly thoughts and gostly ymaginacio^s, with al holy medytacions of thy
holy humanite crucified for me, minding always some point of thy passion, of
thy virtue or some other holy medytacyon or good thoughts. That thou my lord
god may delyght, and take pleasur to dwell and rest in me as often, and as long
as it shall plese thy goodness. Grant me grace therefore good Lord, to accustom
my self to have in my memory lovely and contynually desires, and sweet and
holy affeccyons to the my lord god, that thou may dwell in my soul a sone,
and my soul may have the inclosyd in my will and memory evermore, and so I
may carry the with me where ever I be come. And though I by frayletye do
sometime lose the good Lord Jesus, yet grant me sone to seek the, and to find
the, to thy honor and my salvation Amen.

The fourth is the exercise for mortyfycacyon.
THou must exercise thy self very earnestlye in mortyficacion and abnegacion of
al things which may (in any manner of wise) let the to draw nere and louingli
to be joined and knyt to thy Lord god: that is to say you must mortyfie in the
al thing that is not god, or for god, or ye thing which god will not or loves
not. They are suffycie^tly declarid by ye godly father henry harp in his.xii.
mortifycacyons, which are these, that shall follow here: In the which thou shall
dilygently exercise thy self by goostly and holy medytacyon, with often and
devout prayer, markyng well in every one of them, the most holy exemplar of
thy lord Jesus crucyfyed pryntyng that deapely in thy heart, until that the
nether powers of the soul (that is to say) sensies and sensuallytie put no
impediment or let here after to the higher powers of thy soul, as are reason,
will and understanding, where by they might not flow and tend truly toward god
and in god.

THe first of these is perfect mortyfycacyon of al love and affection and
carefulnes for transytorie and worldly things. This thou must mortyfie so
perfectly, that thou can find in thy heart to resygyne and yield them up unto
the high pleasure of God, with a quyete mind, without secreat murmur or
grudge, whether it shall plese him to give them or to take them, so that thou
doist not desire nether to have nether hold them, nether to bestow them or give
them but only for the pure love and honor of god. Yea thou shall desire and
wyshe to leave them, that thou mighteste always offer up thy whole heart bare
and pure unto god among al casualties and mysfortunes. At the last that thou
may make these oblacions of thy heart unto god in thy will and reason, and that
thou may remain resteful. For this cause thou must put away and utterly
forsake not only superfluouse and unnecessary things, but also such things
as thou haste only for thy pleasure and of curyositie. Yea, thou maiste not
rest by- any love or affeccion in these things that are thy necessaryes, if
thou wylt not be a proprietarie before god, and shall use and take (at the
least) you shalt learn to take and use thy natural necessaryes with
tedyousenes and lothsomnes, that thou may so much the better conform thy
self unto Christ, and may bare and poor fly (as it were) in to his bare and
nakyd arms.

THe second is the mortyfycacion of al affeccion in seking thy self. By which
seking of thy self many louith them selves to well, for in all the good deeds
that ever they do, and in all the evil that they suffer of a certain seruyle
fear, they have an eye and regard and seek busely their own profit
co^solacyon and honor, as well in the outward as in the inward gifts and
goodness of god, and do seek to exchewe and escape their own hurt or
hynderance, their confusyon, and punishment, as well in this present as in ye
world to come. And oftentimes while they repute and esteem their deeds
exercyses great and holy they fall, by the gifts of god, in to goostly pride,
gostlye gluttonye and gredynes. Wherefore against these most dangerus and very
great perels thou must dyligently labor and study, in all things of a fylyall
love and of a right and holy intent, to seek purely the honor the grace and
pleasure of god. And with a syngle intent ordain, dyrect and refer al thy
works to please and have the fruicion of god and to rest in him always, with all
thy myghtes and powers without much trouble or busynes with a certain lovely
flowing and a loving inclynacion or bending of thy inward spirit to godwarde
having this thy inclynacion lyghtened with the knowledge of god by, faith, hope,
and charytie. This is one fundacion and ground of gostly life. Thou must labor
with intencyon godly not to seek the secreate consolacyon of soul but rather to
desire al derelyctyon barrennes and adversity, that thou might be come one
with god, and to have fruicion of god with god.

THe third is the mortificacyon of all the affeccion of thine own sensuality
above or beside reasonable necessity in the delight delectacion and pleasure of
meat and drink of apparel and other temporal things, also in the pleasure
and delyght in vain and unnecessary cogitacyons, words, gestures and talk
with men or famylyars and fryendes for sensual love only. Also in delectable
appetytes, to have or to see fair and pleasant things, to hear news and to
occupye the sensies in vain without reasonable cause, as to se that, and hear
this. These and all the solacyes and delights of nature thou shall mortyfie and
by full and perfect turnyg thy self from all such things as sensualytie is
wont and does delight to rest in: for these make al devotion and goostly
exercyses both unsavory and also more hard. Thou shall also take great heed
and be well ware that thou have nor bear none affectyon in thy heart to any
solace or syn be it never so little who^ you doiste not labor to pulle up by the
root. Thus must thou needs do, that al sensuality may utterly be mortyfied,
least the whole, heap of thy good works come to naught.

THE fourth is the mortificacion of the affection of seculare and wordlye love,
the which causes a man to do many deeds of vertew, that he might come to some
commodity or honor by those wordly persons to whom he is so affectionat either
fearing to displease them either to sustain any damage or disco^modytie or
harm. This affeccyonate love thou must utterly mortify and also the carnal
love toward, thy kinsefolkes, and the love that thou haist gotten among thy
fryndes and that which thou berest to them for their benefytes, so that
without all accepcyon of any person thou do love purely god and gods Image in
them, grace and vertew, not flatteryng or vpholdinge, louinge, or dissemblinge
any man's vice or sin, but thyrst and desire with all thy heart the soul
health of all men. Thou must mortyfie also the inordynate love and
affeccion that mouyth to any unquietness, distraccion or desire to have the
friendship or bodily presence of any person, and paynteth thy fansye and mind
with ymaygynacions of them, specially in time of prayer, or else when thou
would turn thy self unto god, defylinge and infectyng thy heart as it were
a very venom of the love of god. Thou must therefore sley this inordinate love,
and love god only renouncing al creatures, that you may be drawn up with his
love and may be swallowed up all together in him.

THe fyfte is the mortyficacyon of all affeccio^ in Idle thoughts which are
wont to come in the mind, and to trouble us diverse and sundry ways, by
insurges and great flowynges (as it were a great main sea) and causes the
fervor of gods love and virtue to decay in us, though they abide not in ye
affection, they must yet be mortified and al other noughty cogitacions which
we do suffer sometime by negligence to enter into us, with sensual pleasur.
These though they come not to deadly consent, yet do they defile the soul,
they make heavy the holy ghost, and do great damage unto the soul. Both these
noughtye thoughts and cogytacions and also the other idle thoughts and
cogytacyons, aryseth and comes of our own negligence and vnmortificacio^
because we do not labor and endeavor ourselfe to compel with violence our heart
to holy thoughts, but do suffer it to wander upon superfluous and evil things
not to spend frutefully our time. And therefore when we return our self
inwardlye, we find our heart burdened and comberid with innumerable distraccions,
which does hinder and distroye our gostly profet. Not these only therefore
thou shalt cut of from thy heart, but also thou must utterly put away some
lefull thoughts, whether they be of lawful charge temporal of scruples of
consience or of secreate or curious search of things, and thou must busely
prynte into thy heart the Image and memory of thy lord Jesus crucified for
the, and of his most profund humlytie, poverty, mildnes and of al his holy
virtues, in thy outward man, and also printe in thy heart ye image and memory of
his infynite charity (whereby he created the and al things, and redeemed ye so
preciously) in thy inner manne, that thy thoughts may turn into affection,
and thy knowledge into love. For ye love of god does work the mortyfycacion of
nature, the life of the spyrite, the work and operacion gostly of the hier
powers of the soul, the influence or flowyng into god and the solytarynes and
departure from al creatures. Thou shall also turn thy affectyon and whole
desire to come to perfect solitary and very lonnes and departure from al
creatures, not only i^ body, but much more in thy heart and affections yt thou
may attain ye pure and syngle rest and quietness of heart. This rest does
norysh very greatly ye lovely influence and tendyng in to god: for solytarines,
silence, and the strayt keeping of thy heart, are as fundamentes and grounds of
gostly life.

THe syxte, is the mortifycacyon of all care and thought, which is not of just
necessytie, profyt, or obedyence, and also of al passions unmeasurable mirth,
heaviness, hope, fear, love, hate, anger, as shamfastnes, these must be
mortifed yt nothing may rest in thy heart but god or for god.

Wherefore thou must mortyfie all such carefulnes unnecessary and al such
passions natural. And al thy outward works and occupacyons, that necessytie do
require justly of the thou must do them without much trouble or carefulnes of
thy mind, having thy whole heart and affeccion eleuatid and resygned in to the
hands and will of god. For trewly by such occupacyon though it be laufull
that distracteth thy heart, derkenneth thy wit and understanding, thy affection
waxes cold to god ward, al goostly exercise will be unsavory to the, and thou
shalt scante be able with great labor to recollect thy nether powers of thy
soul in the time of prayer. Wherefore if thou wylt easily overcome al
temtacyons, labor busyly to bear always thy mind and desire inwardly lyftyd up
and eleuatid unto god, following always more the inwardly exercise of love,
then the outward works of virtue. Unto the which point there can no man come
except he first be rydd and delivered from all thing under god, and be so
rapt in god, that he can conte^pne and dispice him self in all things for the
pure love of god. For pure love of god makyth the spyryt pure simple and so
free, that, without any pain or labor it can at al times turn and recolect
it self in to god.

THe seventh is the mortyfycacyon of al bitterness of heart toward our even
Chryste^ which arisith originally of diverse causes. First of presu^pcyon of
our own merytes, where by we be ready and prone to judge rashely other, and to
dispyse them, we being full of vnryghtwysenes our selfs. For this
vnryghteousenes genderyth in us indignacyon, and not compassyon. Secondly it
arysyth of immortifycacyo^, because we have not mortified those things and the
desires of them wych inflamith us to murmur against our prelates and superiors
and other that will not agree unto our naughtynes or vycyousenes, but resist
them. Thirdly, is aryseth of rancore and envy or hate for some offenses passed,
for the which we desire to preuente and to take amysse the deeds of them whom
we hate, and find in them somewhat that we might rekuke. Fourthly it arises
of envy against and for the virtues of other which we lack and have not, and
therefore we seek al means to extinct and to hyde them that we might be
preferred or taken as well as they, or least they should be more sete by or as
much as we. Fyftly it aryseth of a nawghty and exasperate and froward
conscience, by the which (like a cockatryse) we desire and would feign hurt
other, and to bring them unto sin with us, for we envy the grace of the holy
ghost, and of malice (wherwyth we are full our self) we take unto the worst al
things, and so sin we against the holy ghost. These and other bytternes and
melancoly of heart, thou must distroy and consume in swetnes of the love of god
that thou may love thy very enimeis and persecutours with as full affection of
thy heart as though they were thy most dear friends, as in very deed they be,
for they do bring and promote the unto great merytes. The eight is the
mortifycacion of al afection unto vain glory and liking of thy self,
honor, and to all pride of thy self in thy words and deeds, of thy graces
and gifts. To this thou shalt come, by clear and perfect consyderacion and
knowledge of thy own vylenes, and by perfect desire of the contempt of thy
self, that you myghtest please, honor and worship god only. Wherefore thou
shall ascribe unto gods only grace with chyldlyke faythfulnes and fydelyte,
all the goodness gifts and graces of thy self and of all other, reputing thy
self most unworthy of any of them and more vile and wretched then al me^
living, first by reason of the great greuousenes, the fylthynes or enormitie
and the innumerable multitude of thy sin and great unkindness to god.
Secondly, by reason of Infinite sins which thou should have fall in, if
the only mercy of god had not preserved the. Thirdly by reason that there is no
sinner in this world, but if he had received so many gifts and graces of god
as thou have done, and had had so many occasyons to have done well as thou have
had, he would have served god more faithfully then thou doyst. And thus shall
thou on the one party be thankeful unto god, and on the other side thou shall
humble thy self very greatly. These well wayed, thou shall desire with all thy
heart to be contempned, mocked, and over trodden of al men, and that for the
very love of god, and this is a very compendyous and a right way to come to
great merit.

The nynth is the mortificacion of all affection in inward and sensible gostly
delyght, in grace, devotion, love and sensible swetnes in ye nether myghtes and
powers of the soul. The which swetnes, delyght, and devotion sensyble be not
very sanctymonye or very charity in deed, but they be certain gifts of god,
which are given to us, not that we should rest or content our selves with
them only, but for an help of our infyrmytie that we might moore earnestly
mortyfie our selves. Wherefore if thou will know how much true love thou have,
look how much thou art mortifyed in these.xii. points, for so much very love
and sanctymonye thou haste and no more, yea all that thou canste ask of God
what ever it be, if thou do not refer and ordeyne them to the mortification
of thy self, all are myxte with nature, which sekyth her self al most in
all thing, yea in god and in godly things, so subtylly that being stayed in
one side, she crepyth in on the other, ear we can well deprehende her. Therefore
there are very few that come to the very knowledge of them self or do perfectly
master them self in all things.

Moreover thou shall mortyfie in thy self, all curyous inuestygacion or
search, all curyous speculacion, knowledge and understanding unnecessary, of
things or sciences as well divine as humane, in yt which many do wast miserably
their time and labor, ever lernyng (as the appostle says) and never attaynyng
or coming to the knowledge of the truth. For as much as the perfect life of a
christian man, is not grounded in high knowledge but in profunde mekenes in
holy symplycitie and in ye ardente love of god wherein we ought to desire to
dye to al affection, to dye to our selves, to sustain pain and derelyctyon,
that we might be perfectly knyte and united unto god and to be swallowed up
all together in him.

The tenthe is mortification of all scrupulousnes of conscience by full
confydence and trust in the goodness of god. This scrupulousnes vexes and
troubles very many, by reason of the inordinate love that they have to them
selfs, by the which love they fear more the vengeance of god, hell and his
ryghtwysenes, the^ they love his goodness, his honor and praise. And therefore
of a seruyle fear they do all there good works and do avoid and eschew all
syn and evil that they shonne. And therefore they do not amend faithfully their
fautes, whose pryckinges and remorse troubles them, nether can they have full
confydence in god. For because that their love to godward is but slender and
small, it gendereth in them but slender and small confidence and trust in him,
where contrary wise, if they had a great and an ardente love, it would gender
in them a great confydence and a full trust in god. O blessed hope and trust in
god, so long as a man do not wexe the colder in godliness, but is sturyd more
earnestly to mortyfication and to the more pacyence in all aduersytie and to
the more thankfulness, blessed (I say) is that hope and trust in God.

THe eleventh is mortification of all inpacie^cie of heart for any outward
adversity, infamy, derision, rebuke or co^tumely loss of goods, sycknes,
pain in body, persecution, and desolacion and derelyction of the mind, the
which may chance and fortune unto a man by gods permyssion, with the which
he is wont to try, his dear friends, and that of most excellent charytie, to
the everlasting health of them, in the which our lord Jesus him self was many
ways tried, and for our example and love with most mylde and meke heart
suffered contumely shame sore strokes scorgi^ges, spettyng, thorns whippings
confucion with the intolerable torments of his cross and passion, and he not
withstanding, prayed for his ennemies. Nether could they lay upon him so
many and so paynefull torments, but he ever desired to suffer many mo and much
greatter for the honor of god his father and the salvation of our sowles.
Therefore should thou also suffer the like pacyently, if god suffer them to
come upon the.

First that thou pretend neither in heart, word, nether deed any rancor
nether vengaunce. Secondly, that thou bear no bytternes, or heaviness in thy
heart, which bytternes ryseth of the in ordynate love to thy self, but
thinkinge thy self worthy to suffer much worse and more grievous euilles:
suffer thou al things mekely and offer thy self ready to suffer all
aduersytie that may chance upon the for ever here after. And thirdly thou
shalt suffer all things by affection of perfect paciente whereby you may be
conformed and made like to the blessed life of thy dear lord Jesus, that is thou
shall not only suffer what commyth, but thou shall long, in manner, and look
with great, desire, and receive with great gladness, and Joy, all adversity,
and be ever ready to suffer more grievous and greater. Here of shalt thou
obtain great abundance and plentye of the love of god, that shall so
penetrat and purify all the powers of thy soul, that thou shalt not (in
manner) feale any pain, but shalt love thy persecutors with as hearty love, as
though they were thy near and special friends and lovers.

The twelffe is the mortificacyon of al thine own will with full perfect
resignacion of thy self to suffer al dereliccio^ inward and outward pain and
pressure or hearts grief and desolacyon, for the pure love of god.

And because that a man has nothing that he settyth more by then by his own
free will (of whose abuse al vice and syn springs) therefore if thou resignest
perfectlye thine own will unto god, inmedyatly (this fundacyon once
overthrown) al vice and syn spryngyng here of, comyth to nowght.

Wherefore it is very profitable to such as are imperfect to make obedyence to
some discrete person, and to give them selfs up to the will of another. To
such as be perfect it is necessary to have a will to submyt the^ selfs to
other, when so ever it pleases god. It is expedyent for every man to mark well
and to execute in them selfs the will and pleasure of almighty god. Thou shall
mark three kinds of obedyence, and thou shall labor to come to the highest
which is the obedience of union. The first is of vow This ought to be outwardly
in all comma^dementes and precepts of thy prelate with all speed and hilarite.
The second the obedience of conformity: and this consistyth in the prompt and
redye will inwardly, not only in commandments and precepts, but in any other
thing leful without commadement, and that purely for the love of god without al
respect of any favor of man, so that you wolddest rather be contempned and
dispysed of man for such obedience, then to be praysyd or to have any reward
for it. The third is the obedience of vnio^ with god which knittith so the will of
man unto the will of god, that it is become but own will with it, so that what
so ever god does permyt and suffer to come upon him, yea in all inward pressure
heauynes and agonye of spyryt desolacyon and dereliccyon, he is fully perswadyd
and be leuith al together to come by the ordinance of apoyntme^t of the
unmeasurable love and mercy of god, and therefore he receauyth it with all
affection, be it never so hard, paineful, shameful or greuus, for this time and
for everlasting, according to the example of his dear loving lord and sauyor.
Jesus which from the most payneful agony and bloody swet in the garden until the
crewell death upon the cross, he was destitute of al sensyble grace and
consolacyon (as though he had been the extreme enemy of god) abydyng most
crewell and most intolerable pain and tormetes, only being resignyd most
perfectly of love into the hands and will of his father. When thou have once
optayned these.xii. mortifycacyons, then shall thou with the powers of thy
soul, be ready and able to flow and to have recourse to god, and in him to rest
co^tynualy with out any let or impediment. Not withstanding, thou must learn
to come to more clear and plain knowelege how thou may optaine and possess
the very true love and stable and sure union between god and the myghtes and
powers of thy soul, first, in the ornament of actyue life, by perfect
mekenes, obedyence, and other moral virtues and by the increase of them, also
by faith, hope, and charytie. Secondly in life contemplatyue spyrytual, by
burning and ardent aspiracions and the gifts of the holy ghost, and also other
godly and gostly exercyes. Therefore thou shall mark and observe dylygently
those things yt thou shall find declared brefely i^ these exercyses following
next after this practyse that folowythe

There are no aspiracio^s for this exercise, but take some of the sentencies of
the practyse as shall like you.

The practice of this exercise for mortyficacion.
MOst almighty and immortal God my most merciful sauyoure Jesus which of most
tender love and pytyfull mercy, that thou bear unto me and to all mankind,
dydest suffer most cruel, most painful, and shameful death for me and al
mankind, I most mekely and most heartily beseke thy mercyful goodness, for ye
innumerable merytes of thy most precious death, grant me grace and power,
utterly to renounce and to forsake all things yt might let me from the
synceare love of the, and fully to mortyfie in me al such things yt is not
good, either that which thou would not, either that which thou louyst not. For
these do press down and draw back my soul, when it would and might wholye
arise unto the perfect and pure love of the by gostly union and spiritual
knote, to be knyte unto thy blessed godhede. First I humbly beseke the swet
Jesus for thy poverty and nedines that thou tokest upon the and sufferedst in
this world for me, grant me (by the might of thy special grace) to mortyfie
most perfectly all care, al love, and al affection, be it never so little, unto
any worldly or transytory thing that I may always with most quiet mind resygne
and offer up, all things wordly, unto thy most high will and pleasure, wether
thou will give them or take the^, that I never desire any thing (be it never so
small) nether to hold it nether to give it, nether to save it, nether to
bestow it, nether to keep it, nether to forsake it, but only for thy honor.
Grant me (god lord) by perfect pouertye of spirit, to forsake al thing in
my heart what so ever chances in all fortunes good or bad, that I may ever offer
my bare heart and love restfully unto the.

Grant me gracyous Jesus, to forsake and do away, al superfluus things, al
curyous things, and in things, that seem necessary, never to rest with any
affeccion to them, but that I may with yrkesomnes and werines, use such things
that I must needs have to satisfy natural necessytye, where by I may the
better follow thy holy poverty, and be more like unto the most meke Jesus
beseke the for thy obediens that thou shewyst unto god almighty thy glorious
father, for that most blessed and most tender love that thou dydest bear unto
us miserable sinners unto the death, and soughtest of pure love toward us and
the glory of thy father celestyal, not thine own glory and honor, but the
heavenly fathers, not thine own comoditie and comfort, but ours. Thou
forsakyst no pain nor punishmente, nor labor nor travel, no shame nor
confusyon, to set forth the glory of thy glorious father and to procure our
salvation our redemption, our felycitie.

Good lord grant me grace to distroy and mortifye in me the seking of my
self and and the inordynate love which I bare to my self. For in every thing
that I do well and in all evil that I forsake, I have (by reason of my corrupt
nature) ever an eye and respect unto mine own commodity mine own
consolacion and mine own honor glory and praise, and in all the gifts of god
that I have or do use and exercise, or do ask, whether they be outward or
inward, my corrupt and crafty nature ever seeks craftily some commodity and
honor and seeks ever moore to escape and avoid hurt, damage, shame
confusyon, pain and punishment as well in this world as in the world to come,
more the^ for pure love. Of this inordinat love of my self, I do count al
things that I do well of much reputacion I esteem mine exercyses to hyghly,
and thus I fall into gostly pride in this gifts. Wherefore most merciful lord
Jesus, help me by the power of thy special grace, and grant that I may begin
and proceed in all things, and do al things of most pure and fylyal love and
pure intent, for thy only fauer and honor, sekyng purely and sincerely to
please the, with an amorous and lovely affection of my inward spirit, being
lyghtened with a dyuyne and a godly understanding by faith hope and charity,
not seking any manner of gostly comfort of the soul, but rather to desire (if
it please the) al dereliccio^ al adversity for thy sake, that I may be like
unto thy afflicted humanytie in this world and in the world to come I may by
thy grace and mercy have the fruicion of thy godhed Most mercyful savior Jesus
for the bitter pain thou suffdrest in thy five sensies and in all thy most
innocent body and blessed soul, grant me grace utterly to extynguyshe, and
to mortyfie in my self all sensualytie and sensual delectacyon, as in meat
and drink, in word, talk, in gesture or behauoure, in seeing curyouse
things to have gaye and pleasant things, to here news, and in using my
five sensies vaynely every where without reasonable necessytye, grant me
most gracyous Jesus, grace to mortyfye perfectly in my self, all such
natural and vnnessesarye comfort and solace, by most perfect turnynge of my
heart from all thing wherein sensualytie would reaste, and to lift up of my
hearty love and desire to the for such sensualyte delectacion, natural
comfort, makyth goostly exercise unsavory and more harder.

Good lord grant me therefore grace with all my power, to avoid out of my
heart all affection to any solas or comfort or to any sin, be it never so
little which sin I would not utterly leave, that all sensuallytie may be
mortyfied in me and so shall al goostly affeccion the better incresed to thy
honor and glory.

Gracyous Jesus which waste forsaken of all thy friends worldly saving only of
thy blessed mother which also dydest not regard the pleasure or dyspleasure
of any person, and fleddyst al worldly worship and honor, grant me grace
for thy pure love and honor, utterly to mortyfie in me all love and worldly
affeccion to any person in this world. For often time the love and fear of
creatures wordly causes me oftin to be ready either to do that I should not do
either to omyt that which I ought to do, desirynge either to please them, either
fearing their dyspleasure. And for this cause I do many of my good works (I
fear me) to receive some honor or comoditie of them, either to exchewe some
damage or confusion at their hands. Wherefore, most blessed savior mortyfie
in me, by thy grace, all ye carnal affection and love unto my kynsfolke and to
my friends for their benefytes, so that without all accepcyon of person and
pryuate love, I may syncearly love, in all men (ye in mine ennimyes) only ye my
lord god and thy blessed Image, graces and vertews, that I never flatter, love
nor dessemble with any man's vices, but that I may indifferently and most
heartily wyshe and desire the soul health of every man. Mortyfye in me, good
lord al such favor in ordynate, which might engender in me any
dysquietnes, dystraccyon, or desire of person to have his favor fryndeshype
or presence, and thus paynte my heart and mind with many fancies in the time of
prayer. And when I should turn my heart unto the, it infectyth it and defyleth
it as it were a very poison of the love of god.

Grant me (good lord) to love ye only, and for thy sake to renu^ce and for sake
the love of al creatures that the image and memory of the only may remain
only in my mind at al time and season.

O most blessed Jesus whose blessed soul was ever occupied and full of heavenly
co^templacion I most humbly beseke the in the merytes of that precious wou^d
of thy godly and most louinge heart grant me grace by thy mightiful help,
most perfectly to mortify in me the intolerable combreaunce of vain and
unprofitable, yea and vycious, phancies, which wonderfully do occupy my mind
most commenly in the time of prayer though I do not consent unto them, yet
they do defyle some what the soul and heart and makyth heavy the holy ghost,
and do much hurt and damage unto the profit in spiritual life. I knowelege,
most merciful lord, that all these cogitacions do arise and grow by reason of
my neglygens and vnmortifycacion, because I do not dylygently labor and with
vyolence compel my heart to be occupied in good thoughts, but suffer it to
wander both vicyusly and ydelly, wasting my time, and therefore when I would
turn in my heart and recolect my spyryte whooly unto goostly thoughts, I find
my heart laden with innumerable dystraccyons, which greatly do hinder my
profyt and encreace in perfeccyon. Wherefore (most loving Lord) grant me
grace so deapely and perfectly to prynte in my heart and memory thy blessid
image and the lovely remembrance of thy most bitter and blessed passion and
death of thy most ardent unmeasurable charity, of thy most low and profund
humylyte, of thy most blessed poverty, thy myldnes, thy obedyens with all thy
holy virtues with ye memory of al thy most merciful benefits, gifts and
graces given unto me and all mankind, that the earnest and often memory of these,
may occupy my heart always, and put out of place all the remembrance of other
transytory things good or bad. And the often cogytacyon and memory of the, may
turn into a pure affeccion. And the knowledge of the, may also be turned into
most perfect love. And with my outewarde silence I may have and hold also
most perfect silence from the Iangelyng of al vain fancies in my heart, that
thou only may rest there in.

Most mercyful redemer Jesus, which sufferedst most cruel kind of passion and
death, grant me (in the merytes of all thy pains and passions) grace most
perfectly to mortyfie in me al care, natural passions as joy, and sorrow, hope
and dread, love and hate and shamfastnes, that nothing may rest in my heart but
you only Lord. For when any of these occupy my heart (yea though it be a thing
lauful) yet the care, the love, fear or hope sorrow or hate of the thing, do
greatly dystracte the mind, darkenyth the heart, it mynyshyth devotion, and make
all goostly exercise unsavory and yrkesome. Wherefore most merciful Lord ryd
my my affection and desire, from al things under the that I may also despise
and conte^pne my self for the pure love of the, then shall no thing make me
glade nor sorry, but thou only. So shall my heart be frea from al thing, and from
the care, love, fear hope and Joy. Then shall I, with ease (by thy grace) at
all times recollect my whole spyryte inwardly unto the, and so in the, and with
the, to rest to thy honor and glory.

O most meke Jesus whose pacyens and swettnes of heart was so great, that thou
wast not discontentyd with them that cruelly and paynefullye put the to death,
but of burnig and excellent charity, thou praidist most charytablely for them
as though they had been thy dear friends, in merits of ye which, thy most
pacyent passion and thy most meke death (which thou sufferedst for me) grant
me grace, fully to mortyfie in my self, al bytternes of heart and angrines
against mine even christen, specially that does arise of a wicked or a
cankeryd conscience, and secreat envy toward mine even christen, for the
grace which he has more then I, whereby I should desire him to fall to syn,
and to be as wicked as I, or else should wyshe and goo about to obscure and hyde
his virtue and grace, lest he should be preferred and better set by then I.

Grant also (good Lord) thal I may utterly mortyfie in my self, all that
anger, bytternes yt may arise in me of any rancor or hate for any displeasure
done in time past, to seek where and what I might find in mine eue^ christian to
his dispraise or rebuke. Also, all that anger that arysyth in me often time, when
I have not that which my vnmortyfyed desire would have, and causes me some
time to murmur in my heart against them that lettyth me from such things, yt
I would have, as my prelates or any other.

Good lord (of thy great mercy) grant me help to mortify in me, the angrines
of my heart which I have many times against the vices of other, or rather
against them where I ought to have compassyon and pity. But mercyful Lord
this arysyth of presu^pcyon of mine own life and merits while I think my
self ryghteous or better then other. And thus do I rashlye judge them and
their deeds, and wax wrathful against them and their deeds. Wherefore mercyful
lord, grant me grace with the swetnes of meke patience, and of perfect
charytye utterly to mortyfie al bitterness of stomach and angrynes that I may
love most heartily all me, yea my most ennimes and such as seeks my death, and
as heartily to pray and to do for them, as though they were my entier friends, and
in very deed so they are, for they bring us unto great merytes.

Most merciful savior most worthy of all worship, honor and praise, which
for my sake diddyst suffer ye greatest shame and most worldy confusyon that the
spytefull malice of the most enuyous Jews could deuyse, I most humbly
beseke the for all the rebukes sorrowful shames and confusions that thou
suffredst grant me grace to mortyfye in my self, all my affection and
appetyte of vain glory, vain praise and pride, the delyght and vain ly
king of my self, of my words, deeds, and of thy gracyes and gifts, by most
clear knowledge and seeing of mine own vile wretchydnes, and wretchyd vylenes,
and by unfeigned desire of all contempt, that I may ever more ascrybe al my
goodness and goods gostlye and bodily unto ye my lord god only, rekenyng my
self most unworthy of the least of them, both for the enormytie, the
fylthynes, and the multitude of my sins, and unthankfulness and for that,
that I had fallen unto innumerable mo and more enormius sines, if thy grace
only had not preseruyd me, and also because that there is not so wretchyd a
sinner in ye world, but if he had the graces that I have, he would serve and
honor and love the more faithfully and trewely then I do.

Wherefore most merciful Jesus grant me grace from my very heart to desire
unfeignedly to be contempned, despised, mocked and over trodden of all the
world, and to suffer all wordly shame and confusion, that when any of these
come, I may with a glad and Joyful heart receive them, as at thy hand my lord
god to thy glory and honor Most merciful sauyoure Jesus, which hangest most
paynefully upon the holy cross, three long hours for me destitute of al
comfort and consolacion inward and outward, as though thou had ben the
very enemy of god, grant me grace and power to mortify in my self al desire
of al delyghte and swetnes sencible in grace, devotion, love sensible, which
is only in the nether powers of the soul, which swetnes sencible though it be
in grace, in love, devotion and prayer, yet it is not very sanctimonie or
charity, but good lord, certain gifts of thy goodness sent unto us weke
sinners to comfort our wekenes, not to rest in them, but that we comforted
with them, should labor more ernestly to mortify our selves and the seking
of our self. For Lord God, look how much I am mortified to al creatures,
and to my self, so much I have of true sanctimonie and very charity.
Wherefore, most gracious Jesus grant me grace, to dye perfectly unto the
desire of al conforte, voth bodily and gostly. And to be fully constante with all derelyccion and desolacio^. That for thy sake and will, forsakinge here al
comfort and abidinge al desolacion, I may, of thy mercy, have ye celesteal
consolacio^, which thou dydyst promise saying, blessed be ye that sorrow for
ye shall have consolacion to thy glory and honor.

O most merciful redemer of my sinful soul, which sufferedst so sorouful,
so paynefull, so bitter and cruel pain and passion, that there was never no
pain nor passion like unto thine, and that, with such mekenes, such
obedyence, longanymitie and pacyence, as never was seen nor hard of, grant me
(most wrathful wretch grace perfectly to mortyfye all Inpacyens, in all bodyly
aduersytie, infamye, rebuke, mockes, contumely, syckenes, trouble, pain
persecucion, and desolacion, and in loss damage, or hurt, which may
chance or come upon me, by thy sufferaunce good lord, with the which, thou
art wont to try thy most dear beloved and electyd, as gold in the furnes.
In the which also thou thy self, my most dear Lord Jesus, was greatly tried,
which sufferydst with most mylde mind and pacyente heart, all contumely, all
scorn, sore strypes, spytetynge, scorges, the turmente upon the cross and so
many pains, as thy enemies could devise. And yet was you ready to suffer much
more, for the honor of god the father, and for our soul health.

Most gracyous Jesus, therefore grant me grace, with most meke and perfect
pacyence, all outward and inward adversity, hurt, or grefe, to suffer and
bear it so long, as it shall please the, that I never in heart, word, nether
deed, do show any point of rancore or gruge, that I may bear no sorrow
norbytternes in my heart, but I may ever reke^ my self worthy, of much worse
and more pain, offering my self to suffer what ever thou shalt send me. And
that I may (of most lovely affeccion to be like and conformable in sufferyng
unto the) with great desire abide and look for, al aduersytie and pain,
whereby I may obtain the abundaunce of grace to thy glory.

O most loving lord Jesus, whose propertye is to have mercy, and of thy in
effable mercy dydest suffer most cruel death and passion, that true
repentaunt siners, were they never so abhomynable and enormius should obtain,
full remyssion of there enormytes, grant me most wretched sinner I humble
beseke the grace to mortyfie in my self, all scrupulosnes of consiencie, by
most full confydence, trust and hope of thy unmeasurable mercy, and by thy most
swet goodness. I knowledge (most merciful sauyoure) that this aryseth in me for
lack of confidence in the, and this lack of confydence spryngeth of the
slender love that I have toward the. For they that have a feruente and a
great love, they have a great hope, but I wretched sinner, have a little and
slender charytie: therefore I have not such confidence as I ought to have in
thy mercy, but by reason that the love of my self is vnmortyfied in me, and I
fear more thy Justice and the pain of hell, then I do love and believe thy
infynitie goodness and blessed mercy, and therefore I am disquietid with this
scrupulous fear, which lets me greatly from many good deeds, and increace
of thy love and holy perfection. Therefore most mercyful lord, for thy mercy
sake, grant me the pure love of the, and most fyrme hope and trust of thy
mercy, that al scrupulous fear may utterly be mortified in me to thy honor
and glory.

O most meke savior Jesus which ca^mest into this wrecchyd world, not to do
thine own will, but the will of thy heavenly father, and in the time of thy
most soroufull, heavy and deadly agony and intolerable heaviness of thy godly
and most innocente heart did forsake thy own will and dydest resign thy
self wholly unto the will of god thy father. In the gracius merits of thy most
painful agony and sorouful blody sweet, grant me I humbly beseke the (sweet
Jesus) the grace utterly in me to mortifye the propryetie of my own will, and
perfectly to yield and resygne my self wholly into thy most blessed pleasure
and hands, to abide, whatsoever you shall, in time or for ever, suffer to come
upon me be it solas or sorrow, pain or pleasure, hell or heaven so it be thy
blessed will, without any gain sayng, murmur or gruge of heart, yt ioifulli I may
for thy love, suffer al pain gostly and bodily Grant me good lord most
perfect obedience not only unto my superiors but also to al others in things
lawefull.

Grant me obedyence unto my superiors, not only in outward deeds but also
inwardly in redines of my will to conform my will unto the will of my Prelate
in all things, and that for no regard of any fauer, laud or praise therefore,
but that I may rather desire to be despised therefore. Grant me (most
gracious Jesus) so exact and perfect obediens unto ye my lord god that I may
never have any other desire or will in me saving only thine. That thine and mine
(by singular grace) may be made one will, one heart, one desire. Take from me
(oh merciful maker) my wicked will the ground of al sin, and give me thy
blessid will ground of al grace and goodness.

Take from me my proud heart, take from me my vnpure and unclean desire and put
into my soul the insaciable desire of thy honor, and to do thy only will to
thy honor and glory. Amen.

The Fyfte exercise to come to the conformytie in virtue of Christ crucyfyed in
the desire of al virtue and hate of al sin.
THou must exercise thy self in the co^stante very true hate of al syn so that
you would never comytte any (were it never so little) for the fear of no
damage, sclaunder or torment in this world were it never so great and
dredeful. Al sin must neades be pullyd out of thy heart before any perfect
virtue cane grow there, and ear thou canste be permyttyd to enter in to the
heart of Jesus to be knyt and made one spiritually with him. Thou shall
therefore hate nothing so evil as syn, yea the least that can be, for it
dyuydythe and sondryth thy soul from god, and god from thy soul. In like manner
thou shall exercise the in the dylygent and contynual search, love and geuynge
of all and every virtue be they never so wonderful or never so many, yea if
thou wist that every drop of water in ye sea were a virtue, thou should
labor for the^ al, for the very honor of god. Thou ought (as much as is
possible for the) to adorn and to crucyfie thy body with virtues, always and
every where co^formyng it unto Christ crucyfied for the, according to the
example of his most blessed body which lived always crucyfied, and crucyfied
he dyed and departed this world, and that of his infynite love which was as
fresh and new in him toward us, as it had been the love of a new married bryde
gromme. Our love therefore ought to be ever fresh and new toward him, like the
love of a new maryd bryde that a faithful and true spouse does bear toward
her most loving housebande.

THus by this true and perfect love toward our sweet love Jesus, we should
(in manner) suck and draw in to us out of his sacrate body these five
pryncypal virtues that follow, with their daughters, and prynte the^ very
strongly and perfectly in our soul and body, that they might shine therein
like as they were sterres in the firmamente. The first virtue is very true
mekenes. This you shall carye in thy feate, and shall desire thy Lord Jesus, by
the precyus wounds of his most holy feate and his infynite humility which
he showed always, but specially in taking upon him manhed, that he will
vochsafe to grant the to be so meke in all things as his most pleasant will, will
require of the.

This humylitie, then thou haist perfectly optayned, when thou sorowest,
lamentest and art unfeignedly sorry, as often as any benefyte or honor is given or
shewid unto the, where of thou verily thynkest thy self very unworthy and also
when the perfect desire of al contempt perseueryth and abydethe in the in ye
myddest of al sclanders injuries rebukes, pains and sorrows that are laid
upon the, and thou thynkest thy self most worthy of them and of much worsse.
This humility brings forth three daughters, obedyens, pacyens, and sylens,
or keeping of the tongue. The true and very obedyent does not only obey his
prelate for his promyses and his vows, but also he obeys al creatures. The
very patie^t sufferith and beryth al things for the honor and love of god be
they never so paynful and sharp that god permyttyth to com upon him, for he
beholdyth and consyderyth how pacyenly our Lord Jesus sufferid his cross and al
his pains and passion for our health. The meke person though he be very wise
and right well learnyd, yet he speakyth few, for all things are not gotten by
much talk and sayng many. For it were better to live well and in few words
to show yt which thou can say when need is, and art demau^dyd And the very
meke spekith little, for he is obedyent, and patient and keeps well his tongue.
The second pryncypal virtue is true wisdom or sapience in the exercise and
use of all thy thoughts works and deeds. This wisdom will govern the
strongly and resonabli that thou shall nether think, speak nether do any
thing (be it never so little) as is the styrryng of any ioynte of thy body)
but only of very reason, and the permyssyo^ and pleasure of God. This wisdom
thou shalt carye in thy head pryntyng thy head into the pearsed head of Jesus
christ, most humbly besekynge him for the sorrow and pain yt he suffered in
his most holy head, yt he will vochsafe to adorn thy head with his godly wisdom
as much as it shall please him, and he shall know to be necessary for the, to
his high honor, and the soul health of thine even christian. For certain
this wysdo^ is very necessary for all gostly life, which ought to be
instituted, begone and fully ended in an order and according unto reason.
Wisdom brings three daughters, the fear of god, dyscrecion, and symplycitie.
The godly wise offendyth god never for he that sins, he is not godly wise in
that point, for all syn is folly and folyshnes, and where ever abides wisdom
godly, there is found also the fear of god which is the beginning of al
wisdom. And with this fear we ought to be adorned always like and after the
manner of children and not like servile servants. And then of his own nature
will discrescion follow, the which laboryth to keep a mean and a measure in
all virtue, least doing any thing more or less then reason does require or
right is, god might be offendyd. Holy simplicity is to avoid doublenes al
troublesomnes and al curiousnes, to cleue unto the high goodness of god only,
and to take all things good or bad immedyatly as at the hand of god, and not
of any creature, and render and refer them again unto god, wisely to observe
and mark the will and ordinacion of god in all things to obaye god and al
creatures for god, doing all things in god symply and perfectly with a
resigned mind a sweet mildnes and not with rashness, for god works all
thynthinges in us if we give place to him with out simplicite wisdom would be
curious and prod Where so ever the very fear of god and wise descrescion are
possessed, error or syn can not lightly crepe in.

The third principal virtue is the true charity of god. This virtue thou
shall here in thy heart, lokinge well upon and marking the throw pierced heart
of Jesus christ printyng thy heart into it. Thou shall most humbly and devoutly
desire thy lord Jesus by the love of his godly and wou^dyd heart that he will
vouchesafe to grante the (in ye merytes of the same) the perfect love of of
him self. The charity of god begettith three daughters, faith, hope, and
perseueraunce. For hereof commyth al our faintnes and decay, that we do not
persevere, for because our charity is little, and is not great inoughe which
might beget perseverance for he that attempteth and enters any thing of very
true charity (be it never so hard and meruelus) he will not cease until he
has opteyned it, for charity begets faith, by which we may do and work
wonders as also by fyrme and sure hope and trust in god, abidinge with
confidens in his help and not in our own power.

The fourth principal virtue is Justice or ryghtwysnes whom thou shalt bear in
thy right hand, and thou must mark well and take good heed unto the right
hand of Jesus Christ how for ryghtwysenes sake it was fastened unto the cross
with a gros and sturdy nail, besechynge him most humbly by the most bitter
pain that he suffered in the precyus wound of his right hand, for rightwisenes
by the love yt forced him to suffer ye pain, that he will vochesafe to grant
unto ye very true ryghtwysenes in all thy deeds, yt thou may render to god
almighty that, which belongs unto him: as al honor and glory, al love and
thanks gyuinge in all thy cogitacions, words, and deeds, in like sort unto
thy superyor, to thy egual, and unto thy inferior, such things as belong unto
them, as is thy duty to render unto them, and also unto thy body that thou
may give unto it those things which belong unto it, as in meat, drink
sleep, clothe and in other necessaryes no more nor no less then thou art bond.
This right wisenes begettyth three daughters. Mercy, truth or verytie, and
thankefullnes.

Ryghtwisenes is a meruelus virtue, the which geuithe to every one that
belongyth and is dew to them and bryngith forth mercy. Very and true mercy
first takyth compassion upon the soul of the even christen as, for example.
If a poor man should ask an alms: first of al (if it be expedient and
opportunity do serve) and thou doist hope of fruit and goostly profit in him,
and perceiuest that he is dyseasyd goostly and is in danger of syn, thou art
bond to give him, a gostly alms for the comfort of the soul, which ought
first to be fed for it is much better then the body, and then feade his body
if he need and you be able. Rightousenes begettith verytie or treuthe which
seaketh god in all things, it begettyh also thankfullnes. For it is not possible
that a right wise man should not be thankeful unto god, and unto al such as
has showed him ye way to come to god and have helped him toward his soul
health. The fifte principal virtue is very and godly fortytude or strenghth
gostly in fulfylynge and doing al vertwe and in eradycatynge and dystroynge al
vice.

True fortytude cares for no creature nor fearyth nether the devil, neither
men nether the whole world, nether the own flesh, but boldly and manfully
going forward and passing through al things, he can co^tepme easeli al
things for gods love of whom he has receauyd that fortytude. When any
temtacyon comyth upon a man where by he is forced to fall, the^ does this godly
fortytude succure him and puts him in mind sayng. What will you do, wylt
thou offend god thy maker? why there wylt thou. Abide still steadfastly where thou
art now ryhtwel, least more myschefe come to the. This vertew of true fortitude
thou shall bear in thy left hand, beholdinge and marking well ye left hand of
thy savior Jesus Christ, and most humbly beseke him by the sorrow and pain of
the precious wound of his left hand, and by the wonderful fortytude that he
showed in all his works that he will vochesafe to power in to thy soul and
body very and true fortitude as much as is necessary for his high honor and
thy salvation. This godly and gostly fortitude begettyth three daughters:
Chastity, sobryetie, and poverty. A strong man in god he sticks not nether
tarieth not any where, but strongely and stowtly passyth through all that ever is
in the whoole world, as though they appertaynyd nothing at al unto him,
neither fears to pass through fire or water (trustinge in the help of god)
until he has optayned that which he desyereth. A strong man in god is easily
pleasyd and sone contentyd in all things yea with a piece of brown bread,
with an homyly apparel, with poor and vile household stuf, he sekith not curious
painti^gs hangings, images, and such other in his chamber: lest such should
pull any porcyon of his love from god, and stay and let his heart that would to
god, for he would perpetually without impediment cleave unto god. And therefore
it begettyth chaistitie, for this fortitude detestith and abhorrith al
uncleanness that displeasyth and is hateful to god: it begettyth also sobryetie,
for wyttyngely if will not admyt nor suffer any ercesse or superfluity. It
bryngyth forth also poverty, for it possesses nothing in this world, nor of
this world, and verily poverty volu^tarie, is a meruelus, yea and an excellent
mean to possess god. These foresaid virtues of our Lord Jesus Christ you must
ask of him and labor to prynt them in to thy body and soul (as much as in
the lies) all thy life time, conformynge thy self in these holy virtues, to
thy lord Jesus, as much as is possible for ye always and eueriwher, beholding by
devout contemplacyon, the image and memory of his crucyfied life and death,
and following the same in these virtues (that we have spoken of) or at the least
in the five pryncypal, stretchynge and naylynge thy self (in these virtues) unto
his cross, so that what so ever thou turnest thy self, either on the right
hand, either on the left hand thou may behold, on ye part of thy body and
on that side, one of these virtues of Jesus set before thine eyes to be hold
and to follow. For our Lord Jesus will make none partakers of his death ye
refuses to crucifye for his sake, his own flesh with vices and lusts, and
to mortyfye the same. More over al be it that ye mortification and crucyfieng
of our most vile flesh be nothing in comparion of the cross and death of
our lord god. Yet that most myldest and merciful lord, of his endless pity
and goodness, does vochesafe to take thankefully the small crosses and pains
that we for his love do wyllingly bear and suffer, whether (by his permission
and sufferaunce) they be inward derelictyon and gostly tentacio^, either
outward iniures oppressions and sorrows laid upon us. For how ever such
crosses come upon us, he takes them thankefully, so that we bear them for his
sake and dye to our own will and desire.

This exercise after thou haste well sucked and dygested it into thy heart thou
shall not forsake all days of thy life.

Aspiracions for this exercise
Oh my dear redemer Jesus in the merytes of thy most bitter death, mortify in
me all sin and vyciosnes and plant in me all verteus.

Oh most meke savior Jesus for thy meke death sake, make me perfectly meke
and sley in me all pride.

Most blessed and sempiternall wysedo^ of the father, for thy cruel coronacion
with thorns, lyghten my wyts with thy holy wisdom, and take from me all
sinful ignorance.

My most dear and loving Lord Jesus for the precious wound of thy sweet
heart, wound and perse my heart with thy perfect love and burning charytie.

Most ryghtfull Judge of quick and dead my lord Jesus grant me perfect
ryghtwysenes that I may give unto the and unto all creatures, that I owe them.

Most myghti lord god my savior Jesus, for all thy blessed pain and passion
grant me gostly fortytude and strength against al ye assaltes and temtacions of
the devil, the world and my flesh.

The practyse of this exercise to the feate of Jesus.
I Laud and praise and give most humble thanks unto the (meke and most
merciful savior Jesus for the example of thy great meekenes, and for thy
unmeasurable love and pain of the most blessed wou^des that thou sufferydest
in thy sweet feate, and in to this thy blessed wounds, and the merytes of
the^. I comyte my self wholly and all my wyckednes and sins of all my former
life, specially all my detestable pride, vain glory, and arrogance. Al my
self will my desobediens, my irreuerency and dyshonoure, that I have done to
the and thy mynisters and servants. All my impacyency my angrynes, my rancore
and malice, my unprofitable ydell and evil talk detraccion and all kind of
sin that appertain unto any of these, besekynge the that they may be
forgeuen and purged in thy precious blood, and by the pain and sorrow of the
same. I most humble beseke (most mercyful Jesus) for thy great mercy, In the
merits of this thy blessed wou^des, of thy most holy feate, and by the pain
and sorrow of the same, by thy ineffable and most profunde mekenes, that thou
showed in taking on ye our nature, and for the love and charytie that compelled
yt to suffer this pain and passion,

Grant me most inward perfect and deape mekenes of heart before thy divine
presence, by the which, I may perfytely and clearly se the dignity of thy
infynite majesty, and the great mekenes of the same. And one the other side I
may perfectly and clearly se and perceive, the bottomeles pyt of my vices and
naughtines, I may also at al time, submite my self most lowly in heart and
mind (and as often as it shall be expediente in deed also) unto, and under al
creatures. I may wholly hate and esteem my self, as a thing of naught, I may
desire and wyshe my self to be co^tempned dyspised and over trodden, as the
most vylest durte of the streets of all men, that I may also be sorry and
refuse, to have any benefyte or honor of any creature. That I may also
speak always most mekely, and most gladly ever more acknowledge, with out all
excuse, my great faut and offense. And utterly dispeiring of my own power and
might, I may think and retain evermore from the bottom of my heart these
words vnfanyedly. I am naught, I have naught, I am able to do naught, I desire
naught but one. I may also (in mine own Judgment) for my great wrechydnes
and vylenes, place my self, most iustlye and worthelye in the loweste and
depest place in hell.

Grant me also (gracious savior) in the merytes of thy obediente death and
passion, grace to follow thy most pure and perfect obedyence, by most
flexible and redye submission of most prompte will, so that I may never be weary,
in forsakinge and denyeng mine own proper will and fansyin al thing subduinge
my flesh unto the spirit both in kepinge and fulfylling most mekely thy will
and pleasure inwardlye and also outwardly in obeying not only my superiors, but
also al creatures, as far as it may be lauful. Grant (good lord) grace that
I never do any thing with propriety or affection singular, being to ernest,
or to much given unto it, but with a continual mekenes of my heart and mind
unto thy will, I may, as it were, lie at thy foot, I may desire nothing,
neither in my self netyher in any creature while the world standith save only
to know and execute thy blessed will, saying always in my heart and with ye
desire of my mind, Lord what will thou that I shall do. And so evermore I may
transform and conform my will into thine, or utterly forsake my will and
turn it to nothing.

Grant me also, most gracious lord, to follow thy most wonderful patience
and myldnes, where in I may (with most quiet and thankful heart) receive at
the hand of thy high prouydence, all pouertye, all rebuke and shame, al
pain, grefe, and sorrow, acknowleginge my self most worthy of them and much
greter and greuos, desiringe evermore to suffer more payneful and more harder
pains with long sufferynge, for very desire to be like, in sufferyng and
pacyence, unto the my Lord Jesus crucified for me, and for thy sake, I may
wyllyngly joyfully and thankefully suffer at al time al things.

Grant me also (according to thy example) meke silence and taciturnitie
whereby I may the more diligently harke^ inwardly thy talk and lovely words
in my heart, and outwardly I may utterly and strongly abstain, both from
speech, and heringe of al idle words, lies and harmful words, and that I may
speak only, very profitable and needful, and that with all meekenes I may
desire to edyfie more in good life the^ with many works, and all my life time,
and specially at the our of death, may have a sure and a certain refuge and
comfort in these thy precious wou^des of thy most holy feate.

Unto the blessed head of our savior Jesus.
I Laud and praise the and give unto the most hearty thanks, most merciful
Jesus for thy great wisdom and for the great love and sorrow of thy most holy
head, which was most painefully and most cruelly prickid and crowned with
thorns, and sore beten for my sake, I most humbly and lowly commend and
commite my weak head with all my senses and wits, into ye innumerable wounds
yt thou suferidst in thy blessed head for all my sins and offenses but
specially the pertinaci and proud stubburnes of mine own wit and wisdom. The
misuse of al my senses and wits in ward, and outward. The negligences of
the fear of the. The inordinate fear and the flatteringe of men. The lack of
discrecion, and my great intemperau^ce, my vnpure intent in my doing and, the
sekinge my self. And the vices and sins that appertain to these or any of
them, that they may be forgeuen me in the merits of thy precious blood, I
most humbly beseke the (most gracious good lord) for the most bitter pain of
thy wounded head, and for that charity and love that mouyd ye to suffer that
most bitter cruelnes for me, and by thy inestimable wisdom, thy most holy
fear, thy blessed dyscrecion, and most meke simplicity adorn my weak head
with thy godly and gostly wisdom, as much as is expedient for me to thy glory
and my salvation. And vochesafe, most merciful lord with the same to govern
me so with in and without, that I nether think, speak do or suffer any thing,
be it never so little, except I know that it may please the, and that by
wainge duly the cyrcumstance and the end hereof, and in my reason, lyghtened
with thy grace, I may perceive as it were, a certain leave given unto me of
the to do yt I intend. Lyghten also good lord, my understanding with the
clear and perfect knowledge of thy great goodness and holy will, and of the
vileness and noughtynes both of my self and of all transitorye things.
Replete, fulfill and make dronke^ mine affection with the sweet taste of thy
love, and with the infaciable desire to honor the, and to dysspise my self.
Turn al temporal things in me unto bytternes. Make me deaffe, dome, and
blind, by thy myghtie power, unto all things which you art not or besides
the.

Grant me also, good lord, the lowlye fear of the, and the perpetual hate
of al sin be it never so little, and a straight costodye and keeping of both my
inward and outward man that I may always remember and think on before hand,
al my words and works having an eye alwaie inwardly unto my conscience that I
may devoutly call upon thy divine and godly help, before that I speak or do
any thing, and that as soon as I perceive any thing against the order of
reason or thy law, I may by and by leave of, least I should lose thy grace,
and offend thy blessed majesty.

Grant me also, merciful savior perfect and clear discression, whereby I
may both know and also avoid, al snares of ye devil and all the natural
seakynge of my self, and that I may wisely take head and ryghtly decerne,
and also execute every thing that appertains to me in their dew manner,
order, and time, that I may come to the mean of virtue which is between to
much and to little.

Grant me also, most sweet Jesus, the symplicitie of babes whereby my
understanding may be void and bare of all doublenes and combernes of many
things, and of much curyose and unprofitable knowledge. My will may be void
and clean of all the sekinge and love of my self. My memory may be clean
clear from all cares, cogitacions and imaginacio^s. My wits and powers may
be, as they were shut up and turned inward, that I may become a dweller inwardly
within my self continually, and thus forgettyng al wordly things, I may in
the pure cogitacion and desire of my heart cleave and rest in the one pure
lord god. And walkinge continually with all reuerens in thy godly presens I
may be careful and busy to keep the unity of my sprite unto the, in the bond
of goostly peace.

Grant, gracious lord that I may dylygently take great head of al my
thoughts, my words, and deeds and of pure and simple obedience under ye, and
other me^ in the and by ye I may do the^ without scrupulus ba^d or cleaving to
the^. Grant me grace, good Lord, yt I may take, as at thy hand and prouidens
al things yt ever come unto me good or bad, and that I may, remembering my
noughtines, for every one of the^, first give hearty thanks to the, and then
take good head and mark, to what end they may serve me, or what they do warn
me of, as whether thy goodness, by this gift does warn me to give the thanks,
for the euel or aduersyties which thou have suffered to come to me or to them,
or have taken away, from me or the^. Or that I should be more fervent in prayer.
Or I should wexe more meke in my self. Or that I should take better head to my
self. Or that I should yield and resygne my self unto thy will. Or that I should
acknowledge and amend my fawte, my infirmytie or negligence. Or to do any other
thing. For thou doiste never send any thing to any creature, but it is for
some good purpose. Teach me therefore (good Lord) to know thy pleasure in all
things, and of al things to take increase of virtue, and purely and wisely to
fulfill thy holy will in all things, utterly forsaking mine own will, and ye
seking of my self. And grant me (most mercyful Jesus) all the days of my
life, but specially in the agony of death a sure and a certain succur, in the
precyus wounds of thy most blessed head. Amen.

Unto the sweet heart of Jesus.
I Laud and praise the and give unto the most loving Lord and sauyor Jesus for
the infinite love and charity, for the great sorrow and heuines of thy most
sweet loving and most godly heart lau^cyd with a knights spear in the sight
and presnes of thy most sorrowful mother mary. I commend resign and commit most
lowly and humbly, al my whole heart with all my affeccyons and desires hereof,
into thy precyus wond of thy most dyuyne heart, the well of al goodness. And also
all my sins and offenses, but specially al my private love to my self and al
vycyus love that ever I bare unto any creature. The abuse and neglygens of thy
blessed sacraments, of thy gifts of graces. My mystrust, my infidelytie my
heresies and errors, my inordynate fear, pusylanimitie, and desperacyon. All
the neglyence and little care that I have taken in the things pertaining unto
my calling and state, with all my instabilitie and the vices and sins
appertanynynge to these or any of them that they may be forgeuen me and be
purged in thy most precyus blod I most humbly beseech the, most gracius Lord
Jesus, for the most burning love and charytie of thy godly heart, and for the
precyus wond hereof, and for all sorrow, agonye and heaviness, that thou
sufferedest in it, and by the ineffable charytie, co^stance and all the virtues
of thy blessed heart, fulfill my heart with most perfect love and charytie which
may sley in me, al love to my self and unto creatures that it may wou^d and set
on fire my heart, with the dart of thy fyry love, yt I may most heartily and
most perfectly love the, with all my whoole heart, with all my mind, with al my
strength and power, puerly, without any respect of any reward save only for thy
goodness.

Grant, good Lord, that I may, for thy sake and love, forgo al things, be
they never so great, I may do al good things be they never so hard, I may
suffer al pains be they never so paynful, and that for thy only love and for
thy sake, and to persevere herein un till the end.

Grant me most merciful lord grace that I may sighe, call, and knock,
continually unto the with burninge desires and co^tynuall prayer, for the
perfect forsakynge of my self, and for the lovely and godly union of my soul
unto ye. That I may ever think on the. I may always talk of the, I may thurst
and hunger the, that I may seek and find the, until that I be fully
tra^sformid and changed al together into the, and made one spirit with the,
ever remaining in ye and thou in me.

Grant also yt I may (in the same charity) love every man, sor thy sake, as
my self. Grant me (most faithful Jesus) a lively and a strong faith that
workyth great and meruelus works for thy honor Jesus.

Grant me also a right and a godly intent lyghtenid with the light of faith
which may dyrecte my with, the simple eye of my pure mind, to thy glory and
most acceptable will in all things that I do or yt I suffer, and that it may
cut of and cast away all the sekinge of my self, whereunto my corupte nature
always craftily drawith me. Grant unto me also, good lord steadfast hope and
strong trust and confidence in the, where by my soul may be lyfted up unto
the above al changable and transitory things, yt it may execute al works and
mocyons so purely (without al carefulnes and imaginacions of outward things,
that it never let, nor lose the lovely rest and influence in the, but among al
perels and adversities with a full hope and trust in ye, it may abide with
long sufferaunce, thy high pleasure and prouydence, and with all mekenes it
may stedfastli hope yt my prayers to be graciously hard of the, for thy great
goodness, without any doubt, abidinge in the help and protection of the hyeste.

Grant most loving lord Jesus, stabilytye and constance in all godly
purpose, proceeding from a strong and true love whereby I may, loking often
upon the blessed example of thy most holy life, go forward in perfection,
with a continual and a feruente desire and labor to grow in virtue
forgetting al things past.

Grant me grace sweet savior Jesus, often to examyne my self and to remember
what I do, what I think, and as soon as I perceive my self distracted from
the, the^ with a new fervor and desire, I may return again unto the. And
that I may not fear nether fiere nor water, but constanly to run through al
things for thy sake and love, and therein to persevere unto the end. Grant me
most merciful Jesus all the days of my life, but specially at the hour of
death, a strong and sure refuge and comfort in the precious wonde of thy
most blessed, loving, and most trusty heart. Ame^.

Unto the right hand of Jesus
I Laud and praise the and give most hearty thanks unto the most ryghteus
lord Jesus, for thy most omnipotente rightousenes and thy unspeakable love and
grievous pain that you suffurest in ye wound of thy holy and myghtie right
hand. And into the same most blessed wound, I cast commytte, and commend my
self wholly and my sins and offenses, but specially all my unrighteous and
wrongs that I have done, to the and to thy creatures. All the bytternes of my
heart, all my dyspleasure angrines and envy. Al my falshed my untruth and
hypocrysie. Al my unthankfulness to the, for thy benefits and to thine for
their benefytes. That all these my sins might be forgeuen me and be purged in
thy precious blood: I most humbly beseke the (most meke savior Jesus) for ye
most bitter and sorrowful pain of that precious wonde of thy right hand, and
for the great charity that moved the to suffer so greuos pain for me to
Justify me, and by thy in estimable ryghtwysenes, thy great mercy, thy godly
treuth and most lovely tha^kfulnes: grant me pecfecte rightwysenes where by I
may render my duty to the my lord specially, and for thy honor unto al
creatures that which belongs unto the^. First grant gracious good lord,
that I may of pure love give evermore unto ye my lord god, al honor and
glory, reverence and fear, all laud praise, thanks and obedyence, in all my
thoughts, words and deeds. Secondely I may also give unto my superyors, unto
my eguals, unto my inferiors (yea unto my soul and body) I may always give
each of these that which belongs unto every one of them.

Grant me, good lord, grace to do al these things which I am bound to do by
my calling, and profession in due time and order with most meke devotion.
That I may also fly that which is forbyden me, and that I may sley and make a
sacrifice of my self daily, for my sins and neglygens, with the sweet tears
of love and repentance. And thus by the merytes of thy bitter and holy passion,
I may be purged here in this world, and walk worthily all the days of my life,
in the calling and state that thou have mercifully called me.

Grant me also, most meke and pytifull Jesus to follow thy most redye mercy,
compassion and pity, thy bontefullnes and lyberalytie toward me, yea to mine
enemies and adversaries yt I be never dyspleased, nor angry with any man, yt I
never hate, judge or conte^pne any man, but that without accepcion of person, I
may with a fatherly affeccion love and honor, for thy sake, al persons,
specially such as be disesed or afflycted, tempted or grieved (though they be
mine enemies) I may faithfuly and loui^gly serve them, and do them good, also
with my prayer and my help, to the vttermoste of my power, I may succor them
in all necessites, but chiefly I may seek and desire their souls health, and
that I may sorrow their sins, and heartily pray for the^. And for ye virtuous
and the good, I may give thanks to ye as I would for my self.

Grant me most sweet savior, grace to follow thy holy verytie, and truth,
and to flee and exchewe all kind of vntreuth.

Grant me to follow also, godly zeal against mine own vices specially, and
al other men's the which holy zeal may devour me all to gether for the
health of christen souls.

Grant also good lord, that my life and al my deeds may evermore agree with
my heart and godly words, and that they may be conformable, also unto ye
verteus of thy most holy life.

Grant me also, most gracius Jesus, most hartye and inward thankefulnes,
whereby I may, with all mekenes, most lowly acknowledge, all thy benifites given
unto me by the and by thy creaturs, and that I may esteem them and regard them
worthily, laudyng, and praysyng the with all devotion, and give unto the most
humble and hearty thanks, ascribyng them wholly and purely (without subtraccion
of any part of them) only to thy infinity goodness thinking my self most
unworthy of them, yea I may think my self one yt does mysuse al thy gifts,
that I may never delyghte in them, nor rest in none of them, be it never so
little, but rest and delyght only in the finally which art the geuer of al, and
with out ye, all they can nothing profit me.

Unto the left hand of Jesus
I Laud and praise the and give most humble thanks unto the (most mighty
Jesus) for thy almighty fortitude and strength, and for the incomprehensible
love and pain of the precius wound of thy left hand, in the which most
blessed wound I most lowly and mekely commend and commit me whooly with all my
sins and offenses but specially all my cowardenes and wekenes against
temtacion and sin. Al my negligence and slowthfullnes. All the loss of my
time and idelnes. All the impuritie and sinful filthiness of my body and soul
And my intemperance and excess in meat and drink, and of other bodily
necessaries. Al my coueties gredines, and inordinate love and pleasure yt I
have had in use or keeping of any thing, withal vices that appertain to these
or any of them that they may be forgeuen and be purged in thy precyus blood and
merits. And (most merciful sauyor Jesus) I humbly beseke thy infinite goodness
for thy most crewel pain and sorrow, that thou suffredst in the precyus wound
of thy left hand, and for that great charity, that caused the to suffer and
abide the same for my sins. I beseke the in the honor of thy most almightye
strenghth, thy most holy purytie, thy most wonderful temperance and thy most
blessed poverty, grant me so much strenghth as is necessary for me to thy
glory and honor and my soul health, by the which goostly strength. I may be
able to rule my wit and soul with all my senses and powers, so that (nether
ferynge man, nether the world, nor my own flesh) I may strongly and boldly
(for thy sake which gave me strength) pass through and despise al thing, as
though they pertaynyd nothing unto me, and that I may not stay nor stycke at
nothing until I come unto, and obtain that, which I most desire (that is to
say) to be one spryte and remain one (in one spyryte) with the my Lord god.

Grant me also (most blessed Jesus grace to follow thy most lovely chastity of
body and puryte of heart, whereby I may vehemently detest and utterly abhor,
al fylthy uncleanness And that I may contynually keep chaistly al my cogytacyons
and my senses, from al syn and occasyon thereof, from al impuritie and
cleauynge unto any creature. And in all unclean temtacions, as often as they shall
chance upon me, grant me grace spedely without any taryance, always to renounce
them and to ru^ne unto the with a mighty turninge of my heart and that with my whole
mind and desire. And so with a pure mind and affection I may cleave and stycke
fast to the only.

Grant me grace, most myld sauyor Jesus, to follow thy most holy sobryetie
and temperance, whereby I may restrain and mortifye all the powers and
affeccyons of my soul, and the senses of my body, from al inordynate
delectacyon and pleasure, and from superfluity and excess in meats and
drinks, that I may moderatly use only necessaryes, without delyght in them,
with thy fear, not turnynge my affeccion from the, but that the uppermost
powers of my soul may remain strongely in the lovely knot and burning desire
of the.

Grant me also (most blessed Jesus) grace to follow thy most blessed
voluntarye pouerte. The which (who might come to it) bringyth a man by a
merueilus near way spedely unto god.

Grant me therefore (good Lord) by that poverty, to be and to abide ever,
losid, bare and verily poor in spyryte, outwardlye from al affection and
temporal things, and inwardly from al love and rest in any of thy gifts
sperytual, that I may use (with sorrow and yrkesomenes) yea my very necessaryes:
that I may never desire to keep or possess any thing but (al naked and bare)
I may rest between thy naked and bare arms, not keeping nor reserving any
thing in my heart or desire, but only a pure intent to please ye, and to seek
how I may do it, and that most perfectly by thy grace and merciful help. And
all the days of my wretchyd life (but specially at the dredful hour of my
death) grant me (most merciful Jesus) to have a suer and trusty refuge and
succure, in the precius wou^d of thy blessed left hand. Most sweet sauyor
Jesus I humblye beseke the that where I wretch by reason of my great enormities
and syn am unworthy to be hard, or to obtain these petycyons of the, thy most
blessed and inmaculat mother marie may optaine the^ for me, to whose blessed
prayer, intercessions and merits, I commend them, yt by her they may be
admittid into thy most godly and gracius prese^s and bring to me (of thy mercy)
forgeuenes and grace to thy glory and honor. Ame^.

The sixte Exercise to obtain a conformity and following of christ's life and
passion.
THou must also exercise thy self in the whoole shape and prefyte medytacyon
of the life and passion of Christ prynting deapely in to thy soul and flesh
his passion and death, that they shine out of the like a lantern, so that
thou always think and talk of them. For Christ our sauyor by the same
redeemed us, when the devil possessed us as his slaves and bond men, that now we
are the fathers of heaven, which by his only begotten son has bought us,
paying by him our dettes wherein we were bound unto him. And for this great
benefit we remain detters unto him for ever. Wherefore if we will repaye this
det unto him godly and thankefuly, we must prynt his life, passyo^ and death i^
to the powers of our soul, and in to the sensies of our body, and in to al
our flesh, we must bear this his cross upon us and follow effecteously as
though we were become one with him in his life and passion. And thus ye debt
that he paid for us, we do some what recompense.

That thou may perfectly fulfill the same thou must neades conform or make
like all thy thoughts thy words deeds and thy manners, so like unto the
thoughts, ye words, the deeds and manners of thy lord Jesus christ, that
wheresoever thou be seen, hard or touched, there be nothing found in ye, but
yt which was in Jesus christ and then shall be seen in yt, that you art a very
christian, a seruante and lover of Christ. And because that we are like him in
the nature of his manhed, we must, according to this example, crucify our
nature in us, because our nature did wyllynglye sin, as he exhorts us in
the holy gospel saying, deny and forsake thy self and take up thy cross
upon thy back and follow me. In this he commands that we should crucifye
our bodily nature and sensualytie with very true virtues. Our soul also we
must confirm and make like unto the most heuye and sorrowful soul of our
lord Jesus, so shall we do, if we sorrow and lamente al way the great
dishonor of god, the loss of souls, and our own sins and the sins of
all men. And look how much we want in this conformytie, and following of
christ's passion in our body and soul, so much more we remain in debte
unto our lord god. Certaynely a faithful lover of Jesus ought to drown (in
manner) and so prynte him self into the life and passion of him yt he should
feale that passion and life more present and more fastened into him self,
then his own pain or cross yt he suferith, yea if he had any specyal pain
or gryef in any member of his body and were sore vexed therewyth, yet should
he feel more the pain and passion of his Lord Jesus, then the sorrow that
payneth him in the member of his own body. Wherefore thou oughtes with great
desire, and devout heart, contynually to pray and intrete thy most gracious
lord Jesus, that he vochsafe to confyrme ye most perfectly unto his mortifyed
holy and crucyfyed humanytye by an ardent, an eleuate and a full resygned
spirit, and by a mortifyed, an heavy, and a compassionate soul, and also by an
aflyctyd, a laborsome, a tormented and a pained body, or at the least thou
shalt pray him to send the some bodily and contynuall pain or grefe to put
the in mind always of his bitter passion, that thou forgette it not, also that
he vochesafe to rest in the and to take pleasure to work in the without any
inpedimente. We ought therefore to exercise our selfs in the most blessid
passion of our lord.vi. manners of ways. First thou shalt exercise thy
self in the passion of Jesus by imitacion or to follow it. Secondly by
compassion or to have co^passio^ therein. Thirdly by admyracion to have wonder.
Fourthly, by joy, or to rejoice therein. Fifthly by resolucio^ or to be resoluid
theri^. Syxtly by devotion to rest therein. First thou ought to have
meditacion in this blessid passion that thou might follow ye same, for it is
the high and most perfectest imytacion that a man can have, this is the high
and most holiest relygion and most relygius perfeccio^. To follow Christ in his
death and passion is the rule and the example of our savior, the rule of our
life in who^ we may have so much the more confort and consolacio^, as we
herein be the more conformable and like our lord Jesus. And let us think our
selfs so much the more desolate, as we find our selfs far from this
example and rule. Let us therefore wyshe and desire as much as lies in us, to
be cast down, to be set at naught, to be scornyd, afflycted scorged of all
persons, and in the service that we do to God, to be rebuked of all men. Let us
be poor and barewyth poor and bare Jesus, let us desire to have nothing. Yea
let it be most payneful pain and unmeasurable sorrow to have any thing, and to
have nothing let it be perfect Joy and gladness, let us abhor al, to taste
sweet and delectable things, and let us rather desire to be refreshed with vile
homely and bitter things, and let us desire, yt al fode or mete may taste to us
rather galle then honey, because yt Jesus drank vinegar and gal. And as I may
say breuely, let us consider how he used him self in his passion, and let us
conform our self for our little power unto him as much as we can, keeping and
obseruyng always ye mean and moderacion that we excede not the measure of our
infyrmytie. Secondly thou must exercise thy self in the blessed passion of thy
Lord Jesus; that thou may take compassyon on him most innocent, co^sideryng
his cruel, scorging, his scorns, his reuyles and rebukes reuoluyng in thy
heart, how greatly our Lord Jesus was dyiectid and co^tempnyd in his most bitter
passion, how great affliccio^ and pain he suffered i^ his heart and body, both
by reason of his own pain and passion, and also by reason of his compassyon
toward us for our sins.

Let us consider with how much bitter sorrow ye very swet angels where
repleanisshed with all, how much greuyd our Lord Jesus, not only the pain laid
upon him, and our vnthankefullnes, but also the sore afflyccyon of his dear
mother, that stood by, whom he louyd most dearly and fre he rredy to swone
for sorrow. Certainly by reason of the excedyng grate and most ardent burning
love that the one bare to the other, they suffered most payneful compassion,
and the affliction of both parts was exceeding great. For the one suffered
for ye other sake. For the mother knew well that her dear son suffered for her
specially as well as for to redeem other. The son also knew full well that
the sword of sorrow of his passion perced the soul and heart of his his
mother. And therefore was the passion of the son, the passion also of the
mother. Goo to the^ good daughter the servant of god and the spowse of christ,
to se and turn these in thy heart with the rebukes and pains of thy lord and
dear spowse, beholding him suffer so great and intolerable pains for thy
sake. If thou weere well and fast knytte unto him in perfect charity, thou
would take excedyng great compassion upon him. If thou feale nothing the
pain of thy head, thou art not a member and one with him. Plainly like as
we should take more compassion and pyty upon the head then on the other
members, even so ought thou in comparably, to take more compassion upon thy
lord Jesus, then thou would or should do, upon either father or mother,
child, kynsman, or most dear friend, yea then upon thine own self, if thou
should suffer all these forsayde pains that thy lord suffered for ye.
Therefore now good daughter let us drink our self drunk with gall, wormwode
and myrre. Let us feale and think on his precius and payneful wounds, let his
rebukes, scourges and wounds pearce through the bottom of our heart, let
there remain nothing in us, that is not all drowned in sorrow and vehemently
afflyctyd and troubled.

Thyrdly thou must behold the passion of our savior Jesus to wonder and with
admyracyon, consyderyng who it is, how much he suffered, and for whom he
suffered. Who suffered? plainly the very son of god most myghtest, most
wysesest, and the very goodness it self. And so good that how much so ever
goodness and nobylite thou ascrybest to him, it is nothing in respect of his
greatness and excellence. All things be they never so good and never so great
and excellent, they are but one ask, yea they are but very vanytie and right
naught, in comparison of him. How great are they that he sufferyth certaynely
travel in a strainge country, banishement, flight hunger, thurst, cold, heat,
temtacions, horyble, fears, persequucyons, wait of his ennymies to be taken,
traytory, spyttynges, reuyles and rekubes, bonds, scorginges, storms,
sorrows, plages and sores, strypes, wounds and death. For the very glory it
self was spyghtfully spit on, right wysenes it self, was condemned. The
Judge of the world was iuged and arayned, he that took wrong was blamed. The
innocente was defamyd, god was blasphemed, christ was trodden under foot, life
it self was slain, the son was derkenyd the moon wexed black, the stars
were, scatered abroad, and al these things did he suffer pacie^tly, as it had been a lamb which with one only beck, was able to have drownid into the bottom
of hell, al these unkind and wicked people that so handled him. But for whom
suffered he? for most vile mancyples, for most sinful ennymyes of his, yea
for very deuilishe persons, and the children (by imitacion) of the devil, for
ye contempners of the majesty of god, and unkind and unthankful servants
to the great goodness of god. Wonder therefore that such and so great a
lord would suffer such and so great pains, for most vile and most abiecte
sinners and wretches. But now of whom suffered he? Of his own chosen, and
specially chose^, unto whom he showed al goodness and bountefulnes, of the most
vylest, the most excellent of the unwise and fools, the most wysest, the
which is the sempyternall word and wisdom of God. The most godlyst, of
most ungodly and wicked. The everlasting bryghtnes of the most filthiest matter
and corrupcion. In all these lift up thy heart and mind, and maruayle at the
infynite goodness and lyberalytie of almighty god, that bought the with so great
a price. Fourthly prynte the passion of thy lord in thy heart to rejoice
thereof, for thou ought to be glad and joy in it with most hearty thanks
geuyng, for the redemcion of the nature of man, for the restoring of angels,
and of the great clemencye and mercy of allmyghty god, And as for the
redemcion of mankind, thou ought to be wonderfully glad accomplyshed by
christ's most bitter passion and precious death. Who is he I pray the, that
would not rejoice and be glad, perceuinge him self delivered, by this most
blessed passion, from everlasting death, from the shame of sin, from the
power of the devil? Who would not immeasurably excedyngly rejoice and beholding
and consydering that the high and most al mighty lord god so well does love him,
that he would submyt and subject him self unto so great vices and affliction
to redeem him, not that he should rejoice at the abiection and passion of our
lord, but of the most gracious affect hereof, and of the tender affection and
love, that he declared in his passion and afflyction, what prince in the
kingdom or empire of an emperor or king, perceuing him self so greatly to be
in favor and love with his lord, that his lord and master would be ready to
suffer death for his sake, would he not very greatly rejoice and be glad in his
whole heart. How much more then ought we most vile wretches, wicked sinners,
and noughty servants, to rejoice and be glad perceauing that the king of al
kings and lord of all lorddes our creator Jesus christ, does love us so
fervently, that he would offer up in sacryfice him self unto most foul and
most vile death. Let us therefore be glad with joy unmeasurable that our lord
Jesus louyth better each one of us, than any man does love him self. Let us
be glad and rejoice, that by the blessed passion of Jesus ye ruin and breche
of the angels is restored. There ought to be in us great Joy and gladness, sith
we se yt by the passion of christ so noble and blessed a colege of the Angels
is repaired, that there might be one fold and one shepehard, and al to be one
in one god. In this ought we and have we good cause both with the heavenly
court and the mylytante church of christ here, to joy and to be glade. O
most amyable, and verily most venerable passion of our savior which
ioynyth to gether things, ye were so far a sonder, and knyttyth together
things so far sequestrated, and most strongly and most fyrmely vnytith and
byndyth them fast together with the bond of most perfect love in the
felycitie of joy sempiternall. But we ought to rejoice and to be glad
specially perceauing in all these foresade things, the high and wonderful
clemencye and mercy of god and of our lord Jesus christ. I think the cheafest
and high glory and joy of the goodness of the good angels is perfectly to
consider the clemency, mercy and benefits of god, and also his unmeasurable
goodness. And this ought to be the syngulare inward joy of him, yt is
contemplatyue, and that in ye very marye of his soul. For where, I pray the,
does more apere ye powryng upon us ye most bontefull mercy, clemencye and
goodness, of ye most swettest and most loving heavenly father and of our lord
Jesus christ the^ in his passion, wherein he suffered such sort and so great, so
foul, so shameful and so grievous pains and turmentes, and al to deliver and
to gloryfie his wicked enmie for ye redempcio^ of a very vanity, worthy of
everlasting death. Let the devout persons enter with al devotion into this
stable and sure joy, yt he may he refresshed with the magnifice^tie of the
goodness of god. Let him approach and ascend vnhye in heart, by contemplacion of
these, and let the most excellent and inenarrable cleme^cye of Jesus be exalted
in his heart. Fyftly you must have medytacion of the most blessed passion of
our sauyoure Jesus to reuolue thy heart and to transform it into him, the
which thou doyst when thou doyst not only follow, and haist compassion, thou
merualyst and reioysest, but thou art wholly converted and turned into thy lord
Jesus christ crucyfied, so that in manner every where and and always the lord
Jesus christ crucyfied metyth with the, yea then art thou verily and trewly
resolved into him, when thou leauyng thy self and going out of thy self and
surmountynge and transsendynge all thing, yea above thy self abstracryd from
all thing, thou art all together turned, into thy lord Jesus crucified, so
that thou can se nothing, you can feale nothing with in thy self, but only
christ crucified, scornid reuyled and put to pain of pure love for ye. Syxtly
you must consider and behold yt most blessed passion of thy lord to come to rest
of inward swetnes, ye which thing you do, when you being resolved (as I said)
do not cesse with a thursty heart or or fervent desire, to reuolue and toss in
thy mind ye most blessed passion And enteryng as far as you art able) into yt
infynite treasure of that blessed passion, mekely and devoutly thou doist melt
for pure and devout love, and with fervent devotion and burninge love thou
falleste from thy self, and doeste rest all together in christ crucified.
But ye more yt thou doste cleue and lean unto him only, so much the more you
fallest and decaiest from thy self and do relent by most devout love: and how
much ye more that thou do decay and leave thy self by love and devotion, so
much the more thou do cleave and art knyt unto thy love yt dyed for the, and
doyst rest in him. And so does the cleauinge unto christ by love and lovely
devotion, increase one ye other until the spouse of christ, that is to say,
thy soul, be all to gether swallowyed up and devoured of that most burning
hoote furnes of love, of the passion of thy spouse most dear beloved, in whose
blessed arms thy soul restyth a sleep, have therefore medytacion of the most
blessed passion of thy lord Jesus in following it, to purge thy mind and heart.
By compassion to get love and union, wonderyng at it, to eleuate and lift up
thy heart rejoicing therein, do delight and conforte thy heart, resolving to come
to parfect conformacion and lykenes: resting therein keep thy devotion.

Aspyracions.
Gracious lord and swet savior which sufferidst most paineful passion for my
love, grant me grace in the merytes of the same passion, most faithfully to
follow it.

Merciful and most petyfull lord Jesus which art full of pytye grant me grace
to take compassion and to lamente thy most Innocente and wrongful death and
most paynefull and gracious passion.

Grant me good lord I humbly beseke the, that I may so ernestly mind thy
bitter passion that I may sorrow it as tenderly as though I suffered it my self.

Oh dear lord and savior prynt thy most bitter death and blessed passion in
my heart yt I may never feale nether any thing dysire save the my loving lord
crucified for me. My most gracious savior Jesus, make my stubburne and sturdy
heart melte and be resolved of very pure and devout love in the meditacion of
thy most precious death and painful passion.

The practice of the syxte exercise.
MOST merciful savior Jesus I wretched siner do knowledge that I am infinitely
bound unto the for the innumerable and most singular benefits which thou
most lovingly and lyberally have bestowyd upon me and al mankind, but
specyaly for the ineffable benefit of my redemcyon by thy most crewel death
and passion from the thraldom of the devil, sin, and hell. And for that thou
have franchessid, and made us the children and heirs of heaven.

For ye which benefyt specially, we remain and are become bond detters unto
the, and though we can never make a just reco^pense for it, yet of thy
gracyus goodness you wylt mercyfully accept that which we are able to make, be
it never so simple. And because that among all that we can do there is
nothing more acceptable to the, than (with thankeful and often medytacyon to
follow thy most blessid life and passion, pryntyng and perfectly expressing it
in the powers of our soul, and in all sensies of our body, therefore I most
humbly beseke the (most gracyus Lord Jesus) grant me the grace, so perfectly
to conform me in my whole life, unto thy blessid life and passion that al my
cogitacio^s, my words, midedes and manners may be so like unto thy holy
thoughts words, deeds, and blessed manners, that where ever I be sean, hard or
felt, there may nothing be found in me, but that, which was found in the my
lord Jesus. And like as thou were crucyfyed in thy blessed humanytie, so grant
me grace (by the merytes of thy crucifyxion) to crucyfie nature, and
sensualytie, by the acquyringe of al true virtue.

Grant me grace also to consider and to conform my soul unto thy most heavy
and sorrowful soul, that I may continually lament thy great dishonor the loss
of souls and my sins, and the sins of all men. Good lord grant me grace
so depely to print in my heart, thy bitter and paineful passion very love, that
I may feale more the pain that thou suffered for me, then any pain yt I have,
or should have, if I where wou^did in mine own body.

Grant me good Lord Jesus yt my spirit may ever burn in thy love, be eleuat,
and mind ever more the, utterly resignid into thy blessid pleasure.

Grant that my soul also may be contryte, compassyonate with the and
mortified unto al creatures.

Grant that my body also to be full of travel pain and afflyccyon, for thy
honor and thus I may be conformable and like unto thy blessid humanyte.

Grant me (most loving Lord Jesus) thy grace to exercise most effectuusly
thy holy and most blessid passion by perfect ymitacion, by perfect
compassion, by perfect admyracyon, by exultacyon and joy, by perfect resolucion
and by perfect rest

Grant me grace with often memory of thy blessid life and passion, to follow
thy blessid example in such virtues as aperith in thy holy passion and life.
For thy blessid passion and life is the most holiest and highest relygion and
the rule and example of al virtue and perfectyon.

Grant therefore (most merciful Lord Jesus) that thy passion may be the very
rule of al my life.

Grant me grace that I may wyshe and desire from the bottom of my heart with
al delyght of my soul, for thy love to be contempned, set at nowght, to be an
outcaste, to be scornyd, to be afflictid, beaten and to be rebukyd of al
parsones when I do the most service, for so were thou handlyd when thou dydest
most good and greateste miracles.

Grant me grace (most gracius savior) that I may be so bare and pore in
spryte that I may wyshe or desire nothing but rather I may think it a greuus
pain and unmeasurable sorrow to have any thing, and that it may be my singular
pleasur and joy to have nothing and to want my necessaryes for thy sake.

Grant me grace good Lord to abhore al delyght and pleasure and swettnes in all
thing, save in the only that I may desire in all thing rudenes homlines, and
bitterness, and in meat and drink I may desire yt thing should rather be bitter
then sweet, remembering you my dear redemer drankyst (for my sake) sour vyneger
and gall. And generally in all labor travel and sorrow, shame, pain and
greafe, grant me grace to conform my self in all thing to thy blessed
example with discreacyon as my wretchid nature is able to suffer to thy honor
and glory.

Gracyus good Lord Jesus grant me thy special grace that I may often time have
swet meditacion of thy bitter passion with most true and earnest compassion and
sorrow for the pure love of the, when I consider what great pain, sorrow and
afflyccyon thou did suffer for my sins, what deadly and payneful agony and
sorrowful heaviness thou sufferedst in thy most loving sweet and tender heart,
when thou swettist both water and blood, and thou weptest upon the cross for
our sin and unkindness. And that I may sorrow the great dishonor of thy
blessed celestyal father and namely for the intolerable pain and turmentes
that thou were in, but in special that thou tokest for thy sorrowful and most
lamentable mother (whom thou louydst most tenderly, when thou dydyst behold her
ready to die for very sorrow and heaviness. For thy passion was a passion most
paynful unto thy most blessid and tender mother, more greuus and more bitter
then ever was turme^t or martyrdom to any saint yt ever sufferid for the.
Grant me most swet Jesus often time to reuolue in my heart, these two sorrowful and
painful passions of the and of thy mother and to lament, morn, and sorrow in
my heart with, the my most loving Lord Jesus and with that blessed maid thy
sweet mother. Make me one, good Lord, with yt, by most intyre love that I may
sorrow and lament as much, yea and more, thy pains then if I suffered them my
self.

Good lord never let thy rebuke, shame, and reuilinges depart out of my mind
nor out of the very bottom of my heart, nor thy bitter scorgyngs thy, thorns
thy wou^des, and precious death never be out of my mind, that what so ever is
in me may be full of thy pains and passion, that I may continually sorrow
therefore to thy honor and my soul health. Gracius good lord and dear savior
Jesus grant me grace to mind often time thy bitter pain and passion with most
reverent and lovely admiracion depely and amyably to consider. First what you
art that suffredst so lovingly and kyndly for me, that I may reverently see and
parceaue, yt it was no small personage, yt was so crewelly put to death for my
sake, but it was the very son of al mighty god the second parsone in trinity
very god and man, most myghtest, most excellent, infinitely good, most
noblest, in comparyson of whom, all the goodness, all excellency, al wisdom al
nobility that is in all creatures, or can be thought of al understanding or
wit, is nothing. For this mighty majesty, and most unmeasurable excellency
incomparably transendyth and surmou^teth al things in heaven or earth. Grant
me grace also good Lord, to consider how grievous and cruel pains so noble and
excellent majesty sufferid for me, how great travel, and labor, how great
hunger, and thurst, cold, heat, watch, temptacions, fear, parsecucyon,
agony, bloody sweet, most crewel comprehe^sion, spyttinges, reuiles, sore
bonds, scorginges, mockes, scorns, sorrow, shame, co^fusyons beatynges,
grievous strokes, innumerable plages and wounds and most crewel and payneful
death. For in thy passion, very honor and glory it self, was dispisid and
dishonored, rightousnes was condemned the judge of all the world was iuged, the
harmeles was rebuked and accusyd, and the innocent was defamyd, god him self
was blasphemyd, god and man over trodden, life it self was slain, the sun was
eclipsid, the moon was darkenid, the stars were sparkelyd. Yet al those
pains, and passion did thou (most innocente lamb) suffer and bare most
patiently for mi sake, which were able and could, if it had pleasid the have
drownyd in the botomeles pyt of hell al those unkind and cruel creaturs and
wicked people

Grant me grace to consider of whom (my gracyus good Lord Jesus) you
sufferedist so cruelly. For if thou had suffered of them whom you had
harmyd or hatyd, it had not been so wonderful. But thou sufferedest of the^,
whom thou didist specially chose, and syngularly louyd, unto whom thou
shewedst special goodness and all kind of benignity. And for thy great
goodness and benyfittes, for thy great virtues and miracles, for thy most holy
conuersacyon and doctrine, thou were cruelly tormented and put to death, of
most vylaines, being most excellent and valyant prince. The most wisest (ye
the eternal wisdom of the father) of most ignorant. Most holiest of most
sinful. Most godlyest, of most vngodlyest. Most righteus, of most wicked. The
everlasting and eternal brightness of god, of the most and foul and filthy
dross and durte of the world. The Lord of his own servants. The king of
his own subjects. The savior and benefactoure of them that he has saved
and done most for. God almighty of his unkind and wretched creature. It may
make me (most gracious lord) Jesus more to wonder and meruell, when I consider
and way deapelye with my self, for whom you sufferedst. For (most loving
lord) and merciful savior thou suffredst for most vile slaves, most sinful
enymies, most wretchyd caytifes, ye very deuelles and dyabolycall persons, and
the very children of the devil by imytacion, for the contemners and dyspycers
of ye majesty of god, and most unkind and unthankful to the infinite goodness
of their lord and maker: of the which number (oh merciful savior Jesus) I am
one. I have great cause therefore, with lovely admyracion to laud and praise
thy merciful goodness toward me and al mankind and with most lowly thanks to
joy in thy most blessed mercy.

Grant me therefore, most gracious Jesus, to have often in the meditacio^ of thy
passion gostly joy and gladness with thanks geuyng unto the, for the
redemption of man kind for the restoryng of the quieres of angels, and for thy
dyuine clemencye and godly mercy.

Grant me grace most merciful Jesus with gostly gladness to remember how
merciful, how louyngly thou have redeemed al mankind and specially me, by thy
most blessed passion and death, remembryng how willingly, how gladly, how
devoutly thou offredst thy self to most cruel death for my sake. There is no
creature that ever louyd him self so well as thou dydest, and do love me.

Great cause have I to rejoice in ye (sweet Jesus) For by thy death and passion
you haste restored again the blessed and gloryus quieers of angels, not
creatyng new angels, but mercyfully placing penytent souls in the high orders
of the blessed angels, and so hayst made by thy most precious death one high
and heavenly colege, and one blessed flock of angels and men. Whereof thou
art the very true shepeherd. Thou art ye glorius and most royal king, upon
who^ al we that be of that blessed and heavenly court shall perpetually wait
and serve in joy everlasting thorough the merits of thy precious death and
most blessed passion.

Grant me grace, most gracious savior Jesus, not only faithfully to follow
thy passion, to have compassion thereof reuere^tly, to marvel, and to rejoice
goostly therein, but also that I al together, may be resolved into the, that I
may always and whereuer I be so earnestly mind thy passion yt I may depart
from the memory of mine own self, and of all things yea, abstracted from all the world, I may be wholly turned into the my lord Jesus crucyfied. And that of
very mindful love of thy blessed passion I may feale nothing within my self,
nor se nothing outwardly but the my lord in pain and passion for me.

Grant me grace, most gracious lord Jesus, with most vehemente desire of my
heart to enter into the ineffable treasure of thy blessed passion. And therein
most mekely, most devoutly, with most feruente and burning love, forgetting
utterly my self, to rest, by inward swetnes. That the more I love that tender
death and pain, the more perfectly I may rest therein, and ye more that I rest
therein ye more I may love the, which suffered so great pain for me, to the be
therefore al glory and honor now and ever. Amen.

The seventh exercise to come to the pure poverty and love of thine even
christen.
THou must circumcyse and purge thy soul very ernestly from all knowledge,
love, and remembrance of all creatures except them only whom thou must
neades have and use in god and for god, and keep thy sensies and wits at all
times streghtly from all superfluity vanytie and ydelnes. And keep also thy
body always in simple homlynes in sobryetie and pouertye. And cast from the
ac ons all things that might let the or be any impedyment at any time between
thy soul and god, yea if it were but a momente of time. And that thou myghtest
fulfill this ye better, thou shall mark well and dylygently all the means and
lettes vysyble and inuisyble, al creatures sensible and insensyble, that ever
did let the, or were any impedymente or means between the and god, or yet may
be hereafter. And turn thy whole heart, verily and perfectly from the^ and so
cut them of from thy soul and turn thy whole heart to god. Thou shall also
consider wether thou be in such place and state wherein thou maiste come to
perfeccyon, if thou be not thou must then seek such a place and state. Al
exteryal and outward things must be cut of and resigned, which thou use
above and more then very and just necessity, with the which bare necessitye only
for the love of the poverty of christ thou must be contented. That is to say,
with two cotes or habytes to change and in like sort of other necessary
apparel, with a few books, with one or two sober meals in the day according
to the time, chosinge always in all things, the vyler or more homlier, that
meke symplycitie may every where shine and apere in the and in thy desires. For
outward poverty wyshed for and desired in heart, does help wonderly much to
come to the very profit and peace of ye heart. And specially when thou art
very well content to lack thy necessaries, or when necessite compellyth, you
do use necessaries in symplycite, and with tedyousnes and yerkeso^nes.
Moreover a great forderaunce to perfection are these things. To forsake
utterly al exquisite delectacion and wilful fansy to any thing, and to love
poverty. If it seem expedient for the person, it is good also to make a vow to
fly the vnnecessarye company of all creatures. A strong and steadfast cleauyng
unto god. Simple and pure obedyence, a word both to god and to thy superiors.
A dylygent keeping of thy heart mouth, and of al thy deeds, and such other. These
thou must exercise, follow and take as the very oportune and conuenyent means
to perfection. Thou must also exchew and a void all impedymentes, as thy
conscience or thy cou^seller shall teach ye. Thou must therefore make a diligent
search of thy conscience, least any vice or fault be it never so little, do
stick or cleave inwardly or outwardly fast unto the. Look there do remain not
with the, curious superflus, or any vnnecessarye thing. For so long as it is
so with the, the holy gooste can never work perfectly in thee. For the great
sins, in to the which we fall unawares or of frayltie, and bewail them, god
forgeuyth them sooner, then the least faut that does clean and remain in
us, specially when we will not acknowledge, or will not or care not to amend it.

Thou shall, after these, exercise thy self in very true love of al men,
according to the example and the charytie of thy sauyor Jesus Christ, which
with most burninge love and desire, spent or bestowid him self al together,
for all men, he also taught and shewid the way of salvation and of perfeccyon
with most holy godly doctrine, he gave him self also most wyllyngly and
louinglye unto al pain, contumely and confusyon, that might chance unto him,
for their salvation. Wherefore, if thou will take upon the his life unfeignedly,
thou must follow him in this point of love. Thou must also lead always an holy
and a godlyke life before al men, that by thy life they may be drawn and
prouokyd to follow the life of Jesus Christ thy Lord. Thou shall teach with some
good exhortacyon, thine even christen, if it may stand with thy state and
vocayon, at time conuenyent, the way to everlasting life. Wherefore when thou
co^mest to thy even christen, you shalt leave vain talk, except thou have any
necessite or necessary matter, and shalt talk with him of virtue and of grace
and such things, whereby he may be ye better, exhortyng him to the love of god,
and to follow the holy life and love of Jesus christ, and that he will consider
the nobility and worthynes of his soul, how in his soul god prynted his
own image and lykenes, and has redeemed the same his own self, and how the
love of god is the very life of the soul, even as the soul is the life of the
body, and as the body dies when the soul departs from the body, even so
does the soul dye, when the love of god is absent and gone from it. These with
such like as the holy ghost shall teach the you shall put thy even chryste^ in
mind of, if it may stand with thy state and calling, specially such as thou have
charge of thy next neighbors or such yt will and be able to take thine
instruction and exortacio^, persuading thy self yt god will require at thy
hand, the souls of them whom thou art able and canste save, as though they
were thy own members. Therefore you shall not Judge nor conempnt any man. Thou
shalt not make sorry nor harm any man, but love every man as thy self, yea
more in manner then thy self because he is better then thou art. The which
thing that thou may the sooner optaine persuade to thy self, that every man
is thy self. For in deed, we be one ye member of the other, as saint paul
says, and therefore thou shalt, be glad with, and and of every man, be sorry
with and for every man, serve and do good to every man that needs. Do the
works of mercy bodily and gostly unto every man, that needs with all thy
heart as unto thy self. Wherefore accostome thy self, that as soon as you
perceauyst any mocyon of dyspleasure or anger against any other man, what ever
he be, or that any other vice chance to come upon the, or into thy mind,
lifting up thy heart swetly unto god, to put it away as the poison of the devil
wherewyth he goes about to kill or to mynishe thy charytye in the, or to make
the lumpish and unlusty, and so to stay the from profiting in gostly life. For
sometime it comyth of our own tepyditie or coldness, that noughty and harmefull
cogytacions, put once from us do return again, and are a great inpedymente
and let unto goostly lucre or gain, yea though we consent not to them,
specially, when we do not extend and stretch forth our self, with all our
powers and myghtes, to things before us, that is to say, to go forward and
increase in virtue and perfection, nether with heavenly and godly desires
continually, as much as we can to ocupie our hearts, therefore ye enmyes of our
soul, by our slacknes and tepidite, find easily a way to return again unto
us, al though some time such cogitacio^s do trouble and weary us not by our
fault but by ye only permyssio^ of god for our exercise.

Aspyracions for this exercise.
MOST loving and most gracious lord Jesus, which being most rychest for my
sake tokest upon the most extreme poverty grant me the grace of perfect
poverty of spyrite.

Oh most swetest Jesus rauysh my whole heart and love upon the which art only
sufficient for the true lovers of the, take from me the love and affectyon of
all creatures that I love the only and purely.

Oh blessed savior which art the only and full reward yt al thy lovers ask,
seake and look for content my heart and my whole desire with the alone, and make
me for thy sake to contempne al other things.

The practice of ye seventh exercise to come to pure pouerte and the love of
thy eue^ christian
O Most blessid Jesus which for mi sake and salvation forsokiste all worldly
love and pleasure, and honor, and lyuidst and dyedst in most perfect poverty.

Grant me grace to purge and cleanse my affection and soul, not only from al
temporal things, but also from the knowledge the love, and remembrance of al
creatures saving only them whom I can not lack, which I must neades use for
thy sake and in the only. For (most mercyful Jesus) when I should lift up my
whoole soul, thought, and desire to the, then does the knowledge or
remembrance or the love of creatures pulle down my desire and love of my heart
and mind unto ye memory desire and love of the^. Grant me (gracyus good
Lord) also grace now and for ever more, to leave utterly the affection and will
unto any venyal sin, be it never so little which I would not gladly amend,
that I may turn my whoole heart from al syn, for (Lord Jesus) thy mercyful
goodness soon forgeuythe venyal syn. Yet sooner thou doyst forgive a mortal
sin that sodeynlye and of frayltye we do commit, and do faithfully repent and
forsake, then a venyal, that we wyllyngly do not utterly abhor and forsake in
our desire. And such small sins and fawtes (if they be not put away by
repentance) do let the holy ghost to work in me. In like sort if I retain any
thing superfluus or for curiosity, thy holy spirit can not work thy true
perfect love in me. Grant therefore grace (gracyus Lord) to me now at this
present and ever more to cast out of my heart al love and desire of al temporal
things what ever they be, that be above bare necessytie. And in my
necessaryes, to chose al way pore symplycytie and the more rude and homely, as
becommyth true and unfeigned poverty. And also in the vsyng of my very
necessaries suffer me not to have any affeccion in the^ but I may redely by
contentyd (for thy sake) to lack them, and ever more symply and without al
affection and pleasure, to use them.

Grant me grace (mercyful Jesus) at all times most straygthtly to keep my
sensies inward and outward, from al superfluytie and unnecessary use, from all
vanytie and ydelnes and to keep also my body in homlye symplycytie, in all
sobryetie, and all poverty, that nether the desire, love, affection, or
memory of any thing that longyth to my body, may at any time let my whole
heart, desire, love, and thought, to tend and turn unto the, the most loving
and blessed delyght of my soul.

Grant me (most gracius savior Christ) grace not only, from the botom of my
heart to abhor and detest al syn and vice but al so to desire and to be so
enamoryd with the love of al virtue (be they never so excellent and many) that
for thy love and honor I would labor and travel for to have them al, yea if
they were as many in number as are dropes of water in the main sea, that I
might (for the vehement love of the) crucyfie my body from vice, and adorn my
soul wythal virtue, and so to become like unto thy most gracyus humanytie,
whose body was paynefully crucyfied, and soul adornyd with al virtue. But
specially grant me grace to have most ardent desire of perfect and profunde
humylitie, and grace most earnestly to labor for yt, ever more desyryng to be
contempnyd, despised, rebuked and shamed with confusyon, and from my heart to
judge my self very worthy of al contempt, shame, rebuke and confusion Make me
sorry (good Lord) wha^ any honor benyfite, laud, or praise be given to me.
Grant me also (merciful Jesus) the three daughters of perfect mekenes. Most
ready obedyens, both unto my superiors and unto al creatures in all things
lawful. Most perfect pacyence that I may most quietli and with rest of mind
suffer al things, that thy blessid will shall suffer to come upon me be they
never so paynful and hard, remembrynge how patiently thou sufferedest for me.
Most discreat silence, that though I were never so wise and well learned, yet I
may speak very few words, and those only profitable and necessary. A very
meke parson (sweet savior) spekyth few words, redely obeith, and sufferith al
thing for thy love and pleasure. Most gracius Jesus grant me grace most
earnestly to desire and labor for ye virtue of wisdom, which may teach and
govern me in all my thoughts, words and deeds that I have to think, to
speak, or to do, that I may do nothing (be it never so little) no, not the
wagginge of my finger but only as reason and wisdom shall lead to thy honor
for necessite, and soul health of mine even Christen.

Grant me also (good Lord) to attain godly fear, descrecion, and simplicite,
which are the daughters of thy godly wisdom. For where soever is this
wisdom, there must be the fear of thee (Lord) for the beginning of wysedom
is to fear al mighty god. Dyscrecio^ puttith a mean in all thing without the
which, there is no virtue. For either we shall do to much or to little. Holy
simplicity, takith no care, for no curiosytie in things. It takyth al things
as at the hands of god, and in good part and thinkith it good enough, be it
never so homly, or rude, so it will serve bare need. Mercyful Lord, to have
wisdom and virtue with out thy fear is occasion of pride, and with out
simplicity it would be to curyus, without dyscresion, it would be to strayte
and hard. Grant me therefore (good Lord) the grace to be godly wise, lovely
fearful, simple with discrecion. Most loving savior Jesus grant me most
ardent desire of true and burning charytie and most infatygably to seek and
syghe, unto the most devoutly for to obtain it. For this virtue (Lord, is so
necessary for me, that al other virtues are nothing worth without I have
perfect charity. This most perfect virtue workith in us lively faith, and
strong believe, it bryngyth hope and turste in the. For look how great our
charytie is, so great is our trust and hope in the. Yea, if charity be great
it begettyth in us perseueraunce. For love will not suffer us unkindly to lead
and for sake our lover, nor to leave undone that we begone of love. This
charytie makes us to abide in great confydence and hope of the mercy of god,
and not to trust in our own power. And therefore (good lord) what so ever
charytie askyth (which ca^ ask no evil) with full confydence and believe in
thy mercy, it optaynyth easily.

Grant me, most gracyus Jesus, to desire thy love most heartily, to believe in
the most constantly, to trust in the most vndoutydly, and to persevere in thy
love most faithfully unto the end. Most merciful sauyoure Jesus grant me
most feruente desire of true Justice, very ryghtwysenes in all my deeds. First
that I may give unto the, in all my words deeds and thoughts al honor,
glory, al obedience and thanks. Likewise that I may give unto my superyours,
to my equales, and to my inferiors, and to every creature that which to every
man belongyth. And also that I may give that which belongs unto my body, as
in meat, drink, cloth, sleep, and in other necessaryes, nether more, nether
less then my dew is to give. This ryghtewysenes is a blessed and perfect
vertewe and brings forth three other virtues, mercy verytie, and
thankefullnes. The which I humbly beseke the (most merciful Jesus) grant me
grace to desire and to labor dylygently for true mercy. For very true
mercy takes first pytye upon the soul of our even christen, and if he need
any gostly alms, he gives that first, if he be able and then the temporal
alms. Verytie sufferith no falshed, nether in deed, nether dyssymulacyon in
word, nor yet ypocrysie nor any vntreuth, be it never so profitable or never
so little. For it is unmeet that the servant of god (who is verytie it self)
should show any vntreuth in word or deed. Tha^kefulnes think it right and
reason, that every man do render thanks for the benefits which he has
received, specially unto god the geuer of al gifts and graces, and to all
such that has, or does help to further them in their soul health, and all
that maynteyneth them in there bodyly necessytes. These virtues grant me (most
merciful Jesus) that by ryghtwysenes I may do my deuty to the, my lord god,
and to my eue^ christen, specially in deeds of mercy gostly and bodily to my
power. By verity I may exchew al dyssymylacyon, ypocrysy, and al vntrewth. And
thankefully I may ever more render unto the al laud, praise and thanks, for
thy innumerable benyfites.

And unto such as helpethe me goostlye or bodily, I may dewly give them
thanks and pray for them. Most myghtyful maker Jesus grant me grace most
affectuusly to desire and optaine, the holy virtue of fortytude and goostly
strength, that thereby I may myghtyly and strongly exercise and practyse al
virtue, and do al kind of good works and manfully resyst al trouble and
temtacyon both goostly and bodyly, that I never care for, nether the world,
man, nether the devil, but with goostly boldness myghtyly pass through all
worldly things as though I had nothing to do with them, contempne and bare
patiently al adversity, and temtacion, and go through, and increasyng in all
perfeccyo^ for thy love and honor, that no trouble nor temptacion never let
me or overthrow me in ye way toward thy perfect love and true service that I
never fear to pass through fire and water to come unto the.

Grant me also good lord Jesus, pure chastytie, mean and sobryetie, and
perfect poverty which spryngeth out of this fortytude.

Goostly fortytude thinks it a great vylany and shame to be overthrown,
ru^^d or mastered of the vile flesh, the peuish pleasure and filthy lusts
there of: and therefore strongely resystynge them, it kepethe him chayste and
pure in soul and body. Gostly strength will not be in bondage unto the vile
belly, nether unto the sinful body. But like the valyante soldier of
christ can be contented to fare hard and to ware vile and homly garments, and
has al his mind to do his dewty unto his great captain and lord christ, to
follow him. And therefore he co^temnyth al beastly lust of the flesh, al
unreasonable pampering of his bealy, and the superfluus and vnnedeful deckyng
of his wretchyd carkas, and when any such temtacyons or lusts do arise in
him, he manfully and myghtyly resystyth, and labouryth to mortify them
utterly. Wherefore most mercyful Jesus grant me this so necessary a virtue,
which am assaultid with diverse and many kinds of temtacyons whom, without thy
special gift of this gostly fortytude, I am not able to wtstande, but shall
fall at every blast of small temtacyon. Help me therefore good Lord with
goostly fortytude, that I may myghtely by thy grace (good Lord) pass and
run throw all perels, impedymentes, and al enmyes gostly and bodily, and
attain the perfect love of the in true perfection. Assyste me with thy grace
and thy gostly strenght (o gracious Jesus) now and ever to thy glory and
honor. Amen. Of the way to come to union with god.

The eight exercise is an exercise to come to a life without any creature, syn,
or delectacio^.
THou shalt exercise thy self to obtain the perfect onynge or union with
god.

This union requires a perfect expoliacion and denudacio^ or bare nakedness, or
utter forsakyng of all creatures, of al sin, and of all delyght or pleasure.
First you must deligently and busely labor to live, as much as is possible for
the, naked and bare, both in affection and also in understanding or mind, from
al creatures, so that thou should feruentlye desire to be made naked and
bare, yea from thine own self, and from all other things. And so to remain,
as thou shalt stand bare before the judgment seat of christ and as bare and
as barely as thy soul came out, by creacyon, from god, that thus thou may
without any let or mean be knyte unto god.

Thou must live also without sin, and because that is scante possible, thou
shalt desire to live with a strong and a steadfast turnynge of thy mind from
al sin and with a fervent conversation and desire of thy heart of al goodness,
which is god. For all sin, be it never so small, lettyth this union or knote.
Wherefore thou shall so observe and keep thy soul and body yt thou shall not
move nor sterre one member, but only in god.

Thou must needs live also without all delight and pleasure. This thing because
it is almost impossible, thou shall supply it in all affection and desire, where
thou can not live so in deed. For when thou have any delyght or pleasure in
thy self, god will deny the, the delyght and swetnes which is in him. Wherefore
such life let it always at ye least be in the desire of thy heart, and bestow
the uttermost of thy power upon this way. And then, by this exercise, thou
shalt find thy self stayed and lettyd in many things, whereof thou thoughtest
thy self clean rid. Wherefore endeuer thy self to be well ware that no sin be
it never so little, do plese ye for it self. As for thy self thou shalt desire
that the bread that thou eatest might sauoure or tayst no more to the then a
stone, yet for his honor and glory that created bread, it shall please the
that the bread sauoure well. But as soon as thou do trust and feale
delectacio^ therein thou shall turn thy heart unto the laud and thanks of god
the creator of bread, and so is then the bread, unsavory unto the. And in
like sort must thou do in all delectacion, unto who^ is not annexed any sin.
For the admyrable suauitie delyght and swetnes of the creatoure of all things,
does sprede it self in all things created, being not sinful.

Thou shall not suffer therefore any mean or let of creatures to remain in ye,
but turned out and made bare and naked of al things, thou shalt approach unto
the bare and pure godhed or divinity without any mean or stay of creature,
for god desires to have the without any mean. Nether shall thou think that
hereby the holy inuocacion and prayers to the saints are taken from the or
should let the, which is for god and in god, for they are one spirit with him.
Not wythstanding thy chief contemplacion and labor shall be in the
contemplacion of thy lord god, whom thou shalt perceive workyng and doing all
goodness and good works, be they never so little, in all men, yea and it be but
the moving of thy finger unto a good deed. For that mocion is of god and
gods, for he is the life of ye soul. Wherefore labor and indeuer thy self
with continual in turnyng (as much as thou can) do live in the very and
perfect abstraction or departure and barenes of thy mind and affection from
all creatures, from sin, and al delectacion. For these three (faithfully and
long used and exercised) makes a man very heauenlyke and angelycal that he may
most frealy have the fruycion of thy lord god as only experience shall teach.
And therefore labor to purifye evermore, more and more, both thy mind and also
thine affection from al phanthasies and imaginations, by ye example of Jesus
crucified, choysinge always rather the bitter and unpleasant, then the swet and
pleasant, rebuke rather then honor, want rather then plentye. That thus
cleuyng with a pure and clean heart unto god, thou may be come one spirit
with him. Yet shall ye superior use this exercise other wise then ye subject.
The innocent, otherwise then the wicked, otherwise the begynners, and otherwise
the perfect. That thou may the sooner obtain and come unto the abnegacio^
and forsakyng of all things, to the knowledge of the deuyne goodness, and of
thine own vylytie and unworthiness, and also that thou may come to the
swetnes of brotherly love, and that within short time, the which thing, the
proprietoris or such that retain in there keeping and affection any thing
against the profession of poverty, for such be called propryetories can not
come to in many years, yea not al their life time with great labors can never
obtain reuolue and toss in thy mind and memory without ceasing and with
great labor or at the least carry about in thy desire intencyon and will,
these two most noble and excellent virtues that is to say, humylitie and
charity, very long and often chawing or remembering and printing into thy heart
these words, I am naught, I ca^ do naught I know naught, I have naught, I
desire or couyt naught but one. True mekenes says, I am naught of my self
but viciousnes, nor I can do naught of mine own might but syn, I have naught.
For whatsoever I have or can have of the creatures in this world, or of the
gifts of god with out god, what soever I see, I hear, or perceive, it is
utterly nothing in me. Weak I am without might, ignorant I am with out
knowledge or wit. I am naught, I am nothing, nor nothing am I able to do, full of
sin and misery am I and therefore I do utterly dyspayre of my self, my
confyde^ce is only the mercy of my lord Jesus. Now charity and love says, I
couyte, I seek, I desire nothing, but only my lord god, put thy trust and
confydence (oh my soul) in Jesus christ and his goodness, fyxe thy thought and
desire in the consideracion of him, for look how much less thou think thy
self, so much the more thou wylt covet to have the love of thy lord Jesus
christ.

Thou shalt understand that there are two kinds of humylytie. The one is
that aryseth of the true acknowledge of thy sins and thine own vileness, by
the judgment of reason. And this humility thou ought to exercise toward
thine even christen, In comparison of whom, thou ought to bring thy self
to naught in thine own estymacion, and to esteem thy self, more vile then
any other, and inferioure to al men, and that from the botome of thy heart. And
thou shall therefore ask mercy of thy lord god, that is present with the, both
for thine own sins and al others, and shall excuse them in thine own
conscience and Judgment, beleauing that there are no sinners so far gonne from
god, but that they may and do often times, though not always, turn them selfs
unto god and do love and honor him with a more synceare affection, and more
faithfully they do sorrow their sins and do purpose to amend the^ selfs
according to the grace given to the^ of god then thou. Thou shalt believe yt
there can not be found any man, which if he had committed so many and so great
sins as thou, and had received so many graces and gifts of god as you, but he
would serve god more fervently then thou do, if thou can not persuade this
and beleaue this with al thy heart thou shall, for this same cause repute thy
self most proud wretch that lives, and more vile then any man that lives.
For this thy ipocrisy and pride in excusable most odyous to god, has verylye
blyndyd the that thou can not know thy self, nor se how that, the mo
benefits and graces thou have receauid of god, the more greuus and greater are
thy sins and neglygences, and therefore there shall be required of the a more
strayghter rekeninge for every one of the^. And this mekenes, as I have said,
love, does work by reason whereby a man estemyth him self vyler then any other
creature, and most worthy of all turment and contumely, of all rebuke and
pain. And this is the mekenes of such that are begynners and profyters and
must go before, and that after it may be confirmed with this mekenes that
follows.

The other mekenes, is, the mekenes of the perfect and the mekenes which love
alone by her self does work, whom the soul fealeth in her self by goostly
syghte and knowledge of Jesus. For whom the holy ghost does lyghten the reason in
the sight of Jesus Christ, to consider clearly the holy humylytie, and charity
of his blessed manhed and to tayst both of them by ye goodness of his divinity,
and by and by the soul perceauyth so great love and joy, in that sight (the
which is very true holy and delectable) that it for gettith her self, and al
things else, and leanith and cleuith holy to her most swettest spowse and
Lord Jesus Christ, by reason yt she is carried or borne, with all her whole love,
to consider and to behold him. She for that time, considerith not her sins
done in times past, nor her unworthiness, but estemyth her self with all her
sins and good works that ever she did as right naught, and nothing, as
though there were nothing in all the world but only her Lord Jesus Christ. Labor
therefore dylygently by the consyderacyon of the mekenes and charytie of Jesus
to judge thy self with full believe either else fealyng thy self, not only to be
most wretch in the world, but also as very right naught. And labor to bring to
naught in thine own estymacyon and judgment thy self with all thy exercise and
good works done in time paste, and to make thy self nakyd from al things.
Thus in the poverty of spirit love to feale thy self to be naught or
nothing, that thou may ascrybe al thy goodness only unto thy Lord Jesus Christ,
that thy substance (as the prophet says) may be as a thing of naught before
him not, estemyng thy self here after to be any thing sith thou art nothing.
For without doubt in comparyson of the increate and unchangeable godly
substance of thy Lord Jesus which only has very essence or being, and is al
things in all thing, thou and al things else, are nothing. For all people and
nations in ye world, they are before him, as though they were not at al. And
thus shall thou not judge thy eue^ christen nether good nether bad but thou
shalt perceive the^ al equally with all other creatures to be nothing as you
art in regard of thy Lord Jesus, and in respect of his mekenes love, mercy and
glory. For as much as they are made of naught and should comme to naught, if
they were not kept and conseruyd by him. Therefore when love, by the gift of ye
holy ghost openith the inner eye to se and perceive this verytie with the other
cyrcumstances, the soul is made verily meek, for then she seyth her self
even as she is indede. And then she considers not her self, nor does not
trust or lean to her self, but she tendith and bendyth her self al together
in to the knowledge and love of Jesus with stable medytacion and desire beholding
him continually. And then does she work more perfectly great works both
inward and outward, then she was wont before. This sight of Jesus, comforts
and liftith up the soul so meruelously and swetli that she can not joy or be
glad of any joy or comfort of his world, nether can she be heavy or sorry for
any adversity of the same. For she remaynith immovable and insensible unto al
such worldly things, couiting to rest in Jesus only, having ever her eyes on
him, for he pullith out her feate from out of all the grynnes of sin and of
temtacio^s, and distraineth in her al ye sterings and mocions of pride and all
vices wonderful secreatlye, defendinge her from the mighty fear, from the
arowe or dart that flies in the day, from the trouble that walkyth or commyth
in the darkness, from incursyon or inuadyng, and from the mydday find, and
leadyth her by holy simplycytie (which is a secret by pathe) unto a stable
and a sure union with her self whereby she shall remain and dwell in god and god
in her How thou should labor contynually, couyting but only one which is
only necessary, to come to this blessid vnyo^ by ardent or fyerie aspyracyons
with most deape resignacyon of thy self it shall be declared here after.

Aspyracyons for this exercise.
Most merciful savior, for thy great poverty, that you suffredst here for
me being most rychest, grant me perfect barenes and poverty in all creatures,
in my affection and memory.

Swet sauyor Jesus, which were borne of immaculate maid and without syn to dye
and redeem me from sin, deliver me from the affection unto any syn be it
never so smally.

Most sweet sauoyour Jesus the delighte of my soul, take from me the delyght
of al creatures.

Oh most gracyus Jesus lyghten the inward eye of my soul that I may verily se
and know my vyletie and that I am naught and nothing of my self.

Most blessed Jesus which art al only enough for my soul, make me to forget
al creatures, and to know, love and se ye only. The practice of the eight
exercise to come to a life without any creature, delectacion or sin.

O Most blessid god, mi most swetest fauyoure Jesus son sempiternall of the
heavenly father, one god, one substance, one blessed essence with the same father
and holy ghost, which by thy most holy Incarnacion, tokest our frail nature
upon the in one personage of god and man that thou myghtest bring us the
blessed union in thy glorious godhed here by grace, in heaven by glory and
bliss. And among al thy most fervent affectuous prayers, that thou made for
thy blessed appostels and for all thy elect, the night that you were betrayed,
thou most heartily, most deuoutely, most fervently desyredst of thy celestyall
father, that they all might be one, as thou and thy father are one. I most
humbly and most heartily beseke the, my most dear savior Jesus, grant me
grace to come to the perfect oning and union with the my lord god, the which
union requires most perfect barenes and forsakyngein my soul, of all manner of
sin of all delyght and of al creatures. And unto this blessed and necessary
barenes I can not come without thy singular grace and special healpe. For the
pureness in the soul from the three, making a man very goostly, heavenly and
angelical and is the syngulare and only gift of the. Wherefore of that infynyte
and mercyful charyti, that caused the to hang al nakid, bare^ and bare of al
comfort, and consolacion, upon ye cross for me, grant me grace to live (as
nyghe as it is possible) without al syn mortal and venyal that I may strongely
withal might turn my heart and set all my mind upon the goodness and the
vehement desire of the. For the lest venyal that is does let that my soul can
not be knyt and vnytyd unto the. Grant me therefore grace (good Lord) that I
may so observe and keep, both my soul and body that I may not move one
ioynte or finger, but only for the and in the and no sin venyal may please me
at any time for it self, that mi soul may be as bare and as clean from al
syn, as it was created of the. Most mercyful sauyor Jesus grant me grace to
live without al delyght, or pleasure. And where that is very hard, and almost
impossyble, grant me grace to have the desire and unfeigned affection to want
all delyght. For (good lord) when I seek or take any delight in my self, then
do thou most Justly take from me, the delight, the pleasure and swetnes, yt I
should have in ye. Grant me grace therefore, good lord, with al my heart and
might to desire the lack and want of all delyght in any thing saving in the
only. That I may wysh and desire the bread (that I must needs take for
necessite) might savor no more to me the^ does a stone for my pleasure, but
only for thy glory and worship, which did create bread with swetnes and
sauoure, because thou will have it so. Therefore, lord, grant me grace, to
tayst swetnes in it, but not to remain therein, but immediately to turn my
heart and thought unto thy praise and honor, and savor and tayst how sweet
and delectable thou art, which have spread (as it were parts and porcyons) of
thy blessed swetnes and admyrable delyght, among thy creatures. Thus make me
to use al creatures which have any delyght or swetnes in them void of sin.

Grant me grace utterly to exchewe all sinful pleasure, and all delyght that
has anexed unto it any sin.

Grant me also (most merciful Jesus) to make bare my soul and to avoid
utterly out of mind all the memory and phansies and the desires of all
creatures, yt my whole mind and desire, with my whole heart, may approach and
draw near, and be Joined and united into the, having no inpedement by the
memory or desire of any creature.

Grant me that my whole heart and thought be al together occupied with the
conte^placyon of thy blssyd godhed, that I may perfectly se and perceive how
thou workyst al goodness in all things, be it never so little and small, as the
waggyng of one finger, for that mocion commyth of the soul, and thou geuyst al
life and al power unto the soul, for only thou art the life of the soul. Thy
myghtful grace grant me (most gracyus Lord Jesus) to labor with al dylygence
to come to the perfect puryficacyon and purgacyon of my understanding and my
memory from ye fantasies and memory of al creatures according to thy holy
example which hangedst on the cross al nakid and bare of al comfort or
consolacion, that I may rather desire for the love of the to suffer pain then
pleasure, sorrow then delyght, sour the^ sweet, rebuke then honor, disprayse
the^ praise, lack and want then habundance and plentye. That thus cleauyng
unto the in a pure heart, I may be made one spyryte with the. And for as much as
these two most noble and excellent virtues: love and mekenes, do syngularly and
specially help me to this goostlye union, I most humbly beseke the (mi most
dear and most loving Lord Jesus) grant me thy grace that I may by daily and
dylygent labor and gostly travel, come to and attain perfect charity and
perfect mekenes.

Grant me thy grace that these most gostly and most true words may be depely
prynted in my heart and belefe, that I may evermore where ever I be, remember
the^, often time record them where ever I goo with most perfect knowledge and
belefe of them. These words I say good lord, I may always believe them and
mind them, yt is to say: I am naught, I have naught, I know naught, I can
naught, I desire naught but one. These holy words often minded, truly thought
upon, and faithfully believed, brings a man unto these two most worthy
virtues mekenes and love. For true and perfect mekenes beleuith and says I
am naught, I have naught nor I can naught. And this is very true. For of my
self, I am naught. For all that I have or that I cane, thou have created and
made of naught, both in body and in soul, and with a thought can bring me
and all that thou have wrought in me, to naught. There is nothing in me that is
not thine only work, save only sin. And what soever I have of thy creatures,
of thy gifts, yt is not of my self, and except I have the wtal it is all to
gether naught worth to me, and shall come to naught. And verily of my self I am
impotente, without all wisdom and knowledge, full of misery and sin, not
able to styre one finger to do any good, thing (but only sin) without thy
help. True love and charytie says always I seek and desire naught but only
one. That is the only (good lord Jesus) which art only enough for me. If I
have the, I have all that good is, that pleasant, that delectable is, that is
Joyful and blessed, yea very heaven it self. For where thou art, there is
heaven and bliss. And where thou art not, there is very hell.

Grant me therefore, good lord Jesus, most heartily to love to wyshe, to desire
with all the powers of my heart the only, to mind ye only, to contempne al
things for the, to suffice my desire with the, to content my love with the, to
delight my self with the only. Oh most meke savior Jesus, dystroye in my
heart all kind of pestlylent estymacion of my self. Lighten my understanding
to se my own vylenes, yt I may evermore perfectly believe and unfeignedly think
from the bottom of my heart that I am more vyler, more sinful, more unkind
unto the, and inferyor, and worse then any man. There is none other sinner
(good lord Jesus) that has run so far from the in sin, but they have very
often time, though not always, turned their heart by contricion unto the and they
do often time love the, and honor the with more pure affection then I do. They do
sorrow more heartily their sins, and purpose more earnestly to amend then I do,
according to the grace that thou have given them. There is no man but if that he
had commyttid so many sins, and so cowardly fallen to sin, as I have, and
had had so many graces, and benefits of the, as I have had, but he would more
fervently and deuoutlye serve the then I do. And because that I can not think
from ye bottom of my heart thus of my self therefore I ask mercy most humbly
of this most detestable pride, besekyng the (most merciful Jesus) be merciful
to all sinners, and specially unto me most wretchedst and unkind of al, pardon
our sin most gracious good lord. And as I have here, lord accusyd my self,
in word as the most sinner of all other, so most merciful Jesus, grant me
grace to come to that point of humylitie, that I may verily believe, and
unfeignedly esteem my self so in deed that I am most vylest of all creatures,
most worthy of all shame, punishment and confusion, al turmente, and pain.
And by this point of mekenes, which is the mekenes only of begynners, grant,
good lord, that I may come to the mekenes, which is of those yt are
perfect. For this blessed and excellent mekenes of the perfect, very love and
charity workyth it in the soul by the gostlye sight and knowledge of the sweet
sauyoure Jesus. Wherefore, most mercyful Jesus, lighten, by the special grace of
the holy ghost, my reason and understanding in the sight of the, to behold and
consider perfectly and plainly, the ineffable mekenes of thy blessed
humanytie, and to tayst goostly of the infynite goodness of thy blessed
deuinitie yt my soul may take by that goostly sight so great love and
pleasure in the, that it may utterly forget it self and all the world, and so
to be wholly rauyshed in the holy love and desire still to behold the and to
forgette my sins, my unworthiness, and to set little by and little to esteem all
the good deeds that ever I did, yea and to set little by all things as though
there were nothing in the world but thou alone with me, most sweet savior
Jesus.

Most merciful and loving lord Jesus, I most humbly beske the open my goostly
eyes by the grace of the holy ghost, to see, and perfectly to believe (with
whole faith) my self to be most miserable, wretched, sinful and wicked. And
unfeignedly to judge and esteem my self and all my good works and exercyses to
be naught worth and so to come to the very poverty of the spirit, thynking my
self, and all that I have, right naught. And to ascrybe al my goodness unto the
only, as in very deed, if thou dydest not uphold me and the whole world both I
and all the world should come to naught in a moment, as we were made of
naught. And I am not able to think one good thought by mine own power o
might, but al good thoughts and deeds, and all that good is, is only of the
merciful lord Jesus. When the holy ghost does open mine inward eye, to behold
and believe this verytie of my self, then shall I be very meke, then shall I not
consider my self, but forget my self, as a thing of naught, and set all my
mind my desire, all my knowledge and al my love with most stable meditacyon,
upon the my sweet savior Jesus.

For this sight and beholding of the, comfort and lyftyth up so meruelusly
and delectably the soul, that it can take no Joy in any pleasure of this
world, nor take no heuines nor sorrow, for any adversity or grieffe that can
chance or hap, for it remaynyth very stable and immovable in the and insencyble
toward al worldly things, ever desyryng to rest in the sweet Jesus, having
ever the eyes of the soul unto the. And then thou do deliver it from the
gynnes of temptacyons and do dystroy in it all ye mocyons of the strength of
pride, and of al vices meruelus secretly. And by holy simplicite which is a
secreat by path, thou do lead it unto a stable and a blessed union in the,
where by thou do remain and dwell in it, and it in the to thy honor and
glory for ever more. Amen.

The practice and the holy exercise to come unto the holy union with god, by
aspyracyon, resygnacyon and postulacion. In the which thou must more use the
affectyon and hartye desire the^ understanding. And feruente aspyracion and
vehement wyshyng, more then only meditacion. And first thou shalt have this or
like medytacion to stire and in flame thy desire and to kyndel thy love unto
god, Most devoutly in thy mind and in thy heart say unto god the father.

MOST almighty Lord God father celestyal, dredful mayesty, the very and only
life of my soul and mine only true bliss and felycitie, I most miserable
sinner and sinful wretch do sit here in thy godly presence, desyryng with al
my heart to enkindle my heart in the most holy and blessed love of ye my lord,
and by burning charity to be made and knyt unto the my creator and maker and
unto this most blessed love I can not come but only by thy merciful help and
grace. Wherefore I most humbly beseke ye (most mercyful father) in the most
blessed merytes of my lord and savior Jesus thy only son, grant me grace
most devoutly, most heartily, and most louyngly, to call to remembrance the
inestimable benefittes, gifts, and graces, which thou only of thy infynite
goodness charytie and love toward me, have and do give unto me. And by this
holy and lovely memory, my heart and mind may be in kindelyd, and set on
fyrre in the very love of the, of pure love to laud and praise the. And first
how much am I bound to love the my dear lord, which have created and made
me of naught, not a stone, but like unto thy most blessed and godly image and
lykenes and hayst created all the world to do me service. Thou have preseruid
me in ye womb of my mother, where I might have peryshed (as many does) that
never commyth to birth. From my birth, thou have perseruyd my life both in
body and soul, and broughtest me to holy baptyme, where I might have dyed
without it, as many do, and do thereby loose the bliss of heaven for oryginal
sin. And from that time hither to, thou have provided for my necessaryes.
First by my parents and friends, and afterward by other means. So yt I have
had always succoure at thy mercyful hand which contynually have and do
provide for me with much more lovely care, then ever did my natural mother,
and have cheryshed me both in body and soul. And like a most careful and
loving parente and father thou have and do deliver me daily from innumerable
perels and dangers both of body and soul, which innumerable times, sith I
was borne, I might and should have fall in if thou had not, most mercyfully
delivered and defendyd me. How long have thou, like a mercyful, pityful parent,
borne with my great enormytes and innumerable deadly sins and mortal, where
thou myghtest Justly have dampened me both body and soul, yet of thy infinite
mercyful goodness thou have tarried, and abyde^ my conversion, because thou
would not dampne me, though I did deserve a thousand thousand times. And
while thou haist so patiently suffered me so detestable, and contumelius
toward the my lord god, and sclanderous unto the world, there has many, that
were far better then I, for less syn then mine, been utterly dampened, for
mysse life. Moreover though I were and am never so destable and grievous a
sinner in thy sight, yet thou (of thy infynite mercy) have never left me
utterly, but have by diverse means and many holy mocions and inspiracyons
called and prouokyd me to repentance. And though I gave no ear to, the but in
manner contempnyd and set ye at naught, yet thou ceased not until at the length
with thy myghtyful power and grace thou broughtest me again to grace and
repentance, and of thy ineffable goodness hayst brought me to this most blessed
state of relygion, and yet doyst not mysse but fatherly do prouid daily for
my necessaries though I be never so unkind and vntha^keful to the. And by cause
no sin, be it never so great and enormious, should dameme if I will repent,
thou have given to most cruel death and passion thine own son and by his
merits and for his sake, thou art ready to in due me with al kind of virtue
and grace. And specially blessed be thy in effable goodness and mercy. For you
hayst endued me with. N.N.N.

In this place remember thy special benefittes that thou thynkest thy self
specially bound to thank almighty God for. Turn thy thought and meditacio^
here un thy savior Jesus devoutly saying.

O Most loving Lord and dear savior Jesus now I turn my heart unto the. O
most swet Jesus, most faithful frind and true lover of my pore soul, for whose
sake and salvation thou wast incarnatyd, and came in to this wretchid mysery,
and suffered innumerable labors, fatigacyons, sorows and inco^modyties, much
wrong and heuines, great pouertye and pains thou sufferedst for me, many a
tear you shedest, with many a sore syghe, many before rebuke, reuyle blasphemy,
great shame, and much worldly confucyon thou sufferedest. Many a sore stroke
and sharp strype, thou had for my sin. And of most tender true love, and
most burning charytie that thou barist to me, thou sufferedest most paineful
passion and creuel death.

Thou swetest and shedest al thy precyus blod, not leuyng one drop within thy
blessid body. And after most deadly and most mortal panges and pynchynges
of death iii. long hours hangyng most paineful upon the cross, at the
length, with the most cruel bitter and paynefull stynge of dredful death, you
yeldest up thy blessid soul for to save and redeem my synful soul. What
point of love coldeste thou have showed more. Yet beside al these thou hayst
most louyngly left to my weak and wretchyd soul, for my gostly comfort and
strength, the very same body and blood wherewith you boughtest me and all the
world in the most blessid sacrament of the altar, that I might often se the,
often receive the, and remember that great love thou beredyst toward us, and
so to learn as to love the again, and of very love, to delyght in the
medytacion of thy most bitter and blessed passion, with hearty desire to follow
the in it. And specially to learn and affectuusly to consider yt great love,
and charytie, thou shewdest to me here in, that mi heart might be inflamed and
set on fire with the love of the. Wherefore (most mercyful sauyor) and most
loving and louesome lord Jesus of that great charytie and burning love, which
caused and mouyd the to suffer al thy bitter pains and passion, and in the
merytes of thy most precious blood, and blessed death, kyndel now in my cold
heart the blessid fire of thy most dear love, and make me to love and to
delyght in the, to set al my joy, felycitie and pleasure in the love and desire
of the my lord, that by perfect love and blessed charytie, my soul may be
knyt and made one with the. The which union, with the in love is the
beginnyge, the perfeccion and end of al co^templacion here in earth, and of the
blessed fruycion of thy godhead in heaven. Where you art all in all things, to
thy glory and honor sempyternal without end. Amen.

This foresaid prayer use daily by inward desire and hearty devotion that by
costome thou maiste when thou wylt, set thy heart on fire with ye love of thy
Lord, with a little labor and thought of his passion and other benefytes. If
you can come to this redines of love, then haist thou the very instrument and
ready way to contemplacyon, for yt is the rote and beginnynge of life
conte^platiue. Thou shall also that day that thou haiste this exercise in
custom, use and accostome thy self every where, where ever thou be, what ever
thou do, to have in thy mind and with hartye and burninge desire to say, not
in voice, but in heart and mind, one of these lovely sweet sentences which may be
callid darts of gostly love. And like as the worldly or fleshely lover has
still his burning desire to his paramour, and is ready in every place and corner
where he metith with his love to expres by lovely and sweet words his fervent
and hot desire that he beryth unto her love, with deep sighs and most hearty
lamentable co^playnt with such mean to set his love on fire and to wound (as
it were) her heart with love toward him again, ever so with these or such like
lovely and sweet sentences, we do open unto our lover Jesus, our fervent desire
of his most blessed love with swet and lovely syghes, hearty devout desires
where ever we mete him, that is, as often as he commyth to our mind, where ever
we be, or what ever we do. And the use of such blessid aspiracions who cold
get acustome in the^, is a wonderful ready way to gostly profyt.

Aspyracyons for this exercise.
O most loving lover and dear spowse of mi soul swet Jesus, I beseke ye for thy
most loving heart, that was pearsed with a spear and wou^dyd for my love,
wound my heart and inflame my mind so flagrantly with the fire of thy love,
that I may comtempne all the world for thy sake.

O most amyable Jesus, would god that I might so heartily, and so hard embrace
the, with ye gostly arms of my heart yt I might never let the go out of my heart
and mind. O most dear love and swet Lord Jesus why do I not love the. Can
you suffer, that any creature should not love the. Though thou do suffer other,
yet I beseech the suffer not that in me but break into mi heart, come in to mi
mind with all thy might and violence most mighty lord. Oh most sweet violence
when shall I suffer this thy blessyde and sweet vyolence.

Oh sweet Jesus how well were I, if I might love the. Oh would to god I could
perfectly set naught by my self and by all the world for thy dear loves sake.

Oh dear love of my soul, stir my heart to seek the, lyghten mi heart that I
may find the, possess you my whole heart yt I may rest in the only and forget al
thing beside the. O the sweet treasure of mi heart, the only joy and life of my
soul, how fayer, how bewtiful art thou, blessid be all that love the Oh when
shall I love the also,

O most sweet Jesus the very true love of my heart make me sick for thy love,
yea make me dye for thy swet louessake.

O most dear Lord, how feign would I love the, and that I thus would, thou
have given it me: give me grace also that I may love the with al mi whoole
heart. For with out the I can do nothing.

Most amyable, most louesome, and gentyl Jesus, the comfort and hope of my
heart, grant me to love the most purely, most faithfully, most derely and
most chastely Most swetest delight, and pleasure of my soul, the consolacion
and joy of my heart which love me ear I was, and have made and created me
such a one that I may love the, and have the, grant me grace to seek the, to
run after the, and that I may not rest till I have found the, and for the
great desire, and love of the sweet Jesus, I may loath al thing beside the.

SVche sweet sentences or like, thou must always have in thy mind and heart,
and force thy self to say them in thy mind as swetly and as devoutly, as thou
can. Though perhaps at the first thou shalt feel little swetnes, yet do as
well as thou may, and in long custom grace will take pyty on thy travel. Thou
shalt not bind thy self exactly to these things, but only if thou have not
of thy self such like, then may thou use any of these or as many as thou
wylt. Yet thou shall not need scrupulusly to follow all the words, but follow as
well as thou can, and take them as god puttith in thy mind. Thou may
perhapes some time have as good or better come to thy mind, as these be. And
such as the holy ghost puttith into thy mind, they are best.

AFter thou have had the medytacion of the benefytes of god in this prayer, yt
went immediately before these aspyracio^s, if thou feale thy heart styrryd with
love toward thy lord, then look what sweet desires or prayer or meditacion
delyghteth the, that follow until thou feale devotion decay. But ear thou
can come to ye swet love that knyttith thy soul unto god, thou must take
some travel, and stand, as it were without the door, abiding the pleasure of thy
lord and lover, when he will let the in.

Therefore (when thou canste not feale the love of thy heart styrred nor
kyndelyd by the meditacion of his benefittes) thou shall swetly dyscretly,
devoutly, and dylygently knock, as it were at the gate of his pyteful goodness,
with these four goostly hammers, that is to say: Oblacion, Petycion,
Conformacion, or likeness and union or knot. With these thou shalt awake thy
beloved, to open the door of his blessed love unto the that thou myghtest enter
in by aburning charity, and be made one with him. Yet if thou feale thy heart
drawn goostly toward the sweet love of god any other ways the^ by these
means, the^ leave these and follow the train of the holy ghost.

The first goostly hammer, which is oblacion or offering thou shall thus use
with as devout heart as thou can say in thy mind with hearty meditacion and
with an unfeigned heart, if thou can, or as well as grace shall assyst for the
time.

An oblacion goostly.
MOST myghtyfull lord god and very true love of my soul in my heart and
whole desire I offer unto the, and resygne into thy blessed will and hands as
a sacrifice, my self, to all that things, that thy blessed spirit shall (by
inspiracion) will and move me to do. And specially to the utter contempt and
forsaking of my self, and mine own will, to the utter cutting of, and
forsaking al delyght, and and pleasure of sensualytie, and of all my se^ces
though they be never so little things, as an ydel word, vain company,
lyghtnes. etc. whereby my heart may be, by any means, moved or defiled. Also I
offer unto the my self, to the perfect mortificacion of al natural passions,
as heaviness, joy sorrow, anger, hate, hope, fear, or shame. Also I offer to
the my self, to the volu^tarie lack and want of al sensyble grace, devotion,
and other gifts of thine, yt are not necessary for my salvation. In like manner
I offer mi self to suffer willingly, with most prompt and ready will, for thy
sake, al adversity and harm, in fame, in goods and fryndes, all syckenes,
disease pain, pressure and heuines of heart. And generally I offer me most
gladly and wyllyngly, to al chances and misfortune, that can happen to any
creature in this world, be it never so evil saving sin, yea, if it be thy
blessed will and pleasure, to put me in hell, that I might suffer all the pains
of all the dampened except the hate of the and seperacion or loss of ye love
of the. And though it be impossible for me thus to do or suffer, yet good
lord, my will and heart ought to be ready at al times if thou will it should be
so. And where, mercyful lord Jesus, I can not be so wyllyng and ready unto al
these things, and make so perfect oblacion, from the bottom of my heart as I
should do, because I se not my great enormytes and detestable wyckednes of my
former life, I beseke thy most blessed mercy in the mercyes of thy most
obedyente death, help my imperfection that I may make full resignacio^ unto thy
only will in all things to thy honor and glory. Amen.

THough thou can not at the first fully make unfeigned oblacio^ to al these so
faithfully, that you would not fear by and by to abide and suffer any, or al of
these for gods sake, for perhaps thou shall feel in thy self fear, or
gruge, if thou should be put to any of these, yet be of good comfort and have
trust that god will work it in the in time at his blessed will and pleasure, so
thou do acknowledge thy infyrmytes and cry mercy and continue thy good purpose
that thou have begone, and this offering shall be very acceptable unto god until
thou can do better. And when thou fealest thy self somewhat resygned unto
the will of god in all these things then may thou with full confydence and
trust enter to the other membre of this exercise which is peticio^ or
postulacion and knock with the second hammer notwithstanding wether thou feel
thy self fully resigned or not, if thou have a desire to be resygned perfectly
to god in all these forsaid things, fear not, nor fail not, but in the name
of god with a humble hope and a meke confidence in the great mercies of god,
make this peticion and knock thus with this hammer as devoutly as thou can in
thy mind unto almighty God, as our savior christ teaches us saing. Seek and
ye shall have, or it shall be given unto you.

MOST glorious god almighty, and most lyberal lord god, which for thy
infinity goodness art redye to give unto all that faithfully and mekely do ask
of the that which may be to thy glory and honor, and their souls health.
And specially the blessed fruycion of thy self in perfect love I most
mekely, most lowly, and devoutly beseke thy unmeasurable goodness, and most
lyberal mercy, in the blessed and infynitie merits of my savior Jesus, for thy
mercyful charytie, yt thou bear toward my poor soul, for his sake,
grant me good lord, the most blessed fruicion of thy only godhede. That my
whole affection love and desire may be satisfied, fully fixed, and altogether
restyd in the only, by the bare, pure and sincere love of the, and in no other
virtue gifts or graces, be it never so excellent, but in the only my most
blessed lord god and most dear love of my soul.

Grant me not withsta^dyng god lord, al such special graces, and thy gifts
which may help and bring me unto the more perfection of life in the true
love of the, and not to rest in them, but by them, to come to the, least
resting in them I might highly offend the, and wexe cold in the desire of
spiritual profit. And in special, grant me (gracious good lord) most pure,
perfect, clear lyghtenyng of my understanding, yt I may most fully and
perfectly know and understand in all things, thy most blessed will, and godly
pleasure, and to follow, fulfill, and execute the same as promptely, spedely,
and perfectly, without any retraccio^ or gruge of heart, as the shadow mouyth
at the mocion of the body, according to the most blessid example of my savior
Jesus. And thus for to do I here offer my self most ready with all the mightes
and powers of my body and soul.

Grant also, good lord, the light of thy grace, to know fully my self my
incomprehensyble vylenes, my vnthanfulnes toward the, my unworthiness and
wretchidnes, my mysery and sinfulnes, whereby I may come to most perfect
contempt, and gostly hate of my self and perfect profund mekenes. Grant me
perfect knowledge of all and very true virtues, and to obtain so many of them,
as most shall plese thy blessed goodness in me, to my salvation. But syngulerly
and above al other things in this world: grant now and evermore the
contynuall increase of the most pure, true and sincere love of the. That al my
delyght, full fruycion, and the rest of my soul may be in the. And yt my heart
may by so incensed and in flamid so whote and set on fire with ye love of the
that the memory of the, may be so frequente and often in my heart and mind, as
is my breath, that I contynually do take to live with all. For like as if I
lack this bodily breath then departith life from my body, even so the very
life of my pore soul is the very love of the, and is continued by often and
continual turning with burning desire to the which art the orygynal of my soul,
unto whom my soul should cleave unto as the son beams do bide with the
son. As for other thy graces and gifts, most gracious lord, that are not
necessary for my soul health, as to be delivered from temtacion, perels, and
pressures, the gifts of reuelacion of secreates, devotion, and sensyble grace
I ask not, most merciful lord god. But as it may most please thy infynite
goodness, to thy glory and my salvation. Wherefore I most humbly beseke thy
great goodness and mercy grant me this my meke postulacion, peticion and
grace, that I may, with al my might and power labor and travel daily and
hourly to obtain it, and never to cease from most feruente prayer and
knockyng, until you (most petyful lord) do open unto me thy most lyberal
goodness, unto thy great glory and honor and my salvation.

ANother part of this exercise after that you have vsyd this one day, the next
day use this following: one day one, an other dai an other. After this manner
first you must styre thy heart to ye love of god with the same prayer callid an
oblaico^ gostly, which is in the exercise next a fore appointed, of the
benefits of god, if you feel thy self disposed in heart to the earneste desire
of the love of god, and thy heart be inkyndelyd with the swet memory of his
kindness toward the Then shall you (as it were) burn al unlikeness toward, god
in thy self (that is to say) al thy sins and vycyousenes, al thy fautes and
imperfeccyons, al thy passions and immortificacion, thy unruled senses and
their in ordinate inclynacyo^, al thy vicius affeccion and thy impaciences,
but you shall not reken and remember them one by one, but generally gether them
together in thy heart and mind and cast them (as it were in to the infynite
fire of gods love, there to be consumyd and burnyd up by his mercy with most
ardent desire and devout mind saing in thy heart and desire thus.

MOst myghtyful god and mercyful Lord which dydyst create and make me to thy
blessed lykenes and thy own image, after that it was disfigured and blemyshyd
by the syn of adam you most mercyfully hayst reformed it, in thy death and
blod of my lord Jesus by baptism. And now I wretchyd caytyfe, and synful
wretch have dysfygured and fully defaced it in me with innumerable sins and
dailye fautes, vices and imperfeccyo^s and have brought and made my soul far
unlike yt my lord god. Wherefore now I most humbly beseke the, in that the
most blessed and burning love which mouid thy mercy to make me like the, and
to redeem me with so cruel payneful, and shameful death and passion of my lord
and sauyor Jesus thy only and most dear son, consume and burn up, and utterly
destroy in me al my vnlykenes toward the in me al mi sinfulnes, mi vices, al mi
fauts and my imperfeccyons, al my inordynate passions and redynes to syn, all the mysorder and abuse of my senses inward and outward, al noughty and
inordynate affeccyons to any creature al my impacyens and scrupulusenes. And
grant me most dear Lord and most mercyful father with most burning desire at
this time and evermore to ask and most vehemently to crave of the (my most
gracyous lord) the perfect lykenes in me, of thy most gloryus and blessid son
my Lord Jesus.

Oh mercyful Lord and most gracyous god wochsafe to adorn and deck my bare
soul withal those most holy virtues and graces that he was adorned, both in
his blessed dyuynitie, and his holy humanity most specially with those
virtues which apeared in him in the time of his most shameful death and
payneful passion

Grant me the perfect affeccio^ and most hearty desire of most low mekenes by
most perfect abyection and contempt of my self desyryng from the botome of mi
heart now and ever, to be abject and vile.

Grant me most perfect desire and affection, of most perfect poverty,
pacyencie, and charytie, and in these virtues most busely, dyligently and
affectuuslie to travel and exercise my self in them. Specially by most
ardente and burning desires, and most devout and continual prayers unto the
until that I may feale in on self in all damage, wrongs, rebukes, sclanders
and pains (yea in the time when grace is subtracted and taken away from me)
then to have a most harti desire to suffer most hartly al greues for the love
of the, and so persevere unto the end, that I might, herein, be conformable and
like unto my Lord Jesus that suffered of pure charity so much, and so many
greuus pains to thy honor and glory, and for my salvation. Amen.

THat day that you doyst use this exercise thou shall have often in thy mind such
desires short prayers every where, where ever thou be, and learn to force thy
heart with most hearty affeccion and earnest desire to remember them and wish
for the in thy mind, and to desire the crying most heartily, earnestly, and
devoutly in this manner or like.

Aspyracyon for this exercise.
Oh most blessed sauyor Jesus how unlike am I unto the, which art so
gracyous, so good, so full of grace and virtue. And I wretchyd sinner am full of
al vices and wyckednes, dystroy (good Lord) al my sinful deformyties, and
restore in me thy blessed image to thy honor and glory.

Oh merciful Jesus that died for my love, make me to dye to all the world for the
true love of the. Mortify in me al impacyence, al inordynate passions and
affeccyons to any creature, that thou myghtest have al my love and whoole heart.

My most gracyous Lord and sauyoure Jesus put in my soul and heart most perfect
pacyence, obedience, most perfect charytie with all other of thy blessed
virtues, that it may be like thy blessed humanytie.

Oh blessed love of my soul, set me so on fire in thy love, that I may think
that all pain, shame, confusion, and turment that is possible to be suffered,
is to little to be suffered for the, that al my delyght and desire may be in the
mids of al my prayer, to suffer for thy love al thing sweet Jesus.

Sweet savior Jesus which dyddest suffer most payneful death for my sin
mortyfie in me by thy special grace, the great redines unto sin in me, al my
viciousnes and fautes, al my negligences and imperfections, that I may come to
the goostly union in the by most burning love and ardente charytie.

THou must most fervently desire and ask in thy heart and devout mind
contynually of god, that thou may be made like conformable unto his blessed
crucified humanity, specially in this point that thou (in all things) never
seek nor desire any thing, that partayninge to thine own self or thy own
commodytie, but only that which belongyth to thy lord Jesus, how thou may
most fervently and perfectly honor serve and please and be like him evermore.
And how thou may most exactly forsake thine own will and contempne thy
self, and love him, forgettyng in manner, thy self and al things. And for the
vehemente burning love of him, thy mind may run so much upon him yt thou
do take no head, nor consyderest not what is bitter, what is sweet, nether
hour time, nor space, nor place, nor markest not one person from another, but
in all things, thou must seek, consider and remember thy lord god, and his
blessid will, pleasure and honor, seeing verily thy savior christ in his
members. And thus doing thou doyst live a contemplative life in an active life.
For in thy outward doings thou hayst contemplacion goostly of god, and
fyndest him every where, and in every thing specially thou do recollect thy
self wholly and do enter into thy heart, and searching the bottom thereof,
resoluyng and resigninge thy self do put thy self wholly in the hands of
god. For then thou art, in manner, transformed into god or deifyed. And unto
what thing soever thou turn thy self to, and what good work soever thou
doyst, you shalt think that god does it and not thou. And to forder the in
this goostly exercise you must indeuer thy self as nere as thou can in all
things ever more choose that which is most to gods honor, or most like
unto christ and his example, or most profitable to thine even christen, or most
against thine proper will, or most grefe and payneful to thy body, with
dyscrecion, or most rebukeful worldy, whereof thou art wordly ashamed, so it
be not sinful. Ever thou must cry out unto thy lord god in thy heart
unfeignedly. I am naught, I have naught, I can do naught but sin only. I seek
naught I desire naught but Jesus a lonly. If thou do this truly contynewe
faithfully in this spyritual work and travel, god, at length, will without
dout, here thy dyligent knockyng and deliver the from all the trouble goostly,
from all the tumulte, noise and co^beraunce of cogitacions and fancies and from
al earthly affeccyons, which you canste by no better mean put away, then by the
contynual and fervent desire of the love of Jesus, the which desire he must
needs in spyre in the and give it and work it in the, which he will very
wyllyngly and redily do, so thou (in the mean time) do fervently ask by
most devout prayer if thou wylt receive it, and not let his workyng, by
following to much thine own will. For look how much more perfectly thou doyste
for sake thine own will, and the love of thy self and of the worldly things,
so much more depely, and fastly, thou shall be knyte unto god, and mcrease in
his true and pure love. And because that these are optayned pryncypaly of god,
who only can and does work al perfeccion in us by his spcial grace: thou
shall therefore say this prayer in thy heart with desire and most devout mind
unto god.

O Gracyous good Lord, which art the geuer of al grace and godnes and, do
give unto them that fervently and faithfully do ask of the nothing so sone
and more gladly the^ the very true virtues whereby we may faithfully and devoutly
serve, love and honor the in all perfeccyon of life: I most humbly and most
harteli beseke the of thy tender mercy and most louinge and infinyte goodness,
in the most blessed and mighty merits of my savior Jesus grant me grace that I
may come to perfect lykenes and conformytie, in all vertewe and grace of the
most holy manhed of my dear and most loving Lord Jesus crucyfied for my sake
and my sin, specially in most perfect forsakyng of mine own will and sekyng
of my self, that in all things I may seek purely, and only yt sinceare honor,
ye pleasure, ye service and will of yt my lord: how I may most ferue^tly and
faithfully honor, serve and please the only, in nothing sekyng mine own will
or mine own co^modytie, but utterly to forsake and renounce mine own will in all things. And so to fix mi mind and my most hearty love, and delyght in the
that I may forget my self and al things, yea not remembryng nor markynge what
is bitter what swet, minding no pa^son no, place, no time nor tide, but as I
were rauyshid in the I may seek and mark in all creatures the only, thy
pleasure and most blessid will and honor. And so to rest in ye love and
beholding of the, that I may consider the in every thing, to what so ever I
turn me to, and what god work so ever I do I may unfeignedly and verily
think, yt thou doyst it, and not I. That I may (being turnyd and transformed
as it were all into the) se the and find ye, in all thing every where. Grant me
also most mercyful lord god grace in all thing to chose evermore, that which
may be most to thy honor, or conformable to the exemple of my lord Jesus, or
most against my own will, or most profitable to mine even christen, or
most paynefull and grievous unto my body, or most shameful to the world. That
I ever more may have ever in mind, heart, and thought, unfeignedly these
words. I am naught, I have naught, I can do naught, but sin. I seek naught,
I desire naught, but only my dear and blessid savior Jesus. Oh mercyful lord
god suffer me never to cease syghyng, and sekyng, knockyng, and prayeng until
thy most gracious mercy and most merciful goodness, vochsafe to hear and to
grant me my humble peticyon, as may be most to thy honor and my salvation.
Amen.

THe forth hammer that you must knock with al, is union. This union, or onyng
is when thou doist transfund or power thy hole will into the high pleasure and
will of god. Wherefore thou must if thou will knock truly with this exercise,
labor with all thy might with most vehemente and burning desires, and endeuer
thy self to leave and to offer up most fully into the pleasure of god al thy
will, and to knyt and make one thy will with his will, so that what soever may
chance the thy will be ever without al murmr or retraction of heart or mind,
ready to except it most joyfully, and for the very pure love of god. Yea that
thy Joy, solace, and conforte be evermore to have his most pleasure done in
the, whether it be adversities, outward syckenes, pain, persecutions,
oppressions either inward grefes and pressures of heart, subtractio^ of grace,
coldness or barre^nes of mind, derkenyng of ye wits or senses, or any goostly
or bodyly temtacion. And at such time when thou suffer any of these thou
must be well war that thou seek no synful consolacion specially, nor any other
sensual pleasure, but by counsel of thy gostly father. Nor set not thy heart
upon vain things, sekyng comfort thereby, nor in no wise be not idle. But
always as nyghe as you can, compel, strain and force thy self, to some good
exercise, or to some good bodyly work. The which good exercise, or good
works, though they be unsavory unto the, yet they are nevertheless, most
acceptable if thou do faithfully that which in the lies. Wherefore you shall
believe fyrmelye in thy heart, that all such adversities therefore cha^ceth to
the, by gods provision and sufferau^ce, to prove thy faythfulnes and true
love toward him, and to take occasion to inryche the and increase more
plentifullye in thee his blessid gifts and al his spyritual graces, if thou
persevere faithfully unto the end, not leauyng the vehement desire of his love
and perfection. And when thou hayst made thy most hearty peticion with most
burning desire to have thy will to be made one with the blessid will of god,
offeringe it frelye up into his hands with this prayer that shall here after
follow, then must thou lift up thy heart with al love, and knyte and fyxe the
point of thy love upon the most blessed love increate of god, and therein let
thy soul and heart rest and delyght, and so be as it were resolved and meltyd
most happily into the blessid godhed. That when the soul fealeth it self to
rest and delyght swetely in god which is an vncreatid love, thou may take it
for a token, that god of his mercy will grant the thy lowly and holy desire.
And planely who soever do use these exercises often time, and persevere in them
knocking devoutly and mekely, it is impossible but he shall come to perfection
of life. And because the love of thy self is one of the greatest lettes and
impedime^tes to come to the pure love of god, that you canste have. Therefore
thou must labor by devout prayer and of holy vehemente desires of thy heart,
to come to the perfect and holy hate of thy self. So that thou canste with thy
hole heart wish to be despised and set at naught, to be ever trodden, to be
beten and boffetyd of al men, to be rebuked and reputed most vylest, and to be
brought in manner to naught with al men. Thou shalt not think it inoughe for
thee to be glade when thou doyst suffer wrong, and to be joyful and to take
comfort when thou suffer much sorrow for gods sake, but thou must also wyshe
that al men might think that thou art most worthy to suffer al these and al
co^tumelye and shame. And thou must also so abhor thy self, that thou woldeste
and dydest wyshe to be despised, contraryed, ye and punyshed of the very
beasts unreasonable. And when you must needs, for thy bodily necessity, take any
delectable thing, thou must take it with great fear, dread and lothsomne^s of
thy self. Yet thou must not vndyscretly forsake and leave thy bodylye
necessaries, to distroye vice and syn in it, and not to dystroy it, kylling the
true man with the thief. Nature is good and of gods creacion. Vice and sin
is ye thief. If thou can come to this perfect hate of thy self, thou shall
then come shortly unto the perfect love of god, and shall begin then so
earnestly to seek the honor of god in all things, and utterly forsakynge and
forgetting thy self, that thou shalt not pass to put thy self in a
thousand dangers for his sake, thou shall not in manner feale any dyfference
between thy honor and thy shame, between joy and sorrow, but whatsoever thou
perceauest to be appertayning to the honor of god, be it never so hard, thou
shalt most earnestly and spedely with al thy might and inward strength follow
and desire the same. Yet when thou hayst done all that is possible for the, thou
shalt think thou hayst done nothing at al. Yea, thou shalt be ashamed and
detest thy self with perfect hate that thou have so wretchedly and
imperfectly served so gracious so noble, and so myghtiful a Lord. And therefore
thou shall desire, and indeuer thy self every hour to do, and to suffer more
greater and perfecter things then thou have done hitherto. Yet remember yt
this perfect and holy hate of thy self, and the love of god, specially this
union and turning of thy will wholly unto gods will and pleasure, and the
syngulare gifts of god, therefore thou shalt with most hearty and arde^t
desire and fervent devotion make this, or like peticion to almighty god for
them, with hearty desire say this prayer following.

MOST myghtyful and magnyficente lord god, at whose only will and pleasure al
things are reveled and remain, whom al things obayeth and seruith, and there
is none yt can resist thy mighty pleasure. Yet to obey and serve yt is most
blessid fredome, and a plain kingdom, I most mekely, and most heartily
beseke the, in the most holy merytes of the most obedyente passion and death
of my Lord Jesus knyt my whole desire and will unto thy most blessid will and
pleasure in all things.

Grant me, most merciful lord, now and from henceforth, fully and
unfeignedly to render and to yield up into thy hands and will, without any
retraction or gruge in heart, my will, so that for the pure love of the, thy
most blessid pleasure and will may be al my desire, my comfort, delyght and joy
in all things that may chance unto me whether it be bodyly adversity,
sykenes, persecutions, shame, confusion, oppression, pains, grefe, or inward
pressures, and agonyes, as subtraction of grace, dulnes of spirit, lack of
sencyble devotion, darkness of sensies or any other goostly temptarion, what
ever it be grant me, for yt synceare love and honor of the, most mekely and
ioyefully to abide them to the end, and to seek no worldly conforte or
consolacio^, and yet not to be dyscoraged from well doing. But to force my self
in such time of trouble, to do some good works goostly or bodyly, evermore
perfectly remembrynge that you of thy ineffable love toward me, doyst send me
such temporal troble, for my great goostly profit, and everlasting mede if I
do mekely receive it, and abide it so long as thou will, yelding most
obediently my self unto thy most blessid will, wyshynge not to be delivered,
but when thou will, remembryng yt I have deseruyd it a thousand fold more,
most heartily tha^kyng the yt thou do so mercyfully punyshe my sin here,
because thou would not turment me for them perpetually. But puryfie my synful
soul here, that after this life and small purgatory, I may euerlastyngly abide
with the in thy bliss to thy honor and glory. Ame^.

The last exercise is, both the practice and the exercise it self.
LAST of al is this exercise wherein thou must labor to dwell and live in god.
And that must thou obtain by these two virtues by true and lively faith, by
pure and ardente love of god. For it is but a small matter, and avails little,
to have god within the, if thou lease him lightly again. But you must be also
altogether hydden and swallowed up in him. First thou must constantly believe
that thou art in god, and god in the so long as thou remaynest in charity,
as. S. John says, God is charytie and he that dwellyth in charytie he dwellyth
in god, and god in him. Christ our master monysshyth us sayng, dwell and abide
in me and I will abide in you. He that remains in me and I in him, he brings
forth much fruit, for without me ye can do naught, he prayth also to his father
that we might be made one as he and the father is one. He that eats my
flesh, and drynkyth my blood the same dwellith in me and I in him. But to
perceive and understand that thing, clearly and plainly, it is the great
gift of god, and therefore you must ask it earnestly of him, and when thou
perceauyst clearly, and plainly fealist thy self to be in God then must thou
learn to abide and remain in him. The which is the most blessid treasure in
this world, or in this life. For when thou lyuyst and abydest in god, thou must
keep the powers of thy soul, and thy senses, as it were shut up in god, from
gaddyng upon any worldy thing or vanytie, as much and as nighe as is possible,
wher-they have a ioyefull security and safenes. For like as if thou would
shute up thy self in a very close chamber, where thou should see nothing,
nether hear, tayste, nor touch any thing, but only that which were within the
closet, and whatsoever were without, they could by no means nether harm the,
nor touch the. Even so when you doyst live and abide in god, whatsoever you
touchest, thou seist, thou hear, or taistest it presentyth to the and
declaryth to ye gods prese^s which is now become unto yt al thing in all
things. For thou sekyst and desyrest to find and to have him only in all
thing, and in every thing thou seyst his blessid presens. And therefore al
things both good and bad, that commith upon the thou receauest them, not of
any creature, but only immedyatly at the hand of god with out al curious search
from whe^s, wherefore or by what chance or how they come, without al trouble,
fear or perplexity, and with all mekenes suffer them. And doyst render them
again unto god, seeking in all things ever more the honor and the holy
pleasure of god, the mekenes and subdewynge of thy self, the amendment of
thine own life, thy true obedyence unto god and unto al creatures for his
honor, not against his honor, but specially to obey thy supery ours with all
humylitie, forsakynge in all thing thine own proper will. And for as much as
thou and all creatures be in the power and regymente of god, therefore there can
no creature harm nor yet touch the, but it must first touch god within whom
thou hayst in closyd thy self, and transposyd and turned thy self al wholly
into him and his godly will and pleasure. And for this cause must thou needs
harke^ more to god, and here him, rather se him, touch him, and tayst him
much more then any other thing. When thou perceauyst thy self thus knyte unto
god, that thou perceuyst thy soul to be more fast, and joined more nerer unto
god then to thine own body, and by the same love which has thus knyt the
unto god, do perceive that he is the very everlasting, the incomprehe^sible,
ineffable and only goodness out of whose power and might thy soul came by
creacion, and is so like unto god that there is no creature that can know and
perceive thoroughly the dyngnitie and nobilytie of thy soul. Then I say, thou
with this co^syderacion, kindelid, and styrred with the love of god, thou may
felyng this love in thy heart at mydnight or in the morninge daily if thou
will exercise thy self whenever thou desyrest to enter, by our savior
Jesus, and to knit thy self secretly unto god inwardely in spirit, in this
manner following. Thou shall knele devoutly only prostrate before the crucifixe,
if thou may conveniently or in a secreate place, where thou can not lightly
be distracted, and first say this prayer that thou may come unto this
knowledge, and may perceive thy self to dwell in god and god in the. For it is
an excellent gift of god, and he only can and will redely give it to ye
faithful and devout peticionars, thou shalt therefore, I say, make from the
bottom of thy heart, this humble peticion in thy mind and hearty desire unto
god saying.

O Glorious majesty of infinite mercy and goodness ineffable which fulfillist
all the whole world and art every where in every thing by thy might, thy
essence, and presence, but specially in the soul of man, and singularli in the
soul of them that are thy chosen such as desirethe, sekythe and longyth after
the, I most humbly and heartily beseke the of thy infynitie goodness and mercy,
lyghten (with thy special grace) mi understanding and knowledge, that I may
plainly and clearly parceaue and understand thy blessid presens in me and how
I am in the. And when I feale and perceive thy holy presence, grant me grace
most merciful Lord to hold the and keep the with much reverence, and with
a reverent fear, to walk and conversant my self before the, keeping all the
powers of my soul and my senses chaystly and clearly from al worldly
vaynities, that they al way may tend upon the, and in all thing I may find and
remember the, And what so ever I se, here, towche, feale, or tayst I may in
them, se, hear, towche, feale and tayst the, more then them. And that I may
receive al thing (what ever commyth upon me) immediately as at thy hand and
sendyng, and seek there in to fulfily joyful thy blessid will and pleasure or my
nighbors profyt and soul health, or ye ame^dement of my life and the meking of
my self, and to obey the and al creatures for thy love and honor, for sakyng
utterly mine own will. By cause thou art in me and in all things, therefore I
should obey the in every creature to thy glory and honor and my soul health.

THou shall say this foresaid prayer devoutly kneling before the imayge of
Christ crucyfed or crucyfyxe if thou can conuenyently as I said before, or in
such place where you shall not be distractyd. Then after this prayer thou shall
recollect thy self, fully beleuynge that thou verily syttest before thy bare,
nakid and crucified lord Jesus, even as he was verily crucified and hang upon
the Cross al nakyd and defaced with most cruel and blody wounds. And though
thou se him not with thy bodily eyes thou ought yet to se him faithfully and
inwardly with thy goostly eyes. For plainly (for as much as thou doyste
heartily desire to love him above al thing and by harti love doist most
heartily desire to be knyt unto him by grace in spyryt, vndoughtidly he is as
verili present as he did hang upon the cross, and is now in the bosom of the
father. And because that the infinite dygnitie worthynes and nobylytie-of god
can not suffer the least sin in him that would be knyt unto him and thou
commenly fallest unto some sin daily after thou haist parhaps been knit unto thy
Lord god. Thou must therefore ascend and come up unto thy lord god, unto the
godhed or dyuinitie of thy Lord Jesus by the most precious wounds of his
blessid humanity which he therefore suffered them, and arose again from death
with them, and kepyth them still in his blessid and holy body that we may clyme
up (as it were) by them unto the blessed godhed, therefore he says. There can
none come unto my father but only by me. I am the door, who that commith in by
me, they shall find pasture. Thou shall therefore first with most profunde
mekenes fall down (if place as I have said will serve) or bow very low down at
his most gracius fete with ye holy penitent Mary magdalene and there thou must
do two things as she did. First you must with tears outward, or inward (as
grace will serve) for thy sins swetly, and louyngly wet his fete, lamenting
(of very love) thy fawtes and sins, commytting the^ with most hearty
confidence in his mercy, and drowning them (as it were) in the most precious
wounds of his blessid fete. Thou shall offer thy self to his merci and al thy
sins, fawtes and imperfeccyons great and small, wherewith thou haist ever
offendyd so loving a father, specially sithe thou were last knyt unto him For
his most excellent and noble majesty can bide no mean nor let be it never so
little, no not one vain thought, or one little morsel, eaten otherwise then it
ought except the same be purgid and cleansed by penance. When thou hayste
washed and weat the feate of thy savior Jesus after this sort. The second
thing that thou must do is thou must wype the same blessed feat with ye locks
of thy head, that is to say. Thou must with most perfect will and purpose so
forsake al syn, be they never so little yt thou would rather suffer death
then commit any sin. Then thou shall with most ardent desire wyshe and long
to optaine al virtues and to die perfectli unto al vice and imperfeccyons. And
make this humble petycyon with hearty devotion in thy affection and mind and
not in voice.

MOst dear sauyor Jesus the longyng" and desire of my soul, I humbly beseke the
by the most blessid wou^des that thou sufferedst upon the cross for me, make
me to suck and draw effecteously out of thy precious wou^des al kind of
virtues. And make me to abhor al sin above al hateful things in this
world, specially pride and vainglory, arroga^cy mine own will in obedience,
irreuerencie toward ye and thy substitutes, al impacience, wrath, rancor,
much talk, detraction, and al vices that comes of them. And grant me
grace to draw and suck from the precious wounds of thy most blessid fete,
most profunde and low humylytie, perfect patience, obedience, and perfect
silence, with all the kinds that procedyth of these. And from thy blessed
head, crouned with thorns, grant me grace to detest and forsake al pertynacie
and stubburnes in my own opinion and wisdom al abuse of my senses and
disolucion, all the neglectyng of the holy fear of the, al flattery and fear
of man, al indiscrection and my great inte^peraunce, my impure intencion, and
sekyng of my self, and al other vices belongyng here unto.

Most mercyful savior Jesus I humbly beseke the for the most bitter pain, yt
thou suffer in thy head crowned with thorns, prynte into my head, and
adorn it with thy godly wisdom so much as may be most to thy honor and my
salvation.

That I may understand thy infinite goodness, and my unmeasurable vile
wretchedness.

Grant me also thy holy and filyall fear, and hate of sin, be it never so
small.

Grant me clear and perfect discrecion, that I may se all the grinnes of
satan, and seking of my self, my errors and excesses. Grant me the holy
simplicity of thy little ones that I may purely take al things to the best,
and obey the and all men in the and for the, and with al symplycytie do, what
ever be commaundyd me except sin, without gruging, resysting, or seking why or
wherefore. And for thy most loving and sweet heart, launced with a knights
spear for my love and salvation, grant me grace to deteste and abhor all the
pryuate and inordynate love of my self and of any creature, the abuse, the
yrreuerence and negligence of thy blessid sacraments and gifts, all
mystruste, infydelytie and errors, al fear inordynate, wekenes of spyryte, and
disperacion, my great negligence and unsteadfastness in those things that
belongs to my estate and calling, and all other vices that belongyth to any
of these, and al kinds and cyrcumstances that co^myth of any of these.
Besekyng the (most loving lord Jesus) of thy most ardente and burninge
charytie and love of thy deuyne heart, and for that precious wound and all the
heaviness which thou suffer therein, for my sake and love and salvation,
grave and prynte into my heart thy wou^did heart, and fulfill my heart with the
most perfect love of the and charytie, which may sleye and mortify in me, al
pryuate and inordynate love unto my self and to al creatures, and make me to
love the only, with al my heart, al my soul, with all my mind, and al my
strenght, and to love al men in the and for the as my self.

Grant me perfect co^stance catholyque faith to avoid al errors.

Grant me perfect hope and trust in the that I may in all trouble gostly and
bodily, avoid al desparacion, and evermore mekely trust in thy mercyful help,
protection and comfort.

Grant me stabylitie and perseueraunce, that I may proceed and increase daily
from virtue to virtue, and grow in all perfection.

Most mercyful savior Jesus for the inco^prehencible love and sorrow of thy
wounded and blessid right hand, grant me grace, to detest and abhor al
vnryghteousenes and wrong, and al bitter melacolynes of heart, al displeasure
and envy, al falsed, untruth and ypocrisie, al unkindness and unthankfulness
toward the and thine, besekynge the most mercyful lord Jesus, for the most
bitter pain and grefe of thy wound in thy right hand to grant me perfect
justice and ryghtwysenes, that I may give unto the my lord al honor and glory,
thanks, praise, and obedyence in all my cogitacyons, words and deeds. And to
give to my superiors, my eguals and inferyors, and unto my body and soul al
thing that belong unto them, doing and performyng al things truly, that is my
duty unto them according unto my state and calling.

Grant me grace also to follow thy blessed example in all mercy, pytie,
compassion, and bou^tyfulnes both to my friends and foes. Grant me to follow
thy holy truth and godly zeal against al vice and sin, both of mine own and
of other men, for thy honors sake and their souls health. Grant me also
the grace of thankefulnes that I may be thankeful and kind always unto the my
loving lord Jesus, for thy innumerable benefits and unto every man, for there
kyndnes and benefytes showed unto me.

Most myghtyful maker and sweet savior Jesus for the incomprehensyble love
and pain of the blessid wound in thy left hand I humbly beseke the grant me
utterly to deteste and abhor cowardnes, sluggysnes and sloth, al ydelnes and
loss of time al uncleanness of body and soul, al intemperaunce and excess in
meat and drink and al other necessaryes, al gredynes and couetise, and al
vices and sins that commyth of any of these: humbly beseking the my lord
Jesus for the intolerable pain and sorrow that thou sufferedst in the wound of
thy left hand, power into my sinful soul so much fortytude, as is
necessary for me to thy honor and my souls health. Whereby I may rule and
govern my will and the powers and senses of my body and soul, so that nether
fearyng the devil, the world nor men, nether yet mine own will or flesh life
nor death I may ma^fully pass through and contemn al things for thy love.

Grant me grace to follow thy amyable chastytie of body and purytie of heart,
yt I may vehemently detest al uncleanness, and that I may contynually keep al my
cogytacions and my senses from all sin and occacyons thereof, and from al
inpuritie and cleuynge unto any creature.

Grant me the grace to follow also thy most holy sobryetie, whereby I may
refrain and mortyfie al my sensies and powers of my body, from al inordinate
delectacion, pleasure and superfluity, and that I may use bare necessaries
with ye grace of the, without any lust or pleasure inordynate in them.

Grant me grace also to follow thy most blessed voluntarye pouertye, which
ledyth a man marvelous spedely unto god whereby I may, by thy grace be made
and remain so bare, so poor in spirit and so lose from al love and delyght
in any creature, and from cleuyng to thy gostly gifts inwardly, and from al
affection of temporal things outwardly, that I may use and take my very
necessaries, with lothesomenes and pain and yt I may never desire to possess
any thing but that I bare and nakyd from al creatures, may fyxe my delyght,
joy and full rest between thy blessed bare arms, being crucyfied thus with
the, and so to render and make amends with my verteus life, in some part,
that which with my former synful life I took from the, sekyng purely thy only
glory and honor here in now and ever. Amen.

AFter thou haiste made this devout petycion in thy heart, then must thou
fully hope and trust that thy loving Lord Jesus has in the unmeasurable sea of
his infynitie merits consumed al these thy fawtes and utterly forgeuen them the.

Then al thy sins are left (as it were) beneth, thou must ascend up unto
his blessed hands which are always stretchyd out unto his dear fryndes in
token of singular frindship thou shall then in this place approach, in thy
heart and desire, unto god askyng of him and desyryng that you maiste be knyt
unto him and made one with him in true love and charytie. And first thou mast
put out of thy heart al carefulnes, al thy dystraccyon, casting and committing
them in to the hands and pleasure of almighty god, by whom there can nothing
be lost nor peryshe. Then thou must set thy full mind and behold thy Lord god,
that is verily present with the there, which louith the most heartily, which also
tarith for the: yea he knockyth and callyth the lovingly. And so must you knyt
thy mind so earnestly upon god that thou may be as it were enclosed within
thy lord god and thy self with in him, gatheryng and recolectinge all the
powers of thy soul and bodyly sensies in ye blessed wou^des of his most holy
hands. And while thou art thus recollectyd thou shall make these three prayers
in thy heart and mind unto god the three persons in trinite.

And first to the father say this prayer.
O Most omipotent god father celestial, in the most blessyde merytes of my
sauyor Jesus take away and put out of my memory and fancy (by thy infinite
power and might) all the imagynacyons and outward affeccyons, and fulfill my
memory with thine own self, and with all godly imagynacyons and desires.

Secondly unto the Some.
O Most al mighty son sempyternall of god I humbly beseke the of thy
infynitie mercy by thy eternal and ever lasting wisdom, most gracyously
vochsafe, to lyghten my wit and understanding with the most blessed knowledge of
thy goodness increate and i^finitie which you art, and to know thy blessed
benefits and most holy will and pleasure, and mine own noughtynes.

Thurdly thou must make petycyon unto the holy ghost after this manner.
O Glorious Lord god holy ghost most humbly I beseke the of thy infinity mercy
and charytie which thou art thy self, vochesafe with thy in comprehe^syble
goodness to raiushe and swalowe me up all together in to the with my will and al
mine affeccyons, and set them on fyere with most ardent love and charytie.

The fourth is unto Christ Crucified.
O Most loving savior and most derest love of my soul my sweet Lord Jesus, I
humbly beseke the for thy cross and passion, and for thy most payneful death
that thou (of most perfect love toward me) dydest suffer upon the cross
vochsafe by thy most holy powers of thy blessid soul, and the senses of thy
most holy body to make bare and nakyd all my wytes and powers of my boodie
and soul from al phansyes, vices, imperfeccions and inordynacyons, and
restore them to their first perfeccyon and order, and vochsafe to knyte and to
enclose them within thy self, and thy self al together within them. Amen.

MORE over as often as thou will knyt thy will and understanding unto thy Lord
god, you must stirere up and not without some labor, these two, that is to say,
thy understanding and will toward thy Lord. First thou must force thy
understanding earnestly to consider, and faithfuly to behold the high goodness
of god and his infinyte, his most super-excellent, and incomprehensible
nobylytie and holiness and therwtal consider and feel also the innumerable
torments, pains, sorrows and passions, that he so high, so noble, so
excellent and so infinite majesty suffered of most ineffable love and
charity for us most vile, wreched and most unkind sinners. And with great
wonder you must meruayl at the most wonderful love that god almyghtye has
showed toward the by his own most dear sone, whom for thy love only and
salvation he gave to suffer al kind of myserye (save syn) of travel, labor,
fatigacio^, care, honger, thirst, watch trouble, sorrow, shame reuyle, rebuke,
co^fusyon, sclander, blasphemye, persecucyon, false trateri, heuines, dread
fear, and deadly agony, until blody sweet, wrongful co^prehencyon and
captyuitie, like a thief in bonds most cruelty, most vile entreatyd, halyd,
pullyd and led from post to pillar, most worngeful accusacion, and most
unjust condempnacyon, spyttynge and conspurcacion, yllusions mockes, and
skornes forsworn and forsaken of his own apostles, most cruel flagellacyon
and beatynges, fore strypes and buffets, most payneful coronacyons, with
thorns his tender limbs body and flesh rent and torn most cruelly. And in all these plages and woeful array made a gasyng stock to al his most cruel
enemies. At the length co^ptyd most abhomynable, more vile and more worthy of
death then a strong thief and cruel murderer he was condemnyd, the other
delivered and so lade^ with his most cruel and heavy cross upon his torn
shoulders and weak body unto his pain and al wordly wonder, confusion, and
shame, he was lad unto the most fylthy and horyble place of his most cruel
and shameful death most bitter drink offered him, and violently spoiled naked
of al his garments, rackid to the lengh and breadth of his cross most
paynefully nailed with sturdy and blunte nails, elevated on high upon the cross
his members most cruelly torn and rent, his veins and synowes violently
broken, his precious blood most paynefully shed, trayled down upon the earth
in great abundance, in such paynfull plyghte he honge three long hours upon
the cross in most wooful panges and pains of death sustayning most deadly
burning thurst, blasphemye, reproach and reprofe, most payneful derelection
without al comfort or consolacion. And thus he most woefully yeldyd up his
blessid soul by most bitter, cruel paineful, and shameful death. And al only
for the mere and most burning love and charity, that he bare unto the his
enymye, that thou might be delivered from the wrath of God, and sentence of
damnacion that thou had deseruyd by the sin oryginal and innumerable
other in normytes deadly and daily offenses which thou hayst done, myghtest
have done, and may do, if he reserved thee not by his grace. And yet
requires he nothing in this world of the, for all these that he has
sufferid and done for the, but only thy true heart and love. And for this cause
he suffered his most dyuine and lovely heart to be opened with a spear, that
thou myghtest if thou would, in manner, crepe into his most blessid side and
sweet heart, the treasure house of al grace and mercy, of al vertrue and
perfection, where thou may obtain what thou wylt ask. And all for the most
tender love, that the sweet loving heart of thy dear lord Jesus berith to the.
Thou hayst therefore great cause to love him again, and to show loving kindness
unto so curtyse and kind lover and lord god. Now if thou can feel thy
heart mouyd unto love toward thy lord Jesus by this or like comtemplacyon of
his benefits and of his infinite goodness, that has loved the from the
beginning of the world with an everlasting charity, then shalt thou proceed
and force thy will and affection to these three sorts or degrees of love. The
first is bare love, that is to say, thou must move thy self to love him only,
and forsake al love, that thou berest to thy friends kynsfolkes, apparel,
books, and of any other thing in this world. For thou can not love these and
love god only. For he will have al thy love, as he is most worthy, and must be
louyd barely alone without any thing with him. For so did our lord Jesus hang
al bare and nakid of al frindes, conforte and of al things upon the cross If
thou can find and feale this point of love in thy heart then must thou
proceed and labor to have love. Thou must have no desire to any thing
created, and specially this pure love is when thou hayst full mortyfied in the
al natural passions and vices as angrynes, melancolly, inordinate Joy, lyghtnes
and such other, so that the powers of thy soul be pure and clean from al
sinful inclynacions and dysorder, clean delivered from al imaginacions or any
lettes or impedymentes of the pure and synceare love of god, that they may
embrace their lord god with most pure and clean love. Thurdly thou must proceed
to come to the thurde point of love, that is thou must love thy lord god with
veheme^te and strong and affectuous love. And this love compriseth the other
two aforsayd loves, and makyth the one with god, and makyth the toward al
other things, as it were insensyble and feltyst nothing else but only thy own
most swetest love Jesus. Hear of commyth it that thou can, and shalt
remain still in god where ever you becomyst, and with whom soever thou be. For
this love will never suffer the to cesse from loving of thy dear Lord Jesus,
nor will not suffer the to rest, but make the bestow all that thou art to the
glory and honor of thy lord god. And of this love it is, that you would, if
thou coldyst, make of every little grass thou seist, some excellent creature
that it might love and laud the lord thy god with the. Yea if it were
possible, thou would make of every man an whole heaven, and so many heavens as
there are men, and offer them up to god with al thy heart and most pure and
lovely desire, to his glory laud, praise and honor. Now when thou fealyst
this threfolde love in thy heart kindlyd, and thou altogether incensid and set
on fire with the love of thy lord, you must recolecte and gether to gether
with force, al thy wits, sencies and powers of thy body and soul, as it
were, with in thy self as though thou were dead from al other, things in the
world. And so as one full of love, thou shall approach unto ye most gracious,
most louinge, and most sweet heart of thy Lord Jesus. Thou shall enter therein as
into an infinite sea of goodness, and botomlesse depeth of unmeasurable love and
charity, with these four exercyses. But yet whether thou feale in thy heart,
these points of love or no thou shalt proceed, nevertheless and follow with
these four exercises, and have a good will and desire to have these points of
love, and this shall suffice I trust in god, for a beginner, until god give to
the grace of this love, for it is a syngulare gift. But you must ear you enter
these four exercises in ye heart of Jesus make this peticion unto that most
blessed and merciful heart saying,

O Most dearest lover of my soul, my most sweet savior Jesus which of thy
infynite charytie and most tender love that thou baryst unto my pore sinful
soul, sufferdst most payneful passion and and most cruel and dreadful death
in the same charytie and love and in the most blessid merits of ye same
passion and death, grant I beseke the that most excellent gift of love and
charity, that I may be set on fire and so incensed with the most feruente and
syngulare love of the, that I may love nothing but the alone, that nether
frynde nether lover, nether any thing in this world be it never so pleasant
or profitable may have any part of my love but you only. Grant me also clean
and pure love in all the powers and senses of my soul and body that they may be
pure from al passions and inclynatio^s to sin and disorder of sinful
corruption, yt my soul in all her myghtes and powers may, without let or
impedimente, freely and wholly love yt her creatoure and redemer herswete spouse
and most faithful lover. Grant me also, most mercyful lord to love ye
vehemently and affectuously yt I may be toward al other things dead, and as
it were insensyble without any fealyng. That I may not feale nor perceive any
thing, but the only my dear lord and lover Jesus, that where ever I be, with
whom ever I be, I may never forget, quayle or slake in thy burning love, that
I may never stynte nor cesse to bestow all that I am and can to thy glory and
honor and worship and never to be satysfyed in well doing, to thy sempyternal
honor and my soul health.

THen shall thou approach with most hearty affection and devotion unto the
blessed heart of Jesus recollectyd as is above said in all thy powers and sensies
of body and soul, and shall enter in (as it were) in to that most blessed
tresure house of grace and bottomless fountain of al goodness with these four
exercyses following. First thou shalt make from the bottom of thy heart (or
as well as grace shall help the) resingnacion, offering thy self body and
soul whooly with all that thou art and haist, and al creatures most frealy
unto his most lovely will and blessed pleasure in this world to the end here
of, and for ever to abide al aduersytie pressure or sorrow of heart, al pain of
body unto al things that is possible to come unto the at his will. Yea to
abide the pains of hell if it should be his pleasure for his love thou must be
redye, that he may have and use the as him pleasyth even as he had the at his
pleasure, and ear thou were creatid. Thou must make this oblacyon thus in thy
heart and desire.

Most mightiful and most loving lord Jesus al thing that I have and that I am,
and al things in this world, in heaven and in earth are thine. Wherefore,
most gracious good lord, I here offer and yield up to thy blessed will and
pleasure, my soul and my body with all my substance that I am or that I have,
and al creatures that ever were or shall be created most freely and franckely for
this time and for evermore to abide at thy pleasure, all aduersytie goostly and
bodily, al pain and grefe of heart and of body, and unto all things
whatsoever thou will send or suffer to come unto me. Yea most mercyful lord
Jesus, for thy love I offer my self ready to suffer if it be thy blessed will ye
bitter pains of hell. And I desire yt thou might so have me at thy pleasure as
thou hadste me before thou creatydst me to thy honor and glory.

SEcondly thou shall ask of thy lord Jesus not only all the graces and gifts
that he has, which thou nedest, but also all that god him self is, yt thou
myghtest have the fruycyon of him and rest in him, and in his only and
infynyte love. Thou shalt ask also a bare and a perfect spirit, the open and
clear knowledge of his dyuine goodness and will and of thine own unworthiness, the
knowledge and perfection of al virtues and most strong perseuera^ce in godlynes
and virtue. Thou shalt ask al necessaries for thy soul health and for all thy
special friends and for ye whole world, and the holy church of christ, and for
the souls in purgatory, in this manner or other like.

MOst blessed and glorious lord and sweet sauyoure Jesus, for the tender love of
thy most sweet heart, grant me in all those gifts and graces that thou
hayste, and be necessary for me to my soul health and salvation, but
specially grant me above and before all things thine own self, thy
incomprehe^syble and most blessed godhede, that my soul may have the
fruicion hereof, and that I may rest only in it and in the sinceare and
infynite love of it.

Grant me sweet savior also a bare senceare and a perfect spirit, with
most perfect and clear knowledge of thy dyuine goodness, the knowledge of thy
will and plesurs, and perfect sight and knowledge of my noughtines and great
unworthiness, the knowledge and perfection of al vertew and perfect and strong
perseueraunce in the same.

Grant me al things necessary for my souls health, and for the comfort and
souls health of al my specyal friends and lovers. And grant peace and thy
protection to al holy churches, and mercy to the souls in purgatory to thy
honor and glory. Amen.

ANd for as much as god has louyd yt from the beginning with an infinite
charytie, and for that charity thy lord and savior Jesus suffered his cruel
death and passion, thou shall confyrme thy self unto his charity desyryng
most heartily, if it should please him that you myghtest live in this world in
as great derelyction and desolacion, in as great sorrow and shame, in as
great poverty and myserye as thy savior Jesus did. And that thy bare soul
might be adornyd and endued with the same vertewes wherwyth his blessid soul
was endued. And because that he is the very everlasting charity it self, and
thou can not come into him but if thou be tra^sformed and turned al together
into love. Therefore thou shalt ask with most feruente desire, to be endued
with the charytie and love that thy sauyoure Jesus was endued. That thus thou
may become formyd and made like unto him both in his manhed and his godhed,
making this peticion with hearty desire.

Grant me also most merciful and most myghtyful savior Jesus, as shall
please the, that I may for thy honor and love, live in this world, in as
great desolacion and as comfortles, in as great sorrow and shame, in as great
labor and trouble, in as great myserye and poverty as thou dydest for me. And
most gracyous lord, adorn and indue my soul with al those blessid and holy
virtues that thy blessed soul and humanity was endued wtal. And specially I
most heartily and with most ardent desire beseke the, my most gracius lord god,
transform me altogether in to ye perfect love of the. And specially my soul
into that charity which thy most blessed soul had and has evermore to thy
most honor and glory. Amen.

FOurthlye thou shalt vehementlye and heartily, desire that thou may be knyte
and made one with him most blessedly and happily without any mean immediately.
The^ if thou feale thine heart and mind knit in most feruente and burning
desire and love of him, thou shall approach unto the blessed dyuinitie
eleuatynge and lyftynge up thy whole thought unto ye blessed godhed of christ,
forgetting clean and leaving out of thy mind and for gettyng al thing created.
Yea not fealyng nor thynking upon thy self. Thus shalt you depely drown, hide
and transform or turn thy self wholly into the most delectable, most
swetest and most blessed love of thy lord god, yea thy very everlasting love,
full of most ardent charytie. So that thou myghtest never here after be found
or known of any creature. Here also thou shalt most heartily desire to be
swalowed up and to be clean consumed of that infynit goodness and also to
swalow up and consume in to thy self that blessed goodness saying in thy heart.

OH most blessid goodness and most holy and glorious godhed of my savior Jesus I
humbly beseke the rauyshe me and hyde me within thy blessid goodness, and
infynite charytie, that I never be found like other frail creatures that I
may forget al things, and also forget and lose my self, that I may both be
consumyd and swalowid of the and into the, and thou into me for there only is
the true love, rest, and felicyte of my soul, there is my beginning, and my
most blessed rest and ending, in that infynyte goodness which is none other
then an unmeasurable bottomeles, depth of eternal and infinite love. Thus in
such conte^placion in the heart of Jesus, thou may be al moolten in the
admyrable love and superadmyrable goodness of thy lord god ye spouse, the most
swetest love of thy soul. Most humbly then thou shalt desire him to open
unto the that most fairest, most lyghtsome and pleasante kingdom of his holy
dyuinitie, and that he vochesafe to translate and utterly drown the whooly in
it, saying in this manner with, hearty devotion or like.

O Superadmyrable power, unmeasurable wisdom and infinity goodness of my lord
God.

O superadmyrable wonder, and over wonderful goodness, when will thou
transform and hyde me al to gether in thine own self, and thy self in me.

O myghtyful lord, it is as little and leasse for the, thus to swalow up and
devour me in the, as it is to the unmeasurable main sea, to devour one little
drop of water.

O my lord god creatoure and confirmer of al thing, would to god I could make
of every creature in the world a reasonable soul, and of every soul (specially
of mine own soul) the kingdom of heaven, where thou myghtest have al peace,
and al joy sweet Jesus, for all the sorrow and heaviness thou sufferedst for me. I
would most heartily and gladly give al these unto the.

Most loving lord, if it may please the let me suffer the pains of all the
dampnyd for thy love and honor, and let me laud and honor the, with the
laud and praise of all the blessid compayny of heaven.

O most sweet and dear love my lord, god open to me (I beseke the) the most
delectable and ioyeful riches of thy most ardent and most blessed divinity,
and hyde me al together in the, that I may never be found of any creature, to
thy most high honor and glory, which art the only most blestyd felycitie
of my soul. Amen.

Now if you can yet a little higher lift up thy heart and thought of thy
mind, thou may more gostly consider the eternal power and wisdom of almighty
god, until thou with ye thought, be in manner rauyshed in a trance, and art
thinkyng without thought, and knowing with out knowledge, loving ardently without
love. And so thou may be made (by grace) that which god is by nature. To
conclude if thou can thus shote up and conuersa^te thy self in the heart of
Jesus, thereto be swalowed up and consumed in the holy dyuinitie and blessed
godhed, then shall yt be most fortunate and blessed. For there shall thou feale
and know such things, which can never be told with tongue, nether written with
pen, nether thought with any man's heart which he only knowyth right well, yt
has had the experyence hereof, by the grace of god, to whom be al praise and
thanks world without end. Amen.

Ten gostly lettes and losses in the way of perfeccyon.
TO much and to many worldly thoughts and gaddings of ye mind and affection
to outward things, therefore such losyth ye inward consolacyon To much and to
great familiarytie and desire to please, man therefore such pleasith the less
god.

To much and to great boldness and rashness, therefore such losyth goostlye
shamefastnes.

To vehemente earnestnes and to gredy delyghte in bodily work and doings,
therefore such losith the tranquyllytie and peace of mind and memory.

To much and to great standing in their own conceyte and reioysyng in them
selfs of their virtue which in very deed is only gods and not theirs,
therefore they lose the very true mekenes.

To rash and hasty judgment of their even christen, therefore they loose often
their charytie.

To much love of temporal things, therefore the goostly love of god is
subtractyd from them.

To great negligence and coldness in prayer, therefore such lose al gostly savor
and swetnes. To slowthful or fearful to take pain and labor in mortifying
their vices and fautes, therefore such losyth the furderance and increase of
perfeccyon.

To much and to often given to bodylye works and exercise without necessytie of
obedyence or charytie, such while they labor not also, by often co^syderacion to
know them self (which is a great furderance in contemplacyon) it must needs
be long ear they be perfect.

Ten points of a perfect person to remember and have them always in mind.
THe first is to think and to remember always where ever thou be, that thou
art in the presence of god.

Second is, to way well and exactly all thy words, deeds, and thoughts, and
to dyrect them always actually to the honor and glory of god.

Thurd is to receive and to be glad with all pacyence, and to take (as at the
hand of god) all things good or bad that ever shall chance or come upon him.

Fourth is to forget al other men's deeds and fautes, and to have a dylygent eye
upon his own, and with al meekenes be glad to acknowledge them.

Fyfte is to forsake and sequestrat from him self, both bodylye and also in
love and affection, al temporal things in the world saving his very
necessaries, whom he must not have in love or affection, but for necessytie
with yrkesomenes.

Syxt is to knyt thy whole heart and love with most burning desire and hartye
affection, unto god.

Seventh is to remember very often and deuoutelye the blessed life and passion of
our sauyor christ, and to follow it to his power The Eight is to forsake his
own proper will, and to knyt his will unto the will of god in all things eather
aduersytie or prosperity, in sweet or sower, to have, or to want, to live or to
dye.

Nynthe is to cast al his care and carke and al his busynes upon god, and to
commyt al to his blessed pleasure.

The tenthe is to laud and praise and to give most hartye thanks unto
almighty god for all things, and in all things good or bad, small or great.

Eight other good points which are a good fou^dacion to profit i^ perfect life
First keep thy self alone in thy celle or other place apt for contemplacion or
good work, from al saving only when obediens or charity compellyth the
contrary.

Second, keep well thy silence eueri where and speak not without necessytie, and
then take good head what, how and to whom thou shall speak.

Thurd, keep well thy heart and thought, that no vain, specially no evil
cogitacion abide therein, occupy thy mind with some good thought always, as
nyghe as thy frayltie will suffer the.

Fourth, in all things seek purely the pleasure of god, and intend only his
honor, contempnyng, leaueyng and forsakyng always thine own will.

Fyft is in all things that thou haste to do, way well and search dewly, what it
is that mouyth the to do that which thou entendyst, wait well upon thy self,
what thou doyste and consider how little thou art able to do of thy self.

Syxte is, occupy not thy thought or mind with any thing that thou hayst not
to do, judge it not, dyscusse it not, but let it pass as it is, if good, good
be it, if bad, bad let it remain and judge it not.

Seventh be ever in thine own syghte vile and of no estymacyon, whether thou
consider the inward gifts of God in thy soul, or outward gifts of bodi,
esteem no whyt thy self the more for them but labor to come to a very
contempt of thy self which hayst naught of thy self but sin

Eight is labor to have pure and sinceare charytie and love, not only that
sencyble love toward god and thine neighbor where by thou fealest affection
toward thine even Christen, but also the goostly love which is in the
bottom of thy heart and mind, wherein thou sekest purely and syncearly and
only god alone.

Six points to be obseruyd if thou will contynewe and persevere in thy good
and godly purpose.
First thou must lift up thy heart and mind to god often time, most heartily
entreating and desyring him of his gracyous assystence and help for, without
his help thou can do nothing.

Second, when thou hayst offendid with al speed you must call thy self home
again with contrycio^, and reconcyle thy self by confession and penance if
it be mortal or dedely sin. And steadfastly purpose to avoid that with al
other, and the occasyons of sin.

Thurdly thou must hear daily the blessed sacryfyce of mass with hearty
deuocio^ calling to god most heartily to renew and increase his love in the.

Fourthly thou must receive, as often as thou may conveniently the blessed
sacrament, or at the least receive the body of our savior Jesus spiritually.

Fyftly, thou must read once in ye days and have medytacion of some good
virtuous and holy lesson, that thou may be the better thereby.

Syxtly thou must exchew and avoid, as near as thou can, the company and
famyliaritie of al persons of what estates soever they be, if they may be
occasion to the to omyt any good exercise, or to do any sin be it never so
little.

The fyftene impedimentes
THe first impediment, which is in manner the ground of al sin as saint
Augustyne says is the love of thy self and of thy own commodytie and
profit, the subtyle nature of man sekyth the own commodytie in all things,
and is not perceiuyd, except thou take very great head and search depely the
very end and true purpose in all good things that thou doist or euylles that
thou doyst exchew. For in all thy good deeds thou doyst and in all sin that
thou flyest, if thou look wisely, and depely do search the cause hereof,
thou shalt find that thou doyst oftentyme seek more thine own commodytie,
then the synceare and pure love and will of god. For sometime thou shall find
that thou desyrest and laborest for vertew, and doyst pray and use good
exercise because thou would come to the bliss of heaven and flyest sin to
escape the pains of hell and purgatory, in this sekest thou not purely the will
of god, but ye commodity of heaven and the exchewynge of pain. Try this, and
ask thy self, if thou were sure that thou should never come in heaven, nor
never have reward for this good deeds and verteous life, but never the less,
if it were the pleasure of god that thou should suffer hell pains for ever,
whether thou would, never the less, do as wyllyngly as gladly, as many good
works, as dylygently, fly sin, for the only will and honor of god, as
thou would do for fear of pain, and for love of heaven. If thou feel thy
self in this mind and good will in all thy deeds, plainly then doyst thou not
seek thine own commodity, but purely gods will and honor For this would
thou do whether god will reward or regard it or not, so it be his pleasure and
honor. In like manner in our deeds we seek often times our commdytie before
man. We oftetime exchewe evil because we would be either praised, honored, either
we would not be rebuked or punished Some time we esteem our exercises and
doings streyte. Thus we fall into goostly pride or else we delight in our swet
thoughts and sencyble devotion, or in our sweet tears and set so much by
them, that if we feale them not, or if they be subtractid and be taken from
us, then we wax dull, heavy and sorye, and undevout, and have no courage to
go forward in good life, thus we fall into goostly glottony or auaryce, which
is weary perylus. A gaynste those great dangers goostly, we must study to do
goostly and bodily, for the pure and only love of god, without al respect or
regard of reward, only because that ye deed, prayer or exercise does please
god, and because yt I am bound to do all that I can, with al ye might and
powers of my body and soul of very pure love to honor him self and to rest
in him, without scruple of bond or custom, with a certain inclinacion of
inward love, as my heart were taught inwardly by god that such good deeds and
virtue should please him and in no wise to seek any secreate comfort,
commodytie or consolacyon of the spyryte or soul, but rather for gods sake
to desire al desolacyon, aduersytie and derelyccion at the pleasure of god.

The second impedyment.
THe second impediment is affeccion, love and care of temporal and corruptyble
things of this world.

What is thy inordinate love toward creatures? Plainly al yt love which
infectith, dystractyth or troublyth the mind of man or caussyth a man to desire
to have this or that, to hear or se this thing or that, except it be only for
the pure and only honor of god. And chiefly the covetousness or love of
certain or peculiar things as of money, of housyng, of garments or
ornaments, of napkyns, of books, of exquisite and fine household stouffe, and
of other commodities apperteining unto their daily use, whether they be
necessary or superfluus, in the which things they rest with a certain sensual
pleasure and delyght, unto the which they are so affeccionate and al together
given, if that these things should be taken from them, they would be evil
contented. These manner of parsons be very proprietaries before god. For ye
poverty of the spirit that the gospel teachyth, consistyth pryncipally in this
point. That a man should possess these transitorye things that he should
remain lose from al love of them, from all affeccio^ toward them, and from al
rest in them, as though he had them not. So that at the pleasure and will of
his prelate, he should be ever ready to forgo them gladly, and would find in his
whole heart, without any gruge with quyetnes and gladness to forsake the^
utterly, and suffer them to be taken from him. And that he do nether desire to
have nor to hold the^, nether to forsake or give them, but only as it may
most please god for his most honor. And though carnal affection do gruge
and murmr, that makes no great matter, so he utterly in his heart and will,
would be ryd of such noughty grugyng, for in time, by grace, he shall over come
it. For his mind ought to be so fre and nakyd from them, that he may at al
time offer up his heart freely to god, what ever chances or fortunyth to him
without trouble, at the lest, in his will and inner desire, he may be at quiet
and rest. He must therefore not only ryd him self and do away the things that
he has superfluus and unnecessary and al such as he has only for pleasure and
curyositye, but also in such things as ar very necessary he must take no
delight nor pleasur. At the least he must not rest in the pleasure, which he
fealyth in them. Ye rather let him learn to be weary of such burden of
necessity, and be ever desirous of most extreme pouertye and barenes that he
may be more conformable and like unto his master and savior christ which honge
al nakyd on the cross, not only of fryndes and of bodily comfort, but also of
al delyght and pleasure, full of bitter sorrow and pain.

The third impedyment.
THe third impediment is the vnmortyfied sensualite, by the which men be very
ready to gadde abroad in their affection and mind and turn them selves to the
pleasure and delyght that we have to se fair things and to hear straynge or
new things, and to to use with pleasure, any of our five senses without
necessity. These are the solaces and comfortes of nature, in the which our
sensualytie has delyght to rest in above or without necessytie or reasonable
cause and dyscression, as in meat, drink in talk, in persons or company, in
worldly things, in bodily occupacions, in familyaryties, in lyghtnes, pastime,
in fables, in heryng news and rumors, and many other vanytes both vain and
curyous, whereby the inner peace, devotion sencible, and the grace of god,
eather is let, either lost. These sow their time in fleshly delyghts, whereof
they shall repe corrupcyo^. By such unnecessary vagacions of sensies which are
sought only of a certain sensual pleasure and of no reasonable occasion, al
devotion and spiritual swetnes and sweet taste in goostlye exercise is lost at
once.

For the beastly man says saint paul sauoryth not the spiritual things
those things that be of the spirit of god, nether is ye wisdom of god found
in the land of such that lives at there pleasure. This pleasure concupisence
and delyght of the sensies or five wits draws the heart of man down from
the high goodness and felycitie, and makyth it to rest in the husks and dross
of the sensies, they trouble the mind, and do quench the charity of god in a
good man. For the pleasure of these do abate deuocio^, makyth goostly exercyses
unsavory and vnpleasante and hard, where a man, ye dredith god, ought to use
these things with great dyscrecion, according unto the necessitye of his
frail nature, not leuyng any thing that nature requiryth of necessytie, but
utterly mortyfie the pleasure and delight (specially that is unnecessary) in
them, by turning his mind and heart fully from them and the pleasure in them,
that he in no wise rest in them. He must eat, drink, sleep, talk, look,
here, for no pleasure nor sensuality, but for necessity. For all these he shall
some time need, then is he bound to take them with dyscrecion. And though he
can not use them or do them without some pleasure in them, yet he must
dylygently take very great head and be well ware in all that he can, that he
retain not in his heart any pryuye affection unto any solace or comfort bodyly
in them, while he felyth this sensual pleasure, but let it goo and pass as it
co^myth, and feade and cheryshe thy body to do god service, with al
necessaryes in dyscrecion, and thou shall not offend god in so doing, but
please him greatly. Therefore thou must with al dyscretion and indeuer go about
busely to pluck it up by the rote, and thus utterly mortyfie sensualytie in
thy self or else all that thou doist build gostly will come to naught. As when
sensualytie moutth the to talk, to gase and look about or to harken, where
thou hayst not reasonable cause, nor necessytie, then with al dyligence thou
shalt keep and brydel well thy sensies, resyst manfully and busyly ye desires
and concupysence thereof, flyeng also ye occasyons and prouocations here unto,
and strain and draw them vyolently with the might and the grace of god, unto
the contrary virtues, until that thy sensuality, al passions and vices be
mortyfyed in the and do freely obey the sprite.

The fourth impedimente.
THe fourth impediment is pride and vain glory, estymacyon and well
pleasyng, delyght of him self, of honor, praise of his works, his deeds, his
graces and gifts, the desire and joy (wherein many do rest) in the favor,
laud, and estymacion of men. For these vices many are left of god. For why?
while they think them self hoole and in health, they nether seek nether take
remedy. Wherefore, for as much as humylytie and mekenes is very necessary to
mortyfie this affection, thou must labor to come unto perfect mekenes. Thou
must seek for this mekenes and pray continually and heartily for it to god of
whom spryngyth all that good is. This is the most surest way. More over thou
must also have before thy eyes, in thy mind always, the infynyte mayestye of
god, the wisdom and the goodness of god, thou must ascrybe all thy gifts
and graces unto god only. On ye other side, thou must consider earnestlye the
bottomless pyt of thy vylenes and noughtynes, thinking still that thou art
the most proudest and vylest in the world, by reason the great multitude of
sins and thy unthankfulness, by reason also that thou should have fallen into
innumerable and more detestable sins then thou dydest, if god of his goodness
had not preseruyd the. By reason also that there is not in the whole world one
sinner, but that if he had receauid such and so many graces and occasions to do
well as you hayst, but he would have served god more faithfully than thou do.
Inwardly think also from thy heart, thy self to be the most wicked sinner in
the world because of the great multitude of thy unkindness showed unto god, and
most unworthy thou art of al his gifts and benefytes, and of all that thou
hayst receauyd of any creatures, or ever shalt receive, and therefore think
thy self worthy of al rebuke, pain, trouble, sorrow and shame. And thus
shalt thou cast down thy self under al men, chosyng to thy self the lowest
place in earth, cryinge out unto thy lord god as a pore miserable wretch.
Mercyful god be merciful unto me wretched sinner, desiring with all thy whoole
heart and wyshe thy self to be condemned, dispysed, set at naught, and mockyd
of al men, to be over trodden of all, to suffer wyllyngly shame and confusyon
for the love of god. Thus shall thou on the one side ascrybe to god that which
is his, that is, al goodness, and on the other side thou shalt show herein thy
self, and shall humble thy self greatly. This mekenes and humylitie
ouercommyth and wynnyth god almighty, and makith the apt and meet to receive
al his graces and gifts. This is a brefe way to get merits, but few takith
it. A lac who can arrogate and take upon him self that he has thy blessid
mekenes, sith it is so hard a thing, so uncertain and so secreate and
unknown a thing, to forsake and mortifye perfectlye and exactly se^sualytie,
and that most venom worm of al good deeds, vain glory.

The.v. Impedymente.
THe fyfte Impediment is seculare or wordly affection, or that we have love to
hold the favor or retain love of worldly persons. For this affection
causyth a man to be very ready to do, not only many good verteous works and
deeds but also to admyte and to do many vicious deeds and sins, eather to
please men, to have at their hands honor or commodyte, eather fearyng their
dyspleasure least he should suffer shame confusion or damage. This inordinate
love and fear makes the^ to do and speak many things which they should not
nor would not do nor speak, and to leave undone and vnspoke^, which they should
not, nor would not leave undone nor unspoken, if they lackyd this inordynate
love and fear. The affection of natural love unto their kindred. The affection
of the love that they bear for the great benefytes of fryndes, do engender in
them much vagacyon of mind, and causyth them often time be dystracted,
dysquyetyd when they fear ye loss of their favor, or desires to please and
to contynew or increase their love toward them. Ye some time yt makith the^
to dyssemble and to flatter their friends, and such as they love or fear in
their vicyous condycious and deeds. Ye to favor that in them, that they
should hate, and ought (without respect or accepcion of person) purely and
only to love in them god, and his Image, grace, and vertew, so that they
should not supporte, dissemble, flatter nor wynke at any man's fault or
mysdoynge and sin, but they should desire with all their heart the soul
health of every man. Wherefore thou must abolysh from thy heart all inordinate
love and affection, which might cause in the any unquietness, distraction or
occupy thy fansye with imagynacions, specially of ye desire that thou hayst,
either of frendshype or company, if thou wylt come to the pure love of god. For
this is a very poison and venom of the love of god, infectyng and poisoning
thy heart. Thou shalt therefore utterly sley it and mortify it in thy self all that thou can.

The syxt impedyment.
THe sixth impediment are the passions sensual, as love, and hate, with othere
ye naturaly flows out of these passions, as immoderat mirth, or gladness,
sorrow, or heaviness, hope, fear love hate and shamefastnes. To say the trewthe,
inordinate love is mother and parent of al these and of al other natural
passions. These passions are ready at every chance good or bad to dysqueet and
move the heart and mind of man. And when the inner eye is troblyd or dymmed
with these and such like, then can yt not judge nor dyscerne, nether him self,
nether what is right, nether reasonable Wherefore if thou desire to have peace
of heart, thou must keep thine heart clean, pure free from the love of creatures,
and from al such passions. Thou must also commit unto the high will and
providence of god al things, that shall fortune upon the good or bad, casting
al thy thoughts and care upon him, taking always good head, that there nothing
rest in the, nothing enter thy heart, save only god. Al things in the earth
be but vile yea and to vile that thou should so love or set by the^ that thou
take any care, have any desire inordynately to have them, or to be sorry heavy
or a shamed to lack them, or to trouble thy noble heart thy immortal and
heavenly mind for any such vile dross. Let them look for these temporal
things, love and take care, joy and be merry and glad to have these things of
this world, that are al worldly and of the world, for whom Christ would not
pray Thou can not please nor serve two masters at ons. Thou can not
love.ij. diverse and contrary things. If thou will know what thou louyst. Mark
well what thing thou thynkyst most on. Leave thou the world and the earth unto
the worldly and ye earthly and thou shall find heaven. Leave the world and have
god. Give up the earth with all his pleasure and treasure and thou shall have
god and find heaven and the bliss everlasting.

The seventh Impedyment.
THE seventh Impedymente is the bytternes of heart of melancoly, and as it were
a testines or frowardnes whereby many be very and often prone and ready unto
impacience, angrines, melancoly, hatred and to revenge. Ye and to despise other
and take al thing to the worst, very uneasy to content or please, ready to
murmur and gruge. Such commenly do murmur against their superiors and
prelates, they judge and co^dempne their neighbors, they report evil and
slander and with venomous eyes of malicie (with which they the^ selves are
infectyd) beholdynge al things, they judge al thing peruersly to the worst.
This arysyth in some of nature, and sometime or much study and then it is so
much the less fawte. But it must be mortyfied by grace. And in some it
arysyth of a certain secreate presu^pcyon and consyderacion of their own
merytes and deeds, grace or estymacion, whereby many are very ready to judge
rashely other, and to despise them preferryng them selfs and their life, and
their false ryghtwysenes, gettyng indygnacyon, and not compassyon. Some time
this bytternes arysyth of in mortyfyed desires. When they may not have that
they would then these passions inflamyth them to murmr and grudge against
their superiors, and those that will not follow or grant their unreasonable
desires or do resyste them. Sometime it arysith of hate or rancor for offenses
and greffes past for the which cause, the desire to peruerte and mistake the
deeds of the^ yt they thus hate, and sekes in their deeds somewhat to put
them to rebuke. Some time it arysyth of Envy whereby they desire to obscure or
to hyde the virtues of other (because they themselves lack them) lest that the
other should be like estemyd before them. Some time it arisith of a wickidnes,
because they envy the virtues and graces that they se in another. Therefore they
of mere malice whereof they are full repleate, interpret and take al thing to
the worst, and so offend they the holy ghost. But this bytternes of heart and al
other thou must full mortyfie, consume and overcome with the swetnes of godly
love and charytie, that thou may find in thy heart as heartily to love thy
very ennimes and persecutors as though they where thy dear fryndes as in very
deed they be, for they bring the and promote the unto great merytes. Wherefore
if thou wylt ever profyt in perfeccyon, thou must needs love thine even
christen in god.

Thou must honor the image of god in every parso^, thou must suffer no
bitterness nor dyspleasure to rest in thy heart against any man but you must
bear a merry cheer and countynance, sweet charytie, mekenes of heart, gentilnes
in speech unto al persons, ready to bear the burdens and infyrmities of al men,
to help the need of every man, to suffer and forgive the offenses of al, to
take and interpret all things to the best, to judge no parso^, to grieve no
man, but glad to do good to al persons and to comfort al generally without
acceptio^ of persons indifferently to show unto al and every one pytie and
compassion.

The.viii. Impedimente.
THe Eight impedimente is impacience and as it were a grudge or secreate
murmuring against god a discontentacion of mind in outward aduersite, infamy,
scorn, rebuke, co^tumely, loss of things, sickness, and pain of ye body,
persecucio^, dereliccion, and desolacio^ of mind, which may fortune unto a man
by ye permissio^ of god with the which god almighty is wont to try and prove
his dear belouid and chosen and yt of most exceeding charity for there
everlasting salvation. Such we must suffer so patiently that nether in word
deed, nether in our heart, thou bare nor show no rancore, evil will, or grefe.
Secondly yt we be not sad, sorry or heavy in our mind which commenly commyth
of our own love toward our self. But we must bear al thing mekely with
pacyens, thynking that we be worthy, not only of this, but of much more. We
must therefore offer our self unto the pleasure of god, in a perfect redines
of will, to al adversity yt may come possible ever here after unto us. Thirdly
by paciens in affection we ought to desire and wyshe with al our heart
adversity, that we may be the more conformable and like to our savior christ
which for our sins suffered with most meke mind and paciente heart all
worldly confusyon and shame, all pain and adversity, all mockes and scorns,
strypes, beatinges, scorginges, thorns, nailed upon ye cross, with cruel
passion and most payneful death. We ought herein (as much as we can to follow
the paciences of our savior christ. That patience may work so strongly, yt
though we feale pain, yet it shall not grieve us or vex us, for we so heartily
love them that thus does afflyct us as though they were our nyghe and specyal
fryndes.

The ninthe impedyment.
THE nynthe Impedymente is the propryetie of our own will. Unto the which
wicked and shrewd self will, our own proper will, fansye or wit, many trust
and stycke so sore, that they dare not almost put al their trust in god,
neither resygne and commyt them self unto him. But their own will and
property of their fansy, is (as it were) foundation and ground whereon they
build together, what ever they Judge, chose, do, or exercise.

From the which things and exercyses, if they be lettyd eather by obedyens
eather by charytie, eather by misfortune or other chance, anon they wexe
melancoly, angry and vex them selfs inwardly, and think they time al lost,
or that they shall speed the worse, or that they have offended or that they have been greatly hyndered in their spyrytual profyt because they have left of, or
have by lettyd by reasonable cause and consideracion, from their wilful costumes
This wicked will causyth them to gruge and murmr when their will is broken,
specialye in their holy works and exercises that they have chose^ of their
own will and brain. Yet are such exercises unpleasant in the syghte of god,
seem they vttwardely never so goodly and godly. Therefore if thou wylt profyt
in goostly life, and have thy deeds acceptable before god, thou must lay
another (ye a contrary) fundacyon.

That is to say. A full and a perfect forsakinge and renouncing of thine own
will and of thy self. Whereby thou must utterly leave and cast of thy own
self, and self will. And without gaynesayng murmur, or grug of thy heart or
mind resygne and commit the wholly unto the will and pleasure of god Embrasynge
(from the bottom of thy whole heart with full delyght of mind his blessed will.
Thou shall also obey all men in all things lawful for the honor of god,
having most perfect confydence and trust in his goodness. Which is ready every
where and present withal them that yeldyth up and commyt them self in body and
soul unto him. Which also provides and seyth better to them in prosperity
and in aduersytye yea in the lest thing that is, then they them selfs can do,
yea or can wyshe. There is nothing in man that he is more loathe to depart
wythall then his own frewyll whereof issues all evil if he mysusyth it.
Therefore if he yield and resygne the same fully and whooly unto the only will
of god, yt fundacion once so overthrow en, all the rotes and ground of vices
and sin, will fall. Then al murmur grudge in aduersytie, al disobediens wholly
commith up by the rote. Then spryngyth pacyens in aduersytie, obediens without
gaynsaying. Then great peace in conscyens and hope in god growyth and
spryngythe. Then al wexeth as ready to follow the will of god as the shadow
folowythe the body. Then al things what ever come upon him they trouble him
not. The^ melancoly, heuines and scrupulousenes are utterly dystroyed. Fynaly
as al syn and vices spryngyth of the property of our own will, even so all
vertew and perfeccyon commyth and growith in the forsakynge and mortyfyinge of
the same, in resigninge of it to the hands and pleasure of god, and following
the will of him. That thou may come to the mortyfycacyon, and to this
resygnacyon it is good for beginngers and imperfect to make obedyens unto some
other and to follow nothing their own will, but ye will of him unto who^ they
have made their obedience The perfect must needs obey or be ever ready to the
will and desire to obey unto al other where ever they perceive the will of god
and continualy they ought to observe and mark well inwardly, and to execute in all things the pleasure of god. There are three manners of obedyence. The one is,
obedyence of vow made. And this must he obseruyd outwartly in things lawful
and this is of necessity. For if we knowing the commandemente and precept of
our rule or of our prelate do not obey and follow his will leauyng our own, we
sin deadly. But the other.ij. are of more perfeccyon, and make more for the
mortyfycacyon of our own will. There second is called obedience of conformytie
and it is the prompt and redynes of the will inwardly, to follow ever more the
will of their superior, and that for pure charytie and love of god without all
regard and respect to any thank of man, so that he would rather be set at
naught and contemned, the^ to be lauded or to have any reward therefore. The
third obedyence is the obedyence of union with god, which so perfectly
knyttyth our will unto the will of god that they be become but one will.

So that what soever god permmyttyth to be done with us to come upon us, good
or bad, Joy or sorrow, comfort or desolacyon mirth or heauynes in soul or
body, we be fully perswadid, that al together commyth of the unmeasurable mercy
of god and of his goodness. Wherefore thou shalt not receive it as at the hand
of man or any other creature, but immedyatly think that it does come of god,
as from the hand of his goodness and high prouydence. Therefore thou must take
it with an untroubled and pacyent mind, eleuatyng and littyng up thy heart above
the consyderacion of the worldly course, change of worldly things, fyxing often
thy heart and thought (by pure love) upon god almighty, being always redye, and
in manner desyrus to suffer all inward pain, desolacyon, derelyccion,
pressure, agony and heaviness of heart for very love of god. And when such thing
commith, receive it with most hearty affeccion and Joy of mind be it never so
paynful, never so reprocheful, and be fully contentyd to abide ye same for ever
(if it so please god) accordydg to the example of our sauyor Jesus who in most
pain and sorrow (which began in the gardyn upon thursday at night abydyng
therein unto the most paynefull death upon the cross) clean destytute of al
comfort and sensible consolacion as though he had been the very ennemy of god,
only having the essencyal love and charytie of god, but in all other
consolacyon, he was most perfectly resigned to the will of his heavenly father.

The tenth impedyment.
THAT is an inordynate earnestnes and cleauynge to, whereby many be addycted
and so earnestlye set upon the works that they have to do, eather of
obedience, or necessity, of charity that (while they do them) their heart and
mind is al occupied in them and for the time they seem to rest in the^. And
though this delyght in such good and necessary works, be not notable
sinful, yet is it a great let and impedyment to goostly profit. Wherefore all
thy outward works that obedience or necessity requirith, thou must do them
without to much care or combraunce, or to much earnest mind or delight upon
them. And have thy affeccion resygned and thy mind liftid up unto god. For when
thy mind and heart is set to earnestly upon such lauful busynes, it is
distractyd and by yt distractio^ thy mind is the more darkened and thy gostly
affection decayth and thy gostly exercise losyth his swetnes, and it will be the
harder for ye to recollecte thy wits conuenyently to prayer. Learn therefore
what ever you doyste, to have thine heart and mind more upon god, by inward
exercise of love, and use also more often such gostly and inward exercise,
then the outward works of virtue. But yet to have thy mind and heart as it were
rapte upon god while thou doyst outward busynes, that is not easy, but only
unto such whose love and affeccion is fre and ryd clean, of al things under
god, such one can (without great labor) when him listith call in his whole mind
and memory upon god only. But if thy mind be comberyd, eather with carefulnes,
either with any passion, either to earnestly set to do any outward thing, then
shalt thou feale it very hard for the to recollect thy self when thou
would. Therefore such dystraccyon is a great hynderance in ye pure and
restful love of god.

The eleventh impedyment.
THat is scrupulosytie of the mind for lack of a full confydence in the
infinite goodness of god. This scrupulosytie vereth and troublyth very many by
reason of the inordynate love that they have toward them selfs. Whereby they
fear more the wrath and the venga^ce of god, hell and his justice or
rightwisenes, then they do love his mercy and goodness. And therefore they do al
good works, and avoid al evil that they do avoid, only of seruyle fear.
Therefore they do not faythfuly and earnestly amend their fautes, with whose
sharp stinges and remorse, they be often time payned and greuyd and they can
not put their whoole trust and confydence in god The cause is. For such is
their trust in god as is their love. Little love little trust. But a great love,
bryngyth a great confydence. O blessid hope. For so long as thou doist not
slack or decay thy duty there by but doyste indeuer thy self to more
earneste mortificacyon and to more pacyence in aduersytie and to more
thankefullnes in prosperytie, that hope is a very blessed hope.

The twelfth impediment.
THat is to much liberty of the fancy in wanderynges in vain and
unprofitable thoughts which is an unstableness of heart and negligence of the
inner manne, and thereof commith it that the heart and mind is contynualy
occupied and full of imaginacions and thoughts of other things and can not
take heed nor parceaue the inspyracions of god. For the mind of man can not be
unoccupied. Therefore when we do not occupy it with good thoughts then does
other thoughts take place sometime ydel, sometime evil.

Both these and al other must be utterly put out of mind and specialy such
thoughts as are evil. For though these grow not to consent of sin, yet they
do defyle the soul and make heavy the holy ghost, and do much goostly hurt unto
the soul. These therefore and al other imaginacions and thoughts must be
utterly cast away and mortifyed For they arise of our own negligence because
we do not labor to occupy our mind with holy and gostly thoughts, but
suffer it to wander, and pass not to waste unprofitably our precious time.
Therefore when we would turn our heart and mind unto god inwardly we find our
heart and mind combred with innumerable dystraccyons which do let greatly our
gostly profyt. Thou shall therefore lay a part all occasyons of vagacyons of
mind, and as much as is possible all ymagynacions, thoughts, fancies and
memories of al things of al men's sainges and doings, or of that, that shall
come upon the herafter, and al other fancies, thou shall, I say, put them
utterly out of thy mind. And recolectinge together al ye mightes of thy soul
inwardely in thy self, thou shall abide and learn to dwell, in gostly rest and
silence of thy heart, that thy mind and heart being puryfyed and cle^syd from
the memory and imaginacions of al creatures, and thy memory lyftyd up to god
what ever thou doyst thou may tend and draw toward him and cleave fast unto
him only. What nedest thou, or why trauelist thou about so many things? Think
upon one. Desire and love one, and thou shall find great rest. Therefore where
ever thou be, let this voice of god be at thine ear. My son return inwardly
unto thy heart, abstract thy self from al things and mind me only. Thus with a
pure mind in god clean and bare from the memory of al things, remaining
immovable in him, thinking and desiring nothing else but him only, as though
there were nothing else in the world, but he and thou alone together.

And with all mekenes most fervently labor and covet to come to this one
point, yt thy whole soul with al thy mightes and powers hereof colectid in god,
may become one spyryte with him And that thou may the sooner come hereto,
thou shalt therefore fyxe in thy mind always the memory of thy sauyor christ
crucified. And remember co^tinally his great mekenes, his love, obedyence, his
pure chaistiti his inestimable pety and mercy, his unspeakable pacyens, and al
his holy virtues in his humanytie. And remember also his mighty mercy, how he
created the, how he redeemed, the how he iustyfyeth the and workyth in ye al
virtue graces and goodness. Thou must so hartly remember him that thy memory
may turn in to love and affection. Thou shalt also use often to draw thy mind
from the remembrance of al creatures and bring thy heart as it were unto a
certain silence, and rest from the jangling and company of all things under
god. And when thou canste come here unto the^ is thy heart a place mete and
ready for the Lord god to abide in, there to talk unto thy soul.

The thurtenth impedyment.
THat is study unmeasurable, where in the understanding is al together occupied
with bare speculacion of such things wherein is nether devotion nether
incensyng or kyndlyng of ye mind, nor virtuous affection is sought for, but
the bare redynge for it self, because it delyghtyth or pleasythe the reder, or
else it is taken for some vain knowledge. Such manner of parsons become vain
and puffyd up in their great lernyng, and of such knowledge presu^ptuous yet
very baren in the affeccyo^ of that whereof they ca^ so well talk. For they can
babble and say much of spyritual life and goostly fealing but they never taste it
but be for from the fealynge here of. Thou shall not read and study therefore
that thou may be countyd learned, but that thou may be the more devout
and godly. Always think rather that thou art ignorant and can nothing. And
desire to know nothing with ye holy apostle paul, but thy Lord Jesus Christ
and the same crucyfied. For if thou can and knoweste Christ, it is ynowghe
though thou know nothing else. Exercise thy self in his life and passion
co^tynually beholding deuoutlye in medytacyon, what he suffered, that thou
may have compassyon and sorrow with him, and how he suffered, with what
Obedyence, mekenes, pacyence, with all other virtues, that thou thereby may
be prouokyd to follow like virtues and wherefore or why he suffered, that thou
may be thankeful unto him in loving him again as he louyd the sith he
suffered passion and death for the. Let there grow and increase in the
contynually desire to be like unto thy loving Lord and sauyor Jesus Christ in
sufferyng, that as he suffered most cruel passion and payneful death for the,
so thou must be wylyng to suffer al adversity and grief for his love and
honor, that he shall lay and suffer to com upon the.

The.xiiij. Impediment.
THat is the inordinate delectacion, and as it were a rest in gostly and
spiritual swetenes, as when we do rest in the delight in grace, in deuocio^, in
love, in sensible or felyng devotion, which be all the gifts of god lent us. We
must not rest in them, or set to much delyght in the^, but use them as means
to lead and to lift our heart and full affection to god for him self. They are
not the very sanctimony and charity, but certain gifts of god given to us
for a help to our infirmity, that we should mortify more diligently the
inordinate love and affeccio^ to our self, and not that we should rest in them.
The more then that a man is mortified to him self in all these points that are
here spoken of, the more charity and true love he has, and no more. Yea
whatsoever he askith of god (if he does not use it to the mortifiyng of him
self) it is impure and myxte with nature, which sekes it self in all things
so subtylly (yea in godly things) that if it be stayed or let on the one
side, it will craftelye apeare and crepe in at another hole before we can well
perceive it.

The.xv. Impediment.
THat is the coldness in devotion and in the desire of perfeccion, whereby many
be led by costume, do many good works, thynkinge that perfeccion lies more in
the multitude of good works, then in the fervor and increase of charity, and
therefore they follow not the tracte and monicion of the holy ghost in forsaking
them self. But thou shall take and hold this rule as the sum of gostly
profit. At al time as nyghe as thou can, keep thy heart and mind elevated
unto god with lovely turnynge and memory of him, with fervent desire to please
him most perfectly, sighing and crying with out ceasyng with some brief burning
aspyracions and lovely sentences: as for example.

Oh my lord god, ye only life of my soul. Oh the whole desire of my heart, when
shall most hertely love the, when shall I perfectly and utterly forsake all the
world, and contemn my own self for thy pure love.

Oh that I could depart wholly from my self, and be wholly turned to the my
lord, that I might with most burning love be transformed and altered into the.

Oh the sweet thought of my heart, grant me grace to love the with all my hole
heart, with all my hole soul and mind, with all the myghtes and powers of my
body and soul. And thus diverse ways as the holy ghost shall put in thy mind at
al times thou must desire, love, sighe for thy love and thy lord Jesus. Thou
must also laud, and praise and give thanks often times unto him. This is most
worthy and most noble exercise, whereby thou may optaine infinite things of
the infinite goodness of thy lord god, for the desire of charity should extend
it self infinitely. God him self commands us to ask, and he him self
also has promised to hear us, which of his infinite liberalite suffers no
sygh nor moan made to him, to pass void or without fruit. For either he
infu^deth grace, either increases the same, either draws the heart to him
more effecteousely, either he refreshes it swetely, either gives it some
gostly light, or else co^firmith it more steadfastly. Do not therefore loose by
negligence, nor neglecte such noble gifts which you may obtain every hour.
Cease not, fly not from ye face of thy loving lord, but follow and pursue thy
dear love and lord through fire and water. And when thou art distracted from
him, when thou art temptid or overthrown thereby, be it never so often, or
never so foul a fall, return again I say unto the lord of all mercy and
pytie, and he will not forsake the. Begin again boldly, intend ma^fully, and
most hertely desire to consume and bestow all that thou art and al thine in
his love and laud, in his honor and service. For vntha^kefulnes causes the
well of his mercy to dry up, and the spirit within us cries without ceaseing
in our soul yt we should be thankeful unto god for his gifts, lauding and
praysyng him in heart, word, and deed, which is blessed and praise worthy
world without end. Amen.

and Certain steps of stayres general to know how much thou do profit
and grow in the love of god, and forsaking of thy self. And as often as thou
shall look hereon, lament and be sorry that thou art no farther forward, and
force thy self with a good hope and courage in god to increase and grow better.
THey stand on the first stayre or step which are well grounded in catholic
faith and the fear of god, and for gods sake exchew al deadly syn. But yet
they are but cold in charity, and neglygent and slow in the gostlye life.
For they seek al together natural commodities, and sensual co^fortes and
solace, whose gostly light is but dym and obscure, their living is daungerus
and not without peril, and their salvation is but doutful. Because that while
they think it enough for salvation to exchew mortal syn, yet they can not well
discern nor judge, nor well exchew and escape al mortal sin. The conuersacyon
of such is in as much parel as are they that dance or walk upon the brinke
of the pyt of hell which with alytle tryp fall flat down hedlong. For these are
in manner in the affect and desire of fyn. Not wythstandyng if such exchew
deadly syn and depart so out of this life, they shall be sauid but as saint
paul says, as it were by and through fire for they shall pass hardly through
that hot and horrible fire of purgatory, where their venial sins shall be full
sharply and sore syngid and purgyd because they were neglygent, and would not
cut away the affeccion of sin, and avoid and purge with penance their venyal
sins while they were here. And then their good deeds shall find but small
fruit, by reason they were not done of, and with, pure affeccion but were in
manner stained with some wordly impuritie as with vaynglory or other worldly
natural respect.

The second step or stayre.
THey stand on ye second stayr yt following ye holy gosts inspiracions and holy
calling of god do avoid and keep the^ self from the vanity and vain pleasure
and commodyties of the world, and from ye occasions of sin, and seek god and
gostly counsel, and famyliaritie of good and godly persons. They frequente the
church and the service of god and devoutly hearyth the word of god taught,
doing many good works. These though they void diligently the great euyls,
yet they fly not the other secret snares, in the leasser sins, imperfeccyons
and fawtes as in soden passions of wrath, of vain glory, vain words, of
light judgment etc. But these are slack and neglygent to take upon them hard
exercyses, and pass not to grow unto more hyer perfeccyon, for they think it
suffycient and a great perfeccio^, to avoid ye greatter venyals, and to have
forsaken ye world, and thus thinking that they are somewhat, and in very truth
they are right naught and standing in their own conceit thinking they need
nor more virtue or better life, trustyng in ye great goodness of god, or rather
(if they search and ransacke depely) trustyng in their own good deeds, they
content them self with that state and care for no other nor further increase.

Though this estate be not evil but better the ye other, yet it is very far
from perfeccio^.

The third steap or stayre.
IN the third stayre stand they, that have more perfectlye vanquyshyde and
over thrown the world, the flesh sensualytie, and also their own will, sloth
and neglygens, and geueyth them selfs unto hard bodily exercyses, as unto
fast watch, to wear vile, hard, and straynge clothinge as woollen sack,
hear, and are given unto much vocal prayer which thing without dout are no
small help and furderance unto perfeccio^, yet because such sort do al these
good deeds and godly things not for pure sincere, and only honor of, god but
to avoid ye pain of hell and of purgatory, and to come to the joy of heaven,
these seek more their own co^modite then the will and glory of god. So while
thus of impure intent they do these things, they are dysceauyd by the subtyltie
of ye devil, with this impure desire of heaven. And using impurely these good
deeds do content them self herin. Thus labor not they to know the nobylytie of
the inward exercise and to come to the very ground of true virtues, which are
perfect mortificacion, pefect mekens, charytie, and other virtues. And beside,
they follow the inclynacyon and tracte of nature by love natural toward
creatures which they bare toward persons temporal to worldly things, and
sundry occupacions supposing this love, as in deed it is, to be lawful, but
little they know how great a let is unto the divine grace of very perfeccyon.
And by these, they are dayelye dystract, with innumerable, impure and unquiet
affeccions, cares, carkes and thoughts yt springith and commith of this natural
love.

The fourth steap or staier.
THey stand upon the fourth steap or stayre which not only with daily does
bodyly and goostly exercise, as in mental prayers, and medytacyons, in
syghynges, compassyons and holy desires do dylygently labor in their inner man.

Yet these as the othere sekyth as much or more their own will and sensible
devotion, the^ the pleasure of god, and lack the true forsakyng of the^ self.
For they glory and joy in these their exercyses and swet devotion, supposyng it
to pass the trade and exercise of other and with their will would never change
it. Wherein apereth a point of the propriete of their vnmortyfied will, which
they have not forsaken in this point. And al though for the time that they
feale this sensyble devotion, they offer them self unto gods will and
pleasure, to suffer and abide al adversity at his pleasure. Yet when got
takith away this devotion from them then were they heavy and are dyscoragyd. If
they betowchyd with any aduersytie, rebuke or shame, or be bid to do any thing
that is against their mind and will, by and by they show what they be, and how
unmortified their will is, then they gruge and murmur, for they have still lying
burning within them the love of the^ self whereby the devil craftily
retractyth and withdrawyth their will, which they seemed to offer wholly unto god,
and so kepyth he them in porpryetie of their will, which they parceaue not, for
they desire their own proper will be done, rather, the^ the pleasure of other.
But if these could ons, give up and commyt them self and al other unto the
high prouydens and pleasure of god only without am withstanding or retract of
their heart, the^ should they grow to much perfeccyon in a little time

The fyfte steap or stayre.
Upon the fyft stayre stand they, which in all their good works and
exercyses, in all there conversation do resygne and renounce their own will into
the high pleasure and will of god.

They be obedient, not only unto al holy inspyracyons and unto their superiors,
but also unto al men, wherein so ever it semyth that it may stand with good
reason and that for the honor of god, and their own mortificacyon. They labor
and endeavor themself al together unto cleanes of heart and pureness of
conscience, to lovely and fyrely desires of god, to devout prayers and unto al
other holy works both goostly and bodily with the which they desire to please
god and to be vnytyd and knyt unto him. But because that these are but young
beginners and have not been but a while trauelid and co^uersant with in this
state and stayre, and because as yet al therie affeccyons are not fully pullid
up by the rote and mortified by often travel in these exercyses, therefore some
time the wynd of in constance causyth the^ to stagger, ye and to slyp from this
stayre, and to fall again into some point of properte. But these perceive their
fall, and arise again by repentance, and returning again unto god, do clime
up again upon this stayre by full resignacyon of the^ self unto the blessed
will of god.

The syxte steap or stayre.
THey stand upon the syxte stayre which with many and often desires, and devout
exercyses do resygne perfectly al property, without al retraccyon or
repyninge of heart, with perfect and full constance to persevere, in to the high
will and pleasure of god, knowlegyng certeynly that al things both prosperites
and aduersyties that come over such as louyth affecteously god, makyth for
them, and turns unto their profyt and furderith their gostly commodytie. And
these exercise them self very busylye, in the very love of god. But these of a
certain secreat and crafty natural inclynacyon toward them selfs, do seek
to gredely with a certain propryetie, at the hand of god goestly or spiritual
comfort or consolacyon, whereby they might the easelyer bear al aduersyties,
whose intent plainly is not al perfectly pure therefore they let greatly the
works of the holy ghost in them selfs. What gifts soever yt we receive of
god whether they be outeward or inward, bodyly or gostly, and do not use them
unto our mortifycacyon, and the pure honor of god we do abuse them unto our
own condempnacyon.

The seuenthe steap of stayre
Upon the seventh steap stand they, that can helthesomely and well use does
their hands alyke, that is to say, the right hand of prosperytie, and the
lift hand of aduersytie at al times very ready to follow the high pleasure and
the will of god as well in the inward co^templacion or introuercyon, also in the
outward workyng, as well in the inward goostly intent as in outward and sensyble
love. They do desire to be made perfectlye like unto the holy life and passion
of our sauyor Christ in all adversity and derelyccion or desolacyon findyng
goostly rest, for they are grounded steadfastly in bare love, in whom they have
learned, not only to do great things, but also to suffer very hard things.
And therefore they are indewed of god with many great and secreate graces. They
be lightenyd in their understanding, they are insensyd in their affection with
most burning charytie, but because yt these (being ignorante and not well
remembered) that plente is perilous, some time they are blinded with Ignorance
and do mysuse the gifts of god that they often do receive, and do rest to much
in the sencyble love of god al though they do not perceive ye same, but this
must they mortyfye also if they will be perfect.

The eight steap or stayre.
THey stand upon the eight stayre which have resygned them self and all
theirs purely in to the hands and pleasure of almighty god, being fully
contentid with all things, what ever he shall send the^ or do with them in this
world, and for ever reserving no kind of propryetie nor no point of any love
unto any creature, but purely and only in him, yea cleauyng only to him and not
cleauyg unto the gifts of god in them self. These above other are vysited
with great gifts of god, and with secreat reuelacyons the which gifts and
secreat reuelacion, by reason of a certain secreat propryetie they be not so
glade to want as to have, for this cause they have yet a point of secreat
propriety which god knowyth right well, and is a fault and an-imperfeccyon
before him. For they ought to be so fre in their heart from all the gifts of god
as though they had receauyd none, and when they receive, they should only
praise the great and merciful lyberalitie of god, toward so unworthy
wretchyd sinners, and turn al to the honor and praise of god and to resygne
them self unto his will and pleasure to be destytute, to lack, and want al his
gifts, and to remain redye to al derelyccion and desolacyon gostly and
bodyly. For in such gifts and reuelacyons standyth not perfeccyon, but by
these gifts god almyghtie does declare his great goodness, to alure and intyce,
to anymate and encourage us to follow and to seek affectuously perfeccyon.

The nynthe steap or stayre
Upon the nynth stand they, which with strong and hard exercise, and earneste
and holy desires, for the pure love of god they have in manner almost consumed
their flesh and blod and ye mary of their body and bones that they might
seem to have no more strenghe the^ the life and quyckenyng of the holy ghost
does mynister unto them. For their blod semyth to be sodde up and wastyd with the
hot fervor of gods love which chalenges in them perfect lordshyp rule, and
dominacyo^ makith and causyth them to suffer and to do above nature. They are
the dear darlings and beloved children of god, though they are (for the most
part) hydden and unknown unto the world, in to whom he infundith the plenty
of his gifts and graces, and some time he lyftith them up to have a ceartaine
sight and contemplacion of his blessid essence or being. Yet are they so
mortyfyed, that they will not rest in these gifts and graces for they have
vtterli trodden under there feat al regard of their own commodyte and pleasure,
and have laid there fundacion in only bare faith formyd with perfect charity
whereby they desire to suffer al aduersytie for the honor of god and the health
of souls with out al stay or help of any dyuine consolacion or comfort, for
they reken and count the^ selfs worthy of al abieccyon and desolacion Also
they think without al fayning them selves under and worsse then al creatures,
and wissyth nothing more then to be set at naught, to be dyspised and over
trodden of al creatures, and to be put to most grievous myserie and most
bitter and crewel death. And though they are very well taught to have al their
joy only in the cross of their Lord Jesus, yet for all that they do never let
(by their negligence) the manyfold heavenly ilumynacyons, vysitacyons, and
goostlye influence, but they offer the^ selfs always (as much as in them
lies) like ready wyllyng and as lively instruments of ye holy gooste unto al
things that the holy gooste shall vouchesafe to work in them lest they should
be unthankful unto the grace of god. They give light in good example and they
burn in the charity of god, and their neyghbors. At any other time when they
be not vysitid, the^ as concerning the outward man they seek most abyectest
and vyleste things, and to be without al mean, comfort and consolacyon. And
concerning the inward man, they seek bare love and charity without al
sensible comfort and consolacion grief and heuines of heart in so much that
they can never suffer so much but they ever desire to suffer and abide more
sorrow wherbi they might be more conformable or like unto our Lord and master
Christ, which in the time of his bitter pain and passion wrestlelyd against
sensualytie with bare love destitute of al comfort and consolacyon goostly or
bodyly, that he might redeem and also teach us the same lesson, for this is
the very way of abnegacio^ or forsaking of our selfs. By the which way we
must follow him through the narowe gate of salvation where unto he bring us
safely by his grace, which lyuith there and raignith everlasting lord god Jesus
Christ our savior for ever and ever. Amen.

A good token and argument of a well forsaken and well resygned will.
IF thou have a fyrme confidence and perfect trust in the goodness of god in
all chances.

If thou doiste take all thing what ever chances good or badde as at the
hand of god, and think it to come of his sendyng, and doist think and
unfeignedly believe that such things are chosen as the best for the by the
high prouydence of god, and therefore doyste commytte thy self and all thine
wholye unto gods will and pleasure.

If in all kind of aduersytie and mysery thou makeste no complaynte to no
parson, nor seekeste no comfort nor consolacion, but humblye and pacyentelye
doyste abide the vttermoste of the high pleasure of almyghtye god, offering
thy self ready, unfeignedly to abide all that thou sufferedst (if it so please
god) worlds without end.

If thou doyste think thy self worthy of all that which thou sufferedste,
and much more and worse, and therefore thou art ready to suffer much more
harder, more greuouse, and more paynefull things then thou doyste suffer. If
thou be lean and think unfeignedly thou art unworthy that the earth should
bare the, and therefore thou think thy self unworthy of any goodness and
most worthy of al pain and grief.

FINIS.
Imprynted at London by Ihon Waley dwelling in Foster lane.


