A BRIEF AND TRVE Declaration of the sickness, last words, and death of the
King of Spain PHILIP the second of that name, who died in his Abbey of S.
Laurence at Escuriall seven miles from Madrill the 13. of September 1598.

Written from Madrill in a Spanish letter, and translated into English
according to the true Copy.

Printed at London by Edm. Bollifant, for William Aspley. 1599

A brief and true declaration of the sickness, last words, and death of the
King of Spain PHILIP the second of that name, who died in his Abbey of S.
Laurence at Escuriall, seven miles from Madrill, the 13. of September 1598.
TO satisfy my promise, and to give answer to your letters, requiring my
advertisement of these present occurrences, I pray you understand, that this
year 1598. the Royal Majesty of our Lord Don PHILIP the third, being then
but Prince, was upon S. John's day, in the market place at Madrill, to behold
the Bullbaytings and other pastymes which were there, at which sports the King
his father (which is now in heaven) was not present by reason of the pain of
the gout which sore troubled him. His Highness being returned from the foresaid
place, discoursed unto his father all that he had seen, whereupon his Majesty
answered, I am right glad to see thee so pleasant, for thou shall never so long
as I live see me have any ease or comfort in this my painful disease. And
thereupon commanded preparation to be made for his removing to Escuriall.
Doctor Marcado one of his ordinary Physicians told him, he ought not to
stir, least the extremity of his pain should increase. The King answered,
seeing I must be carried thither when I am dead, I had rather be carried
thither being alive. So that in the end to satisfy his desire, his footmen
took him up upon their shoulders, and spent six days in going those seven
miles, where after that he came, he was better for some few days, though he
was not able to stand, but was forced either to sit or lie. But presently the
gout reseasing him, accompanied with a fever, made him far sicker then he was
before, his Physicians showed all the skill they could to give him some ease,
but the extremity of pain so increased, that presently he entered into
consideration of his soul by shriuing and confessing himself, and receiving
the sacrament, at which instant he commanded Garcia de Loyaza to be consecrated
Archbishop of Toledo, which was performed by the Popes Nuntio with all the
solemnities and rites accustomed. There happened also to this good King upon
his right knee, a bile so angry and swelling, that he could take no rest, his
Physicians being amazed thereat, one Elias a Physician of Toledo, by whose
advice and direction of others, one Vergara a licentiate Surgeon having applied
al fit means to ripen the sore, opened it, and let forth all the bad matter
therein contained: soon after the which, there arose four other biles upon
his breast, which likewise were ripened, opened and cleansed. This corrupt
matter bred a great company of lice, which were very hard to be killed, he
remaining in this mean time so weak that he was feign to be turned in sheets,
and lift up with four men, whilst two other made all things plain, soft, and
clean under him. Ten days before he died, he fell into so great a trance
(lasting five hours) that it was easily perceived, that his life and vital
powers began to fail, which caused diverse Lords in Madrill to provide mourning
garments. Being returned to himself, he said to the Archbishop and to those of
the chamber there present: My friends and subjects, your sorrows are of no
force to recover my health, for no humane remedy can profit me. The chief
matter of your care ought to be to provide in time all necessaries for my
funerals, and in the mean time I command you to call hither your Prince,
which shall be your future King, and fetch hither unto me my coffin that I
shall be laid in, and place here upon this little cupboord, a dead man's skull
crowned with my imperial crown, all which was forthwith done. The Prince and
the Infanta his sister being in presence, the King called for John Ruyz de
Valasco, putting him in mind of a cofer which he had committed to his
custody, willing him to fetch it, the cofer was very little, yet when it was
brought he caused it to be opened, and taking forth a precious stone of an
infinite value, caused it to be delivered to his Daughter, speaking thus unto
her. My daughter Izabella Eugenia Clara, receive this Jewel brought unto me by
your mother, the which I bestow upon you for my last farewell. And then
turning him to the Prince, said, are you contented with this that I give unto
your sister? Who answered, yea sir, although you gave her all that I have. This
answer lyking the King very well, he willed them to look in the cofer for an
other paper, and giving it to the Prince, he told him, that therein he should
see the form how to govern his kingdom. Then they took out of the said
cofer, a whip with bloody knots, which the King holding up said, This blood is
mine own, and yet not mine but my fathers, who is in heaven, who made use of
this kind of exercise, and therefore to make known the value of it, and the
truth of it I thought good to reveal it unto you. After this he commanded a
paper to be taken from under his pillow, which being read by John Ruyz,
contained these words. We PHILIP by the grace of God, King of Castile and Lion
etc. having governed this Realm 40. years, in the 71. years of mine age,
give over this Kingdom unto my God to whom it belongs, and commend my soul
into his blessed hands, to perform therewith whatsoever it shall please his
divine Majesty. Commanding that this my body so soon as ever my soul shall
be separated from the same, be embalmed: then apparelled with a Royal robe,
and so placed in this brazen shrine here present, and that the hours be kept,
with all rites and ceremonies as the law requires, and I command my funerals
to be solemnized in this manner. Before shall be borne the Archbishops banner,
then the Cross, the Monks and the Clergy presently shall follow, all in
mourning garments. The Adelantado shall bear the Royal standard trailing it
upon the ground. Adelantado is the Admiral of the Galleys.
The Duke of Nayara shall carry the crown under a canopie. The Marquess of
Aguillar shall carry the sword. My body shall be borne by eight of my chiefest
servants all in mourning weeds, with burning torches in their hands. The
Archbishop shall follow the Nobles, and our universal Heir shall follow on the
one side all in dewle. When they come to the Church, my body shall be placed in
the hearse there of purpose erected. All the prayers and devotions ended, the
Prelate shall place me in the vault, my last habitation which shall be given to
me forever. All this performed, your Prince, and third King of that name, shall
go to S. Ierosmes at Madrill there to keep the holy ceremonies of the ninth
day yearly, and my Daughter with my sister her Aunt shall go to the gray
Nuns barefoote. Then speaking to the Prince he said, besides all that which
I have heertofore spoken to you, I pray you have a great care and regard to
your sister, because she was my looking glass and the light of mine eyes.
Keep the common wealth in peace, placing there good governors to reward the
good and punish the bad. Let the Marquess of Mondeiar be delivered out of
prison, on this condition that he come not to the Court. Let the wife of
Antonio Perez also be set at liberty, so that from henceforth she live in a
monastery, and let her daughters inherit the patrimony which she brought.
Forgive those which are prisoners for hunting, with all such as are condemned
to die, (the Kings pardon wanting) and so I give my last farewell to my
children, commending them to all peace and safety. Then the Prince asked Don
Christofer de Mora for the Royal Key, commanding him to deliver it to him,
who craved pardon of his Highness, because it was the Key of all trust and
confidence, which he could in no wise deliver without the leave of his Lord
the King. Well, said the Prince, it is enough. And so went into his chamber,
whilst Don Christofer returning to the King, whom he found a little cheered,
said unto him. Sir, his Highness asked of me the Royal Key, which I have denied
him as having no leave from your Majesty. But the King told him he had done
ill. Not long after he fell into another fit, whereupon he called for the
extreme unction, which was given unto him by the Archbishop. Then he called for
a Crucifixe which had been kept safely in a chest, which was the very same his
father held between his hands, when he died, with the which he desired
likewise to die. Hereupon his Highness returned to his father, at whose coming
Don Christofer upon his knees presented to him the Royal Key, which the
Prince received, and gave it to the Marquess of Denia: whereupon the King
said to him. Remember I commend unto you Don Christofer for the most faithful
servant which I ever had, and so have care of all the rest, which I commend
unto you. And so he took his leave of him again embracing him, at which
instant his speech failed. And in this sort he continued two days, and died
upon Sunday the 13. of September about three of the clock in the morning. The
body was buried upon Monday the 14. of that month, about nine of the clock in
the morning, the Archbishop saying the mass. The new King came from Escuriall
the 16. of that instant, leaving his sister at the gray Nuns, and so went to
S. Ierosmes, the Court remaining in great mourning and lamentation, making
preparation for the great funeral.

FINIS.

