Londoners THEIR ENTERtainment in the Country.

Or the whipping of Runnawayes.

Wherein is described, LONDONS MISERY.

THE COUNTRIES CRVELTIE.

AND MAN'S INHVMANITIE.

OS HOMINI SVBLIME DEDIT



AT LONDON Printed by H. L. for C. B. 1604.

London to thy Citizens, especially to such right Honorable, right
Worshipful, and others, as were thy true-borne ministering comfort to thee, in
time of visitation. Health, peace, and plenty.
THat London has been honorable for her state, admired for her wealth, and
famous for her nurcerie, what living soul has not heard or seen. That she is
now most miserable, and ouer-whelmed with sorrows deluge; witness these lines
of lamentation: oh time of heaviness! that such royalty should be pressed with
misery. But of her misery I have writ at large; the judgment whereof (right
Honorable, right Worshipful, and wise) relieth on your favorable censures,
who have both authority to convict, and knowledge to commend. If therefore out
of this poesy of green herbs, gathered out of a spacious Country garden, you
make your several choices of some (though but of few) to your contents, I
shall think my travails richly guerdoned: suruay them curiously, and you
shall find much variety, but especially of Rue, Wormwood, and Time: But
indeed we may rue the time that ever that bitter weed Wormwood became so
sweet a Nosegay. My labor is past, my book newly come from the press, and
it is in your hands to be censured; if therefore it pass with your good
likings, my desires are accomplished, and my expectation satisfied. In hope
whereof I rest.

The whipping of Runnawayes.
Even then when Peace and Plenty, like a pair of true borne Twins kissed, and
most lovingly embraced one another, not only in the middle center, but also in
every private angle and skirt of this stourishing Iland-Euen then at that
sweetest instant of love and amity, when the thought of man could not have
comprehended a more blessed time, then, then I say (note but the sudden
alteration of Fortune) was transformed our so happy and prosperous estate. But
alas why should I exclaim against Fortune, which is nothing else but the idle
fantasy of ignorant men, when indeed the repentant returning from our
intolerable sins, might have continued our bliss and happiness. What should
I say? what should I write? but that our Summum bonum became our omnimoda
miseria, our good, our worse, by that unexpected change, such is the reward of
sin.

No sooner was the Lady of felicity (the divine Eliza) departed from this Chaos
of iniquity, as one too worthy the government of so wicked a people, by reason
of her gentle chasticements, but in the self same hour of her departure, did
our almighty Father not leave us destitute, but gave in place of our deceased
Sovereign, a royal King of an excellent and princelike substance, molded
with a divine spirit, ordained before for the full felicity of this
languishing Realm, to the end that our disobedience may blush at the sight of
his so gracious respecting us; such a Prince I say that one wrincle seated in
his browe, should dart such terror to the heart of sin, that not one of us
should dare to offend the sacred Deity of the Almighty. But alas, such and
so great was the root of wickedness grafted in our hardened hearts, that as
before so still do the forward branches of horrible sin spring up in us,
wherewith we make us arborss to shadow our lascivious desires, vayling one
sin under another, without either respect or fear.

The King of Kings, the Almighty glorious Essence, noting the stubbornes of so
stiffnecked a people, and seeing that notwithstanding all his threatenings,
thundered into our ears, by his Prophets, the holy Ministers of his word, we
would not repent, but still persevere in our abominable wickedness; even then
when we thought our selves most secure, and shadowed even under the wings of
happiness: Did the God of Justice, the high Almighty one, command his Angel to
vnsheath his sword, which seemed even to have rusted in the scabberd, by means
of his long suffering, and much patience, and with that rod of his severe
correction, to lay on heavy load upon the burdened backs of sinners: Oh how
unwillingly did he proceed to this deadly medicine, like a careful
Physician, trying all salues for cure, before he put his patient to extremest
pain: Yea he has often told us so, by the tongs of his Prophets, and like a
loving Father sull many times entreated us wicked and sinful people, even at
our own doors, to abstain from the filthy desires of the flesh, but we
regarded them not, neither was there any, no not one that feared the judgments
of the highest. Wherefore being overcome with the intollerablenes of our sins,
at last as it were breaking forth into such like words, Since they so slightly
regard those whom I have sent with the tongs of fathers, kindly entreating
them to refrain from sin, and they like disobedient children respect them
not, neither him that sent them, he gave this charge to the Angel of his
judgment. Let them feel in full measure the Judgments of the highest:
Therefore sinite them with the Plague and Pestilence, that they may know, that
I the true and living God can bridle the lofty heads of the wicked. And
forthwith was his power by his just judgment of Plague and Pestilence showen
unto us, when after we had felt his scourge heavy upon us, we could then cry
out and say, we have sinned Lord, we have sinned, Oh forbear thy rod etc.

You know (most kind respected Readers) that the first stroke of visitation
lighted on the very heart of this Realm, London the mother of Cities, and the
Nurce of Countries, even in the prime, and on the neck of Englands newborn
happiness, when the sweets of Flora began to diaper the deasie spangled pauement
of the earth, upon the high pinacles of which admired City, the messenger of
God (as I may say) sitting ready to strike at the commandment of the Lord,
those, and in such places as his masters should give him in chardge. At length
(but yet alas too soon) fell the reward of sin gently on the Skirts which we
term the Subburbs of the City. The reason why it pleased God to strike the
exterior members, before the interior parts: I mean the Subburbs before the
body of the City, may demonstrate unto us, that the Lord would yet look down
in mercy on the body, if that the perishing of some loose members may cause
repentance. For as in a fair and costly garment, after it is framed by the
labor of the workman, and through his negligence, or mistaking, it chance to
be made somewhat unfit, or with some other fault, and therefore does
displease the owner, yet if it may be mended by altering the skirts, or
extremest parts, without taking asunder of the whole, he will be drawn to a
better liking of it: So the Lord, that ever takes delight in sparing and
showing pity, and does seek to recall many into the way, by the punishment
of sewe, in the first breaking forth of his wrath, began to punish the skirts
and subburbs of the City, that the City it self seeing the rod so near,
should fear betimes. And indeed the action of God so distributing and
dispiercing his judgments, may seem besides this, to have had another cause,
namely, the excessive abomination of filthiness practiced in those places, more
then the rest of the City. That as in a body, all the superfluity of
extremities, are by the power of a vegetative heat, wronght to the extremetie
of the body: So this filthy froth of sensual beastliness, being by the force
of good government, (such is the benefit of good laws put in use) expelled from
the inner part, and as I may say, the heart of the City, did residence in the
utmost skirts and appendent members thereunto, and became a fit matter for the
first burning of Gods reuengefull wrath. Afterward, partly by the vicinitie of
place, and partly by the vnrespectiuenes of the infected, and the want of care
of the sound, but especially the conformity of unrepented sins, kindled the
like flame in the inmost places of the City it self. And so ere long after it
so came to pass, that not only the skirts, but also the whole body of the City
was in such sort infected, that the very choice, and special members of the
body divided themselves. I make no question (judicial readers) but you
conceive me rightly; for this I endeavor to let you know, that I go not about
to diminish the power and might of God, but this only I infer, that the
visitation of the body of the City, came likewise by the poisure of the hand of
God, rather then by the disorder of any one infected member, for God is
almighty, al powerful, and can sooner visit those that are free from
affliction, then the visited themselves are able to infect: therefore the only
salve to cure affliction, is to make use of the Ancient saying of the wise
Physician the Evangelist, Luke in his 13. Chapter and 3. verse. Except you
amend your lives you shall all likewise perish. So that if we arm our selves
with hearty repentance, we may be sure that no infection can have power to
harm us. So likewise says David in his Lxxxi. Psalm. 7. 10. and 11, verses,
A thousand shall fall beside thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it
shall not come nigh thee. There shall no evil happen unto thee, neither shall any
plague come nigh thy dwelling, for he shall give his Angels charge over thee to
keep thee in all thy ways.

But to proceed to the miserable estate of the City, which God for his mercy
cease, and inuest a new the royalll estate thereof. Long had not the hand of
the Almighty scourged the deserved sinners of the City, to the great terror of
the residue not afflicted, but London, that dear fostering mother of many
thousand souls, grew into such a general contempt, that she waxed loathsome
and ugly, not only in the sight of her own, borne of her own womb, but of
Aliens and strangers well may you say, no marvel if strangers hate her whom
her own flesh and blood loved not.

How many thousand Citizens, or rather evil sons, as I may rightly term
them, fled from their mother London, which might better both have unployed
their care in propulsing the infection from the untainted parts, by
establishing a good order, and also their money in releeiuing ye distressed
state of those who^ God singled out, to bear public misery: then thus to
have renounced both these their duties: for though a worthy Physician
prescribes this as a sovereign medecin against this contagion. Cito fugere,
long abesse, tarde redire. Yet fear to forsake their station, and to fly from
the performance of their charitable duties, shows a distrustful flying from
God, flying from God do I say? Oh whither could they fly? into what country?
what town? what City? to live secure, and to hide themselves from him that is
all almighty. Flyest thou to the utmost bownds of Europe, nay to any private
angle of the world, why there Jehovah is: Do thou delue into the center of
the earth? why there is God also. And as the Prophet David says in his Cxxxix
Psalm. Whither shall I fly from thy spirit, or whether shall I go from thy
presence, If I clime up into heaven, thou art there; If I go down into hell,
thou art there also. If I take the wings of the morning, and remain in the
uttermost parts of the sea, even there also shall thy hand lead me, and thy
right hand shall hold me. Is the Lord of this might? of such power? and such
wonderful omnipotency: and do thou think thou art free from his anger and
punishment, by flying twenty miles from the place of his visitation: no
surely, nay, thou know it thy self for truth: Has he not stricken thee? or
in sparing thy self, has he not visited thy wife or children? I know it is
true, yea, to thy grief thou have found it true. Hereupon runs the terrible
mouthie rumor through the Country, that this universal Plague comes by the
means of thee, by thy means distressed Londoner, for those of the Country not
judging a right of the cause of this contagious disease, which is indeed the
sinfulnes of all sorts, and degrees of this land: and only looking on the
outward means of increasing, and propagating the same, can philosophize about
this infection, and say, it was not so much marvel that London (in which an
infinite number of people are compact in so narrow a room) be tainted
therewith. But the Country being spacious, and the air clear, and the houses
seated in a well distant vicinitie, might be kept untouched, without the
carelesnes of some amongst them that trading with Londoners; some rather to
respect their private gain, then the safety of many, and also the vain
tymiditie of the Citizens, who dispersing themselves in the Country, and with
themselves, that deadly and pestifferous poison, drew many into the lamentable
participation of their miseries. Therefore woe worth thee Londoner, says the
Country, had not thou been, we had been free. I answer no: for assure thy
self thou Countryman, or Towns man, whosoever thou be, that if thou be
visited, it is thy sin that causes visitation, for else thou should
accuse God of injustice, and improuidence. Of improuidence, by thinking that
this thy affliction comes not to thee, by the determinate purpose of God, but
only by such accidentalll and outward casualties. Of injustice, by not
observing, how thy sins have deserved this scourge, and that it is the just
hand of God striking. But thou looking no further then the external occasion,
frettest against thy afflicted brothers, call into question the justice of
God, and so do hazard loosing of that benefit, might else redownd unto thee,
by this thy visitation. But that the justice of God, in punishing thee also
with this sore affliction, may better appear, do but thus reason with thy
self: If I commit an offense, or if another offend, is an innocent and
guiltless man called in question? or does the Judge condemn thee for my
offense? no. And shall the righteous Judge of the world show less justice, be
it far from our thought. Certainly as the Husbandman does not set his sickle
to the corn, but where it is ripe: so God does not inflict so grievous a
judgment, but when our mellow sins do call down the same. Will thou avoid
this Pestilence? scare thy sin more then the City; if thou remove thy sin
from the face of the Lord, the Cities contagion shall not hurt thee: but if thy
sins remain unrepented, the Countries wholesomnes cannot help thee. Although
I say not, that all those which escape are without sin, or all those which
perish, are most defiled therewith. Yet this, I say, that thou which dwell
in the Country, should not in this thy visitation, blame only the distressed
of the City, which being as willing to save their lives as thou art, desire to
draw the untainted air of the Country: and so forget the true cause, which is
sin: but thou say this it is has so tainted the Country.

Truly I cannot deny, but that this means has been subordained to the will
of God, in bringing to pass this judgment; but how many thousand others has
God preserved to the joy and comfort of their friends. And I cannot tell
whether the inhumanitie of such as thou art, be not a cause of the wrath of God
toward thee. But is this the only cause? nay, is it the chief cause? I know
the contrary, for of my knowledge many have themselves fetched the fire, by
which their own, and others houses have been inflamed: To be short, I cannot
excuse many of the Londoners unconscionable flight; yet also I cannot but
accuse thine uncharitable discurtesie.

It is not long since one of the simple held argu meant against me touching that
point. That had not London been infected, the Country had been free, I am
sure you will all hold with me, that insteede of proving this assertion, he
proves him self ignorant, and he that amongst you thinks otherwise, I
pronounce him one of the same sect and fraternity. For approbation whereof,
note this reason gathered from your selves, do any of you that are careful
Farmers, or tyllers of ground (after you have sown your grain, and that it
appears fair above the ground) suffer any cockle or weed to ouer-peare it,
for hindering the growth of your seed? No more will the eternal careful and
loving Husbandman, suffer any unsavory weed, I mean any sin to ouer-pere,
or ouer-sway his good seed, which are his graces, offered by the means of
salvation he has vouchsafed, insomuch that when he beholds sin in his pride,
and grown even to his head of ripenes, he will suffer him no longer, but
suddenly cut him off, without any further respect. And think thou, that by
dwelling in the healthful air of the Country, thou art shrouded from the
punishments of God. Does he only hate sin in the City, and not in the
Country? or will he punish it in the City, and not in the Country? No. Where
it is, there God will punish it, and all means are his: Thou may (as thou
have practiced) keep out Londoners, but not the judgment of God. Seeing
therefore thine iniquities be ripe, the time of Gods for bearing is likewise
out, that whether London had been visited or no, thy sin surely had caused
thy destruction. Therefore let not the Country think, that Londons sins are
the cause of the Countries punishment, but that their own wickedness is their
own affliction.

But London, now do I speak to thine, I mean thy Inhabitants, thy children,
how disobedient and unnatural they have been toward thee: Shall a mother
bring up her children with much care, great respect, and greater love, till
they be of sufficient ability to help and maintain themselves, and in her
distress shall they fly from her, oh unnatural children. Why did you so
disobedient and unkind Londoners; you, when you saw your mother in misery,
and many of her little ones, your younger brethren in distress, you took you
to your heels, and plaide the runnawayes, when you should have succored them,
and lent them comfort in their necessity. Have thou any thing thou had not
from her, or by her means? Have thou not sucked life from her teate, and wealth
from her stock, and in her extremity did thou leave her? if thou had lent
her but a little relief now in her want, thou had then showed thy gratitude
in that extremity, and she would have repaid thee trebble for it hereafter.
Nay (which is more) thy provident care might have contained the rage of the
infection, and the God of love seeing thy mercifulnes to the afflicted, might
have been moved to mercy: but before thou would lend her or hers any
comfort, thou would spend prodigally on the Country. But I prethie examine
thy self, and tell me truly, what kindness did thou find of the Country,
had thou entertainment? Hardly: Had thou lodging? if any, thou payedst well
for a bad one, and yet were forced to dissemble thy dwelling, before thou
could obtain it: for indeed were thou known to be a Londoner, thy
patrimony could not procure thee a bed, and yet thou would fly from her
that gave thee both lodging, and meat for nothing.

Nay further, let us come more nearer to the uncharitable country, had thou a
brother dwelling in the Country, whose ability by his large revenues, might
aid thee in that thy extremity, and did thou find a brotherlike
intertainment at his hands? It may be he had more kind nature in him, then thy
mother had at thy hands, but my opinion will not bear it. For experience in
mine own travel has shown the contrary. I know where a man of thy stature,
proportion, and comely personage, whose exterior demeanor has been admired
for courtlike complement, whose tongue has pleaded more like a learned lawyer,
then an unskillful Citizen, to a man more simple then himself, yea to his own
brother, and yet has found no remorce, no comfort, hardly any meat upon
extreme request, and for lodging a wad of straw, or a reeke of haie, which he
has been as iocand with, as a bed of down, when he has had all mortal
felicity to attend him.

Moreover, I came to another place of the Country, to a town of an excellent
situation, upon whose battleme^ts the wholesome winds whistles melodious
notes, as if their air warbling did not at al fear any infection, at whose
northern gate my horse and I made entrance, no sooner had I gotten part of the
gate over my head, but a winter-weather-beaten clown repaires unto me, with an
old rustie bill on his neck, stand, says he, from whence came you? The absurd
fellows rusticke behavior, forced me to spend a little time idelie, by
answering rudely as his demandes were simple: Stand, said I? Why art thou a
good fellow, that thou bidst me stand, yea, that I am, said he: why then thou
would have my purse, would thou not? your purse, quoth he? why do you
think that I stand here to keep sheep? why no, said I, but I think rather to
take purses: Sir, says he, I have taken as good a man's purse as yours before
now: by my says not unlike, said I: why then, said he, never tickle me in the
teeth with taking a purse, but tell me who you are, thou see who I am, said
I, but I pray thee tell me wherefore do thou stand here? why, (quoth he) to
keep out Rogues, Rascols, and Londoners. Then by your leave sir Rogue, said I:
And let an honest Londoner pass by.


No sooner had he heard the name of Londoner, but the simple clown presently
gives way, and standing a loofe far from me, waves his rustie bill to and
fro with these words reitterated twice or thrice. You must go that way:
You must not come this way.
With that, laughing heartelie at the silly hind, to see into what a tunerous
extacie, the very name of Londoner had changed him, I set spurs to my horse,
and rode quite through the town, without farther molestation.

Within the space of twenty miles distant from the town aforesaid, I had
gotten another town over my head, the situation I need not to stand upon,
only the nature of the people, and the inhabitants thereof. The black shadow
of night having canopeide the splendant eye of day, and twilight being past,
making entrance into the town, I inquired for lodging at an Inn, an Inn it
had been, and an June it was, but that indeed the bush or sign was taken down,
for all the people told me the Justices of the Country, had caused them to be
taken away, and withal that they should lodge no strangers, which
commandment indeed was very stri^e observed, for I could neither get
lodging, normeate for any money, being driven to such extremity, and seeing my
horse very weary, and that I was destitute of any kind of prouender, I knew
not what shift to make, till at length this refuge I found: Within half a mile
there was a very fair meadowe cut but the day before, and the hay newly made,
so that wanting all other means, I made repair to one of the cocks, and
slipping the snaffle out of my horses mouth, tied the end of his bridle to my
leg, so that my horse well refreshed him, whilst my self betook me to a
little slumbering repose. No sooner had the Harbinger of light opened the
windows of the newborn day, but (as the necessity of my business required) I
went forward on my journey. I had not rode six miles further from those
uncharitable people, but an honest plain fearful Swain meeting me, gave me
the good time of the day, and withal, says he, Sir, if you love your life,
ride not that way, but ride up by yonder hedge, it is not a quarter of a mile
out of your way, otherwise I assure you, you will ride in great danger: I
prethie honest fellow, said I, why do thou wish me to leave the way, are
there any that want money, which make their stand there: no (quoth he) but a
worse matter, for there lies a Gentleman stark dead: God-a-mercy good fellow,
said ^s but if that be the worst, I will not (God willing) leave the way;
whereupon (arming my self with a faithful resolution) I made toward the
body, where I saw the most lamentablest spectacle that ever mine eyes were
guilty of. For in the highway close by a hedges side, there lay a very proper
Gentleman suited all in black, a fair scarffe about his neck, with a silver
hatched short sword hanging in it, a dagger suitable; and dead he was, but how
long before he died, I could not learn, nor how he died; but those that
inhebited nearest to the place, told me, that trauailers suspected it was the
Plague he died of, and I could not otherwise imagine my self, for the cause
that showed the likeliest probability, was this; that as the Gentleman lay dead
booted and spurd, so his horse (a most lamentable sight) went grasing hard by
sadled and bridled.

What became of him I know not, nor how they buried him, I could not since
learn, but no doubt, after the ordinary course of the Country, like a dog;
for in my travail I saw another dead in the like sort, but he seemed to be a
Country Husbandman, with a sustian doublet, a round pair of cloth hose, and a
pitchforke by him, he lay (as I was told) two or three days unburied,
uncovered I may say, for GOD knows his burial was simple. If the birds did
sing him to the ditch his grave, why then he had a knell, otherwise a dog
had a more honest burial. For the manner of his funeral was this, even
tumbled into the ditch, and covered with a little earth, this was all his
burial, and all his funeral. Oh where is Christianity become? Charity long
since was key cold, but at this present, I think Christianity in the Country
be stark dead. Yet London, London, notwithstanding all thy mass of deadly
sin which thou art burdened with, thou yieldest Christian burial for thy
sinful people, yea, albeit thy receipt for dead bodies be but a spanne, in
comparison of the spacious Country, yet thou have with honest respect performed
thy last obsequios and duty to thy dead, and have interred the liuelesse
bodies, of almost forty thousand of thy deceased Inhabitants, yea, and brought
thy younger children more liker to a bridal bed, then to an earthly grane,
decked with odoriserous flowers and garlands, and hundreds of people with
mournful hearts attending on them. Which special instance of Christianity,
no doubt but the Lord will reward in mercy. Therefore thou poor remainder of
that famous City, now at the last remember thy sins, and while thou have
time call for grace, the Lord is ready every minute of an hour to hear
thee, he has lent thee longer days then thy deceased brethren, to see if thou will yet turn unto him, and leave to sin. But without all question, if thou
be stubborn, and wilt still persist in thy wickedness, as the fall of them has
been great, thine will be greater. Wherefore while thou have time, now in thy
most misery call to the Lord for mercy; repent thee of thy former sins, and
persuade thy self, the Lord will not only hear thee, but relieve thee, and
send thee comfort in thy extremity, for he rejoices more in the conversion
of one sinful soul, then in all the glories of the greatest potentate of the
world.

Experience has ever taught us, that if but the least member of the body be
distempered, the whole body is out of quiet, much more if the head (being the
principal member) be never so little troubled. So fares it with the body of
this Land England, the admired Island of the world, whose head thou art London.
distressed London, whose very eye thou art to illuminate, and lighten the dark
members of the same: yea, whose Sun thou art, which (keeping thy diurnall
course through Englands element) do dart such comfortable influence from thy
Horison, that soke up all distilling tears of sorrow.

But now alas, for so much as that head of ours aketh, that eye of ours
winketh, and that Sun of ours sets, how can that body of ours choose but
perish? What rests then, but that each several member according to his
place, lament the heads distemperature, endeavoring and laboring by all
possible means, for some precious balm to cure that same deadly headake. That
balm must be the mercy and compassion of the highest, which is to be obtained
only by prayer, with a hearty repentance of our wicked sins. Know we the
means, yet will not seek redress: Know we a salve? Yet suffer the sore to
ranckle: no marvel then if the Pace of death lie so heavy upon us. Why
should Nature have so little feeling in us, that we the inferior members,
should suffer our head to perish, when that a little, little hearty sorrow,
would salve a thousand wounds. Weep therefore, O thou Countryman, weep not
only with us, but for us, I mean for woeful London thy head, who is now
visited for sin: Let not her affliction be thy security, let not her plagues
flatter thee, and make thee think that thou art free from sin, because thy
visitation is the less: For well may thou perceive, that the self same
scourge (though not in such terrible manner) yet in some measure, it steals
upon thy Towns and Uillages. Therefore persuade thy self, unless Londons
affliction enforce thy speedy reformation, it is to be feared that thou will
taste the like misery. Wherefore with London do thou join in hearty
prayers, that the Lord in mercy would looks down upon us, that not only the
remainder of the City, but also the body of the Country may be so united
together in his fear and love, that so long as they have any being here in
this world, his name by them may be glorified, and they glorified by him in the
world to come.

But to proceed, no sooner had I mounted the usual walks for shepherds, the
downs of Buckingham, but I might hear a Swayne tuning on his harsh pipe such
notes ofsorrow, and withal singing to the same so sad an aelegie, that his
pretty Ewes lest grazing, and would not seed for mourning: the effect whereof
follows.

An Aelegie.
No wonder though I wail, my sheep are poor,
Yet sorrows naught avail, for all my store.
The Summers prime is winter unto me,
My flocks are gaunt, no wonder though they be.
My joy and comfort dies, drowned up in woe:
Ny Lambs by my moist eyes, my sorrows know.
They scorn to live, since they my living fear,
And pyne to see their masters pining cheer.
Hust silence, leave thy cave, thy cave obscured:
And deigne my woes a grave, woes long endured.
Though thou leave me, yet take my sorrows to thee,
Or leaving them, alas thou do undo me.
Silence moved to pity,
Sy, wherefore undone:
Shep. Wayling for a City,
Woeful London.
Whilst London smyl'd, my stocks did feed them full
Skipping for joy, that London had their wull.
Woe is me, they die now, cause they feed not,
Shepherd, Swaynes must fly now, cause they speed not.
Yet when I pipe and sing that London smileth,
My sheep revive again and death beguileth.
Wherefore silence pity, my Lambs mourning:
Join in our sad dittie, till woes turning. (weep by you
Sy. Mourn Swaynes, mourn sheep, and silence will
And as you weep for mercy, Shepeheards cry you.
This passionate dittie was no sooner ended, but I drew near the place,
whence I heard that unexpected lamentation, where on a banck of moss I found a
true love knot of Shepherds all woe begun, even all strooken into an extacie,
of whom I demanded the cause of sorrow, one of them more free of spirit then
the rest, willing to satisfy my demand, to the intent I might mourn with
them, brake into these terms of exclamation. Oh Spring of sorrows, Summer of
lamentations, Autumn of woes, Winter of heaviness, oh times of misery, when
will your contagion have an end, your several aires have been infectious,
whereby many thousands have perished. Never since I knew the contented life of
a slvaine, did I so long suck on the sower dug of infelicitie, for we were
wont to smile howeuer Fortune frowned, but now alas as much subject to passion
as discontent it self, wherefore kind stranger (said he) persuade thy self,
that it is some extraordinary affliction that forces such distilling tears
from Shepherds sun dried eyes. Oh London: and there made a colon, whereupon
all the rest of the shepherds jointly with him did bear several parts in
this sad following Eglogue.

The Aeglogue.
Burst, burst poor hearts, you have no longer hope,
Captive our eyes unto eternal sleep:
Let all our senses have no further scope,
Let death be Lord of us and all our sheep.
Or if we live, thus (living) let us cry, (die,
'Heauens bless fair London, or poor Shepherds
Cry, cry aloude, as they that hear our crying,
May cry with us, and fainting, fall a dying.
FINIS.
To discribe the particular sorrows of every griened soul, were as impossible
as to number Calice sands (as the proverb goes) the lamentation is so general.
And that not only amongst the Swains, but the whole Country, and especially
amongst Clothiers, and their poor serviceable people, for since the memory of
man, almost there has not been known she like. He that was wont to emploie
many hundreds in his work, cannot now help twenty poor, insomuch that it
procures such emulation and malice twixt them that are wrought, and the rest
wanting work, that it even brings a confusion amongst them. And in this case
what should the Clothier do, some come to him on their knees, some with
wringing hands, some crying with Infants in their arms, but all of them with
such pitiful lamentation, that it pitties the amazed Clothier in such sort,
that he is weary of life. At length thinking to give them reasonable
satisfaction, he pleads, that the want of sale for cloth at London, is the
cause he has so little employment. But alas this would not satisfy the poor
multitude, so great is their distress, and such an unanswerable argument is
importunate necessity. And thus I may tell you, never was cloth better cheap
amongst Clothiers, yet seldom has wool been known more dear unto them, and
of money I dare say that most of them never knew the like want, though they
have money forth to great value, and the cause of this, say they, is only
Londons visitation: If then the mittigation of the pestilent affliction laid
upon that City, would relieve the want of many thousand poor souls, (as it
is well known to every one of us it would) why then let us use the means to
take away the effect, that is, prayer to lessen sin, that God in mercy would
pity Londons misery.

And now London, once more do I speak to thee, thou Nurse of people, so
loving and kind a mother, do thou always show thy self unto thine own,
how disobedient so ever they be, that thy arms are howerly open to receive
with joy thy strangling children. They like idle wanderers, have plaide the
runnawaies from thee, yet thou with tears of comfort art ready to entertain
them. And albeit, they have trewanted long in the country, yet thou must be
their refuge, thou art their foster-mother, none will entertain them but thou:
Why then did they fly from thee? only because thou were touched with
calamitic; and albeit thou art not yet free, yet they are now forced to seek
shelter under thy wings, and notwithstanding thy adversity, like poor
prodigals they return of mere necessity. Thou did ever love them, though
they hated thee, so were they hated even of them to whom they fled. They fled
from London to have harbor in the Country, but woe the time that ever London
knew such extremity. Will it not be a most lamentable record to our
posterity, to read this Index of the uncharitable nature of the Country? It
cannot choose: Therefore that Londons adversity may now turn to prosperity,
that the rude and inhumane Country, may taste the wholesome comfort of the City,
let us all pray for Londons health and liberty. Which the God of all mercy,
power, and consolation grant, for the love of that immaculate Lamb Christ
Jesus, our only Savior and Redeemer.

FINIS.
LONDONS WELcome home to her Citizens.
ARe you returned? oh wherefore did you fly me,
Leaving me naked, weeping, and forlorn:
How many thousand Infants here lie by me,
Ceaz'd on by Death since first I began to mourn:
Did they want comfort? wherefore did they die?
I do not say for want of charity.
You fed them full, but it was full of woe,
They had enough;
God wot enough of care,
Indeed you were to blame, you pressed them so,
With more then their weak natures could well bear:
Ill was that well, well bearing had been good,
I would have borne you all, though drowned in blood.
And yet you ran from me, oh whither then?
Into the jaws of inhumanitie,
Unto the people that were worse then men,
Now Catalogue in lasting infamy:
There were your hopes blasted, being crossed,
In strange adventures where your hope was most.
Have I been thus long mother (wondrous Time)
Under whose wings millions of people lie;
Has this childbearing fruitful womb of mine,
Brought forth so many: (oh Security
Why do thou lull my young ones thus a sleep,
Slumbring in peace when I their mother weep.)
Oh let them see my tears how fast they trill,
Am I their mother?
Mother to my grief:
Are they my children? children to their will:
Are they come home again to seek relief?
Oh bid them welcome, for I long to hear
Their pilgrimage in this same wondrous year.
Welcome poor pilgrims: what so ragg'd and torn?
Have you not skirmisht with proud Poverty?
I fear you have; oh wherefore do you mourn?
And hang the head? here is russet misery:
Indeed it is; say therefore which is better,
A russet banck'rout, or a Sattine debtor.
I am too lavish, yet but hear me speak,
I speak in love, and love does make me weep,
Should I not weep, then my heart would break,
And in such passion, who a mean can keep:
I weep for you, and weeping will not lin,
Till I am sure that you are purged of sin.
Sin was the cause of woe, oh welcome then,
If thou have left that sin of thine behind?
The scourge of heaven is past. Oh Citizen,
Or son of me poor London, be not blind
With squint-eyed error; now redeem my same,
Which Sin has pawned by an adult'rate name.
Set Pride to sale, let Avarice go bie,
Enuie's a devil,
Gluttony a fiend,
On want on Strumpets do not cast thine eye,
Abandon Sin, and thus with tears I end:
Tears that all tears of Passion shall surmount,
Till Londons Sin give up her last account.
FINIS.

