An Epytaphe, or a lamentable Discourse: wherein is bewailed the death of the
Right worshipful Knight, Sir William GARRAT: One of the Queens Majesty's
Commissioners, and chief Alderman of the honorable City of London. Who
deceased the.27. of SEPTEMBER. 1571.s
WHo can refrain from sorwing plaints,
and brinish blubbring tears?
What heart will now refuse to groan?
and turn from Joy his ears.
Ne high, ne low, ne Rich, ne poor, in London that remain,
But have just cause for GARRATS loss, to languish and complain:
Help me therefore ye powers divine: that in the heavens do dwell,
The loss of this most worthy wight* in mourninge Uerse to tell.
Come now CALLIOPE I pray, and CLIO Goulden Dame:
with Sisters thine from HELYCON, aid me frssh plaints to frame.
Stay not on Mownt PERNASO now, cast on your mournyng weed,
convert your Hymns and Songs of Joy, to wailyng woes with speed.
Send forth with me your sighing sobbes, the sacred Skies to pearce:
that unto Gods and mortal men, our plaints we may dispearse.
And fail me not O PALLAS now, amidst my grief and woe:
But grant with skyl to guide my Quil, these heavy News to shoe.
Since I with tears do crave your aid, let me your favor find:
The loss of GARRAT worthy Wight, help now to print in mind.
What? fly ye thus from me? alas: why go ye back again?
will none of you to further me, vouchsafe to take the pain?
Alas, (unskillful wretch:) Disdain does thee betide:
For MEDVCE and PIERIDES, with thee in place abide:
These Dames, as hard as Steel or Flint, are fixed in thy sight:
and thou have naught but black and white, thy meaning to endight.
Leave off therefore, since CLIOS Spring, of Rhethorique is fled:
thy will is good, but powers thine, with Ignorance are fed.
I wept to see my Fortune such, my woes did then abound:
But Hoape at last to comfort me, a present mean forth fownd:
Fear not (quoth she) despair thou not, set drowpyng dread aside,
take Pen and wriie: to comfort thee, (I Hoape) a mean provide.
Lift up thine eyes, behold and see, Dame Truth is in thy sight:
with that I rendered humble thanks, and took my Pen to wright.
And now, away ye doubtful lettes, that clogde my heart with fears:
By force to give you overthrow, Dame Truth in place appears.
Should GARRATS loss vnminded be? such Friend to Common weal,
Though he be gone, should we not way, his true and godly zeal?
Should we forget his courtesy, so plainly known and seen?
Then most unkind we should remain, since he our friend has been.
Ye Consuls wise, ye Senators, that Londons wealth provide,
Lament and wayle, for unto you, no small loss is betide.
Ye all have lost a faithful Friend, for Counsel sage and wise:
In things of weight, ye failed not, to follow his advise.
But now that sacred JOVE, by wisdom his decreed*
That LACHESIS and CLOTHO both, their toil should leave in deed:
Coms PARCHAS she, with Sickle sharp, and shreads the thread in twain
That three score years and vii. to weaue: they had imployd their pain.
She cutteth down this Olyue green, whose Branches fair did shoe,
His days are ron to CHAMPIAN now, and BE^CHER he will go.
Of HAYVVARD wise* Pretorian he, now GARRAT leave does take
Good OFFLEY old, and gentle WHITE: by Death he must forsake.
The DRAPER wise, and ALLEN he, whose wisdom does excel.
with all the Troop of Aldermen, thus GARRAT byds, Farewell.
Therefore in Senate when you sit* and want him in your train:
For wisdom his, in Memory, let Image his remain.
In ^ule, he was your equal sure: for Counsel SOLON he,
Then meet with tears his Absence should, of you lamented be.
No Rule* but he has borne* that does to LONDON long,
A man upright in Justice sure, that knew the right from wrong.
Most apt was GARRAT to do good, to all and every wight,
Both rich and poor* may wayle the loss, of such a gentell Knight.
In Justice, single was he sure, in Judgment always sownd:
To cease contendyng* prone and pressed, this worthy man was fownd.
To needy poor a perfect friend, to tender all their grief,
And such a one, as spared not, to them to give relief.
Unto the Prisoners poor, that did in captive plight remain:
From bands to free all that he could, he did employ his pain.
But who has lost the greatest loss? I know not one, but all:
But to his Spouse and Lady dear, the greatest loss does fall.
She wants her loving Make, her Friend and Turtle true:
whose death with sighs and sorowyng sobbes, she cease not to rue.
His Children dear their Father want, they lack their Staff and stay.
His Servants they, their Master miss, alas and well away.
But that they lost, the Lord has sownd, the mighty God on hie:
For as his life was virtuous, so godly he did die.
Amidst his bitter panges of death, that were both sharp and strong:
To see his Christ and heavenly Joys, he vehemently did long.
And now his wish he has obtaind, for Death has done his will:
His Corpse deuoide of breath does rest, yet shall his Fame live still.
His Soul by faith the Heavens has won, his Body shrowdes in Clay
This final farewell GARRAT take: I have no more to say.
I. PHILLIP.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London in the upper end of Fleetelane: by Richard Ionnes, and
are to be sold at his Shop, ioynyng to the Southwest Door of saint Paul's
Church. 1571. October 4.


