AN ANSWER MADE BY ONE OF OUR BRETHREN, A SEcular Priest, now in prison, to a
fraudulent Letter of M. George Blackwels, written to Cardinal Caietane, 1596,
in commendation of the Jesuits in England.



Newly imprinted. 1602.

The Preface.
I Here commend unto you, (good Catholic Reader) this Treatise following,
penned by a Catholic Priest, in answer of a letter written by M. Blackwell,
about five years since, to Cardinal Caietane. In which treatise, the author
amidst many of his greefes, a little to sollace himself, does play with the
said M. Blackwel; but with such modesty as well becomes his calling, the
vanity and falsehood of the party he deals with, considered. Which two
qualities, together with his rude presumptuous Epistolizing to Graces, do so
anatomize the man, as I could not let him pass vncoated with a Preface,
agreeing to the treatise: as not knowing, neither having ever been taught, to
call a tree by any other name than a tree; a gull, a gull; a Coridon, a
Coridon, Et sic per omnies casus cum stultorum plena sunt omnia. I can say no
more, but that of Iesuitisme there is too great plenty in England, the more is
the pity, and the greater is like to be our misery. For as I hear say, Tom
Long Carier is coming on his journey (in the vvide way to perdition) with
Antichrist: and it is further reported, That the Jesuits, Puritanes, Jews,
Turks, Mahometans, and others of that rabble, strive for the supremacy, which
of them should first own him, to make him the great Muster-maister under
Damp-Sathanas, in his dismal march to make the conquest over the kingdom of
Jesus: which is the mark al these do shoot at.

Well, it is a strange case, that the Jesuits should be such fellows; but
much more strange, that good M. Blackwell is become so rude ruricall courtly,
insalutatiue scribbling to princes: or rather Caesar-like take upon him with
Vene, vide, vici, to send abrupt apostrophall congratulations to Cardinals: but
most strange of all, is this, That a condensed multitude of populorums, vvil
not or cannot see vvood for trees; but will still call chalk, cheese; beasts,
men; moldhils, mountains: and so backward again, and all by contraries. But
seeing it is so, Pian piano, I have here laid down before your eyes the Crow
Black well suited in sables, set upon a stake, in pale proper, pinyoned, as it
were the while, until you may blazon the Cras croaking foul in her own
pure naturals.

And to complie a little more formally with the text, you shall (gentle Reader)
understand, that this Black-wel-mand-Statist in comporting of Cardinals with
vncourtly complements, was (as it seems) in such a sweuen upon the sudden,
of an odd co^ceited Monarchy, as he imagined himself to be Monos; though in
very deed he is but a Jesuits Spanified Monopolos: that is in plain English
(abstract from all Hyperboles and Rhetorical figures) the extortionall tithes
and imposts, or rather the very dregs, or a gross Chaos, Rudis indigestaque
moles, non been iunctarum discordia semina rerum of all the Jesuits
Machiauelian drifts, Prothenian plots, and Catelinian countermined
conspiracies, for a conquest. Which vain conceit of that matter in these men,
is now made so apparent, as a very Ninnie cannot but perceive it, and the blind
tankerd-bearer, with help of his dog and his bell, may smell it out at
midnight. For otherwise why do they of the Spanish faction gape so much after
news out of Ireland? Why do they linger and dally off the time in the Low
countries, without coming to any serious parle, or consent to make
satisfaction for their misdeeds, and restitution of Priests and Princes good
names, and other wrongs done by them? Why do they band it out with Spanish
soldiers at Kinsale and other places, new fleets still flocking afresh thither?
yea, and give it out in plain terms both by word and vvriting, That they
will never come to any agreement, peace, and concord, until they hear an
end of the Irish vvarres? Why should they bend all their wits to these
desperate traitorous courses, unless their stratagemicall instigators,
understanding that M. George Blackwell is of late summoned to appear where he
would not; they thereby saw their Arche ready to fall, and their Top-gallants
in danger to break their necks from off their lofty stand: the very
imaginary opinion whereof, has amated them with so desperate amazements; on
the one side, their guilty conscience tormenting them, for banding a bad
cause; and on the other side an envious fear of a happy success to the
secular clergy, in their appeal to the supreme Patriote of the Apostolic
See, and mother city; causing them in defense of the Catholic Roman church
and Commonwealth of Christendom in general, and of Englands little church
Catholic, and weal public, in special: as that hereupon, and for and
through their many other practices their heads are stuffed with so many
quiddits, as they quarter and brave it out every where (but especially beyond
the seas) with the great hopes they have of making England a Iaponian Island by
conquest of Ireland, according to the old prophecy, He that England will win,
through Ireland he must come in. What man, Ireland? Yea, I say Ireland. What,
Ireland won from her Majesty? yea, and from Teron too? Tush man, it is a
jest. Well, a jest it may be termed, in respect of the Jesuits fantastical
assurance: but they go about it in such sad earnest, as all the world may now
discern them to be rank traitors: and they so persuade their fautors, as
all the Iesuited faction stand so much upon their puntoes, in hope of these
Lucian towers, that they will never yield to the appellants (as some of the^
have already blabd it abroad) until Ireland be wholy theirs, or else all
the poor Spaniards have an Irish trick played them in a triple turn betwixt
their heads and their shoulders. But what said I, will they be desperate? Yes
verily, for they have no other means in the world to feed their faction with,
but the hope of Ireland only, as their case now stands. O huge! be these
religious Jesuits? Well, well, I see all is not gold that glisters, nor all
pure Saints that have Puritanes faces: but, etc. and there leaving these
martial Jesuits to their pikes, let me return my pen upon good Master George
his Epistle to Cardinal Caietane; upon which, according to the ensuing
Commentary, I have made a Preface as you see, from point to point unlacing it
in form following.

I have deducted, or rather reducted, all the lines of this spruze
Black-well-beseene-Oratours Letter, gradatim; not oblique, but direct,
comformable to the Epistle it self* even from the circumference thereof, to
the center: that by the exenterating of it, you may peruse and see (as it were
in hearing the Anatomy lecture of this new Legifer, read unto you, brought
forth to be uncased and bowelled before your eyes, in open sight) from what
manner of brain and vain the stately style of this vvorthie Ulysses does
proceed; as also the Longum, Latum, and Profundum of this tropicall
Rhetoricians capacity, and by consequent the Quantum of the whole Compositum,
I mean good master Blackwel the protonotorious Arche of England. The Longum
does consist in this, viz. That he thinks it long, long, long, and every
minute a summers day long, until he be such another State, as to whom he
writes: the Latum is limited to this, viz. That al must think him worthy of
so princely a dignity, far and near over the whole latitude of Albion: the
Profundum is the ditch that Thales slid into by gazing too much upon the stars:
Into this ditch his admirators are suncke down dead like stones, by staring on
Medusaes head too too profoundly: and by consequent (as a man might say by
mere chance) they there have found out the Quantum of the man, in, O quanta
est inscitia viro.

But will you know the Quantum of the man indeed: or rather, his Tantum by his
Quantum: or his Tantillu^ by his Quantillum: at a word, he is a quilibet to a
Jesuits quodlibet, wherein he does so quadrate with them, as Tantum deest
quantum est: and so shall you see the Tantillum of his mind, in the Tantum of
his fellow-like terms to so great a magnificall Mecaenas and princely Prelate
in the church, as is a Cardinal. And by inference of corolaries, himself
being no better than a Pewterers son, and but the Apostolic Notarie or
Scriuener (of matters from England to Rome; or else, where the great Emperors,
Parsons, Creswel, and other Presbiter-Iohns or great Chams or Mogors do
soiourne and abide) besides his Priesthood, you shall only find the Jesuits
sauors extended toward him, to consist in this, scil. in erecting to his
function a goodly new glorious-seeming Arche; upon which they mean to set a
stately Pyramid of Pan, with a dedication, not to that Paxium god (as I
imagine) but to their own popular society with the Ariopagians inscription,
Ignoto deo; or with this Imprese, Sic pro Iesuitis. And last of all, you may
hereby see, the Quantum of the Jesuits pride; the Quantillum of the Archpriests
wit; and the Quantunculum of both their drifts, practices, and devises. Now
read on, and Jesus bless you from Jesuits and Arches.

Amen.
Reverend Sir,
A Letter of yours written 1596, to Cardinal Caietane, came not long since to
my hands. At the writing of it, you were not so great a person as now you
account your self: a man might then have been acquainted with you under a
couple of Capons: Fellow and fellow-like you were that year, with as mean a
man as my self. And therefore having something to talk with you of,
concerning the said Letter; I will deal with you, as then you were, Master
George Blackwell, a good ordinary plain Priest, and an English man. As for
that great Monsignor, Multarum literarum homo, Georgius Blackwellus
Archipresbiter Angliae, and Protonotarius Apostolicus, borne in Latium, I will
admire his shadow: It were sacrilege no doubt, to inter-meddle with him,
except it were to fall down before his footstool, and to worship his
excellency. Marry for you, my old acquaintance, and fellow Priest, gentle
master George Blackwell, if I may entreat you to forget your greatness for a
time, and to remember with me, what you writ to the said Cardinal; I shall be
much indebted unto you. May it please you therefore now, to hear your self
what you writ then.

B.
LEt your amplitude pardon our just grief; we confess surely, that it is a
regal thing to hear evil, when thou do well. We know notwithstanding
(which is to be lamented) that very great detriment may come to our progress
in the business of religion, by the feigned calumniations of evil willers
toward us. Let it be lawful therefore unto us, to stir the horns of the
false accusation made against us. For if it be sufficient to accuse, who shall be
innocent?

P.
It seemed strange to me, when I saw so lofty a style, to so great a
Cardinal, subscribed with your name. You and I might have written our hearty
commendations to our friends in England, for some relief, and never troubled
our heads with the cogitation of so worthy prelates. But I see, that every man
falls out according to his own mould. It should seem, that my father was of
kindred to some Plummer, who dealt but with lead: that is a heavy metal, and
yields but little sound, which makes me so heavy headed. But your father
was indeed a Pewterer by Newgate in London, a man of an honest occupation, it
is most true, but not the best neighbor to dwell by. Now (as it is commonly
said) That he is a loud speaker, who is brought up in a Mill; so may it be
affirmed of you, that being nourished in such an unpleasing dinne, no marvel
if remoter places ring of you. It may be said, That this scornful jeasting
becomes not a priest, and I would confess it (were it not for some
circumstances) to be true. But worms when they are trodden on, will look
back; loosers (we say) may have their words; and it is not amiss to put
sometimes a Peacocke in mind of his feet.

Your Letter sounds better in Latin, than as it is in English. I found it
translated to my hands, and I ought you not so much service, as to amend it. I
suppose the Translatour tied himself to your words, least you should have
charged him to have perverted your meaning: For a very small occasion, (as the
world goes with you) will put you into a chafe. You begin your Letter with
some majesty: Iusto dolori nostro: Pardon our just grief. Whose grief I pray
you? yours and the Jesuits? or your own alone? or ours the secular Priests,
and yours together? If you meant the first, you were partial; if the second,
you showed your arrogancy; if the third, you did us great injury. For the
reports you dislike of, they were made by some of our selves, and will be
justified against you, or any Jesuitical Proctor whosoever. It was but a bad,
and a saucy part of you, to make your self our Proctor, before we entertained
you: such dealing in Westminster hall, deserves sometimes the casting over
bar.

Regium est: It is a Regal thing or accident (you say) to hear evil when
thou do well. A platter for a pewterers Son to talk of: Must you be meddling
with kingly proverbs? was it not convenient to tell you of your parentage? How
like a Prince you proceed in your matters? The saying we acknowledge to be
true, and fit for Kings, when they see cause: but if the Jesuits may have
their wills, and shall be suffered to go on forward as they have begun, they
will altogether turn it top-side-turuey. For the King that pleases them, and
serves their turns, be he never so wicked, they will make him a Saint;
whereas another, if he cross them, let him be as religious and sincere as the
Pope himself, they will make him a Lutheran. So as already, by the rules of
Iesuitisme (which tend to blood, and confusion, wheresoever they come) Kings
that do worst in following their designements, must be most commended; and
the rest are to be slaundred, murdered, and assailed with violent hands by
their own subjects, for neglecting, or discountenancing of their right
worshipful Maisterships. Novimus, We know, quod est dolendum, which is
lamentable. If you had here broken off your sentence, you had done well. It is
great folly to put a sword in a mad man's hand. Better had it been, that you
had never been borne, and so have known nothing; than to have employed your
wit, and pen, as you have done. The Reports made in Rome against the Jesuits
are true, and no calumniations. No man living (to speak for my self) was more
greened (as I think) with their insolences amongst us: and where should we
have complained with less offense, than in Rome? If we had been better
regarded, when some of us complained there; the great mischiefs which since
have ensued, had been prevented. The detriment therefore that you mention, is
wholly to be ascribed to you, and to such like Parasites; who in hope of
preferment have sold your selves, as bond slaves to the Jesuits, and by
fostering them in their follies, and applauding to their enterprises (be they
never so vile, and vnpriest-like) have set them so agogge, as they are ready
to burst with pride. It is true that you say: Si accusare: If it be sufficient
to accuse, who shall be innocent? But by your leave it is as true, that if all
lewd persons (such as our English Jesuits are) shall ever meet with such a
consciencelesse Proctor, as you your self have been to them, what wicked men
should be punished?

B.
There are (as I hear) little aequall, or altogether ignorant esteemers of our
matters, who have not gently whetted the edge of their wit, and style, and the
sharpness of their voice against us.

P.
Sunt vt audio: There are (as I hear.) God bless us from all Bugs. What man,
as you hear? Why, durst any man report that, which might be offensive to your
great ears? Alack, alack, I per se I, do hear. There are (as I hear.)
Good Sir, things will be whispered of (as you know) in any family, sometimes
amongst the servants, before they can come to their masters ears. They were
much too blame, that did not acquaint you at home with their complaints: but
that you should be driven to write to a Cardinal upon hearsay. And yet to
see, how all things sort themselves for your reputation. For whence must this
your intelligence come? forsooth from Rome. Who does not presently then admire
the man, that is daily fed with occurrents from Rome? But yet Master Blackwell,
out of question your phrase of speech was much too blunt. The world now adays
abounds with more Italian, and courtly speeches than these are (as I hear)
to so eminent a person in the Court of Rome. Indeed, I am sorry to hear your
simplicity, I had almost said your folly. It might have become well enough a
man of your state, then, to have written after this, or such like a manner: It
may please your excellency to give me leave, a poor simple Priest to show my
small discretion in presuming to signify unto one of your high place in the
Church, that there are news in England, of a report made in Rome. Sunt vt
audio: There are as I hear. A style for King Phillip (while he lived) to such
a Cardinal.

But what is it that you heard? Forsooth: parum aequi, Men of little equity,
or at the least ignorant of our affairs. Name them Sir, if it may stand with
your good discretion: or if you will not, yet this I can say for them, that if
you know them, you are not ignorant, that they are men every way as learned,
and honest, as your self; and at the time, when you writ this Letter, by some
degrees, in age, in pains, in sufferinges, and in many other respects, much
your betters: and such as through their grave and great experience, both at
home and abroad, did understand the affairs amongst us here, much more
thoroughly than you could possibly do, living in such private sort, as then you
did. You did them therefore great jniurie in writing so of them, as if they had
been men void both of conscience and consideration. There is a certain saying,
avoid it as you can: abominatio est Domino, labia mendacia.

But what did these simple light fellows? Tell us Master Blackwel, without any
allusion to a whetstone, the fittest reward that I would afford you for this
your Letter. Exacuerunt: They did thoroughly whet the edge of their wit, and
style, and the sharpness of their voice against us. Well, by the way whilst
you played in this sort like a jolly Warrior, with your Martial metaphores,
you remembered the instrument that men sharpen their tools with. You are much
beholding unto me, Master Blackwell, that I am disposed to be merry with you,
but in this sort. For I could trace you by the hot sent of your bitter gall,
and malice, or rather indeed of your folly, through a certain Psalm, where
the spirit of God that cannot err, (speaking of the wicked, and of their
hatred against the godly) tells us, That they whet their tongues as if they
were swords, and shoot bitter words for their arrows. Such translations, and
insinuations, from a man of your corruptions, thereby to guird at your
brethren, (who I dare swear for them, never thought upon you, when they
complained in Rome of the Jesuits) become you not assuredly, good Master
Blackwell. But still it sticks in my teeth, that you say against us: did any
of us that were secular Priests write against our selves? or will you seperat
your self from us, and become a Jesuit? If I could have conceived by your
Letter, that some heretics had written to Rome of purpose to have slaundered
us all, whether Priests, or Jesuits; your words had been very well mustered
together, and might have marched on for me, like very tall Soldiers. But
there being no such matter I would be right glad to understand, how far the
word ( us) extends it self.

B.
They say (but rashly) that we Priests in England are tossed with diverse
dissentions amongst our selves, and with the Fathers of the society of Jesus:
and that more freely in lying they might wander, they report the said Fathers
to seek no other thing almost amongst us, than how by the contempt of the
rest of the Priests, greater authority and dominion in the Clergy might
daily grow unto them. A heavy accusation, but most full of falsehood, and
therefore (as I trust) it will be silent, being overcome with this my
testimony, although very slender. I, hedged with the divine mercy, have now
fulfilled more than 20 years in the cure of souls amongst us English men, and
in preaching the Catholic Roman truth: and hitherto I remember not any
dissension amongst us, the breath whereof did at any time a little more
grecuously move us. Men surely we are, compassed with many infirmities: but
(praise be to God) in so great a course of most wicked time, we have been so
covered with divine grace, that nothing (that I know) has happened which at any
time has cast us from the state of mutual peace, and brotherly concord.

P.
Deinde expergiscebar. And then I awaked. A man might dream as here you write
Master Blackwell: because for the most part dreams go (as they say) by
contraries. But for a Catholic priest broadwaking to write in this sort to a
Cardinal, and to Rome, the city of God, it is most abominable. Is all your
whetting come to this? If in so many material points as here you have touched,
any one had been true, I could have borne with you more willingly: but all of
them being so notoriously false, I blush on your behalf to consider your
impudency. First therefore, whereas you say in such general terms, That
some of us, that be secular Priests (for I cannot see how you can mean any
other) men ignorant of the state of things here, have affirmed; that we (the
secular Priests in England) are at wars amongst our selves: I dare be bold to
say it, that you write therein untruly. I am somewhat better acquainted with
this matter, than many of my Brethren, being peradventure my self then in
Rome; or knowing at the least, whom you did then aim at. If any did so write
or report, as here you affirm, he was either a Jesuit, or such another
hyreling as your self, suborned by the Jesuits to write in that manner, of
purpose to work their designments, against our credits, utterly to subvert us.
Of which kind of persons, we hold this opinion, That they have separated
themselves from us, and continuing in their Iesuitisme, are no right secular
Priests, but Mongrels betwixt both, and therefore to be no better esteemed, or
believed in their speeches, than the veriest Jesuit amongst us. Again, if you
mean by your words, Sed temere aiunt, They speak rashly etc* that there was
then no contention at all amongst sundry of us, that were Priests imprisoned
then; that is also most false. For you know the stirs that were then at
Wisbich (few men better) amongst the secular Priests, for the setting up of a
certain Geneua platform, termed an Agenage. So that, if any of us about that
time did write to Rome, how the Jesuits labored to set some of us together by
the ears, amongst our selves for their advantage; he writ therein most
truly, and you have not any spark of grace left in you, if you deny it.

Furthermore, in that you deny, that we the secular Priests were then at a
jar with the Jesuits, you are therein so false, as I want a fit word to tax
you for it. Had not Master Garnet, and Master Weston attempted then to have
brought all our necks under their yoaks? Did they not tell us plainly, that
they saw no reason, why the Jesuits in England, should not as well rule us all
here, as the Jesuits in Italy did rule the English Seminary in Rome? Were
there not most untrue reports made by them against us, of purpose to withdraw
all the Catholics hearts from us? Was there not in this our contention, great
partaking, some holding with us, and some with the Jesuits? You know it full
well, and thrust your self as a stickler amongst us, with great hypocrisy
God he knows. Whereas therefore you further say, that the Fathers sought not
to bring us seculer Priests into contempt, whereby they might bear all the
sway over us, and that for 20 years, you knew of no such contention amongst
us, Priests with priests, or Priests with Jesuits, as tended to the breach
either of peace, or concord: you are in danger to become one of his crew, who
is termed by the Apostle, to be the father of all lies. Homines sumus, We are
men you say: but you might herein more truly say, Daemones sumus, we are
Devils; understanding your self and them that set you to this shameful work.
I protest before God, that I was at the writing hereof, in a kind of agony, to
think that ever a Catholic Priest of my reputation, should dare to write in
this impudent manner. Why Master Blackwell, how comes this to pass? If men
saw you not, yet God you know is not ignorant of this Machiavelisme. Shake
hands therefore with Iesuitisme, repent you of these courses, and return
again unto us. You were not wont, (when you and I were first acquainted) to be
so immodest. Let me obtain of you for our old acquaintance, Master Blackwell,
to tell me here this one thing: With what face durst you write, that you hoped
the said accusation of the Jesuits insolent pride, in seeking dominion over us,
would for ever be dashed hereafter, as conquered and suppressed, tuo valde
exiguo testimonio, By your very slender testimony? Or if your face was hard
enough: what said your conscience? Or if that were seared, where was your wit,
learning, judgment and common sense, were they all gone a wool gathering: you
might have remembered, that you your self did tax them, for seeking dominion
over their brethren at Wisbich. But a man puffed up with pride, has no
understanding: but is become like a beast of the field. Your testimony? If the
Cardinal had known you indeed, as we do, he would not have esteemed your
testimony worth two chips.

B.
As touching the other part of the Accusation, which is built up more
injuriously, against the reverend Fathers of the society of Jesus: that surely
will most easily shrink, being pressed with it own weight of falsehood. (...)

nesse, and charity than Master Parsons: and I warrant you, he will give you a
low beck, and with his eyes and hands lift up to heaven, yield by many degrees
to that worthies perfection. And then remember I pray you, good Master
Blackwell, the old saying; Caelum non animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt. If
Master Parsons be the best of that crew, then assuredly bad is the best. And
howsoever now you flourish for a time, through his good favor, yet when he
shall know, what once you thought, and spoke of him, since he was a Jesuit,
down you must as fast, if he himself can keep his own footing. Although
indeed he never preferred you to your high estate for any other true cause,
than that knowing your weakness, he was sure you would be at his
commandment: so as the preferring of you to your Archpresbitership, was in
effect, as if he had preferred a Jesuit. But yet down you must. If the weight
of your own folly break not your own neck, by the insolent abusing of your
place, yet the blasphemy, which you have used against him, will never be
forgiven.

B.
Surely we should be very unthankful, if we should not prosecute them with
honor, as our Fathers; embrace them with love, as our friends; worship them
with duty, as beneficial; imitate them by study, as Masters; acknowledge
them with affection of godliness, as the chief helpers, and most fierce
defenders of the health of our Country, and of the Church tossed with us by
diverse tempests.

P.
Mentiuntur multa Cantores. If I had not known your parentage and bringing up,
I should have gessed by this your Letter, that you had been apprentise with some
of our common fiddlers, that have certain old and long songs in commendation of
Flodden field, and Cutty Musgraue; what noble fellows were then in those days,
and how they fought in blood up to the knees. All shame to the Devil, Master
Blackwell, of proud wretches, you will make them mad men, and prove your self
no better in the end, if you hold on this course. Our Fathers; our Friends; our
Benefactors; our Masters; lovers of their Country, and chief Bulwarks of the
Catholic faith? Fathers of mischief, friends to themselves, benefactors to
seditious persons, Masters of Machiauelisme, Traitors to England, and to their
Prince: and the chief impediments, whereby I am persuaded, that both the common
cause of Religion, and of all that truly seek the promoting of it, are so
hateful and odious to the present State. Some of us (to say nothing of my
self) are all their ancients, and were spiritual Fathers of many ghostly
children, before their name was known in England: they thrust their sickles
into our harvest, and have reaped where they never sowed. And the brood which
since they have hatched, I fear will prove too monstrouse, if it proceed to a
head. And for their friendship toward us: we may say with the Poet, That they
love us so derely as they cannot endure us. They have sought to cast us out of
the doors, wheresoever they have found us placed: we have nothing (forsooth) in
us, worthy to be accounted of; the spirit of guiding of souls is gone from us
to them. They laugh us to scorn, and do set up their puppets, to give us
Three farewels. Call you this friendship, loving Master Blackwell? Assure your
self, if we be driven to bid England farewell (as they by their farewels to
us would have it) you may shortly after bid your Country farewell, the
Catholic says, and all your comfort farewell, farewell. Of their bounty
toward us, you shall hear anon. But they are you say, our Masters. Wherein
Master Blackwell? I pray you peruse Master Charles Pagets book against Fa.
Parsons, and there you shall find the rules of their school: such (I am sure)
as never came out of Gods sanctuary. If dissimulation, lying, perjurie,
disguised with equivocations, deprauing of Princes, instigations to Rebellion,
stirring up of subjects against their Soueraigns, extolling of the people to
lewd purposes, oppositions against lawful authority, and many such prodigious
monsters be good Divinity, and agreeable to the Catholic says: (as they are
wicked wretches that affirm it) then honor them, worship them, imitate them,
let them be your Masters, and do what you will with them. But yet I tell you
plainly Master Blackwell, if you be one of their scholars, and seasoned with
these documents; I wish with all my heart, that you were honestly in your
grave. And where you tell the Cardinal of their love to our Country, except
you mean such love, as Puttocks have to their prey, we understand you not.
Have those men love to their Country, that for many years have sought the
utter subversion of it? What rebellions, invasions, secret complots of murder,
and most barbarous cruelty, have been executed or attempted since her Majesty's
reign almost, whereof the Jesuits have not been the chief instigators? Their
books and writings do partly testify it, the Kingdom knows it, and we
poor Priests (that do most condemn all such Jesuitical designments) do
most feel the smart of it. It is true that some of our Jesuits are commendably
learned, but name the man in England, and join Master Parsons, and all the
English Jesuits, either in Rome, or Europe with them, and yet I dare be bold to
match them with some of our number, that be no Jesuits, nor any way Iesuited. I
will not think or say, but that they have a good intent, to advance the
Catholic says: but surely they take a wrong course; nay a most profane and
heathenish course, or rather a more profane and wicked course, than ever the
heathen approved or liked of. And therefore being persuaded that God will
never bless it, I wish they would leave it; and that you, Master Blackwel,
should either profess yourselfe a Jesuit, that we might account of you
accordingly: or else renounce Iesuitisme (as I said before) and become in your
doctrine, and practice, a right secular Priest, that we may conceive some
little better hope of you. But Perge mentiri, tell on your tale.

B.
They that discommend them, know neither themselves, nor them. For who are they
amongst us, which help priests coming from beyond the seas, but the Fathers
of the society of Jesus? Being cast without the doors, by them they are
received: being in ragged apparel, by them they are clothed commodiously, and
trickly: wanting both meat, and drink, and money, by them they are vpheld: and
not knowing where to remain, (because they are strangers) they have from them
horses, and other things necessary for their journey, most readily prepared,
and places also most prudently appointed, where, in recovering the lapsed, in
confirming of Catholics, and in spreading abroad the worship of God, they may
labor laudably.

P.
As it is said in the Schools, That one absurdity granted a number will
follow; so it falls out with you, M. Blackwell; one untruth begets
another. That which is false, you affirm to be true: and that which is true,
you say it is false. You might remember who pronounces a Woe against every
one, that shall call good, evil; and evil, good; light, darkness; or
darkness, light. It is a great offense to slander any man, be he never so
evil: and you know the flatterer, is likewise very detestable in Gods sight.
Vir impius lactat amicum suum, and ducit eum per viam non bonam. A wicked man
does flatter his friend, and draws him along in the way that is not good. Woe
be to them (says the Prophet) that sow pillowes under men's elbowes: which
place St. Gregory applies unto flatterers, and adds this rule: Nihil est
quod tam facile corrumpit mentem, quam adulatio. There is nothing that does so
easily corrupt a man's mind, as flattery. And it is termed by another, the
Nurse of Satan's children. I know you can say these, and many other sentences
by heart: but you should not wilfully oppose your practice against them. For
therein you hurt the Jesuits, by increasing their pride. You abused the
Cardinal; and your end (for ought we conjecture) was either malice, or gain,
or both. That which you write of their liberality, is little truer than the
rest, concerning their former virtues. You are not ignorant, that by our means
these fellows had their first credit here: and that now they have so
supplanted us, as all contributions and alms comes into their hands, to be
distributed amongst us at their discretions. Now (say you) when any Priests
come from beyond the seas, who do receive them, cloth them, hyre them horses,
provide them places to remain in, but the Jesuits? whereas indeed, they are
but collectors (as I may term them) or deacons, that carry the purses of
charitable Catholics, to our uses: and if they should not so dispose of these
goods, they were no better than thieves and robbers. Unto the merciful
Catholics therefore, of right this commendation is to be ascribed. Their alms
maintain us: and we doubt not, but God will repay all into their bosoms
again, with a most joyful increase, and blessed reward. You deal therefore
with our true benefactors indeed, as if the bounty of a great housekeeper,
should be attributed to his Steward, who dispenses his Masters goods, but as
he is directed. Nay we wish with all our hearts, that the Jesuits dealt no
worse with our said dear friends, or rather (through their goodness) with us.
For besides that the bestowing of other men's alms, is made an argument of
their singular liberality, and the contributors are never mentioned: the truth
is, that they deceive both them and us. For notwithstanding all that here you
say of them: that which they do is performed very beggarly, except it be to
one of their own society, or upon such a Parasite, as you are, that is made
an instrument to set forward some of their devices. The chief part of the
liberality and bounty, that is bestowed for our uses, is either sent beyond
the seas, to make friends for the better maintenance of their tyranny, and
ambition here amongst us: or spent upon themselves, some one of them bestowing
more upon himself, and his servants in one year, than would serve twenty of
us poor men, either in prison, or at liberty. And touching the placing of
such as come over, they do therein but their duties, part of the said
contribution being committed unto them for that purpose. Howbeit for ought I
see, they rather trouble themselves with displacing of good men (as it is
before expressed) than otherwise. For be he never so grave, honest, and
religious a man; placed already with any Catholic, yet if he will not depend
upon the Jesuits, he must be gone, if they may have their wills. Some false
accusation or other must be devised against him; either he wants policy, or
zeal, or learning, or certain illuminations, or something is amiss, that
another (peradventure a very silly man God knows) must have his place, and
all is well, if he have a relation (as they term it) to the holy Fathers. You
may know (Master Blackwell) by some circumstances, that I were able, if I were
disposed, to give you some examples hereof. And for your wise axiom following
(that justifies Master Charles Pagets report of the Jesuits) the Vicar of
Saint Fools (as the merry saying is) be your ghostly Father. Must you at
unawares bewray their secrets? Master Paget tells us, that they labor
chiefly, to beat this ground into the heads of their disciples, and such as
will believe them, That whosoever disliketh, and opposes himself to Fa.
Parsons, and his society, is to be eschewed, as a man inclining to
Lutheranisme, and no sound Catholic. And now it pleases you to say in effect,
as much your self. Qui illis detrahuut, nec seipsos, necillos norunt. He that
discommendeth them, does neither know them, nor himself. If your rule will
hold backward, what a man are you, M. Blackwell? we have then the sage, and
great wise person, that knows himself; for you can well commend them. But in
good sooth Sir, are you persuaded that none, which have blamed and reproved
the Jesuits, did know them? What say you by Card. Alane, and by the Bishop of
Cassane? Did neither of these two worthy persons, know either them, or
themselves? Surely the one was much grieved, that ever the Jesuits came into
England; and the other (as some of you say) that ever they obtained the
Rectorship of the English Seminary in Rome: and this was not for their
virtues, as I suppose. To put you in mind of the University of Paris, will
little avail, your own grave censure is able to ouer-weigh two or three such
witnesses. Surely you blessed your self well that morning, and rise up upon your
right side, when first you knew the Jesuits: they have made you now, so
absolute a person. They know you, and you know them: you commend them, and they
commend you: here is, Claw me, and I will claw thee: virum vir: men confederate
together, by facing and falsehood, to advance themselves, and oppress their
brethren.

B.
Neither is their charity concluded within these bounds: for we our selves
(who now for many years, have borne the weight of the day, and heat) liberally
profess, that we have had much ease and consolation out of their Fountains,
in our necessity. If your amplitude knew, how much money these Fathers have
spent of their own patrimonies (for most little things those are, which come
unto them by alms) in such and other offices of godliness; and how promptly
they always run to refresh the Saints that are kept in prison, and others
inwrapped and oppressed with diverse difficulties of things, and times: I doubt
not but the same would presently restrain the unbridled boldness of these men,
who being tossed with the pricks of envy, have diminished any thing from the
estimation and charity of the Fathers.

P.
Qui semel verecundiae sines. He that once exceeds the limits of modesty,
will easily grow to be impudent. I would I were in debt of a Crown, as poor a
man as I am, (M. Blackwell) that you would tell me truly, whether you showed
not this Letter to Fa. Garnet, before it was sent to Rome. I do verily
suppose, that he had first the perusing of it: and that thereupon the good
Provincial did stroke your wise head for your pains, you have set them out
so gloriously. If the Jesuits had not this policy, to procure by their
sleights, certain woodcocks from amongst our selves, that be secular Priests,
to extol and magnify them in this manner; that so by our credits their most
intolerable insolences, and Machiauelian fetches, might be the better
cloaked; it had not been possible in mine opinion, that their reputation should
have continued so long. But touching their charity. To be liberal of another
man's purse is no great matter, you know M. Blackwell: marry to be so exceeding
bountiful, as to sell their own patrimonies for our relief, that are
captives, and in bonds for the Catholic faith, I must needs admire it, and if
there be any such, adore them with you. I know what Jesuits of any name have
been yet in England, and I am much deceived, if you can tell me of any one that
had any great patrimony left him. Such a matter must needs have been
notorious. It was not your great Master Fa. M. Parsons, as I suppose; how say
you was it? If not he, who then? Let the man be known, that Gods name may be
thereby glorified. Those great works would not be concealed. I have heard
indeed of a certain very admirable exercise, which the Iusuits have, to
cosen young Gentlemen, and get from them that which their friends have left
them, and I could name the parties; but you mean not them, M. Blackwell, do
you? Surely except you have the parties names on your fingers ends, you were
much to blame to write thus to the Cardinal. Or otherwise M. Garnet of
likelihood told you such a tale, and you very wisely believed him. But that
will not serve the turn; for you pretend to write the matter upon your own
knowledge, and profess, that you your self have received much ease, and
consolation out of their fountains; and that many other Saints in prison, have
been refreshed by them. It was surely well done of them. I, and some others,
could say somewhat for the secular Priests that have been long in prison, now
here, now there; and yet I do here avow it unto you, M. Blackwell, in the word
of a priest, that I never heard of, or received any one penny, of any Jesuits
patrimony under that name, or as given out of a Jesuits own purse, to me, or
any other, for ought I know, or can remember: and (I thank god) I have not
hitherto forgotten in my prayers, my good benefactors. I, and others with me,
have oftentimes felt some want in prison, and were assuredly very unfortunate,
Sitam adsanctos refocillandos in carcere detentos occurrerint, if they were
ever so ready to help us (as these your words import) that they never came by
our doors. Out of question, if the Jesuits have been so liberal, as you
informed the Cardinal, you that were abroad still in the sunshine, devoured
it all; we that were in the shadow of prisons received nothing.

But in good sooth, M. Blackwel, to commune a word or two with you, as
concerning the great burden of the day, and heat you speak of; What has your
burden been, that you should thus brag of it? About 20 years since, to my
remembrance, you were imprisoned in London: but your brother, being the Bishop
of Londons Register, by favor procured your release very shortly after. Since
which time, the greatest heat that (for ought I know) you have endured, has been by the Sun in the heat of Summer, in troubling your walkings; and by the
fire in winter, when you sat too near it; or by your soft bed, when you had too
many clothes upon you: For many Priests that way (M. Blackwell) have not had
your good fortune: such has been the liberality of a right good Gentlewoman
toward you. I write not this to diminish their merits, who have had their
measure of afflictions heaped up upon them, though they have escaped
imprisonment: but of all that number, none have had less cause (as I think)
to complain, than your self. And therefore if you that had no greater need,
did draw from the Jesuits Fountains such store of comfort: you did poorer men
great injury, and it was surely Beneficium male collocatum: Alms evil
bestowed. But all you write hereof, are meet fictions, and shameless untruths,
such as few men but your self in England, would have presumed to have uttered,
much less to have written to Rome: where many wise men could easily discern
your folly, or rather dishonestie, or at the least could not be long deceived
by you. We know you are a man, that if you be clapped on the back, and
encouraged, you dare write anything; but otherwise a check does daunt, and
deject you. We do therefore beshrew the Jesuits, that have put this lying
spirit and this audaciousnesse into you.

Marry, I do much marvel, that you should be so grossly bewitched by
them, as not to spare the Catholics generally throughout England, and involue
them also within the compass of your childish calumniations. It might have
been sufficient for you (M. Blackwell) to have defamed us, and magnified the
Jesuits at your pleasure, though you had not pinched at them. Alas, if they
forsake us, what shall we do? It seems, that the Jesuits with their own
patrimonies will be good unto you, but what will become of us? We must stick
to the lay Catholics, and rely upon their pitiful compassion of our
necessities, or else we must perish. After you have amplified the Jesuits
liberality in receiving of Priests from beyond the seas; in feeding,
clothing, horsing, and placing them; and thereupon do further add, how they
relieve all sorts of distressed poor Catholics, both in prison, and out of
prison: you do by the way in a short parenthesis, prevent this objection,
which might have been made to the no small blemishing of your ridiculous
commendation of their said supposed liberality. For simple men might have
said, or thought, that by the exceeding bounty of the lay Catholics, there
were daily supplies of money for such godly uses, and that all the Jesuits
commendation is, or can be, that they deal faithfully in the distributing of
it without any partiality, but as every man's necessity does require. All
this you wisely foresaw, and therefore you prepared an answer ready to meet
with any such ignorant men of the affairs in England, and with their dull
conceits, that should so much as dream of any such matter. Tush it is a toy.
Nam minima sunt, quae ex eleemosynts illis obueniunt. for they are scarce
mites, that by alms does come to their hands: it is their own patrimonies
which they employ to these good purposes. It is very well said of you (good
Master Blackwell) and like a tall champion. And yet shall I be a little bold
with you? I knew one Catholic, that delivered to the Jesuits for such uses as
is before expressed, 2200 pounds at the least, at one time; set me such another
Jesuit by him, gentle Master Blackwell. There be of our company (as I hear)
that would proceed in this course with you, to the value of ten thousand pounds
almost, within few years, which the godly Catholics have delivered unto
them. And could you answer them, sum with sum, man with man, a Jesuit for
a Catholic, to so great a rate? It is well known, that not long since, the
Jesuits sent for Flanders 2200 pounds, which argues, that if you say truly,
that they are but mites which they receive of the laytie here; and that besides
all their said gifts in England, they are able to send so round a sum into
Flanders; their patrimonies thus employed, were exceeding great. I pray you
Sir, in what Countries lay they? But you are so hard hearted, as I may ask you
what I will, for you will be sure to answer me nothing. These gross lies
served in Rome for the time, and that was all that your Abettors expected:
leaving you in the briers (poor fellow) to scamble out as you can.

B.
Envy is the companion of virtue: but as smoke, so she prevails indeed in
the beginning, and by and by vanishes, the things being lightened, whereby she
was envied. Therefore I am led into great hope, that it will come to pass,
that the beams of your amplitude, will most willingly dissipate (by the truth
of things now opened) those clouds which malicious men have cast upon the
shining brightness of our Country. In explicating of these our injuries, these
my silly letters have proceeded further tha^ I had determined, but not more
sharply than I ought. I am made unwise, but they that are accusers of their
brethren have compelled me, for we should rather have been commended of them:
but we go not a birding for humane praise, he shall be allowed whom God shall
commend. That which rests, is, we submit with the greatest humility of
mind that we can, the defense of our cause, against all assaults of men that
think not well of us, to your protection: hoping that your amplitude will
(...), that the license of slanderers, may not so freely run up and down un
punished, as hitherto it has done, to our ignominy, the offense of good men,
and the loss of the Catholic faith; whose immouable strength (that I may use
S. Cyprians words) has hither to rema^ned by Gods grace amongst us, and her
stable and unshaken virtue against all the incursions of b^^king floods against
it. God preserve your amplitude most long in safety and health.

At London the tenth of January, 1596. The most humble servant of your most
illustrious Lordship, George Blackwell.

P.
Vanitas vanitatum, and omnia vanitas. You are in great hope (you say) that by
this your relation, the Cardinal will rest satisfied, as well concerning the
deserts of the Jesuits, as also the aforesaid injurious reports, made by some
against them. Why (Master Blackwell) who were you then, that you should once
imagine, that your letter should be of such credit with his excellency? If
you had then been advanced to the Archpriestdome, such a conceit had been
more tolerable. Shall we think so basely of the Cardinals in Rome, as that
they will be led this way, and that way, upon every simple priests letter? It
is certainly a very shallow imagination, or rather (if you were a man of any
substance) very injurious and scandalous. Hope, you know (Master Blackwell)
is fed with promises: Either then you had no such hope, as you write of, or a
vain hope, or else you were told of some promise, that the Cardinals mind was
so understood already, that whatsoever you should write unto him in
commendation of the Jesuits, he would believe you. But that which follows,
passes all the rest. Consider with me, I pray you, how discreetly you allude
to the Apostles words. S. Paul 2. Cor. 12. after his painful preaching
amongst the Corinthians, was in his absence greatly depraved by certain false
Prophets, who blaming him and his doctrine in sundry points, he justifies
both, and thought it convenient (in respect principally of the weaker sort in
that city) to enter into a discourse concerning some mercies of God, bestowed
upon him for their good. I know a man (says he) that was taken up into the
third heaven, and into paradise, and heard secret words; which are not lawful
to be uttered: and thereupon, after some other speeches, he comes to these
words, Factus sum insipiens, vos me coegistis, ego enim a vobis debui
commendari. And now let us see (Master Blackwell) how substantially you knit
your matters together, that so you might be countenanced a little with the
Apostles words. I am become unwise, say you: and indeed (to take away your
allusion) they are the truest words in all your letter. But you should rather
have said, I am become a mad man, or a dishonest man, or a man bewitched by the
Jesuits: and not to excuse your bad dealing, so grossly, to have abused the
Apostles words. When Saint Paul used that speech, he did not tax the spirit
of God (which was the author of them) but a little reproves thereby the
weakness of some, who by his former speeches he foresaw might deem amiss
of him. Now it might be demanded, whether you (Master Blackwell) ascribed the
like weakness to the Cardinal, as suspecting that he might by your letter
think you not the wisest man in the world, whereas all that you have said, did
proceed from the Holy ghost: which were a great imputation, and to the
Cardinals discredit. And yet if you did not wilfully or foolishly abuse the
Apostles words, you could have no other apt meaning. Sed illi me coegerunt: But
they compelled me. Who (Master Blackwell) dealt so roughly with you? Speak
the truth man, Was it not Master Garnet that urged you to write this letter? or
did some other Jesuit in his name, or by his procurement, so greatly misuse
you? If you mean that some of us (the secular Priests) had so written of the
Jesuits; we confess it (as I have said before) we did so, and that most
truly. But then you do us great injury to say, that we compelled you. For we
have been ever so far from urging you to commend the Jesuits, as in truth,
now that you have done it so eagerly, we condemn you for it, as having lent
your pen all the while to Satan, who is the author of all those glauering
untruths, wherewith you meant to have adorned them. But who they were that
compelled you, it is a point we care not for, and therefore we will omit it.
Only give us leave to conjecture how it came to pass, that you amongst all
the secular Priests in England, should be compelled to take this office upon
you. There was nothing laid to your charge (for ought we know) that might have
drawn you unto it. You were not then (in our opinions) a man worth the
whistling, and a little otherwise regarded of, than as of an ordinary priest
amongst us. Besides, you write nothing in your own defense, as of your being
in any supercoelestiall places, or of any such your divine illuminations,
wherewith your wise friend has told you (in his Metaphisycall Treatise of his
Three farewels) that the Jesuits are so fully replenished. Again, you were not
then our Apostle, nor any man's else; the pains you have taken for twenty
years, has been cheefely with a Gentlewoman or two, which cannot demerit the
name of an Apostle. But peradventure we have found you. In turning over a
chapter or two of Saint Paul, to find some veil to cover your folly with, you
did out of doubt, light on that place where he says, That the care of the
whole Church did lie upon his shoulders: Instancia mea quotidiana, solicitudo
omnium ecclesiarum: and so you took upon you (as a most principal person,
that stood in the gap against our enemies) to commend the Jesuits, even for
conscience sake. If still we miss your intent, then tell it us plainly, to
ease us of further trouble, for we will have it out before we leave you. Why
should you be compelled to this lying course, more than any other? Did either
(...), or any for him, promise you for your pains the the place, that now you
have attained unto? Well, to trouble you (good man) with no more questions at
this time. Out of doubt the Jesuits finding you a fit man for their purpose,
did put courage and spirit into you, assuring you, that they would by their
private Letters to the Cardinal, so magnify and extol you, as that you
should be judged in Rome, the only worthy Priest in England to be had in
principal estimation. And it stood them upon at that time so to do, for their
credits then were greatly cracked, except they had gotten some singular person
of name, to have written in their behalf: such a man as they made the
Cardinal to believe that you were. Whereupon it pleased your Mastership to
write to the Cardinal, in so stately a manner, and with so high a style: There
are as I hear: I hope by my relation: Factus sum insipiens sed illi me
coegerunt: and most gravely: Nos debuimus ab illis commendari. We ought to have
been commended by them. Indeed Saint Paul deserved singular commendations;
therefore you M. Blackwell? He was compelled to speak for himself; therefore
you for the Jesuits? The Apostle excused by those words, Factus sum insipiens,
the commending of himself, and the mercies of God toward him: but you by the
same, the length of your lying and foolish Letter? And yet you shall not loose
all by your Apostolical allusions: for I will give you this commendation, and
do think indeed that you have deserved it. If your wisdom and policy were
answerable to your pride, boldness, and lying; you were in mine opinion a
very fit man to be an ordinary English Jesuit. For the rest of your Letter,
when I find you harping still upon one false string, Non been de nobis
sentientium: Not thinking well of us: we submit our selves: the defense of our
cause: Ad nostram ignonimiam: To our dishonor. Were I a man of a collericke or
a queasie stomach, had I not just cause to cry out, as it is in the proverb,
Date mihi peluim? We have a saying in England, that when men speak to no
purpose, at Randon, and besides the matter, they talk ad Ephesios. But I cannot
say so of your Letter, (Master Blackwell) you had counsel enough, (I doubt
not) to prosecute your instructions, which were to abuse our names that were
secular Priests, for the Jesuits advantage, and our own disgrace: as though we
had spoken by your spirit, (according to that which here you have written)
these intolerable falsehoods, which in our hearts we abhor. And therefore
although I will not say, you write ad Ephesios, yet I may justly call your
Letter, litteras Ephesias, Ephesian Letters; that is, a scroll of juggling, and
incantations, a pack or fardell of fictions and untruths. I told you in the
beginning (Master Blackwell) that I would not know you in the answering of your
Letter, as now you are advanced, and frankely rewarded for your writing of it:
but deal only, not with the Latinus Georgius, but with my old companion,
plain Master George (according to the scottish phrase) and with those bad
humors that reigned then in you. Since that time it may be, that you are
changed, and are become another man: Honores mutant mores, sed raro tamen in
meliores. And so I commit you to God, desiring his divine Majesty, from the
bottom of my heart, that he will pardon your course thus begun, and still
continued by you, amongst us poor Priests, and other Catholics, our Consorts
in England.

Your ancient acquaintance and loving Friend, Andreas Philalethes.

FINIS.

