THE CATALOGVE OF THE CHANCELLORS OF ENGLAND, THE LORD Keepers of the Great
Seal: AND THE LORD TREASVrers of England.

With a Collection of diverse that have been Masters of the Rolls.

By J. P. Summerset Herald.

Printed at London by Tho. Cotes, and are to be sold by Andrew Crook in Paul's
Churchyard, 1636.

CRESCAM UT PROSIM CONSTANTER ET PRUDENTER The Right Honble Sr Alex Campbell of
Cesnok one of the Senators of the College of Justice and one of the Lords of
Her Maties most Honble Pray Counsel and Exchequer etc: 17^7

bookplate of Sir Alex Campbell

To the right Honorable and excellent Lord, Thomas Howard Earl of Arundell and
Surrey, Primer Earl and Earl Marshall of England, Baron Howard, Mowbray,
Segrave, Brewes of Gower, Fitzallan, Clun, Oswalderstree, Maltravers and
Greystock, Justice in Air of all the Kings Forests Parkes and Chaces beyond
the River of Trent, Lieutenant general to his Majesty in the Provinces of
Norfolk, Sussex, Surrey, Northumberland, Westmerland and Cumberland, of the
Privy Council to his Majesty in England, Scotland and Ireland, and Knight of
the most noble order of the Garter.
MY LORD,
I Have received many encouragements (by Friends that have perused these
Collections) to render them to the public, which cannot be done without your
Lordships approbation and permission to the Press. The Catalogues of the great
officers in France (long since printed) have offorded much contentment and do
worthily preserve the memory of such as merited in those places and their
qualities. And as I have no other but the same end in the publishing of these.
So I will comfort my self with an humble hope that it will give no
coffeehouse. The encouragements your Lordship has conferred up on the
office of Arms in general and my self in particular with a bountiful hand
may give your Lordship just occasion to expect some fruit of our endeavors:
If these may pass in that estimate, but for blossoms it will be more then
they demerite. And if your Lordship shall conceive them worthy to be
communicated to the world, I most humbly crave leave that they may pass under
Dedication to your Lordship, which grace and favor will give them life and
acceptance, and very much encourage and comfort

Most noble Lord, To Your thrice humble and most obliged servant, JOHN PHILIPOT.
Summerset Herald.
To my very loving friends, the Master and Wardens of the Company of
Stationers, at Stationers Hall in London these.
LEt the Catalogue of the Chancellors of England, the Lord Keepers of the great
Seal, and Lord high Treasurers of England, Collected by John Philipot
Summerset, be printed.

Arundell and Surry.
Arundell House the 16. of March, 1635.
CANDIDE ET CONSTANTER Coventry family coat of arms

MErcedem meritis postponis, legibus aurum*
Quod nunc prodigii pondus and instar habet.
Consilio multis, opibus succurris egenti,
^
The Preface.
THE Catalogue or Series of the Chancellors of England has been with much
care and diligence labored by Robert Glover, Somerset Herald of Arms, and
after him by Francis Thin, Lancaster Herald; whose M. S Collections J have
by me, and in them a thankful commemoration is made of Mr. Thomas Talbots
kind assistance, he being Clerk of the Records in the Tower of London, where
the Charters and their Dates that afford the exactest testimonies of them are
to be found for many Ages past. So that J shall not need to cite the vouchers
and proofs at large. Neither will I be so false to my self or my Reader, as
to conceal that the worthy and reverend Antiquarie Sr. Henry Spilman Knight,
in his Glossary has summarily mentioned them: The nature of the Office is most
accurately described by him in that work, and also by Mr. William Camden,
Clarenceux King of Arms, in his History of Great Britain, in the description
and definition of the several Courts of Justice in this Kingdom, to which J
refer those that desire to be particularly informed in that kind. Pollidor
Virgill would persuade us the Office and name of Chancellor was not known in
this Kingdom till after the Norman Conquest, and the Author of the Catalogue
of Bishops, is positive in that opinion, speaking of Swithen Bishop of
Winchester, (the opinion of whose piety procured him the title of a Saint.) But
the contrary is most clear and evident as by the Authorities hereafter
mentioned will appear, to which I refer my Reader.

A CATALOGVE OF THE CHANCELLORS of England from the time of the SAXON Kings.
TVrketill was Chancellor to King Ethelbald, who began his reign in the year
718. this Turketill gave six Manors to the Abbey of Croiland.

St. Swithen, Bishop of Winchester, was Chancellor and chief of Council to
the great Monarch King Egbert, who began his reign about the year 802.

Wolfinus, was Chancellor to King Athelstone, who began his reign in the year
924. This King enriched the Monastary of Malmesbury in Wiltshire, with large
and ample indowments, and bestowed great immunities upon the Town. And in the
Charter and grant of those Liberties; ths Wolfinus is a witness with the title
of Chancellor.

Turketill, was Chancellor to the said King Athelstone, and so continued under
King Edmund, who began his reign in the year 940. and after the death of King
Edmund, he was Chancellor to King Edred, the space of two years.

Adulthus, Chancellor to King Edgar; who began his reign in Anno Dom. 959. Of
this man speaks Hugo Petro Burgensis, and Leland calls this Adulph,
Cancellarium and Archigrammatum, Chancellor or chief Secretary.

Alsius or Aelsius, the second Abbat of Elie, Chancellor to King Ethelred, who
began his reign in Anno Dom. 979. This man being by Ethelwold Bishop of
Winchester, consecrated Abbat, by the appointment of the said King Ethelred, or
Egelred, and being then Abbat of Elie, when Ethelred gave out his commandment,
that the Abbat of Elie, should then, and for ever be Chancellor, I doubt not to
place him here amongst the Chancellors, the proof of which matter I have here
verbatim set down out of the second book of the history of Elie. Statuit
(which was Ethelred) atque concessit quatenus ecclesiam de Elie, ex tunc and
semper in regis curia cancellarij ageret dignitatem, quod etiam alijs, sancti
videlicet, Augustini and Glasconiae ecclesijs constituit, ut Abbates istorum
caenobiorum vicissim adsignatis succedendo, temporibus annum trifarie
dividerent, cum sanctuarijs, and caeteris ornamentis ministrando, etc.

Leofricus Bathonicus Chancellor to Edward the Confessor, in Anno Dom. 1045.
and some years before, this man was Bishop of Cridington in Cornwall, which
see was after translated to Excester.

Wifinus, or Wolfinus, Chancellor to Edward the Confessor, in the latter end of
the said year 1045, being the third year of his reign.

Resenbaldus, or Rembaldus, (for I take them both by many and ancient
authorities to be all one man,) was Chancellor to Edward the Confessor, and
Seale-bearer, witness amongst others, to many Deeds, which I have seen of
the Confessors, some dated in Anno dom. 1066 and some otherwise, he was buried
at Cirencester or Cicester.

Mauricius, Chancellor to William the Conqueror, in Anno dom. 1067. being the
first, and part of the second year, of William the Conqueror.

Osmundus, after Bishop of Sarum, Chancellor to William the Conqueror in Anno
dom. 1067, and after in the year 1075, about Anno 9 of the Kings reign.

Arfastus Bishop of Helmane, who translated his See from Helmane to Thetford,
was Chancellor to William the Conqueror, in Anno dom. 1068, being in the second
and third year of the Conqueror, and also in the year 1077, being about Anno
10. of William the Conqueror, Mauricius was again Chancellor.

Hirmanus, that was first made Bishop of Suring or Wilton, and translated his
See from Wilton to Shirborne, and from thence to Sarum; He is that Hirmanus,
which (I suppose) was Chancellor to William the Conqueror, and called Hirmanus,
and that wrote the life and miracles of St. Edmund King of the Eastangles.

William Welson, or Wilson, borne of a Noble house, Chaplain and Chancellor to
William the Conqueror, (as has Robertus Montensis) succeeded Arfastus in the
Bishopric of Thetford, to whom by the gift of William Rufus, succeeded in
that See Herbertus Losinga Abbat of Ramsey, which translated the Bishops See to
Norwich.

William Gifford, Bishop of Winchester, was Chancellor in the time of the
Conqueror, and of William Rufus, and of Henry, who made him Bishop of
Winchester, in Anno dom. 1100, and was consecrated in Anno dom. 1107, though it
seems that Robert Bluet came in place of this William Gifford, removed about
the fourth year of the same Rufus, from his Office of Chancellorship, (as I
suppose will be well prooved,) but after placed again in that Office. Of the
death of this William is much contrariety; for Matthew Westminster, placed it
three several years, viz in Annis 28 and 29, Henry 1, and again in the year
of Christ, 1142, being the seventh year of King Stephen.

Robert Bluet, Bloit, or Bloscit, made Chancellor in Anno dom. 1090. being Anno
4. of William Rufus, he was made Bishop of Lincoln, in Anno dom 1092. but as
it appears by some authority, that I have seen he did execute that Office,
being Bishop of Lincoln, he dyed at Woodstocke, in Anno dom. 1123. being about
the 23. year of the reign of Henry the first, whose Epitaph Henry Huntington
recites in this manner.

Pontificum Robertus honor, quem sama superstes
Perpetuare dabit, nec obiturus obit,
Hic humilis, dives (res mira,) potens, pius ultor,
Compatiens, mitis, quum pateretur erat,
Noluit esse suis dominus, studuit pater esse,
Semper in adversis, murus, and arma suis,
Jn decima Jani mendacis somnia mundi
Liquit, and evigilans vera perhenne vidit.
Ranulphus in the the time of William Rufus, which might be that man, which was
after Chancellor, in the time of Henry the first.

Waldricus Ch ncellor to Henry the first, in Anno dom. 1103. being Anno 3. of
his reign.

William Gifford, aforesaid was again Chancellor.

Herbertus, Chancellor in Anno 4. Henry the first, in Anno dom. 1104. as
appears by an Ann^nymall pamphlet in written hand, of whom I am not yet
resolved, whether this were Herbertus Losinga, Bishop of Norwich or not.

Roger, Bishop of Salisbury, whom Henry the first, called a meet Chaplain to
serve soldiers, was Chancellor to King Henry the first, in Anno dom. 1101.
being the first year of King Henry the first, in Anno dom. 1107. about the
seventh year of Henry the first, being chosen Bishop, in Anno dom. 1102. and
consecrated in the year 1107.

Galfridus Rufus, Bishop of Durham, witness to a Deed, wherein Henry the first
confirmed to the priory of Christ church, a piece of ground without Aldgate,
called Knighton guild, in the presence of Geofry Chancellor, Geofry Clinton,
and William Clinton, he was Chancellor in Anno 22. Henry the first, and so
until Anno 33. Henry the first, and then was made Bishop of Durham, which
Geofry dyed about the year 1141.

Robertus Ranulphus, called by Matthew Westminster, Ranulphus Chancellor to
Henry the first, and Richard the Chaplain, keeper of the great Seal, being at
one time. This Ranulph was Chancellor in Anno dom. 1116. being the sixteenth of
King Henry the first, In which Office I suppose that he continued until Anno
dom. 1123. being in Anno 23, of the said King, In which year this Chancellor,
(for so is he then called) fell from his Horse, and brake his neck on an hill,
not far from Dunstable, where the King kept his Christmasse.

Richardus Capellanus, was keeper of the Seal under this Ranulph.

Reginald Chancellor to King Henry the first, (as Leland has set him down,)
writing in this sort, in his notes of Montacute Abbey, Reginaldus Cancellarius,
so named (belike) of his Office, he was a man of great fame, about King Henry
the first, he fell to Religion, and was Prior of Montacute, and enlarged it
with great buildings, and possessions.

Thomas, Chancellor after this Regnaild, witness to a Charter of the Church of
Norwich.

Roger, Bishop of Salisbury, again Chancellor, in the latter end of the reign
of King Henry the first, and in the beginning of King Stephen, in Anno dom.
1136, which Henry the first, dyed in the year 1135, being in Anno 35, of his
reign. This Roger died in Anno dom. 1139, being about the 4 year of King
Stephen.

Godfrey, Chancellor to Henry the first, (as I gather out of Matthew Parker, in
the life of William Corbel, or Corbris) the 36 Archbishop of Canterbury, to
which dignity this William was advanced in Anno 23, Henry the first, being in
Anno dom. 1123, of which Godfrey, the said Matthew further writes in this
sort, speaking of the said William the Archbishop, returned from Rome with the
Pall. Deinde Alexandrum Lincolniensem episcopum Cantuariae, Godfridum Regni
Cancellarium, Bathoniensem episcopum Londini consecravit.

Alexander, Bishop of Lincoln (as may be after a sort gathered out of
Wilhelmus Paruus, lib: 1, cap. 6. being Cousin or Nephew to Roger Bishop of
Salisbury) was Chancellor, the words of which Wilhelmus Paruus be these. Eodem
(that was to King Stephen) quoque sublimato in regem, se (that was Roger Bishop
of Salisbury) talem exhibuit, ut obsequiorum gratia praeclaram apud illum
habere fiduciam videretur. Tantis ille beneficijs ingratus, and in ipsum
episcopum, (cujus opera nunquam episcopalia fuere) ultor divinitus ordinatus,
eundem tanquam exigui hominem momenti primo carcerati custodia, postmodum etiam
sibi inopia, and nepoti ejus (qui Cacellarius fuerat regis) intentato supplicio
ita coarctavit, ut duo illa praeclara castella (which were the castles of Vise,
otherwise called the devises, and the castle of Shirborne) in quibus thesauri
ejus erant repositi resignaret.

Robert, Chancellor of England, in the time of King Stephen, but I find not in
what year, because the Charter is without date, neither can I learn what he
was, because I know not his surname.

Philip, Chancellor to King Stephen, about the fourth year of his reign,
being in Anno dom* 1139. witness to many Deeds, which King Stephen made to the
Monks of Elie, and to Nigellus the Bishop of that See.

Reinold Abbat of Walden, whom I have seen in one anonymall brief Chronicle,
M, S* to be termed Chancellor, but in what time he lived, or what other name he
had, I do not yet know, but by the course of the history, much about this time.

John Chancellor of England, in the time of King Henry the second.

Thomas Becket, made Chancellor, (as some write) in the first year of the
reign of King Henry the second, others say in the fourth year, but the best
authors agree, that he gave over the Seal in Anno dom. 1162, being in the
eight year of the victorious Prince, King Henry the second, against the will
of the Prince, he dyed in Anno dom. 1170.

Ralphe Warnevile Archdeacon of Roane, and Treasurer of the Church of York,
was made Chancellor about the year 1173, being in Anno 8, Henry the second, Of
this man speaks Matthew Paris, and Matthew Westminster.

Walterus de Constantijs, Archdeacon of Oxford, Bishop of Lincoln, in Anno
dom, 1182, from whence he was advanced in Anno dom. 1184, being in Anno 31
Henry the second, unto the Arch-bishopricke of Rome.

Geofry, the bastard son to King Henry the second, after he had surrendered
the Bishopric of Lincoln, whereof he was never consecrate Bishop, but kept
the place, and received the revenues, was made Chancellor much about Anno 26,
Henry the second, in Anno dom 1181.

William Longchampe, the proud Bishop of Elie, Legate of England, for the Bishop
of Rome, chief Justice of the South, and West, parts of England, Deputy of
that part of the Realm, when Richard the first, went to the wars of the holy
Land, was made Chancellor in Anno 1 Richard the first, being in Anno Dom. 1191,
of the sumptuous feast, of whose inthronization, thus writes Ferthulphus, or
Ferculphus, by the way of comparison, Praevisis alijs, Eliensia festa videre,
Est quasi praevisa noste videre diem.


He dyed in the year of Christ, 1197, going to Rome, in the Abbey of Pimie;
being of the Charterhouse order, about which time in Anno 6, Richard the first,
there was a Vice Chancellor called Malus Catulus.

Eustachius, Deane of Salisbury, was Chancellor of England, being elected
Bishop of Ely, in the third Ides of August, in Anno dom. 11^6, being in Anno 9
Richard 1, Of whom thus writes Matthew Parker, in the life of Hubert
Archbishop of Canterbury, contrary to that which others affirm; writing that
Eustachius succeeded William Longchampe in the Office of Chancellor, and in the
Bishopric of Ely. The words of Matthew Parker in the life of Hubert be these.
Hubertus deposito magistratu civili, ecclesiae curae totus vacabat,
consecravitque postea Robertum de Solopesbi, episcopum Banchorensem, and
Eustachium, qui in cancellarij munere ei successit Eliensem episcopum,
VVestmonasterij debita accepta ab utroquesubjectionis professione.

Hubert Walter, or Walter Hubert, for such a transmutation of the name, is used
by authors, being first Bishop of Salisbury, and then Archbishop of Canterbury,
was made Chancellor shortly after the Coronation of King John; which was in
Anno dom. 1199, at what time a certain Nobleman said unto him in scorn, I
have often seen, of a Chancellor made a Bishop, but I never before saw an
Archbishop made a Chancellor.

Simon; or rather Hugh, of which is more hereafter, Archdeacon of Wels, in the
first year of King John, after (as I suppose that Hubert had left the Office,
being so disgraced and abased, as he thought) was witness to a Deed, in which
King John, granted to the Citizens of York, a guildhall, hanse, and other
liberties, as I have seen noted in the Copy of the same Charter, for which
cause, I have set it down as another man, although in truth I am fully
resolved, that this Simon, and the Hugh following, were all one person, leaving
it yet for every man's Judgment.

Hugh de Wels Archdeacon of Wels witness to the Deed, in which King John, in
the sixth year of his reign confirmed to the Monastery of Westminster,
Gistslep, or Islep in Oxfordshire, in which house Edward the Confessor was
borne, he was made Bishop of Lincoln, about Anno 10, of the reign of King
John, in Anno dom. 1209, and dyed in the year of our Lord 1235.

Walter Gray, chosen Bishop of Chester, in anno dom 1210, was Bishop of
Worcester, and after Bishop of York, a man of extreme age, was made Chancellor
in the seventh year of King John, as one anonymal Chronicle says, to hold
that Office during his life. Others say that he was made Chancellor in anno
dom. 1209, being the tenth year of King John, after Hugh de Wels. But I
suppose he surrendered that Patent; to hold it during his life, when he came to
be Bishop of York.

Richard de Marischo, whom Matthew Paris, terms Tholenarius, as it were
Toll-gatherer, or Treasurer (if you list,) being Archdeacon of Northumberland,
was Chancellor in the fourth year of King John, as appears by a Deed that I
have seen, and further he was made Chancellor in Anno 15, of King John, in
which Office he continued to the 17 year of the said King, and as some do
write, during King John his life, and died about the kalends of May, in Anno
dom, 1226, in Anno 10, of the long reign of King Henry the third, as some
have; but the Book of Durham says; that he was made Bishop of that See, by
Gwado the Legate, and consecrated by Walter Gray, Bishop of York, in Anno dom.
1214. being about Anno 16, of King John, and dyed suddenly at Peterborough the
first day of May, in Anno dom 1226, being the t nth year of King Henry the
third, after that he had been Bishop of Durham, nine years.

For whom this formal Epitaph was made, Culmina qui cupi it is lauds pompasque
sui it is
Et sedata si it is si me pensare veli it is
Qui populos regi it is memores super omnia si it is
Quod mors immi it is non parcit honor poti it is
Vobis praeposi it is similis fueram been sci it is
Quod sum vos eri it is ad me currendo veni it is


Ralphe Nevill, was confirmed Chancellor, as it seems by the whole consent of
the Nobility in Anno dom. 1226, being about Anno 10 Henry 3, after which he was
made Bishop of Chichester, in Anno 11 Henry 3, being in Anno dom. 1227, or as
has Matthew Westminster, he was made Bishop of Chichester, in Anno dom 1223,
being before Chancellor, after which the King in Anno 22 of his reign,
offended with Nevill, took from him the great Seal, and delivered it to
Geofry of the Temple, as has Matthew Paris, and John de Lexington, although
that the said Nevill remained still Chancellor, and received the profit
thereof, to whom the King would have regiven the seal in Anno dom. 1229, being
the three and twentieth year of his reign, but Nevill would not receive it
This man dyed in the year of Christ 1243, being Anno 27 Henry 3, at his Palace
at London, not far from the new Temple.

Geofrey the Templer and John de Lexington, were made keepers of the great
Seal, but shortly af er this Geofrey had the Seal taken from him, because he
grew in dislike of the Nobility in continually provoking them to anger.

Hugh Pateshall, Cannon of Paul's, is by Matthew Paris, Fol 656, called
Chancellor in Anno 23 Henry 3, Which I much doubt to be true, of his man shall
be more said in the Treasurers of England.

Simon the Norman keeper of the great Seal, in Anno 23 Henry 3, being in Anno
dom. 1229, he had the Seal shortly taken from him, and was banished the Court,
because he would not seal the Patent, whereby Thomas Earl of Flanders might
take four pence for every Sack of Wool, that came out of England into
Flanders, This Simon dyed in the year of Christ 1249, being in Anno 33 Henry 3.

Richard Grass or Grossus, Abbat of Evesham, (the said Simon expelled) had the
keeping of the great Seal in Anno 23, Henry 3, he kept the Seal three years,
and being chosen Bishop of Chester, he resigned the Seal in Anno dom 1242,
being the 26, year of Henry the third, he dyed (being wise and learned in the
Canon Law,) in the same year in Gascoigne, in a City called in Latin Riola
or Rigula, where he was buried.

John de Lexington, was again made keeper of the Great Seal in Anno 26 Henry
3, being in Anno dom. 1242, to execute that Office, Ralphe Nevill being in
life, and still Chancellor, but in the Kings disgrace, shortly after which,
this Nevill dyed. This John Lexington dyed in Anno dom. 1252, being in Anno 41,
Henry 3.

Ranulfe Briton, as I read, is said to be Chancellor, and Treasurer of the
Chamber, about the 37 year of Henry the third, being in Anno dom. 124^, I
suppose that he only had the keeping of the great Seal, as the rest had before
him, during the life of Raphe Nevill, and so I leave him to the judgment of
others, since Matthew Paris, continually names him Treasurer, and once
Chancellor, who suddenly dyed after dinner, beholding players at Dice, in Anno
dom. 1246, being in Anno 30 Henry 3, Of whom thus writes the said Matthew
Paris, in his greater history Fol. 934, Ranulphus Brito quondam Dominus
familiarissimus Regi and Reginae multis posthabitis nobilibus and ejusdem
Cancellarius specialis, quum post mensalem refectionem, aleatores certatim
inspexisset colludentes, laethalis apoplexia, inexpectato vulnere corruit
sugillatus.

Silvester de Eversden, received the great Seal in Anno 29 Henry 3, being in
Anno dom. 1246, he was Vice Chancellor, and consecrated Bishop of Carleil,
(being a man most cunning in the custom of the Chancery) in Anno dom. 1247.
being in Anno 31 Henry 3.

John Mansell Treasurer of York, Parson of Maidstone in Kent, Parson of Wigan,
Chancellor of Paul's, Master or Ruler of Beverley, Chief Justice of England,
one of the privy Counsel to Henry the third, his Chaplain, Ambassador into
Spain, and a worthy soldier, crossed to go to Jerusalem, who at one feast,
had two Kings, two Queens, and I know not how many Noblemen, and whose
spiritual livings were about 4000 Marks, of yearly revennewes ^s I have
gathered) he was at the will a^^ ^^stance of the King made keeper of the great
Seal, as Vice Chancellor, for Matthew Paris says, Custodiam sigilli regij
accepit Cancellarij vices acturus and officium, about Anno 31 Henry 3, in Anno
dom. 1247, he built an house of regular Cannons at Rumney, one of the Cinque
Ports in Kent; To this man King Henry the third, in Anno 30 of his reign, did
grant that his Town of Wigan should be a Borough.

John de Lexington, being after chief I^stice of the Forest, from the River
of Trent Southward, was again keeper of the great Seal, until some part of
the 32, year of Henry the third, in Anno dom. 1248.

John Mansell, again keeper of the great Seal, who at Woodstocke, in the 32
year of Henry the third, did receive the great Seal of the said John
Lexington, which he kept (as I suppose, and that with some good proof) until
the 33 year of the said King, being in anno dom. 1248, Of which John Mansell,
thus writes, an old anonymall Chronicle, concerning the Barons wars. Sed and
Johannes Mansell multarum in Anglia ecclesiarum Rector, seu potius incubator,
reddituum quoque quorum non erat numerus possessor magnificus, ita quod ditior
eo clericus non videbatur in orb episcopali, puta dignitate minime insignitus,
metu Baronum aufugit, and latenter ultra mari de Turri London, in qua Rex
Angliae, and Regina sua tunc temporis tenuerunt se. Quem quum Henricus filius
regis Alemaniae fugientem insequeretur, and ipse capitur quum applicuisset
Bononiae, a Magistro Ge^ardo, de fines procuratore ut putabatur reginae.

Radulphus de Diceto, was Chancellor as I read and suppose, much about this
time.

William of Kilkenny, being a modest, wise, and faithful man, learned in the
Canon and Civil Laws, was made keeper of the great seal in Anno dom. 1250.
being in Anno 34 Henry 3, He was elected to the Bishopric of Elie, as says
the History of Elie, the 18 Calends of September, in Anno dom. 1255, being
about anno 39 Henry 3. But others say, that he being then Vice Chancellor, was
elected Bishop of Elie, in anno dom. 1254, being anno 38 Henry 3, after that he
had faithfully, and to his great commendation, used and borne the great seal,
he was consecrated to that Bishopric in anno dom. 1255, and dyed in anno dom.
1256, being about anno 41 Henry 3, whose heart was buried at Elie.

Henry de Wingham, was made Chancellor in anno 39 Henry 3, and continued in
annis 41 and 42 Henry 3, in which year (as some have) and in the 43 of Henry
the third, (as others have) he was chosen Bishop of Winchester, upon condition
that he should give place to Athelmer, half brother to King Henry the third,
and son to Hugh Brunne, Earl of Marshe, and of Eleanor, King Henry the third
his Mother, being banished by the Barons, if that he should again come into
England, and then leave the bishopric of Winchester unto him, which he did
upon the coming again of the said Athelmer into England, and for that cause
was after chosen Bishop of London, in Anno dom. 1259, being in Anno 33 Henry 3.
and still Chancellor, and is buried in Paul's, on the South side of the Quire,
(next to Eustachius Bishop of London,) in a Monument of Marble, with this
inscription on the wall to tell who it was. Hic jacet Henricus de Wingham
quondam episcopus hujus ecclesiae qui multa bona contulit ministris ecclesiae
sancti Pauli.

Walter Merton Chancellor in Anno 44 Henry 3, being in Anno dom 1260.

Nicholas of Elie, made Chancellor by the Barons in Anno dom. 1260, and Walter
Merton displaced. But King Henry the third disdaining to have Officers
appointed him by his subjects, did in the month of October following in Anno
dom. 1260. or rather 1261, deprive the said Nicholas, and replaced the said
Walter Merton.

Walter Merton, Bishop of Rochester, the second time made Chancellor, as before
appears.

John de Chesill, Archdeacon of London, and Treasurer of England, was made
keeper of the great seal in Anno dom. 1264, in Anno 48 Henry 3. This man was
consecrated Bishop of London in Anno dom 1274, the third Kalends of May, as
has Matthew Westminster, he dyed in Anno dom. 1279, the fourth Ides of
February, in Anno 7, of King Edward the first.

Thomas de Cantelupe, borne of the noble house of the Lords Cantelupes, the
son of William Cantelupe and Millecent, which (as says Leland) drew her
original from the Countesses of York, being Archdeacon of Stafford, was
Doctor, and afterward Bishop of Hereford, in Anno dom. 1276, and before that
made Chancellor, after the feast of S. Peter's Chair, in Anno dom. 1265, being
in anno 49, Henry 3, he dyed beyond the Seas, coming from the Court of Rome,
in anno dom. 1278, being in anno 6 Edward 1, or more truly (as others have,)
in anno 1283, being anno 11 Edward 1, whose bones were brought to Hereford.

Walter Gifford Bishop of Bath and Wels, whom many do call William, did enjoy
the state of the Chancellor, in anno dom 1266, being anno 50, Henry 3, he was
translated from Bath to York in anno dom. 1259, being in anno 49 Henry 3, and
dyed the 7, kalends of May, in the xij, year of his Bishopric in anno dom.
1277, being in anno 6, Edward 1, or as Nicholas Trivet in anno dom. 1279. being
the 7, year of King Edward 1.

Geofry Gifford, was Chancellor also in anno 51 Henry 3, being in anno dom.
1267, This man was Bishop of Worcester, about anno dom. 1299 where he sat 34,
years, 4 months, 4 days, and dyed in the year 1304, being about the 32,
year of King Edward the first.

John de Chesill, was the second time honored with the place of the Chancellor
in anno dom. 1268, being the 53 year, of King Henry the third.

Richard de Middleton, so surnamed of the place where he was borne, was
advanced to the Office of the Chancellorship in the said anno 53 Henry 3, in
the month of July in anno dom. 1268, and was also, (as appears by a Charter
which I have seen,) witness to the same Deed, in anno 54 Henry 3, who as
far as I can gather) dyed in August, in anno dom. 1271, being anno 56 of the
long government of King Henry the third.

John de Kirby, after the death of Richard Middleton, was made keeper of the
great seal, in the said anno 56 Henry 3, It is very probable that this was the
same John Kirby, which after was Bishop of Elie, and Treasurer of England.

Walter Merton, the third time made Chancellor of England, in Anno dom. 1273,
being the first year of the reign of that famous Prince King Edward, the
first of that name, He was Bishop of Rochester, and founded Merton College in
Oxford, and dyed the year of Christ, 1278, being the sixth year of the reign
of King Edward the first.

Robert Burnell, the eleaventh Bishop of Bath and Wels, (after the uniting of
those two Sees, in one, by John de Toures, in Anno dom. 1272, was made Bishop
of Bath, in the year of our Lord, (as says Eversden) 1274, chosen Archbishop
of Canterbury, in Anno dom. 1278, but rejected by the Pope. He was Chancellor
in Anno 2 Edward 1, in which place it seems, that he long continued, of whom
thus writes an anonymall Chronicle.

Dominus Edmundus Comes Cornubiae fundavit novum studium ordinis Cisterciensis
apud Oxonias, and monachos de Them primo ibidem introduxit, and dedit eis
prima donatione Manerium de Erdington, and secit dedicare locum Abbatiae Tertij
Jdus Decembris, per Dominum Robertum Burnell eposcopum Bathon and Wels,
Cancellarium regis, and posuit fundamentum novae ecclesiae eodem die
Northosneiae. This Bishop was required, with the son of Edward the first, and
Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, in the time of Edward the first, to be
delivered for pledges for Lheweline, Prince of Wales, for his safe return, if
he came to the parliament, whereunto he was sommoned, by the said King Edward,
In the time of this Chancellor, the Court of Chancery, was kept at Bristow.
This man dyed in Anno dom. 1293, being Anno 21, Edward 1.

John de Langton, was made Chancellor of England, in Anno dom. 1293, being the
21 year of the victorius King Edward the first, in which office he remained
until the death of the said King, being in Anno dom. 1302, He was made Bishop
of Chichester, about Annis 26 or 27, Edward 1. being in Anno dom. 1298, or
rather 1299, And in the said year 1299, he was before chosen Bishop of Elye,
but rejected by the Pope, who made him Archdeacon of Canterbury. From which
Langton King Edward did take the great seal in the thirtieth year before
said, and delivered it to John Drokenford.

John Drokenford keeper of the Wardrope was made keeper of the great Seal in
the thirtieth year as before, in which office he continued from about the 15
day of August; until Michaelmas.

William de Grinefeild Deane of Chichester and Canon of York, was advanced to
the place of Chancellor in Anno Dom. 1302. being about Anno. 30. Edward 1.
which Office was given unto him at Saint Radigunds (as says Anonymus M.S. He
was after chosen Bishop of York, in Anno dom. 1303. who in the year of our
Lord 1308 buried the body of the said King Edward the first in Westminster,
though the King dyed in Anno dom. 1307. This Bishop dyed in Anno dom. 1315
being about the sixth year of King Edward the second, at Cawood, after that he
had been Bishop nine years, eleaven months and two days, and was buried in
S. Nicholus Porch at York, receiving his consecration at Rome, in Anno dom.
1305, (after that he had been there two years) of Pope Clement; This
Greinfeild was a man very eloquent, and pithie, and Prudent in Counsel.

William de Hamilton, Deane of York, was created Chancellor of England, in
Anno dom. 1305, being the 33, year of that noble prince, King Edward the
first; this William dyed in Anno dom* 1307, being about Anno 35, of the said
King at the Abbey of Fontnesse in Yorkshire, being a man that well deserved of
the Common wealth.

Ralphe de Baldocke, chosen Bishop of London in Anno dom. 1303, was confirmed
at Titneshall, by Robert of Winchelsey Bishop of Canterbury, and consecrated at
Lions by Peter of Spain, Bishop of Alba, the third Calends ^f February, in
anno dom. 1305, He was made Lord Chancellor of England, after the death of the
said William Hamilton, in the said 35, year of King Edward the first, and
received the great Seal, in the Rogation week following, being some four or
five weeks, after he was advanced to that Office, at the Exchequer, shortly
after which dyed King Edward the first, for which cause the said Baldocke sent
the great Seal to King Edward the second then at Carliel, by reason of his
fathers death. This Baldocke dyed, on S. James Eeve in anno dom. 1313, being
anno 7, Edward 2.

John Langton Bishop of Chichester, again made Lord Chancellor of England in
Anno dom 1307. being the first year of King Edward of Carnarvan in which
office it seems that he continued until Anno dom. 1310 being in Anno 3
Edward 2.

William Melton having two others joined with him had the great Seal delivered
unto them for a certain time, to execute all such things as were to be done
therewith, during the Kings pleasure. This man was a Canon of York, Provost of
Beverly, Treasurer of England, and Archbishop of York, as says Anonymus M.S.
He was consecrated Bishop of York at Rome, where he tarried two years for the
same, he was a man never wearied with travel. He first of all the Bishops of
York, after a long controversy betwixt the Deane and Cannons of York,
visited the chapter by due order, he was wise, rich, severe in correction,
gentle, familiar and humble, he finished the West part of the Church of S.
Peter's in York, with 300 pound, he was Archbishop of York, 22 years, five,
or six months, and two days, he dyed at Cawood, on S* Georges Eeve, in Anno
dom. 1330, and was buried in the Minster of York near the Font.

Walter Reinolds Bishop of Worcester* Treasurer of England, and Archbishop of
Canterbury, was made keeper of the great Seal, and Chancellor of England, on
the sixth of July* Anno dom. 1310, being anno 3 Edward 2.

John de Sandall Clerk, Bishop of Winchester and Treasurer, was at York made
Chancellor of England, in Anno dom. 1314. being anno 8 Edward 2, in which
place, he continued two years and more, some part thereof being after that he
was made Bishop of Winchester, (as I gather) and then delivered back the seal
at Westminster, in anno dom. 1317, being in anno 11 Edward 2, Of this man is
more spoken in the Treasurers of England.

John Hotham Bishop of Elie, was created Lord Chancellor of England, in anno
dom. 1317, being in anno 11 Edward 2, In which Office he continued until anno
dom. 1319, being anno 13 Edward 2, During whose government of the Sea of Elie,
in anno dom. 1341, the steeple fell down, which made such a terrible noise,
and shaking of the ground, that it was supposed to be some earthquake. He dyed
of the palsy in anno dom. 1336, being anno 10 Edward 3.

John Salmon Bishop of Norwich, was advanced to be Chancellor in anno dom.
1319, being anno 13 Edward 2, against whom the Nobles rebelled, for the
misdemenour of Piers Gaveston, (the Gascoigne) Earl of Cornwall, In this year
1319, (as says one Anonymal Chronicler M.S.) was William Airemine, Keeper of
the seal, Vice Chancellor, taken prisoner by the Scots. The words of the which
Author, for the more certainety thereof, we have here set down.

Episcopus Eborum, episcopus Eliae thesaurarius, Abbas beatae Mariae Eborum,
Abbas de Selbie, Decanus Eborum, Dominus Willielmus Arymanee Vice-Cancellarius
Angliae, ac dominus Johannes Dabeham, cum 8000 ferme hominum, tam equitum quam
peditum and Civibus properanter, civitatem egredientes, quoddam flumen Swale
nuncupatum sparsis cuneis transeuntes, and indispositis, seu potius confusis
ordinibus, cum adversarijs congressi sunt. Scoti siquidem in Mart gnari
amplitudinem eorum exercitus caute regentes, in nostris agminibus strictis
audacter irruerunt, nostrorum denique in brevi laceratis cuneis atque
dissipatis, corruerunt ex nostris, tam in ore gladij quam aquarum scopulis
suffocati, plusquam 4000. and capti sunt domini Johannes de Pabeham, and
dominus Willielmus de Arymenee, ut praefertur de Cancellaria etc. Which William
Ayrmenee was also in the said 15 of Edward 2. one of the Keepers of the great
Seal, as I have seen registered.

Robert Baldocke, Archdeacon of Middleton, a man evilly beloved, and whom the
old English Chronicle remembers, with ill attributes, was made Chancellor of
England in anno 17 Edward 2, at the Castle of Pickering in Yorkshire, he was
after made Bishop of Norwich and did his fealty for restitution of his
Temporalties in anno 19, of the said King Edward the second, at Woodstocke, in
Oxfordshire, he was apprehended in anno 20 Edward 2 being in anno dom 1326, or
as others have in the year 1325, And first committed to the custody of Adam
Tarleton, or de Orleton, bishop of Hereford, and after was put in the prison of
the Newgate, of London, in which 20 year of King Edward the second, the great
seal was again delivered to William Arymenee, who (as I suppose was then also
made Bishop of Norwich and this Baldocke deposed from that see. Of which
Baldocke thus writes a Polythronicon of Durham. Robertus de Baldocke
Cancellarius anno 1325, captus cum Hugonibus de Despensers, quia clericus fuit
and sacerdos in nova porta Londiniarum, poni fecit Edwardus Princeps and
Isabella matter ejus, ubi pro nimia miseria mortuus fuit infra breve.

John Hotham bishop of Elie, the second time was at Westminster, made
Chancellor of England in anno dom. 1326, being the first year of the Reign of
that King, that entitled himself King of England and France, but he continued
not long in the same Office, for he was removed in the second year of the said
King, being in anno dom. 1328, He was elected Bishop in anno dom. 1316, in
which place he ruled twenty years, and died in anno dom. 1336, of the palsy,
at Summersham, being buried in the Church of Elie, under a goodly monument of
stone, with the Image of a bishop carved out of Alabast r upon his Tomb.

Henry Cliffe, Master of the Rolls, had the charge and Keeping of the great
Seal of England, in the said year of Christ, 1328, being the second year of
King Edward the third, and was the Kings Chancellor also.

Henry de Burgh, Burghwash, or Burghurst, Nephew to Sr. Bartholmew Bladismere
baron of Leedes in Kent, having been Treasurer of England, enjoyed the honor
of the Chancellor, in the second year of King Edward the third, being in anno
dom. 1328. and was made Chancellor at Northampton, which Office he did not long
enjoy.

John Stratford Bishop of Winchester, and after of Canterbury, and sometime
Treasurer of England, was made Chancellor of the Realm, in anno dom 1330, being
in anno 4 Edward 3, who being sent in the sixth year of his reign, in anno
dom. 1332, Ambassador beyond the Seas, about the affairs of the King and
Kingdom, did not like Cardinal Woolsey the Chancellor, (in the days of King
Henry the 8,) presumptuously carry the great Seal with him beyond the seas,
but left the same in his absence with others, who both could and would answer
the well or evil using thereof whiles he was in France, This man continued in
the Office, until the Eight year of Edward the third.

Richard de Bury, otherwise called Richard de Angervile, being borne in a
little village besides S Edmundsbury commonly called the Bury Abbey, was so
surnamed Bury of that place, had to his Father Sr. Richard Angervile Knight,
This man being first kept at school by his Uncle Sr. John VVillobie Priest,
was afterward Treasurer of England, Chancellor, and Bishop of Durham, to which
place of Chancellor-ship, he was advanced in the year 1334 being in anno 8
Edward 3, which office he received by the Kings gift at Westminster, in which
year he was inthronized, being first consecrated Bishop in anno do. 1333, in
the Bishopric of Durham, by William Cowton Prior of Durham, He kept the Sea 11
years, two months, and twelve days, and died in the year 1345, and was
buried in the South angle of the Church at Durham.

John Stratford, the second time Lord Chancellor, being now Archbishop of
Canterbury, was installed therein at York, in anno dom. 1335, being the ninth
year of the Reign of King Edward the third.

Robert de Stratford or Strafford (as some have written) but as I think
corruptly, being Archdeacon of Canterbury, (which Office was first ordained by
Anselme, Archbishop of the said City) was made Chancellor of England, on the
24 day of March, anno dom. 1336, being in anno 11 Edward 3, He was after made
Bishop of Chichester, desiring to be remooved from that office of
Chancellorship, which was granted unto him, Whereupon he surrendered up the
Seal unto the said King Edward 3, in the 12 year of his Reign, being in anno
dom. 1338.

Richard de Bintworth, chosen Bishop of London, and confirmed by John
Stratford, Archbishop of Canterbury at Oxford, the tenth kalends of June 1338,
was at Waltham advanced to the honor of Lord Chancellor, in the month of
July, in the said year 1338, being the 12 year of King Edward the third.

John Stratford the third time Lord Chancellor of England, in which Office he
did not long continue.

Robert Bishop of Chichester, being the foresaid Robert Stratford, was again
made Lord Chancellor of England, in Anno dom. 1340, being anno 14 of the reign
of Edward the third, who was put out of that Office, and should with the
Treasurer of England have been sent into France for a pledge for the payment
of certain sommes of money.

Robert de Bourchier, borne of the honorable house of the Lord Bourchiers, was
in the Tower of London, made Lord Chancellor of England, in December in anno 14
Edward 3 being in anno dom. 1340, though some say, he was made Chancellor in
anno 15 of the said King.

Robert Perning, Pernicke, or Pernwicke, also Treasurer of England, was made
Chancellor of England, in anno dom. 1341, bing in anno 15 Edward 3, he dyed in
the year 1343, being in anno 17 of the said King, This man was a Serjant in
the third year of Edward the third when he began to plead as a Serjant, in
which he continued until anno 11 Edward 3, and was after that, Justice,
Treasurer, and Chancellor, and dyed in the common plees being Chancellor,
sitting and arguing amongst the Justices, as appears in the Law books of
those years, of Edward the third, of whom is last mention made in the 17 year
of Edward the third, where he is named Chancellor.

Robert de Saddington Knight, was invested with the dignity of Lord Chancellor,
after the death of Perning in anno dom. 1343, and in anno 17 Edward 3, He was
elected to be Bishop of Canterbury, and so was installed, but never received
the Pall. There was also one Richard Saddington Knight, Treasurer of England,
of whom I have spoken in my discourse of the Lord Treasurers.

John Offord or Vfford, Deane of Lincoln, was made Chancellor of England, in
anno dom. 1345. being anno 19 Edward 3, He dyed in the month of May, in anno
dom 1349, being the 23, year of the Reign of that victorious King, Edward the
third.

John Thorsby Bishop of Worcester, Archbishop of York, and Cardinal, was
installed in the seat of the Lord Chancellor, in anno dom. 1349, being anno 23
Edward 3, who at his great suit was discharged of the Office of Chancellor, by
delivery of the great Seal in November in anno 30 of the said King, being in
anno dom 1356, after he had kept that place, almost by the space of 7 years,
He in the 10 year of his Bishopric, on the third kalends of August, began
the frame of the Quire in S Peter's Church in York, and laid the first stone
thereof, to which he gave an Hundred pounds, He dyed at Thorpe, and was buried
at York, in anno dom 1363, or as others have, 1373, after that he had been
Archbishop, one and twenty years, and one and twenty days.

William de Edington, Bishop of Winchester, Lord Treasurer of England, was made
Chancellor of England in November, in anno dom. 1356, in anno 30 of King
Edward, the third.

Simon Langham, Abbat of Westminster, Bishop of Elie, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Treasurer of England, was made Lord Chancellor in February in anno dom.
1363, being the seven and thirthieth year of the government of King Edward
the third. Of this Simon were these verses, made when he was removed from Elie
to the Bishopric of Canterbury.

Exultent caeli quia Simon transit ab Eli
Cujus in adventum flent in kent millia centum.
Of whom also because he richly endowed the Abbey of Westminster, with great
gifts, of singular cost and value, a certain Monk compiled these verses.

Res es de Langham, tua Simon sunt data quondam
Octingentena librarum millia dena.
Of this man is more spoken in the following discourse, of the Lord Treasurers
of England.

William de Wickeham, so called of the place of his Birth, whom Leland makes
Treasurer of England, which by any possible means cannot be so, for any thing
that I can yet learn, This man being Bishop of Winchester; and advanced to
that place in anno dom. 1367, in anno 41 Edward 3, in which place he sat
seven and thirty years, was sometime keeper of the privy seal, and made
also Chancellor of England, in Anno dom. 1367, being the 41 year of Edward the
third, in which Office he remained about four years, and in March* in the
year 1371, being the 45 of King Edward the third, did deliver up the great
Seal, to the King at Westminster. He was buried in the body of Winchester
Church, which he new built, with the other places about it, of whom were these
verses composed, for the building of his Colleges, the one at Oxford, and the
other at Winchester.

Hunc decet esse pium fundatis collegiorum
Oxoniae primum stat Wintoniaeque secundum.
Robert Thorpe Knight, being before Justice of the Law in Anno dom. 1370, was
after at Westminster advanced to the Chancellorship in March, in Anno 45,
Edward 3, being in Anno dom. 1371, Who going home to his own house, left the
great seal with four of the Guardians, or Masters of the Chancery, whereof
the one was called Walter Power, to keep and use as need required.

Sr. John Knivet or Knivell, (as some books have by the transcriber corrupted)
was made Chancellor of England in July, in Anno dom. 1372, being the 46 year
of King Edward the third, in which Office he continued (as I gather) until
the 50 year of the said King Edward the third, in which year (as here at
hand appears) came in place, the Bishop of S. David's.

Adam de Houghton, Bishop of Menenia, or of S. David's in Wales, was advanced to
the office of Lord Chancellor in Anno dom. 1376, being the 50 year of King
Edward the third, who in the 51 year of the said King, was with the Earl of
Salisbury, and the Bishop of Hereford, sent Ambassador beyond the seas. And
here I think it not amiss to set down the original of the Rolls in Chancery
Lane in this sort.

Henry the third did build an house for the Jews converted to the faith of
Christ, which house is at this day, (and has been long before this time)
appointed for the keeping of the Kings Rolls and records, being now called
and known by the name of the Rols in Chancery Lane, besides Lincolnes Inn. In
which house the master of the Rolls (for the time being) has his dwelling. In
which also there is a fair Chapel, called the Chapel of the Rolls, being
a place commonly appointed wherein men accostome to pay money upon contracts.

The grant of Henry the third, for erecting of the house of Converts.

Rex archi episcopis etc. Sciatis nos intuitu Dei, and pro salute animae
nostrae and animarum antecessorum and haeredum meorum concessisse, and hac
charta nostra confirmasse pro nobis and haeredibus nostris domum quam fundari
fecimus in vico, qui vocatur Newst eet, inter vetus Templum and novum London,
ad sustentationem fratrum conversorum, and convertendorum de Judaismo ad fidem
catholicam, in auxilium sustentationis eorundem fratrum in eadem domo
conversantium, domos and terraes quae fuere Johannis Harbeton in London, and
sunt in manu nostra, tanquam eschaeta nostra, excepto Gardino, quod fuit
eiusdem Iohannis in vico praedicto de Newstreet, and quod prius per Chartam
nostram concessimus venerabili patri Radulpho Cicestrensi episcopo Cancellario
nostro, and omnes alias eschaetas, quae tempore nostro per feloniam, vel
quacunque ex causa nobis accident in civitate nostra, vel in suburbio infra
libertatem civitatis nostrae London. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus pro
nobis and haeredibus nostris quod praedicta domus habeat and teneat libere and
quiet Been and in pace, ad sustentationem fratrum conversorum and
convertendorum de Judaismo; ad fidem catholicam, in auxillium sustentationis
eorundem fratrum, in eadem domo conversantium, domos and terras, quae fuerunt
Johannis Harbeton in London, and sunt in manu nostra, tanquam eschaeta nostra,
excepto gardino quod fuit eiusdem Iohannis in vico praedicto de Newstreet, and
quod prius per chartam nostram concessinus venerabili patri Radulpho
Cicestrensi episcopo Cancellario nostro, and omnes alias eschaetas, quae
tempore nostro per feloniam vel quacunque ex causa nobis accident in civitate
nostra, vel in fuburbio infra libertatem civitatis nostrae London, sicut
praedictum est, His testibus venerabilibus patribus W. Kaerl. and W. Exon,
episcopis. H: de Burgo Comite Kantiae. Radulpho filio Nicholai, Godfrido de
Crancombe Iohanne filio Philip. Amaurico de sancto Aumundo, Will: de Picheford,
Galfrido de Cauz and alijs. Dat. per manum Ve: P: R: Cicestrend: episcop.
Cancellar. nostri apud Westmin. 19. die Aprilis.

The Grant of Edward the third whereby the said house was in the one and
fiftieth and last year of the said Edward, converted to the custody of the
Rolls and records of the Chancery.

Rex omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem. Sciatis quod nos, considerantes qualiter
domus conversorum in suburbio Civitatis nostrae London, de patronatu nostro
existens, and capella, aedificia, and clausur: ejusdem, tempore quo delectus
noster Will. Burstall custodiam ejusdem domus ex collatione nostra primo
habuit, per negligentiam and incuriam aliorum qui ante praedictum Will.
custodiam domus illius habuerunt, and ibidem, morari seu inhabitari non
curaverunt, multipliciter and quasi totaliter in ruina exstiterunt, and quod
praedictus Will. tempore suo de bonis suis proprijs, grandes costas and
expensas super recuperatione and emendatione domus, capellae, aedificiorum, and
clausur. praedict. ac etiam super factur: novar domorum ibidem. Nos ut domos
conversorum, capella, aedificia, clausur. and novae domus supradict*
competenter sustententur and custodientur in futurum, ad supplicatio. nem
praedicti Willielmi, qui custos Rotulorum Cancellariae nostrae existit, in
praesenti concessimus, de gratia nostra speciali, pro nobis and haeredibus
nostris, quod post mortem ejusdem Willielmi, dicta domus conversorum, cum suis
juribus and pertinentibus quibuscunque remaneat and moretur in perpetuum
Clerico Custod, Rotulorum Cancellar nostrae and haeredum nostrorum pro tempore
existente, and similiter annex. eidem officio in perpetuum, and quod
Cancellarius Angliae vel custos sive custodes magni sigilli nostri and haeredum
nostrorum Angliae pro tempore existentium, post mortem ipsius Willielmi habeat,
and habeant potestatem ad quamlibet vocationem dicti officij custodis
Rotulorum, per mortem cessionem, vel mutationem personae, quocunque tempore
futuro, institutum successive custodes Rotulorum praedictorum in dicta domo
conversorum, and Custodes illos ponend. in possessionem ejusdem cum suis
juribus et pertinentibus quibuscunque. In cujus, etc. T. R. apud Shene. 11.
Aprilis, Anno 51. Edw. 3.

But after the death of this King Edward, the said William Burstall Master of
the Rolls, (belike not supposing this to be a sufficient grant) procured this
house by act of Parliament in the first year of King Richard the second, to be
more strongly established to the use of the Master of the Rolls for the time.
After which John de Waltham, Master of the Rolls, after Bishop of Salisbury,
and Treasurer of England, procured King Richard the second in the sixth year of
his reign, by his Letters Patents to confirm the said house to the said
William and his successors Masters of the Rolls. And whereas by the Patent of
Edward the third, the Master of the Rolls was appointed and installed in that
house by the Chancellor, it is to be noted, that the same manner of induction
and instalment continued as long as the Master of the Rolls was of the Clergy,
as I have seen set down by others, and as the Presidents of those
instalments, and the Writts themselves extant of record do well prove.

Sir Richard Scroope Knight Lord of Bolton, having been Lord Treasurer in the
time of the deceased King Edward the third, was now in October about the latter
end of the year, 1378 or the beginning of the year 1379. being the second
year of the after deposed King Richard the second, made Lord Chancellor, and
had the great Seal delivered unto him, who in the third year of the said King
at a Parliament, did surrender up his office. Of this man is more set down in
the discourse of the Treasurers.

Simon Sudbury so surnamed of the place of his birth, but by descent called
Tibold the son of Nicholas Tibold, descended of a gentleman like race
dwelling at Sudbury in Suffolk. This Simon was Archbishop of Canterbury, and
made Chancellor about the year of Christ, 1380. in the third year of Richard
the second, and was by the Rebels beheaded in the Tower of London, in the
fourth year of the disquieted government, of that unfortunate, but valiant
King Richard the second. After whom in the fifth year of the said King, was R.
Bishop of London, whereof I have seen and taken a note, which Bishop was (as I
conjecture, and have some authority to prove) Robert Braybrooke which
follows, and was made Chancellor again after Sir Richard Scroope.

R. Bishop of London Chancellor the fifth year of King Richard the second, at
which time Robert Braybrooke was Bishop of London.

Sir Richard Scroope Knight, Lord of Bolton, made Chancellor again about the
latter end of November, by the Lords of the Parliament (as I take it) in the
fifth year of the reign of King Richard last mentioned, and was the year
following, being about Anno dom. 1383, again deposed from his office, and the
King receiving the seal, kept it a certain time, and therewith sealed such
grants and writings as pleased him, and in the end delivered the same to Robert
Braybrooke. Of this man see more in the Treasurers.

Robert Braybrooke Bishop of London, made Lord Chancellor in September
following the month of July when Sir Richard Scroope was deposed, was advanced
to that dignity on S. Matthews Eeve, in the sixth year of the reign of the
said King Richard the second, in which he continued not longer then the March
following, (as has Anonymus, M.S.) he was consecrated Bishop of London the
fifth of January, Anno dom. 1381, he dyed the 17. of August in Anno dom. 1404,
being the fifth year of King Henry the fourth.

Michael de la Poole, or at Poole, as has Thomas Walsingham, was made
Chancellor in the month of March* in Anno 6. of the said King Richard the
second, and was made Earl of Suffolk in the ninth year of the said King,
being after deposed from his office of Chancellorship at his own and earnest
request, in the tenth year of the said King. This man having fled the Realm,
for that he was pursued by the Nobility, dyed at Paris in Ann. 13. of Richard
the second, being in Anno dom. 1389, of whom that worthy Poet Sir John Gower,
living at that time, in his Book entitled Vox Clamantis, composed these
verses.

Est comes elatus, fallax, cupidus, sceleratus,
Frauds per mill stat Cancellarius ille
Hic proceres odit, and eorum nomina rodit
Morsibus a tergo, fit tandem profugus ergo;
Sic Deus in caelis mala de puteo Michaelis
Acriter expurgat ne plus comes ille resurgat.
Thomas Arundell, of the noble house of the Earls of Arundell, was first
Bishop of Elie, and then of York, and lastly of Canterbury, he was made Lord
Chancellor of England, in Anno 10, of the reign of the unfortunate King
Richard 2, which was about Anno dom. 1386, in which office he remained about
two years.

William Wickham, was again made Lord Chancellor of England, in Anno 12
Richard 2, but was in the end remooved from thence in September, in the 15
year of the troublesome government of the said King Richard.

Thomas Arundell aforesaid, was the second time created Lord Chancellor of
England, in the said 15 year of Richard 2, in place of William Wickham, in
which office he remained about five years, and was deposed and banished the
Realm in the 20 year of the said King Richard.

John Scarle, Scirlee, or Serle, Master of the Rolls of the Chancery, and
Keeper of the great Seal, he was Chancellor or in the place of Chancellor in
the first year of the reign of King Henry the fourth, being in Anno dom. 1399.

Edmund Stafford, Keeper of the Privy Seal, Bishop of Excester, and sometime
Bishop of Rochester, and lastly Bishop of York, and borne of the noble house
of the Staffords, was made Lord Chancellor of England, about the month of
March in Anno dom. 1400, being about the second year of the usurping King
Henry the fourth, in which Office he continued until Anno dom. 1403, being in
Anno 4 of the said King Henry the fourth, he being Keeper of the Privy Seal,
was made Bishop of Excester, the 20 of June, in Anno dom. 1395, being the 21
year of Richard 2. He was consecrated at Lambeth, and kept the Sea of
Excester, three and twenty years. He increased two fellowship in Stapletons
Inn, in Oxford, reformed the Statutes of the house, and called it Excester
College. He died the fourth of September, in the seventh year of King Henry
the fifth, being in Anno dom. 1419.

Henry Beuford, the son of John of Gaunt, by Katherine Swineford, made Bishop
of Lincoln in Anno dom 1398, as has Ypodigma, was advanced to the dignity of
Chancellor in Anno dom. 1403, being the fourth year of King Henry the fourth
his elder Brother, by the daughter of the Earl of Hereford, in which office,
he was in the fifth year of King Henry the fourth, and sixth of the same King,
(as our Chonicles do remember) he was made Bishop of Winchester, in Anno dom.
1404, being the fifth year of King Henry the fourth.

Thomas Langley Priest and Bishop of Durham, was at Westminster made Chancellor
in Anno dom 1405, being in Anno 6. of Henry the fourth, in which office he
continued (as far as I know) until he was made Bishop of Durham, which was on
the 7. of May in Anno 7. of King Henry the fourth, being in Anno dom. 1406, he
was Bishop one and thirty years, and dyed in Anno dom. 1437, being the 16.
year of King Henry the sixth. See more following.

Thomas Fitzalen, brother to Richard Earl of Arundell, being returned out of
exile, with Henry of Bullingbruke, Duke of Hereford and Lancaster, and after
King of England, by the name of Henry the fourth, was again Chancellor, and
continued therein about two years being removed from that place about
September, in Anno 11 of Henry the fourth, being in Anno dom. 1410.

Thomas Beauford Knight, the son of John of Gaunt, son to King Edward the
third, and brother to King Henry the fourth, was made Lord Chancellor in Anno
11 of the said King, being in Anno dom 1410, in which office he remained not
full three years, but left the same office, and was created Earl of Dorcet,
and lastly, Duke of Exceter.

John Wakering Clerk, Master of the Rolls was made keeper of the great Seal,
when Thomas Beauford left the office of Chancellor, which Seal he kept about
the space of a Month, for in January after that he had received the Seal,
there was a Chancellor created.

Thomas Fitzallen, or Arundell, Archbishop of Canterbury, was the fourth time
invested with the Chancellorship in Anno dom. 1412. being in Anno 13. of Henry
the fourth, in which office he continued during the life of the said King, who
dyed in the fourteenth year of his Reign, and in Anno dom. 1413.

Henry Beauford Bishop of Winchester, and after Cardinal in the time of Henry
the sixth, being Uncle to King Henry the fifth then reigning, was the second
time made Chancellor in Anno dom. 1413. being in Anno 5, of Henry the fifth, in
which place he remained until the fifth year of the reign of the said King,
being in the year of our Lord 1417.

Thomas Langley Bishop of Durham, was the second time made Lord Chancellor of
England in the said year of our Lord 1417, being the 5, year of that worthy
Conqueror King Henry the 5, Which office he received at Southwicke, and
continued in that honor (as far as I can learn) by the space of six years
or more, whereof five years were fully ended in the life and death of the said
Henry the 5, and the sixth year ended in the last of the first, or beginning of
the second year of King Henry the 6.

Henry Beauford Bishop of Winchester before named, was the third time made Lord
Chancellor of England, in the second year of the reign of King Henry the
sixth, being about Anno dom. 1423, or 1424, for the second year of that King
fell partly in the one and partly in the other of the said years of our Lord.
In which office he continued about the space of four years, until he was
made Cardinal in Anno dom. 1426.

John Kemp Bishop of London, was made Lord Chancellor of England in the fourth
year of that King Henry, who in his youngest years was crowned first King of
England, and then King of France in Paris, in which office he remained (as I
suppose) about six years.

John Stafford Deane of Saint Martin and of Wels, Prebend of Milton in Lincoln
Church, Bishop of Bath and Wells, Lord Chancellor and Treasurer of England, and
Bishop of Canterbury,) was made Lord Treasurer of England, in the month of
February, in Anno dom. 1431, falling in the tenth year of King Henry the sixth,
he remained in that office, until John Kempe, was again made Lord Chancellor,
which was about Anno 6 of Henry the sixth, And here I think it not unmeet to
remember, that some have noted William Wanfleet, that was Bishop of Winchester,
and Chancellor of Oxford, to be Chancellor of England, when he built Magdalen
College in Oxford, in Anno 25 Henry the sixth, which possibly cannot be, since
this John Stafford, held that office from the tenth of Henry the sixth, until
the eight and twentieth of the same King, which was eighteen years, during
which time they place this Wanfleet to be Chancellor of England, which error I
suppose they have committed, in that they finding him Chancellor, at the time
of the building of his College in the said 25 year of King Henry the sixth,
have taken him to be Chancellor of England, when he was then but Chancellor of
Oxford, although indeed afterward he was Chancellor of England, in Anno 35, of
the said King, as after shall appear.

John Kempe, Bishop of York, and Cardinal was the second time made Lord
Chancellor in the 28 year of King Henry the sixth, being in Anno dom. 1450, in
which office he dyed, being Bishop of Canterbury, in Anno do (as says Matthew
Parker) 1453, being the 32 year of the reign of King Henry the sixth. This man
was first Bishop of Rochester, next of Chichester, thirdly of London, then of
York, where he sat sat 28 years, and lastly he was Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Cardinal by the title of Saint Rufind, which preferments are
briefly expressed in this verse.

Bis primas, ter praeses and bis Cardine Functus. Richard Nevill, Earl of
Salisbury, the son to Raphe Nevill, Earl of Westmerland, and father to the
valiant Richard Nevill, Earl of Warwick, was after the death of John Kempe,
by Parliament made Lord Chancellor in the 32 year of King Henry the sixth,
though others make it to be in the 33 year of the same King, In which place
he continued not long, for in the year following, another was substituted and
he remooved.

Thomas Bourchier, brother to Henry Bourchier, Earl of Essex, Bishop of Elie,
and Bishop of Canterbury, was made Chancellor in Anno 33 Henry 6, in which he
remained much about 2 years in whose time (as says Matthew Parker) about Anno
dom. 1461, was the Art of Printing invented at the City of Argentorat in
Germany. About which matter, and especially for the exact and certain time
thereof, many writers, although their count about one time do disagree: yet at
the inventing of that worthy thing, were these verses composed, in commendation
of the same most excellent Art.

O faelix nostris memoranda impressio tectis
Inventore nitet utraque lingua tuo
Desierat quasi totum quod fundis in orb
Nunc parvo doctus quilibet esse potest
Omnes Nunc homines igitur te laudibus ornent
Te duce quando ars haec mira reperta fuit.
William Patan or Paten, borne of a Gentlemanly Family, being commonly called
William Wanfleet, of the place of his birth, and being provost of Eaton, and
Bishop of Winchester, was Lord Chancellor in Annis 35, and 36, and 37, of the
unfortunate King Henry the sixth, as have the Records, of the Exchequor. By
which appears the error of those, as I have before noted, that mistaking the
25. of King Henry the sixth, in which time he was but Chancellor of Oxford, for
the 35. of the said King, in which he was Chancellor of England.

George Nevill (the son of Richard Nevill Earl of Salisbury and brother to
Richard Nevill Earl of Warwick) being made Bishop of Excester, came to that
See, in Anno dom. 1455. in which See he continued ten years, and was removed
to York in Anno dom* 1465, he was made Lord Chancellor in the 38. year of
the reign of the deposed King Henry the sixth, in which office he remained
about 8. years, and then was remooved in the seventh year of King Edward the
fourth, being in Anno dom. 1467, He was a great friend to S. Albons, and
procured Edward the fourth, in the fourth year of his reign, to give and
confirm to John Whethamstead Abbat of Saint Albons, the Priory of Pembrooke.
This Bishop Nevill did after in the 13 year of King Edward the fourth, grow in
such disgrace with the King, that he was spoiled at one time of twenty thousand
Pounds.

Robert Kirkham, Master of the Rolls, was made Lord Keeper of the great Seal,
upon the removing of George Nevill, in the month of July, in the year of
Christ, 1467, being the seventh year of King Edward the fourth.

Robert Stillington, Doctor of the Laws, Keeper of the privy Seal in Anno 3
Edward the fourth, Bishop of Bath and Wels; being made Chancellor in the
seventh year of King Edward the fourth, did still so continue until Anno 13,
of the said King.

Henry Bourchier, Earl of Essex, and first advanced to that title of honor by
King Edward the fourth, came in place of the last Chancellor, about the 13
year of Edward the 4, in which place he remained not much more then one
Trinity term, for in the said 13 year, about the Month of August, was
Bishop Booth, Lord Chancellor of England.

Lawrence Booth, sometime Master of Pembrooke Hall, Bishop of Durham, and after
of York, was made Lord Chancellor about August, or rather before, between
that and Trinity term, (after Henry Bourchier) in the said 13 year of King
Edward the 4, after his redemption of the Kingdom of England. This Bishop
being brother to William Booth, sometime Bishop of York, did build the Bishop
of York his house at Battersey, which Manor he before bought of Nicholas
Stanley, whom Leland the minser and refiner of all English names, does most
curiously in Latin call, Nicholaum Stenelegium. He continued in the Sea of
York, three years and nine months, and died at Sowthwell, in Anno dom. 1480
being in Anno 20 Edward 4.

Thomas Scot, surnamed Rotheram, because of the Town of Rotheram, in
Yorkshire, where he was borne and bred up, was Bishop of Rochester, and then
of Lincoln, where he sat nine years, and after that was Bishop of York,
whereunto he was installed first at York, then at Ripon, being Provost of
Beverley, he was made Chancellor of England, in Anno dom. 1474, being in Anno
14, Edward 4. This Bishop in Anno 15 of the said King, went over the Sea, with
the said Edward 4, when he went to have an interveiw with the French King, of
which meeting Monsieue de Argentine, (by name Philip Comineus) besides our
English Chronicles, does make mention, as a person that bare a part in that
Solemnity.

John Alcot Bishop of Rochester, was made Chancellor during the absence of King
Edward.

Thomas Rotheram, being before Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal, was after his
return out of France, the second time made Lord Chancellor, about the time, in
which the said King had gotten Berwicke from the Scots, about Anno 20 Edward 4,
For the free gaining of the Town was not so much before his death. In which
Office this Rotheram, continued all the life of King Edward the 4, and in the
time of the Reign of the guiltless murdered young Prince King Edward the 5,
until it was ascribed to him for over much lightness, that he had delivered
in the beginning of the rebellious government of the protectorship of the
bloody and unnatural Richard, Duke of Gloucester, the Seal to the Queen, to
whom it did not appertain, and from whom he received it not. He founded a
College at Rotheram, dedicated it to the name of Jesus, and endowed it with
great possessions, and ornaments, and annexed thereto the Churches of Langhton
and Almanbury.

John Russell Bishop of Lincoln, a grave and learned man, had the Seal
delivered to him by the said Protector of England, during the time of the
short Reign of the young King Edward, when the same Seal was taken from
Rotheram, and so this Russell was made Chancellor in the month of June in Anno
dom. 1483, being the first year of King Richard the third. This Russell is
buried in the Church of Lincoln, in a Chapel cast out of the upper wall of
the South part of the Church.

Thomas Barow Master of the Rolls, was made Keeper of the great Seal, which I
suppose, was in the third and last year of the said King Richard the third,
for in that year he was Master of the Rolls*

Thomas Rotheram, made again Lord Chancellor in the first entrance of King
Henry the seventh, into the government, but very shortly after he was
displaced, and the Bishop of Worcester, placed in that room, he was Archbishop
of York, 19 years and ten months, he was very beneficial to all his
kindred, and advanced some with marriages, some with possessions, and some with
spiritual livings. He dyed the 29 day of December, in Anno dom. 1500, being
the 16 year of King Henry the eight, at Cawood in Yorkshire, the morrow after
the Ascension, being of the age of threescore and sixteen years, or more. He
was buried in York Minster, on the North side, in our Lady Chapel, in a tomb
of Marble, which he caused to be made whilst he was living.

John Alcot, Bishop of Worcester, made in Anno dom. 1476, was Lord Chancellor
of England in Anno 1 Henry 7, being in Anno dom. 1485 shortly after the
entrance of the said Henry into the government of England, for though Rotheram
were Chancellor, when he got the victory, for that he had been so before, and
for that the King was neither provided, nor minded suddenly to have a man, not
meet for that place to execute the same, yet this Bishop Rotheram kept not that
room many months, but that Bishop Alcot came in place, because the King found
Bishop Alcot a meeter person to execute the same office, answerable to the
disposition of the Kings humor. All which notwithstanding, whether for malice
of others, or for his own deserts, or both, or for the more special trust,
that the King put in Doctor Moorton, Bishop of Elie, who had been the means
to bring him to the Crown, this Bishop Alcot, fell shortly in the Kings
disgrace, was displaced of his Office, and Doctor Moorton came in his room.
So that in this first year of King Henry the seventh, there seemed to be
three Chancellors in succession, one after another, All which before Moorton,
in this first year of King Henry the seventh, may perhaps more properly be
termed, Keepers of the great Seal, then Chancellors.

John Moorton Doctor of the Civil Law, an Advocate in the Civil Courts, and
of the Counsel of Henry the sixth, and to Edward the fourth, to whom also he
was Master of the Rolls, was made Bishop of Elie, in Anno Dom. 1478, and Lord
Chancellor, of England, at his return from beyond the Seas, in the first year
of King Henry the seventh, being in Anno Dom. 1485, after which he was advanced
to the Arch-bishopricke of Canterbury, he dyed in Anno Dom. 1499, in Anno 15 of
Henry the seventh, as has Matthew Parker.

William Warham, Advocate in the Arches, Master of the Rolls, Bishop of
London, and then Archbishop of Canterbury, was before his advancement to the Sea of Canterbury, made Chancellor of England, in the time of Henry the
seventh, in which office he continued, until about the latter end of the
seventh year of King Henry the Eight. At what time surrendering the Seal, by
reason of his age and weakness, the same was delivered to Thomas Woolsey.

Thomas Woolsey, sometimes Chapleine to Henry Deane, Archbishop of Canterbury,
after the Kings Almoner, and Abbat of S. Austins, who possessing many other
Abbeys, and Bishoprics, was advanced to the government of the great Seal,
about the beginning of the 8, year of King Henry the eight, being in Anno Dom.
1516, to hold the same during his life, (as I gather) in which office yet he
continued not above thirteen years, until Anno 21 of King Henry the 8, being
in Anno Dom. 1529. During which time of his Chancellorship in Anno 19 of King
Henry the eight, being Anno Dom. 1527. he went into France, representing the
King of Englands Person, to set order for the delivery of Pope Clement the
seventh, and Francis the French King, at what time he carried the great Seal
over the Seas, to Calis, Which Seal he left with Doctor Tailor, Master of the
Rolls, to keep the same at Calis until the Cardinals return out of the
French Dominions. He died in Leicester Abbey, not without suspicion of poison,
as was thought, which he had prepared for himself, and given to his Apothecary
to deliver when he called for it, the two and twentieth of King Henry the
eight in Anno Dom. 1530.

Thomas More Knight, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, was advanced to
the honor of Chancellorship of England in Anno Dom. 1529, being in Anno 21 of
King Henry the eight, In which office this rare witted Knight (to use Erasmus
his epitheton) and learned Chancellor continued not full three years, but in
Anno 24 of the said King, with much labor and earnest suit, he left his
office. Touching which it will not be impertinent to set down the words of
Matthew Parker, in the lives of the Bishops of Canterbury, in the life of
Thomas Cranmer, writing after this manner. Interearex dum Papae meditabatur
excidium, singulorum de papali authoritate sensus iudiciis haud obscuris
collegit. Inter quos Thomas Morus quia regis conatus pontificiis valde
suspectus fuit, Cancellarii munere, venia regis aegre impetrata, sese abdicavit.

Thomas Audeley, Attorney of the Duchy of Lancaster, Serjant at the law, (as
most affirm) and speaker of the Parliament, was made Knight, and Keeper of the
great Seal, the fourth of June, in Anno 24, of the reign of King Henry the
eight, in Anno dom. 1^32, not long after which he was made Lord Chancellor of
England, This man in the tenth year of his Chancellorship, being in Anno dom.
1542, and Anno 35, Henry 8, changing the name of Buckingham College in
Cambridge, did name it the College of S. Mary Magdalen, and endowed it with
some possessions. He dyed on May Eeve, in Anno dom. 1544 being in Anno 35 Henry
8.

Thomas Wriothesly, Knight of the Garter, Son to William Wriothesly, York
Herald, and Grandchild to John Wriothesly, Garter King of Arms, being
created Baron at Hampton Court, on the first day of January, in the 35 year of
the Reign of King Henry the eight, in Anno dom. 1543. was after advanced to
the honor of the great seal, and Chancellorship of England, about the
beginning of May in Anno 36 Henry 8, being in Anno dom. 1544, in which office
he did continue until the death of the said King Henry the eight, And in the
beginning of the reign of King Edward the sixth, he was the sixth of March
remooved, and the seal was delivered to William Paulet, Lord S. John of
Basing. This Thomas Lord Wriothesly, being created Earl of Southampton, by
King Edward the sixth, died at his house of Lincoln place in Holborne, the 30
of July in the 4 year of the said King Edward, in the year 1550, and was
buried at S. Andrews in Holborne.

William Paulet Knight, being first Steward of the lands of the Bishopric of
Winchester, then Treasurer of the household, Lord Sent-John of Basing, Lord
great Master of the Kings house, afterward Earl of Wiltshire, Marquess of
Winchester, and Treasurer of England, being of the Privy Council to King
Henry the eight, King Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, had
the keeping of the great seal committed unto him the seventh day of March, in
the year of our Lord 1547, being the first year of the reign of the young
King Edward the sixth, which seal he had in Custody, about seven months,
until the 23, or 24, of October following, at what time Sr. Richard Rich, was
made Lord Chancellor.

Sir Richard Rich, Knight, A Gentleman well descended and alyed in Hampshire,
created Lord Rich, was advanced to the dignity of Lord Chancellor of England,
about the 23, of October, in Anno dom. 1547, being the first year of the
reign of the noble King Edward the sixth, in which place he remained about five
years.

Thomas Goodericke, or Godericke, being Bishop of Elie, had the great Seal
delivered unto him, and was made Lord Chancellor of England, the 20 of
December, (as John Stow has noted in his Chronicle) in Anno dom. 1551 being
Anno 5 Edward 6, in which office he continued all the life of the said King
Edward, who died in July, Anno dom. 1553, being the seventh year of his
reign, and about one month after, until the 13, or 14, day of August, in
which Queen Mary made Stephen Gardener, her Chancellor.

Sir Nicholas Hare, Master of the Rolls, had at the coming of Queen Mary to
the Crown the great Seal, after the death of King Edward, as Lord Keeper by
the space of a fortnight, and shortly after was Stephen Gardener made
Chancellor.

Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, was in August in Anno dom 1553, being
the first year of the reign of Queen Mary, made Chancellor of England. This
man going in embassage unto Calis, left the great seal in the custody of
William Paulet, Marquess of Winchester, which Bishop after his return into
England, continued in that office all the time of his life, which he ended the
19, of November in Anno dom. 1555, being the third year of Queen Mary. After
which the great seal, lying in her Majesty's custody, she on the New-yeares
day following, made a new Chancellor.

Nicholas Heath, Bishop of Rochester, Almoner to the King, Ambassador into
Germany, Bishop of Worcester, President of Wales, and Archbishop of York, was
upon New-yeares day, in Anno dom. 1555, being the third year of the reign of
Queen Mary, advanced to the honorable dignity of Chancellorship; But Queen
Mary deceasing on the 17 day of November, in Anno dom. 1558, and the sixth year
of her government, this Heath, upon the placing of Queen Elizabeth, upon the
throne of the English government, was remooved from his Office, and Master
Bacon advanced.

Nicholas Bacon Esquire, Attorney of the Court of Wards, was made Knight, and
Lord Keeper of the great seal, the 22 of December in Anno dom. 1558, being the
first year of Queen Elizabeth. Which name of Lord Keeper, he still kept
during his life, and the time of his Office. In whose time there was an Act of
Parliament established, to make the power of the Keeper of the great seal
equal with the authority of the Chancellor. This man continued in this office,
and worthily executed the same, being a man of rare wit, and deep experience
during the time of his life, which continued until the 20 of February in Anno
dom. 1578. after the Account of England, being the one and twentieth year of
Queen Elizabeth, which place this man kept eighteen years.

Thomas Bromlie, the general Solicitor of Queen Elizabeth, a Councellor of
the Law, and one of the Inner Temple, was advanced to the dignity of Lord
Chancellor, on the 25 day of April in Anno dom. 1579, being in Anno 21
Elizabeth.

Sir Christopher Hatton, being Vice-chamberlaine, to Queen Elizabeth, was
constituted Lord Chancellor of England, and Keeper of the graat seal, upon
Sunday the 29. day of April, in the 29 year of the said Queens reign. Anno
dom. 1587.

John Puckring, Serjant at law, was made Knight, and sworn of the privy
Council, at Greenewich, upon Sunday the 28. day of May, in the 34. year of
Queen Elizabeth, and at the same time was made Lord Keeper of the great seal
of England.

Sir Thomas Egerton, Knight, being Master of the Rolls, had the great seal of
England delivered unto him, at Greenewich, and sworn of the Privy Council,
upon the 6 of May 1596, being in the 38. of Queen Elizabeth, and so continued
in both those places till the first year of King James, who created him Baron
of Elsmere at Hampton Court 21 July 1603, and made him Lord Chancellor, and
lastly created him into the dignity of Vicount Brackley, the 7. day of
November* 1616, but severed the place of Master of the Rolls, which was given
to Edward Bruce, Lord Kinlosse.

Sr. Francis Bacon, Knight, Attorney general to King James, and at the same
time of the Privy Council; second son of Sr. Nicholas Bacon, sometime Lord
Keeper of the great seal, upon the 7 of March 1616 in the 14 year of King
James, a few days before the death of the former Lord Chancellor, had the
great seal committed to him, and being created a Baron by the title of Lord
Verulam at Wansted the 12 of July 1617, was made Lord Chancellor the 4 of
January following and made Vicount of St. Alban the 20 of January 1620.

Upon the removal of the Lord Chancellor Bacon who was displaced by the
Parliament, in Lent the 18 year of King James. The keeping of the great Seal,
was committed to Henry, vicount Mandevile, Lord President of the Council,
Lodowicke Duke of Richmond, and Lenox, Lord Steward of the Kings house, William
Earl of Pembroke, Lord Chamberlain of the Kings house, and Sir Julius Caesar
Knight, Master of the Rols, who continued the custody thereof till July
following.

John Williams, Doctor of Divinity, Deane of Westminster, and one of the Privy
Counsel, and after that consecrated Bishop of Lincoln, was made Lord keeper
of the great seal of England, the 10 day of July, in the 19 year of King
James.

Sir Thomas Coventry Knight, eldest son to Sr. Thomas Coventry Knight, one of
the Justices of the Common pleas, being the Kings Attorney General, was made
Lord keeper of the great seal of England, the first day of November, in the
first year of King Charles, and Created Baron Coventry of Allesborough in the
County of Worcester, the 10 of April, in the 4 year of King Charles; whose
exempler virtues in the execution of this great office, to the honor of his
Majesty, and the general good of the Kingdom, I cannot mention without due
Attributes, and fearing as I justly may, that I shall rather show mine own
defects, than be able to set them forth in due characters; I shall with much
security discharge my self in this kind, by reciting the preamble of his
Majesty's Letters Patents, for Creating his Lordship into the dignity of a
Baron and Peer of this Realm.

Rex etc. Archiepiscopis, Ducibus, etc. ad quos praesentes literae provenerint
Salutem Officio and curae Regali nihil magis arbitramur convenire, quam
virtutum praemia viris illustribus ^ite disponere, ac illos Honoribus attollere
qui de Rege and Republica optime meruerunt: Perspicimus enim Coronam nostram
Regiam quam plurimum honorari, and locupletari, cum viros cordatos Consilio,
prudentia, virtutibus, illustres, ac praesertim in administranda Justicia
strenuos and insignes ad Honoris and dignitatis gradus vocamus and erigimus.
Nos igitur in persona praedilecti, and per quam fidelis Consiliarij nostri
Thomae Coventry, Militis, Custodis Magni Sigilli nostri Angliae, gratissima and
dignissima servitia quae idem Consiliarius noster tam praecharissimo Patri
nostro Jacobo Regi beatae memoriae per multos annos, quam nobis ab ipsis Regni
nostri primis auspicijs fidelissime and prudentissime praestitit and impendit,
indiesque; impendere non desistit. Nec non circumspectionem, prudentiam,
strenuitatem, dexteritatem, integritatem, industriam, constantiam, and
fidelitatem ipsius Thomae Coventry Militis, erga nos and Coronam nostra^ Animo
benigno and Regali intime r^colentes pro gratiae nostrae, erga praefatum
Consiliarium pignore. Nec non virtutum and benemeritorum ejusdem encomio
posteris suis relinquendum, ipsum, in Procerum hujus Regni nostri Angliae
numerum ascribendum decrevimus, Sciatis itaque; quod nos de gratia nostra
speciali, ac ex certa scientia and mero motu nostris praefatum Thomam Coventry
Militem, ad statum, gradum, dignitatem and Honorem Baronis Coventry de
Alesborough, in Comitatu nostro Wigorniensi ereximus, perficimus, and
creavimus. Jpsumque; Thomam Coventry Militem, Baronem Coventry de Alesborough
praedicta tenore praesentium erigimus, perficimus, and creamus. Jn cujus rei
etc. T. R. apud Westminster. decimo die Aprilis, Anno Regni Regis Caroli quarto, per
ipsum Regem.

FINIS.
Custodes Rotulorum.
23. Ed. 1.
ADAM de Osgodby Clerk,

10. Ed. 2.
William Ayremyne after Keeper of the great Seal.

17. Ed. 2.
Richard de Ayremyne.

20. Ed. 2.
Henry de Clyffe Clerk, after keeper of the great Seal died the 7 of King
Edward the third.

7. Ed. 3.
Michael de Worth January 20.

11. Ed. 3.
John de Saint Paul April 28.

14. Ed. 3.
Thomas de Evesham, Tuesday after the feast of Circumcision.

36. Ed. 3.
David de Wollere

45. Ed. 3.
William Burstall, July 22.

^. Rich. 2.
John de Waltham Clerk, after Bishop of Salisbury.

8. Ri. 2.
Johannes de Burton, Clerk Octo. 24

1. Ri. 2.
Thomas Stanley Clerk.

3. Ri. 2.
John Scarle or Serle, after keeper of the great Seal.

^. Hen. 4.
Nicholas Bubwith Septem 24.

6. Hen. 4.
Johannes Wakering Clerk, after keeper of the great Seal.

3. Hen. 5
Simon Garnastead Clerk June 3.

2. Hen. 6
Johannes Frank Clerk October 18

17. Hen. 6
Johannes Stopinden Clerk Nov. 13

25. Hen. 6
Thomas Kirkby, had the Reversion March 29, he was in 28 and 33 H. 6.

1. Ed. 4.
Robert de Kirkham Clerk December 23 after Lord Chancellor.

49. Hen. 6
William Morland Clerk Februa. 22.

1. Ed. 14
John Alcocke Deane of the free Chapel at S. Stevens in Westminster, April
29, after Lord Chancellor.

12. Ed. 4.
John Morton, Clerk, Doctor of Law, March 16, made Bishop of Ely 18 of Edward
4, January 4, after Lord Chancellor, and Archbishop of Canterbury.

18. Ed. 4
Robert Morton Clerk,

7. Hen. 7
William Kliot.

John Blithe Clerk.

Thomas Barow, Doctor of Law after keeper of the great Seal as some have it.

9 Hen. 7
William Warham Clerk, after Lord Chancellor, and Archbishop of Canterbury.

17 Hen. 7
William Barow Doctor of Law, mentioned in the Glass window, in the Chapel of
the Rolls 1503.

20 Hen. 7
Christopher Beinbrig Clerk, No* 15

1 Hen. 8.
John young Clerk, January 12.

8 Hen. 8.
Cuthbert Tunstall Clerk, after Bishop of Duresme, March 12,

14 Hen. 8
John Clerk Clerk, October 20,

15 Hen. 8
Thomas Hanniball Clerk, Octo. 19

19 Hen. 8
John Tailor Clerk, October 19.

26 Hen. 8
Thomas Cromwell Esquire after created Earl of Essex, etc. October 6

28 Hen. 8
Christopher Hales Esquire, after Knighted, June 10,

33 Hen. 8
Robert Suthwell Esquire, July 1,

4 Edw. 6
John Beaumont Esquire, December. 13.

6. Edw. 6
Robert Bows Knight, June 16.

1 M. Q.
Nicholas Hare Knight, September 18, keeper of the great Seal.

4 and 5 Phi. and M. 23 Eli. Q.
William Cordell Knight, Novem. 5,

Gilbert Gerard Knight.

Thomas Egerton Knight, after keeper of the great Seal, and Lord Chancellor.

Edward Bruce, Lord Kinlosse.

Thomas Phillips Knight, Serjant at Law.

Julius Caesar Knight, Chancellor of the Kings Exchecker, which place he left
when he was Master of the Rolls.

Dudley Digges, of Chilham Castle, in the County of Kent, Knight. 1636.

FINIS.
Honoratissimo and Reverendissimo Dom. in Christo Patri, Dr. Guilielmo Iuxon,
Speciali Dietatis providentia Praesuli Londinensi Totius Angliae
Archithesaurario. Et e Secretioribus regiis Arcanis Conciliario.

Pientissimo virtutis Assertori, strenuo politioris literaturae vindici and
Religionis syncerae, propugnatori Acerrimo.

blazon or coat of arms

Ioh. Philipot Fecialis Regius a Provincia Sommerset tensi Denominatus.

Dignitatis vestrae cultor humilimus Hanc Thesurariorum Seriem DICIT, DEDICAT,
CONSECRAT.

A CATALOGVE OF THE LORD TREASVRERS OF ENGLAND.
DVnstane, Archbishop of Canterbury was Treasurer to Eadred or Eldred King of
England, who began his reign in the year nine hundred forty and six, of whom
thus writes Matt. Parker, in his book of the Archbishops of Canterbury, in
the life of Odo Severus the two and twentieth Bishop of that see. Edmundo (the
King of England) defuncto. Eadredus corona regia ab Odone redimitus, and rem
publicam administrans, Dunstanum (ut in ejus vita patebit) tam singulari amore
prosequutus est, ut omnes regni thesauros illius custodiae commendaret. This
man was canonized a Saint, and the Goldsmiths of London are incorporated into
the Society and fellwoship of Saint Dunstan.

Hugolme, was Treasurer and Chamberlain to Edward the Confessor, he gave
Deane and South-bright to Westminster, which Edward the Confessor did afterward
confirm to that house.

Odo, half brother to William the Conqueror Earl of Kent, Bishop of Baieux
and chief Justice of England was Treasurer in the time of the Conqueror, who
had at his death; as says Anonymus. M. S. Sixty Thousand Pounds. Excepto auro
and gemmis, and vasis, and Palijs.

Geofry Clinton, Treasurer and Chamberline to Henry the first: He about the
thirteenth year of Henry the first, in the year of our Lord One Thousand one
Hundred and Twelve, did found the Priory of Kenelworth, and was after accused
of treason, in the one and thirtieth year of the reign of the said Henry the
first; but (as it seemed) restored (in short time after) to the Kings favor.

Ranulph, Bishop of Durham, was Treasurer to the King, whom Florensius
Wygorniensis calls Praecipuum Regis placitatorem, and Regni exactorem, whose
last word, Exactor, some men do english Treasurer. Of this man is more said in
the Chancellors of England.

Roger, Bishop of Sarisbury, Treasurer and Chanceller of England, as appears
by Leland, writing in this sort, Roger Bishop of Sarum Treasurer and Chanceller
to Henry the first, made the Castle of Vies such a costly, and so strong a fort
as was never before nor since set up by any Bishop of England. The Keep or
Dungeon of it set upon a hill cast by hand, is a piece of work of incredible
cost. Besides which to prove the same Roger Treasurer at the later end of the
Reign of Henry the first, together with William de Pontlearch at the entering
of King Stephen into England: Thus writes one, Anonymall chronicle. M. S.
Stephanus cum intravit Angliam, Rogerum Sarisburiensem and Willielmum de
Pontlearijs Custodes Thesaurorum ad se traduxit. Which William de Pontlearch
was a witness with William Stigill to a certain Charter which Ranulph Bishop
of Durham made to the Monks of Durham commonly called S. Cuthberts Monks,
wherein he confirmed to them Blakestone, Standropp, and Sandropshire, with the
wood of Henworth, on the East part of Mareburne, as far as it goes to the
Sea. This Roger Bishop of Salisbury died in the year of our redemption One
Thousand one Hundred Thirty and Nine, being about the fourth year of King
Stephen, of whom, mention is made in the Chancellers of England.

Nigellus, the second Bishop of Elye, Nephew to Roger Bishop of Sarum, and
Treasurer to Henry the first, was advanced unto that Bishoppricke of Elie, in
the year of our redemption One Thousand one Hundred Thirty and Three, the
first Calends of June, being the Three and Thirtieth year of the reign of
Henry the first, at whose going down to be installed in the said Bishopric,
he was received with such joy, that all the whole street of Ely, through which
he should pass, was hanged with curtains and carpets, with seats set on
each side, and the Monks Cannons, and Clerks meeting him with procession with
diverse other Priests standing round about them. After his installation he
returned to the dispatche of the affairs of the Kingdom, committing the
charge of his Bishoppricke to one Ralph, sometime a Moonke of Glastenbury, and
now become an Apostata. Great contention was between this man and King
Stephen. He bought the Treasurership for the Sum of Four Hundred Marks of
Henry the second for his son Richard, filius Nigelli, or Fitz Neale,
otherwise called Richard of Elie. He governed the Bishoppricke Six and Thirty
years, as some say, and builded Saint John's College in Cambridge. Trivet
affirms that he died in the year of Christ One Thousand One Hundred Sixty
and Nine, and the Fifteenth of King Henry the second, after that he had
governed Six and Thirty years, he was honorably buried in the Church of Saint
Ethelred of Elie, before the Altar dedicated to the Holy Cross.

Richard of Elie, or Fitz Neale son of the said Nigellus Bishop of Elie, was
made Treasurer to King Henry the second, by the purchase of his father Nigellus
when the King went to the wars of Tolous. Of whom the History of Elie
writes: That after the burial of Nigellus his Father, this Richard being also
an enemy of the Church of Elie, as his father had been before, made have to
pass over the Seas to King Henry the second, fearing that some evil would be
prepared against him, if the Church should have sent any other thither before
him. At whose coming to the King, he accused the Monks of many things, and
did therewith so edge the King against them, that the King sending into
England, charged by Wunndrus, one of his Chaplens, that the Prior of Elie
should be deposed, and the Moonkes with all their goods to be proscribed and
banished. This man being Treasurer to King Henry the second, the Treasure of
the said Henry the second at his death came unto One Hundred Thousand Marks,
notwithstanding the excessive charges of the King many ways. Which Richard
being Bishop of London, by the name of Richard the Third, and the Kings
Treasurer was chosen to that See, in the year of our redemption, One Thousand
Eighty and Nine, being the first year of King Richard the first, and was
consecrated Bishop at Lambeth, by Baldwine Archbishop of Canterbury in the
year of Christ 1190. He died the fourth Ides of September, in the year of
grace 1198. being the Ninth year of King Richard the first.

William of Elie, being of kin to the last Richard Bishop of London, was
Treasurer to King Richard the first, and to King John. To which William then
Treasurer, Richard his kinsman, the Bishop of London An. Do. 1196. being the
seventh year of the reign of Richard the first, and the said number of years
of the government of the said Richard in the Bishoppricke of London, did give
all his houses in Westminster, which the said William did long after give to
the Abbat, and Moonkes of Westminster, as by the Charter thereof appears, in
this sort abridged.

Vniversis Christi fidelibus, ad quos praesens scriptum pervenerit. Gulielmus
de Elie quondam Regum Angliae Thesaurarius salutem. Noverit universitas vestra
me dedisse, etc. Deo and Monachis Westminster, etc. pro animabus Richardi and
Iohannis Regum Angliae and pro amima Richardi London Episcopi, etc. Domos meas
and curiam cum pertinentibus in villa Westminster, etc. quas habui ex dono
Richardi Episcopi London, and quae sunt de feodo Westminster, etc. Testis
Eustachius Fauconbridge Domini Regis Thesauraius, etc. He dyed in the year of
Christ One Thousand Two Hundred Twenty Two, being the Sixth year of the long
reign of King Henry the Third: As notes Matthew Paris and Westminster, who
write that then. Objit Gulielmus Eliensis Angliae Thesaurarius.

A Deane of Paul's was Treasurer to the King as appears by Matthew Parker in
the life of Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, writing after this manner. Eodem
tempore (which was a time between the creating of Hubert Archbishop of
Canterbury, in the year of Christ 1194. being the sixth year of Richard the
first, and the death of the said Richard the first, which fell in the year of
Christ 1199. Ecclesiae Paulina Decanus aerarij regi custos fuit, sive (ut
vocant) Thesaurarius, and so goes on with a discourse of his miserable death.

Walter Gray, Bishop of Worcester whom some call Treasurer in the Eleventh of
King John.

Geffery, Archdeacon of Norwich Treasurer to King John, who forsook his Master
the King being excommunicated by the Pope, as writes Matthew Parker in the
life of Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury, in these following words.
Inter quos (meaning the Bishops, which durst not openly publish the
excommunication of the King, but secretly cast libels about the high ways,
which gave notice thereof) quam ad fiscum Regium Gaufridus Norvicensis Archidia
conus negotijs regijs intendens sedisset, coepit assidentibus exponere
excommunicationis sententiam in Regemjam latam, affirmavitque non esse tutum,
Capellanis and Ecclesiasticis dignitatibus, beneficijsque affectis servire Regi
amplius. Ideoque aulam deserens, ad Ecclesiastica beneficia (quae Regis
servitio acquisierat) secessit. Rex hunc tam proditorie a se deficientem, per
Willielmum Talbot, Militem prehendi, and ad se reduci fecit, cumque in publica
custodia servatum, (donec sive paenae sieve conscientiae taedio pertaesus vitae
fuit and expiravit) detinuit, whose manner of death is in this sort set down
by Mat. Paris, Page 305. that he was committed to prison, Vbi post dies paucos
Rege praefato (which was King John) jubente capa indutus plumbea, tam
victualium penuria, quam ipsius capae ponderositate compressus, migravit ad
dominum. Much about this time (as I suppose) which was An. Do. 1209. being
about the Eleventh year of King John, the Chequer was by the King removed from
London to Northampton, (in hatred of the Londoners) until Christmas.

John Ruthall, Custos Officij Thesaurarij, as is proved out of the Records of
the Exchequer, had that office the third year of Henry the third, in the year
1219.

Eustachius de Fauconbridge, a Justice to receive fines, Chanceller of the
Exchequer, and Treasurer to Henry the Third, was by the Bishop of Rochester
consecrated Bishop of London in An. Do. 1221. being the fifth year of King
Henry the Third: which Eustachius in the year 1222. with the Deane and
Chapter of London had great suites against William Abbat of Westminster, he
was Treasurer in the third year of King Henry the third, being about An. Do.
1219. he died the day before the Kalends of November in An. Dom. 1228. being
the 13. of King Henry the third, and is buried on the south side of the Queere
of Paul's (besides Henry Wengham) under a fair Monument of Marble, over whom on
the wall is this inscription. Hicjacet Eustachius de Fauconbridge quondam
Episcopus hujus Ecclesiae, qui multa bona contulit ministris ecclesiae sanccti
Pauli.

Johannes de Fontibus, or John defontnes was Bishop of Elie, and Treasurer in
the Ninth and Eleventh years of King Henry the Third, and before (as I take
it) this man being Abbat of Fontnes, and (as authors say) Vir simplex and
justus, ac recedens a malo, was at Westminster made Bishop of Elie, in An. Dom.
1220 he died after that he had been Bishop five years and odd months in
An. Do. 1225. being the Ninth year of Henry the Third, and was buried in the
Church of Elie, toward the Altar of Saint Andrew.

Walter Malclarke, or Lack latin; Treasurer of England, was made Bishop of
Carleil in An. Dom. 1223. being about the seventh year of Henry the third, who
in An. Dom. 1233. being the seventeenth of the said King, was by the counsel
of Peter de Laroches Bishop of Winchester not only removed from his office of
Treasurership, but also put to the fine of 100. marks, which he paid with the
loss of certain holds, given him by Charter during his life: After which he
would have fled beyond the Seas, but entering the Ship at Dover, he and all
his were staid, and evilly entreated by the Kings servants. This man in An. Do.
1246. being the 30. year of Henry the Third, did on the day of Peter and Paul
at Oxenford, enter into the habit of the Friar preachers: After which in An.
Dom. 1248. being about the 32. of Henry the Third, he surrendered his soul to
God.

Ranulph Briton, by some is made Treasurer of England, but untruely (as I
suppose) for in truth, he was but Treasurer of the chamber, for any thing I can
learn, and removed from that place in the sixteenth year of King Henry the
third, in An. Do. 1232. in whose place came, Peter de Rival. Of this Ranulph
is mention had in the Chancellers. Besides which, about this time I read, that
Hubert de Burgo was Treasurer, for thus writes Johannes Londoniensis. Rex
(about An. Dom. 1232.) fecit ipsum (which was Hubert de Burgo) suum
Institiarium principalem totius Angliae, and postea Thesaurarium.

Peter de Oriall, in Latin called Petrus de Rivallis was Treasurer of the
Chamber, and Treasurer of the King, Chamberline of England and Ireland,
Guardian of all the Forests of England, of all the Escheats, of all the Ports
of the sea, and of all the Prises of England and Ireland, being so dear to the
King, (as says Matthew Westminster) that Expulsis castrorum custodibus per
totam fere Angliam, Rex omnia sub ipsius Petri custodia commendarat. This man
was made Treasurer after Walter Malclarke in An. Do. 1233. being about the 17.
year of King Henry the third, and in the 18. year of King Henry the third,
who as I gather was together with Peter Bishop of Westminster, Stephen de
Segrave, and Robert Parslew, called to accounts in An. Dom. 1234. for the Kings
treasure and seal evilly employed and kept, whereupon Peter de Revallis hid
himself in the Cathedral Church of Winchester, which Peter Bishop of
Winchester and Peter de Rivallis, the King removed by the persuasion of Edmund
of Abindon Bishop of Canterbury, as they before had removed Walter Malclarke.
After which it seems, that growing in o favor again, this Petrus de
Rivalis, was in An. Dom. 1257. being the 41. of King Henry the third, made
Treasurer of the Chamber; For thus writes Matthew Paris. Circa festum sancti
Michaelis, which in An. Dom. 1257. Mortuo Hurtaldo Domini Regis consiliario and
clerico speciali, ac Thesaurario de camera Regis, subrogatur Petrus de
Rivallis; Under this Peter de Rivallis did Robert Passelew keep the Kings
Treasure; Touching which Robert Passelew writes Matthew Parker. Quo etiam
tempore, (which was in An. Dom. 1244. being about the 18. year of King Henry
the third) Robertus de Passelew qui in thesauris regiis custodiendis and
augendis totus versat^s est, coque nomine Regi charus, ab Ecclesiae Cathedralis
Cicestrensis canonicis, qui Regi placere studuerant, Cicestrensis Episcopus
electus est. Quod Bonifacius Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus indigne tulit, and
Episcopis provinciae suae convocatis, in difficillimis quibusdam and nodosis
quaestionibus per Lincolniensem Episcopum compositis serio examinavit, deinde
electione rescissa hunc Robertum repulit, and Richardum quendam de Wiz loco
suo, (inconsulto Rege) substituit. Next writes Matthew Westminster, that in
An. Dom. 1233. being the 17. of Henry the third, the Nobility accused many of
the Kings Counselors, amongst whom they placed, Robertum Passelew
Thesaurarium. Again, a little after he says, Et sic absondit se iterum
Robertus Passelew, qui post Walteru^ Carleolensem officium thesaurarij
administraverat. Of whose death Matthew Paris writes thus; Eodem quoque anno,
which was 1252. being the 35. year of Henry the third, Octavo Idus Iunij, obijt
apud Waltham Robertus Passelew, archidiaconus Lewis.

Hugh Pateshall, Treasurer of the Exchequer, which was Treasurer of the green
wax, or of the Seal, was also treasurer to the King in the 18. and 19. years
of his reign, and after made Justice of all England, as Matthew Paris has set
down in these words. Rex autem fretus consilio saniori (in An. Dom. 1234.
being the 18. year of Henry the third) Hugonem de Pateshall clericum filium
videlicet Simonis de Pateshall, qui quandoque habenas moderabatur totius regni
Iustitiarij, virum fidelem and honestum, loco praedictorum, which were Stephen
Segrave, chief Justice of England, and Peter de Rivallis Treasurer) subrogavit
Administraverat enim idem Hugo officium Scaccarij antea laudabiliter, secundum
quod appellatur secretum sigillum custodiendo, and definitam pecuniam a
vicecomitibus recipiendo, quare plenior fides est ei adhibita, paterna
fidelitate testimonium fidei perhibente. He was confirmed Bishop of Coventry
in An. Dom. 1240. being the 24. year of Henry the third, (who having been the
Kings Treasurer before did now with great solemnity take his leave of the
Barons of the Exchequer with tears, and they all rose up and kissed him. Of
whose election (in An. Dom. 1230.) to that Bishopric, thus further writes
the said Matthew touching the Moonkes of Coventry. Eligerunt secundum
praedictam formam dominum Hugonem de Pateshall. etc. canonicum sancti Pauli
London, and domini Regis Cancellarium in Episcopum, and custodem animarum
suarum. Concerning whom I collected this note out of the Register of
Westminster, that Phillip Coleville Knight the son of William Coleville, the
son of Agnes Foliot gave to Richard Abbat of Westminster, all his part of the
inheritance which was Robert Foliots, brother to the said Agnes, in London,
Mortan, and Chalneie, witnesses Raph Bishop of Chichester, Chanceller, and Hugh
Pateshall Treasurer in the 19. of the reign of Henry the third, which
Pateshall Matthew Westminster in the year of grace 1234. calls Summum
thesaurarium

Galfridus Templarius, whom some will have Treasurer, but this man is more
spoken of amongst the Chancellors.

William Haverhull, a Cannon of Paul's Church in London was made Treasurer to
King Henry the third, in An. Dom. 1240. being the 24. year of the reign of
the said King Henry, in which place he continued in the 28. year of the reign
of King Henry the third, being in An. Do. 1244 he dyed at London in An. 1252.
being the 36. year of the reign of King Henry the third, as says the
addition to Matthew Paris, fol. 1128. After which the said Author, fol. 1226.
laid his death in the year 1256. being the 39. year of King Henry the third,
such error is crept into Histories by the negligence of the transcriber, but I
suppose the first note of his death to be the truer, because the same is
confirmed by Matthew West. speaking in the said year 1252. of the death of
this man, for whose Epitaph, these following verses were made.

Hic jacet Haverhulle jaces protothesaurarie Regis,
Hinc Haverhulle gemis non Paritura talem
Fercula culta dabas, empyrea vina pluebas
A modo sit Christus, cibus and esca tibi.
I have also read a note of one William Haverhull, (which might be this man)
which says that William Haverhull, the son of Brithmarus de Haverhull, gave
houses in Cheapeside to the Abbey of Westminster, and that one Thomas de
Haverhull, was the son and heir of William Haverhull.

Richard de Barking, Abbat of Westminster, as witnesses the lives of the
Abbats, was one special Counceller to Henry the third, Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, and Treasurer of England who I suppose did follow William Haverhull,
for his death which happened on the 23. day of November in the 30. year of
King Henry the third, in An. Dom. 1246. after that he had been Abbat 24.
years, must needs prove him to be Treasurer before Phillip Lovell, yea and
peradventure, (which is most likely) before Hugh Pateshall, yet Matthew Paris
speaking of the death of Haverhulla, will needs have Phillip Lovel to succeed
William Haverhul, as after shall appear. This Richard de Barking was buried in
Westminster Church, before the middle of the Altar, in our Ladies Chapel in a
tomb of Marble, which after in the time of William Colechester Abbat of that
place, was pulled down by Friar Comb, a sacrist of that house of Westminster,
who laid a fair plain Marble stone over him, with this present Epitaph thus
inscribed.

Richardus Barking prior and postinclitus Abbas
Henrici Regis, prudens fuit ille minister
Hujus erat prima laus, insula rebus opima
Altera laus eque Thorp, census, Ocham decimaeque
Tertia Mortone castrum, simili ratione
Et regis quarta de multis commoda charta
Clementis festo mundo migravit ab isto
M. Domini C. bis xl. sextoque sub anno
Cui detur venia part pia vergo Maria.
Philip Luvell or Lovell was in this order advanced to the office of Treasurer,
as appears by the words of Matthew Paris upon the death of William Haverhull.
Et cum crederetur quod Dominus Rex Iohannem Franciscum officio Wilhelmi, (which
was Haverhull) subrogaret, fabricatis rumoribus, quod idem Johannes in partibus
remotis Angliae Borealibus, (ut contra quosdam religiosos plantaverat)
obiisset, constituit Dominus Rex Philippum Lovell clericum virum prudentem,
foecundum, and generosum in loco memorati Wilielmi, suum thesaurarium, quod
factum est apud sanctum Albanum, procurante (ut dicitur) Iohanne Mansell amico
Philippi speciali. This man was Treasurer in the 35. and so until the 42.
year of Henry the third, and was in the same year deposed by the Barons, He
dyed at Hamesley in An. Dom. 1259. whose executors were Philip Lovell, and
Robert de Mercenton. But his goods after his death, the King commanded to be
confiscate. Matthew Paris and Matthew Westminster, mention who were the Queens
Treasurers about that time, thus obijt and Walterus de Brudellejusdem Reginae
thesaurarius, which he places in An. Dom. 1255. being the 39. year of King
Henry the third. Of the second person Chacepore thus writes Matthew West. in
An. Dom. 1254. Veniens autem Rex ad mare, nec ventum habens prosperum apud
Boloniam moratus est invitus, vbi obijt Petrus Chaceporc, natione Pictavensis,
Reginae thesaurarius and Regis clericus and consiliarius specialis. These two
Treasurers of the Queens, are supposed by some, (but not rightly) to have
been the Kings Treasurers.

John Crackhall, Archdeacon of Bedford was Treasurer in 42, 43, 44. years of
Henry the third, to whom the King in the 44. of his reign, being in An. Dom.
1260. gave a Prebendary, wherein being invested, he was from thence removed by
a former collatio^ thereof made to one John Le Gras. The same Crackhall after
died the same year at London.

John Abbot of Peterborough was by the Barons in the 44. year of Henry the
third made Treasurer as the other Officers of the King also were. Nicholas of
Ely was then made Chanceller, and Hugh de Spencer chief Justice, which Office
of Treasurership this John continued in the 46. year of Henry the third, 1262.

Nicholas de Elic so called, because he was Archdeacon of Elie, was Treasurer
to the King in the 47. of Henry the third, being the year of our Lord 1263.
whereof I have seen this note of Record. Memorandum quod in Crastino Paschae.
Anno 47. Hen. Regis 3. in praesentia Rogeri le Bigot Comite Norfolk and
Mareschalli Angliae. Hugo le Bigot, Arnoldi de Berkeley Baronis de scaccario
magistri, Iohannis de Chisull Cancellar. regis, etc. recepit Magister Nicholaus
archidiaconus Eliensis Thesaurarius, subscripta in Thesauraria domini regis,
etc. This man as before appears, had been Chanceller, of whom is mention
made in the catalogue of the Chancellers.

Thomas Wimundham: This man being chief Chanter of Lichfield, was by the
Barons in An. Dom. 1258. in the 41. year of King Henry the third, made
Treasurer (at the Exchequer) at the Seal or place where the Writts be sealed
with green wax, after which he was Treasurer to the King in the 50, 51, and
52. years of King Henry the third.

John Chisull sometime Chanceller, was Treasurer in the 54. year of Henry the
third, being about An. Dom. 1269. He was Deane of Paul's, chosen Bishop of
London in An. Dom. 1273. and consecrate to that place in the year of Christ,
1274. in which place he continued about five years, and died in An. Dom. 1279.
being in the seventh year of the reign of the victorious Prince, King Edward
the first of that name. See more of this Chisull in the Chancellors.

Phillip de Elie was treasurer as appears by the Records of the Exchequer, in
the 56. year of King Henry the third; and in the first year of King Edward
the first, partly falling in the year 1272. and 1273.

Joseph de Chancy, whom on anomynall author calls John Chancy, but not
rightly, as I suppose, was Treasurer in the second year of King Edward the
first, being in An. Dom. 1274.

William Gifford, Bishop of Bathe and Wells, was Treasurer to Edward the
first, he was removed to York, in An. Dom. 1275. This man is by many
Chronicles and that perhaps most truly called Walter Gifford; He dyed in the
7. year of King Edward the first, being An. Dom. 1279. as has Nicholas Trivet
Of this man see more in the Chancellers of England.

Robert Burnell, Bishop of Bathe and Wells, Chanceller of England, and
Treasurer to King Edward the first, is by the Welsh-history, page 328. called
chief Justice of England. Leland reports that an Abbat told him, how that a
Bishop Burnell built the Castle of Acton Burnell: Of this man more is spoken in
the Chancellors of England.

Joseph de Chancy, the second time Treasurer to King Edward the first, in the
sixth year of the said King in An. Dom. 1278. was also Prior of Saint John's of
Jerusalem in Anglia as I take it, and by another name called the Lord of Saint
John's, or of the Knights of the Rhodes in England.

Thomas Beck, Archdeacon of Dorcester was Treasurer in the seventh year of
Edward the first, in An. Dom. 1278. as some have, but 1279. as other have, by
the witness of Leland, out of a Moonke of Glastenbury in his book De
assertione Arthuri, reciting the words of the said Moonke in this sort. An.
Dom. 1267. Edvardus Rex Henrici Tertij filius venit cum Regina sua Glasconiam.
Die vero Martis proxima sequenti, fuit Rex and tota Curia accepta sumptibus
Monasterij. Quo die in crepusculo fecit apperiri sepulcrum inclyti Arthuri, ubi
in duabus cistis imaginibus and armis eoru^ depictis, ossa dicti Regis mirae
grossitudinis separata invenit. Imago quidem Reginae coronata, imaginis regiae
corona fuit prostrata, cum abscissione sinistrae auriculae, and vestigijs
plagae unde moriebatur. Inventa est scriptura superhis singulis manifesta. In
crastino, viz. Die Mercurij Rex ossa regis, Regina ossa reginae, pallijs
pretio^is revoluta, in suis cistis recludentes, and sigilla sua apponentes,
praeceperunt idem sepulchrum ante majus altar celeriter collocari, retentis
externis capitibus, propter populi devotionem, apposita hujusmodi scriptura.
Haec sunt ossa nobilissimi Regis Arthuri quae Anno Dominicae incarnationis
1278. decimo tertio Calendas Maij per Dominum Edvardum Regem Angliae illustrem
hic fuerunt sic collocatae, praesentibus Leonora serenissima ejuseum Regis
consorte, and filia Domini Ferandi Regis Hispaniae, Magistro William de
Middleton nunc Norwicensi electo, Magistro Thoma de Beck Archidiacono
Dorsitensi, and predicti regis Thesaurario, Domino Henrico and Lasciae Comite
Lincolniae, Domino Amideo comite Subaudiae, and multis magnatibus Angliae. Thus
far the Moonke of Glastenbury.

Richard Warren or de Ware, Abbat of Westminster was made Abbat about An. Do.
1260. being about the 44. year of Henry the third, who was made Treasurer as
has John de Eversden, An. Dom. 1280. being the 8. year of Edward the first,
which year 1280. some do falsely make to fall in 10. some in 11. of Edward
the first, which contrariety has only risen by the default of the
transcriber. But most certain it is, that he was Treasurer in the 9. 11. and
part of 12. of the said Edward the first. This man going to Rome for his
consecration brought from thence certain workmen and rich purphury stones
whereof and by whom he made that rare pavement containing a discourse of the
whole world, which is at this day most beautiful, and to be seen at
Westminster before the communion table, a thing of that singularity,
curiousness, and rareness, that England has not the like again, in which
pavement are circularly written in letters of brass, these Ten verses
following.

Si lector posita prudenter cuncta revolvat
Hinc finem primi, mobilis inveniet
Sepes trina canes and equos, homines super addas
Cervos and corvos, aquilas immania cete
Mundum quodque sequens praeeuntis triplicat annos
Sphericus archetypum globum hic monstrat microcosmum
Christi milleno, bis centeno duodeno
Cum sexageno subductis quatuor anno
Tertius Henricus, Rex, urbs Odoricus and abbas
Hos compegere purphyreos lapides.
Which Abbot with those workmen, and those stones did also frame the shrine of
Edward the Confessor, with these verses carved out of stone and also gilded
set about the same Shrine or Monument.

Anno milleno Domini cum Septuageno
Et bis centeno, cum completo quasi deno
Hoc opus est factum, quod Petrus duxit in actum
Romanus civis, Homo, causam noscere si vis
Rex fuit Henricus, sancti praesentis amicus.
This Abbat died the second day of December in An. Dom. 1283. being the 12. of
Edward the first, after that he had governed the Monastery 23. years and
more, and was buried there at Westminster in the aforesaid plain pavement of
Purphury on the North side near unto the Tomb (as is yet well to be seen) of
Odomer or Aimer de Valence Earl of Pembrooke, on which grave is engraven this
brief Epitaph here ensuing.

Abbas Richardus de Wara qui requiescit
Hic portat lapides, quos hic portavit ab urbe.
Walter Wenlocke Abbat of Westminster. whom Matthew Westminster calls William de Wenlock,
was made Abbath of Westminster after the death of Richard de Ware, and was
Treasurer to King Edward the first, as has the Register of the lives of the
Abbat of Westminster and other records that I have seen. Which office it
seems he had mean time between the 12. and 14. years of Edward the first,
as I suppose. This man after that he had been Abbat 26. years lacking six
days, died the 25. day of December on the Christmas day at night in his manor
of Piriford in Gloucestershire in the first year of Edward, the son of Edward
(which was Edward the second in An. Do. 1307. and was buried in the Church of
Westminster besides the high Altar then standing without the South door of
Saint Edwards Shrine before the Presbiterie there under a plain pavement, and
a Marble stone decently adorned with this Epitaph to his high commendation.

Abbas Walterus jacet hic sub marmore tectus
Non fuit Austerus, sed mitis, famine rectus.
A Bishop of Coventrie and Lichfield was Treasurer of England in the 14. year
of Edward the first, being An. Dom. 1286. in whose place the same year came
John Kerkbie.

John Kerkbie Deane of Winburne and Archdeacon of Coventrie and Treasurer to
King Edward the first, was on the seventh Kalends of August in An. Do. 1286.
being the 14. year of the said Edward; (then at Paris) made Bishop of Elye,
whom Leland the Refiner of all names does in his Comment upon his song of the
Swan, in the word Winchelsega, thus term Johannes Chirchebius Episcopus
Anguillarinus Regi a thesauris. This man was Treasurer in the 16, 17, and part
of 18, of Edward the first, in which year (as it seems) being part of An.
Do. 1290. This Bishop died the 7. Kalends of April, after that he had been
Bishop three years some months and some days, and was buried by Walpoole
Bishop of Norwich in the Church of Elie, on the north part of the queere,
before the Altar of Saint John Baptist.

William de Marchia or Gulielmus Martius, was Treasurer in Easter term in the
18. of Edw. the first, in which office he continued about 5. years, and was
removed from that place in the 23. of Edward the first, and Peter of Leicester,
Baron of the Exchequer, with the two Chamberlaines executed al functions of
that office until a new Treasurer was made this William de Marchia was made
Bishop of Bathe and Wells in An.Do. 1293. being the 22. of Edward the first,
in which See he remained almost 10. years; and died in An. Do. 1302. being
about the 32. of Edward the first, and was buried in the Church of Wells in
the wall, between the door of the Cloister, and the Altar of Saint Martin, at
whose Tomb in times past (as the nature of that credulous age did hastily
believe) were many miracles done, as some have left in memory to the following
posterity.

Walter Langhstane Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry was made Treasurer after
William de Marchia in 23. Edward the first, in which office he continued (as I
gather) during the life of Edward the first, which fell in the 35. of his
reign being An. Do. 1307. and was then removed and imprisoned in the Tower
with two men only by Edward the second then coming to the Crown, because the
said Walter Langstone had caused Edward the first to imprison, and as some have
to banish this new King, for breaking down the Parkes of the said Bishop.
During the time that this Peter de Willeby was under-Treasurer or Livetenant of
the Treasury, for the words be Locum tenens thesaurarij in 30. 31, and 32.
Edward the first, this Walter was made Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield in An.
Do. 1295. being 23. year of Edward the first, and the same year that he was
made Treasurer: he died about An. Do. 1321. being about the 14. year of Edward
the second to which Bishop the Barons of Cobham were heirs, being descended
from Margaret the Sister and heir of John Peverell, the Cosen and heir of
this Walter Langhstane, which Margaret was married to Sir William de La Poole
of Ashby Knight, from whom the Lord Cobham issue. In this man's time of being
Treasurer dyed King Edward the first, for whom were these verses.

Dum viguit (Rex) and valuit tua magna potestas
Fraus latuit, pax magna fuit, regnavit honestas
Scotos Edvardus dum vixit suppeditavit
Tenuit, afflixit, depressit, dilaniavit.
Walter Reynolds, Schoolmaster to Edward the second, Bishop of Worcester and
after of Canterbury and Chanceller of England was advanced to the place of Lord
Treasurer of England in the first year of Edward the second, being in An. Dom.
1307. after which in the year 1308. he was made Bishop of Worcester, he
continued in the office of Treasurer until some part of the 4. year of Edward
the second, at what time came in his place John Sandall, who was Livetennant
unto the said Walter in place of the Treasurer, as appears by many writs
directed unto him by the name of John Sandall Locum tenenti Willimi Episcopi
Wigorniae. Of him is more spoken in the Chancellors of England.

John de Sandall being Clerk Scutifer Regis, Chanceller of the Exchequer, and
Chanceller of England having been before under Treasurer, or Deputy for the
high Treasurer, came now in the fourth year of Edward the second, to be made
chief Treasurer, and entered into that office in Easter term about the
beginning of the 4. year of Edward the 2. But in the year following, which
was in the fifth year of Edward the second, he gave place to another. He was
chosen Bishop of Winchester, in the ninth year of King Edward the second,
being in An Do. 1316. Of whom thus writes Anonymus, M.S. Obierunt Episcopus
Winton and Elie viri sacra professione insigniti, quorum primo successit
Johannes de Sandall Cancellarius Angliae vir cunctis affabilis and necessarius
communitati; Secundo successit Johannes Hothum scaccar. regis, vir si quidem
scientiae penitus ignarus, qui statim episcopatus ascenso culmine ad honorum
pariter and officij thesaurarij Rex in sui favorem sublimavit.

Walter Norwich Knight Treasurer in the 5. year of Edward the 2. and afterward
in Easter term in the 8. year of Edward the 2. did on the third of October
receive the office of Treasurership, and took his oath before the Barons and
Chamberleynes of the Exchequer, to behave himself well and faithfully in the
same office which he had received by Letters Patents dated at york the 26. of
September in the eight year of King Edward the second, which he kept not long
at that time.

John Sandall, was the second time Lord Treasurer in sixth and seventh year of
King Edw. the second: This man being Bishop of Winchester was Treasurer. Of him
see more in the Chancellers of England.

Walter de Norwich being Treasurer as before in the eight year of Edward the
second did not long enjoy the same, but as I suppose grave place to John
Drokensford.

John Drokensford the 14. Bishop of Bath and Wells had as I have read the great
seal delivered unto him, and was also Treasurer of England, but because I
find not as yet in what year, although it were in the time of Edward the
second, I cannot set down the certainety. Of whom thus writes the Register of
the Bishops of Bath. Johannes Drokensford Thesaurarius, 14. Bathon Episcopus
post Walterum Haselshawes, successit in Episcopatum Bathon, annis. 19. iste
episcopatum pluribus aedificijs insignivit, franchesias per regis episcopatus
concessas, non solum litterarie renovavit, sed etiam ampliavit, and quo
additationem and exaltationem parentelae suae fere fuit aequalis praedicessori
suo Roberto Bornell, and Welliae sepelitur ante altar sancti Iohannis
Baptistae.

John Hothum Bishop of Elie, as is before noted out of one anonymall Chronicle,
obtained the place and honor of Treasurership in the 11. year of Edward the
second, which he did not long enjoy, for in the Michaelmas Term in the the
12. year of Edward the second, came William VValwaine. Of this John Hotham is
mention made in the discourse of the Chancellers.

William VValwaine, Treasurer of England in the 12. year of Edward the
second, about An. Dom. 1318. was (as it should seem) for his negligence and
unworthines removed at the Parliament at york, in such sort as he possessed
not that place (as I conceive) above half a year: for in the same twelfth
year came the Bishop of Winchester.

John Stratford, Bishop of Winchester, upon the removing of VValwaine was in
the 12. year of Edward the second, admitted into the office of Treasurership,
until the King should otherwise determine. Which Bishop found out in the
Treasury above Twenty nine Pound Seventeene shillings eight pence, which might
be the cause of displacing of VValwaine, who had over prodigally dispersed the
Kings Treasure.

Walter Stapleton, Bishop of Exeter was Treasurer in the 13. year of Edward
the second, An. Dom. 1319. In which I suppose he continued until the 15. year
of Edward the second, An. Dom. 1321.

Walter Norwich Knight, was the Third time made Treasurer, which place he
enjoyed in 15. Edward the second, An. Do. 1321. or thereabouts, Walsingham
says, that in the second year of Edward the third. Obijt William de Norwich.

Roger Northborrow Scutifer or keeper of the seal being taken by the Scots at
the battle of Banocsbourne about the seventh year of Edward the second, in
An. Do. 1313. was also Clerk of the Wardrobe, and Treasurer in the sixteenth
year of Edward the 2. being in An. Dom. 1322. Of whom thus writes one
Anonimall Cronicle. M.S. An. Do. 1321. Obijt VValterus de Langtone Episcopus
Cestren cui successit in episcopatus honor per viam impressionis and
ambitionis Rogerus Northburgh Clericus de regis garderobia, sibi regis in
cunctis faventibus auxilio and voluntate. I have read of one Godfrey of
Northburgh Bishop of Chester that died in thirty three year of Edward the
third, being in An. Do. 1359, which perhaps should be this Roger Northborow.
Godfrey being by the transcriber placed in stead of Roger, but I will not at
this time define any certainety thereof, although I find another note of one
Roger Northburgh consecrated Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield in An. Dom. 1321.
who sat in that See 38. years, which 38. years added to the other in which
this Roger was made Bishop do make up the number of 1359. in which it is said
that Godfrey Northborow died.

Walter Stapleton, Bishop of Exeter the second time Treasurer in the 18. year
of Edward the second, and before was removed in Easter Term in the same year.
In which Easter Term was William Bishop of York also made Treasurer, as is
proved by the Pell of Exitus, that Term being thus entitled. De Termino
Paschae An. 18. Edw. 2. tam tempore VV. episcopi Exon, quam VV. archi-Episcopi
Eborum. This Walter being elected to the Bishoppricke of Exeter in An. Dom.
1307. did sit in that place twenty years, and was beheded at the coming into
England of Queen Isabell to depose Edward the second in the year 1326. The
cause of whose beheading was, for that he had procured the banishment of the
said Queen Isabell and of her son Prince Edward.

William Melton Archbishop of York made Lord Treasurer in Easter Term in the
18. year of Edward the second kept the same office until the deposition of
himself from that place, and of his Master from his Kingdom in the twentieth
year of the said Edward the second, and then gave place to John Stratford.

John Stratford, Bishop of Winchester was the second time made Treasurer of
England in the 20. year of the deposed King Edward, after the death of Walter
Stapleton, This John the 14. day of November in the twentieth year of Edward
the second, coming into the Exchequer brought thither the Kings patent or open
Writ, or commandment, under the seal of Edward the Kings eldest son, to
witness his election and creation to that place of Treasurer, the tenor of which
writ, I have thought good to set down, because it was done by the son, in the
fathers name, and under the Test of the son, the father yet being King in
show, but the son indeed as governer of the Realm, which title he enjoyed,
until that he most unnaturally, by the malice of his mother, the ambition of
himself, and the flattery of his followers, had deposed his father. The tenor
of which writ, was in these words as follows.

Edwardus Rex Angliae, and dominus Hiberniae, baronibus and camerarijs suis de
scaccario suo salutem. Quum pro eo quod venerabilis pater. VV. archiepiscopus
Eborum nuper thesaurarius scaccarij praedicti, circa diversa negotia in
partibus borealibus est occupatus, quo minus intendere possit ad ea quae ad
officium illud in dicto scaccario pertinent exercenda. Constituerimus
venerabilem patrem Iohannem Wintoniensem episcopum, tenentem locum thesaurarij
scaccarij praedicti, quousque de officio illo aliter duximus ordinandum.
Percipendo in eodem officio (dum illud sic tenuerit) feodum consuetum prout in
literis nostris patentibus episcopo praefato inde confectis before continetur.
Vobis mandamus quod ipsum episcopum ad officium admittatis, and ei in his quae
ad officium praedictum pertineant intendatis in forma praedicta. Test Edwardo
filio nostro primogenito custode regni nostri, apud Hereford Sexto die
Novembris, anno regni nostri vicessimo.

Adam Tarleton, or de Orleton, borne in Hereford-shire, being Decretorum
Doctor, was made Bishop of Hereford by the Pope at Avinion in An. Dom. 1317.
about the 10. or 11. year of Edward the second, being he that made the Sermon
for the deposition of King Edward the second, and wrote the amphibologicall
Epistle for the death of the King, containing these words; (Regem occidere
nolite timere bonum est) which has by a comma or point made at Timere, one
sense, and by a comma made at Nolite, another sense. Which Adam was made Lord
Treasurer in the first year of Edward the third, being in An. Dom. 1326. in
which office he continued not long, for in the Easter term of the said King,
came Henry Bishop of Lincoln. This man was made Bishop of Winchester in An.
Dom. 1335. being the ninth of Edward the third, in which seat he sat 12.
years The death of which Adam, (who gave Hemingfield parsonage to the Church
of Hereford) Sir Thomas De la More, does most plentifully set forth.

Henry Burwash, Bishop of Lincoln, descended of the Lord Burghurst his Family
called Lord Burwash, was Lord Treasurer in Easter term in the first year of
Edward the third, being in An. Dom. 1327. in which office he continued until
2. year of Edward the third, and was afterward removed.

Thomas, Bishop of Hereford enjoyed the honorable office of Lord Treasurer in
the third year of Edward the third, being in An. Dom. 1329. but in the year
following another came in place.

Robert Woodhouse possessed the room of the high Treasurer of England in the
fourth year of Edward the third being in An. Dom. 1330. And was also Treasurer
some part of Michaelmas term in the fifth year of Edward the third, who in the
year following did give place to another.

William Archbishop of York was again Treasurer of England in the fifth year
of Edward the third, being An. Do. 1331. and enjoyed that place some part of
Michaelmas Term in the said year, after whom came the Bishop of Norwich.

William Bishop of Norwich, was made Treasurer in Michaelmas Term in the fifth
year of Edward the third, in which term there had been three Lord
Treasurers successively, (a thing seldom or never heard, which office this
Bishop kept all Michaelmas Term in the sixth year of Edward the third, being
in An. Dom. 1332. and somewhat more in the end, yet yielding that honor to
another.

Robert le Ailstone, being Lord Treasurer in the seventh year of Edward the
third being An. Do. 1333. continued in the same office until the tenth year
of Edward the third being in An. Dom. 1336. which was about three years, the
same being a longer time then any other had possessed that place, since the
beginning of the reign of the said King.

Henry Burwash, Bishop of Lincoln, was again Treasurer the tenth year of
Edward the third being in An. Dom. 1336. in which year (as has Scala
cronicorum) the King holding his Parliament at London, was advised by his
Counsel to prosecute his title to the Crown of France. Whereupon King Edward
sent Ambassadors, to the Duke of Bavier Emperor, which had married the other
sister to the Earl of Hannalt, (as King Edward the third had married one) for
surety of aliance, and to retain noble men about him with no small charge,
which ambassadors were Henry Burgwash Bishop of Lincoln, and the Earls
William Mountacute of Sarum, and William Clinton of Huntington, who returned to
the Parliament at London with their answer well liked. Of this man see more in
the Chancellers, being yet after his embassage Treasurer for some part of the
11. year of King Edward the third.

Richard de Bury, Bishop of Durham did enjoy the honor of Lord Treasurer in
the 11. year of Edward the third, he was a man of great gravity and much
esteemed of the nobility and gentlemen of the North. Of this man is more soken
of in the Chancellers of England.

William de la Zouch, borne of the noble house of the Lord Zouch was Treasurer
of England, in the 12. year of Edward the third in An. Dom. 1338. he being
Bishop of York, was vicegerent to the King in the North parts in the 20. year
of Edward the third, and in An. Dom. 1346. at what time he took David Bruce
King of the Scotts. This man went to Rome, and after a long contention between
him, and William Kelslye, Kelsbie, or Kelsey (for all these different names,
are found in Authors) touching the Archbishopprick of York, he was after two
years thus spent consecrated Bishop of York by Pope Clement the sixth, after
which this William in the 11. year of his Bishoppricke being long troubled
with a grievous disease, began the work of a Chapel on the South side
adjoining to the Church of Saint Peter's in York, where he purposed to be
buried, but died before it was finished, and lies interred in the said Church
before the Altar of Edward the confessor.

Sir Richard Sadington Knight, was Treasurer in the fourteenth year of Edward
the third, being in An. Dom. 1340. There was one Robert Sadington living about
this time, of whom is more mention in the Chancellors of England, but as yet I
well know not whether they were both one man or not, since Authors may misplace
Robert for Richard, as they have often done.

Robert Northborow, being at that time (as I judge) Bishop of Coventry, was
Treasurer of England in the 14. year of Edward the third, and in An. Dom.
1340. in which year he was removed, whom with the Chancellor the King meant
afterward (as after shall appear) to have sent into Flanders as Pledges for
money that the King ought there. After whom as I suppose, that Sadington came
in place

A Bishop of Chester was Lord Treasure of England in the fifteenth year of
Edward the third, being in An. Dom. 1341. in which office he did not long
continue.

Robert Perning or Pernicke was Lord Treasurer in the Easter term in An. Dom.
1341. being the fifteenth year of King Edward the third, in which year also
he was made Chanceller, and so continued both offices a while until the
sixteenth year of Edward the third, as I gather by all circumstances of times,
records, and histories, who in the seventeenth year of Edward the third, being
An. Dom. 1343. (as appears by the books of the Law) being Chancellor,
delivered a record with his hands into the Court of the Kings Bench; Of this
man more is set down in the Chancellers.

Roger Northborow (as I take it) being then Bishop of Coventry, did honorably
possess the place of Lord Treasurer of England in the sixteenth year of
Edward the third, being in An. Do. 1342. Of whom thus writes Matthew Parker in
the life of John Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury. Ibi (meaning at the Tower)
concilium initum est, tandemque definitum, ut Archiepiscopus and episcopus
Cicestrescis regni Cancellarius and Coventrensis Thesaurarius una cum alijs
satellitibus and lictoribus deprehensi, ad publicam custodiam rerum a se,
absente rege, gestarum rationem reddituri ducerentur. Mane accedunt satellites
Lametham, sed archiepiscopus ei pridie decesserat, tum Londinum reversi,
Couentrensem and Cicestrensem episcopos cum alijs designatis capiunt, captos ad
turrim deducunt, etc.

William de Cusans being Lord Treasurer in the seventeenth year of Edward the
third in An. Dom. 1343. continued in the same office all Michaelmas term in
the eighteenth year of Edward the third and An. Dom. 1344. Between whom and
Thomas Henley Abbat of Westminster was great contention about the Jurisdiction
of the hospital of Saint James in the parish of Saint Margaret in Westminster,
which Hospital is now a stately house belonging to the King, and built by King
Henry the eight, called the manner of Saint James with a Park walled about.

William de Edington, Lord Chancellor and Treasurer of England, Bishop of
Winchester, was Lord Treasurer in Easter Term in the nineteenth year of
Edward the third, being in An. Dom. 1345. in which office he continued until
the 32. year o the said King, An. Dom. 1358. being 14. years He was so
surnamed of the place where he wa borne, being the Town of Edington in
Wiltshire, he was made Bishop of Winchester (as some have) about An. Dom. 1347.
being about the 21. year of Edward the third: This man chosen Bishop of
Canterbury (but yet never Bishop) died (as has Walsingham in the fortieth
year of Edward the third being in An. Dom. 1366.

John Bishop of Rochester, was Lord Treasurer in the 32. year of Edward the
third in An. Do. 1358. in which office he continued in the 33. and 34. of the
same King.

Simon Langham, being of the Priory of Westminster made Abbat of that house,
was shortly after made Lord Treasurer of England, which office he held in the
35. year of Edward the third, and 36. who being Bishop of London (as has
Matthew Parker) was in An. Dom. 1361. being the thirty fifth year of Edward
the third, by the Pope made Bishop of Ely, where he sat five years, and was
after in An. Dom. 1366, being in the 40. year of Edward the third, chosen
Bishop of Canterbury, and consecrated in An. Dom. 1367. as says the same
Matthew Parker: On which day of his consecration, he demanded homage of the
Earl Stafford of Thomas Rosse, John Tirhill, Robert Brockhill, and Raphe
Sentleger Knights, for their Lands which they held of the Sea of Canterbury.
Shortly after which in An. Dom. 1368. being the 42. year of Edward the third,
he was made Cardinal, and died at Avimere the 22 day of July, about An. Dom.
1376. being in the 50. year of King Edward the third, and was buried besides
Avinion, in a place which he had raised from the foundation. Three years after
which, his bones were brought to Westminster, where at this day he has a
worthy Tomb on the south side of the Shrine amongst the Kings, on whose Tomb
the Moonkes of Westminster did sometime place this Epitaphe in the remembrance
of him.

Simon de Langham sub petris his tumulatus
Istius Ecclesiae monachus fuerat, prior, abbas
Sede vacant fuit, electus Londoniensis
Praesul and insignis eligi, sed postea primas
Totius regni, magnus regis que minister
Nam Thesaurarius and Cancellarius ejus
Ac Cardinalis in Roma Presbiter iste
Postque Praenestinus est factus episcopus atque
Nuntius ex part Papae, transmittitur istuc
Orb dolente pater, quem nunc revocare nequimus
Magdalanae festo milleno septuageno.
Et ter centeno sexto Christi ruit anno
Hunc Deus absolvat, de cunctis quae male gessit
Et meritis matris sibi caelica gaudia donet.
Of this man I have treated in the collection of all the Chancellers of England.

John Barret made Bishop of Worcester in An. Do. 1362. being the 36. year of
Edward the third was Treasurer of England in the 37. year of Edward the third,
in which office he continued, being Treasurer in Michaelmas Term in the 38.
year of Edward the third, which fell in An. Dom. 1364. and so he continued
till the 43. year of Edward the third, still Treasurer. He was made Bishop of
Bath in An. Dom. 1363. in which Bishoppricke he remained three years, and was
by Vrbane the 6. then Bishop of Rome, translated from Bath to Elie in An. Dom.
1366. being the 40. year of Edward the 3. in which place he sat six years,
and being a very old man, and having been Treasurer about six years, he
died at Hatfield the seventh Ides of June in An. Dom. 1373. in the 47. year of
Edward the third, he was buried in the Church of Elie, besides the high Altar
on the south part.

Thomas de Brantington being Treasurer for the King in the parts of Guisnes
martches, and Calis in An. Dom. 1367. being in the 41. year of Edward the
third, was made Bishop of Exeter by special Letters of the King in An. Dom.
1358. being the 43. year of Edward the third, and was Lord Treasurer of
England, in the 44. and 45. years of Edward the third, which 45. being in An.
Dom. 1371. he was in a Parliament at the Petition of the Lords removed, at
which time also there passed a Law, that the Chancellor Treasurer and Clarke of
the Privy seal should no more be spiritual men, but that secular men should
have those offices.

Sir Richard Scroope, Lord of Bolton and Chancellor of England, was Treasurer
of England in the 46. year of Edward the third, and then gave place to Sir
Robert Aston Knight. This Richard made out of the ground the Castle of Bolton
consisting of four great strong towers, and of other stately lodgings, which
Castle was erecting 18. years, the charges whereof came yearly unto a
Thousand Marks, which was 18. thousand Marks, or 12000. pound; which Castle
he finished before Richard the second died. He bought the heir general of S.
Quintine that was owner of Horneby Castle in Richmondshire, which heir he was
content one Conyers a servant of his should marry, and have the preferment of
that ward, and so Horneby Castle came to the Coniers, of which the first Lord
was William Coniers, grandfather to him that died in the time of Queen Mary
without heir male, whereby his inheritance came to his three daughters, which
William the first Lord Coniers of that name did much cost upon Horneby Castle
being before but a mean thing. I have read of this Lord Scroope that he had a
son called William, whereof we will speak more hereafter, that was Earl of
Wiltsshire, who being beheaded in his fathers life, left no issue behind him.
After which the father surviving was made Treasurer to the King, and died in
honor; althoug he was not restored to his dignity of Chancellership, but at
what time he should be the second time Treasurer (after the death of his son
William) in the time of Henry the fourth. I cannot as yet certainly learn,
But it may be that he was again Treasurer in the ninth year of Henry the
fourth, for that I find not by any former search who then possessed that
place. It seems that he had two wives, the one the daughter of the Lord
Spenser, the other the daughter of Michaell de la Poole Earl of Suffolk
called Blanch. He had three sons, for whom he bought of the King the three
daughters and heirs of Robert Lord Tiptoft, whereof the eldest daughter
Margaret was married to Roger his second son, the second daughter was married
to William his eldest son, the third daughter called Millescent was married
to Stephen the third son of the said Richard.

Sir Robert Ashton Knight, Constable of Dover Castle, and Lord warden of the
Cinque Ports, was Lord Treasurer in the 50. and 51. year of King Edward the
third in Michaelmas term, which was the last Michaelmas term wherein the
King reigned, being in An. Dom. 1376. of which name there was also one that was
chief Baron in the time of Edward the second, as I have read.

Henry Wake or Wakefield being made Bishop of Worcester in An. Do. 1375. being
in the 49. year of Edw. the 3. was made Lord Treasurer of England in An. Dom.
1376. in the 51. year of Edward the third, in which office he continued part
of Easter term in the first year of Richard the second, being in An. Dom.
1378. he died in An. Dom. 1395. as says Walsingham.

Thomas Brantington Bishop of Excester was made Lord Treasurer in first year
of Richard the second toward the latter end of Easter term, being in An.
Dom. 1378. as I compute it, from which place he was shortly removed in the
second year of Richard the second.

Richard Earl of Arundell and Surry made Lord Treasurer of England in the
second year of Richard the second, whereof part fell in Anno Dom. 1378. and
part in 1379. continued about One year in the same, and then gave place to
him, which possessed the same place last before him, he married Elizabeth
daughter of William de Bohune Earl of Northampton and Hereford, by whom he
had issue Thomas Earl of Arundell, Ioane married to William Beuchampe Lord
Aburgavennie, Elizabeth married to Thomas Lord Mowbray, Margaret married to Sir
Rowland Lenthall, and Alice married to John Charleton Lord Powes. He dyed in
the 21. year of Richard the second.

Thomas Brantington, Bishop of Excester was the third time made Lord Treasurer
of England in the third year of the after deposed King Richard the second, and
was removed from his office in the 4. year of Richard the second in An. Dom.
1380. after the account of such, as begin the year on the 25. of March.

Robert Hales, chief Prior of the Knights of the Rhodes entitled by the name
of the Knights of St. John's Jerusalem in England, was Lord Treasurer of England
in the fourth year of Richard the 2. in which office he continued during his
life, for shortly after he came into that place, which I suppose he held in
Easter term, and some months after, in the said year of Richard the second
in An. Do. 1381. the Rebels having spoiled the hospital or famous college of
those Knights of Saint John's by Smithfield near unto London, amongst other did
fetch this Robert Hales out of the Tower of London (where the King then lay)
and beheaded him on the Tower hill.

Hugh Segrave Knight, whom Walsingham calls Regis seneschallum, the Kings
Steward, was made Lord Treasurer of England in the fifth year of Richard the
second, who continued in the said office, the 6, 7, 8. and some part of
Michaelmas term in the 9. year of Richard the second, being in An. Do. 1385.

John Fortham Canon, being Secretary to the King, was made Bishop of Durham the
29. day of May in An. Dom. 1381. being in the fourth year of Richard the
second, and was inthronized in September in An. Dom 1382. being in the sixth
year of Richard the second. This man was made Lord Treasurer in Michaelmas
term in the ninth year of Richard the second, being in An. Dom. 1385. and so
continued part of the 10. year of Richard the second, until he was by
parliament discharged. He was translated from the Bishoppricke of Durham to
Elie, by Boniface the Pope the first Calends of October, as has the book of
Durham 1389. being in the 12. year of Richard the second; but as says the
book of Elie, 1388. being in the 13 year of Richard the second, which both
may be true, because the one may have relation to the year of his
translation, and the other to the year of his inthronization, both which many
times happened in several years of many other Bishops. He was Bishop of Elie
37. years three months, and four days, and dyed a very old man the 13. of
December in his Manor of Durham in An. Dom. 1425. falling in the fourth year
of Henry the sixth.

John Gilbert, Bishop of Hereford was by Parliament made Lord Treasurer in the
10. year of Richard the second, being in An. Dom. 1386. in which office he
continued the eleventh and all Michaelmas Term in the 12. year of Richard
the second, and the 21. day of March following; after which he was again
removed, and then he with twelve more were appointed by commission to the
government of the whole Realm under the King, of whom thus writes on
Anonymall Chronicle. M. S. Is fuit in ordine praedicatorum vir qui plus lingua
quam fide regebat. Which Bishop (as I suppose) was removed to Saint David's,
after that he had been thirteen years Bishop of Hereford.

Thomas Brantington, Bishop of Excester. I have read that the Bishop of
Excester was made Treasurer in the twelfth year of Richard the second, upon
the removing of John Gilbert, which Bishop of Excester could not be Edmond
Gifford, as some falsely name him, for there is no such man, as I can find in
the catalogue of all the Bishops of Excester, neither was it Edmund Stafford
for he was not made Bishop of Excester until the 20. of June 1395. being the
day before King Richard began the twenty one year of his reign, which is
eight years after the time whereof we now entreat. Wherefore it must needs
be Thomas Brantington, for he being consecrated Bishop of Excester the tenth
day of March in An. Dom. 1370. being in the 44. year of Edward the third, and
governing that See 24. years, till An. Dom. 1395. in which came Edmund
Stafford Keeper of the Privy Seal, it must be that the Bishop of Excester
being Treasurer in the twelfth year of Richard the second falling in An. Dom.
1388. it was this man Brantington, and that he was the fourth time made Lord
Treasurer of England, about the 18. year after that he was made Bishop of
Excester, who died in the year 1395. as has Ypodigma.

John Gilbert, Bishop of Saint David's in Wales was Lord Treasurer in the 13.
and 14. year of Richard the second: Of whom there is somewhat spoken before.

John Waltham, of whom there is large mention in the discourse of the
Archbishops of Canterbury in the life of Will. Courtney, was Bishop of
Salisbury, Master of the Rolls in the sixth year of Richard the second, and
keeper of the Privy seal, after which he was Treasurer of England in the 15,
16, 17, and part of the 18. year of Richard the second, for he died in
Michaelmas Term in the 18. year of Richard the second, in An. Dom. 1395.
others say, 1394. Of whom thus writes Walsingham. Hoc Anno (which was 1395)
obijt Johannes de Waltham Episcopus Sarum, and regni thesaurarius, qui tantum
Regi complacuerit, ut etiam multis licet murmurantibus apud monasterium inter
reges meruit sepulturam.

Roger Walden, sometimes Secretary to the King, and Treasurer of the Town of
Calis in the twelfth year of Richard the second, was made Lord Treasurer in
the eighteenth year of the said King, about An. Dom. 1365. in which office he
continued in the 22. year of Richard the second. He was elected and made
Bishop of Canterbury, but after rejected and deposed, and thereupon was by Pope
Innocent the seventh made Bishop of London in the tenth year of December in
An. Dom. 1404. being in the sixth year of Henry the fourth, in the which
Bishopric he continued one year, and died in An. Dom. 1406. being buried at
S. Bartholomewes Priory in Smithfield, who of a poor man (as says Walsingham)
was made Lord Treasurer of England.

G. Bishop of Saint David's in Wales was Lord Treasurer of England in the
twenty two year of Richard the second, which Bishop I suppose to be Guy de
Moon, whom the book Ypodigma and Thomas Walsingham call Bishop of Saint
David's, and say, that he died in An. Dom. 1407. writing in this sort. Eodem
anno Guido de Moan Menevensis episcopus praesentis lucis sensit eclipsim, qui
dum vixit magnorum malorum causa fuit.

William Scroope Knight, Vicechamberleine to Rchard the second was Lord
Treasurer, he bought of William Montacute Earl of Salisbury the I Will of Man
with the Crown thereof. He was one of those to whom King Richard the second,
let the Kingdom to farm, he was Lord Treasurer of England in the 22. year of
Richard the second, and was after created Earl of Wiltshire in the said 21.
year of Richard the second, in An. Dom 1397. He was after beheaded at Bristow
in the twenty three year of Richard the second: Of which William Scroope and
others, thus writes that worthy Poet John Gower in his history of Richard the
second, commonly taken as part of his book entitled Vox Clamantis.

Dux probus audaci vultu cum plebe sequaci
Regnum scrutatur, si proditor inveniator
Sic tres exosos, magis omnibus ambitiosos
Regni tortores, invenerat ipse priores.
Ense repercussi pereunt, Gren, Scrop, quoque Bussi
Hi qui regales fuerant cum rege sodales.
Scrop. comes and miles, cujus Bristolia viles
Actus declarat, quo mors sua fata pararat
Gren quoque sort pari, statuit dux decapitari
Bussi convictus similes quoque sustinet ictus
Vnanimes mente, pariter mors una repent
Hos tres prostravit gladius, quos fine voravit
Sicut and egerunt alijs, sic hi ceciderunt
Quo dux laudatur, regnumque per omne jocatur.
Sir John Northbury made Lord Treasurer in the first year of Henry the fourth,
being in An. Dom. 1399. and continued in the same in the third year of Henry
the fourth in which year he was keeper of the Privy gardrobe in the Tower
also.

Henry Bowet made Bishop of Bath about An. Do. 1401. being in the second year
of Henry the fourth, in which bishopric he continued 8. years, and was after
at the Kings instance in An. Dom. 1407. about the eight of Henry the fourth
removed to York, This man was Lord Treasurer of England in the fourth year of
Henry the fourth in An. Do. 1403. in which place he continued not above a
year.

William Lord Rosse the son of Thomas Lord Rosse did possess the honorable
place of Lord Treasurer of England in the fifth year of Henry the fourth about
An. Dom. 1404. and shortly after gave place to the Lord Furnivall. He married
Margaret daughter of Fitzallen, Lord Matravers, he had issue Thomas Lord Rosse
slain in France in An. Dom. 1421. about the ninth year of Henry the sixth, and
many other Children.

Thomas Lord Furnivall kept the place and office of Lord Treasurer of England
in the 6, 7. and some part of the 8. year of Henry the fourth, as in
Michaelmas term of the said 8. year falling in An. Dom. 1406. after which
this Lord Furnivall, who had the custody of the Castle and honor of Wigmore
being in the Kings hands by reason of the wardship and minority of Edmond
Mortimer Earl of March, was (as it seems) removed from the Treasurership, in
whose room succeeded the Bishop of London. To these Lord Furnivalls did
Furnivalls Inn in Holborne sometime appertain as their mansion house, being
now an Inn of Chancery for young Students of the Law, and Atturneis, and
belonging to Lincolnes Inn in Chancery Lane.

Nicholas Bubwith, made Bishop of London in An. Dom. 1406. being in the eight
year of Henry the fourth, must be that Bishop of London (as far as I can
yet conceive) who was Lord Treasurer of England in Michaelmas term in the 8.
year, the office of the Treasurer remained in the Kings hands, and the
Accounts of the said term go under the same title of being in the Kings hands.

Sir Richard Scroope Lord of Bolton (whereof is so much spoken before) was as I
suppose the second time made Treasurer of England in the ninth year of Henry
the fourth; whereunto I am induced by this reason. That first the King would
not keep that office so long in his hands as almost amounted to Two years,
but that he would bestow the same upon some other: Secondly, for that I read
that this Richard Scroope father to William Scroope Earl of Wiltshire,
beheaded by this Henry the fourth, before he came to the Crown at Bristow, in
the last year of Richard the second, and in the first of this Kings reign,
was after the death of the said William made Treasurer of England and so died
in honor. Thirdly for that I cannot see how he might be Treasurer in any year
since the death of the said William until the ninth year of Henry the fourth.
And lastly, for that I cannot in any record or other author find any other man
mentioned to supply that place in this year, for which causes I have attempted
to bestow him here, and that rightly for any thing that I can yet learn.

Sir John Tiptoft, or Tiptote Knight did possess the place and office of Lord
Treasurer of England in Michaelmas term in the tenth year of Henry the
fourth, being in An. Do. 1408.

Henry Lord Scroope of Masham and of Flaxfleet was made Lord Treasurer of
England in 11. year of Henry the fourth, being in An. Dom. 1410. as has
Walsingham, in which office he continued until the death of Henry the fourth,
which happened in the fourteenth year of the said King, and in Anno Domino
1412. after the account of England, but 1413. after the account of such as do
begin the year in January. He rebelled against King Henry the fifth, and was
beheaded at Southhampton in the third year of Henry the fifth being in An.
Dom. 1415. the last of July. Of which Henry so conspiring against Henry the
fifth. I find these verses in a written book of parchment, entitled
Extractum breve de cronica Thomae Helmham Prioris Lenton de tempore regis
Henrici Quinti. In which verses by the capital letters, are set down the
names of the principal conspirators, and the year of our Lord, wherein the
same was done, being 1413. The greater Roman capital letters in the third
verse serving for the yerae of Christ, and for the name Zore, derived of this
word Cor in the 4. verse, and the English capital letters only serving for the
names of the persons in this sort couched together for common capacity.

Mox rex navigium parat ut mare transeat armis
Scrop furit Henricus proditione fremens.
SCrVtans Conspirat RIMatVr OlenCla Plebi
Rumpe Iugo COR Avens Res Dabit Vltra Sonum
EIA Ruit Gens Avita Malis Opus Host Triumphat
Vota voluntatis sic sacre Christ tuae
Versibus his quinque praetactis Traditionem
Lector scire potes, hinc repetendo stude
Hi tres Richardus Zorc, Henry Scrupque Thomas Gray
In regem surgunt proditione pares
Munere Francorum corrupti terga dedere
Iusto munus habet, vindice quisque suum.
Thomas Fitzallen Earl of Arundell and Surrey, was advanced to the office of
the Lord Treasurership of England in An. Do. 1413. being the 1. year of the
reign of the most victorious Prince King Henry the fifth, in which office it
seems that he continued the 1, 2, and 3. of Henry the fifth. He in the year
140^. being the seventh year of Henry the fourth, on the next day of the feast
of Saint Katherine, married Beatrice the natural daughter of the King of
Portugal, by whom he had no Issue, but left his sisters his heirs and dyed
in An. Dom. 1416. being in the third year of Henry the fifth, and was buried in
the College at Arundell.

Sir Roger Leche, whom some call but not rightly as I suppose; Sir Philip Lech,
being brother unto the said Sir Roger, was Treasurer of England in Michaelmas
and Easter term in the fourth year of Henry the fifth, being An. Dom. 1416.
He was at the seidge of Rone with this King Henry, in the sixth year of his
reign, being also Treasurer for the wars in that voyage.

Henry Lord Fitzhugh, was advanced to the office of the Lord Treasurership of
England in the fifth year of Henry the fifth, being in An. Dom. 1417. in which
office he continued as I gather until the death of the said King Henry the
fifth which happened in August in An. Dom. 1422

John Stafford Clerk was made Lord Treasurer of England in the first year of
King Henry the sixth being in An. Dom. 1422. in which office he continued in
Michelmas term in the fourth year of Henry the sixth falling in An. Dom.
1425. he was chosen Bishop of Bath in the third year of Henry the sixth in An.
Dom. 1424. he was Chanceller of England, and removed to the Archbishopric of
Canterbury, of whom is mention made in my discourse of the Chancellers of
England, and touching whom I will for this time only set down here, what
Matthew Paris writes of him, in the life of Henry Chichely an Archbishop of
Canterbury, Archiepiscopus (says he) in An. Dom. 1424. Cantuariensis 12.
October. clerum in ecclesia Paulina convocavit, in ea Henricus Beauford Winton
episcopus regni Cancellarius, and Johannes Stafford Bathoniensis electus
episcopus regni thesaurarius, ad bellum Gallicum opem a clero petivit, and
interposita paucorum dierum deliberatione. Wilhelmus Linwood officialis curiae
Cantuariensis de arcubus hoc responsum ab inferiori clero Synodo acceptum
episcopis declaravit, non posse penes cleri procuratores potestatem subsidium
concedendi. Nam cum in dicta Synodo in singulis diocaesibus constituti essent,
clerus de solutionibus consentiendi licentiam express ademit, quia tantis
tributis diu pendendis ad magnam inopiam and egestatem devenit. Itaque
Cancellarius a superiori Synodo ad inferiorem transiens, longa and diserta
oratione, ac regis jam minoris necessitate, ac de instanti in Gallia bello
egit, ac ne quicquam suasit.

Walter Lord Hungerford Knight of the garter the son of Sir Thomas Hungerford
Knight was made Lord Treasurer of England in the fourth year of Henry the
sixth, being in An. Dom. 1425. in which office he continued about six years,
until some part of Michaelmas term in the tenth of Henry the sixth, falling in
An. Dom. 1431. He was also one of the Counsel to the said King, of whom is
Mention made by Matthew Parker in the life of Henry Chicheley Archbishop of
Canterbury, in these words. Proximo anno (which was about An. Dom. 1425)
synodus sub eodem archiepiscopo 15. Aprilis inchoata est, Qua Iohanne Kempo
Eboracensi archiepiscopo and Waltero Hungerfordo Milite Regijs consiliarijs
(ille cancellario hoc thesaurario regni) regis nomine postulantibus regi
decimam concessit. Ac eisdem his petentibus triennio post in recenti Synodo
media decima regi a clero data est. This Lord Treasurer married Katherine the
daughter and heir of Thomas Peverell Knight, by whom he had issue Walter Lord
Hungerford of Hatchberry Knight of the garter, that dyed without issue; Sir
Robert Lord Hungerford of Hatchberry, Edmund Hungerford Knight, that died
without issue, Margaret married to Sir Walter Rodney Knight, and Elizabeth
married to Phillip Courtney Knight, which Robert Lord Hungerford and Margaret
his wife, John Cheiney of Pim Esquire, John Mervin Esquire, and others did (by
the Kings license granted unto them in the 11. year of King Edward the fourth)
build the hospital of Hatchberry in Wiltshire.

John Lord Scroope of Vpsall and Masham made Lord Treasurer in the tenth year
of Henry the sixth being in An. Dom. 1431. in which office he continued until
some part of the 12. year of the said King, as I for this time do gather. Of
whom thus writes Matthew Parker in the life of Henry Chichley Archbishop of
Canterbury, touching a Synod holden in An. Dom. 1430. at what time of the
Clergy he says, that Johannes Stafford episcopus Bathoniensis Cancellarius,
etc. D. Scroope Thesaurarius regni nec non Wilhelmus Lindwood custos privati
sigilli, pro rege subsidium postularunt, and mediam decimam tandem aegre
impetrarunt.

Raphe Lord Cromwell the son of Raph Cromwell Lord of Tatershall, possessed
the place of Lord Treasurer of England in Easter term of the 12. year of the
after deposed King Henry the sixth, being in An. Dom. 1434. and so continued in
that office about ten years following as I suppose in An. Do. 1444. This man
being knight was created Lord Cromwell, by the said Henry the sixth, and was
lineally descended of one of the heirs of Robert Lord Tatershall that married
one of the daughters and heirs of William Dalbeny Earl of Arundell. This Raph
Lord Treasurer died without issue, and made his Testament in An. Dom. 1454.
being in the 33. year of Henry the sixth, after whose decease the Inheritance
came to the Three Auntes, being his heirs, whereof the first was married to the
Lord Bardoffe stain at Branch ammore in Northumberland, the second was
married to Sir William Fitz-Williams Knight of the Sepulcher: the third
Elizabeth to Sir John Cliston Knight, and after his death to Sir Edmund
Benested Knight, of one Lord Cromwell I find this note set down by Leland.
Dominus Radulphus* Cromwell and Matilda vxor ejus fundatores Collegij sanctae
Trinitatis de Tatershall, quumque Roberti ordine domini erant de Tatershall,
hos sequutus est Radulphus Comwell.

Sir Ralphe Butler Knight of the garter, Lord Sudley descended from John Lord
Sudley, and William Butler Baron of Wem, which married Ioane daughter and heir
to John Sudley Baron Sudley, did possess the honorable place of the Lord
Treasurership of England, the seventh of July in the 22. year of Henry the
sixth, being in An. Dom. 1444. which office he kept about three years, for in
25. of the said King, was the Bishop of Carlisle Lord Treasurer. This Raphe Lord
Sudley builded the Castle of Sudley, in the time of King Henry the sixth, and of
Edward the fourth was committed to prison by the King, first sending for him to
come to his presence. Whereupon he going to the King, and resting on an hill,
from whence he did behold Sudley Castle said. It is thou, it is thou, Sudley
Castle, and not I which am the traitor: After which coming to the King, he
resigned the said Sudley Castle into his hands. Which Castle came after to
Jasper Duke of Bedford, and is now 1635. in the possession of Giles Bridges
Lord Shandois. This Ralph being made Baron in the 20. year of Henry the sixth
married Elizabeth, the daughter of Sir John Northberry by whom he had issue
Thomas his son that died without issue leaving his Two Sisters to be his
heirs, whereof the Eldest daughter was married to Sir John Northberry, whose
heir general was married to John Halwell of Devonshire, who had issue Ioane
his daughter and heir married to Edmund Lord Bray, of whose heirs general
are descended, the Lord Cobham, Lord Chandos, Sir Edmund Verney, Knight
Marshall, Sir Percivall Heart of Kent, The other Sister married to Sir Hamond
Bellknap, of whom is descended the Lord Wootton of Bocton Maleherbe in Kent.
The which Ralph Lord Butler of Sudley was vexilifer, and high butler of
England, and steward in house to Henry the sixth.

Marmaduke Bishop of Carlisle, was made Lord Treasurer of England in the 25.
year of Henry the sixth, in which office he continued, about two years in the
27. year of Henry the sixth, being in An. Dom. 1448. (or as some have) 1449.

James Fynes created at Bury Baron and of Say, of Seal, on the 3. of March, in
the 25. year of King Henry the sixth, being in An. Dom. 1446. was Constable of
Dover Castle, and Lord Treasurer of England in the 28. year of Henry the sixth,
and was from thence removed, (as some have) in An. 29. of the said King: And
was by the Rebels of Kent Jack Cade and his fellows, taken of out the Tower
to the Guildhall, where he was arraigned before the Major and other the Kings
Justices, who desiring to be tried by his Peers, was by the Rebels forceably
taken from the Officers, and beheaded at the standard in Cheap. Which his
beheading some do attribute to the 28. year of Henry the sixth, being in An.
Dom. 1450. He had issue Sir William Fines Knight, and one daughter married to
Sir William Cromer Knight, Sheriff of Kent, beheaded at that time also with
his father in law. Of which Cromer, Sir James Cromer of Kent, Knight descended.

John Lord Beuchamp a person of great worthiness possessed the place of the
Treasurership of England in the 29. and 30. year of Henry the sixth.

John Tiptoft Earl of Worcester, possessed the place of the Lord Treasurer in
the 31. and 32 year of Henry the sixth: Of whom is more mention made hereafter.

James Butler the son of James Earl of Ormond being Earl of Wiltshire and
Ormond, possessed the office of the Lord Treasurer of England in the 33. of
Henry the sixth, falling in An. Dom. 1455.

Henry Vicount Bourchier, borne of the noble house of the Bourchiers the son
of William Bourchier Earl of Ewe in Normandy, was Lord Treasurer of England in
the 33. year of Henry the sixth, in which office he did not long remain.

John Talbot Earl of Sherwsbury the son of John Talbot the first Earl of
Shrewesbury of that name, possessed the place of the Treasurership of England
in the 35. and 36. year of Henry the sixth, and then gave place to the Earl of
Wiltshire. This Earl was slain at the battle of Northampton, in the 38. year
of Henry the sixth, being in An. Dom. 1460. He married Elizabeth, the daughter
of James Butler Earl of Ormond, and had issue John Earl of Shrewesbury, James
Gilbert, Christopher, and George, Anne married to Sir Henry Vernon, and
Margaret, This man was buried in the Priory of Worksop.

James Butler, son to James the fourth of that name, Earl of Ormond, was the
second time made Lord Treasurer of England, about the 37. year of Henry the
sixth, in which office he continued (as I suppose) in the 38. year of the said
King, In which year he conveyed himself out of England into Duchland, (for
fear of the Nobility, as the Duke of York and others, that rebelled against
the King) sending back his soldiers into England, which he had before
assembled upon the Sea, but after he returned into England, and was again put
to flight at Mortimers Cross, by Edward Earl of March, after King, by the
name of King Edward the fourth. He was made Earl of Ormond in the 39. of Henry
the sixth, being his last year. He married Elinor, the daughter of Edmund Duke
of Somerset, and diep without issue, being beheaded at Newcastle in An. Do.
1461. in the first year of Edward the fourth.

Henry Viscount Bourchier, was Lord Treasurer of England the second time, in
the 39. year of Henry the sixth, being in An. Dom. 1460. who upon the
deposition of the said King, by Edward the fourth, was also removed from the
said office.

Thrmas Bourchier, made Lord Treasurer of England in the first year of Edward
the fourth, in An-Dom. 1461. continued not long in that office, but gave place
to John Earl of Worcester.

John Tiptoft Earl of Worcester, the second time possessed the place of the
Lord Treasurership of England in the second and third year of Edward the
fourth.

Edmund Lord Gray of Ruthine, the son of John Lord Gray of Ruthine, did enjoy
the office of Lord Treasurership of England, in the fourth year of Edward the
fourth in Anno Dom. 1464. This man secretly in heart forsaking the part of King
Henry the sixth, for injuries received at his hands aided the said Edward the
fourth, and was the chief means whereby he attained the Crown, in
Michaelmas Term in the said fourth year of this King, there was a Sergeants
feast held in Holbourne in the Bishop of Ely his House, to which the Mayor and
Aldermen repaired being bidden thither. But when the Major looked to have kept
the state in the Hall, forgetting that he was out of his own liberties (for
the Bishops place was an exempt place) as it had been used (says John Stow)
in all places of the City, and liberties of the same, out of the Kings
presence, the Lord Gray of Ruthine then Treasurer of England, unknown to the
Sergeants, and against their wills (as they said) was placed in the highest
room, whereupon the Major Aldermen and Commons departed. This Edmund does
Matthew Parker, in the life of Thomas Bourchier Archbishop of Canterbury, make
to be Treasurer in the Third year of Edward the fourth in Anno Dom. 1463.
which may well enough stand with the former, being Treasurer to John Earl of
Worcester in the 3. year of the King. For upon removing of the said Earl in
the 3. year of Edward the 4. came this Lord Gray in place. The words of which
said Matthew Parker (with a note of An. Do. 1463. in the margent) are in this
order: Edwardus Rex duobus jam annis faeliciter gesto regno, parliamentu^. West
monasterij tenuit, quo etiam tempore, Archiepiscopus (which was Thomas
Bourchier, the brother of Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex) and Clerus in synodo
convenerunt. In hac synodo Johannes Comes Wigorniae, Henricus Comes Essexiae,
and D. Edmundus Gray Thesaurarius Angliae, D. Humfridus Cromwell, D. Wenlocke,
D. Johannes Prior sancti Iohannis and Robertus Stillington Legum doctor, custos
privati sigilli regis consiliarij, allatis literis regijs petierunt a clero
decerni regi ad Scotos repellendos subsidium. Quod quidem gratissimis omnium
animis tam munifico regi concessum est, qui superiori anno ecclesiae
immunitates atque jura iniquis judiciorum calumnijs (uti in Iohanne Stafford
antea diximus) convulsa and labefactata diplomate regio restauravit. Besides
which thus writes John Whethamstead, that learned Abbat of Saint Albons of
this Lord Gray, declaring in what authority he was at first, in the days of
Henry the sixth, and then in the reign of Edward the fourth, His words be
these. In the 36. year of Henry the sixth, Venerunt tres viri monachi de
caenobio Cluniacensi, quibus ad audiendum eorum nuntium, missi sunt episcopus
Dunelmensis, custos privati sigilli, Dominus Edmondus Gray de Ruthine, and
Secretarius regis, quibus isti viri dixerunt, eorum adventum esse ob tria.
Primo ad aperiendum quomodo reges Angliae, and praecipue Henricus secundus
fuerunt tam magni benefactores ad eorum ecclesiam ut potius pro nunc dicatur
earum patronus and praecipuus fundator. Secundo venerunt ad petendum
possessionem and confirmationem bonorum illorum quae dicti progenitores eis
contulerant, and per tempus non paucum jamdudum a manibus eorum detenta and
distracta erant. Tertio ad impetrandum liberam licentiam ad ingrediendum
singula loca religiosa ob eorum caenobio dependentia, and quae per nobiles
progenitores reges posita fuerunt sub eorum regimime. Sed nihil hic eis gratum
fuit actum, itu at tristes discederunt. Out of which words of Whethamsted, may
other things be gathered, besides the doings of the Lord Gray, as that the
Kings of England, and specially Henry the second, have been great benefactors
and founders of the Charterhouse Monks, with many more matters contained in the
same, which I refer to the wise and learned reader, which made me the
willinger to set down his words so largely; Moreover the same Whethamsted,
continuing the History of Henry the sixth, writes of the battle of
Northampton, wherein was this Lord Gray, in this sort. In praelio
Northamptonensi Edmundus Gray, dominus Ruthine, corpore licet praesens (even as
the Lord Stanly was in the battle fought betwixt Richard the third, and Henry
Earl of Richmond, after King, by the name of Henry the seventh) in campi
domini regis Henrici Sexti steterat, cor tamen ejus non erat rectum in eo,
neque omnino fidelis habitus aut inventus fuit. Nam venientibus turmis dictis
ad fossam circumvallationis and ipsam non multum prompte propter elevationem
ver ticis in part ulteriore ascendere valentibus, occurrit ipsis dominus cum
suis copijs obvians, porrigendoque ipsis dextran, traxit eos per manus in
campum Martium, juxta votum suum. Thus much Whethamsted of Edmond Gray Lord
Ruthine, who was made Earl of Kent, in the fifth year of Edward the fourth,
in An. Dom. 1464.

This Edmond Gray being Lord Hastings, Weisford, and Ruthine, (before he had
the honor of this Earldom) did by his Deed of Indenture dated the eighteenth
of November in the 25. year of Henry the sixth in An. Do. 1446. give to John
Pinchbecke Prior of Duffefield in Northamptonshire in Alms, during the life of
the said Prior, his Field called Challocke, to keep the obits of Sir John
Gray, father to the said Sir Edmond, and of Dame Constance the widow of the
Earl Marshall, and daughter of John Holland Duke of Excester and Earl of
Huntington, mother to the said Sir Edmund with mass, etc. as such other
Collects, as the said Edmond should deliver unto the said Prior.

Sir Walter Blunt Knight, who was the first Lord Montjoy, possessed the place
of Lord Treasurership of England, in the fifth year of Edward the fourth,
which fell in Anno Dom. 1465. Of this man is mention made in the Book of the
Law called Long Quinto of Edward the fourth; He married the daughter of Sir
John Biron, and had issue William, John, and James.

Sir Richard Woodvile Knight Chamberlain to the King, and Constable of
England, was made Barron on the ninth of May in the second year of Henry the
sixth, in An. Dom. 1424. and was after created Earl of Rivers in the fifth year
of Edward the fourth, in An. Dom. 1465. who thus advanced, was after Lord
Treasurer in the 6. 7. and 8. of Edward the fourth. In which 8. year of Edward
the fourth, Thomas Cook, late Major of London was accused of Treason, and
arraigned for the same, who after he had been many times purged theref, was
yet at last found guilty, and by this Lord Rivers, then Lord Treasurer so
handled, as that he could not be delivered, until he had paid 8000. pound to
the king, and 800. pound to the Queen. This Lord Treasurer married Iaquet, the
widow of John Duke of Bedford, daughter to Peter of Lucenburgh Earl of Saint
Paul, by whom he had issue, Richard Earl Rivers, Anthony Lord Scales in the
right of his wife, Edward Woodvile Knight slain at the battle of Saint Albine
in Britain in ^he third year of Henry the seventh, Lionell Bishop of
Salisbury, Margaret married to Thomas Earl of Arundale, Margaret married to
William Herbert, Earl of Huntington, Anna first married to William Bourchier
Earl of Essex, and after to George Gray Earl of Kent, Iaquet married to John
Lord Strange, Elizabeth married to Sir John Greie younger son to the Lord Greie
of Ruthine, and after the death of the said Sir John Greie, to King Edward the
fourth, and Katherine married to Henry Duke of Buckingham; Besides all which I
have read of one John, which was son to this Earl Rivers, which John married
the old Duchess of Norfolk, and was beheaded with his father, the truth
whereof I leave to further trial. This Richard Earl Rivers Lord Treasurer in
the ninth year of Edward the fourth, in An. Dom. 1469. was by Robert Hiltard,
who named himself Robert of Kidesdale, taken in the forest of Deane, (as some
have) others say at Grafton, and from thence brought to Northhampton and there
was beheaded.

John Longstrother Prior of Saint John's Jerusalem in England, possessed the
place of Lord Treasurer of the Realm in the ninth year of Edward the fourth,
in Anno Dom. 1469. for in the same year he gave place to the Bishop of Elie.

William Gray, Bishop of Elie was after the translation of Thomas Bourchier
from Elie to Canterbury advanced to that See, by Nicholas the fifth, then
Bishop of Rome, who gave it to the said Bishop, being then procurator too for
King Henry the 6. at Rome in the year of our redemption, 1454. This man was
Lord Treasurer in the ninth year of Edward the fourth, in An. Dom. 1469. in
which office he continued until the 11. year of Edward the fourth, or
thereabouts. This Greie was borne of the noble house of the Lord Greyes of
Codnor, as says Bale, and traveled into Italy to attain great learning,
where he heard the noble Clerk Guarinus Veronensis read in Ferraria. He
continued Bishop of Elie 24. years 11. Months and two days, departing this
life at Durham the fourth of August in An. Dom. 1478. as I have read, and was
buried at Elie, between two Marble pillars, having bestowed great sommes of
money upon the reparations of that famous Belfrie of the Church of Elie, and
upon other ornaments of the same Church.

Henry Bourchier Earl of Essxe, did the third time possess the honorable
place of the Lord Treasurership of England in the 11. year of Edward the
fourth, in which office he continued (as I gather) 12. years, being all the
residue of the life of Edward the fourth, who departed this world, about the
ninth day of April in An. Dom. 1483. which Bourchier being made Earl of Essex
in the first year of Edward the fourth, in An. Dom. 1461. married Elizabeth,
daughter of Richard de Conisburge Earl of Cambridge, the sister of Richard
Duke of York, by whom he had issue William Lord Bourchier, Thomas, John,
Henry, and Humphery, Knights.

Sir Richard Wood Knight, whom some call Sir John Wood, being before under
Treasurer in the 23. year of Edward the fourth, was in the same year made
Knight about a Month before the death of the said King Edward the fourth. This
man did possess the place of the Lord Treasurer of England, (as I gather out
of the record of Pellis exitus, of that year) in the second year of the
Reign of King Richard the third, being the year of our redemption 1484. which
office I suppose, that he kept until the said Richard the third was slain,
by Henry Earl of Richmond, afterward King of England, by the name of Henry the
Seventh.

Sir Reignold Brey Knight, the son of Richard Brey Physician (as some have
noted to King Henry the sixth) being servant to Margret Countess of Richmond
mother to Henry the seventh, was for the fidelity of his Lady, and good service
in furthering King Henry the 7. to the Crown received into great favor with
the said King, and made Lord Treasurer of England, as appears by the record
of Pellis exitus, made under his name in the first year of Henry the seventh
in An. Dom. 1485. besides which Office, he had many other offices and honors,
part whereof were that he was Treasurer of the Kings wars, that he was one
of the executors to King Henry the seventh, that he was made Knight of the
Bath, at the Coronation of the King, and created a Banneret at Blacke-heath
field. He died in the 18. year of the prudent Prince. King Henry the seventh,
being in An. Dom. 1503. and was honorably buried at Windsor.

Sir John Dinham Kinght, the son of Sir Dinham Knight, a faithful servant to
the house of York, as well in ayding the Duke of York, to whom Edward the
fourth, son to the said Duke of York, in the second year of his reign, had
given one Annuity of 30. pound per Annum; did after the death of the said
Edward the fourth in the second year of Henry the seventh possess the place
of Lord Treasurer of England in An. Dom. 1486. and so continued until in An.
16. Henry the seventh, and then gave place to Thomas Earl of Surrey. Of which
Lord Dinham thus writes, Leland. Dominus Dinham primus fuit fundator sancti
Nicholas alias Hortland, He was created Lord Dinham in the first year of
Edward the 4. shortly after the Coronation of the said King in An. Dom. 1461.
He dyed in Anno 16. of the same King Henry the seventh in An. Dom. 1500. and
the 30. day of January was brought to the Gray Friars in London, and there
buried. He married Elizabeth daughter of the Lord Fitzwater, by whom he had
issue George and Phillip, and Sir Thomas Dinham his base son that married one
of the daughters and heirs of Sir John Ormond: Which Thomas was buried at
Ashring, Three miles from Berkhamsted, besides which children, this Lord Dinham
or Denham (for so I find both written in Chronicles) had by his legitimate
wife diverse daughters, which were Margaret married to Nicholas Baron of Carew
Ioane married to the Lord Zouch, Elizabeth married to the Lord Fitz Warren, and
Katherine married to Sir Thomas Arundell of Cornwall Knight.

Here I think it not amiss to say somewhat of a note which I have seen, that
makes John Touchet Lord Audley Treasurer of England, which note is this. John
Touchet Lord Audley Treasurer of England dyed the 26. day of December in An.
Do. 1490. falling in the sixth year of Henry the seventh, and had issue James
Lord Audley, beheaded the 28. of June in An. Dom. 1497. being the 12. year of
Henry the seventh.

Thomas Howard the son of John Lord Howard created the first Duke of Norfolk
of that name (in the time of Richard the Third) was at the same time also
created Earl of Surrey. This man after the slaughter of his father at Bosworth
field, when the Tyrant Richard the third was slain by Henry the seventh, was
after received into such favor with the said King Henry the seventh, that he
was advanced to be Lord Treasurer of England in the 16. year of Henry the
seventh in An. Dom. 1500. Which place he continued all the life of the said
King Henry the seventh, who died in the 24. year of his reign, being in An.
Do. 1509. After which for the good service he used in the time of King Henry
the seventh, King Henry the 8. permitted him to keep that Office, which he
possessed until the 15. year of King Henry the 8. in An. Dom. 1523. This man
was created Duke of Norfolk on Candlemas day in the fifth year of Henry the 8.
being in An. Dom. 1513. at what time also his son Thomas Howard was made
Earl of Surrey. This Duke was advanced to that honor, in recompense of the
death of the King of Scots, and for the good service that he did against that
Nation in the said 5. year of Henry the 8. with an augmentation of his arms:
the Arms of Scotland, in medio benda Armorum proprij Nominis of Howard.
Touching which victory of the death of the King of Scots. Buchanan, Lib. 13.
writes to this effect. That the said Thomas Howard (as a note of the conquest)
gave to his servants (to wear on their left arm) being a white Lion (the
beast which he bear before as the proper Ensign of that house) standing over
a Red Lion, the peculiar note of the Kingdom of Scotland) and tearing the same
Red Lion with his paws. This Tho. Duke of Norfolk married two wives, his
first wife was Elizabeth the daughter of Frederick Tilney Knight, by whom he
had issue Thomas Earl of Surrey, after Duke of Norfolk, Edward slain at Breast
Admiral of England and Edmond Howard, with Elizabeth married to Thomas Bulline
Earl of Wiltshire, and Muriell married to John Gray Lord Lisle: His second
wife was Agnes daughter of Philip Tilney Knight, by whom he had issue William
Lord Howard of Effingham with many others. This Thomas Duke of Norfolk died in
the 16. year of King Henry the 8. in An. Dom. 1544. and was buried at Thetford
in Norfolk.

Thomas Howard, son to the said Thomas Duke of Norfolk, being Earl of
Surrey possessed the place of the Lord Treasurer in the 15. year of Henry the
8. in An. Dom. 1523. the which office he continued in the 38. year of the said
King, in An. Dom. 1546. in the which year on the 28. of January, the said King
Henry died, so that this Duke and his father were Lord Treasurers of England
almost 48. years: But about some few days more then a Month before the death
of the said King, that is to say, on the 12. day of December, this Duke with
his son Henry Earl of Surrey were committed to the Tower, the one by water,
the other by land. Shortly after which, the said Henry was beheaded at
Tower Hill the 19. day of January, about 9. days before the death of the King.
And the Duke remained as condemned to perpetual prison, till the beginning of
the Reign of Queen Mary, who then set him at liberty: He married for his
first wife Anne the daughter of King Edward the fourth, but had Thomas that
died young after, he married Elizabeth daughter to Edward Duke of Buckingham,
by whom he had issue Henry Earl of Surrey beheaded as before, Thomas Viscount
Bindon and Mary married to Henry Fitzroy Duke of Richmond, He died about the
beginning of the Reign of Queen Mary.

Edward Seymer Earl of Hartford was after the death of King Henry the 8. made
Lord Treasurer of England, in the first year of King Edward the sixth, in An.
Dom. 1546. in which year he was also made protector of England and Duke of
Somerset, of whom thus writes Matthew Parker, calling him Regni Camerarium, in
the life of Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury in these words, page 397.
In testamento (meaning King Henry the 8.) Edwardo Principi minori novem annis
nato haeredi suo Sexdecem tutores, ex Episcopis solos Thomam Cranmerum
Cantuariensem archiepiscopum and Cuthbertum Tonstallum Dunelmensem Episcopum
dedit. And a little after, page 398. follows, Verum pluribus (ut diximus (ei
minori) (that was King Edward) a patre constitutis curatoribus, ne numero suo,
atque multitudine ad dissentiones faciles essent and proclives, unus electus
est, qui ex consilijs reliquorum impuberis regis tutelam solus administraret:
Is futit Edwardus Seimerus Comes Herefordiensis totius regni Camerarius
regisque Auunculus. Qui suscepta tutela regis, totius regni atque dominiorum
suorum proctteor and Somerseti Dux nuncupatus atque creatus est. This Duke of
Somerset being Treasurer of England continued in the same office (until his
death which was) more then 4. years, and was beheaded in the fifth year of
Edward the sixth, in An. Dom. 1551.

Sir William Paulet Knight Marquess of Winchester, was made Lord Treasurer,
upon the death of the Duke of Somerset, in the fifth year of Edward the sixth in
An. Dom. 1551. Which office he kept by the space of Twenty years and more, a
longer time then ever any other Treasurer had done before, except the two last
Dukes of Norfolk. This man being a man of extreme age, (as attaining to the
years Ninety Seven) died Lord Treasurer of England, the tenth of March, in
An. Dom. 1571. (being the 14. year of the Reign of the famous Queen
Elizabeth) at his Manor of Basing. He in his life time did see the Children
of his Childrens Children grown to the number of One Hundred and Three; a rare
blessing of God to men of his calling. He married Elizabeth the daughter of Sir
William Capell Knight, by whom he had issue, John Marquess of Winchester,
Thomas, Chidiocke, and Giles, Alice married to Richard Stowell, Margaret
married to Sir William Berkeley, Margery married to Richard Waller, and Eleanor
married to Sir Richard Perckshall.

Sir William Cecill Knight, principal Secretary of State, created Lord
Burghley, upon the death of the Marquess of Winchester was made Lord Treasurer
of England the 13. July 1572. being in the 14. year of the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and continued in that office during his life, being also (elected
unto that most noble Order of the Garter. Chancellor of the University of
Cambridge, and a Commissioner for the Office of Earl Marshall of of England.

Thomas Sackvill Barron Buckhurst, heir Male of that ancient Family that have
flourished in a continued series from the Conquest, and coming over out of
Normandy, deserved Nobly in that action was made Lord Treasurer the 15. of May
in the 41. year of Queen Elizabeth, and continued in that office during his
life: He was after by King James Created Earl of Dorcet the 13. of March
1603. being Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, and Chancellor of the
University of Oxford.

Sir Robert Cecill second son to William Lord Burghley, being Principal
Secretary of State to Queen Elizabeth and after to King James, was by the said
king created Baron Cecill of Essendon the 13. of May 1603. vicount Cranborne
the 20. of August 1604. and Earl of Salisbury the 4. of May in the sixth year
of King James, and upon the death of the Earl of Dorcet he was made Lord
Treasurer of England, and continued in the place till his death.

Thomas Lord Howard of Walden (second son to Thomos Howard Duke of Norfolk)
created Earl of Suffolk by King James, being then Lord Chamberlain and
Knight of the Garter, was made Lord Treasurer of England the 12. of July in the
12. year of the reign of King James.

Sir Henry Montague Knight, Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench, was made
Lord Treasurer of England the 14. of December in the 18. year of King James,
and the 19. day of the same month and year he was Created Baron of Kimolten
Castle in Huntington-shire, and Vicount Mandevile, and immediately after the
Coronation of King Charles he was created Earl of Manchester.

Lyonell Lord Cranfield of Cranfield in the County of Bedford, so created by
Letters Patents, bearing date the 9. of July 1621. was made Lord Treasurer the
19. of October following, and created Earl of Middlesex the 19. of October.
1622.

Sir James Ley Knight and Baronet, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, was
made Lord Treasurer of England the 22. of December in the 22. year of the
reign of King James, and upon the 31. day of the same Month he was created
Baron Ley of Ley in Devonshire, and immediately after the Coronation of King
Charles, he was created Earl of Marleburgh in Wiltsshire.

Richard Lord Weston Chancellor of the Exchequer, upon the remove of the Earl
of Marleburgh was made Lord Treasurer of England upon the 15. day of July in
the 4. year of King Charles, and was after that created Earl of Portland in
Dorcetshire, by Letters Patents, bearing date the 17. day of February in the
eighth year of the reign of King Charles.

Upon the death of the said Earl of Portland, his Majesty appointed
Commissioners for the said office, viz. William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
his Grace; Henry Earl of Manchester, Lord Privy Seal; Francis Lord
Cottington Chancellor of the Exchequer; Sir John Cook, and Sir Francis
Windebank Knights, Principal Secretaries of State.

The right reverend Father in God William Iuxon, first Lord Bishop of Hereford,
then translated to London and made deane of the Kings Chapel, and called to be
of the Privy Council, and was made Lord Treasurer of England, the Ninth day of
March, 1635.

FINIS.

