THE Second Part of HERO and LEANDER. Containing their further Fortunes. By
Henry Petowe.

Sat cito, si sit been.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot, for Andrew Harris, and are to be sold at
his shop, under the Popes head next to the Royal Exchange. 1598.

To the Right worshipful sir Henry Guilford Knight, H. P. wishes all
increase of worship, and endless Felicity.
RIght Worshipful, although presumption merit penance in dedicating such
rude and unpolished lines, to the protection of so worthy a personage: yet I
hope your wonted favor and clemency will privilege me from blame, and accept
of the giver, as one who would hazard life to move your Worcester: the least jot of
content. If it be thought a point of wisdom in that impouerished soul, that
by taking sanctuary, does free himself from many dangers: then impute no
blame unto my self, that seek for safeguard, being round beset with many
enemies. No sooner had report made known my harmeles Muses first progress, how
she intended to make trial of her vnfledged plumes; but (my self being
present where that babbling dame was prating) I heard injurious Envy, reply to
this effect, Dares she presume to fly, that cannot go?
We Will cut her plumes said they, it shall be so.
Then with a snarle or two, these ever meddling Carpers betook them to their
cabbins. At the next rowsing; I expect no other favor, then Enuies extremest
fury, which to withstand, if I may purchase your Worcester: safe protection, no
better guarde will my fearful soul desire. To make the cause manifest unto
your worthine, why Envy thus barketh at me, I entreat your wisdom to
consider the sequel. This History of Hero and Leander, penned by that admired
Poet Marloe: but not finished (being prevented by sudden death:) and the same
(though not abruptly, yet contrary to all menns expectation) resting like a
head separated from the body, with this harsh sentence, De sunt nonnulla. I
being enriched by a Gentleman a friend of mine, with the true Italian
discourse, of those Lovers further Fortunes, have presumed to finish the
History, though not so well as diverse riper wits doubtless would have done: but
as it is rude and not praise worthy: so neither do I expect praise nor
commendations. This therefore is the cause of their sudden enmity, that I
being but a fly dare presume to soar with the Aegle. But how-euer they
dislike it, may your wothines but grace this my first labor with your kind
acceptance, my heart shall enjoy the depth of his desire: And your Worcester: shall
continually bind me in all serviceable duty to rest unto your worship always
devoted.

Your worspips most humbly to command. Henry Petowe.

To the quicke-sighted Reader.
Kind Gentlemen, what I would I cannot, but what I could with that little skill
I had, I have presumed to present to your favorable viewes: I am not ashamed
to beg your kind favors, because I find my self altogether insufficient to
perform that which my good will has taken in hand: Yet with my soul I wish
my labors may merit your kind favors. If not for the toil herein taken,
which I confess have no way deserved the least iotte of favor: yet for the
Subjects sake, for Hero and Leanders sake. If neither of these purchase favor,
the frowning brows of sad discontent, will banish my poor harmeles Muse, into
the vast wide wilderness of eternal oblivion. I am assured Gentlemen, you
will marvel what folly or rather fury enforced me to undertake such a
weighty matter, I being but a slender Atlas to vphoulde or undergo such a
massy burden: yet I hope you will rather assist, and further me with the
wings of your sweet favors, then to hinder my forward endeavors with your
dislikings: esteeming it as the first fruits of an unripe wit, done at certain
vacant hours: In which hope I rest captiuated till I be freed by your liberal
and kind Censures.

Yours still, if mine ever. Henry Petowe.

HERO and LEANDERS further Fortunes.
WHen young Apollo heavens sacred beauty,
Began on his silver harp with reverent duty,
To blazen forth the fair of Tellus wonder,
Whose fair, all other faires brought subject under:
Heaven began to frown at earthes fragilitie,
Made proud with such adored Majesty.
Hero the fair, so do I name this fair,
With whom immortal faires might not compare,
Such was her beauty framed in heavens scorn,
Her spotles fair caused other faires to mourn:
Heaven frowned, Earth shamed, that none so fair as she,
Base borne of earth in heaven might equal be*
Fell moodie Venus pale with fr^tting ire,
Aye me (quoth she) for want of her desire,
Earthes basest mould, framed of the baser dust,
Strumpet to filth, bawd to loathed lust:
Worse then Maedea's charms, are thy inticements,
Worse then the Mermaides songs, are thy allurements.
Worse then the snakie hag Tysip^one,
To mortal souls is thy inueagling beauty:
Thus, she exclaimes against harme^es. Hero's fair,
And would the Gods consent, her dangling hair,
Wherewith the busy air does often play,
(As wanton birds upon a Sunshine day*)
Should be transformed to snakes all ugly black,
To be a means of her eternal wrack.
But wanton Jove sweet beauties favorite,
Demands of beauty beauties worthy merit:
If beauties guerdon merit pain (quoth he,)
Your fair deserves no less as fair as she,
Then moodie Juno frowning began reply,
I Will want my will, but strumpet she shall die.
Juno (quoth he) we ought not tyrannize,
On such (said she) as you do wantonnize.
But since our continent the scope of Heaven,
Contains her not, unless from earth beryuen,
I Will make a transformation of her hue,
And force the hautie Mother earth to rue:
That her base womb dare yeilde such bastard faires,
That Jove must seek on earth immortal heirs.
I Will cause a second desperate Phaaeton,
To rule the fiery Chariot of the Sun:
That topsie turuie Heaven and Earth may turn,
That Heaven, Earth, Sea, and Hell may endless burn.
Stay head-strong-goddesse Jove to Juno said,
Can you do this without your husbands aid?
With that she began entreat it might be so,
But Jove would not sweet beauty overthrow:
But this he granted Juno, that Apollo
Should never more extol the fair of Hero.
His censure past the irefull Queen does hie,
To set a period to his harmony.
From forth his yiedling arms she soon bereaues
Apollo's Lute, whom comfortless she leaves,
Making a Thousand parts of two gould-stringes,
Into obliuions Cell the same she flinges.
Quick sighted spirits, this supposed Apollo,
Conceit no other, but th'admired Marlo:
Marlo admired, whose honney flowing vain,
No English writer can as yet attain.
Whose name in Fames immortal treasury,
Truth shall record to endless memory,
Marlo late mortal, now framed all divine,
What soul more: happy, then that soul of thine?
Live still in heaven thy soul, thy fame on earth,
(Thou dead) of Marlo's Hero finds a dearth.
Weep aged Tellus, all earth on earth complain,
Thy chief borne fair, has lost her fair again:
Her fair in this is lost, that Marlo's want,
Inforceth Hero's fair be wondrous scant.
Oh had that King of poets breathed longer,
Then had fair beauties sort been much more stronger:
His goulden pen had (...) her so about,
No bastard Aeglets quill the world throughout,
Had been of force to mar what he had made,
For why they were not expert in that trade:
What mortal soul with Marlo might contend,
That could against reason force him stoop or bend?
Whose silver charming tongue, moved such delight,
That men would shun their sleep in still dark night.
To meditate upon his goulden lines,
His rare conceyts and sweet according rimes.
But Marlo still admired Marlo's gone,
To live with beauty in Elyzium,
Immortal beauty, who desires to hear,
His sacred Poesies sweet in every ear:
Marlo must frame to Orpheus melody,
Himnes all divine to make heaven harmony.
There ever live the Prince of Poetry,
Live with the living in eternity.
Apollo's Lute bereau^d of silver string,
Fond Mercury does harshly gin to sing.
A counterfeit unto his honney note,
But I do fear he^le cha^ter it by ^^te:
Yet if his ill according voice be such,
That (hearing part) you think you hear too much.
Bear with his rashness and he will amend,
His folly blame, but his good will commend.
Yet rather discommend what I entreat,
For if you like it, some will storm and fret.
And then insulting Aegles soaring hie,
Will pray upon the silly harmeles fly*
(Nil refert) for I Will pawn my better part,
Ere sweet faced beauty loose her due desert.
Auaunt base Steel where shrill tong'd silver rings,
The chatt'ring Pie may range when black-birdes sings:
Birds black as Iet with sweet according voices,
Like to Elyziums Saints with heavenly noises.
Why should harsh Mercury recount again,
What sweet Apollo (living) did maintain?
Which was of Hero her, all pleasing fair,
Her pretty brows, her lip, her amber hair,
Her roseat cheek, her lilly fingers white,
Her sparkling eyes that lend the day his light:
What should I say, her all in all he praised,
Wherewith the spacious world was much amazed.
Leanders love, and lovers sweetest pleasure,
He wrought a full discourse of beauties treasure:
And left me nothing pleasing to recite,
But of unconstant chance, and fortunes spite.
Then in this glass view beauties frayltie,
Fair Hero, and Leanders misery.
THE virgin Princess of the western I Will,
Fair Cambarina of the goulden soil,
And yet not fair, but of a swartie hew,
For by her gould, her beauty did renew:
Renew as thus, that having gould to spare,
Men held it duty to protest and swear,
Her fair was such, as all the world admired it,
Her blushing beauty such, all men desired it.
The scornful Queen made proud with fained praises*
Her black-fram'd soul, to a hier rate she raises:
That men bewitched with her gould, not beauty,
A Thousand Knights as homage proffer duty,
If such a base deformed lump of clay,
In whom no sweet content had any stay,
No pleasure residence, no sweet delight,
Shelter from heat of day, or cold of night:
If such a she so many suitors had,
Hero whose angry frowns made heaven sad:
Hero whose gaze gracing dark Plutos cell,
Pluto would deem Phoebus came there to dwell.
Hero whose eyes heavens fiery tapors stain,
Hero whose beauty makes night day again,
How much more love merits so sweet a Queen,
Whose like no out-worne world has ever seen.
Of sweet Leanders love, to Hero's beauty,
Heaven, Earth, and Hell, and all the world is guilty,
Of Hero's kindness, to her trusty Phere,
By lost Apollo's tale it does appear,
Recorded in the Register of Fame,
The works of Marlo do express the same.
But ere he began of fickle chance to tell,
How bad chance against the Better did rebel:
When love in loves sweet garden newly planted,
Remorcefull Hero to Leander granted,
Free liberty, to yield the world increase,
Unconstant Fortune foe to harmeles peace:
Playde such unruly prancks in loves despite,
That love was forced from his true-loues sight.
DVke Archilaus cruel, void of pity,
Where Hero dwelt was regent of that City:
Woe worth that town where bloody homicides,
And Tyrants are elected cities guides.
Woe worth that country where unlawful lust,
Sitts in a Regal throne, of force it must
Down to the low laid bowels of the earth,
Like to a still borne Childs untimely birth:
Duke Archilaus loved; but whom loved he?
He courted Hero, but it would not be.
Why should he plant where other Knights have sown,
The land is his, therefore the fruit his own,
^ust it be thus, alas it is not so,
L^st may not force true-louers overthrow.
Lust has no limits, lust will have his will,
Like to a ravening wolf that is bent to kill,
The Duke affecting her that was beloved,
( Hero whose firm fixed love Leander proved,)
Gave onset to the still resisting fort,
But fearful hate set period to his sport.
Lust egged him on to further his desire,
But fell disdain enforced him to retire.
When Archilaus saw that thundering threats
Could not prevail, he mildly then intreates.
But all in vain, the Do had choose her make,
And whom she took, she never would forsake,
The Doo's sweet Dear, this hunter seeks to chase,
Harmeles Leander whose all smiling face
Graced with unspotted fair to all men's sight,
Would force the hounds retire, and not to bite:
Which when the Duke perceau'd, an other curre,
Was forced from his den, that made much stir,
And treason he was named, which held so fast,
That fears swift wings did lend some aid at last.
For force perforce Leander must depart
From Sestos, yet behind he left his heart.
His heart in Hero's breast, Leander left,
Leanders absence, Heroes joys bereft:
Leanders want, the cruel Duke thought sure
Some ease to discontent would soon procure.
Leander having heard his woeful doom,
Toward his weeping Lady he does come,
Dewing her cheeks with his distilling tears,
Which Hero dries with her dangling hairs:
They weeping greet each other with sweet kisses,
(Kindly embracing) thus they began their wishes.
Oh that these foulding arms might nere undo;
As she desired: so wished Leander too:
Then with her hand, she touched his sacred breast,
Where in his bosom she desires to rest.
Like to a snake she clung unto him fast,
And wound about him, which snatcht-vp in have,
By the Prince of birds, borne lightly up aloft,
Does wrythe her self about his neck, and often
About his wings displayed in the wind,
Or like as Iuie on trees cling bout the rind:
Or as the Crab-fish having caught in seas
His enemies, does claspe him with his cleas.
So joined in one, these two together stood,
Even as Hermophrodi^us in the flood:
Until the Duke did bannish him away,
Then began Leander to his Hero say.
(Let me go where the Sun does parch the green,
In temperate heat, where he is felt and seen:
Or where his beams do not dissolve the ice,
In presence pressed, of people mad or wise.
Set me in high, or else in low degree,
In clearest sky, or where clouds thickest be,
In longest night, or in the shortest day,
In lusty youth, or when my hairs be gray:
Go I to heaven, to earth, or else to hell,
Thrall or at large, alive where so I dwell,
On hill or dale, or on the foaming flood,
Sick or in health, in evil fame or good:
Thine will I be, and only with this thought,
Content thy self: although my chance be naught.)
Thus parted these two lovers full of woes,
She stays behind, on pilgrimage he goes.
Leave we a while, Leander wandering Knight,
To Delphos taking his all speedy flight,
That by the Oracle of Apollo,
His further Fortunes he may truly know.
TRue-loue quite bannisht, lust began to plead,
To Hero like a scholar deeply read:
The flaming sighs, that boil within my breast,
Fair love (quoth he) are cause of my unrest.
Unrest I entertain for thy sweet sake,
And in my tent choose sorrow for my make.
Why do thou frown (quoth he) and then she turned
Oh cool the fainting soul, that flaming burned:
Forced by desire, to touch thy matchles beauty,
To whom thy servant vows all reverent duty.
With that her irefull brows clowded with frowns,
His soul already drencht, in woes sea drownes.
But floating on the waves thus he began say,
Flint hearted Lady can thou be so coy?
Can pity take no place, is kind remorce
Quite bannisht, quite fled? then began he to be horce,
Unable to exclaim, against her longer,
Whose woe lament made Hero's heart more stronger.
Hero that gave no ear to her commander,
But ever weeps for her exiled Leander:
And weeping sore among'st her liquid tears,
These words she spoke, wherewith her sorrow wears.
(The pillar perished is, whereto I lent,
To my unhap, for lust away has sent,
Of all my Joy, the very bark and rind,
The strongest stay of my unquiet mind:
And I alas am forced without consent,
Daily to mourn, till death do it relent.)
Oh my Leander he is banished,
From his sweet Hero's sight he is exiled.
Oh ye just heavens, if that heaven be just,
Rain the unbridled head, of hautie lust,
Make him to stoop, that forces others bend,
Bereave his joys, that rest me of my friend.
I want my self, for Hero wants her love,
And where Leander is, my self does move.
What can I more, but have a woeful heart,
My mind in woe, my body full of smart,
And I my self, my self always to hate,
Till dreadful death do ease my doleful state.
The angry Duke lay listening to her words,
And till she ends no speech at all affords,
Until at length; exclaiming against her kind,
Thus he breathed forth the venom of his mind.
(Oh timorous taunters that delights in toys,
Iangling iesters, depriuers of sweet joys,
Tumbling cock-boats tottering too and fro,
Grown'd of the graft, whence all my grief does grow:
Sullen Serpents enuiron'd with despite,
That ill for good at all times does requite.
As Cypress tree that rent is by the root,
As well sown seed, for drought that cannot sprout.
As branch or slip bitter from whence it grows,
As gaping ground that raineles cannot close:
As fish on land to whom no water flows,
As flowers do fade when Phoebus rarest shows,
As Salamandra repulsed from the fire,
Wanting my wish, I die for my desire.)
Speaking those words death seized him for his own,
Wherewith she thought her woes were overthrown:
Hero so thought, but yet she thought amiss,
Before she was beloved: now finds no bliss.
Duke Archilaus being sudden dead,
Young Euristippus ruled in his stead:
The next succeeding heir to what was his,
Then Hero's woes increast, and fled all blis.
Look how the silly harmeles bleati^^ lamb,
Bereft from his kind make the gentle dam,
Left as a pray to Butchers cruelty,
In whom she finds not any drop of mercy.
Or like a warrior whom his Soldiers flies,
At his shrill echo of his foes dread cries.
He all unable to withstand so many,
Not having wherewith to combat, nor any
Assured friend that dares to comfort him,
Not any way for fear dares succor him.
But as a pray he yeildes to him he would not,
If he had help, but (helpless) strive he could not.
So fared it with the meek distressed Hero,
That sweet Leander, bannished her fro.
She had no Hercules, to defend her cause,
She had no Brandamore disdaining laws,
To combat for her safety; this sweet Io,
Had no kind Jove to keep her from her foe.
This Psiches had no Cupid, love was bannisht,
And love from love exild, love needs must famish.
Wood Euristippus for his brothers death,
Like as a toyled huntsman wanting breath,
Stormeth that bad chance in the games pursuit,
Should cause him panting, rest as dead and mute.
Or like sad Orphey for Euridi^e,
Whom Cerberus bereft so hastily,
Like to the thundering threats of Hercules,
The worlds admired Prince the great Alcides,
When Nessus got the height of his desire;
By rauishing his fairest Deianire.
Such was his ire, ^^d more if more may be,
Which he against Hero breathed spightfully:
Thou damned hag: thus began he to exclaim,
Thou base borne Strumpet one of Circes train.
Durst thou presume, poor silly simple fly,
With Venum's force, to force an Aegle die?
What though my brother Leander bannished,
Must he by thee therefore be poisoned?
Die cursed wretch, with that he cast her from him,
And would not suffer her to look upon him.
The still amazed Lady musing stood,
Admiring why the Duke should be so wood.
Humbly she prostrates her at Angers feet,
And with down dropping tears, like liquid sleete,
She waters the Summer thirsty ground,
Weeping so long, she fell into a sound.
Again revived by the standers by,
She does entreat them to resolve her why,
Duke Euristippus wrongeth her so much,
As to dishonor her with such a touch.
Well know the Gods my guiltless soul (quoth she,)
Was Archilaus poisoned by me,
If so? Just heavens and immortal powers,
Rain vengeance down in all consuming showers:
And cause that Hero, that was counted fair,
Like a mad hellish fury to despair.
The more she weeps, the more the heavens smile,
Scorning that beauty should take any soil,
Juno commanded Argos to defend her,
But Jupiter would not so much befriend her.
Argos stark dead; sweet Hero might not live,
For of her life the Duke will her deprive.
Her doom was thus, ere three months date took end,
If she found none, that would her cause defend:
Untimely death should seize her as a pray,
And vnresisting life, should death obey.
Mean time within a rocke-fram'd castle strong,
She was imprisoned traitors vile among:
Where (discontented) when she should have rested,
Her food bad fare, with sighs and tears she feasted.
And when the breathless horses of the Sun,
Had made their stay, and Luna had begun,
With cheerful smyling brows to grace dark night,
Clad in black sable weeds, for want of light.
This all alone sad Lady began to play,
Framing sweet music to her welladay:
The'ffect whereof this Sonnet plainly shows,
The fountain whence springs Hero's heavy woes.
Hero's lamentation in Prison.
NIghts mourning black and mistie vailing hew,
Shadows the blessed comfort of the Sun:
At whose bright gaze I wonted to renew
My liueles life, when life was almost done.
Done is my life, and all my pleasure done,
For he is gone, in whom my life begun:
Unhappy I poor I, and none as I,
But pilgrim he, poor he, that should be by.
MY love exiled, and I in prison fast,
Out streaming tears break into weeping rain,
He too soon banished, I in dungeon-cast,
He for me mourns, I for him complain.
He Is banished, yet lives at liberty,
And I exiled, yet live in misery:
He weeps for me far off, I for him here,
I would I were with him, and he more nere.
But this imprisoning cave, this woeful cell,
This house of sorrow and increasing woe,
Griefs tearie chamber where sad care does dwell,
Where liquid tears, like top filled Seas do flow:
Beating their waves against still relentles stone,
Still still they smile on me, and I still moan;
I weep to stone, and stone of stone I find,
Cold stone, cold comfort yields (oh most unkind.)
Often have I read that stone relents at rain,
And I impleat their barren womb with store,
Tears streaming down, they wet and wet again,
Yet pitiless they harden more and more.
And when my longing soul looks they should sonder,
I touch the flintie stone, and they seem stronger,
They strong, I weak: alas what hope have I?
Hero wants comfort, Hero needs must die.
WHen the melodious shrill toung'd Nightingale,
With heavy cheer had warbled this sad tale:
Nights drowsy God an iuorie Cannopie,
Curtains before the windows of fair beauty.
Drowned thus in sleep, she spent the weary night,
There leave I Hero in a heavy plight.
Now to the woeful Pilgrim I return,
Whose passions force the gentle birds to mourn.
The sea Leander weep, with heavy note
They faintly singe, as when they singe by rote:
While he began descant on his misery,
The pretty fowls do make him melody.
Leanders complaint of his restles estate.
BRight Heavens immortal moving Spheres,
and Phoebus all divine,
Rue on low Earths unfeigned tears:
that issue from Earths eyne.
Eyes, were these no eyes, whilst eyes eyesight lasted,
but these dark eyes clear sight, sad sorrow wasted.
WHat creature living lives in grief,
that breathes on Tellus soil?
But Heavens pity with relief,
save me, a slave to spoil.
Spoil do his worst, spoil cannot spoil me more,
Spoil never spoiled, so true a Love before.
THe stricken Dear stands not in awe
of black grym irefull Death,
For he finds herbs that can withdraw
the shaft, to save his breath.
The chased Dear has soil to cool his heat,
The toyled Steed is up in stable set.
THe silly Owls lurk in the leaves,
shine Sun or nights Queen whether:
The Sparrowe shrowdes her in the eaues,
from storms of huffing weather.
Fowls comfort find, Leander finds no friend,
Then (comfortless) Leanders life must end.
BY this it pleased the smiling brows of Heaven,
Whose deadly frowns, him erst of joy beryuen:
To set a period to Leanders toil,
Having enjoyed that long desired soil.
When he had viewd the stately territories,
And Delphos sacred hie erected towers,
Unto Apollo's Oracle he goes,
In hope to find relief for many woes;
He craves long lookt-for rest, or else to die,
To whom the Oracle began thus reply.
The Oracle. He loves thine that loves not thee,
His love to thine shall fatal be.
Upon suspect she shall be slain,
Unless thou do return again.

THese harsh according rimes to mickle pain,
Did but renew Leanders woes again:
Yet as he might, with Fortunes sweet consent,
He gins return all dangers to prevent.
Within short time at Sestos he ariueth,
On Loves light wings, desire Leander drives,
Desire that longs to view a blessed end,
Of Love and Fortune that so long contend.
This back retired Pilgrim lived secure,
And in unknown disguise, he did endure,
Full two months space until the time drew nie,
To free fair Hero, or enforce her die:
The date outworne of the prefixed day,
When combatants their valor should display.
(All things prepared) as blazing fame reported,
It Were wonder to behold how men resorted.
Knights neighboring by, and Ladies all divine,
Darting days splendor from their Sunne-like eyne:
Spectatum veniunt, veniunt spectantur vt ipsae,
But wanting fair, they come to gaze on beauty,
Beauty fair Heavens beauty, worlds wonder,
Hero whose beauty keeps all beauty under.
This fair faced beauty, from a foul faced cell,
A loath-some dungeon like to nights dark hell,
At the fell Dukes command in open view,
Was sent for, on whose never spotted hew,
Earths mortal souls do feed and gaze upon her,
So long they gaze, that they do surfeit on her.
For when this Earthes admired immortal Sun,
To peep from under sable hold begun.
Like as the pearcing eye of cloudie Heaven,
Whose sight the black thick clouds have quite beriuen.
But by the huffing winds being ouerblowen,
And all their black expeld and overthrown.
The day does gin, be iocond secure playing,
The fair of Heaven, his beauty so displaying:
So when the fairest Hero did begin,
(Whilome yclad in darkness black tan'^ skin.
To pass the noisome portall of the prison,
Like to the gorgeous Phoebus newly risen,
She does illuminate the morning day,
Clad in a sable Mantle of black Say.
Which Hero's eyes transformed to fair white,
Making the lowring-morne dark, pure light.
As many mortal eyes beheld her eyes,
As there are fiery Tapors in the skies:
As many eyes gazed on fair Hero's beauty,
As there be eyes that offer Heaven duty:
As many seruitors attended on her,
As Venus, servants had to wait upon her.
Though by the stern Duke she was dishonored,
Yet of the people she was honored:
Mong'st whom exiled Leander all unseen,
And all unknown attended on his Queen.
When to the neere-adioyning pallaice gate,
The place appointed for the Princely combat,
They did approach; there might all eyes behold,
The Duke in armor of pure beaten gold,
Mounted upon a Steed as white as snow,
The proud Duke Euristippus Hero's foe.
Hero being seated in rich Majesty,
A servile hand-mayd to Captivity.
From whence she might behold that gentle Knight,
That for her sake durst hazard life in fight.
For this was all the comfort Hero had,
So many eyes shed tears to see her sad.
Her hand-maide hope, persuaded her some one,
Undaunted Knight would be her Champion.
Yet since her Lord Leander was not nie,
She was resolved either to live or die;
But her Leander careful of his love,
Intending loves firm constancy to prove:
(If to his lot the honor did befall,)
Withdrew himself into the Pallaice hall,
Where he was armed to his souls content,
And privily conducted to a tent,
From whence he issued forth at trumpets sound,
Who at the first encounter, on the ground,
Forced the mazed Duke sore panting lie,
Drowned in the river of sad extacie.
At length reviving, he does mount again,
Whom young Leander in short time had slain.
The Duke quite dead, this all unknown young Knight,
Was forthwith made the heir of Sestos right.
The Princess Hero set at liberty,
Kept by the late dead Duke in misery:
Whose constancy Leander began to prove,
And now anew begins to court his love.
To walk on ground where danger is unseen,
Does make men doubt, where they have never been.
As blind men fear what footing they shall find:
So does the wise mistrust the strangers mind.
I strange to you, and you unknown to me,
Yet may not love twixt us two grafted be?
What I have done, for Hero's love was done,
Say then you love, and end as I begun.
I hazard life, to free thy beauties fair,
From Tyrants force and hellish soul despair:
Then sacred Fair balance my good desert,
Enrich my soul with thy affecting heart.
Hero replied: (to rue on all false tears,
And forged tales, wherein craft often appears,
To trust each fained face, and forcing charm,
Betrays the simple soul that thinks no harm.)
(Not every tear does argue inward pain,
Not every sigh warrants, men do not feign,
Not every smoke does prove a present fire,
Not all that glisters, goulden souls desire,
Not every word is drawn out of the deep,
For often men smile, when they do seem to weep:
Often malice makes the mind to power forth brine,
And envy leakes the conduits of the eyne.
Craft often does cause men make a seeming show,
Of heavy woes where grief did never grow.
Then blame not those that wisely can beware,
To shun dissimulations dreadful snare.
Blame not the stopped ears against Sirens song,
Blame not the mind not moved with falsehood tongue.)
But rest content and satisfied with this,
Whilst true Leander lives, true Hero's his.
And thy Leander lives sweet soul said he,
Praising thy all admired chastity.
Though thus disguised, I am that banished Knight,
That for affecting thee was put to flight.
Hero, I am Leander thy true phere,
As true to thee, as life to me is dear.
When Hero all amazed began revive,
And she that then seemed dead, was now alive:
With kind imbracements kissing at each strain,
She welcoms him, and kisses him again.
By thee, my joys have shaken of despair,
All storms be past, and weather waxes fair,
By thy return Hero receaues more Joy,
Then Paris did when Hellen was in Troy.
By thee my heavy doubts and thoughts are fled,
And now my wits with pleasant thoughts are fed.
Feed sacred Saint on Nectar all divine,
While these my eyes (quoth he) gaze on thy eyne.
And ever after may these eyes beware,
That they on strangers beauty never stare:
(My wits I charm henceforth they take such heed,
They frame no toys, my fancies new to feed.
Deaf be my ears to hear another voice,
To force me smile, or make my soul rejoice,
Lame be my feet when they presume to move,
To force Leander seek another love.)
And when thy fair (sweet fair) I gin disgrace,
Heaven to my soul afford no resting place.
What he to her, she vowed the like to him,
(All sorrows fled) their joys anew begin.
Full many years those lovers lived in fame,
That all the world did much admire the same.
Their lives spent date, and unresisted death,
At hand to set a period to their breath,
They were transformed by all divine decrees,
Into the form, and shape of two Pine trees.
Whose Natures such, the Faemale pine will die,
Unless the Male be ever planted by:
A map for all succeeding times to come,
To view true-loue, which in their loves begun.
FINIS.
Qualis vita, finis ita.

