THE POOR MAN'S APPEAL.

In a Sermon preached at Leicester Assizes before the Judges.

By T. P.

PRO. 22.22.23. Rob not the Poor, because he is poor; neither oppress the
afflicted in the gate: For the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the
soul of those that spoil him.

AT LONDON, Printed by Edw: Griffin, for Arthur Johnson, and are to be sold at
his shop near the great North door of St. Paul's. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir HENRY HOBART, Knight and Baronet, Lord chief
Justice of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, and Chauncellor to the most
excellent Prince CHARLES, Prince of WALES, Grace and Peace.
MY LORD,
THat reverend Regard your Honor gave this Sermon, when it was delivered you,
as a message from the Highest, was but a just Regard* But for your vouchsafing
to peruse, and give the frame thereof approbation, both it and I have therein
largely tasted of your favorable Regard. Both your Regards it then had, and I
now in regard of both, conceived an hope that the public inscribing it thus to
your Lordships name, would pass, at least for a pardonable transgression, and
might (peradventure) in the nobleness of your interpretation be accepted, (as
I intend it) for an act of my dutiful regard to your Honor. Whereof how can I
forbear presumption, remembering who has said; Ye are Gods, and are all
children of the most High. Your Lordship then cannot vnresemble your heavenly
Father, who gently takes the meanest oblations of the poorest and lowest, being
himself rich over all, and Higher then the highest. He, the Judge of all; The
Lord Chief Justice of Heaven and Earth, bless and direct you so, as we may
long enjoy, from him, thorough you the beams and influence of his Justice in
earth, and you, after this life justly finished, the bright beams of his
Glory, and that blessed Regard, and reward of his everlasting Mercy in the
highest Heaven; So prays.

Your Lordships true honourer, T. P.

THE POOR MAN'S APPEAL.
ECCLESIASTES 5.8. If in a Country thou see the oppression of the poor, and
the defrauding of Justice and Judgment; Be not astonished at the matter; For he
that is higher then the highest regards, and there be higher then they.


I Shall have some use of the whole verse, but these words, (For he that is
higher then the highest, regards.) I choose forth for the Text, as being axis
and Cardo, the hindge upon which all turns; For they are a reason of the
former, the substance of the latter. Their parts are visible; two persons, and
an action. First, the persons, Altus desuper altum, etc. or Altus superior
Alto, (says Tremelius.) Two persons then, stands betwixt them here like an
Istmus, or Hiatus rather, large in extent, as the space betwixt earth and
heaven. For thou could have none (says Christ to Pilate) not the lowest
degree, except it were given thee desuper, from above. So that the one depends
of the other; the one absolute, and in recto: Altus the high one by way of
excellence; the other in obliquo, and with relation to a Superior: Alto an
high one too, but not like Altus, no, the case is altered; Alius is primus and
summiu, the first, the chiefest high one, comes therefore before Superior, as
having none, but Alto is set after, and would soon come all to nothing, if not
governed by Superior here: So much, and so justly is Altus superior Alto. In
sum, the latter of these titles belongs to men; that is plain by the
addition here, or reddition rather; For it is the same again another way. And
there be higher then they: then who? then those men spoken of before. But for
the first title here it does, it can belong to none but God. He only is the
high one, or that high one: It is a peculiar of his, and his prerogative only.
So David, Thou whose name is Jehovah, thou alone art most high over all. Psalm.
83. vlt. And that Solomon here intends this only high God, is apparent too, in
the last strain of the verse; where he names him Alti, in the plural, which
tho some interpret of God, and his Angels, yet Iunius better of God alone,
excusing the difference of number, partly by the sacred mystery of three
persons in the Godhead, and partly by an Hebraisme, expressing by the positive
plural a singular superlatiue, so raising the title from Altus to Altissimus,
or as the english here, higher then the highest. So high indeed, that all words
forsake us in the utterance; But of that when we try this Title. We know now
the persons; The action remains, and is ascribed to Altissimus. God regards.

Observe. How means he? what does he regard? It is left here indefinite,
Regards, and no more, but may be diversely understood, first by making this
indefinite and universal too, the same with Hesiods (...), sees all things,
and David's, Quo fugiam? Whither shall I go from thy presence? And so his
regard is the same with providence: or divide this Sea into two arms of mercy
and justice, acts of his special providence over all men and all their
actions; or apply it lastly to this particular in the text, and we shall find
that God in both these hands of mercy and justice takes, and with both these
eyes beholds oppression. Oppression? why? is that the matter here? yes. If thou
see oppression, be not astonished; for he that is, etc. It is true, he
mentions here rapinam too, stealth or defrauding of justice, but upon the
point it comes all to one: for be it violence, or be it cunning, by fraud or
by force, it forces not; it is oppression: that is the Ocean which deuoures,
and the common sink that swallows both these floods of wickedness, both
these filthy channels of corruption: But oppression is an action, and actio est
vis illata; so is oppression right, and does infer a passion; we must have a
patient then, and we must find out the agent: for if oppression be observed,
if God regard it, he can not but regard them. These in reason are like
Plaintiff and defendant in law, which is grounded on reason.

These would be brought in then before we can proceed with our action: The Law
will allow the Plaintiff first; call him we need not; If thou see the
oppression of the Poor. He Is adest, there he is; the Poor, Alas poor man,
poor and oppressed too, that's an heavy case: who is there to speak for him? not
any man, no; for no man regards him: the poor is despised of his own
neighbor: here he seems to stand poor silly soul, with a face covered over
with tears, his very heart broken his tongue cleaues to his roof; only his
hands and hi^ eyes are lift up toward heaven: I, there is his refuge, there is
one that understands the language of his sighs, and bends an ear to the voice
of his weeping, and though the high ones of the world turn away their eyes,
yet he that is higher then the highest regards: But where is the agent and
defendant? we shall need a quest of inquiry for him: If thou see, etc. Non
est inuentus: what, does he sly for it? so much the worse: But it is not
possible he should be far; the very sin will find him out without a
Crier, it is a crying sin: Sure he is hidden here, this greedy eating Adam
among the leaves, or like Saul among the stuff of the Text. Let us turn it
over again: If thou see the oppression of the Poor, soft, the Poor
oppressed; who can this be? and defrauding of justice and judgment, in whose
power is it to do that he that is higher then the highest. There is all the
persons this Text affords.

It is betwixt these two then; either the high one of heaven, or the high one
of earth has done this. It cannot be the first, alas no; God oppress the
Poor? he is their helper and defender, it is he that regards him: or does God
use to defraud in judgment or justice? Oh no, Shall not the Judge of all the
world do according to right? yes, With righteousness shall he judge the
earth, and the people with equity.

It is the other high one then, it can be none but he: he is the Oppressor,
whether it be an height of wealth, this, and so liker to fall upon the poor e
diametro, or an height of authority, and so apter to defraud in judgment and
justice; and whether this oppression be by violence or secret cosenage it
skils not; they are both like to abide it; for God can abide neither of them
both: but abhorres both the blood-thirsty and the deceitful man. Ps 5.6. Yet
since the principal intended here by Solomon, is the high one that abuses his
height of place and power to the oppressing of the poor: such as these, if
thou see them do so and so, and go clear away with it, yet be not
astonished, let not this stagger thee; for he that is higher then the highest
regards.

Out of this text thus opened, arise these doctrinall conclusions.



Secondly, that these are sometimes oppressors.

Thirdly, that God is still the highest.

regards, does mark and observe all things.

Secondly, observes men and their actions with a double Respice, a twofold
obseruat, of mercy to the good, justice to the bad.

Lastly, he both ways regards oppression, the patient in mercy, because
pauperem first, and then pauperem pressum, the poor oppressed: The agent in
justice, because altum first, and then altum oppressorem, the high Oppressor.
Of these in order, and order requires we begin with the latter person first,
and from it the first observation is the (...) that there be such, or there are
higher powers. Height of wealth I pass over, and insist on dignity.

Height is by ascending; assents are by stairs and degrees, such asconding is
motion properly, all motion from some principle and ever to some end: The
general end of motion is quies, peace and rest, that is the end of this
motion, wherein men ascending are heighthened by degrees; Peace opposed both to
war and to disorder. This height is in differently called Magistracy:
Magistracy I mean subordinate is either Ecclesiastique or secular: secular is
military or civil, polemick or politic. The first of these (we bless God)
we have had little practice of, so little, we can scarce imagine there is
such a thing: but we may have: It is not good to neglect the knowledge of it,
first; for these men, soldiers, and warriors despised in this dull and fusty
time of peace, if occasion served, would be as highly esteemed, as now basely,
who are of so high and brave an order, that God himself is said to be the
sovereign of their order: The Lord is a man of war (says David) the Lord of
Hoasts is his name; he teaches my hands to war and my fingers to fight: and
as the motion from God, so the ascent is by degrees, ranks they have, and
orders, Officers, sergeants, Lieftenants, Captains, Coronels, Generals,
Admirals: of the height whereof judge, but by that of David to Ioab and his
brethren: you are too mighty for me, ye sons of Zeruiah, and Elisha^s offer
to the Shunamite; would thou be spoken for to the King or to the Captain of
the host, as (happily) the second person in the Kingdom. Now the end of arms
is peace, the Civil Magistrate also (I mean subordinate, for of regal power
the supreme on earth I speak not now) is in high place; such are the nerves
and glory of a Kingdom, therefore Chronicled in the days of David and
Solomon, and their offices registered; such and such were Chancellors and
Recorders, such over the tribute, such Judges and Rulers. And in this rank we
see and know a diversity of order, and degrees of dignity, and all from God, a
Deo ordinate, ordered and ordained by him; And as Solomon calls marriage, Pro.
2. the Covenant of God, propter eximiam sanctitatem; so David the Session of
Judges and Magistrates, coetum Dei, as approved of him and honored with his
presence, in a special manner, Ps. 82. He sits, in medio little, 2. Chron. 19.
But as the wild and foolish Anabaptist would destroy all Magistracy from the
liberty of the Gospel; so there want not some such froward disputers (as the
Apostle speaks of) men of perverse minds, that reason from the old Testament,
that sin first brought in servitude, or else God had made no subjection: It
is true indeed that the sin of Cham occasioned his slavery, A servant of
servants shall thou be, Genesis 9 But yet in purest nature, even in the state of
innocence there was a superiority, not only in man over the creatures, but
conjugal in the husband over the wife, in which estate had children been
borne, there would even in the law of nature have sprung up, patria potestas, a
fatherly power, which in time must needs have risen to regia, or the same that
regia is. And of this motion to and promotion, which comes from the Lord, comes
also the right end set down by saint Paul, That we under them may lead a quiet
and a peaceable life, in, etc. Where peace may be opposed to tumult, strife,
and private revenge. For first, if we had not these lawful assemblies, but
that Demetrius and his fellow hammer heads might rush into the halls and seats
of judgment, what would they do? why shout they would and tear the air with
noyses, and so part again before they knew why they were come together: and
secondly, where would contention stop her course, did not the laws confine us,
and (as God gives a law to the Sea) bound us in, with a decree of, Hitherto
shall thou come and no further? And last of all would the Rorers of the Age,
and Brethren of the Sword be restrained, either by Gods prohibition (the God
of peace) or the Kings Proclamation (a King of peace) were it not for Iudex and
vindex, the Judge and the auenger of blood, who is appointed betwixt plea and
plea, betwixt blood and blood, Deutr. 17. that these unruly and bloody people
may hear, and fear, and do no more presumptuously. I named Ecclesiastique,
and will but name it, which together with the civil meet and are united under
regal and sovereign majesty; as all the coniugations of sinews in the
natural body run up to the head: which is enough to join and combine those
two states and powers with the heavenly masticke of true charity. For as the
veil of the temple rending presaged the ruin of the whole; so if these two
fly off and fall to malign, and seek to consume each other, it is no good
Omen to the whole frame: It shall become me only to remember, that Moses and
Aaron were brethren, and to sing a Requiem with David's Ecce, Behold, how good
it is for brethren to dwell together in unity.

2. Use.
There is use to be made of this too for subjects, which is obedience* The glory
of rule to Princes and magistrates (says he in Tacitus) the glory of
obedience God has given to the subject; which must be yielded both to the good
and ill, either active or passive, to the good as causes, to the wicked rulers
as occasions of our benefit; the good are nurses, the ill in stead of tempters,
which must be endured as we endure drought and dearth, and other things from
heaven; And both the rule and the reason is from God. Let every soul be
subject, etc. for there is no power but of God, and powers that be are by him
ordered.

Nehemiah (in another case) The Princes and Rulers have been chief in this
trespass. Nehem. 9.2. They be fat kine of Bashan fatted in the mountains,
that oppress the poor and orush the needy, Amos 4.1. High place being like
high knowledge. This made Angels and man scorn Gods direction that makes us
despise his dominion; then we have no Lord we know him not, What Lord shall
control us, say they in the Psalm, and they are oppressors that so say: Then
break his bonds and cast his yoke from us: we are Lawmakers then our selves,
and our will shall be a Law, or we can do mischief and the Law shall defend
it. Ex plebiscitis, and Senatus consultis, scelera exercentur. They becoming
actors that should be reformers; it is the misery of the weakest and lowest
things to be oppressed by the higher: The earth as lowest of all, is therefore
blasted from heaven, burnt with fire, colickt and pincht with wind, ouerflow'd
and wasted with water, her bosom and her belly plowed and ripped up by her own
Children, who are but even althought higher than she, For dust they are, and
to dust they return; If the earthen Pitcher will venture the stream along
with the brasse-pot, it is sure to be knocked; The shrub that grows under the
Oak is beaten bare with dropping on; what poor beasts soever chance to come
near the lion, though but in visitation, the Fox can spy Vestigia nulla
retrorsum; It is so with oppressors, they are never high enough, till others be
under their feet, and by a cousening argument, then pride themselves as
highest, when they have made others lowest.

Let Rhehoboam be an example. 1. Kin. 12.11. Before he was well warm in the
Kingdom, he begins to ruffle, and shake up the subject: They come with
pitifully complaining of the yoke made grievous by his Father, and would have
him mend it; Come, come, (says he) my Father? my Father was not so wise as he
might have been. He did indeed but piddle, and trifle with you, I tell you my
little finger shall be heavier than my Fathers loins: He pressed you indeed,
but I will add to it: add what? What is more then pressing? Why oppressing*
that is pressing with a vengeance: He chastised you with whips, but I will
sting you with Scorpions: There Is a Gallant; there is a firker indeed: Take heed
you come not in his fingring. And do we want experience of the like? And that
we may preserve the modesty of the Text, contenting our selves with Country
and home examples, for so it is. If in a Country thou see the oppression of
the poor, etc. Take one of these things that Fortune lifts up, when she is
pleased to jest, and to make sport in the world; a young heir of the Country,
suppose young Nymrod, of the race of the Giants, comes to an estare of many
thousands, and momento turbinis exit. Marcus Dama is incontinently knighted (as
that is a thing of naught) Sir Rhehoboam Nymrod; what will he do now? why?
bluster and break in upon the poor tenants, down they go before this golden
Call, and worship him all over; Now add to this measure of Altitude, a Cubite
of Iusticeship, and on that a Quorum; quantum vertice in aur as, tantum radice
in Tartara, said Virgill of a Tree; and it is true of such blocks as he; The
higher in dignity, the deeper in crueltic. And as Philoctes Coous is said
(being madd) to have made him shoes of Lead, for fear the Wind should blow
him away; so he imagines his honor would evaporate unseen, if his power were
unfelt, he will tread upon the poor: and as if he had leaden feet indeed, or
feet like that Image in Daniel, half clay, half iron, nay, as if he had
millstones in's feet, so he will grind the faces of the poor, and tread
them as David trod his enemies, Psalm. 18.
that is, flat, as mire in the streets. Entering like a tempest, or a
whirlewind, that leaves naught behind it, nothing stands that is mankind
about him; his many are oues and Boues, etc.

Use.
But to dispatch him out of the way, we shall hear more of him, and his
fellows, in Gods particular regard: till then, all the use we can make of him
is to show the danger of high place and authority; attendo celfitudinem, and
e vicino periculum reformide, (says Bernard to his Eugenius) the danger of
falling into grievous sins, and this among, and above the rest; For this is
Salomons verdict, at least, such are returned as principal here, Alis
oppressores. The high ones are oppressors.

3. Doctrine.
The third conclusion from the chief person here is, the trial of a Title,
which is given God; Altissimus, the Highest. The school makes three degrees of
perceiving God, both in nature, and scripture. First, Negatienis, remotionis;
He is not the Sun, Moon not finite, mutable: Secondly, Perfectionis,
affirmationis, when what is most excellent in things create, we apply to God
by way of Analogy and resemblance: So we call him just, merciful, high,
glorious: Thirdly, of excellence, or super-heminence, as this here implies. A
title therefore suitable to his nature, for to seek him among the highest
things, we know is ridiculous; to pin or determine him there impious; vltra,
vltra quaerendus, still above and beyond all we must enquire for him, (says
Bernard.) And as suitable, so there is none of his titles more ancient; so
soon (I think) as we find mention of any height amongst men, regal, or
sacerdotall, as hoth are referred to him, so with this title annexed, Genesis 14
Melchizedek king of Salem, and priest of the most high God. It is held
throughout the old Testament, and not left of in the new. So Luke 1. John is
called the Prophet of the highest: and Luke 6.35. Do good, etc. and so be
Children of the highest: So that as David speaks of his greatness: God is
great, and there is no end of his greatness; So he is high too, and no end of
his highness. We have those on earth that are to day high, to morrow low as
the grave, and therefore though men have, and do wear this title of most
high, yet God wears it with a difference (says the Prophet.) But thou O Lord
art most high for evermore. Psalm. 92.8. And as it belongs to him for ever, so
to every person in Trinity, to the Father first, acknowledged both by the
powers of heaven and hell: In Luke 1.32. A celestial Angel testifies of
Christ, He shall be called son of the highest: and in Luke 8.28. the
Confession of a spirit infernal: Jesus thousonne of the most high God. So the
son himself is styled, (the same S. Luke still 1.78.) Oriens ex alto, the
day spring from on high. And in Ephesians. 1.21. He is said to sit at his Fathers
right hand, far above all principalities and powers, having put all things
under his feet, and given him to be head over all things: So the holy Ghost is
not only called virtus ex alto, power from on high, Luke 24.49. but of him
said; The power of the most high shall ouer-shadow thee. Luke 1.35. In so much
that God himself seems to receive delight and complacencie in this title; for
whether men praise him on earth, it must be with an Hosanna in the highest, or
Angels and Hosts from heaven, it must he with a Gloria Deo in excelsis, Glory
to God in the highest. Now this title is applied to God, either in respect of
his essence, or his attributes and divine vertuer. First in essence and nature
he is Altissimus, among the causes efficient, exemplarie, final, he in all
these has the pre-eminence, as primum, principium, and vltimus finis. In
purity of nature, water above earth, air above water, then fire, then light,
and he Pater luminum, the Father of lights. Beasts above plants, men above
beasts, above men, Angels and spirits, and he Pater spirituum, the Father of
spirits. In sublimitie of nature, there being in him, the perfection of all his
creatures, and that in a most eminent, and unspeakable degree. So that none is
Highest but he only; nay, none like the Highest; He that said, he would be,
fell the lowest; I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning. As thus in
essence, so last of all in Divine virtue. Now there is incident to God none of
thosevertues, which suppose imperfection, as Faith, Hope, etc. But such as
these; mercy, bounty, power, justice, wisdom, holiness: and in all these is
GOD superlatiue, nay, infinitely above all degrees of comparison: we may choose
to show it in these four for all the rest, mercy, wisdom, justice, power.

Psalm. 144. For his power made nothing, but what his mercy moved him to; of an
unknown height it is then, as appears by Psalm. 103.11. As high as heaven is
over the earth; for it is stablished in the heavens. Psalm. 88. and the earth is
full of his mercy. Psalm. 32. In both places he is Pater misericordiarum, a
father of mercies. 2. Cor. 1. according whereto the Church prays; O God whose
nature and property is to have mercy, etc. For if we inquire a reason of his
mercy at large to all his creatures; to men as his image, to good men as his
sons; what can be returned but o altitudo! O the height of the exceeding
riches of his mercy!

o altitudo! Romans 11. Man's knowledge is far above the beasts, in quibus non
est intellectus. But we come to no height, no perfection, in enigmate, in part
and but darkely, like the Fox licking the Vial, when he could not come at the
liquor it self: And if yet even from men, we see so many wise laws of
Princes, and Books of Counselors and Judges, in which there is extant a
strange light of humane. reason, what shall we think of the Highest, in whom
is the highest law, out of which as out of a fountain these are drawn, and
thither as waters to the Sea returned. For there is one Lawgiver, and one
Judge, Iam. 1. By whose only wisdom it is that Kings do reign, and Princes
decree Justice. Pro. 8. What ever the Creature has, is a deriuatiue from that
Primitue, as Art is conueighed (says Aquinas) from the mind of the Artizan
into his workmanship. So that this whole University of Gods work is (as it
were) a certain common place of wisdom: But that poor deal whereof men are
capable, is received in long time, and but by drops; by many acts we understand
one thing, he in one act all; distinctly: they are naked and bare in his
sight, with their substances, forms, differences; we read of wise men from
the East, and of the high wisdom of Solomon, excelling all the East, but nor
he, nor those three attained to the first three; not to Alti here, in the end
of this verse. Down then with all humane presumption, and ascribe unto the
Lord (as the glory) so the wise dome due unto his name, for as his name is
here, so is his wisdom, higher than the highest. There is no Judge above God,
nor none that has understanding like the highest. 2. Es. 7.19.

Altissimus. His Justice first, so high that he is said to be Judge alone; and
this height of Justice is best discerned by the arms, or top branches;
Proemium and poena, Reward and punishment: whosoever shall but regard those
four conditions of Hell torments, for variety the most, for their greatness
insufferable, for purity unmixed with the least allay of comfort, or hope of
mitigation, for their continuance everlasting, will easily discover in them
Gods Justice to be highest. And contrary for reward it excels all, a good
measure, pressed down, yet running over: Great is your reward in Heaven.
Earthly Monarchs think they go far, when they speak like Herod, even to the
half of my Kingdom: And what a poor thing is that? Not an inch in the mapp,
and in the form of the Heavens nothing. The goodly houses they bestow, are but
as Childrens, Kings halls, made of shells and dust, and what pleasures the
Courts of Princes can afford us, Heb. 13.
let Moses refusal tell us; pleasures of sin, common to us with beasts, and
but for a season, for a moment. But whom God exalts and aduances, he rewards
with his own kingdom, a kingdom of glory; his own city, a city of pure
gold, in that mansion to remain with him, at the same Table, and yet higher,
to sit with him upon the same throne. Apoc. 3. This is more then ever was:
Omnis potestas impatiens consortis. And Pharaoh to Joseph his prime favorite,
Lucan.
only in the throne I will be above thee. What might be added of the high
nature of those joys, which the Angels enjoying do adore; and of their
eternity? At his right hand are pleasures for evermore. To give us heaven (if
we could do his Law) were Justice high enough, though but for one instant of
time, but when it is added, For evermore, it is Iustitia in excessu, and in
excelso too. It Is Justice at the Highest.

And finally, no less admirable is the Power of God, which is so high in him
(says Beza) it makes him ever Agent, Bellarmine would prove the Popes
supremacy, by his twelve great names given him by his Parasites, more easy
were it from Scripture, recounting the glorious names of God, as also from his
miracles to draw up this Power to a supreme head. But it is a beaten way, and
a subject so full, that who ever handles it, cannot choose but handle it well.
I will only instance in that height of Power, which is expressed, and proved by
place. Power terrestrial is declared by ascending to thrones, and if
exaltation be measured so, then the Lord alone (as Esaias says) shall be
exalted; For he dwells, (says Esdras) above the Air, super altitudinem
aeris. 2. Es. 6. Nay, super altitudinem coelorum, a second super, above the
height of the heavens. 2. Es. 4. That is a maine height. For who can find out
the height of Heaven? (says Syracides) the pride of the height, as he terms
it, Ecclus 43. I but there is another super yet, above the heavens, and the
heavens of heavens. What? above all? I far (says the Apostle) gone up on
high far above all heavens, Ephesians. 4.10. The Queen of Sheba viewing the high
throne of Solomon, of which the Text says, There was none like it in any
kingdom. 1. Reg. 10.20. and observing all his royalty: Non habebat vltra
spiritum; she was astonished. But an higher than Solomon is here; For Solomon
in all his royalty was not clothed like the Lillit of the field, much less
like the Lord of Heaven, who dwells in light inaccessible, and cloths himself
with light as with a garment. As Solomon had no such roabe, so no throne like
Gods: For he prepares his throne in Heaven, (says the Psalm) Solium excelsum,
a throne high, and lift up, Esaias 6. a glorious high throne says Jeremy,
17.12. Before which throne all thrones are cast down (says Daniel) for it is
a fire flaming aloft, and towering up higher than the highest. Now as the
throne, so is the Power of God, that the emblem of this. And therefore King
David will not repent his kneeling to God. Psalm. 95. For (as he adds) the Lord
is a great God, and a great King above all Gods: Nor will Solomon for all his
own highness, rob God of his honor, but stand to the title, which he has
given him here: It is no more than right. He is a King, even Rex regum, a king
over all kings, and higher than the highest: Most high above all the earth, and
much exalted above all Gods. Psalm. 97.9.

But of what use is this Title for us? Uses.
of manifold use: We may draw all to Timor and Amor, Fear and Love. First,
Fear, and that first in gesture, when we present our selves before him. It is
exacted by himself. We may believe him when he swears it: I have sworn by my
self (says the Lord) that every knee shall bow to me. Repeated in Romans 14.11.
Esaias 45.23. And he gives us such examples as we cannot refuse. Christ Jesus
himself, who best knew this height, and the infinite distance betwixt the
Creator and the creature as he was most humbled in soul, so he professed it, in
lifting up his eyes to Heaven, in prayer, in kneeling, falling on his face. The
glorious Angels adore with covering their faces, and falling down before him.
The Church begins her Lyturgie with that inuitement; O come, let us worship,
and fall down, and kneel before the Lord And yet I know not how it comes to
pass, we seem (many of us) ashamed of doing this reverence to God. Hic homo
erubescit timere Caesarem (said Macaenas:) So rude is our behavior, and such a
sacrifice of fools we offer him, as if we neither thought upon our own
condition, which is but do and ashes, with one blast dispersed past gathering
up again; nor remembered him to be our God, for then we would not stand like
Elephants, or stony Pillars in his Temple; but prostrate our selves, and
think no abasement too much, not the lowest, being done to him that is the
Highest. So in our tongues (secondly) forbearing that sauciness, and
familiarity some use in Prayer; wherein as the heart must be Faith, so the
lungs would be Fear, least it catch an heat. So cool a form is that of holy
Church: Grant us O Lord those things which for our unworthiness, we dare not
presume to ask. Remember (says Solomon) God is in Heaven, and thou on the
earth; Let thy words be wary, and few. The same fear should possess us when
we speak of, or swear by his name, not vainly, falsely; For holy and
reverend is his name.

2. Use.
Amor, Love: And this is native and radical in the very temper of oursoules,
and as a spark would break to flame, but that the world and the Devil choke
and keep it down, and this frail corruptible mass weighs down the
immortal spirit: for these two are contrary one to another: The body of the
earth, carthie, but the soul from heaven, heavenly, tho forced like the
Sunbeames to converse with filth and do, yet haeret originisuae; cleaues
still in affection to God, and has restless motions of desire to return to
him that made it, but clogd with sin and feebled in all her powers, she must
beg and wait now a superinduction of graces, that so being stablished in
faith and rooted in charity, and borne up by the assistance of Gods spirit, as
by the wings of a Dove she may fly unto her rest.

This is exemplarie in holy David, whose heart once touched with these divine
graces, he lifts up the^ his eyes and hands, and heart, and voice. O Lord, whom
have I in heaven but thee? or whom do I desire in comparison of thee? As the
Heart after the rivers, as the thirsty dry ground after shewres, so longs,
pants, gasps my soul after the living God. So will the heart of every man that
is like him, a man after Gods own heart, make him his chief trust, and mark
of highest regard; for he that loves any thing better then me, is not worthy
of me (says Christ) he is highest, and will have the highest place in our
affection, and has therefore made it his first and great commandment. Love
the Lord thy God with all thy mind and might, and love him above all things:
They were stony hearted Jews that cried, we will not have him rule over us,
not rule, then nothing: if he may not be the head stone, he will not lie in
any part of the building: and if we venture to build without him, woe be to our
foundation. Let valabour then to lift up our heart, together with our hands
unto God in the heavens: Let us call daily for his grace, and cry unto him to
draw us after him, and he has promised to hear from his holy place, and send
down his hand from above, to mount us upon those blessed stayres of
justification, sanctification, glorification; and then we are where we would
be, with him that is higher then the highest.

The action here referred to God is regarding, 2. Part.
an action suitable to the title. High places and noble actions should go
together: God is not then such a God as Eliah makes Baal, perhaps he sleeps,
no he regards. First generally all things: For in him they live, move, are:
and as the eyes of all things look up toward him, so his down on all, in
heaven, earth, under the earth: Dan. 4. from one end of heaven to another;
whose branches reach out shade and sustenance to all those creatures reckoned
up in Ps. 104. For as the soul minds all the bodies actions, and the Sun
penetrates all corners, so this true soul of the world and this Sun of
righteousness, but with a remarkable difference (says Saint James) he does it
without varrying or shadow of turning unmoved, ever the same, he sits in midst
of heaven; and yet they be the eyes of the Lord that run too and fro through
the whole earth, Zach. 4.10. reigning above, and yet containing all below,
compassing all about and yet piercing all within: and what is yet more
marvelous, this general regard and discerning of Gods, to extend even to all
things: all the stars, all the sons of men, all the Cattle on 10000. hills, all
those number les shoales of fishes in the seas, all fowls of the air, even to
seueralls and minuities: the little sparrowes, not one of them is forgotten,
all the miseries of all his servants, all their tears in his bottle, in Man
alone to regard all the members of his body, gressus (says David) the steps of
his feet, capillos (says our Savior) hayres on his head, all the sins of
his soul, and all in order, all our works, not a word in our tongue, nay, in
our heart, (from whence imaginations rise as fast as sparks from a furnace) not
a thought, but our heavenly father, who sees in secret, sees it though nere so
secret; nay long before either birth or conception: and as he calls, so he
knows too and regards the things that are not as if they were. O Lord our
governor, how excellent is thy name, for it is higher than the highest, and
how excellent is thy knowledge in all the world, for there is nothing, was, nor
can, nor shall be nothing but thou O Lord know it altogether.

2. Now this general runs into two special respices or obseruats, the one
of mercy over the good, and the other of justice over the wicked: His eyes
behold, Ps. 11. and his eyelids try the children of men* but with a different
regard: he watches over all, but over some for preservation, over others for
destruction: Ier. 31 and in Ier. 44. he calls it a watching for good, and a
watching for ill: with the first he daily watched over his own Israel, in a
cloud and fiery pillar, but through them both it is said he looked on the
host of Egypt and troubled it, Exodus, 14.24. It Is true he delights most in the
first of these watchings, and then his highness i^ best pleased, when ioind
with a merciful regard, when he shows us the beauty of his holiness, and
causes the light of his countenance to arise: But if our sins provoke him to
anger, he will suffer his displeasure to arise, and tho we be his own people,
tender as the apple of his eye, and his chief treasure above all nations; yet
then, as he threatens Israel, Leuit. 26 9. he will set his face against us,
then (as Daniel has it) he will watch upon the evil and bring it upon us. So
that it is a true title Seneca gives him, Deus bonorum, malorumque obseruator
and custos. Our good and our evil, He that is higher then the highest
regards.

Oppression; the patient, first in mercy, and first of all as pauperem, then
(most of all) as pauperem pressum, the poor oppressed: God regards the Poor:
prefixed, makes this action glorious: what he? whose excellence has no stint
upward, above the clouds, stars, heavens of heavens, still higher then the
highest, to look down de super, so low: a solio, ad solum, from his throne of
glory, in excelsis, to regard the cries of the poor, de profundis? yet so it
is, thou God see me (says poor Agar) Genesis 16. And the euer-blessed Virgin:
Thou have regarded the low or poor estate of thy handmaid: And this seems a
kind of state in God, and then his highness is in full Majesty, when he
shows his powerful regard over the meanest, and the most despised on earth,
such as men sell for shoes and count not worth looking after* yea God is
expressed in Scripture as if he labored for the advancement of the Poor, and
then most of all when they are most wretched: so in Psalm. 113. he is said to
lift at it, to raise the poor even out of dung, to set him with Princes, etc.
It is a great mercy to behold an humble God, who being highest, yet bows down
himself to regard the poor: but much more pauperem pressum, the poor
oppressed.

regard; as we see by visiting his Israel in Egypt, and by his own
confession: Now for the sighing of the needy and oppression of poor, I will up
(says the Lord) Psalm. 12.5. If once they come to the shadow of death, to be
fast bound in misery and iron, and then cry to the Lord in their trouble, he
delivers them out of their distress. One example, and it is a full one indeed.
David in a case of oppression he betakes himself (as his known and only
refuge) unto God, and calls him by this very name in the text, Altissimus, Ps.
56 2. Mine enemies (it is indeed my obseruers) daily oppress me and would
devour me. Be merciful unto me, O Lord thou most high: though they be high
ones and daily observe me watching over me for evil, do thou regard me for
good, for thou art higher then they, and thou beholdst iniquity and wrong, yea
thou regardest the poor but much more pauperem pressum, the poor oppressed.

altum first, and then as altum oppressorem: first as high God sees not as man
sees; man thinks high things best and brauest stupet in titulis and imaginibus:
But that which is altum high among men, is abomination to God. They that looked
into the book of nature, saw the lightening scorch the mountains most, and
Lucretius observed, that res abdita quedam (as he calls it) a certain hidden
thing there was which did still proculcare kick down the highest things, and
Iudibrio sibi habere, seemed to take pleasure in so doing. And in the book of
Gods scripture we see what desolation he threatens often, and often seems
delighted to bring upon the high ones of the world: so he seems to triumph over
the Amorite, whose height was as the Cedars; yet I destroid (says he) his
fruit from above, and his root from be low: so he does menace Edom, tho high
roosted and nested among the stars, yet there and thence will I fetch thee down
(says the Lord) Ie. 49.16. these do indeed escape all power on earth (perhaps)
but cannot free themselves from being the quarrie of him which is the highest.
The hearn and vulture outflying both falcon and Gyrfalcon, is by the Sacre
seizd on in an instant, which foul (as the name imports) is made by all a
symbol and hyeroglyphick of the Deity, of whom it is said, Wisd. 6. That he
will come horribly and speedily upon the wicked governors, and a sharp
judgment shall be to them in high places: for mercy will soon pardon the
meanest, but mighty men shall be mightily tormented. But all this is to be
understood of high ones that are wicked on whom as he looks in special
justice, so particularly on altum oppressorem, the high Oppressor.

per rapinam (here) by cauening: I but non sic inter vos, it shall not be so
amongst your God had another care in making man after his own image, and in
keeping him uses a guard of Angels, gards and regards him, regards (says the
Scripture) all his hones, and therefore who ever shede man's blood, this great
regarder will require it. I, his blood; but oppression is not murdering: it is
true, things may be flead alive with cunning handling, but as good take vit
(...) as victum, life as liueload; beside, there is more in this sin then is
yet discovered: for who is it that bleeds? Non cruer hic de stipito manat,
Polydorus ego sum; and does not Christ Jesus say the same, I am Jesus of
Nazareth whom you persecute, so whom you oppress to; it shall come all to a
reckoning: for inasmuch as you have done it to them, you have done it to me:
therefore he gives us caueats, Rob not the poor because he is poor, neither
oppress the afflicted in the gate: why? what will he do? The Lord will rise up an
advocate and plead their cause, in forma pauperis, and spoil the soul of
those that spoil him, Pr. 22.23. And as there an advocate, so in Malachy a
witness too, and a swift one comes in (belike) before he is called or looked for.
And it is no dallying in this case, for their Redeemer is mighty (sales Solomon)
Pr. 23.11 And if I commit this sin (says Job) he will terrify me and ( because
of altissimus here) because of his highness I cannot endure: So in Ier. 22. he
frights Iohoiakim that had lived by ^oring like a Lion, with the burial of an
ass, eue^ drawn and cast our, ye^, cast out into utter darkness, where for
eating the poor and not regarding his tears, he shall have both weeping and
gnashing of teeth: For over these terrible ones on earth that watch for
iniquity, Esa. 29. there is a terrible supervisor above, who (without
repentance) will deliver them to a terrible one below too, even the King of
terror who will ou^rore them; for it is his property, (and they do but learn of
him to go about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. And this the
Lord calls recompencing their own way, Destroying for destroying, Ezech. 22.
vlt. And (that which is worthy our regard and 1619.
now seaso^able) so sore an auenger is God of this sin, that for it he
threatens not the age^ts only, but the whole land. In Am. 8. see what work the
Lord swears he will make there. he will never forget it, he will make it a bitter
day; nay, the land shall tremble and rise up wholly as a flood, and be drowned
as in the flood of Egypt, which was a whole destruction (indeed) for the text
says (i remember) there was not one of the^ left: so terribly does the regard
of his justice fall upon these 2. when ioin'd together, al^u^ oppressore^, the
high oppressor.

He that in wise will consider this. And the consideration is useful. Use.
First, Salomons lesson of Nemixiris: Be not astonished, do not wonder at the
matter, that is, istem v^^^^^ ^^^em; at this will or purpose in God; for Iunius
interpretation of the will or council of wicked men is too cold, and unlikely.
No: Solomon would not have us repine at Gods ordering the matter Nemixiris.
Where simply to wonder is not forbidden for hat's the seed of knowledge and an
impressio^ of delight, which man may and is invited to take in sorveighing the
works of God. O consider and behold! And cherefore the Philosophers in their
(...), wherein they placed perfection did not ^^^^d to take away this pleasant
admirings and obsecuring the world, nor to hinder our lively, active, and
vigorous conte^plation of God, for it becomes not only our religion, but
discretion too, to mount our holiest and chastest thoughts unto him, confessing
him infinitely above the highest endeavors of our imaginations, but they taught
the same that Solomon do^^ here ne mireris not wonder with astonishment, which
they could not understand of a profound carelessness, for then women and idle
dissolutes would do it duly. But they meant a beauteous sweet state of the
soul, by taking down the sails of vulgar opinion and passion which make men
nice, and soon disquieted. So that in Salomo^s mireris here, 2 things only
seem prohibited. 1. a distrust of Gods providence; 2. vexing our selves about
the execution of his Justice.

know it not; nor seem they to know either God or themselves that practice it.
Why? He regards (says Solomon) he rules in heaven, in earth, and in all deep
places, He is thy King, Thou must either endure his sway, or get out of his
dominion. It is a very good one, the Mexican salvation to their infants newborn o child thou art borne to suffer, suffer and hold thy peace. Do not
whine and complain as the vulgar ignorant at every storm or more or may the
tumor of an earth quake or a water wrack, though a 1000. leagues off, and but
in a ballade, draws them together like Bees at sound of a basin, and holds
them suspended and astonished. The simple plowman is afraid those cowling (...)
of heaven should not remember their duties do him, and is ready to brawle with
God, for crossing the contents of his Almanac, and not sending him drought and
showers at his pleasure. But what speak^ of these? we all labor of the same
infirmity, no man thinks sufficiently, that he is but man, and but one: for
every man taken upon him to be a public paedagogue, and would rule this world
with a rod; and we are prone all to quarrel with God of carelesnes, or of
presumption, that would make a would, and not given is better than he does.
Foodmen I. (says Solomon) do not break your souls with these imaginations;
better deny him utterly, than think ill, or idly of his providence; as it is
better for a man to be rumor'd dead, than reported wicked; For he regards the
world, and that law which was the part ^^ne to make it, is the Card to guide it
by; not after thy will or wisdom happily, but (...), etc. Ep. 1.11 according
to the council of his own will; and if it force thee to a stand to consider
it, beware yes of murmuring either at his providence, or justice, which is the
second thing forbidden Cato, that when P^^^tis did all against right and
reason, he ever prospered, but for the Commonwealth had no success: and it
would make any man wonder indeed, nay, vex with David to see the wicked in no
misfortune, like other men, nay, like good men (oftentimes.) for ^^ny are the
troubles of the righteous, and among those many, this is a maine one,
Oppression, which is able to make even a wise man madd (says Solomon) to
suffer it, and enough (as it seems by this very Text) to stagger us, beholding
the poor oppressed, and the oppressor go free. I; but be not astonished (says
the Breacher.) Judge nothing before the time (says the Apostle.) We cannot by
one title, or by one word judge of the masons fabrique, or the Poets verse; we
must view the contexture, and hear all the syllables sound. And shall we
think to take a true estimate of Gods judgment (says St Austen) ante quam
totus orde decurrat. Before the whole stream and course thereof be run out?
There remains mercy for the righteous, as sure it is that a judgment to come
remains for the wicked; and as if none were punished here, none would believe
our report, that, The highest Regards; so if all here stricken, who would
regard a judgment to come?

2 Use.
Secondly, since God regards the poor oppressed, here is double consolation for
the poor, all poor, for it is no personal privilege this. They are Lamps
despised in the opinion of the rich, but not in his, who is rich over all. He
regards them, in mercy, and the rather for being poor, nay, the more poor,
the more he regards the^: for that's true the the other way too: that which is
abomination to men, he that is higher than the highest regards. And of what
can they despair, who are thus highly regarded, by him who is able for earthly
to give treasure in heaven? which nor defrauder, nor oppressor can bereave, for
a smoakie cottage here, a building of a 1000. stories high, not made with
hands, but eternal in the heavens. Mean time, wanting money they have his
loving favor, which is above silver and gold; in stead of corn, and wine, and
oil, he shows them the light of his countenance, and in mercy regards them.

Panperem pressum. What though oppressed and deprest, even as low as the dungeon,
or the den, or the belly of the Whale or the bottom of the belly of hell
(says Sirach:) yet here are two words like a pair of heavenly pullies, able
to fetch them up, to an high and lively consolution, Altissimus, observat. He
that is higher than the highest regards. This then is, The poor Man's
Appeal, so call this Text, when stung with those fiery serpents, they may yet
fix their eye on this brazen serpent, that is lift up higher than the highest,
and yet from thence Regards and send down that cheatful voice of the Prophet;
The needy shall not always be forgotten; Psalm. 9.18.
the patient abiding of the poor shall not perish for ever.

High one first, and then the oppressor. These. 4.6. Much more let the high
oppressors fear that crying and bloody sin, who tho they can escape the
judgment of men, yet how will they prevent or escape super ^^^inspectorem, he
that is in his holy watch tower above, and in whose sight all thing are naked
and manifest, and whose vengeance is both sudden and powerful, vno nutu, at
one beck able to press and crush, and for ever perish a whole world of
oppressore, at the very blasting of the breath of his displeasures.

The Application.
And first do you (most Reverend Judges) suffer the word of Exhortation: you
see your calling is an high one, sharing with God, in names of Lord and Judge:
nay, I have said you are Gods, and are all children of the most high. Be
followers of God as dear children; follow him, tho non passibus aequis. For
humane nature is not capable of perfect justice, no more then of other things
in their purity; only see that you bend your highest endeavors in imitation of
the highest; not kept down by the baseness of the world, nor your sweet and
wholesome acts of Justice (like the Sunbeams in a burning glass, bowd, and
contracted by passion or partiality, and be merciful, as your heavenly father
is merciful, sans hope of earthly reward or sting of vainglory: and being in
the place of God, learn his action here of regarding, for this end sits he in
heaven, and he has not set you here to be regardlesse, like Gallio, Act. 18.
one that cared for nothing, as so many Scarcrowes in a garden of Cucumers; but
to regard the poor in mercy, and the high Oppressor in justice: and say not you
to him as Joseph to old Jacob, not so, my father, reaching rather your hand
(clean contrary) of judgment to the poor, and of favor to the oppressor: but in
mercy respect the poor and needy, that are sick and need your physic, not
purges or lettings blood with the whip, so much as your cordials of provision,
your gentle laxatiues, your blessed lenitiues and restoratiues: And in justice
regard their adversaries, and look that such as ar the grand thieues sit not
near you on the bench, while the petite ones plead at the bar for mercy. I know
that simple people think you may do wonders, but my prouocatio^ tends no
further then to urge the execution of that lawful power, which to you through
our excellent Soueraign is conuaid from him that is higher then the highest.
And that therein you would oppress the oppressor, and beware lest (as the
Apostle says in another case) the strength of sin is the Law, so these high
ones do not strengthen their hands in this sin of oppression, either by the
shelter or conniuence of the Law or Magistrate, which if you do not, he regards
that is higher then they or you: and which if you labor to do, by despising (as
the Prophet speaks) the gain of oppression, shaking your hands from taking of
bribes, stopping both eyes and ears from seeing evil, or bearing blood, then
he regards in mercy, and great is your reward in heaven, for your defense shall
be the munition of rocks, and you shall inhabit loca altissima, the highest
place, Es. 33.16. And this speech to you (my gracious Lords) is but like a
second impulsion to a wheel already moud, and I admonishing to do what you ar
obserud to do already, do in my admonition bear along both praise and
approbation. Consider then what I have said, and that Lord Judge of heaven and
earth, who is only wise, give you understanding in all things. And next let us
learn to aply this text, we that are now in his sight, speaking, hearing, for he
regards out instant actions, sees our reverence, knows our thoughts. When we
part from hence, the Text will follow us, in our houses, chambers, closets, his
eye is ever on us, let then the eyes of our souls be ever fixed on him, and
ever even in midst of night and silent darkness suppose our selves in a Theater
since he sees us; and every where upon our walls and garments, in our rings,
and on our foreheads, and in the palms of our hands, ingraue this posie,
Altissimus obseruat. Do you in special that are to attend the Courts of
Justice and judgment, Counselors in your pleas, and witnesses in your
depositions; Ere you open your mouths hearken to the voice of Solomon here, nay,
lend but an ear to the call of your own consciences, and they will preach
this text unto you; He that is higher then the highest regards. And you of
the Iewry be not like those Physicians, who use to erect a figure, by that
minute, in which they are consulted, and thereby give their judgment. For
that's too usual with ordinary Jurors, to have regard to certain aspects, and
relations, and predominancies, and to give verdicts according as they find
Superiors inclined. Their Landlord may chance to frown else, and take away
their leases, or cast them out of their houses: I, but Solomon tells us of a
superior here far above all Lords, by Land or by Water, one that can deprive
them of inheritance in the kingdom of Heaven, and able to cast them both
bodies and souls into Hell: And therefore fear him; fear not their
regarding, but hi-regarding; His that is higher then the highest: To whom be
praise and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

Gloria Deo in Excelsis. FINIS.

