THE Key of History. OR, A most methodicall Abridgement of the four chief
Monarchies, Babylon, Persia, Greece, and Rome.

Being a general and compendious Chronicle from the Flood.

Digested into three books.

Whereunto is added a marginall Chronology of every Roman Emperors Reign, and
of all the most memorable persons and accidents.

Together with brief illustrations upon the more obscute names, places, and
Offices. With a directory t^ble for the more profitable reading of History.

Written by that excellent and most learned man JOHN SLEIDAN.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for William Sheeres, and are to be sold at his
shop near Grayes Inn at the Sign of the Bucke, 1627.

The Translator to the indifferent Reader.
THE praise of History in general, or this General History, being but
tralatitious, especially both speaking their own worth, may be my Apology for
both; either to excuse me from the usual encomions in the preface to most
Histories, or dismiss me with Salusts speech concerning Carthage, It Is better
to speak nothing, then not to speak home. For the first therefore, Ciceroes
five most significant, and severally volume-worthy Epithetes, shall suffice:
History is Times evidence, Antiquities Herald, Truths light, memories life, and
life's Mistress: And for the other, (this Chronicall History following) besides
the Authors own admired and approved knowledge in history: the large
Commentaries, and explication of the original Authors, set forth by the
accurate investigation of two reverend Divines, and a famous Poet, warrant it.
His maine drift, as thou may easily perceive, was to be succinct and close,
but withal perspicuous, by which he has made himself the Prince of
Epitomists: and, by this transcendent delineation of the four chief
Monarchies chief Monarch of all Historians in this kind. For he has attained
to such a height of perfection, that, as Polybius would have it, a man may at
the first view, behold the whole body of History, and every member so
pourtraied to life, that scarce any man of eminency, or act of excellency,
either in Church or Commonwealth, is omitted: being withal so exactly and
methodically coucht together, that thy eye may run in a line, from the
beginning to the end. He has made it a common key to every door, and a
little Perspicill to carry thy sight all the world over: the work it self,
being the very marrow and quintessence (pardon the metaphors) of all history.
The consideration hereof invited me (one most unfit) to adventure the
transplantation of this precious exoticke root, into our own soil. Wherein my
care to the Authors meaning was religious, which (as I supposed) would be the
chiefest thing aimed at, especially in an old man's last work (for he ended
this book and his life both in one year*) where we must not look for a
Panegyricall style, or lofty words (which I might have performed and perhaps
with more ease) but, as it is a plain, facile, and methodicall narration best
suiting with the tender capacity of younger Incipients, for whom the Author
intended it, well knowing that oftentimes young wits dote more upon frothie
words, then solid matter. Plainness is my ambition, else needed not these
little marginall illustrations only to satisfy a mere English Reader. In some
places, (if thou considerest not my reasons) I maseeme to swerue from the
Authors meaning.

As in the word Caesar, with the Author uses for Emperor, almost throughout the
book. But after Nero I call them all Emperors (only for more plainness)
because the line of the Caesar's was extinct in him.

France I call Gallia, till about Honorius his time, when (after the French
Germans had seated themselves there) it fell into their name. I have taken the
same course too, touching other Countries and Cities, till they changed their
names: except such, as still (with very little alteration of the ancient idiem)
reteind their names, as Vesontio now Besanson, Suessions now Soissons, etc.
Some may think, that Julius Caesar would have sounded better then Caius
Caesar, (by which name the the Author calls him in every place) because that
compellatio^ is more commonly known: but questionless the Authors meaning
therein, was to avoid all doubts; for we read of more of the Caesar's beside
him, that had the nomen Julius, as Lucius Julius Caesar, and Sextus Julius
Caesar, but never any other called Caius, that ever I heard of.

For my well-meaning presumption, in adding the times of each more memorable
accident, and of the several reigns of all the Emperors; I hope I shall find
pardon, since it may serve for a little Chronology.

Though I cannot be so ambitious to desire a freedom from every openmouth'd
Ardelio, when the best deserving men could never yet obtain it; yet I both
wish and entreat that every indifferent eye would make a charitable
construction of (if I may so call them) my good endeavors, ballancing all
venial errors, with my young experience, and inconvenience of study, and to
accept of the Diamond though not set in its deserved foil: the one may
encourage, the other cannot daunt me, for I have set up my resolution, in old
Mimnermus his Distich: Oblectes animum, plebs est morosa legendo,
Ille been de te dicet, and ille male.


Farewell.
TO THE MOST Illustrious Prince, Eberard, Duke of Wittenberg and Leck, Count in
Mumpelgart; John Sleidan wishes all health, etc.
LIterature being the greatest ornament of your dignity, (Princely Eberard)
though it be but indifferent; yet that especially, which comprehends in it the
Acts of all ages, suits best to your Condition: And amongst us that profess
the name of Christ; the holy Scriptures challenge the highest place in this
kind, which both set forth the original of mankind, show us Gods will, and
afford us many examples both of his mercy and wrath. Next to them we ought to
know, what is delivered to memory concerning other Nations. For scarce can
that accident happen, whereof there is not some pattern extant, and in sormer
times practiced. In which behalf, those that govern a Commonwealth, have an
exceeding great help and furtherance, if they neglect not this kind of
learning. Now that way is most commodious, which diuides the whole course of
this world into four Monarchies. As concerning the first of them, we want
Books necessary, having besides the Scripture, almost nothing credit-worthie,
or whereupon we may rely. That age questionless was altogether heroical and
most illustrious, for surpassing and memorable exploits. But what part thereof
came to our hands? Semiramis, Babylon, and Sardanapalus are memorized, and
almost nothing else. But for that dreadful, and never yet paralleld, terrible,
and dire spectacle seen in any one man, which Nabuchodonozer relates of
himself, as Daniel has it; who ever touched upon it? that a King of such
puissance, should be brutified, cast out of his Kingdom, banished from his
ancient habitation, thrust out of doors, excluded from all humane society,
have his nature metamorphosed, and feed with other bruit beasts, and be quite
degenerated into a beast. This is there related plainly; but with what
astonishment think we, were they stricken, that beheld this lamentable example
of Gods Majesty and fury? Therefore I have briefly run over the Assyrian or
Babylonian Monarchy, because it must be wholly bounded within the compass of
holy Scriptures; but the other three that follow, are very famous by many
Authors works; especially the Greek and Roman. Amongst which writers, those
(of the Greeks) challenge the first rank, Herodotus, Thucidides, Zenophon and
Polybius: for those other that Cicero mentions, Pherecides, Hellanicus,
Acufilas, Phyllistus, Agathoclis, Theopompus, Ephorus, Calisthenes, Timaeus,
Clitarchus, Silenus, are lost: as also those Latins that wrote the ancient
Roman history, whom the same Cicero nominates, viz. the Pontifies Annals,
Fabius Pictor, Marcus Portius Cato, Lucius Piso, Caelius Antipater, Caius
Vannius, Vennonius, Clodius, Asiso, Accius, Lucius Sisenna. And those indeed
were the Authors, out of whom, Titus Liuius, who is better half dismembered,
and before him, Salust, imperfect also, collected their works. Cicero indeed
used not this kind of writing, but was most studiously verst in it, as his
Books witness, which are every where besprinkled and inameled with
remembrances of all antiquity: but he was a most diligent obseruer of the
course of times, so as by him, one may attain to the orderly knowledge both of
persons, ages, and the times of accidents. For otherwise all writings are
obscure: and because he was wont to say, that the writings of histories
(especially after the Greek fashion) was very much Oratoricall: therefore
Pomponius Atticus counseled him to this kind of writing, complaining that
history stood in need of the Latin tongue: and alleging, that he was able
to effect that, which, even in this kind of writing also, would make Rome not
inferior to Greece. So he writ a Commentary of his Consulship in Greek, and
begun another in Latin, as he says himself. For he was very desirous to
have that year, wherein he was Consul, celebrated by other men's pens:
insomuch that he professed, that if they forbear him, he would not forbear
himself, but would write concerning himself. Caius Caesar only, writes of
his own exploits, and borrowed nothing from any of those before him. Then also
flourisht Diodorus of Sicilia, and a little after, Dionysius of Halicarnassus:
then Plutarch, Suetonius, Cornelius Tacitus, Appianus, Herodianus, Trogus
Pompeius, Aelianus, Quintus Curtius: but many of those are either wholly, or
the greater part of them lost. After those, many more followed, who (each one
continuing the history of his time, or of his Country) held on, even till
within our memory. And we must be seen in all those, or at least a good part
of them, to furnish our selves with that ability which is required. Some also
we must read for the matter it self; others, for the matter, together with the
style and form of speech. In which rank, Caius Caesar alone, justly challenges
precedence among the Latins: for none are more pure, none more elegant then
his: who for a delectable style, far excelled not only those that came not
long after him, but also all of his time. Besides those before mentioned, we
must likewise turn over such Ecclesiastical Authors, as treat of the
conversion of Religion, the afflictions of the godly, or the laws and decrees
of Councels and Bishops. And because the holy Scriptures foreshew the Papal
kingdom, we must search out the beginning, together with the progress and
increase thereof; thereby to enable our selves, to compare it with those marks
and signs which the Scripture has chalkt out. But because this large argument
which we have propounded, is various, manifold, and combersome, and this field
so exceeding spacious, not to be gone over in any short time: some nearer way
must be taken, by a methodicall course, for the help of younger Students: as for
those of deeper experience, they may well enough by themselves, as they say,
swim over the whole stream of Writers. And for this end have I undertaken this
task, that the Neoterie may have a tract and pathway leading to their further
learning, by which in the mean time they may trace, as by a line, till they
be grown riper scholars, and come to that proficiency, as to be able to
cast away and despise those rudiments. For I have not writ this, that they
should be content with, or confine themselves to these bounds, but to give them
a taste of their future reading: when being invited by variety of matter, they
may be more spurred on, hereafter to perlustrate the Authors and Books
themselves, from whence these are culled. But this kind of study properly
appertaining to those, that are appointed to the government of a people, as I
said before, I suppose (most Noble Duke) I shall not misapply, to your age and
condition, in offering up those my small watch work^s to your Highness: so that
by you, and through your hands as I may so say, the residue of younger Students
may receive some fruit thereof, if any may redound from thence. And albeit,
those most worthy men, your Tutors, John Sigismund and Sebastian Cox, use their
best diligence about your instruction and erudition: yet as in the culture of a
little garden plot, which we desire to have exquisite and arraied with all kind
of flowers, we scorn not any little plants and herbs brought us from another
ground; so likewise I hope this small present of mine, sent to the manuring of
the seed-plot of your learning, will not be inacceptable, being but only
offered up for a time, tilyou your self, having gotten strength, as I said
before, be able to walk abroad, and course up and down these open fields and
flowrie meads. For which course, you have that most renowned Prince, your
Fathers virtue, for a resplendent pattern: who by his elegant learning, added
no small ornament and luster to his Noble birth; and that which is all in all,
he made right use of this his faculty: to wit, that the name of God should
be celebrated, Churches and Schools well ordered, godly teachers provided for,
and a competencie allowed for maintenance of Scholars. For this duty God
chiefly requires at the hands of you Princes; and as he severely punishes the
neglect thereof, so also he remunerates, those with most bountiful rewards,
that show themselves faithful Stewards herein. Those examples of your
illustrious Fathers piety, constancy, and fortitude, might be mentioned by
name: but you will read them in good time hereafter, imblazoned at large, and
shall know the proper ornaments of Nobility. For he that is benign to good
wits, how can it be, that he should not at one time or other, be repaied by
them, with the descrued fruits of gratitude, and be celebrated to posterity?
Therefore understanding both the dignity of his place, and the charge laid
upon him by God; he made it his chief care to have your mind trained up to
godliness and learning, even from your young and tender years. And that which
is the feeling pulse of a Fathers love, nothing ever ioyd him more, then to see
his expectation bettered by your industry. And I doubt not of your own
voluntary propension that way (as much as your age can bear) and your Tutors
their diligent vigilancie. Wherefore Illustrious Prince, proceed auspiciously,
and as you are borne to the government of a Commonwealth, so furnish your
self with such ammunition, as is both perpetual, and will afford infallible
aid: and not only extenuate the labor, which you must sometimes undergo in
governing an ancient Province, but also make it easy and pleasant.

From Strasburg, Anno Dom. 1556.
JOHN SLEIDAN of the four chief Mo^narchies. OR, The key of History.
The first Book.
BEfore I treat of the four chief and principal Monarchies of the world,
Babylon, Persia, Greece and Rome: I must speak a word or two of the great
difference, about computation of years from the beginning of the world; for
the Hebrews, Eusebius, S. Austin; Alphonsus, and Mirandula, do exceedingly
vary amongst themselves. But because almost all the learned men of our times,
do in this point follow the account of the Hebrews: I also (seeing the case
so stands) will tread in their steps. And first of all, that I may come to my
purpose, I mean the first Monarchy, (passing by those occurrents which
happened in the Genesis 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, chap.
first age of all, as also the narration of the Flood, sit hence all those are
contained in holy Scriptures, and cannot be better expressed,) I Will take start at
that time, when the race of mankind being reduced to a very small number,
begun (after that the Moles.
massy multirude of waters was again dispersed, and the earth made dry) to
increase anew. The time of the Flood is referred to the year of the world,
1656. and Gen 5.
Mathusalah the seventh from Adam, died at that very time, being 969. years of
age. Gen 7.
Noah Mathusalah his Nepos.
Grandchild by his son Lamech, (being then 600. years of age, and by Gods
especial favor, preserved together with his family,) now when the number of
men begun to multiply by little and little, was the first that caused his
children and posterity, by remoouing into several Countries, to inhabit the
earth, and build themselves cities: and afterward (about the hundredth year
after the Flood) allotted to each of them his proper Province.

At which time, Nimrod Noah's Grand-childes son, together with his retinue,
inhabited the land of the Chaldees, but at length (the multitude of men still
multiplying,) many were necessarily enforced to remove and seek out new seats
and Colonies. They before their departure, desirous to leave their perpetual
memorial behind them, did thereupon ( Genesis 11. It is credible that hereupon
the Poets took occasion to make that fiction of the Giants, who beaping
moantaine upon mountain, went about to overthrow the gods. Michael Glycas
writes, that there were forty years spent about building of this Tower.
Nimrod being their Chief-taine) begin to build a City, and within that, a
Tower of transcendent height: And forgetting Gods wrath, which had so lately
swallowed up the whole Globe of the earth, and whereof Noah without all doubt,
had very much, very often, and diligently preached to them: intended to extend
the fame of their own names, by vaineglorious and ambitious works. But God
herewith offended, made frustrate these their enterprises, sending amongst them
a confusion of tongues: whereas before that time, there was but one and the
same kind of language all the world over. Thus being constrained to surcease
their begun work, they departed into several parts of the world. From this
confusion of tongues, the city called Babell, took the name: and from ye time,
I mean from the 131. year after the Flood, or therabouts, the kingdom of the
Chaldees and Babylonians took the beginnings. The first King thereof was
Nimrod, before spoken of, who as it is written, ruled 56. years. The Scripture
styles him the Genesis 10. 1 Chronicles. 5. Mich 5. The land of Babylon is called the
land of Nimrod.
mighty Hunter, and attributes to him strength and puissance. Others call him
Saturn, and report, that in the 45. year of his reign, he sent away certain
Princes of Colonies, hither and thither, as Assure, Madas, Magog, and Mosech.
Those erected kingdoms after their own names, as Assyria, Media, Suidas
writes, that the Persians were so called, but Melanctho^ think them to be the
now Turks.
Magog, and Mosco, the two first whereof do wholly belong to Asia, and the
third and last to Asia and Europe. The Scripture makes mention of this Assure.
Genesis 10. Belus.
Assure, and that Niniue was by him builded. Jupiter Belus succeeded his Father
Nimrod, who (as history speaks) possessed all the Country from the
sunne-serting to Sarmatia in Europe, and afterward made war against
Sabbatius King of Saga, whom not he, by reason he was prevented by death,
Ninus the first Monarch, about 1905. of the world.
but his son Ninus subdued: who extending his dominions far and wide, was
the first that ever took upon him a Monarchy. Noah died 350. years after the
Flood, and about the 18, year after his death, Genesis 11.
Abraham the tenth from Noah (so commanded by God) left his Country, being then
75 years of age, and in Genesis 17.
24 year after that, God made a covenant with him, by ordaining the
circumcision. In the Genesis 21.
100 year of his age, his son Isaac was borne unto him: he lived after
that, 75. years, for the term of man's life was now much shortened. The
manner of his Grandchild Genesis 37.
Jacobs life, and upon what occasion he went down into Egypt, and there dyed:
how afterward his posterity remained in Egypt for some ages, oppressed with
most grievous bondage, and by Gods favor brought out and set at liberty by
his servant Moses, the holy From the 30, chapter of Genesis to the 14. of Exodus
Scriptures declare. This departing of the children of Israel out of Egypt, is
referred to the year of the world, 2454. that is, 430 years after the promise
made to Abraham, as Gal. 3.
S. Paul has it. After Moses, the children of Israel were governed by Judges,
till the days of Saul, whom David, (another King of the same people)
succeeded. Now let us return to the Empire of Babylon; Ninus being dead, his
wife Semiramis succeeded him in his Empire: Semiramis.
who in riches, victories, and triumphs, was inferior to no mortal Prince.
She enlarged the town of Babylon; and made it a city of sufficient
greatness, adorning it with diverse fair buildings, and inuironing it with a
wall. She subdued Aethiopia, and made war also in India. Her son Zameis
the fifth King, Zameis.
performed nothing worthy of memory; Arius.
but Arius, who next succeeded him, conjoined the Bactrians and Caspians to his
Empire. It is written, that Aralius his successor was renowned for his wit and
prowess, Aralius.
but what he achieved, is not committed to writing. The next to him, Baleus.
Baleus, subdued many Nations, extending his dominions even unto Judea, and was
therefore surnamed Xerxes, that is, a conqueror, and triumpher, or warrior.
Armatrites the ninth, Armatrites.
was altogether given over to pleasure and idleness. There is nothing written
of Belochus the tenth, Belochus.
but that he applied himself to the study of soothsaying and divining.
Baleus the eleventh, paralleld Semiramis, in renown for his prowes, and
military industry, and has the fame, to have been highly extolled in sundry
learned men's works. Altadas.
Altadas the twelfth, of him it is recorded, that he followed his ease and
tranquillity of life, accounting it a point of folly, to be wearied with
multiplicitie of labors, and fettered with variety of cares, about enlarging
the bounds of his kingdom, because it tended not to the weal and commodity
of any men, but rather to their endammagement and servitude. His successor
Mamitus the thirteenth, Mamitus.
stirred up his subjects on fresh again, to diligence and industry in military
affairs, and his puisance gave cause of suspicion to the Syrians and
Egyptians. For Mancaleus the fourteenth, Mancaleus.
his actions afford not argument worth the discourse. Spharus.
Sphaerus the fifteenth is commended for his great virtue and wisdom. There
is no mention in writing of any memorable act performed by Mamelus the
sixteenth. Mamelus. Sparetus.
In Sparetus the seventeenth his reign histories report, that wo^drous
accidents happened every where. Ascatades.
Ascatades the eighteenth brought all Syria under his subjection. And thus
far the supposed Berosus, of whose writings almost all men make a doubt, and
think them counterfeit: but because we have no other records extant, they
follow this order. See their names at the end of the Book.
Others reckon 20 Kings more together with Sardanapalus, making him the eight
and thirtieth King of the Assyrians. This King as without all compare the most
effeminate of men, continually sitting amongst harlots, spining and carding
with them, and so totally plunged in voluptuousness, that he would scarce ever
show himself in public. For this cause two of his Rulers, Belochus of
Babylon, and Arbaces of the Medes, alienating their affection from him, after
they had emblazon'd his filthiness and lasciviousness up and down amongst
the vulgar: made war against him. He with his womanish troops, having
scarce joined battle (such was his bad success) fled to his palace, and ^here
causing a great fire to be made, threw himself and all his goods into it. In
this deed only, The Monarchy divided,
as a certain writer says, showing himself a man. Afterward these two
rulers divided the Monarchy betwixt them, Belochus was made King of Babylon,
and Arbaces of the Medes. After is had stood 1300 years
Thus Sardanapalus was the last king in that course when that Monarchy had
stood 1300. years, for almost all their Kings lived exceeding long.

Belochus the nine and thirtieth, Belochus. 2 King. 15. 1 Chronicles. 5.
or if it seem better, the first King of the Assyrians in the new Monarchy,
compelled Manasses King of Israel to pay him Tribute: the Scripture calls him
not Belochus but Phul. Phul Assure. 2 King. 15. 2 Chro. 28.
Phul Assure, surnamed Tiglath Pileser, succeeded him. He took some certain
Cities in Judea, and carried away the people captive into Assyria. Achas King of
Judah, in whose time the Prophet Isaias lived, desired aid from this Tiglath
against the King of Syria, Salmanassar.
and sent him presents. After Tiglath followed Salmanassar, who after three
years siege, took the City of Samaria, and carried away captive Hosea King of
Israel, and his people, and allowed them a dwelling place in his own Dominions
even amongst the Medes as the Scripture says, 2 King. 18.
whereupon some gather that he ruled also over the Medes. His successor
Senacherib kept his Court in the City of Niniuie: Senacherib. 2 King. 18.
He made Ezekiah King of Judah tributary to him, and soon after besieged
Jerusalem with a mighty Army, and by his Ambassadors exhorting the people to
make a revolt: 2 King. 19.
and scoffed at their King, who hoped for help from his God. But he escaped
not unpunished, for God by his Angel in one night slew 185000. of his men, as a
little before he had confirmed it to Ezekias by his Prophet Isaiah. Isa. 37.
After his return home, he was slain by his own sons. Tob. 1.
Till this time, the Babylonians after Sardanapalus his overthrow, were in
subjection to the Assyrians. Senacherib, as we said before, having received
such a destruction at Jerusalem, and not long after slain by his own sons:
there followed a great change in the State of the Kingdom, which was then
divided. For the two brothers Adramalech, and Sarazar, who had committed the
parricide fled. Notwithstanding they levied forces, and prepared Arms against
their brother Assaradon, Assaradon. 2 King. 19.
who after his fathers death had seized upon the Kingdom: having formerly
governed the Commonwealth in his fathers Isa. 37. Merodach.
absence. Merodach Governor of Babylon taking hold on this fair occasion, 2
Kings 20. 2 Chro. 32.
for his own good success: revolted, proclaiming war: and having by degrees,
partly by favor, partly by force, drawn in the neighboring countries round
about him, to his party, and overcome Assaradon in the 12. year of his reign:
annexed the whole Empire of the Assyrians, to the Babylonians, and reigned
Isai. 39. and 50. Be^^nerodach. Nabuchodonozor, 1.
forty years after. Many reckon, next after him, Benmerodach, and
Nabuchodonozor the first of that name: but seeing the holy Scripture discouers
nothing hereabouts: nor can we rashly give credit to others, we will rank that
Nabuchodonozor whom the Scripture makes much mention of, Nabuchodonozor the
Great.
next in order after Merodach. He therefore within few years after his
entrance, made war with the Kings 24. Ierem. 46.
Egyptians: and took from them the whole Country therefrom Euphrates to
Suidas calls this Peleusiuns, the Key of Egypt, It is now called Damietta.
Peleusium, made tributary to him 2 K^n. 24.
Ioachim King of Judah, and in the eight year of his reign carried away captive
to Babylon his son Iechonias, together with his chief men, and artificers,
not only of the City of Jerusalem, but also of the whole Country. In the
eighteenth year of his reign he took Kings 15. 2 Chro. 36
Jerusalem, after two years siege, and within a while after Ierem. 52
sacked, burnt it, and broke down the walls, carried away most part of the
people, putting out king Zedekias his eyes; and killing his sons, and Noblemen.
Ierem. 25.
The Prophet Jeremy, had foretold this calamity in the first year of
Nabuchodonozors reign: and from this time we must reckon the 70. years
captivity of Babylon. Nabuchodonozor, about the four and twentieth year of
his reign having overcome the kings of the Ier. 46.
Ammonites, and Moabites) passed into Egypt with an army: where having got
possession of all that Country, afterward begun his Monarchy. In the second
year of his Monarchy, as the learned of our times collect, he saw in his
dream a great Image, whose head was of gold, the breast and arms of silver,
the belly and thighs of brass, the legs of iron, the feet part of iron,
part of clay. When he awakt, and could not call to mind what he had dreamt,
but yet remained mightily astonished, calling together his Magicians and
soothsayers, charged them under pain of death to interpret his dream. Daniel
a young man. Captive with the rest of his Nation, brought thither from
Jerusalem, signified that he could satisfy the kings desire: being brought
forth, first he showed what the dream was, and afterward interpreted the
meaning thereof. The Image said he, signifies the four chief Monarchies of
the world, which are to succeed in order, and turning his speech to the King
himself; Thou, said he, whom God has invested with supreme power and glory,
to whom he has given rule over all men, beasts of the field, fowls of the
air; Thou I say art the Golden Head of that Image. After thee another kingdom
of silver shall arise, worse then this of thine: afterward the third kingdom
of brass which shall bear rule far and wide: but the fourth kingdom shall be
of iron, for as iron breaks in pieces and subdueth all things, so also shall
the fourth and last, break in pieces all the rest, and bring them in
subjection to it. This therefore is the first and formerly never heard of
prophecy, of the four Monarchies, which God revealed to us by his Prophet
Daniel. A thing truly worthy to be committed to memory, because in a few words
it comprises the history of all ages, until the end of the world: as
afterward I am to speak of. Now it suffices how at this time first of all,
God has discovered to us, the order and successiue course of the Monarchies.
Dan. 4.
That place in Daniel also; manifests more clearly of what great puissance this
Nabuchodonozor was: where the Scripture compares him to a Tree, whose height
reached to heaven, which, as it were, oue^shaddowed the whole earth: whose
leaves were very fair, and most abundantly laden with fruit, whereby all
creatures were fed and fatned: in whose branches and boughs, all manner of
foul dwelt and made their nests. This therefore is the first Monarchy: which, as
it was exceedingly amplified in this Kings reign and hoisted up to the very
highest step. So also it fell away and in his Nephews time was quite
extinguished even as God had denounced by Daniel, and other of his Prophets.
This Nabuchodonozor reigned three and forty years. It would quite the cost if
all mortal men, especially Kings and Princes, would read and diligently
consider, with how dreadful a spectacle and example; God (as Daniel sets it
down) revenged his pride: Dan. 4. and 5.
that so they might the more reverence Gods divine Majesty, Euilmerodach. 2
King. 25. Ierem. 51.
and perform that office to the people, which is committed to them. His son
Euilmerodach succeeded him, he reigned 30 years, Assure. Labassardach.
and his successor Assure three years. Labassardach, who reigned Metasthener
and others say but 6.
even years, succeeded him. After him Balthazar bore rule ^^ue years: Many
reckon them after this manner, but the learned of our time, omitting two of
them, Balthazar.
put Balthazar next after his father Euilmerodach, and write that he reigned
14. y. which is very necessary to make the perfect number of 70. years, during
which space the Jews were in captivity to the Babylonians: sithence their
captivity begun in the nineteenth year of Nabuchodonozors reign. Those who
observe this order and leave out the two Kings before spoken of follow the
Tract of Scripture, and especially the Prophet Ieremie^s testimony, Ierem. 25.
who prophesied that the Jews should serve the King of Babell, his son, and
his sons son, but in this point let every man have his judgment free to
himself. Howbeit Balthazar, as the Scripture mentions, was the last King of
the Babylonians, Dan. 5.
and in this all Writers agree. As for the manner of the taking of Babylon,
many Authors describe it. Dan. 5.
Daniel also mentions how God denounced to this King, his imminent and even
present calamity, and relates how the government of the Monarchy, after that
King was slain, was translated to Darius the Mede, Darius.
then 62. years of age. Many Writers call this Darius, Cyarxes, who was the
son of Astiages, eight King of the Medes, whom Daniel calls Assuerus, Dan. 9.
who having no issue male, bestowed his daughter in marriage upon Cyrus the King
of Persia's sister son: and being prouokt to enter into a war with the King
of the Assyrians, sent for aid to Cyrus, who leading his forces thither, and
being made General of the whole army, returned conqueror, having taken that
most powerful Babylon. Dan. 9.
City. It is recorded that Darius lived not above a year after this victory.
And then, when Darius was yet living after the taking of Babylon, and the
children of Israel, Ier. 25. and 29. Dan. 9.
had by this time, remained captive in Babylon, almost 70. years: God revealed
in more ample manner to Daniel, according to his prayers in that behalf, who
made known the same to the Prophet Jeremy, foreshewer of the captivity:
Cyrus founder of the second Monarchy of the Persians, when the first of the
Assyrians, had stood about 1538. years, this was about 3434.
and did not only confirm the nearnes of their freedom, but also showed what
time the Messiah should come, who should satisfy for the sins of men.

After Darius his death, the sway of government was committed to his son in
law Cyrus, and this is the beginning of the second Monarchy; for now Cyrus
alone held in his own hands, Assyria, Media and Persia, even to the Ionian
sea, as Thucidides has it, having before his winning of Babylon, taken Craesus
that most puissant King of Lydia. So this Cyrus is first King of the Persians,
and founder of the second Monarchy. This most renowned Prince, having
vanquished the Babylonians, made war with the Scythians, whether going with
his army, and at length intrapped and environed by his enemies, was there
slain. In the beginning of his reign, after the taking of Babylon, he
permitted the Jews to return home again out of captivity, 2 Chro. 16.
that they might reedifie the Temple, and the City of Jerusalem, and to that
purpose bestowed very liberally out of his own Treasury. Isai. 44. and 45.
God by his Prophet Isai, had foretold him by name, some ages before he was
born. Xenophon brings him in, discoursing with his sons before his death, about
the immortality of the soul, as Cicero has it, who interprets that place, as
all others, very elegantly. Cyrus reached the 70. year of his age, and reigned
30 years, being 40. years old at the beginning of his reign. His sons name
was Cambyses, Cambyses.
whom, when he went from home to the Scythian war, he set over his Kingdom.
He (his Father being absent and in imploiments) took Egypt. In war indeed
he was renowned, but otherwise vicious, and did not represent his Fathers
virtues. Among the rest of his filthy and savage deeds, he commanded his own
brother to be slain trecherously. Plato in his books, which he writ of the
Laws, reports how Cyrus was very much to blame, for that he brought up his
sons effiminately, amongst women: who, when they grew into riper years, being
corrupted by flatterers, for the most part abusing their cares; did, after
their Fathers decease, Darius the son of Histaspis.
endanger one another life.

Darius the son of Hystaspis succeeded Cambyces, second King of the Persians,
who suruiued his Father but a short space. And by reason that many of his
subjects, and together with the rest, the Babylonians did, (after Cyrus his
death, and so great an overthrow of his army) revolt from the kingdom of
Persia: He took arms at the first step of his reign, and reunited them to
his Empire, having after a long siege, taken Babylon also by help of He
mangled himself, cutting off his cares, nose, and lips, faigning that Darius
had so pu^^isht him, for speaking in the Babylonians behalf, when eupon they
received him, and by that policy, he got the City for Darias.
Zopyrus. Within a while after, he made war against the Athenians, who upon a
sudden, mustering up their forces, not expecting any aid from the
Lacedaemonians, did at Marathon, with about 10000. men, Miltiades being their
Leader, overcome his huge It consisted of 600000. men.
army. Darius was aminded to renew the war, but death prevented him, in his
very first attempt: whose son and successor, Xerxes.
Xerxes in the tenth year after the battle at Marathon, as Thucidides relates,
came with an Some confine it to 1000000 but Justine extends it to 2000000 and
Herodotus to more.
innumerable army, with intent to subdue all Greece. Hereupon the chief
managing of these wars, was by common consent committed to the Lacedaemonians,
because they bore greatest sway all over Greece: but the Athenians followed
Themistocles his counsel, quitting their City, leaving their wives and
children in one place or other, betook themselves to their ships, and
joining battle with the enemy at Salamina, overcame him. That victory was
very commodious to all Greece in general, for Xerxes being also expelled their
Country, did by an unfortunate and a dishonorable flight, In a little Fishers
boat.
return home, and the Grecians likewise after his departure. But the Athenians
having a Navy of 400. sail, or thereabouts, coasting on further, and pursuing
their enemies, took the town of Sestos upon Hellespont, which the Persians
held: and there wintring, afterward returned home, gathered together their
dispersed wives and children, and repaired the walls of their City (which the
enemy burnt when he took it) and fortified the Port. This war of the
Persians, or (as Thucidides calls it) of the Medes, happened, as Cicero writes,
almost at the very same time, with the Volscian war, where the exild Roman
Coriolanus was General: Xerxes his war, An. Mund. 3488
and that was in the 266. year after the building of Rome. Herodotus, before
Thucidides, writ of this Persian war. Cicero calls him the Father of
history, but reports that his writings are stuffed with an infinite company of
fables, The Lacedaemonians were sore offended at this fortification of the
Athenians, but since they could not tell how to amend themselves, buried all in
murmuring silence: and both they, as also the rest of the Grecians, together
with the Athenians, joining forces, took the I Will of Cyprus, and the City Now
called Constantinople.
Byzantium, which the Persians held.

Among the rest of the Lacedemonian Captains in this war, Pausanias was one,
who (being condemned of treason) after he was returned home, and lay besieged
in a certain Sanctuary, was famished to death with hunger. Themistocles also
(being in like manner accused) fled. Soon after this, Greece was tossed up and
down with sundry wars and dissentions, partly foreign and partly
domestical, which Thucidides pithily relates. But at length, in the fiftieth
year after Xerxes departure out of Greece, as Cicero reports it after
Thucidides, that cruel war sprung out when the whole Country of Now called
Morea.
Peloponnesus, conspired against the Athenians; Pericles, Anaxagoras his
scholar, being their Leader in that war; who, as Aristophanes reports,
lightened, thundered, and set all Greece on fire with his tongue. For these in
times past, were the masterpieces of prowess and eloquence. On the other part,
Archidamus King of the Lacedaemonians had supreme command. Thucidides who writ
of this war, was both equal to, and emulous of Pericles. Sophocles the
tragical Poet, was, as Cicero writes, Pericles his colleague, in the
Generalship.

Now let us return to Xerxes. He, by reason of such his bad success, being
grown into contempt, was slain by his own subjects. Artaxerxes Long-hand.
His son Artaxerxes Long-hand succeeded him. To him fled the exiled
Themistocles, whom we spoke of a little before, and there Poisoned himself,
because he would not go with Artaxerxes to sight against his own Country.
Darius Nothus.
ended his life, and was buried at Magnesia. After Long-hand, Darius Nothus
reigned, who married his own sister. In the beginning of this Kings reign,
happened the aforesaid Peloponnesian war. And the Athenians, though they had
remora's enough besides, yet in the fourth year of this war, as Thucidides
recites in his third book, they sent a Navy into Sicilie, under pretense to
aid the Leontinians, against the Syracusans, but their intent was to bring that
Island under their subjection, that so they might more conveniently subdue
Greece, and afterward when they were returned, and fostered their own
factions, Hermocrates of Syracusa, was the first that moved the Sicilians to
live in peace, laying aside all grudges, for the Athenians had laid snares of
bondage, to intrappe the liberty of their whole country, and his persuasion
took effect. This was in the seventh year of this war.

Three years after this, the Athenians and Peloponnesians, concluded a truce
for fifty years, but it held not full seven: for even then many outrages were
broached, and though the peace were not quite abolished, and gappes of offenses
committed, were ever anon stopped up again by truces; yet in the 17 year, they
burst forth again into open war with full forces, and this second war
continued ten years. Then the Athenians send over again their Navy, most
exquisitely furnished, into Sicilie. The chief Commanders, whereof among the
rest, were Alcibiades and Nicias. Nicias very earnestly (declaiming certain
Orations to that purpose) dissuaded them from this voyage: but Alcibiades
persuaded the contrary. The Peloponnesians gave aid to the Sicilians: at
length, the Athenians encounter with their enemies in the Port of Syracusa: but
after a doubtful and dangerous battle, were all of them put to flight and
slain. In the mean time, the Lacedaemonians and their confederates, conclude a
league against the Athenians with Darius King of Persia. Tissaphernes was
Darius his Ambassador. Next after, Codrus, Polydor of Sparta, and Aristomenes
of Messene: these following are for the most part reputed the chief and most
renowned Captains of the Greeks: some whereof performed worthy service for
the whole Country of Greece, and every one for his own country at the least:
as, Miltiades, Leonidas, Themistocles, Pericles, Aristides, Pausanias,
Xantippus, Leotychidas, Cimon, Conon, Epaminondas, Leosthenes, Aratus of
Sicyon, Philopoemen. Most of these were at length banished their countries.
Cicero describes the Port of Syracusa, and reports how the Athenian Navy
only, which consisted of 300. ships, did within man's memory, invade it, and
was vanquished and overthrown within the same, by reason of the advantage in
the situation and nature of the place, and port it self: and then first of
all was the puissance of that City borne down, abated and overwhelmed, and
shipwreck was made of Nobility, Government and Glory. Thucidides relates,
that the circuit of Sicilie is as much as a great vessel can sail round about
in eight days space: and that the Island is distant from the Continent, about
twenty Two miles and a have.
furlongs.

Darius had two sons Artaxerxes Mnemon, and Cyrus; Artaxerxes Mnemon.
the first whereof succeeded his father, and Cyrus governed lonia: but not
being content with his own share, made war upon the King his brother, and was
there ouerthrown and slain. Marcus Portius Cato, as Cicero has it, calls this
Cyrus the younger King of Persia, a man of an excellent wit, and the glory of
his Kingdom. He commends him also for his delight in husba^dry, as Xenophon
writes of him: for this Xenophon was one of his soldiers, and very familiar
with him, and for that cause was afterward driven into exile by the Athenians
who were in league and amity with Mnemon. Ochus. Darius.
After Mnemon reigned Ochus, his third and youngest son. Darius the last of
all succeeded. Against him, Alexander King Philip of Macedon his son, made
war: who, after he had subdued Thebes and pacified Greece, set forward into
Asia, and in three battles overthrew Darius, taking his mother, wife and
daughters, prisoners. Darius offered him very large conditions, and part of his
kingdom to the river of Euphrates: but he refused both, and ceased not, till
he had overthrown him: for when Darius saw that he could not make his peace
upon these conditions, he renewes the war the third time, and coming against
him with a most puissant Army was the third time overthrown, and as he fled,
slain by his own men: when, together with him, the Monarchy of Persia, which
had stood 200. years was extinguished.

Alexander by these famous victories, brought under his subjection almost all
the countries lying Eastward, The third Monarchy of the Greeks founded by
Alexander the Great about 3609. after the Persian Monarchy had stood about
200. years.
translated the Imperial feat out of Asia, into Europe, and founded the third
Monarchy. After this, he made wars in India, but, such is the weakness of
mortal men, those blasts of ful-handed and indulgent fortune, could not breath
upon him, but must needs puff him up with ambition: when having played many
insolent prankes, and in a manner commanded divine worship to be given him:
coming to Babylon there died of a fever, or (as many write) of poison, being
33 years of age, and having reigned 12 years. Calanus an Indian, as Cicero
relates, foretold him of his death, whom, as he was going to be He caused
himself to be burnt following the ancient custom of the chiefemen of his
Nation.
burnt, Alexander asked if he had any thing to say, Oyes, quoth he, I shall see
thee ^re it be long. Within a few days after Alexander breathed his last,
which was (as it is commonly taken) in the hundred and fourteenth Games in
honor of Jupiter celebrated every fifth year: they begun An. mund. 3186 (...)
Most authors (as Meibomius notes) agree that he dyed in the 429 y. after the
building of Rome.
Olympian, and in the four hundred and ninth year after the building of the
City of Rome, which is 322. years before the birth of Christ. He was a very
devout lover of good Arts, and most liberal toward learned men: and is
therefore highly extold in many of their works. He delighted much in Homers
Poems, and though we read that he was never without many learned men about him
to record his acts: yet when he stood before Achilles his tomb in Sigeum. O
happy young man, said he, that have found such an Herald as Homer to proclaim
thy virtues. For as he would (rather then any others) have Apelles his Painter.
Pictor, and Lysippus his Statuist.
Fictor: so would he have his worth extold and commended to the memory of
posterity, by such, as in setting forth his glory, could purchase renown to
their own wits. He employed his Tutor Aristotle, about describing the nature
of all living creatures, and for that purpose procured certain thousands of
men, throughout Greece and Asia: as Grasiers, Huntsmen, Fishermen, Fishmongers,
Fowlers, and many more such like, to give him information of each creature. Its
written that he gave to the Author himself in recompense of his labor, 800
Talents, which amounts as the learned of our times collect to 1480. Crowns. He
sent Xenocrates the Philosopher 50 Talents, by his Ambassador, which comes to
1030 Crowns, which when he refused and sent him word back again by his
Ambassadors that he has no need of so much money. What, said he, has he no
friend, who^ he may benefit by the^?

In his tender years, when he was Aristotle's scholar, he was, as Cicero
writes, endued with a most excellent wit, and exceeding great modesty, but
afterward advanced with the title of King. He grew proud, cruel and deboist.
Historiographers tell wondrous stories of Darius his gorgeous pomp, delicious
pastimes, and riotous exesse: For he kept within his Tents Cooks of all
kinds, Hucksters, crammers of foul, Artificers, clerks of his kitchen, and
Confectioners: lest he should be unprovided of any means that might increase
his bodily pleasure. Many writers speak of the Kings of Persia their
solemnities and sumptuous provision in their daily banquets elsewhere. They
were wont to keep many wives, as Cicero writes, and to those they gave certain
cities, that such a city should find such a woman with all manner of attire
for her head, and such a City with this or that apparel. Such was Darius his
end, as I formerly recited, who as he fled from Alexander, drinking foul water
polluted with dead corpse: denied that ever in all his life he drunk a more
pleasant draught: for he never drunk when he was a thirst, before that time.

After Alexanders death, his spacious Empire was divided amongst his Nobles,
Ptolomeus, Laomedo^, Antigonus, Cassander, Leonatus, Eumenes, Python,
Lysimachus, Antipater, Meleager, Seleucus, but the chief of those was
Seleucus, afterward made King of Syria, as also Ptolomeus of Egypt, Antigonus
of the lesser Asia, and Cassander of the Macedons and Greece, having quite cut
off all Alexanders alliance. This Lysimachus is he, whom Alexander being on a
time angry with, caused to be shut up with a Lion: but when he heard how he had
killed the beast, highly esteemed of him. Now most grievous wars, as it is
common, arose betwixt those forenamed successors and their sons and Nephews:
for the mind once corrupted with ambition can admit no rest, but plots how to
augment its own power, by committing injury upon other men. And all these
Countries being most miserably afflicted with those wars, by reason they were
continual, by little and little grew into subjection to the Romans, who
extending their dominions far and wide, made up the fourth and last Monarchy,
whereof I am now to speak.

But amongst Alexanders successors in this Kingdom of Egypt, Ptolomeus
Philodelphus was one, a most laudable Prince: For he, as much as in his lay,
kept peace with all, stirred up the liberal sciences, appointing stipends for
scholars, erected a most copious Library and commanded the books of Moses, and
the Prophets, to be translated into the Greek tongue.

The beginning of the city of Rome therefore, was at that time when Salmanassar
before mentioned, reigned in Assyria, that is in the first year of the seventh
Olympiad, according to Plutarch, and of the world, 3212. when as, almost 400.
years before, Rome built 3212.
Aeneas had begun his reign in A part of Italy.
Latium, after the Trojan wars, which Homer left to the memory of posterity:
of whose Herodotus, Dion: Halicarnass. Solinus, and Gellius (as Meibomius
notes) writes of his time.
time, as likewise of his Gellius also writes of his Country.
country, there is no certainty extant: only Cicero writes that many years
before the building of Rome, and Romulus: there was such a man. Howsoever there
is no profane writing of more antiquity then his Poem: for as Horace says;
Many brave worthies
flourisht ere those days,
When Agamemnon shined,
whose bootlesse praise
Has not the force
t'attract one liquid eye:
For lasting night
with black obscurity,
In ignorance inuelopt
has their names,
Wanting no Herald
to proclaim their fames.


Cicero also signifies as much, who writes that there was not the tract of an
Orator to be seen before Homers time.

As for the original of Rome, it was but mean and in a manner contemptible,
but because God has so ordained as afterward it shall be declared: it grew up
to the height of potency. In their first beginning seven Kings reigned over
them, 244. years. And in Seruius Tullus the sixth Kings reign, Solon and
Pisistratus flourisht in Athens, and Pythagoras in Italy, as Cicero writes. At
what time Tarquinius the proud was expelled. He writes also that in this
Seruius Tullus his reign, Athens had then stood about 700. years. Having
expelled their Kings, the government of their State was translated to two
Consuls, whose office was annual. The first was Lucius Iunius Brutus, one no
less vehement and diligent about expulsion of the Kings, and setting up the
liberty of his Country: then vigilant and valiant in preservation thereof. For
when his own two sons, Titus and Tiberius, amongst other Noblemens sons of
Rome, had commun'd together in private consultations, about calling in again
of the Tarquins: after the matter was openly disclosed, he put them to open
death He also abrogated his Colleague Tarquinius Collatinus his authority, who
was his associate in expelling of the Kings, as also coadiutor in his
Counsels. Cicero defends this fact as just, and says it was no less
profitable then honorable to his Country, that thereby both the name of the
Tarquins, and the remembrance of the Kingdom might be extinguished. But in
this variable fortune of the Romans, when all Tuscanie.
Hetruria had conspired against them, three hundred of the 306. as Liuie,
Florus, Ovid, etc.
Fabies marched out of the City against the enemy, and were all slain,
saving a child which was left at home, and so left alive: who afterward
raised the house again: this happened in the thirty three year after the
expulsion of the Kings. By reason of the troublesome state of the
Commonwealth, Ambassadors were sent into Greece, in the three hundred year
after the building of the City, to fetch from thence, the laws, which the
City of Rome should use. After their return the form of government of the
Commonwealth, was changed, and the Ten Noblemen appointed to govern in
stead of Consuls.
Decemvirs were put in authority with the government thereof, but this order
held not full three years: for Appius Claudius, one of the Decemvirs, by his
lewdness in violently carrying away a Virgin, daughter to Lucius Virginius, a
Citizen of Rome, to serve his lust: gave occasion to the people wholly to
subvert this order. So the government returned to the Consuls, but those two,
held it but a few years: and then two Much like our Knight Marshals at this
day.
Tribunes of the Soldiers were constituted with Consular authority: but they
before their year was out, left off their office, and made room again for
the Consuls: and at this time, which was in the three hundred and fifteenth
year of Rome built, Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus the Dictator, caused Caius
Seruilius Hala, master of the Cauallery, to kill Spurius Melius, and also
plucked down his house, because he indeauoured by his lavish liberality of
corn in the City, to procure the Kingdom. Two years after this, the
government was reduced to the Tribunes of the Soldiers, who afterward were
not bipartite, but more were created at one and the same time, as the people
pleased, and the state of the Commonwealth required.

This kind of government continued almost 70. years, and among the rest in
this office, flourisht, Marcus Furius Camillus, inferior to none for valor:
who, though he had done worthy service for the Commonweal, yet his
ungrateful country, thrust him out into banishment, after he had been
Tribune of the Soldiers the fourth time: but after he had recovered the Citio
out of the hands of the Inhabiting in and about Sons in Gallia.
Gallisenons, who had taken it, and vanquished the enemy, was restored to his
former dignity, and within two years after made He had power regal, and was
never chosen, but when the Commonwealth was in great danger, and could not hold
his place above half a year.
Dictator. A few years after this, Marcus Manlius, he that defended the
Capitol against the Gauls, being suspected of affecting sovereignty, was
pitched headlong from the top of the hill Tarpeium, and a law made, that no man
descending from the stock of any Senator of the house of the Manlies, should
be called Marcus. After this, Camillus was the seventh time created Tribune of
the Soldiers, and being very old, ended his life in the 389. year after the
building of Rome: the government being a year before his death, again reduced
to the Consuls. The first whereof was a One of the Commeueltie.
Plebeian. In those times flourisht the most renowned Captains of war in
that City, such as were, Marcus Valerius Corvinus, Titus Manlius Torquatus,
Caius Martius Rutilius, Publius Decius Mus, Papirius Cursor, Publius Philo,
Lucius Volumninus, and others.

One of which, namely, Titus Manlius Torquatus, one of the Consuls, beheaded
his own son, for that he (contrary to his command, and out of his rank) had
encountered his enemy in a single combat, although he got the vpperhand.
Publius Decius Alus the other Consul, in the battle against the Latins,
deuow'd and bequeathed himself to death for the Romano Army: when violently
rushing into the thickest troops of his enemies, by his death, re-established
the tottering state of Rome. His son, of his own name, four times Consul,
performed the like against the Galli-Senones, forty four years after that. At
the same beforementioned time, in the Most Authors agree of 10. or 12. years
before, viz. Anno Mundi, 3620. or 22.
420. year of Rome built, Alexander the great, founder of the third Monarchy,
as we have above declared, flourished and made his wars. Titus Liuius
compares Lucius Papyrius Cursor with him, and extending his discourse as well
for his own as his Readers recreation, shows that he was able to have resisted
Alexander, if happily he had led his forces into Europe, after his conquest of
Asia, and made war upon the Romans. This before-recited Papyrius Cursor, was
endued with the very quintessence of valor: for, omitting other his valiant
acts, when Titus Veturius Caluinus, and Spurius Posthumous Albinus the two
Consuls, together with the whole army at the Made of spears or iauelings
stuck in the ground under which the conquered were to pass in dishonor.
Forks of Caudium, were compelled by the Lamnits, to go ignobly under the
yoke, and had made a dishonorable peace with the enemy: He (being created
Consul) vanquished the late conquering enemy, and put him to flight; as also
when he was Dictator, made his own Master of the Cauallery an example to
teach what strict observance ought to be had in military discipline. In this
age also, and a little upwards, Greece brought forth men of transcendent
learning; for then flourished Socrates, and from him, as from a certain
fountain, Aristippus, Plato, Antisthenes, Speusippus, Aristotle, Di^aearchus,
Xenocrates, Heraclides, Theophrastus, Polemo, and Strabo; all of them
Physiologers, and as Cicero calls them, Speculators and hunters of Nature. Then
also flourished most famous Orators, as Gorgias, Protagoras, Prodicus,
Hippias, Isoerates, Lysias, Demostenes, Hyperides, Aeschines, Phalerius,
Demetrius. And Historiographers chiefly, Xenophon, whom Cicero calls a
Socratist, and Calisthenes, Alexander the great his companion.

In this age lived Dionysius the Spracusan Tirant, to whom when Plato came and
spoke freely concerning the duty of a Prince, he put him in great danger of
his life, as Cicero relates. This was he who committed not the guard of his
body, to his allies, but to certain strangers, and savage and barbarous
people: he who taught his daughters how to cut their hair, that they should
not adventure their necks under the Barbers hands: who suffered them not to
use any manner of edgetoole, after they were come to years, but made them
cindge his head and beard with redhot Walnut-shels: who resorted to his wives
often times by night, but first made sure to survey and pry into all places:
who not daring to show himself in the common Pulpits, was wont to speak to
the people out of a Tower: who showed Damocles one of his Parrasites, what
manner of felicity that of his was, which he had boasted of: for as he sat
in the midst of his choicest delicates, with abundance and superfluity of
all manner of pleasures; he caused a glittering sword, hanging by a bristle of
a horses upper lip, to be let down, that it might hang over his neck.

About forty two years after Alexanders death, Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes
came into Italy, and made war with the Romans. In his second years war,
he solicited the Senate about concluding of a peace and a league. But Appius
Claudius both old and blind, who, as Cicero writes, had been twice Consul
before that, came into the Court; and dissuaded the Senate inclining to peace,
from making any league with him; for, even in that case, wherein he then was,
he had so much courage, as not to shrink from any either private or public
service. The Oration which he then pronounced concerning Pyrrhus, when he
broke off the peace, was extant in Ciceroes days, as he himself witnesses.
At this time, Cains Fabritius Luscinus, performed a worthy piece of service for
the Commonwealth, who being solicited by Pyrrhus, to revolt, contemned his
most ample gifts, and large proffers: nor only so, but also sent him back
again, a certain captiued runne-away, who had certified, that he could take
away the Kings life by poison. Cicero compares him with Aristides the Athenian.
Mannius Curious Dentatus, gave Pyrrhus an utter overthrow, at his second
invasion of Italy, and triumphed over him. This Pyrrhus was the first that
ever brought Elephants into Lucania. And till this time, (being almost five
hundred years continuance) the Romans were in wars with the inhabitants of
Italy only, amongst whom the Latins, Veientes, Aequies, Faliscians,
Samnites, Hetrucians, resisted very stoutly, sometimes conquered, sometimes
conquering: who being at length subdued, and a peace settled; that most bloody
war against the Carthaginians sprung up: the Josephus writes that it was
built within 143 years after Solomon's Temple. The first Punicke or
Carthaginian war began Anno mandi 3697.
original of which City, is by evident testimony, proved to be far more
Josephus writes that it was built within 143 years after Solomon's Temple. The
first Punicke or Carthaginian war began Anno mandi 3697.
ancient then Rome. This war begun in the four hundred eighty fifth year
of Rome built: In which, that noble act, which has report of performance by
Marcus Attilius Regulus deserves singular commemoration, who, being taken
prisoner by the Carthaginians, and sent by them to Rome, to treat of a peace
and exchange of prisoners, with condition (except he prevailed) to return to
his bondage: He, when he came thither, persuaded the Senate the quite
contrary way, and showed that it was repugnant to the custom of the
Commonwealth: but yet holding it a point of honor, to hold promise with his
enemy, returned to Carthage, where he was put to death with the most cruel
kind of punishment: his eyelids being cut away, and so bound fast in an
engine, consumed to death by waking. This war proceeding, the Romans had
their first and fortunate sea fight in Sicilie, against Hanno, Publius Duillius
Consul: Cicero ranks this Duillius, Mannius Curious, and Caius Fabritius; as
also Attilius Calatinus, Cneius and Publius, both Scipioes, Aphricanus,
Marcellus, and Fabius Maximus, within the list of the most renowned Consuls of
Rome. The year following, Lucius Cornelius Scipio, Consul, took the Islands of
Corsiea and Sardinia. The Carthaginian war, after it had lasted three and
twenty years, Held 23. years.
was at last appeased, Quintus Luctatius, Catulus Cercus, and Aulus Manlius,
Consulls. Two years before this, was Ennius borne. He was elder then Marcus
Portius Cato, (who calls him his familiar consort) by five years. And Rome was
now again intrapt with new wars against the Of Tuscame.
Faliscians, Of Tuscame upon the Seacoast.
Lygurians, Sclauonians.
Illyrians, Of Gallia, now France.
Galls, Bohemians.
Boys, Of now Lumbardie. The second war which the Carthaginians begun, Anno
Mundi 3751.
Insubrians, whom having at length overcome, the second Punicke or Carthaginian
war burst forth, in the twenty fourth year after the conclusion of peace.
Publius Cornelius Scipio, and Titus Sempronius Longus, then Consuls. Hannibal
was Captain General in this war, who sacked the City of Saguntum, and
bending his course through Spain toward Gallia, and from thence to Italy, in
three several battles, at Now Pauie.
Ticinum, the River Trebia, and the Lake Thrasimine, overcame the Romans. But
Quintus Fabius Maximus being created Dictator, and marching forth against the
enemy, by subtle and dilatorie withdrawing from him, weakened and took off
the edge of his force and fury. This was that very Fabius, whose fame Ennius
celebrating, says thus of him.

One man's delay, our safety has regained. Cicero accounts him a great
Politician, and says, that he could conceal, keep silence, dissemble,
ensnare, and prevent his enemies in their consultations. But after this, the
Romans received a very great overthrow at A town of Apulia in Italy.
Canna, which struck such an horrid fear in the City, that many of the abler
sort purposed to fly and forsake the City, but were reanimated and withdrawn
from their intents, by Publius Cornelius Scipio Publius his son, a
magnanimous young Gentleman, and then scarce four and twenty complete. The
fourth year following, Claudius Marcellus took Syracusa after a long
continuing siege. In the sacking of which City, the famous Mathematitian
Archimides was slain: who was drawing certain Astronomicall figures in dust,
not dreaming of the conquest of his country. Marcellus having notice hereof,
took his death wonderful heavily, and commanded his body to be buried: not
only suffering the conquered City to remain in safety, as Cicero writes,
but also left it so furnished, that it should stand for a Monument of victory,
humanity, and clemency. Moreover, as he speaks upon Verres, the Much like our
Lord chief Justices at this day.
Praetors arrival there; in this victory of Marcellus, there were fewer men,
then gods slain: but Liuie reports, that many abominable examples of wrath,
envy, and avarice, were then and there showed. Cicero when he was Much like our
office of Lord Treasurer.
Questor of Sicilia having by some description found out the place of
Archimedes burial, showed his tomb to the Senate of Syracusa, 137 y.
afterward, though it was quite worn out of memory, grown over with briars and
brambles, and unknown to the very Citizens themselves. He further reports that
this City of Syracusa, was the greatest and most beautiful city in Greece, and
that it was compact of four very great Cities: the Island, where was the
fountain of Arethusa, having great store of fish: Acradania where the market
place Porticus. The public walking place for pleasure, recreation or exercise.
Prado, and Curia.
Senatehouse stood: Tyche, where the Temple of Fortune stood: Neapolis built
last of all, where the most spacious Theater was erected. Moreover, this, of
any foreign Nation, was the first, that entered into amity and allegiance with
the Romans, and was their first province, as the same Cicero testifies:
Annibal, soon after his victory, compelled all Campania to be yielded up to
him: but his Army wintering at Capua with superfluity of victuals and riot,
became wholly disjoynted and broken. The third year after the ouerthow of
Syracusa, Capua was surrendered into the hands of the Romans: and it was long
and much demurred upon, whether or no, they should quite destroy the City: at
length they agreed to preserve it, yet lest it should at any time afterward,
be able to raise any rebellion, their fields were quite taken away, all manner
of authority both of Magistrates and Senators abrogated, as also the Council
of Estate, no image of a Commonwealth left, but was appointed to be a
storehouse for fruit, the plowmens rendezuous, the Countreymens market town,
and the common Garner and Cornhouse for the country of Campania. Within two
years after this, Asdrubal brought over new Auxiliary Forces into Italy: but
was slain at the river of Metaurum by Marcus Liuius Salinator, and Caius
Claudius Nero Consulls. In the mean while Publius Cornesius Scipio had good
success in Spain, after his father and his uncle had lost their lives there.
He having recovered the whole province, returns to Rome, and being made
Consul, desired to be authorized over Africa, that he might make war there.
But Quintus Fabius Maximus, an aged grave Senator withstood him very earnestly:
and urged that it was not fit to pass into Africa, but to join battle with
Hannibal. Scipio contrariwise, that if war were made with the Carthaginians
within their own Quarters, they must of necessity, be constrained to call home
Hannibal out of Italy, in who^ they settled their chief hopes and helps. After
much dispute the Senate grants Scipio the Province of Sicilie, and permits him,
if it might be commodious to the Commonwealth, to pass over into Africa. He
therefore at length sets forward out of Sicilie into Africa: where, what he
had foretold the Senate by word, he confirmed by deed. For the Carthiginians
having received some overthrows by him, and being much endammaged, call back
Hannibal. Thus he who for sixteen years together, had raged up and down
Italy, and picked out a place under the very walls of Rome, where to pitch his
Tents, was compelled to return home, though sore against his will and to his
great grief: where at length in his own country quarrel, Hannibal vanquished
An. mund. 3797.
he was vanquished by Scipio, who soon after, by decree of the Senate,
concluded a peace with the Enemy. Hereupon came his surname of Africanus.

But here we must consider, after what manner the Romans creptout of these most
intricate straights, for all their fortune now hung by a most slender thread;
yet so it was destined, that they should ouersway all force and trouble, and
become Lords of the whole earth. Some report that Hannibal foresaw this, when
he heard of his brother Asdrubals overthrow. The words which he then used,
Horace sets them down, in that Ode, Horace l. 4. Ode 4.
wherein he celebrates the fame of Drusus and his house; which being most
learned and elegant, worthily, amongst other matters, deserves commemoration by
all of the younger sort. Thus the Romans being at peace with the Carthaginians:
besides those wars wherein they were employed, in Italy, Istria, and
Lusitania: The Roman war with Philip King of Macedonia, 3770.
made sharp war against Philip King of Macedonia, who infested the Country
of Greece. In this war Titus Quintus Flaminius was General, who at length,
getting the upper hand of the Enemy, did by decree of the Senate restore
Greece, to its former liberty: and amongst other injunctions prohibited King
Philip from making war in any place, out of his own Territories, without
decree of the Senate. The Roman wars with Antiochus King of Syria, 3777.
To this war another succeeded, against Antiochus King of Syria, who passing
over into Europe, was overthrown and expelled Greece, by Mannius Glabrio,
Philip King of Macedon aiding the Romans in that war. Those before recited
Kings of Asia, Syria, and Macedonia, descended from their posterity, who, as
we have above related, divided the provinces amongst them after Alexander the
Great his death. For Carthage being pacified, and all Italy brought under
subjection; the Romans having subdued their neighboring Countries of Europe
both by sea and land, were now grown to that height, that Kings and people
far remote implored their patronage.

After this manner the Egyptians (whose King Ptolomy Epiphanes was, a very
young Prince, and not of ability by reason of his nonage to govern them)
being brought into imminent danger by Antiochus the Great, sent over their
Ambassadors to Rome, petitioning the Senate to undertake the tuition of their
young King. Hereupon the Senate enjoined Antiochus to forbear Egypt: He
hereat incensed, but more especially when Hannibal who was fled to him and
remained his guest very earnestly persuaded him to the war: struck over with
a Navy into Greece, and there, as we reported before, was put to flight.
Whereupon the Romans setting forth with an Armado, pursue him, and striking
over into Asia, overthrew in a maine battle, and beat him back beyond the
Mountain Taurus. Cicero relates, how after this overthrow he was wont to say,
that the Romans had done him a very good turn, for now (being freed from too
exceeding great government) he would contain himself within the moderate
bounds of a Kingdom. Lucius Cornelius Scipio, Publius Scipio Africanus his
brother, was Captain General in this war, thereupon surnamed Asiaticus.

After this, Marcus Fuluius Nobilior, vanquished the A certain people of
Greece.
Aetolians, and triumphed over them. And Publius Scipio Africanus, after his
return home out of Asia, (whither he was sent in Embassage to his brother in
time of this war) being crossed by the Officers appointed for protection of the
Commons against the Nobles.
Tribunes of the Commons: withdrew himself into his village of Liternum, and
there, this man of transcendent worth, ended his life: being, as many write,
52. years old, of the same age with Marcus Portius Cato. In that Dialogue,
Sleidan (as Meibomius notes) mistakes Africanus, for Quintus Fabius Cunctator
whom Cicero speaks of.
which Cicero writ of old age, he brings in Cato speaking very affectionately
and honorably both of his age and studies, but most especially extolling his
magnanimity: howbeit Liuie writes, that Cato was his enemy, and was wont much
to disquiet himself with the odious envy, that he bore against him for his
fortitude. Cicero commends him for his dexterous celeritie in dispatch of
business.

At this time flourisht those Poets, Ennius, Plautus, and Neuius.

After Antiochur his overthrow, Hannibal fled to Prusias King of Bythinia: and
(when the Romans desired to have him delivered into their hand) by a draught
of poison finished his life. Hannibal poisoneth himself. An. 3786.


To Antiochus, his son Antiochus Epiphanes succeeded, who likewise practiced
by treachery to have seized upon the Kingdom of Egypt, for that he was uncle
to Ptolomie Philometer King of Egypt, who succeeded after his fathers death;
hereupon, professing himself to be the young Kings Tutor, purposed to dispatch
him, and so transfer the sway of government into his own hands, but his plot
being discovered, the Romans (whom the Egyptians had again solicited for aid)
sent over to him in Embassage Caius Popilius Laenas, who coming to conference
with Antiochus, commanded him in the name of the Romans to depart from
Alexandria, which he then besieged: who desiring time to deliberate upon it;
Laenas with a little rod drew a circle round about him in the place where he
stood, and in flat terms charged him to give his answer what he would do,
before he stirred out of that Ring. He, hereat dismayed, and not being
ignorant of the puisance of the Romans, promised peace.

Those passages are only for this purpose mentioned, that it may appear how
the Romans, from these small beginnings gathered ground step by step, and
climbed up to the highest branch of government. For now their puissance having
outstript the bounds of Italy, made an impression into several Quarters of the
world: but a great part of their labor yet remained toward the keeping in
together the ponderous burden of this their Empire, whose circuit contained
the chiefest part of the whole world, as hereafter though briefly, I Will declare
in order.

Philip King of Macedon, he whom I formerly spoke of, taking it very hainously
that the Romans had put him to such a straight: was aminded to renew the
war; but being prevented by death, his son and successor Perseus, having
been long before that incensed against the Romans, undertook this war as
it were a part of his inheritage: but Lucius Aemilius Paulus, the second time
Consul, Perseus K. of Macedonia, with his wife, mother and Children led in
triumph at Rome, by Aemilius Paulus, 3802.
at length overthrew him in battle, took him, together with his wife, mother,
and Children, and led them in triumph, for this cause surnamed Macedonicus: and
from that time Macedonia became one of the Provinces of the Romans. The year
next before this, dyed Ennius, aged 70. years, as Cicero has it. Within a few
years following, Publius Cornelius Nasica, subdued Dalmatia, and not long
after the third Punicke or Carthaginian war begun. The third Punick or
Carthiginian war, 3819.
For the Carthaginians being impatient of peace and ease, offer violence and
hostility to the rest of their neighbors, but more especially to Massinissa
King of Numidia, a confederate and friend of the Romans. The Romans being
requested for their aid, decreed to make war in the 604. year of Rome built:
but herein they differed in their opinions, whether it were better to raze the
City, or preserve it safe: some were of opinion, that it should not be
destroyed, for that, said they, Carthage being taken away, they should fall
into civil wars and dissentions amongst themselves: but Marcus Portius Cato,
urging the contrary, showed what danger might hang over the Commonwealth of
Rome, by reason of that City, unless it were quite destroyed, and this his
opinion carried it, he himself departing his life in the time of this
deliberation, having attained to the eighty fifth year of his age. Cicero
ranks him amongst the ancient Orators, and places him next after Marcus
Cornelius Cethegus, whom Ennius (as he reports) extolled. He also further
relates, that there were a hundred and fifty of Catoes Orations extant, stuffed
with excellent words and matter: and reprehends those of his time for their too
much niceness, in not diligently perusing them. He compares him with Lysias
the Athenian Writer.

In this third Punicke war, Publius Scipio Aemilianus, Publius Macedonicus
his son, and Publius Scipio Aphricanus his nephew by adoption: was at length
made Captain General. He, in the fourth year of his war, begun by
others, after a sharp siege continuing for certain days, took the City of
Carthage, sacked it, burnt it, and laid it level with the ground, Carthage
destroyed, 3822.
thereupon gaining his surname, likewise styled Aphricanus, as he was, that
overthrew Hannibal, as aforesaid. And this was the period of this most puissant
City, which by original was more ancient then Rome, and for worthiness of
Captains, scarce inferior to it, having borne rule far and wide. Cicero
writes, that Publius Scipio after he had taken Carthage, restored to the
Sicilians, those Ensigns and ornaments which the Carthaginians had taken from
them some years before: as also to the Agrigentines, that famous brazen Bull,
which is reported to be Phalaris the Tyrants, wherein he was wont, for
punishment, to enclose men alive, and then to set it on fire. This Phalaris
lost not his life by treachery, as many other Tyrants did, but the whole
multitude of the Agrigentines fell upon him. Cicero calls Africa the tower of
all Provinces. Much about this time, the Romans made war with the Achaians a
certain people of Greece, for offering injury to their Ambassadors. Lucius
Mummius Consul, was Captain General in this war, who getting the vpperhand
in battle, forced all Achaia to be yielded up to him, and by decree of the
Senate, set fire on Corinth the chief City, and utterly subverted it: lest at
any time hereafter, being repaired, it might arise and lift up head again.
Mummius hereupon was surnamed Achaicus. About this time also one Viriathus,
(who from a Shepherd grew to be a Hunter, from a Hunter, to a Highway-thiefe,
and afterward, leader of a strong Army) kept the Country of Now Portugal in
Spain.
Lusitania in possession; who for some certain years holding play with the
Romans, and very often putting them to the foil, was at length trecherously
slain: and soon after, Decius Iunius Brutus, subdued all Lusitania, even to
the Ocean. In the mean time the Romans received a great overthrow from the
Numantines a people of Spain: for, refusing to accept of the peace made by
Mummius the Consul, in regard it was dishonorable, of a new create Publius
Scipio Aemilianus Aphricanus, Consul, contrary to the ordinary course, and
to him commit the charge of the war: who marching forth with an army, having
recalled the soldiers, grown more effiminate and impatient of labor, to
observance of strict military discipline, after he had besieged the city of
Numantia some certain days, Numantia destroyed, 3832.
took and subverted it, in the fourteenth year after the subversion of
Carthage, and of Rome built, six hundred and twenty. Cicero calls Carthage and
Numantia, the two terrors of the Roman Empire.

At this time there arose an vproare of the bond-slaues in Sicilie: who having
gathered together great forces, were at length with much ado repressed by
Caius Fuluius the Consul. After this, the Romans had war with Aristomius in
Asia: for Attalus King of Pergamos, had by his testament made the Romans his
heirs, but Aristomius being allied to him, seized upon that part of Asia, and
defrauded the Romans of the benefit of his Testament. Him, Marcus Peperua,
Consul, vanquished, and at length took prisoner. The year following, which
was the 625. year of Rome built, Scipio Aphricanus murdered 3837.
Scipio Aphricanus lying at his own house, was in the nightime murdered by
his own kinsfolks, as it was supposed. Cicero makes relation of his most
fluent eloquence, his fidelity and integrity: and writes, that albeit the
whole City was plunged in depth of sorrow for his death, yet no man opened his
mouth about the cause thereof. He reports also, that in this year, the sun
was twice doubled. Thus this most renowned Commander ended his days, aged 56.
years, which, as Cicero in a most sweet fictitious invention faignes,
Aphricanus the elder had forewarned him of. In this age lived Lucilius,
Terence, Pacuuius, Accius, Licinius, Caecilius, Afranius. Caius Laelius, one
most intimate with Aphricanus, calls this Pacuuius his friend, but Terence his
familiar consort. After this, Fabius Maximus Consul, in a maine battle,
overthrew the Of Sauoy.
Allobroges, About the River L^ire.
Aruerni, and About Rhodes.
Ruteni, people of Gallia. At the same time, Caius Gracebus, Tribune of the
soldiers, an eloquent man, and defender of the Agrarian law, was slain at
Rome, his brother Tiberius Gracchus having twelve years before lost his life
for the like cause. Cicero gives both of them commendations for their
eloquence: and writes, that Tiberius his Orations were not very beautifully set
forth in words, but were acute and full of wisdom: and Caius his brothers,
were fittest to be perused by those of the younger sort, as serving not only to
whet on, but also to nourish the wit, and he styles him the most witty and
most eloquent of all the Romans. Gracchus dreamed that he heard his brother
Tiberius telling him that he should die of the same death whereof he did: and
as Cicero reports, he told it to many before he was created Tribune of the
Commons. Their laws are extant, about provision of corn, replantation of
Colonies, The war with Jugurth King of Numidia begunne^^ Anno Mundi, 3857.
soldiers rewards for their service, government of the Province, the peopls
suffrages about election of Magistrates, and of letting to farm King Attalus
his lands, and the country of Asia. After these Tribunician dissentions
followed that war, which the Romans had with Iugurtha King of Numidia. It was
begun by Lucius Calphurnius Bestia, Consul; continued by Quintus Coecilius
Metellus: Ended, 3859.
and ended by Caius Marius the Consul, who served in the wars with Publius
Scipio: For Bacchus King of Mauritania, Iugurtha's confederate, not willing any
longer to undergo the hazard of war, delivered up Iugurtha bound, into
Sylla's hands, who was sent over to him for that purpose by Marius. And at this
very time, which was in the six hundred forty seventh year of Rome built, was
Marcus Tullius Cicero borne, Cicero borne 38.
being eight years after the birth of that most famous Orator Quintus
Hortensius. In the time of this Iugurthine war, the Danes.
Cimbrians and Germans vanquished by Caius Marius, 3867.
Teutons, pierce some into Italy, some into Gallia; where having very much
annoied the Romans, and in certain battles, sometimes ouercomming the
Proconsuls, sometimes their Lieutenants, were at length overthrown and put to
the sword by Caius Marius, the fourth time Consul: the Teutons at Aix.
Aquensis, and the Cimbrians on the marches of Lombardie
Insubria.

To this felicity succeeded a new tumult: for certain people of Italy, as
the Samnites, Pelignians, Marsians, The Sociall war, 3877.
Vestinians, Marusinians, Vmbrians, Picentines, Lucanians, revolted from the
Romans. At diverse battles, at length they were reduced to subjection. In the
neck of this, follows another mischief, and a dangerous one to the
Commonwealth: The war with Mithridates, 3880.
for Mithridates, King of Pontus, expelied Ariobarzanes King of Cappadocia, and
Nichomedes King of Bythinia, (both friends and confederates with the Romans)
out of their dominions: and seizing upon Phrygia a Province of the Romans,
broke into Asia. Hereupon the Senate decreed to remedy it by the sword: but
just in the nicke, sprung up a faction, some requiring Lucius Sylla a man of
Noble parentage, others Caius Marius for their General. Publius Sulpitius
Tribune of the commons, aided Marius his party, but Sylla having command over
the army, expelled Marius the City; who thus exiled, and lurking in the
marshes about Minturnae, not without very imminent danger of his life, in a
little Bark, struck over into Africa. In Sylla's absence, in the wars of
Asia, Lucius Cornelius Cinna, Consul, begun to raise an vproare, and
practice new seditions: who, after he was banished by his colleague, Cneius
Octauius, and expelled the City, makes fresh head again, and ioynes with
Caius Marius, who upon that occasion was returned from Africa. Cinna and
Marius besiege and take Rome, 3882.
Thus having contracted their forces, they jointly besiege the City of Rome,
on that side where the village of Ianiculum stood: when many of the City,
showing themselves not so much cowards, as perfidious wretches (no means for
resistance being left) giving them entrance, they made all places flow with
blood and destruction, and forthwith reproclaiming themselves Consuls, in that
their office, exercise much cruelty: among the rest Lucius Cinna committed
that famous orator Marcus Antonius to the sword, and Caius Marius, did the like
for Quintus Catulus. Lucius Sylla hearing of those hurly-burlies, having in a
manner recovered all that he warred for, concluding a peace with Mithridates
returns into Italy, but Marius, seventh time Consul, dyed before his
arrival. Lucius Cinna had for his Colleague Cneius Papirius Carbo on their
party: who although they opposed Sylla with might and maine, were, together
with Marius his son put to flight: and Sylla being now sole Commander, pursued
his adversaries very sharply, hung out a writ of proscription, sels the
proscripts goods, and disinabled their children of all privilege and right of
bearing honors in the Commonwealth: and then making himself Dictator, carried
all matters according to his own will, and enfringed the Tribunes authority:
and when he sold the Citizens goods, declared in the public assemblies, that
he sold nothing but his own prey. Briefly, it came to that pass, that no man
without his consent, could hold either goods, country or life: and with such
bitter hatred was he incenst against Caius Marius, that he caused the relics
of his body to be scattered and strewed up and down the river Teueron.
Anio: and he himself was the first of any Nobleman of the house of the
Cornelioes, that desired to be burnt by fire: it may be fearing lest the same
accident should befall his own dead body. Cicero relates that Marius was
strong and valiant, and constant in his wrath: but he taxes Sylla of
vehemence, and Lucius Cinna of cruelty. He further styles Marius the terror of
his Enemies, and the hope and help of his Country. Lucius Sylla made four new
laws, against forgery, parricide, murder and injuries. In the time of his
Dictatorship, Marcus Cicero aged 26 years, came into the Court, and pleaded
Sextus Rossius his cause in public. Before him, these Orators were most
famous, Quintus Catulus, Caius Julius, Marcus Antonius, Lucius Crassus. In
which age, says Cicero, the Latin tongue was grown to full perfection in a
manner. This age indeed, wherein Cicero lived, did most of all excel in
learning. For to let pass so many and so worthy Orators, there were famous
Lawiers, and amongst the rest Caius Aquilius Gallus, Lucius Lucilius Balbus,
Caius Iuventius Sextus Papirius, who were Quintus Mutius Scaeuola the Chief
Priest about the sacrifices.
Pontifies Auditors, to whom Cicero also in his youth, was a retainer. Publius
Seruius Sulpitius was well near Ciceroes equal, he was Auditor of the above
named men: and Aulus Ossilius, Publius Alphenus Varus, Caius Titus Decius, the
two Aufidioes, Caius Atteius Pacuvius, Flauius Priscus, Cinna, and Publius
Caecilius were his scholars. At the same time, with Sulpitius, flourisht Caius
Trebatius whose scholar Antisteus Labeo was. Cicero extolling the deceased
Sulpitius in most ample words, says, That if all who ever in any age professed
the law in this City, were gathered together into one place, they were not to
be compared with Seruius Sulpitius; for he was experienct in point of aequity,
as well as strict law.

Amongst those who were proscribed Quintus Sertorius was one, a man renowned
both for his courageous valor and experience in military affairs. He begun a
most fierce war in the further parts of Spain, Sertorius his war, 3890.
where overthrowing certain Roman Generals, brought many Cities into
subjection. Hereupon the guidance of this war, was at length committed to
Cneius Pompeius: when after many battles, with diversity of fortune on both
sides, at length Sertorius was treacherously slain; and afterward Pompey,
being almost the tenth year after the beginning of the war, recovered
Spain. About this time Nichomedes King of Bythinia, departing this life, made
the Romans his heirs: But Mithridates King of Pontus, who formerly in that
faction betwixt Marius and Sylla had struck a league with Sertorius, seizing
upon Bythinia, with maine forces renewes the war. Against him Lucius Lucullus
was sent with an Army, who when he was Confull, had good success in his
battles of horsemen; and afterward being Proconful, defeating his forces, and
recovering Bythinia, caused him to retire into Pontus: and there to Mithridates
receiving an overthrow in a maine battle, fled to Tigranes King of Armenia:
yet Lucullus still following and pursuing him, in some few battles defeated
both their forces: but the mutinous dissentions among the soldiers, by some
craftily raised, hindered him from fully finishing the war, and bringing home
the wished success and honor of his victory. For within a while after Lucullus
being called home, Cneius Pompey was made Captain General in that war: to
which service Marcus Cicero also was a motioner, having made a very elegant
Oration to the people in Pompeyes commendation. Lucullus thus recalled, held
his triumph nevertheless, and bestowed a very sumptuous banquet upon the
Romans: soon after this, leaving his Offices in the Common wealth, he lived
at home privately studiing Philosophy, and erected a most copiously furnished
Library. In his ordinary table, he was (as at all times else) very sumptuous and
magnificent. Cicero makes mention of this Library, and says, that he was wont
to come thither to cull forth books: Pompey put Mithridates to flight, and
pursued him very far. He caused King Tigranes to yield himself over into his
hands, and seeing him abased and forlorn in his camp, advanced him, as Cicero
writes, and placing the Insigne regium.
Diadem upon his head again which he had taken from him, under certain
cautions commanded him to reign again. At length Mithridates being besieged
by his own son Pharnaces, slew himself. That war which Pompey made
against the Pirates (which was before he went against Mithridates) won him
much authority.

This war thus appeased, presently another civil broile is broached: for
Lucius Catilina with many more, conspired the ruin of the Common wealth, but
by Ciceroes singular industry, (who was then Consul) his villainy was
discovered, he expelled the City, and having gathered together certain bands
and troops of abject fellows in Hetruria, was in battle by Caius Antonius
Consul Ciceroes Colleague overthrown and slain. Cicero every where amongst his
works, speaks much of the service which he then performed for the Common
wealth, and makes relation not only of the firebrands then seen in the night
time, the flaming of the elements, lightnings and earthquakes: but also applies
those wondrous prodigies, which happened when Lucius Cotta and Torquatus were
Consulls, (being two years before his Consulship) to this time: when many
Turrets in the Capitol were struck down, the Images of the gods overthrown,
the statues of the ancient Heroes beat down, the brazen tables of the Law
melted, as also the statue of Romes builder, Romulus in form of an Infant,
gaping and sucking at the teats of a wolf, was smitten. Cicero describing
Catilines nature and qualities, says, that there never was such another
Monster as he upon the face of the Earth, composed of such contrary different
and mutually antipathizing appetites and dispositions of nature.

In the time of Ciceroes Consulship was Caius Octauius borne, Caius Octauius
borne. 3906.
and Iudaea made Tributary to the Romans, after Cnelius Pompey had surprised
the City of Jerusalem. The fifth year following, Lucius Piso and Aulus Gabinius
Consuls, the Now called Switzers.
Heluetians changed their habitation, and leuying maine forces intended to
pass through the Province of Gallia into the further parts thereof, and there
to seat themselves in regard of the fertility of the soil. But Caius Julius
Caesar who was six years younger then Cicero having notice hereof preparing
an Army (the Senate having authorized him over that Province) marched thither
and in pitched battle vanquished the Enemy, and afterward going out against
Arionistus King of the Germans, who had annoyed the Country of Gallia That
part of France betwixt the River of Seine and Garonne.
Celtica, but more especially the Now Walloons.
Heduies confederates with the Romans, overthrew him at Besanson, a Town of
the burgundians inhabiting about the river Seine.
Sequans, not far from the Rhyne. Soon after he brought the whole Country
of Gallia in subjection to the Romans, and forthwith striking over the sea
into Britain, conquered it.

Cicero reports that Caesar writ to him out of Britain on the first day of
September, and the Letters came to his hands the eight and twentieth day of the
same month. When Caesar went into Gallia, Cicero being molested by Publius
Clodius Tribune of the Commons departed into exile, first making an oration to
the Gentry and Commons, wherein he commended his children and family to their
care: and within a few months after being called back by the Senate, (with
exceeding great congratulation of the prople) made another Oration to the
Romans, wherein he rendered thanks to his friends. Afterward, he laid the
blame on Lucius Piso, and Aulus Gabinius Consuls, for his banishment, and
showed that by them he was betrayed, declaiming certain Orations against each
of them, in one whereof, he counsail'd the Senate to take from them the
Provinces of Syria and Macedonia, and not to call back Caius Caesar, having
most happy success in his wares in Gallia, but to continue his authority,
whereby he might fully finish the war. Mean while Ptolomie Auletes King of
Egypt (for his slothfulness and cruelty thrust out of his kingdom) came to
Rome, and the Senate, at Cneius Pompeyes entreaty, restored him by Aulus
Gabinius, expelling Archelaus whom the people had ordained to be their king. At
length Gabinus was adjudged to pay into the common treasury 10000 Talents, or
as some of our times suppose 6000000. Every Talent amounts to 176 pound
sterling.
because he had received so much from Ptolomie. And Marcus Crassus, (who had
in charge the managing of the Parthian war) having past over the River of
Euphrates, was overthrown, and soon after slain at an enterview upon Truce.
This was he, who was wont to say, that no man was rich, except he could
maintain an An Army consisted of 2400 foot, and 20000 horse.
Army at his own charge. About this time was Publius Clodius slain by Titus
Anaio Milo; Cicero defended Milo (Cneius Pompey being then the third time and
alone Consul) yet at length he was commanded to go into exile.

The wars with the Galls being ended, which was about the eight year
thereof, that civil war of Caius Caesar's, The civil war betwixt Caesar
and Pompey begun 3916.
with his son in law Pompey, burst forth. The occasion whereof was, because
Caesar was to be deprived of his Consulship, except he would first dismiss
his forces, and surrender his Province, but he was advised that it could no
ways stand with his safety, to part from his Army: yet he condescended
descended upon condition, that Pompey as well as he, should yield up his
forces: but when that was refused, marching out with his forces with incredible
celeritie, he left Gallia and came into Italy, where entering into the Country
of Flaminia, he took many towns some by force, Now Romandi^la.
o^ hersome by dedition. Upon notice hereof, Pompey and the two Consulls Caius
Marcellus, and Lucius Lentulus fly from Rome to Brundusiu^, a Sea coast Town
in Puell.
Apulia: thither marched Caesar, but before his arrival, the Consuls had struck
over the Seas to Durachium: Durace in Macedonia.
and not long after Pompey follows them. Now Caesar being prevented by time,
not having a Navy in readiness could not pursue them, but returns to Rome,
where calling together the Senate, he makes complaint of his injuries, and also
propounded certain conditions of peace: but being slighted off by the Senate,
he marches to Marsiles in France.
Massilia, where the gates were shut against him: hereupon rigging his Navy,
he besieges it both by sea and land, and there leaving his Deputies, sets
forward into Spain, where at length he compels Petreius and Africanius two of
Pompeyes Captains, together with the whole Army, to yield. Then he returns to
Massilia, which City despairing of all aid, presently yields to his power: and
after he was made Dictator in his absence by Marcus Lepidus the Praetor,
repaires to Rome, calls an assembly, and is created Consul together with
Publius Seruilius Isauricus: soon after having settled the affairs of the
City, he strikes over into Greece, and at length overthrew Pompey in Thessaly
in a maine battle, Pompey overthrown 3921.
and disbanded him, though his Army far exceeded Caesar's. Pompey thus put to
flight, arriues in Egypt, Ptolomy Dionysius, Ptolomy Auletes son, being then
King thereof: which Auletes, (when he was expelled his Kingdom) Pompey had
restored by Aulus Gabinius, as aforesaid. In regard of which benefit, he
expected aid and protection from that Country: but the King being a child, his
Nobles (either despising Pompeyes fortune, or else fearing some troubles)
treacherously kill him. And slain.
Caesar pursuing Pompey, arriues at Alexandria with 3200 men, and there first
of all had notice of Pompeyes death. Cicero passing his censure upon both of
the^, If in the last war, says he, Pompey had abated somewhat from his austere
gravity, and and Caesar much from his ambition, we should have had both a
firm peace, and some Common wealth left us.

The King of Egypt was then in wars with his sister Cleopatra. Hereupon
Caesar being at Alexandria, would have their controversies rather decided by
course of law before himself, then by civil wars amongst themselves:
because he was Consul of Rome, and some years before there was a co^federacy
agreed upon with Ptolomy the Kings father by decree and consent of the Senate.
But the States took this most hainously complaining that their Kings Royal
Majesty was ecclipsed, in calling him to sit in judgment upon their
controversies. Thus incensed in mind they prepare to make war against
Caesar, but he after much danger getting the upper hand, did not reduce it into
the form of a Province: but tolerated Cleopatra, and her younger brother (the
King being slain) to hold the Kingdom. From thence marching into Syria, and
afterward into Pontus, he put to flight King Pharnaces, Mithridates his
son, and settled peace in Cappadocia, Armenia, Gallo-Greece, Pontus, and
Bythinia. Forthwith returning into I talie, and so to Rome about the middle of
Winter, at the Winter Solstitium.
Sun-sted, he strikes over from A town and promontory in Sicilie.
Lilybeum, into Africa, though warned by a chief Soothsayer, not to take his
voyage before the end of Winter. Scipio and Cato, Marcus Portius Catoes
Nephews sons were fled thither from the battle at Where Pompey was
ouer^hrowne.
Pharsalia, and having gathered together a great Army, drew King King of
^^a^^it^nia
Iuba, into confederacy with them. Caesar marching thither, overthrew and
destroyed them all; but Cato, (lest he should fall into his hands) killed
himself at Now called Biserta in Barbary.
Vtica; which fact Cicero defends and says, that it was better for him (whom
nature had endued with incredible gravity) so to do, then to behold the face
of a Tyrant. This Cato was of the sect of the Stoickes, and would oftentimes
maintain strange opinions in the Senate, as though he were versed in Platoes
politickes, as Cicero says, and not in the refuse offspring of Romulus.
Afterward Caesar repaires to Rome, and having triumphed over Gallia, Egypt,
Pontus, and Africa, set forward to Spain, where he warred against, and
subdued Sextus Pompeius. Thus having vanquished all his adversaries, and settled
a peace in many Nations far and wide: in the fifth year after the beginning
of his civil wars, The fourth Monarchy begun by Caius Caesar, An. 3925.
being 300. years and odd after Alexander the Great.
he returns to Rome, where after he had triumphed over Hispaine, he assumed
the offered title and authority of perpetual Dictator, and swaied the Senate
according to his own will: he, in a manner having the sole bestowing of all
honors, and public offices, conferring them upon whom he pleased, thereby
incurring many men's ill will.

And now the state of the Commonwealth being altered, and the supreme
government thereof reduced to one man's principality, those conspiracies then
in brewing against him, were at length, broached: For, in the fifth month after
his return to Rome, Caius Caesar slain.
he was slain in Pompeys Curia.
Courthouse, on the Ides of March, and by those very men, whom by his late
showed kindness, he had obliged to him, as also pardoned them for serving
against him in the Pompeian war. Those were Marcus, and Decius Brutus, Caius
Cassius, Cneius, Domitius, Caius Trebonius, Quintus Tullius Cimber, two of the
Sernilioes, Casea, Hala, and many more. Marcus Antonius the Consul, Cesars
Colleague, indicted Cicero also before the Senate, as guilty of the murder: for
that Marcus Brutus presently after Caesar was slain, (holding up his dagger on
high) shouted aloud, and nominated him, congratulating him for recovery of
their liberty.

Many report that Caius Caesar spoke to Marcus Brutus in Greek, as he rushed
upon him, and called him son, how they take it, I know not; but it is evident
out of Cicero, that Brutus was fifteen years younger then he.

Caius Caesar made diverse laws, some whereof when he was Consul, and other
some when he was Dictator, which after his name were called the Julian laws:
as, about distribution of lands, concerning violence, Majesty, extortion,
Priest-ships, usury. Others laws there were, which go under his name, but
were made by Octauius. All commend him for his clemency, and Cicero gives him
praise for his wit, quickness, reason, memory, learning, providence,
diligence: but he stormed grievously at his authority, yet secretly and in an
Epistle to Atticus, Thou shall perceive, says he, that this kingdom can
scarce hold half a year together. But in all those proceedings, Cicero carried
himself very wavering and inconstantly: for during the war, he followed
Pompeyes party, and his camp, although he reprehended his discouragement of
mind and cowardice, and in his Epistles to his friends, he calls Caesar a
war-waging Tyrant and monster. But after Pompey was put to flight, and slain,
and Caesar had pardoned many of his adversaries, he changes his style, and in
three set Orations extolled him with praises to the very heavens. Further, when
Caesar heard that there was treason plotted against him, and would often say,
that he had lived long enough; he beseeches and requests him to reject that
opinion: for although he was full fraught with glory, and in that regard, for
himself, had lived long enough, yet he had not lived long enough for the
Commonwealth, which could not be without his aid and protection: as concerning
any danger, he need not trouble himself. For all of us, says he, do not
only promise to watch about and guard Thee, but also to interpose our own
sides and bodies. But for all this, after Cesars death, he rejoiced
wonderfully, and boasted, that they who had slain him, had obtained that
glory, which could scarce be contained within the heavens.

This therefore is the fourth and last Monarchy: in which place we must note,
how this city which was built by Shepherds: from most slender beginnings, by
little and little increased to the height of potencie, and grew to be Empress
of the whole world. Now hereafter, I will briefly, as far as I may, declare,
after what manner it fell off by degrees from this most high estate, unto ruin.

The end of the first Book.
JOHN SLEID AN of the four chief Monarchies. OR, The key of History.
The second Book.
Caesar being slain, Octauius Caesar begun his raigue, Anno mundi, 3925. and
reigned An. 57.
his sisters son Caius Octauius (having drawn about the military bands to
his party) persecuted the murderers most bitterly. And at first, seemed to
take arms in defense of the Commo^-wealth against Marcus Antonius: but
afterward diuding the Empire with him, and Marcus Ledipus ordained a Government
by three. Cicero put to death, An. 3926.
Triumuirat, in which Marcus Cicero was by Marcus Antonius (whom he had very
vehemently opposed) put to death, being sixty three years of age, which was
eight years after Quintus Hortensius his death, who was so many years elder
then he, as abouesaid. Cicero directly ouershot himself in his own policies:
for when Marcus Antonius molested the Commonwealth, after Caius Cesars death,
he with exceeding great praises commended to the Senate, Caius Octauius, Cesars
kinsman, a young Gentleman of twenty years of age, and begun to urge to have
him created Consul, without any regard had to his age, producing examples of
ancient times, how it might be done, and refuting such objections as might
seem dangerous: professing to be bound to the Senate upon his honor, that he
should always couernue such a Commonwealths man, as he then was, and such an
one, as they ought chiefly, to wish and desire him to be: but afterward,
forsaken by him, he fell into Marcus Antonius his hands. Marcus Brutus
reprehends him sharply for such his flattery.

Then as it is common, certain grudges arising in emulation of the Empire,
when as Marens Lepidus for conspiracy against Octauius, was formerly removed
out of the Triumuirat, and banished: Octauius made war against Antonius his
other Colleague: and after his victory at A town in Epirus.
Actium, overthrew both him and Cleopatra beforementioned, at Alexandria,
forcing them both to kill themselves, and made Egypt a Roman Province. Authors
report, that in Ptolomie, Auletes reign the yearly revenues of Egypt, came to
12500. talents, which sum the learned of our times reckon to 7500000.
crowns: but when it came in subjection to the Romans, they judged it to be
far more rich, in regard of the traffic with India and Aethiopia. Antonius
thus overthrown and cut off, Octauius alone governed the Commonwealth forty
four years, and in 29. year of his Empire, and of the world, 3954. Christ
born An. mundi, 3954.
as most account, was our Savior JESUS CHRIST borne. Herod, surnamed the
Great, having seven years before, most sumptuously re-edified the demolished
Temple of Jerusalem.

Marcus Antonius was married to Caius Octauius his sister, but afterward (being
entangled with Cleopatra's love) forsook his wife, and married her, which
partly was cause of the war. Both of them were exceeding riotous, and Authors
relate almost incredible stories of their banquets, delights, and pleasures:
but such as I before set down, was the vp-shot and end of their lives: This
Marcus Antonius, was that most famous Orator beforementioned, Marcus Antonius
his Nephew.

In Caius Octauius his reign, the Romans had their first war in Germany,
within their own territories. Caius Julius Caesar indeed overthrew the Germans
twice, but it was in Gallia, to wit, Ariouistus in the Country of the Celts,
and afterward at the meeting together of the River Maze, and the Rhyne. After
this victory, he built a bridge, and past over the Rhyne, but resting there a
few days, brought back his Army into Gallia, and broke down the bridge. Two
years after, he passed again over the Rhyne on his second bridge, a little
above that place where he formerly had led over his Army, and then fully
intended to have gone against the Now of Pomerania in Germany.
Sueuians, but being certified by his Scouts of all affairs, and fearing much
difficulty and scarcity of provision, returns into Gallia, breaks down
some part of the bridge, and in the other part, built a Tower and a Castle, and
fortified it with Cittadels, that he might not altogether free his enemies
from the fear of his return. And this was all that Caesar did against the
Germans, as he himself writes. But Octauius by the two brothers, Tiberius and
Drusus, made war against the Germans bordering on the Alps.
Rhaetians and Vandals.
Vindelicians, and with People about Colen.
Vbian forces, (who were confederates with the Romans) Quintilius Varus being
their Captain General, invaded that part of Germany, now called Westphalia:
howbeit Arminius Chiefe-taine of the Germans near the river Elbe.
Cheruscans, almost utterly overthrew him, betwixt the River Ems.
Amasia, and Necchar. Horat. lib. 1 Ode 24.
Lupia. Horaee in a most elegant Ode, comforts Virgil, lamenting his death.
Drusus died in Germany, leaving behind him two sons, Germanicus a most
worthy soldier, and Claudius. Horace in another most elegant Ode, as we said
before, Horat. lib. 4 Ode 4.
extols him, and deriues his pedigree from Caius Claudius Nero, who when he
was the second time Consul, together with Marcus Liuius Saelinator, slew
Asdrubal, Annibals brother, at the River of Metanrum, as he was bringing over a
supply of forces. Octauius so styled, in honor, as much as Soueraign at this
day.
Augustus also subdued the Of Biscay in Spain.
Cantabrians, Of Aquitane in Gallia.
Aquitanians, Hungars.
Pannonians, Inhabiting Wendenland in some parts.
Dalmatians, Of Sclauonia also or Wendenlond.
Illyrians, Inhabiting near Lombardie.
Salassians, and inhabitants of the Alps. It is reported, that he often
intended, to lay off the weighty charge of the Empire: but again considering
with himself that it would be rashly committed to many men's authority, changes
his mind. In the thirty third year of his reign, deceased Herod the Great:
whom he, and Marcus Antonius in the third year of their Triumuirate, had made
King of Iudaea: and in the eight year after his death, his son and successor
Archelaus was banished to Vienna a Town in Gallia. It is written, that
Octauius maintained forty four legions of soldiers in protection of the
Provinces of the Empire. In Egypt, there were three, as many in Hispaine, and
eight in Germany. The yearly expense (as many in their computation reckon)
amounts to 2100000. crowns, so as they may distribute amongst every legion,
272000. crowns yearly. A legion as they hold, consists of 6000. footmen, and
500. horsemen.

Octauius is very much commended for his love and liberality toward men
renowned for their learning. The most famous Poets which then flourished, were
Varius, Virgil, Plotius, Valgius, Fusous, the two Viscoes, Pollio, Messala, the
Bibulies, Seruius, Furnius, and Horace, who desired that his works might have
approbation from them, not regarding other men's censures of the^. But the most
famous wits of Reme, flourisht in a certain continual order from Marcus
Portius Cato, and Aphricanus the elder, until this time. For this age wherein
Augustus lived, was in a manner the last that retained that genuine sense, and
pure vigor of the Latin tongue; for afterward by little and little, it grew
more and more corrupt, till it degenerated into mere barbarism, which
continued even till within our memory. The Poets borne at City of Betica in
Spain.
Corduba, used as Tully says, a kind of gross and uncouth garb: but what
think we, would he have judged of them, who lived after him above a hundred
years, not only those who were borne and brought up at Corduba, but those of
Rome also.

Now Tiberius Augustus his wives son, Tiberius An. Dom. 16. an. 23. m. ^ d.
26.
as also his son in law, and by adoption, did (but utterly against his will,
at leastwise he pretended so, being with much ado at last persuaded to it by
the Senates entreaty) take upon him the Empire, and at his first entrance,
undertook nothing of himself alone, but communicated with the Senate in all
matters of importance: notwithstanding within a little while after quite
neglecting the affairs of the commonwealth wholly gave over himself to his
pleasures. In his reign the Parthians bereft him of A^menia, and the Dacians
and Sarmatians of Moesia, the Germans forraged Gallia: but all those losses
nothing at all moved him.

Many writers, (and those, men of great esteem in point of Divinity) record
that in the fifteenth year of his reign our Savior JESUS CHRIST was
crucified, Christ crucified, An. etatis 34. Luke cap. 3.
but Saint Luke writes, that in that same year he was baptized by John Baptist.

At that time flourisht those Lawiers, Marcus Coccius Nerna, the father and
son, and Cassius Longinus. Tiberius Nero who served in the war at
Alexandria with Caius Caesar, was this Tiberius his Father. To him Caius Caesar
Caligula succeeded, Caius Caligula, An. ^om. 38. an. 3. m. 8. d. 8.
the most wicked son and direct monster of Germanicus his most worthy
father. Its recorded that Tiberius in those twenty three years which he
reigned, had gathered together an infinite Mass of gold: which Caligula out of
hand in the very first year consumed. About the second year of his reign
Herod Antipa, Herod the Great his Son, he who beheaded John the Baptist, was
sent in banishment to Lions in France.
Lugdunum: to whom Herod Agrippa succeeded, who beheaded James the Apostle.

After Caligula was slain, Claudius his uncle was brought in. Claudius, 42. an.
13. m. 8. d. 20.
He hearing that Britain had revolted, went thither, and after he had
subdued part of the Island, returned home. In his reign happened that great
general dearth, which Agabus foretold, Acts 11.
as the Evangelist Saint Luke mentions.

Claudius Nero, Nero 56. An. 13.
this Claudius his successor, openly signified, that at some time or other, he
would quite abrogate the order of the Senators. In his reign Britain gave
him a great overthrow, massacring the Roman Citizens and confederates there:
the Legions also in Armenia were compelled to go reprochfully under the yoke:
with much difficulty Syria was held in: Gallia revolted by the means of Julius
Vindex Governor of that province: as afterward Spain, Galba 68. m. 7. d. 7.
Sergius Galba being their Leader. And whilst he was casting about how to
recover those losses, Othom. 4. Vitellius m. 8.
and making ready his journey into Gallia, the rest of his forces which lay
dispersed in other provinces, rebelled. Histories relate what a loathsome and
outrageous Monster he was: and thereupon being condemned by the Senate, as an
enemy to the Commonwealth, by the help of one of his servants, he killed
himself. Besides Seneca these Poets the^ flourished, Lucan, Persius, and Silius
Italicus: the last whereof was Confull in the last year of Neroes reign. From
that time the State of the Common wealth was brought to that pass, that the
Creation of the Emperors lay within the power of the Armies and legions of the
Romans. After this manner was Vespatian made Emperor. Vespatian 69. an 9. m.
11. d. 24.
For those bands which lay in Masia, Pannonia, Iudaea, and Syria revolted from
Aul^s Vitellius, and swore fealty to Vespasian. He subdued Achaia, Lycia,
Rhodes, Byzantium, Samos, Thracia, Cilicia, and Comagena, making them Roman
Provinces, and utterly subverted Jerusalem, Titus. 79. an. 2. m. 2. d. 20.
Domitiaen 81. an. 15.
which war his son Titus managed. Flauius Domitian, made war against the
Now of the Lantzgraue of Hessens Country. Nerua 96, an. 1. m. 1. Trajane 97
an. 19. m. 6. d. 15.
Chatties, Dacians, and Sarmatians, and triumphed over them. Then lived those
Poets, Statius, Iuuenal, and Martial. Vlpius Trajane (adopted by Cocceus Nerua,
and afterward made Emperor) subdued the Dacians, twice rebelling, bringing
them in subjection to the Romans, and planting Colonies there, marching with an
Army against Armenia, and the Parthians, upon dedition and favor brought them
into his party, thereupon gaining his surname of Parthicus, but almost all
those Countries by him subdued at length rebelled, especially the Armenians and
Mesopotamians, and the Parthians rejected the King whom he had assigned them,
as soon as his back was turned homewards toward Italy. Aelius Adrianus
subdued I^daea then rebelling: Adrianus 116. an. 19. m. 6. d. 15.
the occasion of this war, was because he had erected a Temple at Jerusalem
(which City he suffered to be inhabited again) to Jupiter Olympius: which
fact the Jews took most hainously. He likewise visited the Gallia's,
Germany, Britain, and the Hispaines, as afterward Mauritania, the Parthians,
Asia and Greece: and returning home through Sicilie, from thence went again
into Africa: and after his return to Rome, sets forward again into Greece,
and from thence passed into Arabia, and afterward to Egypt.

Assembling the Senate, Antoninus Pius, 151. an. 22. m. 7. d. 26.
he commended to them Antoninus Pius, who being made Emperor after him,
maintained peace, endeavoring to obtain all men's good will, and by his letters
and courteous demeanure, kept foreign Kings and people within their obedience.
In his time flourisht those Lawiers, Alburnius Valens, Tuscianus, Vindius,
Verus, Vlpius, Marcellus, Arrianus, Tertullianus, Saluius, Iulianus, Lucius
Volusius, Metianus.

To Antonius Pius his son Marcus Antoninus surnamed the Philosopher,
succeeded: Antoninus the Philosopher 160 an. 19. m. 0. d. 11.
He took his Carien calls him his brotuer
kinsman Lucius Aurelius Verus to be his Associate in the Empire. By him he
had happy success in his wars in Parthia, he himself looking to the
affairs of the Commonwealth at home, and in the City: but soon after Verus
dying he reigned alone, and overcame in his war against the Germaues,
overthrowing also the Now Morauians.
Marcomannes. Sarmatians, Vandalls, and Inhabitants in and about Silesia.
Quadies, who had invaded the Upper and lower Hungaria.
Pannonia's. For at this time almost all the nations from Illyricum to Gallia,
had conspired against the name of the Romans.

Commodus Antoninus the most lewd son of this most laudable Prince, Commodus
Anteninus 79. an. 12. m. 8. d. 15.
by his Leiutenants overthrew the Of Mauritania or Morisco in Barbary.
Pertinax. m. 3. Didius Iulianus m. 7. Septimius Seuerus 192. ca. 17. m. 8. ^. 5.
Moors and Dacians, quieted the Pannoniaes, Germany and Britanie, which
Countries cast off their subjection: He himself in the mean while, wallowing
in all manner of filthiness and cruelty.

Septimius Seuerus had ciu^ll wars with Niger and Albinus who procured Asia
and Gallia to make a revolt: he had good success in his wars against the
Parthians, vanqu^shed the Jews throughout Syria, subdued Abagatus King of the
Persians, and compelled the Arabians to come to composition. He fortified
Brittanie, with a wall cross ouertwart the Island, reaching to the Ocean on
both sides: and having subdued those people that annoyed the Country dyed at
York.

His son Antoninus Bassianus Caracalla, Caracalla 210. an. 6. m. 2. d. 5.
made war against the Parthians and Armenians. This was he that commanded
Pupinianus, Prafectu^ praetorij, Governor of the pretorian Cohort.
Captain of the Guard, to be put to death, for refusing to defend his For
Caracalla slew his brother Geta.
fratricide. In his time flourisht many Lawyers, and most of them Pupinianus
his Auditors, as Tarruntius, Paternus Macer, Papirius Fronto, Anthius, Maximus,
Hermogenianus, Africanus, Florentinus, Triphoninus, Iushts, Callistratus,
Venuleius Celsus.

After Caracalla was slain, Macrinus succeeded, Macrinus 216. An. 1. m. 1. d.
28.
who, having bad success in his wars against Artabanus King of the
Parthians, and perceiving the legions incline to Heliogabulus Bassianus his
son, Heliogabulus 217. an. 3 m. 9. d. 4. Alexander Senerus 221. an. 13. m. 0.
d. 9.
concluded a peace.

Alexander Seuerus a stout soldier, successor to Heliogabulus that most
brutish of men: overthrew Artaxerxes King of the Persians in maine battle: and
recovered Mesopotamia, which was lost by Heliogabulus. He made war by his
Lieutenants in Mauritania, Illyricum, and Armenia, and had good success: but
afterward in his expedition against the Germans, who had forraged the
Country of Gallia, was murdered by certain of his own soldiers. Vlpianus
the Lawyer, Pupinianus his scholar was very intimate with him, and in his time
lived Paulus Pomponius, and Modestinus.

To this Alexander Maximinus succeeded: Maximinus 234. An. 2.
He with maine forces marches into Germany: his Army consisting not only of
Roman soldiers, but also of Moors, Osdronians, and Parthians, who had served
under Alexander. He burnt the Dorps in Germany far and wide, put very many of
his enemies to the sword, and took many more prisoners, returning with a
wealthy Army: Germany being at peace he marches to Syrmium, and was purposed to
have made war against the Sarmatians, not only so, but his further intent
was, to have brought all those Countries which lie northward even to the Ocean,
in subjection to the Roman Empire: but his soldiers not enduring his cruelty,
Gordianus 236. m. 1. d. 6.
created Gordianus their Captain General, which the Senate (bearing no good
will neither toward Maximinus) ratified and proclaimed the other enemy to the
Commonwealth. He, going about to revenge this fact, first made an Oration to
the army, and then set forwards toward Rome: the Senate upon notice hereof
proclaim Pupienus and Balbinus their Emperors: Pupienus, Balbinus 236. an. 1.
some months.
and to Pupienus was committed the charge of the war against Maximinus, who,
together with his son, was at the siege of A City in Italy.
Aquileia slain by his own soldiers as he lay asleep in his Tent.

After this, Pupienus and Balbinus being both slain in a mutiny amongst the
soldiers in the second year of their reign, the government of the Empire was
committed to Gordianus a young Gentleman. Gordianus junior, 237 Ann. 6.
He in the fourth year of his reign, marched through Moesia and Thracia
against the Persians, and in those countries subdued the enemies of the Romans;
from thence, striking through Syria, came to Antiochia, which was then held by
the Persians. There he fought diverse battles, in so much as he compelled the
Persians, who were in a manner accounted the terror of Italy, to contain
themselves in their own limits. At length, in the sixth year of his Empire,
he was slain, being betrayed by Philip Captain of the G^ard, Philip, 243.
An. 5.
who had raised a mutiny amongst the soldiers. And this Philip also, who sent
over his Lieutenants with an army against the Scythians that were up in arms
against the confederates of the Romans and their free-boroughs, came to the He
was slain by his own soldiers at Verona. Decius, 248. An. 2.
like end: Decius succeeded him, who being created Emperor by the Legions of
Illyricum, and afterward by consent of the Senate; first of all appeased the
troubles in Gallia. Afterward commending the care of the Commonwealth to the
Senate, He, together with his son, whom he had made his Colleague in the
Empire, sets forwards, (having the Senates consent thereunto) on his expedition
against the Scythians, who both by sea and land forraged the country of Thracia
and other dominions of the Empire: from whence (after some battles, having got
the vpper-hand, and drawn the enemy into a narrow straight place) he had
returned with complete victory, had not Gallus Hostilianus Governor of the
furthest parts of Moesia, revealed his counsel to the enemy; whereupon it
came to pass, upon joining battle, that both he and his son (by treachery
circumuented) were slain.

After this, Gallus 250. An. 1. m. 6.
Gallus made Emperor by one of the Legions, and the remainder of the furuiuing
soldiers, concluded a peace with the Scythians, to the dishonor and ignominy
of the Romans, in that he promised to pay them tribute, never heard of before,
and altogether unworthy the Majesty of so renowned a State. The Scythians
hereupon grown more fierce, broke the league, overrun Dardania, Thrace,
Thessalie, Macedonia, not resting there, but Asia also ^ouerthrowing and
subuerting very many Cities. At length, many other Countries, after the example
of the Scythians, turned enemies to the Romans, and many rebelled. The
Parthians broke into Syria, and seized upon Armenia, putting their King
Tyridates to flight. And such was the insolency of the Seythians, that they
threatened Italy also, and were likely to have done much mischief, had not
Aemilianus Governor of Moesia upon the coast of Sarmatia, encouraging his
soldiers with fair promises, and hope of rewards, given them an overthrow, and
pursuing them very far, Aemilianus, 252. m. 4.
took from them their own Territories: for this cause the soldiers proclaim
him Emperor: and Gallus upon notice hereof, marching forth to resist them, was
slain, together with his son Volusianus his Colleague in the Empire.

In this age flourished Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, certain of whose Epistles
to Lucius Bishop of Rome, whom he calls his brother and colleague, are amongst
diverse others, yet extant: and many more of his to Cornelius, where amongst
other matters, he complains of those, who being for their offenses condemned
by the Bishops of Africa, and degraded from their Priesthood, had appealed to
Rome: for it is fit says he, that where the crime is committed, there the
cause should be discussed. Sithence every Pastor has a certain portion of a
flock committed to his charge, whereof he must render an account to the Lord:
therefore the concord of Bishops is not to be abrogated, Valerianus 252. An. 7.
nor their decree to be annihilated, who had already given sentence in the
cause, in Africa.

In the mean space, another army, lying in the Alps, creates Valerianus
Emperor, a man of Noble parentage, which when it came to the cares of
Aemilians soldiers, they, to shake off all danger from themselves, kill their
own Emperor, and fly to Valerianus his party. This Aemilianus, when he was
made Emperor, sent his letters to the Senate, wherein he promised to deliver
Thracia and Mesopotamia from the enemy, to recover Armenia, and on every side
to repel the enemies of the Roman State. Valerianus making war against the
Persians, was by fault of one of his Captains, taken prisoner, by Sapor King
of Persia, whom the neighboring Princes, and confederate Nations, counseled
(but all in vain) to have dismissed. For it was the destiny of the Romans to
grow more valiant in resistance, after they were conquered.

Valerianus thus taken prisoner, Gallienus 295. An. 8.
his son Gallienus succeeded. He wholly gave himself to his pleasures,
neglecting the Commonwealth, insomuch as the armies which lay dispersed in the
Provinces, elected every one a new Emperor; as in Gallia, Spain, the
Pannonia's, Illyricum, Egypt, Africa, and the rest: but partly by him, partly
by civil dissentions amongst themselves, all those were ouerthrown. In his
reign, the Goths seize upon Thracia, forage Macedonia, and besiege
Thessalonica: the Scythians invade Bythinia, Cappadocia, and Asia, and striking
through the Which parts Europe and Asia.
Euxine sea into A River in Jllyricum, which begins in Germany, and is there
called Danubius or Danow.
Isther, offer hostility against the free-borroughs of the Romans, but so
excessive was his rechlesnesse, then when these news of the Provinces revolt,
and public calamity came to his ears, his reply was in derision and scorn:
as though all this could not hinder the subsistence of the Commonwealth, or the
preservation of the dignity thereof, or the state thereof be any whit
impaired thereby. Thus by this dishonorable course of life, grown into
contempt, as well at home as abroad, he got himself many enemies in the
Commonwealth, the Scythians and Goths mixed together with other Nations, being
about 320000. strong, were then up in arms, and had conspired the destruction
of the Romans: Flauius Claudius 167. An. 1. m. 9. Aurelianus 269. An. 6.
but Flauius Claudius (who succeeded after Gallienus was slain,) with much
ado vanquished all those in Moesia and other places.

He was a man of great prowess, and worthy of a longer life. After Claudius,
followed Aurelianus, because his worth was eminent, having made evident proof
thereof in Claudius his reign, against the enemy in many places. He made
wars in Insubria, and with the Marcomannes: at the beginning indeed with much
hazard and ieopardie, but at length, (after the Sibylla's books, by his
command, were perused, and the Senate had purged Religion) with happy success.
After his return from thence to Rome, (where he inflicted a penalty upon
those, who in his absence had raised an insurrection;) he made war for
recovery of those Provinces which lay eastward, and in Syria, which Zenobia
held, (a puissant and magnanimous Queen, and her own childrens Tutrix) being
left to her by her husband Odeuatus, who in Gallienus his time, behaved
himself very courageously and stoutly in those parts.

Wheresoever this Emperor set his foot, there he overthrew the enemies of the
Romans, as in Illyricum, Thracia, and the rest: and at length arriving in the
Syria.
enemies country, after no less doubtful then dangerous battle, overthrew
and took the Zenobia.
Queen; who, relying upon the Armenian and Persian auxiliars, most valiantly
resisted him. The chief City in that Country, (which he subdued,) was
Palmyra: the Citizens whereof, upon the Emperors return out of Asia into
Europe, rebelled, killing their Governor, and maintaining a Garrison for their
defense. But the Emperor making another expedition thither, demolished the
conquered City, put all to the sword, not sparing any age or sex. After this,
he recovered Egypt, which then had revolted, and of a new reduced the Gallia's
into the Roman subjection. Then he triumphed at Rome, and from thence marching
through Illyricum, proclaimed war against the Persians: but in his journey,
was slain by his own familiar friends. After his death, there was a
Jnterregnum.
vacancie for a For six months. Tacitus 275 m. 6.
space, which had never happened before since Romulus his decease. At length,
Tacitus succeeded, who, continuing Emperor but a few months, achieved no
memorable exploit; him the Senate requested, that he would not ordain his
children his successors after him in the Empire, Florianus, m. 2. Probus 276
an. 6. m. 4.
but some man of approved worth and integrity: which was, Probus, who being
confirmed, as well by the Legions as the Senate, recovered Gallia, and in
diverse battles overthrew the Inhabiting Franconia, now called Frankenlandt.
French, a people of Germany, who had gotten possession thereof. He vanquished
the Sarmatians, and other Nations in Illyricum; and coasting through Thracia,
with the very terror of the name of the Romans, and the greatness of his
noble exploits, obliged the barbarous people to his subjection: In Asia he
settled a peace, and the fame only of his name, made the Parthian King sue for
peace. He concluded a peace with the Persians, and from thence returned into
Thracia, and transplanted those foreign nations whom he had subdued into the
Roman territories; some whereof, continued in subjection, but others
contrariwise, notwithstanding afterward he vanquished all or the greatest
part of them: and having composed the rebellions in Gallia, Hispaine, and
Britain, in his journey through Illyricum, toward his intended war against
the Persians, was trecherously slain, by his own soldiers. At this time the
Commonwealth flourished, peace being settled in all nations on every side far
and near; in so much as Probus would sometimes say, that the world would come
to that pass shortly, that there would be no need of Legions and garrisons:
but the soldiers offended at this his speech, thought it best to cut him off.

After him, followed Carus: Carus 282. An. 1. and some months together with
his sons, Corinus and Numerianus.
he subdued the Sarneatians, who now, after Probus his death, were grown more
insolent, and menaced even Italy it self: then making an expedition against
the Persians, took Mesopotamia, and marching on further, died. His younger
son Numerianus served in the wars with him: his other son Carinus he had
set over the Gallia's. Numerianus was slain by his Arius Aper. Diocletian,
284. an. 20.
wives father, and in his place, came Diocletian: with whom Carinus had diverse
conflicts about obtaining the Empire, but was overthrown and slain.
Diocletian in regard of the troubles and seditions in many places kindling,
took to him for his Colleague, Maximianus. He quiered the country of Gallia
then in commotion, as also Africa; and Diocletian Egypt putting the Authors of
these broiles to death. He recovered Britaina also in the tenth year after the
revolt: and to the end that the state of the Commonwealth might be more firm,
and to avoid new commotions about succession, he adopted Galerius, and
Maximianus, Constantius Chlorius. Galerius being sent by Diocletian, against
Narses King of the Parthians, had ill fortune in that war, losing the major
part of his army: but afterward commanded to renew the war, he overthrew
the enemy in maine battle, and marching on further in those places, then any
other Emperor, except Trajan, took Ctesiphon, subdued all Assyria, and
recovered the five Provinces, lying beyond the river Running through Armenia.
Tigris, which had revolted in Trajan the Emperors time.

Diocletian having settled the affairs of Asia, returned into Europe, where the
Scythians, Sarmatians, Almaines, lying betwixt the Alps and Ments, as Carrion
supposes.
Alans, People of Sarmatia.
Bastarnans, ^welling about the River Carpis in Scythia. Constantius Galerius,
304. an. 2 m 3. an. 7. m. 5.
Carpies, Chatties, and Quadies, were then all in peace. Afterward both he,
as also Maximianus resigning their Sovereignty, inuest their Colleagues before
mentioned, with the title of Emperors: Constantius of the Gallia's, Britain,
the Hispaines, Italy, and Africa; and Galerius, of Illyricum, Greece, and
Asia: Marcellus was then Bishop of Rome, whose decree is extant, prohibiting
Bishops from calling a Synod, without the authority of the Sea of Rome, as
also to condemn any Bishop who should appeal to Rome. But Maxentius the
Emperor persecuting him, his estate as others before him, was both mean and
miserable. Whereupon it may easily be coniectured, whether or no, he (in those
perplexities and lurking corners) could take so much upon him, as to establish
such manner of decrees.

At length Constantius dying at York, Galerius adopted Severus and Maximianus.
In the mean space, the Preterian soldiers at Rome, elect Maxentius their
Emperor. After Seuerus was slain, Maximianus made choice of Licinius for his
Colleague in the Empire. Among those arose great troubles: whereupon the Nobles
of Rome call home Constantine, Constantius his son, then employed in the
Gallia's, to rescue their City from the tyranny of Maxentius. Constantine the
Great, 306. an. 30. m. 9. d. 27.
He marching forward into Italy, with part of his army, in pitched field, got
the victory, and afterward quite defeated Maxentius his forces at the City
of Rome. After this, he fought against Licinius, who being overthrown in
battle, and almost grown into hatred with all men, was at length slain by
his own soldiers. Many write that the cause of this war was, for that
Licinius did bitterly persecute the professors of Christianity, although he
had been very often entreated and admonished to the contrary by Constantine.
For from the time of the resurrection of Christ, until this age, (almost three
hundred years) the professors of Christ were diversely punished; omitting those
whereof the Scripture makes mention, as of Acts 7.
Stephen, Acts 11.
James the brother of John, Acts 9.
Peter's imprisonment and enlargement by the Angel; passing over in silence Paul
likewise, who grievously persecuted the Church of God, but after his
conversion, escaped no kind of punishment for Christ's cause: the Roman
Emperors also, as Nero, Domitian, Trajan, Septimius Seuerus, Decius, Valerian,
Aurelian, Diocletian, and Maximian, committed most horrible and outrageous
masfacres. But Constantine coming to the Empire, and embracing the true
Religion, affoorded harbor and refuge to the Christians. Then first of all
began the Bishops of Rome to live in safe^ie; for till then, almost all of
them, (who from Peter, whom they will have to be their first, are reckoned to
thirty three) were tormented with persecutions. Their decrees are inserted in
the books of the Councels, but the greatest part of them are so slight,
triuiall, and quite different from the sacred Scriptures, as makes it credible
that they were a long time after forged by some others. But if they be true,
and proceeded from them, then indeed that which Paul by prophecy foretold, 2
These. 2.
seems most rightly to be applied to this place, that then that son of
perdition and man of sin began to work the mystery of iniquity. That
decree yet extant goes under Anacletus his name, the fourth from Peter, as they
reckon; wherein he ordains the Church of Rome to be (by Christ's command and
institution) the head of other Churches.

To Alexander the next after him, is that decree attributed, where he commands,
that the water should be consecrated with salt, to purge the people, and to
avoid the snares of the Devil. But judge I pray you how far those differ from
that Majesty of the Apostles, how far from the writings of S. S. Ierom
writes that he dyed in the 68 year after the passion. Suidas says that he lived
120 years.
John the Evangelist who almost lived till this very time. I have only set
down these two decrees, that by them we may judge of the rest, for they are
almost of the same molde, and carry open color of ambition, and not only the
speech wants the grace, but also the matter it self has no salt in it, Colos.
4.
both which Paul requires in the Ministers of the Church.

And to this place also appertains, that decree of Constantine the Emperor,
which they have inserted into their books, for the foundation and bulwark of
their power. For the cause and occasion of his excessive In conferring (as they
imagine) the City of Rome the Empire of the West etc. upon he Popes.
liberality, which is there set down, may out of history, be disproued and
convicted of falsehood. Further, be it granted that the Emperor was thus most
exceedingly profuse; perhaps for himself only, he might herein abate of his
own right, but could not do it, for his successors, authorized with coequal
power, and Protectors of the Commonwealth. For he who damnifies the freedom
and liberties of his Empire, ought not to have the title of Father of his
Country, nor can he ordain another to share with him in equality of authority
or prejudice the same.

By Constantine the Emperors appointment, The first Council of Nice held in
An. 325. continued 3. years.
a most populous Counsel was called and assembled at Nice a City in Bythinia,
wherein the heresy of Arrius, denying Christ to be coequall in substance with
his father, was condemned. Its recorded that many Bishops, not only out of
Europe and Asia, but also out of Egypt and Lybia, met together there. Amongst
other, one decree was, that through Egypt, Lybia and Pontapolis; the ancient
custom should be maintained, that is, all the Bishops there, should remain
under superiority of the Bishop of Alexandria, notwithstanding the usurpation
and withholding thereof by the Bishop of Rome: as also that the Church of
Antioch and other Provinces and Churches should each one entirely retain their
peculiar privileges. After this Council, certain Iewd opinions were vented,
(one Eustathius being Author) about shunning of marriage, In monastical manner,
and some women artired in men's habit.
about a new and unusual kind of habit, about forbearance to eat flesh, and
forsaking propriety of possessions. And hereupon (many husbands procuring a
divorce, and servants leaving their masters, betaking themselves to this new
and religious habit, as they call it; women likewise taking the same course,
forsaking their husbands: and those who fed upon flesh, as also the Ministers
of the Church that were married being publicly contemned, as persons impure and
unacceptable to God;) a Counsel was assembled at Gangra a town in Paphlagonia,
wherein those were condemned, who either taught or held that opinion.

Constantine (for reestablishing a peace in the Commonwealth) being with most
general acclamation, confumed both by the Senate and people of Rome, turned
himself wholly to foreign wars, and after many battles overthrew the G^thes
and Sarmatians, then forraging the Country of Thracia; afterward being
stricken in years, he proclaimed war against the Persians, who wasted the
Country of Mesopotamia: and in Asia, where he was arrived with his Army, (after
receipt of a medicine for recovery of his health) breathed his last, not
without suspicion of poison. This is he by surname, styled the Great: who named
Byzantium a City of Thrace after his own His desire was to have it called New
Rome, but use prevailed and altered it to Constantinople.
name, and thither translated the Imperial Seat. He began his At Rome, but he
reigned 6. years before in Britain and elsewhere.
reign about the three hundred and twelfth year after the birth of Christ. It
is written that Comets of wonderful greatness, were seen before his death.
He left three sons, Constantine, Constantius, and Constans, amongst those
was the body of the Empire divided, to Constantine part of the Alps, Gallia,
Hispaine, Britain The Island of Orkney lying near and belonging to Scotland.
the Orcades, Ireland, and Now called Island lying beyond Scotland, as some
say, others Hitland. Constantine, 337. An. 3. Constantius 337. An. 24 Conslaus
337. An. 1^
Thyle, were allotted: to Constans, Italy, Africa, with the Islands, Illyricum,
Macedonia, Achaia, Peloponnesus, and Greece: to Constantius, Asia, and Thrace.

Constantine not satisfied with this division made war upon his brother
Constans, and at Aquileia (whither he was then come) joining battle with
Constans his forces: lost both his Army and his life. Constans who in the mean
time, was up in Arms against the The same who were afterward called Goths.
Carrion.
Getes and Sarmatians in Dacia, returns into Italy, and having gotten the
Alps, invaded Gallia, and in two years space won all his deceased brothers
dominions: but was slain within a while after by the treachery and crafty
dealing of Magnentius. Him, the soldiers (before hand allured and inueigled
with rewards) elected Emperor. Constantius the only suruiuing brother of the
three, upon notice hereof, (deputing Gallus his uncles son, and sisters
husband, his Vicegerent over Asia) marches with a strong Army into Italy, and
so into Gallia, where in maine battle he overthrew the Enemy. But Magnentius
escaping, sends his Ambassadors to sue for peace. Whose suit the Conqueror
rejecting, he on a fresh wages battle again, but with ill success: thereupon
flying to Lions, where perceiving his own friends to conspire his destruction,
and not having any corner where to hide himself, became his own executioner.
Afterward Constantius commanded Gallus his Cousin germane, and Vicegerent for
Asia as abouesaid, (who abused his authority and power) to be put to death,
when he could not otherwise remedy it. After this he returns into Asia, with
intent to prosecute the war in Persia, which, by reason of Magnentius his
faction abouementioned, he had broken off. And in regard the Germans about
this time, making an inroad into Gallia, forraged the Country there, he
adopted his other Cousin germane Iulianus, Gallus his brother, and to him
committed the protection of Gallia. Iulianus, (having had prosperous success
in his designs, and in many battles gotten the upper hand) beat back the
Enemy beyond the Rhyne, took many prisoners, and rescued many Roman soldiers
out of prison, and at Strasburg in Germany
Argentine almost quite cut off the Enemies whole Army. Hereupon the soldiers
proclaim him not only Caesar, but also Augustus, and set a Diadem upon his
head, but against his will as he pretended. For in his letters to Constantius
he indeauoured to remove the envy of the fact from himself. But Constantius
hereat greiuously offended, ceasing his war in Persia, and liberally and
kindly entreating the neighboring nations, that they might continue their
allegiance, sets forward on his journey to reduce Iulianus to his duty; but on
the way whilst he was yet in Asia, being taken with a fever, ended his life,
first ordaining Iulianus his successor.

During Iulianus his reign the enemies contained themselves within their own
bounds not raising any commotion in any place. Julianus 361. an. 1. m. 7. d. 23.
He himself went out against the Persians, and forraging Assyria (having put
the Enemies forces to flight) marched forwards as far as Ctesiphon. At length
returning home with his forces, the enemy set upon him in the rere, where,
fighting in the midst of his soldiers in the maine battalia, he received a
wound, whereof, within a while after, he died, an enemy to the name of Christ.
The soldiers having thus lost their Leader, Iouinianus, 363. m. 7. d. 22.
being plunged in great distress, create Iouinianus Emperor: at what time
Julius the first of that name was Bishop of Rome: certain of whose Epistles to
the Bishops of the East, are yet extant, in which he often presses it, that to
Him alone, as Bishop, says he, of the chief See, by a certain singular
privilege and divine ordinance, belongs the right of conuocating General
Counsels. But it may seem wonderful, with what face he could write thus, or
they so boast of it, when as before him, Constantin^ had called the Council of
Nice; and after him, a hundred years full, Martianus the Emperor called the
Council of Chalcedon. To Him also alone, as Primate of that City, says he,
appertains the cognizance of Episcopal causes, and other matters of that
kind of more weighty importance. This his arrogance the Bishops could not
endure. But assembling at Antiech, boldly reply: That it was not fit, that the
sentence by them passed should be repealed by him, for that they were
possessed of the same degree of dignity, whereof he was, and the doctrine of
Christ, came from their Countries to Rome Tandem.
at the second hand, by the pains and ministry of the Apostles. Wherefore in
case he should proceed, and make new decrees, they would not obey them, neither
have communion with him, but would take such a course as the matter it self
should require. And in another Council in the same City (of greater concourse
then the former) amongst other decrees, They limit the office of a Bishop, as
also of a Metropolitan, about discussing matters of more weighty importance.
For they decreed, that in case the Bishops concur not, the Metropalitane of
the next adjoining province, shall delegate certain Judges to determine the
cause. But if any Bishop be condemned for an offense by common decree of the
rest of the Bishops, they ordain that their sentence shall stand firm, and
not be repealed by another. They further establish that the Bishop, shall
faithfully dispense the Bona sacra.
goods of the Church, and distribute them to the use of the poor, and that he
himself if need require, may take from thence as much as shall be necessary
for natural sustentation. For St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 6.8.
We ought to be content with food and ^raiment. Which goods if the Bishop say
they, shall perchance convert into his own or his friends private commodity,
or commit the administration thereof to his kindred, he is to be restrained by
a Council.

At length Ioninianus (the enemy being at his back) concluded a dishonorable
peace, redeliuering those five Provinces beyond Tigris, (won by Galerius, as
above mentioned) as also part of Mesopotamia: and afterward couenanted that
the Romans should lend no aid, to the King of Armenia their friend and
confederate. Marching forth with his Army, as he was returning home dyed upon
the borders of Bythinia. The soldiers forthwith create Valentinianus Emperor,
who soon after his coming to Constantinople, Valentinianus 364. An. 11. m. 8.
d. 32. together with his brother Valens
took his brother Valens to be his Colleague in the Empire, and commending
those Of the East.
Countries to his care, marched into Germany, where he subdued the Saxons
bordering upon the Ocean, and soon after he had been in Gallia, In Pannonia
falling into a fever by an excessive straining of his voice in an angry reply
against some offenders.
dyed as it is written upon a vehement passion of anger. By this time his
brother Valens was arrived in Asia, to repress the Parthians forraging the
Country of Armenia, and the King of Persia, who breaking the league, was fallen
into open hostility: But after the Hunnes or Tartars, and Scythians had
overrun Pannonia, Epirus, and Thessaly, he returns into Europe, where in
pitched battle being overthrown, and as he fled wounded and carried into a
little cottage, which the Enemy setting on fire, he there dyed. That Edict of
Valentinianus the Emperor, and of Valens, is yet extant, wherein it is
provided, That those who betake themselves to a monastical life and
solitariness, and in that regard escape warfare and public impositions, shall
be drawn out of their cells, and either serve for their Country, or else
forfeit all those benefits, afterward conferred upon them, that undergo both
pains and peril for the Commonwealth.

The Enemies not long after (appeased by the Emperors gift and money) departed
from Constantinople which they then besiged. Saxony being at peace, Valentinian
the Emperor chose his son Gratianus for his Colleague: Gratian 375. an. 7. m.
9. d 9. With his son Valen^i^tan the I^.
who, after his father and uncle Valens their decease, succeeded them both,
both. But he (the Commonwealth being tossed with diverse billows of troubles)
assumed Theodosius a worthy Commander in war, and sent him into the Eastern
Countries. There at Constantinople, he vanquished the Huns, and Goths, and
chased them out of the Coasts of Thrace. After this, Gratianus was
treacherously slain in Gallia, by Maximus one of his Coronels who affected the
Empire. Ausonius of Bordeaux (certain of whose Poems are yetexta^t, was his
Tutor for literature, whom afterward he advanced to the dignity of a Consul.
His son Valentinianus also died in manner of the same death, by the treachery
of his familiar friend Arbogastus. But the murderers escapt not scot-free, for
both of them were slain by Theodosius the Emperor. Maximus was taken and put
to death at Aquileia, and the other acted that part himself.

Those Tyrants thus cut off, Theodosius 378. an. 16. d. 12.
Theodosius possessed of the Empire, ordaines his two sons Honorius and Arcadius
his Colleagues: to whom by reason of their nonage he appointed Protectors, or
as it were Governors: to Arcadius he assigned Ruffinus, and to Honorius,
Siilico; sand not long after departed hi life. The second Council of
Constantinople, An. 381.
By his command a Council was held at Constantinople, wherein the heresy of
Macedonius, who derogated from the Divinity of the holy Ghost, was condemned.
The Fathers there assembled, being as it is recorded, 150 in number, ordained
Bishops, both there as also at Antiochia, which they style the elder and truly
Catholic Church, and at Jerusalem which they call the Mother of all Churches.
They transmitted those their proceedings to Darsasus Bishop of Rome, who
endeavored to call them to Rome. Saint Hierom when he was young, was familiar
with this Damasus. He was the Author of that memorable saying. Wheresoever the
Bishop is, be it at Rome, Engubiu^, Constantinople, Rhegium, or Alexandria, he
is of the same demerit and Priesthood. Theodosius has the fame for a very
godly Prince, who being reprehended by St. Ambrose Bishop of Millane, and
prohibited entrance into the church took it patiently.

Arcadius governed in the East at Constantinople, Arcad us 395 a^. 13. m. 3 d.
15. Together with Honorius, who reigned about 15. years after the death of
Arcadius.
and Honorius at Rome. But Ruffinus with intent to translate the Empire to
himself, underhand incited the King of the Goths to make war against
Arcadius: whose treachery being disclosed, he was slain by the soldiers.

Innocent the first of that name excommunicated Arcadius the Emperor, for that
he gave consent to have Saint John Chrysostom expelled out of his Church, as
it is related in the Papal Law. At this time flourisht Saint Augustine also,
Bishop of Hippo, who was present at the third and fourth Counsel of Carthage,
where amongst others, those decrees passed, That the Bishop should have a
little mansion house near to his Church.

That his housholdstuffe should be mean, his table and provision poor, and by
his uprightness and integrity of life, should get himself authority. That he
should use the vtensils of the Church, as things committed to his charge, and
not as his own.

This Innocent the first writ also to Saint Austine, and to Aurelius Bishop of
Carthage, where exhorting them to mutual prayers, he calls them brothers, and
fellow-priests. After Innocent followed Zozimus, who commending the decrees of
the Fathers, and of antiquity, says that it is not lawful, no not for the Sea
of Rome, as they call it, to make any alteration therein, or any contradictory
decree. He also reprehends and corrects the custom of his time, that many men
of no learning, aspired to the order of Priesthood. Boniface the first
succeeded Zozimus, in whose time the sixth Council of Carthage was assembled,
whereto there was great concourse, wherein Saint Austine also was present.
Boniface sending his Legates thither, declared that the Council of Nice had
granted such privilege to the Sea of Rome, that all Provinces every where,
should appeal thither: and therefore requested the Fathers there assembled, to
establish and confirm the same. Their answer was, that as far as they knew,
there was not any such decree at Nice, but, that the certain truth might be
sifted out and known, they were agreed to send for a true copy of the
Council, from the Churches of Alexandria and Constantinople; which being at
length produced, the decree was found quite contrary: to wit, each Province
should have the cognizance of their own causes, and that an appeal should lie
from the Bishops to the Counsels of the Province, or else to the Oecumenicall
Council, as they call it. St. Cyril was then Bishop of Alexandria. Boniface
died before the copy came, and his successor Celestinus urging the same, had
his answer according to the tenor of that decree.

Arcadius dying, his son Theodosius the II. succeeded, Theodos. II. 408. an.
42. m. 2. d. 28.
in whose reign, and by whose command, a Council was held at Ephesus, in which
Nestorius was condemned, who denied that Christ was borne God of the Virgin
Mary, and at this time dyed St. Augustine. On the other side Stilico Honorius
his Protector dealt no less perfidiously then Ruffinus: For he not only gave
the Goths leave to inhabit and seat themselves in Gallia, but also instigated
them to march into Italy, with their Leader Alaricus, and took the City of
Rome, which happened in the year of Rome built 1162, and of our Lord 412.

The Goths keeping their Rendezuous at Rome for a while, and harrazing the
Country till they came to A seacoast town in Italy, now called Reggio,
opposite to Sicilie.
Rhegium, from thence sayld over into Sicily, where they suffered shipwreck,
and lost their King. But Stilico still continuing his villainous and
treacherous practices, with intent to translate the sway of government into his
own son Eucherius his hands: was (upon discovery of his plot) taken, and by
Honorius his command put to death. King Alaricus thus dispatched, the Goths
elected his kinsman Adolphus their King, and under his leading marched back
again to Rome, where, what remained, they spoil. He being slain, Gensericus
reigned, after whose death followed Wallis, with whem Constantine Honorius. his
sisters husband and Leiutenant for the Gallia's, as afterward Colleague in the
Empire: entered into amity and league, granting them Aquitania a part of
Gallia to inhabit.

At the same time the Scots and Picts. infested Britain, but were put to
flight by the auxiliary forces sent from Honorius the Emperor, likewise the
Vandals and Alans, with their chiefetaine, Gense ricus pillaged up and down
Hispaine.

After Honorius his decease at Rome, his sisters son Valentinianus succeeded
him in the West and at Rome. Theodosius Arcadius his son, as above recited,
in the mean space governed the other part of the world at Constantinople.

About this time the Vandalls and Alans (provoked by the dissentions and
factions of the Roman Captains in Africa) break forth out of the Hispaines
into Africa, and wasted the country with fire and sword. After with destruction,
a certain part of Africa was given them to inhabit.

The Goths (who by Honorius his permission and consent as a little
abouementioned, inhabited Aquitane in Gallia) not satisfied with their own
bounds, offered violence and injury to their neighbors: and wearied Narbon with
their siege. But Litorius being dispatched thither with forces, raised the
siege, set the Town at liberty, brought in provision, and giving them battle,
at the first sped well, but afterward was taken with the loss almost of his
whole Army: so great was this overthrow that the Romans were forced to sue for
peace. In like manner Gensericus King of the Vandalls, breaking the league made
with the Romans in Africa, as before mentioned, on a sudden surprises Carthage,
where he exercised much cruelty: which City had then continued in subjection to
the Romans, for 585. years. Thus having got possession of Carthage, he
strikes over into Sicilia, which he made flow with blood. Hereupon Theodosius
the Emperor rigging a Navy, prepares for war against the Vandals, but by
reason the Hunnes forraged Thrace and Illyricum, the Army was recalled out of
Sicilie, to defend those parts. The Scots and Picts then again make an
irruption into Britain, and the inhabitants despairing of aid from the Romans,
desire help from the English, The Saxons invade Britain, about 448.
a people of Saxony: who being allured with the beautifulness of the country,
by little and little conueying over more forces (oppressing the Britains)
brought the greatest part of the Island into their subjection. Not long after
this, Theodosius the second, died at Constentinople; in whose reign, as it is
written, the Sun was doubled, and a comet appeared almost from the Ides of
July, till the month of September.

Martianus succeeded Theodosius in the East. Martianus 450. an. 6. m. 6.
We have above mentioned Gensericus, with whom Valentinianus concluded a
peace, dividing Africa betwixt them. About this time, Athila King of the Huns,
having got Ducia and Pannonia, most cruelly harrazed the neighboring
Countries, Macedonia, Mysia, Thracia, intending to conquer the Eastern part of
the Roman Empire. But perceiving that the war would be extreme difficult,
in regard the Goths, (who then were in league with the Romans, and inhabited
part of Gallia, as abouesaid) aided the Romans, therefore by his Ambassadors,
he requires their amity and confederacy, but Aetius Valentinianus the
Emperors Lieutenant prevented that; who corroborating the league with
Theodoricus king of the Goths, wholly bent himself to the war. Athila
nevertheless proceeds, and in the Downs of Chaalons, (which part of France in
regard of the plains, is Champaigne) was this most dismal battle fought, in
which as it is recorded, 180000. men were slain. And Athila losing the day,
determined to kill himself, lest he should fall alive into the hands of his
enemies. Howbeit king Theodoricus his son, following Aetius the Lieutenants
counsel, returned home with his forces, to succeed his deceased Father:
whereby Athila getting time to recollect himself, retires into Pannonia, and
leaying new forces, marches, full swollen with revenge, into Itali^: where at
length, winning the City of Aquilleia, (first wearied out with a
long-continuing siege) sacked and burnt it. Then forthwith he takes Concordia,
Padua, Vicentia, Verona, Brescia, Bergamo, Millaine and Pauie: and so pillaging
up and down Romandiola.
Flaminia, encamped at the meeting of the River of Mencius and Po: where
deliberating about his passage to Rome with his Army, Leo the first of that
name, Bishop of Rome, comes to him, and so far prevailed, that altering his
intent, he not only surceased his expedition to Rome, but also quite removing
out of Italy, returned into Pannonia, where within a while after he ended his
days.

This was that Leo, many of whose Epistles to Theodosius the second, and
Martianus the Emperor, are extant, wherein he partly apologizes for his
absence from the Councels by them conuocated, and entreats them not to be
offended for sending thither of his Legates; and partly also requests, that
they would design some place in Italy, rather then in Asia, for the
celebrating of Councels: but he obtained nothing.

Whilst Athila thus raged up and down Italy, the City of Venice was
builded; Venice begun to be built, An. 430.
when many of the abler sort, leaving the adjoining places, betook themselves
to those sea-sands, little Islelands, and hillockes, as into some harbor. Thus
mean and in a manner desperate and miserable, was the beginning of this City,
which now, as we see, is grown to a wonderful greatness. They reckon 805.
Dukes till this time; the first whereof was Some Authors call him Paulutius
Anafestus, and write of his beginning in Anno Dom. 697. and after their City
built, 282.
Paulus Anazatus, in the year of grace, 706. being 252. years after the
beginning of the building of their City.

Afterward when Valentinianus was slain, Gensericus King of the Vandals,
sailing over with a Navy from Africa into Italy, marches with an exceeding
great army (being aided by the Moors) toward Rome, and takes the City, in a
manner left quite desolate: but at the earnest request of Leo the Bishop, who
also, as aforesaid, appeased Athila: he forbore fire and sword: The
Citie-sackt, captives were transported to Carthage in great troops. The
enemies after this, infest Campania with grievous outrages, raze Capua, Nola,
Naples, and other Cities: those who survive the sword, they condemn to the
irons, and grown rich with the wealth of Italy, return into Africa.

Martianus, Emperor of the East, a Prince of a calm nature, inioyed peace:
he was wont to say: That it was not sitting for a Prince to take arms, as
long as he might live in peace. In his reign, The fourth Council at Chalcedon
in Bythinia.
and by his command, a very great Council was assembled at Chalcedon, wherein
Eutyches who confounded the two natures in Christ, was condemned.

There, amongst the rest, it was decreed, that no Clerk, as they call them,
should be admitted to the Churches of two Cities. Plurality of livings, as
we term it, was not then heard of, which now is grown so ordinary, as
nothing is more common. And almost within our memory, that custom crept in
amongst other blemishes of the Church, that the Pope may confer two
Bishoprics upon one man. If now therefore he would restore the custom in
this behalf, which was held in the next precedent age; he should do his
duty, but seeing that cannot be, can we suppose it ever to be granted, that
matters shall be amended according to the holy Scriptures, and decrees of the
Apostles and primitive times? No, they toil in vain, that balance the deeds
of the Popes, with the rules of ancient Religion.

Martianus dying in the seventh year of his Empire, Leo, 457. an. 17.
Leo succeeded him: and Auitus, (when Gensericus after the taking of Rome, was
returned into Africa) succeeded Valentinianus at Rome, and in the West, next
to him, Majoranus, then Seuerus, and after him, Anthemius: after those followed
others, but nothing eminent, who perished in their mutual massacres and
treacheries, and reigned but a while, insomuch that now the other part of the
Roman Empire in the West, stood in great danger.

Nothing memorable is recorded of Leo the Emperor, but that he entered into
amity and league with the Goths, then wasting Illyricum, and an Epistle or
two of Leo the Bishop of Romes to him, Zeno 474. an. 17. m. 2. d. 7.
are extant. Zeno Called Isauricus, because he was borne in Isaurica in Cicilia.
Isauricus was his successor. Among stthose also, who ruled in Rome, after
Valentinianus his death, Augustulus was one, in whose reign, Odoacer with a
maine army of Herulians and Syrians, out of Pannonia, inuades Italy, takes
Orestes, a Nobleman of Rome, who was fled to Pauie with his forces) puts him to
death, sackes and burns the City: and marching on, takes in the whole Country
as far as Rome. Augustulus dejected in mind, voluntarily resignes his Empire:
Odoacer enters the City, and obtaining the kingdom of Italy, governed
without resistance fourteen years. But at length, Theodorieus King of the
East-Gothes, sent by Zeno the Emperor: marching from Constantinople, overthrew
the Part of the Goths.
Gepides and Bulgarians, opposing him; and so making his way through Mysia, and
Pannonia, arriues in Italy, and incampes himself not far from Aquileta:
whither Odoacer afterward repairing, a sharp battle insued. Odoacer losing
the day, fled; but recollecting his forces, ioynes battle on fresh, and is
again ouerthrown, most part of his army lost: some whereof perished in
battle, others in A River running through Verona.
Athesis. He flies amain toward Rome, where shut out, he spoils the Country
about, and comes to Rauenna: there at length, after three years siege, upon
the Cities yielding, she was taken and put to death.

Odoacer thus cut off, Theodoricus became Lord of Italy, marches to Rome,
where he assembled two Councels of Bishops, whom he called together out of
sundry Provinces of Italy, to sit upon Pope of Rome.
Symmachus his cause, whom the greatest part refused, as one unworthy, and
falsely created. This Theodoricus was an Arian, as the Papal books have it.
His surname was Because of his victory at Verona.
Veronensis, and was descended from that Theodoricus abouementioned, who was
slain in the battle against Athila King of the Hunnes. Odoacer was a Of
Rugerland in Pomerania.
Rugian, a people of Germany, upon the Danish sea. Theodoricus thereby to
strengthen himself, obliged the Kings of the Vandals, Visigothes, and
Burgundians to him by affinity.

Whilst the squares went thus in Italy, great troubles were on foot,
throughout Thrace, Africa, and Britain, where at length, the Saxons got the
vpperhand.

Zeno dying at Constantinople, Anastatius, 491. an. 27. m. 3. d. 3.
Anastatius succeeds him. He favored many of those, who allowed of Eutyches
his opinion: whereupon a dissension grew betwixt him and Gelasius Bishop of
Rome: who by tedious letters dehorts him, as their books have it, from
undertaking the protection of them: for there were two things says he, whereby
principally this world should be governed; the sacred authority of Bishops
and regal power: and so much the more charge lies upon the Priests, for that
they, even for other men, must render an account to the Lord: but he was to
govern for civil policy, yet so, as to be subject to the Ministers of God,
and to depend upon their judgment: and seeing that Priests do obey the laws
political, it is likewise just, that he himself should not refuse those
constitutions, which the Steers-men in matters divine establish: therefore
sithence this honor ought to be given to all Ministers of the Church, the
cause it self requires, that to him most especially it should be attributed,
whom God by his own word, as also the consent of the Church, would have to
rule over the whole order of Priests. Let him leave off therefore, and rather
hear him an excuser in this life, then find him an accuser in the other.
After this, his decree concerning the holy Bible is annexed, in which he grants
superiority to the Sea of Rome, as they call it, then to Alexandria, and the
third place to Antiochia.

In Anastatius his reign, Sicilie was tossed with troubles and hostile
insurrections, which were quenched by the Authors death. Then also the Hunnes
wasted Armenia, and Cappadocia: the Getes, Macedonia, Thessalie, and Epirus:
from both which the Emperor was enforced to buy his peace by gifts, and no
small losses.

Much about this time, which was in the year of Grace, 500. Clodoueus King the
French, first of all embraced the Christian Religion, having been very often and
earnestly solicited thereunto, as also to forsake his Idols and superstition:
by his wife who was of the house of Burgundy. The Council of Orleans in his
reign established, which consisted of thirty three French Bishops, is extant:
wherein amongst the rest it is decreed, that if the rauisher of a Virgin shall
fly to a Church, though he have offered violence to the Virgin, yet he shall
not come within danger of death: but shall either be as a bondslaue, or else
redeem himself from her.

Anastatius slain by lightening, or as the papal law speaks, dying upon an
Sleidan (as. Meibomius notes) here mistakes the Emperor, for Pope Anastatius.
Iustine, 518 an. 9. d. 24. ^
eruption of his bowels: Justinius succeeded, a man of obscure parentage, and
from a swine-heard made a soldier, as it is written. He was at dissension with
Theodoricus King of the Goths, Lord of Italy, about diversity of Religion,
but yet they held off from blows: Theodoricus dying, Alaricus his Grandchild
by his son, succeeded, to the great joy and contentment of the Goths. John
the first of that name, was then Bishop of Rome. He with other more, was sent
in Embassage, by the aforementioned King Theodoricus, to Constantinople; where,
as their books relate, he was most honorably entertained, not only by the
people, but also by the Emperor himself. For they, say they, were exceeding
joyous, that it was their fortune, now at length to see and entertain the
blessed S. Peter's Vicar, as they term him, in Greece; which had never
befallen them before since Constantines time the Great, and Syluesters. But it
is strange, that they should pra^e thus of Syluester, who came not into Greece,
as it is manifest: For, then when it was most be^oofefull, as also needful, I
mean at the Council of Nice, he stirred not, but sent thither his Legates,
Victor and Vincent: and afterward as they relate, he himself assembled
another Council at Rome, wherein he confirmed the decrees of the Council of
Nice. There is extant also, a consolatorie Epistle of this John the first to
the Bishops of Italy, wherein he exhorts them, that albeit King Theodoricus
polluted with Arian heresy, threatened destruction to them, and to all Italy,
yet they should not desist from their purpose, but resolutely proceed.

After Iustine, Iustinianus, 527. an. 38. m. 3. d. 13.
his sisters son Iustinianus was made Emperor: He wholly bent himself to the
restoring of the Commonwealth, and at his first entrance, set over the whole
charge of government to Belisarius, who by many great battles, overcame the
Persians, transgressing their bounds, and offering violence to the Roman
dominions: set free Illyricum, wasted by the Gepidaes and Bulgarians, reduced
the Parthians being up in arms, to amity: overthrew the Vandals most
powerful forces in Africa, recovered Carthage; and from thence striking over
into Sicilie, where having notice of the rebellion in Africa, he returns
thither, and speedes well. Then at length marching into Italy, takes Naples,
sackes it, overthrows the Goths, whose King Theodatus then was. After this,
he repaires to Rome, where he was kindly and honorably entertained by all,
removing from thence, takes in the towns and forts every where, and amongst
the rest, Perousa: after this, he besieges Rauenna, where Vitigis, King of the
Goths giving him battle loses his Army, is taken prisoner, and carried away
by Belisarius to Constantinople. The Goths renewing their forces in the
country beyond Po, elect Hildebrand their king. To him, two succeeded, and
after them, Totilas. He in Belisarius his absence, ouer-running all Italy,
takes Rome, after a siege, sackes and sets fire on it. Belisarius hereupon
recalled, having finished the war against the Parthians, who again forraged
Syria, returns into Italy, and recouers the City in a manner left desolate:
and then incountring with the enemy, had a happy battle: but sailing into
Sicilie for provision, is called back by Iustinianus, which affoorded occasion
to Totilas, to renew his forces, and return to Rome. The Emperor forthwith
ordaines Narses the Eunuch, General in the Italian war: he expelled the
Goths quite out of Italy, which was so much the easilier effected, they
having lost their King Totilas, who died of a wound. That war with the
Goths, lasted eighteen years. And Iustinianus thus recovering Italy, and
Affricke, after he had assumed his Grandchild by his daughter, for his Colleague
in the Empire, departed this life. Some write, that he was a Prince of a dull
nature, and ouerswaied by his wife Theodora. Tribonianus the Lawyer was in high
esteem with him: he who (abrogating the writings and disputations of the
Ancients) gathered out of them an hotchpotch of the laws, and left us the
fragments only, which now go under the name of the Pandects: But he had
certain helpers in that work, whose names are mentioned all over. He did the
like also in the references and laws of the Emperors, which being
comprehended in three books, the Gregorian, Hermogenian, and Theodosian: he
contracted into one volume, naming it Justinians Code, using other men's helps
therein, whose names the Emperor reckons up in the preface to his book. There
are Authors that report, how this Tribonianus was a covetous man, and for
gain, Virgil 6. Aenoad.
(as the Poet says) made and marred laws. In the Code before mentioned, there
are many of Justinians laws, which contradict the former. There was added
also, a peculiar work, of new constitutions, which throughout bear the name
and title of Justinian.

The Emperor entreated Belisarius, whom I spoke of, (him by whose prowess he
had obtained so many and so glorious victories) most ignominiously: and in his
extreme old age, caused his eyes to be put out. In his reign, some Councels
were assembled at Constantinople, wherein Menna, Patriarch of that City, sat
President: who, as their books have it, is styled the most holy, most blessed,
and oecumenicall. In the beginning of the Code, an Epistle of the Emperor to
the Archbishop of the City of Rome, is set down, wherein he calls him, the
Head of all Churches, and subjects all to him. Furthermore, although the
learned are of opinion, that it was forged, yet grant it be true, it is
certain, that this controversy continued many years after, til at length the
Bishops of Rome, amplified with abilities, prevailed: and in the possession of
the Church, would erect to themselves a Tower, which, whether reared by the
hands of men, or favor of Princes, now carries the name, as though it were
founded by power divine. We have formerly mentioned how the sixth Council of
Carthage was held in S. Austines time, wherein Pope Boniface the first, and
Pope Caelestines fallacies were unmasked, when they alleged how it was decreed
at Nice, that all Provinces should appeal to them. And in Justinians time,
Boniface the second was Bishop of Rome, whose Epistle is extant, wherein he
sharply reprehends Aurelius Bishop of Carthage in the beforementioned
Council, and says, that he with his fellows, did by the devils instigation
resist the Church of Rome: as also, gives God thanks, that in his time,
Eulalius, Aurelius his successor, was reconciled to the Church of Rome, and
after that, rehearses the words of Eulalius, wherein he professes, that he
condemns both his predecessors and successors whosoever they be, that go
about to weaken the privileges of the holy and Apostolical Church of Rome.

Agapetus the next to Boniface, removed Anthemius Patriarch of Constantinople
out of his place, for denying the two natures in Christ. Theodora the Empress,
took this very hainously, and by Belisarius, admonished Siluirius Agapetus his
successor, to restore him: and Belisarius (certain other accusations also
being laid to his charge) turns him out of his place, and sends him into
banishment, substituting Vigilius, who likewise called to Constantinople, and
refusing to recall Anthemius, was condemned to the like punishment: whereby it
sufficiently appears, in what manner the Bishops of Rome were then subject to
the power of the Emperor.

Iustine the II. Iustine I^I. 565. an. 10. m. 10. d. 20.
being Emperor, the Persian war was renewed, which miscarying, Archelaus the
Emperors Lieutenant, of a new concludes a peace,

Narses the Emperors Lieutenant throughout Italy, (after the Goths were
expulst, and Totilas dead) held Italy almost sixteen years: afterward called
home by the Emperor from whom receiving certain unwelcome letters, and therein
perceiving his ingratitude, he not only stays still, but surther for revenge,
(sending away his Ambassadors) instigates the Lombards then seated in
Pannonia, proffering them very large rewards, to depart from Pannonia and come
into Italy, the most pleasant and fruitful of all Countries. Thereupon they
took that part of Italy, which till this day, retains the name from them.
This Iustine as it is written, constituted an Exarch, Governor throughout
Italy: he was as it were the Emperors Vicar or Deputy: His chief seat was at
Rauenna, neglecting Rome, and in each City and town ordaining some Governor.
The Italian writers report that this new ordinance, was the bane of Italy, and
Rome. Narses soon after dyed at Rome.

Tiberius not long before adopted and made Colleague in the Empire, Tiberius II.
576. an. 6. m. 10. d. 8.
was Iustines successor. He got two happy victories against the Persians: and
established a peace with the Lombards, whose Kingdom then reached from the
Samnites unto the Alps, the City of Rome only expected, which after they had
for a space sharply besieged, at length (constrained by force of tempest and
rain) raised their siege. Mauritius 582. an. 19. m. 3. d. 11.
Mauritius, Tiberius his son in law, being created Emperor, in some certain
battles by his Lieutenants, overthrew the Persians, and at length concluded a
peace with them: recalling his Army, he expelled the Scythians out of Mysia,
repressed the Lombards throughout Italy: chased the Hunnes out of Pannonia: but
being hated of the soldiers for his covetousness, was enforced (upon a
mutiny arisen) to fly to Chalcedon, and there at length was slain, together
with his wife, children, Phocas 603. an. 8. m. 4. d. 9.
and whole race, by Phocas the Centurion, who afterward through sedition, was
proclaimed Emperor.

It is written that in Mauritius his reign, a Comet appeared for six months
space, and then also was Mahomet borne, whom we will speak of hereafter.

At that time, John Bishop of Constantinople, styled himself the universal
Patriarch: but Pelagius the second, Bishop of Rome, vehemently resisted him,
and pronounced his decrees void. His successor Gregory, the first sharply
reprehends him for this, and indeed confesses, that in the Council of
Chalcedon, this title and honor was given to his predecessors, but none of
them used it. As also he exhorts Mauritius the Emperor by his Letters, to
restrain him, for that also appertained to his authority, which he (in
arrogating such a kind of power) did much impair. It is recorded that the
next after Gregory, Boniface the III obtained the primacie from Phocas,
certain Edicts and charters being published in that behalf.

In Phocas his reign the Persians very greiuously annoyed the Commonwealth:
seizing upon Mesopotamia, and Assyria, and marching on even unto the lesser
Asia, such was the negligence of this Prince. Germany also, together with
Gallia, and a great part of Italy revolted. The Saracens wasted Egypt: and he
himself being slain for his cruelty and neglect of the Commonwealth,
Heraclius succeeded. Then again the Persians marching on very far through
Egypt, invade Africa, which they bring under their subjection. The Scythians
diversely dismember Europe. Heraclius at length marching into Asia, when he
could not make his peace, though propounding certain conditions, little
tending to the honor of the Romans, almost by mere constraint encountered
with the Persians, (who now also forraged Iudaea) and in a battle or two
discomfited them. Then marching on beyond the River Tigris, and ransaking
Persia far and wide (entering at length into amity with Sirochus the Cosroes.
King of Persia's son, who having slain his father, set upon the Kingdom)
recovered Africa, and Egypt, and whatsoever else the Persians had taken, and
it was couenanted that the River Tigris should divide the Persian and Roman
dominions. At this time also the Saracens serving in the wars under
Heraclius, being defrauded of their pay, revolt in huge troops, and pillaging
up and down Syria, (Mahomet being their Chieftaine) took Damascus, forraged
Egypt, subdued Arabia, and gave the Persians some overthrows. This Mahomet
was by parentage obscure, but subtle and aduenturous, as also afterward
enriched by marriage: and by reason of his prompt wit carrying great sway he
propounds a new kind of doctrine (to reason indeed very delectable, but for the
most part ridiculous and foolish) whereby he might more and more oblige the
minds of men, and more firmly possess himself with sovereignty. And though
this flame might at first have easily been quenched, yet being neglected, in
short space grew to a maine height: and so from that time the Majesty and
Empire of the Romans in the East, decayed more and more, Nations reuolting one
after another.

In Heraclius his reign, the fourth Council of Toledo was celebrated, where,
because most part of the Priests throughout Spain, did not every day (but
only upon that day which we call Sunday) use that prayer which Christ
himself taught us: amongst other matters, a reformation therein was decreed,
as also that the Apocalypse of S. John, as they say should be read in the
Church from Easter to Whitsontide.

The Goths then reigned in Hispain, when as the Spaniards (grown weary, as it
is common, of foreign government) attempting an innovation, this Council
under a severe penalty prohibited the practizing of any conspiracy against
their King or the Gothish Nation: and that after the Kings decease, the States
and Clergy of the whole Nation, Constantine the III. reigned 2. months, and
Heraclian two years.
should by common consent appoint the successor. The same decree was also
renewed in some other of their assemblies. The singing of the Hebrew Allelujah
in the Church, in time of Lent was likewise forbidden, Constans the II. 642.
an. 27. m. 8. d. 10.
for that it was a time of sorrow and not of rejoicing. To Heraclius, Constans
succeeded, who was his grandchild by his son Constantine. He had an
unfortunate sea fight with the Saracens, who getting the victory, took Rhodes,
and without doubt had proceeded further, had not the factions kindled amongst
them procured a two years truce with the Romans. The Emperor having this
time to pause, marches with an Army into Italy, thereby, as he boasted, to
rescue it out of the Enemies hands: and arriving at Tarento, besieged Luceria,
and other places of Apulia belonging to the Lombards: but in his journey
toward Naples, his rereguard was cut off by the Lombards. Entering Rome
peaceably, at length he disrobes the City of all its ornaments, and there
staying a few days struck over into Sicily, where afterward he was murdered
in a Bath: and some dissension arising after his death about succession, the
Sarazens (laying hold on this opportunity) with a great Navy invaded Sicilie,
commit a horrible massacre of the Islanders, take Syracuse and carry away with
them all Constans his spoils taken from Rome. Constantine the IIII, or
Bearded, 669. an. 16. d. 7.
To Constans, Constantine the IIII. succeeded, commonly called the Bearded. He
for certain years encountering with the Sarazens, at length vanquished them
insomuch as they sued for peace, and for a thirty years Truce: as also
condescended to pay a yearly Tribute: and the Romans Enemies in the East
herewith shaken implore a peace. But the Bulgars, transpassing their bounds
wast Thrace, with them a peace was at length concluded, and both the Now Bursia
in Asia.
Mysia's yielded up to them: but afterward (when they perceived the Romans
negligence) breaking the league, fly out again, and extenuate the forces of
the Empire. This Emperor as it is recorded, was the first, that ordained, that
whom the Clergy and people of Rome together with the soldiers, had created
Bishop of that City, he should obtain full power: for till this time the
dignity of Bishop of Rome depended upon the confirmation either of the
Emperor, or of his Deputy for Italy. There is a long Epistle extant of Pope
Leo the II, to Constantine, wherein he condemns all manner of heretics, and
highly extolls him for his love to, and protection of Religion, as also for his
liberality and munificence: adding, that the Church having gotten such a
Defender, most joyfully triumphed. The sixth Council at Constantinople, 680.


The sixth Counsel at Constantinople was held in his reign which consisted of
150. Bishops. Wherein, about the end thereof, mention is made (but in obscure
words) of those Canons styled the Apostles. But Gratianus reckons up the
contrary opinions, for he auerres, that there be those that can affirm, that
they were compiled by heretics, rejected by the Primitive Church, and
accounted among the Apocrypha's. Yet it is written that Zepherinus B. of Rome,
in order the sixteenth approved them: as also, after him, this Council before
mentioned, which (as they report) was ended in Iustine the II. his time,
Constantine the IIII. his son. In brief, all flotes upon incertaine grounds,
neither do they agree in the number of the Canons, for some hold 50. others
60. others 84. in which number indeed they are extant. Whereby it may easily be
coniectured that more were added by degrees, and afterward (though proceeding
from many) comprehended under one title. It is written that then also the
Archbishop of Rauenna, subjected himself to the Bishop of Rome, who before
that (but most especially after the translation thither of the Exarchy) would
yield nothing at all to him.

To Constantine, Justinian, II 686. an. 10.
Iustinianus his son succeeded; he by reason of his nonage and inexperience,
misgouerned the Commonwealth, and breaking the league which his father had
made with the Sarazens and Bulgars, was brought to that pinch, as he himself
was constrained to sue for peace to both of them. At length, being thrust out
for his cruelty, an^ banished with his nose cut off, Leontius succeeded,
Leontius, 696 an 3.
having been prisoner two years upon suspicion of affecting the Empire. In
the time of those broiles, the Sarazens invade Africa, but were within two
years after chased out thence by force of arms. The Roman soldiers forsaking
the garrison in Africa, since the Emperor slighted over all affairs with
negligence and carelessenesse, and fearing lest they should again be expelled
by the Sarazens, Tiberius Apsimarus 699. an 7.
who were then exceeding strong: create one Tiberius Emperor. He marches with
his forces to Constantinople, where winning the City, takes Leontius, cuts off
his nose, cast him into prison, and constitutes a new Exarch in Italy. And
whilst all matters were carried after this boisterous manner, the Sarazens
laying hold on this fit opportunity, march out of Egypt, with an huge Army: and
again surprise Africa, and Lybia, and welnigh all Hispaine.

Iustinianus (he whom I above spoke of, Justinian the II. again, 706. An. 6.
expeld and bannisht by Leontius,) by help of Tribellius King of Bulgaria, at
length takes Constantinople, and therein Leontius, and Tiberius, whom he put
to death: First causing them to be carried up and down the city bound in cords,
then trampling upon their necks and lastly beheading them. Philippius Bardanes,
712. an. 2. m. 9. d. 7.
after which he reigned six years cruelly, proving also ungrateful to King
Tribellius, and at length joining battle with Philippicus Bardanes, to whom the
soldiers had revolted, both he and his son Tiberius were there slain. Pope
Constantine pronounced this Philippicus (for difference in Religion) a
Schismatic, whose eyes being afterward plucked out by his own servants,
Anastatius the II. was his successor. Anastatius the II. 715. an. 1. m. 3.


He sent a strong Navy to the Rhodes to make war with the Sarazens,
constituting an ecclesiastical person General thereof: whom the soldiers
refusing to obey, a mutiny arose and one Theodosius of obscure parentage was
created Emperor, Theodosius Adramittenus, 716. m. 7. d. 16.
who changing the voyage, marches to Constantinople, takes the City, and
confines Anastasius (who^ he overthrew in battle) to a Monastery: but not
long after being expulst by Leo Lieutenant of his forces, Leo Conon, 717. an.
24. m. 2. d. 25.
he also betakes himself to a Monastical life. About this time which was in
the year of Grace 717. the Moors with their whole powers break into Spain,
and subdue it, Rodericke being then King of the Hispaines, whom the Goths had
elected. The Sarazens in Leo's reign, having ouerrunne Thrace, besiege
Constantinople both by sea and land for three years space; but at length
(being well nigh destroyed by the plague) were constrained to retire home. This
Leo was a mortal adversary to Gregory the II. Bishop of Rome: and charged his
Vicar or Exarch in Italy, by all means to cut him off: but the Lombards
defended the Pope, not for any love they bare him, but to the end, that by
these dissensions, they might enlarge their own Territories. For upon this
occasion they surprised many towns belonging to the Exarchie-Certaine of this
Gregory's Epistles to the Clergy and Laity of Thuringia, A part of Saxony,
where the City Erford stands.
are extant, whereby he admonishes them more and more to increase in the
knowledge of God: as also to the Saxons sharply deterring them from worshipping
of Idols, in which employment he used one An Englishman borne in Devonshire.
Boniface his help, whom he had sent into Germany.

The Emperor Leo throws all statues and Images of Saints, out of Churches,
and enioynes the Pope also to do the like: but he not only disobeyes, but
also denounces sharp punishment against him perseuering in his purpose.
Constantine the V. 741. an. 35. m. 1. d. 27.
To Leo, his son Constantine of that name the V. succeeded, surnamed
Copronymos, of the same Religion with his father. He, setting forth with a
great Navy against the Sarazens, for recovery of Alexandria in Egypt.
understanding by a messenger of the insurrections hatched at home, and of
Artabastus the new elected Emperor retires to Constantinople, takes the City
by force, and puts out Artabastus his eyes. He also, as his father Leo, lived
in vehement discord with Gregory the III. Bishop of Rome, who forthwith sending
his Nuntio's, excommunicates him: and they being cast in prison, he made a
decree in the Council thereupon assembled: That, whosoever should hereafter
demolish the Images of Saints, or contumeliously abuse them, should be utterly
excluded from the Communion of the Church: after this, with all diligence and
endeavor he erected Images in diverse Churches, and as far as he could,
sumptuously adorned them.

After Gregory the III. Zacharias succeeded. An Epistle of his is extant to one
Boniface a Bishop in Germany; the same man, as it appears, whose help Gregory
the II. used, as a little above mentioned. Zacharias satisfied his requests and
permitted Bishoprics at Merburgh, Bamberg, and Erphord; and also gave him
leave to go to Charlemaine, Charles Martel his son, who was desirous to have
a Council held in some City of the French Kingdom: and that he might
diligently reform the abuses of the Church, but most especially remove
adulterers, and those that had many wives from the order of Priesthood: for
sithence after the undertaking of the holy Ministry, they ought not to have or
touch so much as one wife, much less at one and the same time, they should
have more, for Paul's words, that a Bishop should be the husband of one wife,
is to be understood not of the time present, but past, to wit, that he who
desires to be admitted into the ministerial function, should have no more
wives then one. To this Epistle Charlemaines Edict (who styles himself Duke of
the French) is annexed: wherein he ordaines that a Council should be held
every year in his presence: and commands that adulterous Priests, and
whoremongers should be removed out of their places: and likewise prohibits them
from hunting and hawking, and charges them not to maintain any whore at home:
but concerning wives not a word.

From this time Aistulphus King of the Lombards required a tribute from the
Romans, sharply menacing them in case of non-payment. Stephen the II. of that
name, then Bishop of Rome, seeing he could not stop his mouth neither with
flatteries nor rewards sues to Constantine the Emperor for aid, but no help
coming from him, he sollicites Pipin, lately (as we below shall mention) made
king of the French; to lend him his hand. He marching with an Army into Italy
besieges Pauie, and compells Aistulphus to come to composition, but the Enemy,
after Pipins return home, grown more kene, again takes arms: whereupon
Pipin, again solicited, marches into Italy; then at length Aistulphus
surrenders the Exarchie to Pipin, in which Country those Cities are of chief
account, Rauenna, Fauentia, Caesena, Forli, Forlimpopoli, Bologna, Reggio,
Parma, and Placentia.

It is written that Pipin delivered all this Country into the Popes hands,
though the Emperor first required him to restore them to him, as belonging to
the Empire, not to the Church of Rome.

To Constantine, ^^o the IIII 775. an. 4. m. 11. d. 26.
his son Leo the IIII. succeeded: He undertook one only expedition into
Against the Sarazeni.
Syria, where discomfited, he retires home, and not long after dyed, of the
same religion with his father, leaving behind him his son Constantine the VI.
who by reason of his nonage, not of ability to reign, his mother Irene
governed the Commonwealth, but he, waxen warmer in 20 years of age.
years, deposing his mother, took the Empire upon himself, with no less
insolency then cruelty: whereupon certain conspiracies being practiced against
him: he set a mulct, amongst others, upon his uncle Nicephorus, and put out his
eyes. And at length he himself by the means of his mother, was served with
the same sauce, within a while after dying of grief; and thereupon the sway of
government returned into her hands. Irene the Empress 797. an. 4.
Who afterward in the fourth year of her Empire was deposed and sent into
exile, Nicephorus whom we before mentioned, was her successor.

In the mean time whilst matters were thus tumultuously carried at
Constantinople, the name of Charles King of the French, grew famous. For he
having finished the war in Aquitania, at the request of Adrian Bishop of
Rome, marches into Italy, and as his Father Pipin repressed Aistulphus King of
the Lombards, as abouesaid: so he, after a long siege took Desiderius,
Aistulphus his successor, a heavy foe to Italy, and Adrian the I. As also
excluded his son Adalgisius out of the Kingdom, and chased him quite out of
Italy. For the Emperors of Rome, by reason of their far remote absence (I
mean at Constantinople) ever since Constantine the Great, and being likewise
hindered, not only with foreign wars, but also with civil and domestical
dissensions, in a manner neglected Italy, or at leastwise could not
conveniently protect it, especially the Lombards reigning there: Furthermore,
most of them also, being at deadly dissension with the Bishops of Rome, as we
have formerly specified, out of their hatred toward them, were not moved at
this prosperous estate of the Lombards. For this cause the Popes provided
foreign defense, and because no house was in those times, of more renown and
puissance, then that of the French Kings, in regard of the greatness of their
noble exploits, to them they fly, as to a harbor in time of trouble. And
after this manner, Adrian dying, Leo the third, who succeeded him, having many
adversaries at Rome, Charles the Great, 801. an. 13. m. 1. d 4.
sued to Charles, Pipins son: who, at his fourth accession to the City, was by
the Pope and all the people proclaimed Emperor, which happened at the same
time, when naught but factions swarmed at Constantinople, insomuch as the very
time it self, and state of the Commonwealth, seemed to administer the cause
and occasion of this change.

Thus therefore the Empire of the West, came to the Germans: for without all
doubt, Pipin and Charles were Germans. This was in the eight hundred and first
year after Christ's birth.

Now, Nicephorus was overcome and slaineby the Bulgars, and his scull made a
drinking bowl by Crumnus King of the Bulgars.
after Nicephorus, the Emperors of the East were tossed with continual
wars; for at first, the Bulgars often incountred them, then the Sarazens
issuing out of Africa, took the I Will of Candie, as afterward Sicilie, and
made havoc in Asia far and wide: and last of all the Turks, a people of
Scythia.

The Emperors of Greece, from Nicephorus to Constantine Palaeologus the last,
are reckoned to 50, some whereof were women: but most of those were sloathfull.
And in Constantine Monomachus his reign, the Turks from a base original, by
degrees getting ground more and more, began to wast Asia, and daily increasing
their power, at length made up a Monarchy, but no new or fifth one, but
sprouted out of that part of the Roman Empire, lying in the East. Ottoman
first Monarch of the Turks, an. 1300.
Of which Monarchy, Ottoman was the head, about the year of Christ, 1300.

Afterward, Ma hom et of that name the second, great Grandfather to Solomon,
who now swaies the Empire, taking Constantinople, and putting Constantine
Palaeologus the Emperor before mentioned, together with his whole family, to
the sword, utterly extinguished the n^me, and succession of Emperors of our
Religion, in those parts. And the Turks to this day hold Asia, Syria, Egypt,
Mesopotamia, Judea, the Rhodes, all Greece, Thracia, Bulgaria, Macedonia,
Illyricum, both the Mysia's, and of late, almost the other part of Hungary, and
some part of Africa.

In former times, the Churches of Jerusalem, Antioch, Constantinople, and Rome,
contended amongst themselves for primacie, but especially the two last, as we
formerly showed: but the Turk ended that controversy, and set such a
confusion in those Hierus, Antioch, Constantinople.
three places, that there is not a tract remaining of a Church or Christian
Congregation: and the matter it self shows, of what color the face, and what
the state is of that Rome.
Church now remaining, which now (those Aemulis.
riuals or eye-sores being removed) alone triumphs.

Therefore having shown after what manner the other part of the Roman Empires
body, lying in the East, utterly decayed and fell into the hands of strangers:
it remains that we should also briefly unfold, how that part in the west,
quite perished, and found new Lords. But here by the way, let us consider,
after what a wonderful kind of mockery of fortune, that maiesticall glory
and sublimitie of the Empire, was from those Romans and ancient families,
brought into the hands of strangers, and some of them of base degrees: some
being Spaniards, others originally of Pannonia, Dacia, Dardania, Dalmatia,
Gallia, Thrace, Cappadocia.

But chiefly it is worth observance, how doubtful and miserable the estate of
these Emperors was: for their dignity and safety consisted not in the power
of the Senate, or people, but of the Legions and soldiers: so that it may
stand for a great wonder, that any would undertake this charge so dangerous and
obuious to injuries: For from Caius Caesar, (who was murdered in the face of
the Senate) till Charles the Great, about thirty of them were slain, four
whereof killed themselves: always something was wanting in them, which the
soldiers desired, who could abide the good no more then the wicked: but upon
the least occasion, raising a tumult, cut off those, whom sometimes they had
drawn up to that height of honor against their wills, as for example, it was
Aelius Pertinax his case. The Senate stood in fear of the Emperor, but the
Emperor himself was swaied by the will, and in a manner, the beck of the
rascal soldiers. And this presumption they took upon them after Caius
Caesar's death, especially those veterane bands, which he had employed in
Gallia, Hispaine, and Africa.

Hereupon Cicero deploring this: Courageous they are indeed, says he, but in
regard of the memory of those exploits, which they achieved for the liberty of
the Romans, and the dignity of the Commonwealth too fierce, and recall all
our Council to their violence.

The end of the second Book.
JOHN SLEIDAN of the four chief Monarchies. OR, The key of History.
The third Book.
BEfore we speak of Charles the Great, (to who^ I told you the Empire of the
West was befallen) some thing must be unfolded concerning the Germans, from
whom he deriues his original. And first of all it is manifest, beyond all
doubt, that the Germans very often passed over the Rhyne, and entered the
Gallia's, there to seat themselves in regard of the goodness of the soil. For
the Teuthons broke into the Province of Gallia, and were put to flight by Caius
Marius the Consul. Afterward the Aruernes and Heduies quarrelling about
principality, the Germans (hired with pay from the Aruernes and Sequans)
marched thither at first indeed but with indifferent forces, but increasing by
degrees, in Arcouistus their Kings reign, possessed a good part of the
country: but them Caius Caesar overthrew it battle: and some years after,
when he made war against the Inhabiting L^ke be^ond Brabant.
Eburons, a people of Gallia Belgica, the Germans again march over the Rhyne,
with intent to beat back the Roman Army, but were by him discomfi^ed, at the
meeting of the Ri^er Maze and the Rhyne. Many years following, they contained
themselves within their own bounds, because the Roman Emperors held them in
play by wars: yet as often as they could lay hold on fitting opportunity,
slackt not their own commodity, but continually wasted Gallia. After this
manner, Gallienus being Emperor, one no less careless then voluptuous, they
made an inroade, and by little and little, sprung up to that potencie, that the
Emperor Probus had much ado to repel them. Iulianus also, Constantius his
Lieutenant, made war against them. Afterward, when Honorius was Emperor,
the Goths broke into Gallia, to whom the Emperor (detained by sundry wars)
granted the Country of Aquitania to inhabit. On the other side, the Of
Frankenlandt, then Franconia in Germany.
French-Germanes, making their way through Holland.
Belgia, vanquishing the In and about Triers
Treuires, Of Iuliers or Gulicke.
Menapians, Eburons, Part in Flanders, part in Picardie.
Morines, Of Turnay.
Neruians, of Picardy. The beginning of the French Kingdom in Gallia, about
421.
Amtians, of Picardy. The beginning of the French Kingdom in Gallia, about 421.
Bellouacans, of Picardy. The beginning of the French Kingdom in Gallia, about
421.
Soissons, seated themselves in that part of Gallia, which retains their name,
and is called France, in which Country, Paris is the chief City, and not
far from thence stands San-Denis, afterward consecrated for the Sepulture of
the Kings of France to this day. After this manner enlarged, having formerly
possession of a good part of Germany, even all the Country betwixt the River
Maine, and the Rhyne: they easily repelled not only offered hostility, but
also made war upon others. Besides, the Roman Empire in Asia and Africa,
daily more and more sliding away, and the Lombards wasting Italy, they almost
extended their dominions quite through Gallia: and after many of their Kings
had reigned there in successiue course, at length the Crown came to Pipin
also, and to his son Charles. Charles Martel Pipins Father, who was not king
himself, but only one of the Nobles and Governor of the Palace, or as they
are commonly called, Majors of the house: vanquished the Bauarians, and
Sueuians. For as the writers of the French Annals deliver it, the Kings there,
for some years together, had nothing at all besides their title, the
principality of government belonging to the Governor of the Kings house. For
those Kings degenerated from the worth of their Predecessors, and gave
themselves over to pleasure, rejecting the care of the Commonwealth: whereupon
the Governor of the Palace bore all sway, and by how much greater the kings
negligence was, so much more he augmented his authority. At length upon this
occasion, Pipin who was Governor in Childrickes reign, (when the cause, as
they say, came to canuasing before Pope Zachary) got the Kingdom. Hereof is
mention made in that decree which they name Gratians, to wit, that it is
lawful for the Pope to deprive Kings of their principality: but the title and
inscription of that place is false, seeing there were two Anastatio'^
Emperors, and it cannot be referred to either of them; for the former reigned
about 200. and the other, 37. years, before this happened: as also there was
no Pope Gelasius in the later Emperors time.

I thought good to add this for the Readers aduertizement, that they may
wisely and warily peruse the Papal records: for it is not one place alone
which discouers this to be their prime practice, so to fasten an opinion of
antiquity upon their laws, that they may carry the more weight and authority.

Pipin, (besides his repression of the Lombards in Italy, at the Popes
request, as before mentioned) commenced war also against the Saxons, and
afterward against the Aquitanians, whose Chieferaine he took and put to
death: not long after, departing his life, they forthwith rebelled, and King
Charles his son with much difficulty and infinite toil, at length made an
end of that double war. For he was in arms against the Saxons, full thirty
three years; during which war, he made other also: Bauaria likewise with
their Chiefetaine Tassilo, he brought under his subjection, and in two
expeditions against the Lombards, marching into Campania, subdued all Italy,
and settled it with laws; and reduced into subjection those Cities of Gallia,
lying upon the Ocean, which Caius Caesar calls Armorica, but now go under the
name of little Britain, which refused any longer to pay yearly tribute to
the Kings of France. In Hispaine also whither he made an expedition with an
Army against the Saracens, victory attended him: but in his return upon the
Pyrene Mountains, by a stratagem received a fore overthrow from the Of
Gascoigne.
Vascones, a people of Aquitane; notwithstanding at last, after eight years
war, he overthrew the Hunnes, then in possession of Pannonia, and likewise
by his Lieutenants composed Bohemia. And his last war was against the Danes
or For the Normans originally inhabited Norway.
Normans, then with a great Navy forraging the maritime coasts of Germany and
France. By the atchieuement of those so famous exploits, he gained his surname,
the Great. For, whereas before him, the French Kings only held that part of
Germany, lying betwixt Saxony, and the River Danow, and betwixt the Rhyne,
and the River Sala: to this he added Sueuia, and Ba^arta; all Saxony,
afterward both the Pannonia's, Dacia, Istria, Ireland, and the midland Country
of Dalmatia: whereas also the French Kings had only that part of Gallia, lying
betwixt the Rhyne and the River Loire, betwixt the Ocean and the Against the
Islands o^ Maiorq^e and Minuerque.
Balearique Sea: he added all Aquitania, all the top of the Pyrene mountains,
to the River Iber, and (which should have been named first) all Italy from
the Alps to the furthest part of Calabria. And this done, he sets forward to
Rome the fourth time, where he was proclaimed Emperor Augustus, by Leo the
Third, and all the people: after he had reigned thirty three years.

Thus the Roman Empire in the West, rent almost into peece-meales, especially
from that time when the Emperors made choice of Constantinople for their Court
and seat (as appears out of that which we have before mentioned:) was by the
Emperor Charles redintigrated, and as it were a new body, reassumed beauty
and feature, after so many and so great Provinces were reduced into one man's
principality.

Nicephorus the other Emperor in the East, was much displeased hereat, but
Charles by his humanity and kindness, appeased him, and interchanging
presents, both of them lived in amity: and the certain bounds of each Empire
were set out.

Besides other assemblies, he had a Council at Rhemes, wherein amongst many
others, one decree was, that Bishops should diligently peruse the holy
Scriptures, and Preach the Word of God. There was a Council also held at Mentz
the year before his death: and others, some years before, at Tours, Chaalons,
and Arles, about reformation of the Church, as they deliver it, that lived in
those times. Then constituting his son Lewis, heir of his kingdom and of
the Empire, died at Aix, a town in Gallia Belgica, aged, seventy years, in
the year after Christ's birth, eight hundred and fourteen, after he had been
Emperor almost fourteen years, the first of any Germane advanced to that
dignity. In his time, there were only one and twenty Metropolitan Cities, as
they call them, throughout Italy, Germany, and France: as Rome, Rauenna,
Millaine, Friuly, Grado, Cullen, Mentz, Saltzburgh, Triers, Roane, Sens,
Besanson, Lions, Rhemes, Orleans, Vienna, Monstier, Iuerdun, Bordeaux, Tours,
and Burges in Berry.

Pipin his Father committed the Exarchat, taken from the Lombards, into the
Bishops of Romes hands, as above said, which indeed is so delivered to memory,
and it is reported that he directly gave it to them, but that very many call
into question.

Eginardus one very familiar with Charles.
him, and his sworn Scribe, writes, that he more dearly esteemed of that
Church, which they call S. Peter's in Rome, then any other, and that a great
mass of gold, silver, and jewels, was transported thither, and very many gifts
sent from him to the Popes: for herein he used extraordinary diligence, that by
his means and procurement, the City of Rome might enjoy her ancient
authority, and S. Peter's Church might not only remain safe and secured under
his patronage, but also flourish in wealth above other Churches: Thus much
only he writes, but of the donation of so many and such potent Cities, within
the bounds of the Empire, not a word: nay, it is written, that after his fourth
coming into Italy, when he was created Emperor, he ordered not only the
public affairs, but also both ecclesiastical and private, concerning the
Pope, the City of Rome, and all Italy. For when he was not yet Emperor, but
only King of France, having vanquished Desiderius King of the Lombards, as
above faid: he came to Rome, and had a Council, in which (as their books
relate) Adrian the first together with the whole Council, granted him the
right and power of electing the Pope, as also disposing of the sea Apostolic,
as they term it, and confirming Bishops.

Eginardus attributes to this Charles, many virtues worthy of a Prince, as,
temperance, modesty, frugalitie, love to religion, learning, eloquence, and
knowledge, not only of the Latin, but also of the Greek tongue: withal, his
exceeding care and diligence in educating and nurturing up his children to the
same course. He also, as it is written, founded the Academie of Paris, as well
of his own accord, as also by the instigation of Commonly called Alcoinus, an
English man, so Bid and others.
Albinus his Tutor for learning of the arts, as Eginardus reports. He also gave
Germane names to the twelve months, and to the winds, which they now use,
whereas before that time, as the same writer relates, the French used partly
Latin, partly barbarous names.

And thus far in Prefacewise touching the Germans, and the Emperor Charles:
henceforward i will briefly run over and show, after what manner this part of the
Roman Empire in the West, hard and sharp restored and recollected by Charles:
again decayed, which being divided, fell into many men's dominions, who held
the same, as their proper right, not acknowledging the fountain from whence
they flowed: Insomuch, as that Maiesticall and so much renowned sublimitie of
the Roman Empire, is nothing else at this day, then a certain slender shadow
of a great body, after it was shrunk from such an huge mass, to Germany one
only particle of Europe. Last of all, i will briefly explain, how Daniel
foretold this interchangeable course of Monarchies, and fall of the Roman
Empire.

Now Lewis, Charles his son, Lewis l. 814 an. 26. m. 14. d. 24.
another Germane Emperor, renewed amity with Leo Armenius, Emperor of
Greece: and Pope Leo dying in the third year of his reign, his successor
Stephen the IIII. coming into France, consecrated Emperor.
him at Rhemes To this Pope, Paschalis succeeded, who, (by reason the Emperor
interposed not his authority) diligently and earnestly excusing the fact,
alleged, that the Papacy was obtruded upon him, altogether against his will.
The Papal books have it, that this Lewis the Emperor, confirmed to this
Paschalis, and to the rest after him, both the possession of goods, and also
permitted a free election, that whomsoever all the Romans should judge fit for
that dignity, he should be accounted Pope. But I see not what credence can be
given to such kind of writings as these: for they so jar amongst themselves,
and are so patcht together without all method, that it cannot be understood
what should follow.

Lewis had three sons, Lotharius whom he elected Colleague in the Empire and
his Kingdom: Charles (who succeeded his deceased brother In France
Pipin) he set over Aquitania: and Lewis over Bauaria. Upon a rebellion raised,
The Emperor Lewis deposed by his own sons. an. 833.
he being taken by his sons, and deposed from his Kingdom, was confined to
a Monastical life at Compeigne a town of the S^issons. The French Annall
writers report, that the ecclesiastical Prelates (whose hautinesse and riot
he desired to restrain) conuocating some assemblies at Aix, stirred up those
broils against him, and prouokt his sons to put in practice this so impious
a fact. Restored the sixth month following.
But being set at liberty the sixth month following, to the great contentment
of the people, he recovered his Kingdom and all more.

Because the place serves, let us by the way, take a view of the many National
Synods held in France; for next after that beforementioned at Aix* there was
another at Troy in Champaigne: after that at Rhemes, Tours, Digion, Paris,
Lions, Vienna, Auinion, Vierron, Orleans, and many more in the same places, for
when the affairs of the Commonwealth so required, the Kings themselves
conuocated as well the States Ecclesiastical as others, for reforming of
public enormities. In like manner Lewis the twelth, at bitter enmity wi^h
Julius the second; assembled a Council of his own people at Tours and Lions,
in the year of Grace, 1510. and 1511.

Now to the purpose, Lotharius 840. an. 15. m. 3. d. 10.
Lewis dying was buried at Metz and Lotharius (then up in Arms against his
brothers) succeeded; which war at length quenched, and a new division made,
Germany fell to Lewis, and part of France, from the River Maze to the Rhyne:
to Charles, France, from the British Ocean, and Pyrene Mountains to Maze:
Lotharius (besides that he was Emperor) held Italy, and the Province of Narbon.

To him his son Lewis the II. succeeded, Lewis II. 855. an. 19. m. 10.
who repressed the Sarazens breaking into Italy. In his reign amongst others,
Adrian the II. was Pope, created (as their books have it) contrary to the
Emperors assent, by the Roman Nobility, Citizens and Clergy as they call
them. For although the Emperors Deputies were in the City, yet were they not
called to the Election: who taking it in ill and discontented part, received
their answer, that it was not done in any contempt against the Emperor: but in
caution for future times, lest that custom of expecting the Emperors Deputies
at the Popes Creation, should grow up as necessary. They report that with this
answer, they were not only well pleased, but also in reverence humbly saluted
the Pope. Now here we may see a certain wonderful variety and inconstancy in
their writings: for if Lewis the I. granted them a free election, as they
boast, and as it is mentioned a little about, why did Lewis the II. his
grandchild take this for an injury offered him? But howsoever the case stands,
the title of that decree which is in Gratians Centons, is evidently false, for
it is attributed to Gregory the IIII. whereas he departed his life, twenty and
two years before Adrian the II. was made Pope. Did he write a history when he
was dead of those things which happened afterward?

Nicholas the I. was the next before Adrian. A very long Epistle of his to
Michael Emperor of Greece, concerning his power over all Churches: is extant.
For Ignatius was removed from his Bishopric at Constantinople, and Photius
placed, without the Bishop of Romes consent: as also the Images were thrown
down. He therefore with all the vehemence he could exclaimes against this.
Many of his decrees also are extant full of Papal Majesty.

Charles King of France, as abouesaid (notwithstanding his other elder brother
Lewis the King of Germanies resistance) marches in all have into Italy, and is
consecrated by John the eight Pope of Rome. In his second expedition into Italy
at the Popes request, Charles the Bald, 875. an, 2. m. 2.
for repression of the Sarazens who had again invaded Campania: he dyed at
Poisoned by Zedechias a Jew.
Mantua. His son Lewis surnamed the Stammerer was his successor, Lewis the
Stammerer, 877. an. 2. m. 6. d. 5. Charles the Gross, 879. an. 8. m. 7.
but he reigned only two years. After him the government of the Empire came
to Charles the Gross, son of Lewis King of Germany, who (his two brothers
being dead) held all Germany, Italy, and France, and chased out the Sarazens,
who infested Italy: The Normans first coming into Normandy in France.
for a while also making war against the Normans, a people of Lower Germany,
then annoying Belgia: at length granted them that part of France, which to this
day retains their name. Next after him Arnulphus his brothers son was
Emperor, Arnulphus 887. an. 12. m. 1. d. 19.
a worthy Prince. He marching into Italy to set Pope Formosus at liberty from
his adversaries: takes Rome, and took revenge upon the Authors of that
sedition.

In the time of his reign, the Hunnes being chased out of Scythia, break into
Pannonia, and marching into Germany, (Lewis the III. Arnolphus his son being
then Emperor) got a notable victory not far from the River Laech: and then
ouerran Bauaria, Sueuia, In Germany betwixt Sueuia and Hassia.
Francia, and Saxony, with bloodshed, robberies and fire.

Arnolplus Emperor, a Council of two and twenty Germane Bishops, was held at
Triburia sometimes a town upon the bank of the River Maine, where amongst
many other, one decree was, That no man should sell a burying place for the
dead, and that no Layman, as they call them, should be buried within the
Church.

About this time a mighty vproare, burst-forth throughout Italy: For
Berengarius and certain other Nobles of Italy, laden with multiplicity of
favors from Charles the Bald, conspired against France, at what time Charles
the Gross reigned: but their attempts there, proving frustrate, they bend
their minds for Italy, which (by long and mutual conflict, as it is common)
they harraze with merciless outrages. At length the victory falling to
Berengarius, he got the Kingdom of Italy, where after he had taken Lewis
the Emperor he put out his eyes, as histories relate. About this time also
(that no parcel of calamity might be wanting) the Sarazens, Africans, and
Hungars, most outragiously ouerrunne Italy.

Thus whilst the state of most beautiful Religion, under the Berengarians,
Hugo, Rudolphus, Lotharius, Albertus, and certain others, was so doleful and
miserable, and Lewis the Emperor dying in the time of those broiles; the
Germans, but more especially the Saxons, and Francons, proclaim Otho Prince
of the Saxons, and Thuringes Emperor, but he, stricken in years, persuades
them to take Conradus Duke of Franconia, Conrade I. 911. an. 7. m. 6.
who being created Emperor, ordered all affairs according to Othoes
direction: and soon after Othoes death, when he himself was very dangerously
sick, calling together his prime Nobility, requested them to acknowledge
Othoes son Henry then absent, for Emperor. This was that Henry vulgarly called
Henry the Because of his great delight in haw^ing.
Falconer. Henry the Falconer, 919. an. 17.
Thus, we see after what manner the Imperial splendour and dignity, fell from
the French, and Charles the Great his lineage, to the house of Saxony.

These two Emperors, Conradus and Henry, were not consecrated, as they call
it, by the Bishop of Rome, and for that cause are left out by many: moreover it
is written, that this Henry neglected the Popes offered ceremony of
consecration, and that he should say, that he was content with the acceptance
and suffrages of good men.

Within a while after this, Arnolphus the Evil Duke of Bauaria, intended to
bring about the sway of government into his own hands: whereupon forces being
mustered up on both parts, when both the Armies stood in battle ray at
Ratisbon, the Emperor calls him out to private parley, putting him in mind how
he was created Emperor by the most part of the people of Germany, and
dehorting him from ieoparding the lives of so many thousand men, most whereof
were innocent and ignorant of the cause of the war: changed his intention,
and so broke off the battle.

In like manner Burchardas Duke of Suenia, rebelled, but (shaken with the
Emperors puissance) came to composition.

The Hungars again spoil Saxony: but after their chieftaine was taken, make a
nine years truce. The Emperor after this, trayning up his subjects in feats
of Arms, vanquishes the Dalmenincians, takes the City of Prague, together with
Wenceslaus Duke of Bohemia, making that country tributary to him. In maine
battle he overthrew the Hungars then again (after the truce ended) breaking
into Saxony: and distributed the tribute which the Saxons paid them, amongst
the poor.

He intended to have gone to Rome, Otho the Great, 936. an 36. m. 10 d. 6.
but hindered by sickness, constitutes his elder son Otho heir of the Empire.
He commenced wars many years together against the Bohemians, then in
rebellion: as also vanguisht and put to flight the Hungars, who then also
striking over the Rhyne in the Vangions Country, Of Wor^^bs.
had made an inroad into Franconia, with intent to march on from thence and
pillage in Saxony. He brought Burgundy under his subjection, and afterward
marching with a great Army into Italy, and vanquishing the Berengarians: there
married his second wife Aditheida. Luitholdus his son hereat displeased,
practices treachery against him, having Coadiutors every where in readiness
to serve his plots, and amongst the rest Conradus Duke of Sueuia his sisters
husband. But his father besieging him at Ratisbon, he (first brought into
distress) humbly craves and obtaines pardon.

After this the Hungars, having forraged France, break into Germany in greater
multitudes then at any time before, and encampe themselves near Auspurgh, on
that place, which takes name from the River Lych. The Emperor marching thither
with the Saxons, Franks, Sueuians, Bauarians, and Bohemians; after a doubtful
and long battle put almost all the enemies forces to the sword, and caused some
of their Chieftaines to be hanged. Then returning into Saxony, after he had
settled the affairs there, makes a new expedition into Italy: but before his
journey constituted his son Otho Colleague in the Empire. At length arriving
at Rome, he assembles a Council, where he sat President, and deposed Pope
John the XII. for his offenses, in whose place he appointed Leo, of that name
the VIII. A decree of his is extant incerted in the Papal Law, where he says,
that he conferres to Otho the Emperor and to his successors for ever, the
authority of choosing Popes, disposing of the Sea Apostolic, and confirming of
Bishops: as also pronounces a most severe punishment against those, who (not
expecting the Emperors approbation) consecrate Bishops. See here another
Decree, contrary to some other before. After this there is the form of an oath
added, by which (as they report) the Emperor Otho bound himself to Pope John,
but its not added who this Pope John was, nor of what numb^r ^n name either
this John or Otho were. And surely it is wonderful that matters of such
importance and moment, should be so negligently put into writing.

Now if Otho the I. took this oath, then this objection may hold against him.
That whereas in this form beforementioned, amongst other things, he swears
not to procure any danger to the Popes life, nor to abrogate his honor and
dignity: but how can this appear, when as he, as we said before, removed John
out of his place, and ordained another? Let him that can reconcile this.

Otho, by reason of the new broiles, marches again into Italy, where having
settled the affairs, and returning home dyed about the beginning of May, and
was buried at Maidenburg, in the year of Grace, 974. In regard of his noble
exploits, and surpassing prowess, He Is styled the Great.

Henry D. of Bauaria, rebelled against Otho the II. Otho II, 973. an. 10. m 7.
d. 2.
but the sword reduced him to his duty. Lotharius was then King of France,
whose brother Charles was by the Emperor created Duke of Lorraine, under
condition that he should be a Beaesiciarius.
Leige-man of the Empire. Henry the Emperor (as the Annals report) got this
Province from Charles the Simple King of France, and entailed it to his
successors in order. But Lotharius displeased hereat, on a sudden leauying an
Army, speedily meets him at Aix, and had almost discomfited the Emperor before
he was aware. The Emperor to revenge this affront, musters up forces, and
marching on as far as Paris, at length (not without great bloodshed on both
sides) concludes a peace, Returning home, and from thence making an expedition
to Rome, he commenced war against the Greeks, who held Calabria and Apulia:
where, after his Army was defeated, he was intercepted by Pirates, as he fled by
sea, but not being known who he was, they dismissed him upon a sum of money
paid in hand: and so returning to Rome, besieges Beneuento with the remainder
of his forces, takes and sets fire on it. And not long after, wounded with a
dart in a battle against the Greeks and Sarazens, departed his life, and was
buried at Rome.

To him his son Otho succeeded by consent of the Nobility, Otho I^I. 983. an.
17. m. 1. d. 21.
and was consecrated at Aix. He created one Bruno a Germane Pope, afterward
called Gregory the fifth. But Crescentius a Consul of Rome, set up John Bishop
of Placentia in opposition to him. The Emperor therefore coming to Rome
inflicts a heavy and ignominious punishment upon Crescentius and his Accomplices,
and caused John of that name the XVII. his eyes to be put out.

The Emperor in regard of the perpetual dissensions about succession in the
Empire, ordained with the Popes help: That certain of the prime Nobility in
Germany should be authorized with right and power of electing the Emperors:
lest that any man hereafter should set upon that dignity as hereditary. The
Electorall Princes of Germany, constituted (...) the yo^^ of Christ 1000.
This Decree was made about a thousand years after Christ's birth.

Robert then reigned in France, a Prince that loved peace and learning. The
Annalls ex^oll him for building many Churches and amply endowing them, as also
going in pilgrimage to Rome.

This Emperor Otho granted to B^leslaus Duke of Polonia, regal dignity and
immunity, The beginning of the kingdom of Polonia, 9 ^.
as their Annalls have it. This therefore is the beginning of that Kingdom.
Otho, after this, returning out of Italy He was poisoned by a pair of gloves
given him by Cresentius (aforesaid) his widow. Henry II. or the Lome, 1001 an.
23. m. 5. d. 16.
dyed. The next Emperor after him, was Henry, of that name the II. Duke of
Bauaria, kinsman to Otho the great D. of Saxony, and Emperor. He, having
settled a peace in Germany, and drawn on some of his adversaries into amity by
his extraordinary kindness, and subdued other some: marched into Italy, there
restoring Apulia to the Empire, which the Sarazens had taken. Then, after his
consecration by Benedict the VII. sending away his Army into Germany, He
himself, taking his journey through the Sequans Country, came to an enterueiw
with Robert the French King, where a confirmation of amity was established on
both sides. This Emperor was greatly loved of the Clergy, for he was very
liberal toward them.

After Henry's decease, when the Electorall Princes could not agree, there was
an interreigne or vacancy a For two years. Conradus to 24. an. 14. m. 10. d.
12.
while. At length Conradus Duke of Franconia succeeded. He enforced Stephen
King of Hungary to conditions of peace. And having settled the affairs of
Germany, makes speed into Italy, which was almost all ready to rebel; And at
first he lays siege to Millaine, then going to Rome, where consecrated by John
the XVIII. he is proclaimed Augustus, with the peoples acclamation. Then
impo^ing a mulct upon those that attempted the innovation, he composed Italy,
and returned into Germany. But new troubles again kindling in Italy, he
marches thither and punishes the Authors of that Conspiracy, the Archbishop of
Millaine being one amongst the rest, neither desisted he till he had brought
it all under his subjection. Having dispatched there, he returns home, and
dyed at Vtrecht, a Town upon the frontiers of Holland.
Batauia. His son Henry of that name the III. succeeded him, by consent of the
Electorall Princes. He suppressed the Bohemians then rebelling, and made them
tributary: re-inthronized Peter King of Hungary, once or twice deposed by his
own subjects: and quieted the whole Country, though not without great loss
of his own men.

At this time happened an exceeding great vpr^ a^e at Rome, for Three contended
for the Papacy, and what they attempted was all by sinister practices: those
were, Benedict the IX. Siluester the III. and Gregory the VI.

The Emperor hereupon marching thither, having after a siege, taken the City,
he calls a Synod, and constitutes Suitgerus Bishop of Bamberg Pope: who
changing his name, was called Clement the II. from whom, soon after the Pope
received consecration.

Then again the Citizens took oath not any ways to meddle with the Popes
Creation, without the Emperors assent. Italy, thus set at peace again, soon
after the Emperors return into Germany, Pope Clement dyed, and was buried at
Bambergh. The Emperor upon notice hereof creates Boppo Bishop of Frisingen,
Pope.

This was Damasus the II. who holding the place but 23 days, Leo the IX.
Bishop of Tull, supplied the deceaseds place. A certain parcel of an Epistle
of his is extant, wherein he says, it is not lawful for a Bishop, Priest or
Deacon, to forsake his wife for Religion sake, but it is fit they should find
her with such necessaries as belong to natural sustentation: notwithstanding,
in case she use carnal copulation, it is not lawful: sithence Paul says, He
had power as well as the other Apostles, to lead about a wife; 1 Cor. 9.
which place he thus interprets. That the Apostles had their wives always with
them for this intent, that they should be maintained, together with them, by
those, whom their husbands instructed, in the Christian Religion and faith: and
not that they should exercise the office of wedlock, or lie together:
therefore Saint Paul thought fit to use the word lead about, and not lie with.

In the year 1050, Leo going from Rome, assembled a Council of 42. Bishops,
at Mentz, wherein the Emperor sare President. He dying within three years
after, Gebehardus Bishop of Aisten, by the Emperors assent, succeeded him:
this was Victor the II.

The Emperor marching into Italy, after he had settled the affairs there,
returns into Germany comes to treaty with Henry, the first of that name, King
of France, dies in Saxony, and was buried at Spire, the Pope and many other
Nobles being present at his death. He had a son called Henry, very Seven
years old. Henry IIII 1056. An. 49. m. 10. d. 3.
young, but was constituted Emperor a little before: notwithstanding, his
Mother and the Bishop of Auspurge governed the Empire. Within a while after
Pope Victor the II. dies, after he had held the Papacy little above two
years. To him, Frederick of the house of Lorraine, called Stephen the IX.
succeeded. He also within few months after dying at Florence: One Benedict,
of that name the X. by help of his friends, and without the Emperors assent,
sets upon the Papacy. The Romans liked not well of this prancke, who, to
acquit themselves, dispatching their Ambassador to the Emperor, proffer the
same fidelity to him, which they had performed to his Father, and entreat him
to constitute a lawful Pope; Benedict hereupon deprived, the Emperor gave
them Gerhardus Bishop of Florence, this was Nicholas the II.

The Princes of Germany grudged much, that the Commonwealth should be
governed by a woman, the Emperou^s mother, as above said: upon which occasion,
a mean was invented to draw away her son from her: whereupon the Archbishop
of Mentz and Cullen had the prime managing of all affairs: to them the
Archbishop of Bremen, one in exceeding great favor with the young Prince, was
now and then conjoined, who alone ouer-ruling him, disposes of Ecclesiastical
promotions to himself and his friends, especially Abbeies: and to keep the
flame of envy lower, persuades the Emperor to confer them likewise upon
other Princes. In the mean space, Nicholas the II. dies, in whose place the
Emperor constitutes the Bishop of Parma: but having not at all acquainted the
Senate of Rome herewith, and in that regard some troubles likely to ensue:
Alexander the II. Bishop of Luca was elected. Betwixt those two, a sharp
controversy followed, but Alexander having the longer sword, carried it.

The Archbishop of Bremen only bearing all sway with the Emperor, incensed
his fellow Bishops against him, by whom at length he was deprived: and though
shortly after restored to his place, yet he long suruiued it not. And the
Emperor, (necessity constraining him) since all in a manner complained of the
state of the Commonwealth: requested Anno Archbishop of Cullen, to undertake
the Government. But he, seeing insolency and iniquity, bore great sway,
excusing his age and sickliness, afterward resignes up his office to him.
This young Emperor now grown to two and twenty, being by nature prone to vice,
began to increase his lasciviousness, and despising his wife Bertha, kept
many Concubines. Then raising Castles all over Saxony, intended to bring them
into servitude, and restrained not his officers, who used much excess and
insolency.

Hereupon the Saxons, as well the Nobility as Clergy, knitting a league,
betook themselves to Arms, in vindication of their liberty: which, after
much ado, and long intercession, they lay down again, he first satisfying
their demands, and making a narrow escape by flight in the night time.
Alexander the II. dying, the Roman Nobility, without the Emperors assent,
set up Hildebrand, called Gregory, of that name the VII.

The Emperor upon notice hereof, expostulates with them by his Ambassadors,
and withal admonishes the Pope to give him satisfaction herein. He makes
answer, that he was drawn to it against his will, and when he never dreamt
of it, and that he would not have been inaugurated before He, and the rest of
the Princes of Germany had approved of his election. Thus he appeased the
Emperor, and was afterward by his consent, confirmed. Then dispatching his
Legates into Germany to certain Bishops, willed them to assemble in Council:
but they refused it, alleging, that it was contrary to the custom and
privilege of their Nation.

This design miscarying, He in some certain Councels held in Italy, decrees,
That Massing Priests shall have no wives but shall dismiss them, or else leave
their places; sending this his decree to the Bishops in Germany, vrges
earnestly, under a penalty denounced, to have it established: but the Clergy,
as they call them, and whole stream of Massing-Priests, stiffely reclaim
calling him an heritike, that propounds such doctrine; sithence Christ's words
are, That all should not receive this word. Mat. 20.
And Paul says, They that cannot contain let them marry: 1 Cor. 7.
But this Pope not regarding Christ's word, and contemning Paul's authority,
would constrain men, to reject the use of marriage, which is lawful and
ordained by God: and to burn in most filthy flames of lust, and rush into
manifest lewdness, but they would rather leave their Ministry then matrimony.

He nevertheless, as before, sending his agents, pressing it on, and standing
stiffely upon it, the Archbishop of Mentz began to hearken to him; who at first
gently admonishes those in his inrisdiction, and afterward assembling a
Council at Erphord, would flatly inioyne them, but an vproare arising, he
escaped death very narrowly.

The Emperor in the mean time, to revenge the ignominy, recei^ed the
precedent year, when, besieged by the Saxons, he wrought out his safety by
flight in the night time: makes ready for war, and violating the league,
which he had made the year before, musters up all the forces he could
possibly make, and in the month of July, setting upon the Saxons (who by their
frequent Ambassadors had, but in vain, solicited him for peace) discomfits
them in many battles, not without great l^sse of his own men, no small number
of the prime Nobility being then slain. Pursuing his victory, he harrazes
their country fair and wide, and by his Ambassadors, exhorts them to yield:
willing them to hope for all favor from his benignity: but that failed,
though a certain few obeyed. Bucco Bishop of Halberstadt, and Otho Duke of
Bauaria, banished by the Emperor, had the chief mannaging of this war.

The Archbishop of Mentz again solicited by Gregory the VII. assembles another
Council, and makes a new proposal about the Clergies not marrying: but was
entertained in like manner as before, and stood in great hazard of his life,
whereupon he thought it his best course, utterly to lay off this design.

The Saxons thus put to flight, the Emperor dismisses his forces, and the
auxiliarie Princes: but upon condition, that they should again present
themselves in arms before him, on the two and twentieth day of October
following. When that day came, a great many appeared, and amongst them, many
Bishops, but not so many in number as before. There again the Saxons send
their Ambassadors for peace, in camping themselves at Northausen. The Emperor
sends them answer, that one way to peace, was to yield themselves: so they,
though seeming rather to do any thing then this, yet certain Princes (which
were sent as Intercessors and Ambassadors from the Emperor) promising them
very largely, that they should not thereby incur any indammagement either of
liberty or goods: at length assented, and the Bishop of Maidenburgh, and
Halberstadt, Otho Duke of Bauaria, Magnus Duke of Saxony, and Frederick Count
Palatine, yielded themselves into his hands: and likewise, soon after, many of
the rest of the Nobility.

The Emperor at first commits them to custody, not without favor: but
afterward flying from his promise, caused them to be carried into several
places, how be it, not long after, he set Duke Otho not only at liberty, but
also entreated him very familiarly, but for the rest, both kept them prisoners,
and gave their goods for a prey to others. Then raising new Castles and Forts,
wholly bends himself against the safety and liberty of the Saxons, and in
his absence committed the whole charge of government to Otho Duke of Bauaria,
by parentage descended from the Saxons. After this, he conftituted a Bishop at
Bambergh, as also at Cullen, and an Abbot at Fulden. Now a little before this,
he was accused to the Pope, and most especially for selling Ecclesiastical
promotions. Whereupon the Pope, by his Legate, cites him to make his appearance
at Rome, within a certain time, and to give his answer in the cause. But he
calls a Synod of Bishops and Abbots at Wormbs: there it is decreed, that the
Pope, for that he came to the Papacy by sinister means, should be deprived
of his place, and forthwith publishes this at Rome, by his Ambassadors. Henry
the IIII. excommunicated by Gregory the VII. alias Hildebrand an. 1076.
But the Pope not a whit moved hereat, both excommunicates him, and also more
especially, the Bishops of Mentz, Vtrecht, and Bambergh, having formerly
excommunicated certain of his familiar friends, by whose counsel he supposed
him to have been drawn on to this practice. Furthermore, the Princes of
Germany decpely offended at the Emperors demeanor and disposition: especially
for that, contrary to his promise, he persecuted the Saxons with so obstinate
hatred, conspire against him, and so much the rather, because he was
interdicted the Church. Whereupon they dismiss the surrendered prisoners, (the
custody whereof was committed to them by the Emperor) judging them not to be
tied to him in any bond of allegiance.

At the same time certain Nobles in Saxony, stirring up, and drawing on
others into their party, surprise those Castles every where raised, some by
force and command, other some by dedition; and dismiss the Garrisons in
safety, first binding them by oath, never after to bear Arms against Saxony.

The Emperor upon notice hereof, in subtle policy, sets at liberty the rest
of the imprisoned Princes, to the end that they, returning into Saxony, might
do him faithful service in punishing the Rebels: for he saw there was no
other means to bring about his wished success, with more facility, then by
kindling factions amongst them, and renting one from another, but the event was
not correspondent: for they, after their return home, well acquainted with his
qualities, with joint minds and might resolved to fight for the common
liehrtie; and Duke Otho also, forsaking him, did the like: yet the Emperor was
full fraught with good hope, having broken through Bohemia, into the Country of
Campania aided with Bohemian forces: but when he was certified of the Saxons
conjunction, and their Army in readiness, despairing victory, retires.

Then at length the Princes of Germany, appointing the day, met together in
great abundance: thither also repaires the Popes Legate, who unfolding the
causes of the Emperors excommunication, exhorted them to create another, which
otherwise they were about to do of their own accord: for, making a rehearsal
of his life, even from his tender years, they pronounced him to be the
blemish, dishonor, and reproach of the Empire; and decreed, that (in regard he
had afflicted the Commonwealth with most grievous calamities) he should be
deprived of his government. He, brought into these straights, began to
deprecate and entreat by his Ambassadors, when after much ado this condition
was proposed. That he should stand to judgment, and subject himself to the
Popes cognizance, whom they would send for to Auspurge against the first day of
February. That he should procure his absolution within a year after the date
of the excommunication, wherein if he failed, the whole cause should fall:
dismiss his forces: In the mean time live at Spire, as a private man, with a
small train: not meddle in any public affairs, nor assume the Bundles of
rods used in ancient time to be carried before the Roman Consuls.
fasces, or Imperial Ornaments, till the controversy were lawfully decided.
He accepts the conditions, and whilst he lived at Spire, bethought himself
of going down into Italy, to work his mature peace with the Pope. Taking his
journey together with his wife and little son, through Burgundy and Sauoy,
in a most sharp winter, not without extreme difficulty and danger of life:
at length arriues in Italy, where he was kindly enter^ained, by the Nobles
and Bishops of that Country, they thinking that he came thither, incenst with
anger against the Pope. The Pope in the interim, at the request of the Germane
Princes, began his journey, coming on some part, till he understood of the
Emperors arrival. Whereupon he stays to acquaint himself with the state of
the cause. The Emperor forthwith sending a sumptuous Embassy, wherein were
some gallant Ladies, amongst which, one was accounted somewhat too obsequious
to the Pope: makes suite to the Pope for his absolution: at first he seemed
very loath, and said he could do nothing therein, except the accusers were
present: but after much ado, ouercommed at length with entreaties, he refused
not. Howbeit the Emperor before he came into the Popes presence, stayed full
three days in the lower rooms, court yard, and without the gates, where the
Pope then was: being clad in mean and simple apparel, without any regal
ornaments, bare foot, and fasting from morn to night. The fourth day having
admittance, the Pope propounds to him these conditions: that he should stand
to his judgment, answer the Princes their accusation, and if convicted, leave
his Empire, and never afterward attempt any revenge: in the mean time live as
a private man, and not meddle in any public affairs, release his subjects
from their loyalty and oath: remove from him his Counselors and familiars: in
case he shall do any thing to the contrary, that benefit now granted him to
become void, and the Princes to have free liberty, presently thereupon to
choose them another. When the Emperor had approved of these conditions, the
Pope says Mass, and to purge himself from all pretended crime, takes the
unleavened bread, which they call the Lords Body, inuocating fearful
execrations upon his own head and estate, if all these troubles were not
wrought by his adversaries: and then he exhorts the Emperor (if he thought the
crimes objected against him by the Princes, were false, or any injury offered
him) to do the like, and take the other part of the consecrated bread: but he
excused himself, showing that he could not conveniently do it, and the Pope
urged him no further, but entertained him with a banquet, and so courteously
dismissed him. The Nobles of Italy understanding of those proceedings, were
vehemently vexed, that he should submit himself so basely and ignobly to him,
who by most lewd practices had set upon the Papacy, who had polluted all
places with bloodshed and adultery. In him (being the Patron of Justice, the
Altar and Bulwark of laws) they had grounded all their hopes, and had not
only contemned the excommunication, but also for his sake affronted the Pope
in bitter enmity: and now, for him, by this, directly the most dishonorable
of examples, to brand the Empire to all posterity, with this so deep and
indelible infamy, and come in favor again with him, the public enemy both
to Church and Commonwealth. Thus, and much more after this manner they chafed,
and were minded to elect the Emperors little son, carry him to Rome, and
depose the Pope.

The Emperor herewith acquainted, saw no means likelier to pacify them, then
by fleeing from the league, and joining with them; which fact quite confounded
the Popes plots, insomuch as he was enforced to break off his intended
journey into Germany. And which was next to be done, by his Legates, signifies
to the Princes of Germany; how matters stood, and withal exhorts them to have
a care of the Commonwealth. This was in the year, 1077.

They therefore create Rudolphus, Duke of Sueuia, Emperor, whom the Archbishop
of Mentz consecrates. But Henry returning into Germany, musters up forces:
Rudolphus does the like, who chiefly relied upon and from the Saxons; but in
the third conflict receiving a deadly His right hand was struck off in
battle, and being brought to him, lying upon his death bed, he cried out,
saying; This is the hand wherewith J confirmed my promised loyalty to the
Emperor, etc.
wound, departed his life.

Presently after this victory, the Emperor calls a Diet at Brescia: there a
decree passed by the Bishops then present, as well Italians as Germans, that
Gregory was not lawful Bishop of Rome: whereupon Victor the II. Archbishop of
Rauenna, was appointed in his place: upon this decree the Emperor hastens to
Rome, besieges Gregory, who at length escapes by flight: and then confirms
Victor the II. by whom he is consecrated.

Gregory the next Pope after him, dying, Vrbane the II. at Gergoie, a town of
the Aruernes, vulgarly called Claremont, where there was a meeting of many
Princes: persuades Philip, of that name the first, then King of France, to the
Sarazen war: of which, afterward, Godfrey. Duke of Bulloigne, went Leader,
who had much happy success, and recovered Jerusalem. Paschal the II. Vrbans
successor, was troublesome also to the Emperor, who for that cause intending
to go down into Italy, first assigns his son for his successor. But he,
pricked forward by others, and forgetting that duty ingrafted in us by nature,
drove his Father into extreme distress; having the Pope and very many Princes
of Germany, his Accomplices, both in council and in the fact. And hereupon he
was created Emperor, of that name the V. his Father afterward dying miserably
at Liege. Henry the V. 1106. an. 18. m. 8. d. 16.


Some few years after, he marches into Italy with a great Army, to make an
end of the controversy, betwixt the Commonwealth of the Empire and the
Papacy, and hewing out his way with his sword, at length, arriues at Rome.

Now from Constantines time, the Emperors had the collation of Ecclesiastical
honors and dignities: but the Popes grown more wealthy, at length greatly
repined hereat, as a thing unmeet; and from this fountain issued almost all
the iarres betwixt them. Now this Emperor standing upon his own right and
power, a great tumult arose at Rome, in so much as the Emperor raised up in
the night, was constrained to aid his own men, who fell by the sword, all the
City over. But these factious persons once suppressed, he takes Paschal the II.
and dismissed him not, till he had given him satisfaction by entering into a
league: but after the Emperor was returned into Germany, the Pope flies off
from the league, Henry the V. excommunicated by Paschal the II. 1115.
whereto he had sworn in most sacred words, and excommunicates the Emperor,
which stirred up many of the Germane Princes to rebellion, and amongst the
rest, more especially the Archbishop of Mentz. The Emperor marching down into
Italy, sends his Ambassadors to the Pope, about a peace. But whilst the
matter was in hand, the Pope dies: To him, Gelasius the II. succeedes. The
Emperor, for that he was not called to the election, marches to Rome, and sets
up another. Gelasius thus deposed, excommunicates both him, as also the Pope by
him constituted: and the Emperor in regard the Popes Legates solicited the
Germans to revolt, was constrained to retire home. But Gelasius dying in the
interim, the Romans choose Calixtus the II. He thrust him out of his place,
whom the Emperor in hatred to Gelasius, had created, and after much
interession, compounds with the Emperor.

To Henry the V. Lotharius, Lotharus II. 1125. an. 13. d. 18.
of the house of Saxony, of that name the II. succeeded. Him Conradus Duke of
Sueuia opposed, storming that the sway of government, was fallen again into the
Saxons hands: who marching into Italy, to settle himself in that Kingdom,
(whilst Lotharius in the interim held Germany fast) destitute of aid, returned
home, and made his peace with the Emperor.

Innocent the II. was then Pope of Rome. Him Anacletus resisted: to whom,
because he was descended from noble parentage, Innocent was forced to yield,
but imploring the Emperors aid, was restored.

The Emperor returns into Germany, where having se^led the affairs, he
marches down again into Italy with a mighty Army, subdues some Cities then in
rebellion, and amongst the rest Ancona and Spoleti, chased Roger King of
Sicilie out of Apulia and Campania, and (as fame speaks of him) scarce any
Emperor since Charles the Great, archieued more worthy exploits throughout
Italy. It is written that then also, the civil law which as we mentioned, was
collected by Justinian the Emperors command, having been borne down by storms
of war, was brought to light again.

Conradus D. of Suenia, succeeded him: Conradus III. 1139. an 12. m. 10. d. 15.
at what time Henry surnamed the Proud, was Duke of Bauaria, and by marriage
with the Emperor Lotharius his daughter, Duke of Saxony also: who affecting
the Empire, and plotting much mischief against the Emperor, was proscribed
and his lands given to others. But Duke Henry, having recovered Saxony; as he
was marching into Bavaria, dyed, leaving behind him his son: in favor of
whom, the Saxons rose up in rebellion against the Emperor, and not so only,
but Welpho also, brother to the deceased Duke Henry; by force of Arms
challenged Bauaria, excluding Ludolphus, upon whom the Emperor had conferred
that Province. A little above we mentioned how the Emperor expelled Roger
King of Sicilie: but whilst Germany was thus turmoiled, King Roger laying hold
on the opportunity, inuades Sicilie, and chases out the Emperors Deputy: and
then spurs on Welpho with large promises to proceed and hold the Emperor in
play: The King of Hungary too, took the same course, who also stood in fear
of the Emperor.

At length the Emperor marching out against the Sarazens, lost his army, and
returns home: from whence intending to go down into Italy, having all in
readiness, dyed at Bamberg. Commonly called Barbarossa. Frederick Barbarossa
1152. an. 38. m. 3. d. 7
Frederick Aenobarb or Red-beard, Duke of Sueiua, of that name the first,
succeeded him, a man of heroicke spirit. He in the beginning of his reign,
made a peace among the Princes of Germany, and ended the controversy about
Saxony and Bauaria, afterward with a maine Army, marches down into Italy:
sets a mulct upon the Veronesses, who had contemned him: and for example sake
hangs some of the chief upon gallows. He commanded a Court of Guard to be
kept about him near Placentia, by all the Leige-Princes of the Empire:
besieges Millaine, rases Asta, and lays Deitona level with the ground. Going
to Rome is consecrated by Adrian the IIII. suppresses the rebellious Citizens,
subuerts Spoleti, and made a great slaughter: subdues the Lombards, and having
broken the snares laid for him by the Veronesses, returns into Germany,
inflict an ignominious mulct upon the Prince Palatine, who in his abscence had
raised some commotions: The beginning of the Kingdom of Bohemia. about 1^00.
and after that he made the Duke of Bohemia King.

In the mean space the Millanois, practiced many insolent outrages against
their neighbors, and again reared up Deitona, demollshed by the Emperor:
whereupon he, returning with a strong army, sacks Millaine, by the aid of the
Cremonesses, Pauians and Nouarians. The City thus taken, the multitude, at the
Princes of Germany their intercession (to whom they had petitioned) was
spared. All Lombardy was reduced into his subjection: from hence (having settled
the City with Laws) he remoues to other people thereabouts. After his return
they rebel, contemn the Laws by him established, and demolish the Forts by
him raised: whereupon again marching thither; he harrazes the whole Country,
and rases all places within their Dominions.

In the mean space, mortal conspiracies were in hatching against him all
Italy over: in which Pope Adrian beforementioned, was one: who, as soon as he
had absolutely resolved to excommunicate him Drinking of water wherein a fly
were drowned.
dyed.

The Emperor marching into Italy the third time utterly euerts Millaine, puts
the Author of the rebellion to death, and compells the rest of the multitude to
go into exile: then besieging the City of Rome, lost a great part of his Army
by contagious sickness. For that cause raising his siege, and placing garrisons
throughout Hetruria: setting over at Spoleti, Ancona, and Rauenna, such as he
pleased should govern the Commonwealth, he returns into Germany.

Pope Adrian dying, two contend for the Papacy, Victor and Alexander the III.
the Emperor being absent, who indeed inclined more to Victor: but Alexander
first excommunicates his Competitour, and afterward (the dissension
increasing) the Afterward when the Emperor came to him to Venice for his
absolution, the Pope trod upon his neck, and caused that place in the
Psalmist to be sung; Thou shall tread upon the Aspe and Basilisk, etc. The
Emperor exclaiming that he did not this honor to him but to S. Peter, the
Pope replied, To me and to Peter too.
Emperor also.

The Millanois perceiving this occasion break into rebellion, and in many
places in Italy expel the Emperous Deputies, hanging some of them upon
gallows. The Emperor hereupon returning into Italy fought a hazardous battle
with them. The Pope was Copartner in the war, who fled to Venice. At length
when peace was concluded by truce, he makes an expedition into Asia, against
the Enemies of the Christian Religion, where going into a River to wash
himself, was by force of the stream overwhelmed and drowned.

His son Henry, Henry VI. 1190. an. 8. m. 2. d. 22.
of that name the VI. was his successor. He (after William the son of Roger
King of Sicilies death) having been twice in Italy, conquered Apulia, and
Calabria, and taken Naples, subdues Sicily, placing strong garrisons there, in
regard of the inconstant disposition of that Nation. Then he constitutes
certain Nobles over Rauenna, and Ancona, and throughout Apulia and Hetruria:
soon after, having assigned his son Frederick, as then an Infant, for his
successor in the Empire: he went into Sicily by consent of the Princes of
Germany, and there ended his Falling into a burning fever by a poisoned potion,
given him (as it was supposed) by his wife.
life. Frederick his son, being as aforesaid, in respect of his age, but a
Child, all men in a manner deemed it fitter to take his uncle Philip: but
Innocent the III. Pope of Rome, most vehemently withstood that. Howbeit the
Princes disagreeing in their choice, when some would create Philip, others Otho
Duke of Saxony, a great vproare thereupon ensued, especially about the coast of
the Rhyne: But Philip partly by force of Arms, partly by his exceeding
humanity, drew on his adversaries into subjection, and forthwith made his peace
with the Pope whom by experience he had found a bitter Enemy. Not long after,
Otho IIII. 1208. an. 4.
he was murdered in his Chamber, and Otho Duke of Saxony beforementioned was
his successor: who incurred the Popes displeasure, (being formerly his most
entire friend) and was at length excommunicated by him: whereupon a Diet
assembled, the Electorall Princes solicited by the Pope to create another, call
home out of Sicilie, Frederick the King thereof, Henry the VI. his son, to
whom, (as a little above it is mentioned) they had given allegiance, being then
an Infant. Him the Emperor Otho meets with an Army at the Rhyne to stop his
passage, but was discomfited, and returning into Saxony, dyed, as it was
supposed, of grief. Frederick the II. 1212. an. 11
And thus was Frederick made Emperor of that name the II. Grandchild to
Frederick Aenobarb or Red-Beard, by his son.

Innocent the III. before spoken of, had a Council at Rome, called the
Laterane, there amongst others, those decrees passed.

That the Chrisme and Eucharist, which they call the Host, should be kept
under Lock and Key.

That a private confession of sins should be made once every year.

That an election made by the civil Magistrate, in spiritual promotions,
should be of no force.

That those of Ecclesiastical Order should not, without cause, promise fealty
to those that are called Laymen.

That the Laws made by Princes should not prejudice Churches.

That Ecclesiastical persons should be exempted from all contribution.

That Tribute should not be paid before Tenths.

That the Relics of Saints, should not be shown forth of a Casket.

About these Decrees there followed a great dissension, betwixt the Greeks and
Latins. for the Greeks would not touch those Altars whereon the Latins had
offered up the Host, till they had washed and expiated them, as also of a new
baptized those whom the Latins had baptized. Hereupon it was decreed that they
should return to their mother Church of Rome, whereby there might be one Fold,
and one Shepherd: in case they obeyed not, to be (after excommunication)
degraded from their Order.

The Emperor goes to Rome, and is consecrated by Honorius the third. He
subdued those Rebels, which were spread all over Italy, and proscribes some of
them. Many whereof fled to Rome, and implored the Popes aid. This gave occaon
of great discord, for the Emperor took it most hainously that his adversaries
should have their harbor and habitation there. The rancor raging hotter, He
by consent of the Princes, assigns his son Henry his successor in the
Empire; and summons the Princes to a Diet at Cremona: but being hindered
entrance there, by the Pope, and the Lombards factions, returns into Apulia:
and within a while after the Pope dies, to whom Gregory the IX. Frederick the
II. excommunicated by Gregory the IX. three times.
succeeds, who exco^municates the Emperor for not performing his expedition
against the Turks, whereto he had bound himself by vow.

The Emperor deprecating this offense and purging himself; when nothing could
prevail, he marches to Rome, deposes the Pope and inflicts a heavy mulct upon
his Accomplices: then calling another Diet at Rauenna; is hindered by the
fugitive Pope, who had stirred up enemies against him in every place. At length
the Emperor, after his wife was dead, that he might perform his promise, and
provide for the Commonwealth, sets forward on his expedition into Asia: But
the Pope whilst he was absent, makes war, and seizes upon Apulia. The
Emperor having good success, recovering many places, and amongst the rest
Jerusalem: being certified of the state of Italy, concluding a ten years
truce with the enemy, returns with his Army, and recouers his own Countries.
The Pope fortifies himself by a new league, with these Nobles of Italy, on
who^ the Emperor had set a mulct, and then again excommunicates him for
entering into truce with the enemy. The Emperor loving quietness, by his
Ambassadors treats for peace, which with much a do he obtained, and so he
returned into Germany. But the Pope not able to leave his old guise,
dismantling Viterbo, again excommunicates the Emperor, who hereat incensed
beyond measure, posts into Italy, in raging and wrathful manner, and punishes
all the Rebels throughout Hetruria, Vmbria, Lombardy, and the Country
bordering upon Po: whereupon the Pope ingeminates his excommunication, and
conioynes in league with the Venetians. The Emperor coasting through Italy,
having in a manner reduced it all into his subjection, lays siege to Rome, and
not long after, Pope Gregory dies, having first summoned a Council of his own
adherents, at Rauenna, whither notwithstanding they could not have access, all
passages being blockt up by the Emperor, insomuch as certain of them were
taken.

This was the Pope that patcht together the Decretall Epistles, as they call
them, which are a great part of the Pontificiall Law, laden with multiplicity
of Commentaries: wherein it may seem wonderful, that such men there should
be that will take so much pains as to adhere to those, not only
inconvenient, triuiall, foolish, but also ridiculous works, as fast as if they
were a kind of Oracle: and spend all their labor and time in interpreting,
explaining and garnishing them: as though they were hired to that end, to
defend other men's folly and error, with their best vigilance and industry, and
to lose the reputation of their own modesty, in other men's impudency. That
decree, which goes under Gratians name, in diverse places, amongst other
passages, has these:

The Rule of the Church of Rome, which is the blessed Apostle S. Peter's seat:
must be followed.

It is not lawful to hold a Council without permission of the Bishop of Rome.

The Laws of the Church Rome, are to be observed, as pronounced by Peter's
own mouth.

What yoke the Church of Rome imposes, though it be not tolerable, it must be
endured.

The Ministers of the Church ought to vow chastity, that is, they should not
mary.

It is lawful for him, that has not a wife, to have a Concubine.

If the Pope be negligent and remiss in his office, he may hurt indeed,
as well himself as others: notwithstanding he cannot be judged by any man,
because he himself is to judge all men.

The Emperor ought to be ruled by, and not rule over the Pope.

All mortal men besides, may be judged by men, but the Pope, Peter's successor
by God alone.

It is lawful for the Pope to release subjects, from their loyalty and oath,
whereby they are bound to their Prince.

In Gregory's Decretall Epistles, and in Boniface his sixth book of Decretalls,
the Clementines, and Extrauagants as they call them: it is set down there
amongst other things; That the Popes authority is not subject to the Decrees of
Counsels.

It belongs to the Pope to approve of the elected Emperor, or to reject him, if
he be not fit.

There are two great lights which govern the world, the Sun and the Moon:
The Pope is in stead of the Sun, and the Emperor, of the Moon. Bishops may
deal more mildly with those, that have offended by adultery, and other such
crimes, as being of lower nature.

The Pope only, has cognizance concerning the privileges of the Church of
Rome.

The bones of excommunicate persons already buried, ought to be dug up and
thrown away.

The Pope may depose the Emperor from his place and Magistracy.

The Emperor is bound to perform allegiance and fealty to the Pope, by oath.

It is just, that Ecclesiastical persons, should be exempt and free from all
cost, molestation and charge.

A man may be declared an Heretic after his death, and his goods be
confiscated.

The sons of heretics ought not to be admitted to any place of government
either civil or ecclesiastical.

It is necessary to salvation, that all men be subject to the Pope of Rome.

Those few places only are drawn out of an immense heap: and what kind of
stuff they are, there is no man that is well in his wits, but may perceive.

The Law is, that men of deepest learning should define the same. Sovereign
reason is grafted in Nature, which commands those things that are to be done,
and forbids those that are contrary. And all laws ought to have reference to
the common good. And the Lawmakers ought to have the like affection toward the
people and Commonwealth, that the father has toward his own Children: but
what likelihood hereof is there in any the beforementioned places? but for
them, not only to excuse those fopperies, but also to garnish, adorn, and
illustrate them, with new Commentaries, and rather to babble out any thing,
then suffer their dignity to be impeached, I pray you what gross impudency
is this? but ^^e^sting no deeper.

If pride, avarice, ambition of bearing rule, and ignorance of learning drew
them on, to make such decrees: if they themselves vary in opinions, nor will
one be tied to another laws, because endued with equality of power: pray
thee, why do thou macerate thy self in straightning those crooked and
contrarizing decrees? I omit that Ocean, or rather sincke, I mean that part of
the Papal law, containing the sale of benefices as they call them, and
consecrated goods: for who is able to reckon up their deceipts and collusions?
no not they themselves, that have been factors many years together in this
kind of traffic, do sufficiently understand and know all the tricks: when
new ones are daily invented. But this argument requires both another time, and
a book of purpose: now therefore let us return to our purpose.

As Frederick the Emperor, so also Lewis the IX. King of France invaded Syria
and Egypt with an Army, who afterward Of the plague.
dyed at the siege of In Africa, where formerly (as some say) Carthage stood.
Tunis City, in the year of Grace, 1270.

In his reign, William Bishop of Paris raised a question about Ecclesiastical
Benefices: which cause being publicly discust, his opinion took place, that
it was not lawful for any man to hold more then one; but it is sufficient to
have spoken only, and writ down such decrees as those.

To Gregory, Innocent the IIII succeeded, upon whom, as it were by hereditary
succession, the Emperors displeasure fell. Whereupon calling a Council at
Lions, he summons the Emperor, excommunicates him for not appearing, depriues
him of his dignity, exhorting the Princes of Germany, to choose another, and
this his decree (which amongst others is in private) as also certain of the
Emperors Epistles, to several Kings are extant, wherein he demonstrates at
large, the Popes iniquity, and his own innocence.

The Emperor was minded to go to Lions, and try his fortunes: but a new
rebellion breaking forth throughout Italy, turns all his forces that way:
where, good success failing him, he returning into Puel, began to languish,
and at length died. Some say he was poisoned, others, strangled by his bastard
son Manfred, who afterward invaded Italy.

At that time lived the famous Lawier, Azo, after whom, the whole stream of
Writers followed; who violating that sharp and severe edict of the Emperor
Commanding his Code only (into which as abouesaid the whole law was
contracied) to be bserued.
Justinian, filled the world with an innumerable company of Books; from whence
we must now seek those points, which those Ancients handled most copiously and
learnedly. For one man compiles another works, so that there is no end or
measure of writing: and all ouerflowes in contrary opinions, in so much as the
old man's saying may properly take place here; who having asked three Lawyers
their advise; you have done bravely, says he; I am a great deal further to
seek then before. I omit the quiddities which are daily devised in abundance;
for the Comedians saying falls right here; that craft starts one mischief in
the neck of another. Cicero complains, that many worthy ordinances were
settled by laws, but those for the most part were corrupted and depraved by
Lawyers inventions. What if he were now living, and saw those Pyramides of
books, and our modern practice, and that sacred repositorie of the laws,
thus filthily polluted, and miserably contaminated? Howbeit, as God indeed has
within our memory, brought all other Arts to light again, so has he raised
up many men, who being furnished with the help of good learning think those
pains taken in this behalf, not to be repented of, being to restore this
subject most beautiful, and altogether necessary for the society of mankind;
yea, this gift, even heavenly, drawn out and conuaied from the mid-fountaines
of Philosophy, to it is former splendour and equity; which their endeavors
merit not only public commendation, but also remuneration.

After his death, there was a vacancie for almost 22. years: A vacancie in the
Empire for the space of 22. years after Frederick the II. his decease.
first one, then another being elected, who notwithstanding, held not the sway
of government in those troublesome times. In the mean time the Kingdom of
Naples fell from the Emperor Frederickes house into the hands of the French,
and afterward Sicilie also. For the Popes relied upon the French power, though
soon after most cruel wars insued about those Kingdoms betwixt the house
of Arragon, and the house of Angiers in France, but that appertains not to
this place.

When the Commonwealth had floated in this state, as aforesaid, for so many
years together, Rudolphus Habspurgh, 1273. an. 17. m. 9. d. 16.
Rudolphus Habspurgh is created Emperor. He in the beginning of his reign,
appeased those commotions spread throughout Germany. And after some Diets
ended, marches out against Ottacar King of Bohemia, then in rebellion, whom he
enforced to conditions of peace, which he notwithstanding (by his wives
instigation) not long after, breaks, and marching the second time into
Austria, is slain in battle. Ladislaus Cunus King of Hungary, aided the
Emperor Rudolphus.

At length a peace being concluded with the Bohemians by Iutta the Emperous
daughter was married to Wencislaus King of Bohemia, Ottacars son.
marriage, the Emperor gave Austria, which the King of Bohemia had held many
years together, to Albertus his son: and being hindered by diverse businesses
in Germany, went not down into Italy, neither was he inclined much that way
howsoever: for it is reported of him, that he would sometimes merrily tell a
tale of the Fox that would not visit the Lion, lying counterfeitly sick in a
certain den, because he was affrighted with the footsteps of other beasts,
of which none had returned: notwithstanding he deputed a Governor in Italy,
in manner of Vice-Emperour; and as it is written, confirmed the often mentioned
Country of Flaminiae, and the Exarchie to the Church of Rome; when he saw
very small commodity return to him from those parts: For the Emperors
wearied with perpetual dissension and variance with the Popes, became more
remiss: neither would the Popes ever be at quiet, till they had removed them
forth of the Coasts of Italy: and therefore in a manner shelrring themselves
under the wings of the French Kings, and fostering their factions by the
Bishops of Germany, at length effected their own wished desires.

But here by the way let us call to mind the interchangeable course of
estates, when as they (who were secure, had their being, and held their place
and dignity by favor of the Emperors) were enriched by their goods and
liberalities, both arrogated dominion over them, and also defrauded them of
their patrimony. For they keep to themselves, not only a good part of Italy,
but have also strictly obliged the Kings of Sicilie and Naples, to their
party: which two kings, both pay the^ yearly tribute, and also are forbidden
to undertake the imperial dignity without their permission: and when they
receive possession from them, amongst other clauses, that is one part of their
oath.

That memorable massacre of the French, through out Sicilie, happened in
Rudolphus the Emperors time. For they being in possession of that Country,
where, after soldiers fashion, playing many insolent and outrageous prankes,
were by secret conspiracy, after a sign given, all put to the sword, when the
Bell rung to evening prayers. This Massacre is commonly called the Sicilian
Vespers: The Sicilian Vespers, 1281.
which was committed upon Easter day, in the year 1281. Rudolphus upon a sum
of money paid, infranchised and set charge-free many Cities in Italy belonging
to the Empire, as the Bononians, Florentines, Genowaies, Lucans, and others.

After this, assembling the Princes at Franckeford, he desired, but in vain,
to have his son Albert assigned his successor. Rudolphus dying, Adolphus of
Nassaw, 1292. an. 6. m 5. d. 7.
Adolphus, of the house of Nassaw succeeded, who not long after, began to
pick quarrels with Albertus Archduke of Austria: and moreover offending the
Princes of Germany by his demeanor, as also the Archbishop of Mentz, by whose
help he was made Emperor, is deposed, and Albertus Archduke of Austria,
Rudolphus his son, is elected: who, uniting his forces, having the Princes
aid, makes forward toward Adolphus, when giving him battle in the Bishopric
of Spire, Adolphus being grievously wounded by Albertus, was soon after slain
by the rest of the soldiers.

After this victory, Albertus, 1298 an. 9. m 9. d. 5.
Albertus to confirm his own title, lest any might report that his former
election was unjust, desired to be solemnly created Emperor; which done, Pope
Boniface the VIII. reclaimed; denying to ratify what the rest of the Princes
had done: but within a while after, when Philip the Fair, King of France, and
he fell into bitter dissension: he approved of Albertus, and spoke much in
praise of his progenitors. At length, Albertus was slain by his own kinsmen,
as he was marching into Bohemia, having all in readiness, to intrude his
son Frederick into that kingdom. This Pope Boniface added a sixth Book, to
Gregory the IX. his decretall Epistles, which are contained in five Books.
Amongst the rest, he made a decree, that it might be lawful for the Pope to
dispossess himself of the Papacy; for is written, that he himself by
sinister means, persuaded Caelestine the V. thereunto, whom he succeeded.

After Albertus, Henry, Henry the VII. 1308. an. 4. m. 9.
of that name the VII. of the house of Luxemburgh, is created Emperor. He,
having by marriage made his son King of Bohemia, go down into Italy; the
estate whereof was at that time most miserable. For ever since Frederick the
II. his decease, about 57. years, the Emperor neglected Italy, which caused
the sundry dilacerations thereof from them, by the greater Nobles, especially by
the Two Noble families in Sueuia, which afterward removed into Italy.
Guelphs and Gibelines, which two factions have many retainers in those parts.

He therefore first of all constitutes Governors over the Cities, and free
buroughs throughout Lombardie, and swore the inhabitants to his subjection:
then resting a while at Millaine, indeauouring, but all in vain, to reconcile
the beforementioned factions: where when Turianus, Governor of the City, had
complotted to assail him unawares: after discovery of the conspiracy, and
suppression of his adversaries; he commits the government of the City to a
Vicount. All the Cities in that Country yielded into his power and protection,
only Brescia rebelled, the walls whereof (having after a long siege taken it)
he demolisht. Then marching through Genua, and so striking over to Pisa,
arrived at Rome: and was crowned by some of the Cardinals, because Pope Clement
the V. having left the City, was removed into France, and kept his Court at
Auinion.

When the Cardinals required the oath of him, which they said was to be given
to the Pope: he refused it, and would not have any such kind of oath, to be
thereby bound to the Pope: upon notice hereof, the Pope, to enlarge his own
power, expounded that general form of the oath at large, and annexed it to
the rest of his decrees now extant. For he himself also preferred many laws,
which retain their name from him, and are called the Clementines. The knights
of the Temple suppressed about 1308.


Now also those Knights called the Templars, being very puissant, were by the
same violence put to death, and made away in diverse places. Philip the Fair,
King of France, by the Popes permission, seized upon a great part of their
Revenues. Soon after, the name and memory of them was condemned: and by the
French national Synod, at Vienna, their lands were given to those, called the
Knights of the Rhodes. At this time also the University of Orleans was founded
by King Philip, and Pope Clements authority. After the Emperor Henry's He was
poisoned by a Monk with a cup of Wine in the Communion.
decease and burial at Pisa, being poisoned as it was strongly suspected:
there followed most bitter contentions about the election: for Frederick
Archduke of Austria the Emperor Alberts son, Lewis 1314 an. 32. m. 11. d.
24. Frederick of Austria opposes him, and is elected Emperor also.
and Lewis Duke of Bauaria, were competitors for the Empire. The Archbishop of
Mentz crowned Lewis at Aix: and the Archbishop of Cullen, Frederick at Bena:
and Pope John the XXIII. proclaimed them both Emperors, but of the two was
more inclined to Frederick, which proclamation increased the flame of discord.
Forces being mustered upon both sides, a sharp battle was fought at Esling a
town in Sueuia, but in a manner with equal fortune: and soon after another
in Bauaria with stronger forces, Frederick the other Emperor taken prisoner.
1323.
in which the Archduke Frederick was taken prisoner, losing a good part of his
Army, afterward he was see at liberty, and returning home, died within a few
years after.

Lewis the Emperor having thus compast the Empire, marches down into Italy,
in despite of the Pope, constitutes Governors over all the Cities and
free-burroughes, and is crowned at Millaine by the Archbishop there, from
whence (having sent his Ambassadors to the Pope at Auinion, again and again,
about his solemn inauguration, and there failing) he goes to Rome, after he
had settled the affairs of Millaine. At Rome he was entertained with exceeding
great joy, and crowned by one or two of the Cardinals: but the Pope
ingeminating his excommunication, he, by the advice of his Nobles, creates
another Pope, and after this fashion continued these most deadly flames of
hatred betwixt them, not without most scandalous criminations cast forth on
both sides.

The French Annall-writers report that Charles the Fair, King Philips son,
was the first that granted Pope John Tenths of Ecclesiastical goods in France,
and shared the prey betwixt themselves, but the Popes chief aim in procuring
this, was to furnish himself with money against the Emperor.

After the Emperor was returned into Germany, the Pope dies, and his successor
Benedict the XII. both excommunicated and deprived him of his dignity.
Whereupon the Emperor conuening the Princes at Franckeford in a solemn
speech, complains of the Popes injuries, explaines the reasons of his
allegiance, produces and declares the ancient laws of the Empire: withal
showing, that the Bishop of Rome had nothing to do with the Commonwealth of
the Empire: For he, who is elected by the Princes consent, is truly Emperor,
without any assent, consent or consecration from the Pope, all that being but a
ceremony, which by little and little crept up, and now is grown too high, to
the great dishonor and indammagement of the Empire.

After this, Pope Benedict dying, Clement the VI. succeeded, one far more
violent then any before him: who in vehement manner propounded certain
ignominious conditions, upon refusal whereof, he grew a great deal more
furious, sharply admonishing the Princes to choose another Emperor, within a
certain time by him limited, which if they would not dae, he would take care
that the Church should not want a Patron and Advocate any longer. Whilst the
Commonwealth was thus tossed, the Emperor Lewis departed this life, and
Charles King John his son, Henry the VII. his Nephew was elected King of
Bohemia.

A little before this, began the occasion of that cruel war betwixt the French
and English, When Charles the Fair, King of France, dying without issue male,
which was in the year, 1327. Edward king of England, of that name the III.
being son to Isabel, King Charles his sister, challenged the Kingdom as due
to him; but the Estates of France, which are called the Peers, set the crown
upon Philip of Valeis, cozen germane to the deceased King Charles: excluding
not only King Edward the sisters son, but also King Charles his posthume
daughter; alleging, that the inheritance of that kingdom did in no wise
appertain to daughters: hereupon insued that bloody war scarce yet quenched.

The beginning of the Emperor Charles the IIII. Charles the IIII. 1346. an.
32. m. 7. d. 14.
his reign was troublesome, and the Imperial dignity was offered to Edward
the third King of England: but he, as it was reported, refused it, being
hindered by the French wars.

After the quenching of sundry combustions in Germany, the Emperor Charles
goes down into Italy, and by consent of Pope Innocent the VI. then being in
France, is crowned at Rome by some Cardinals, upon condition not to stay any
longer, either at Rome, or in Italy. He returns to Millaine, and granted the
office of perpetual Vice-Emperour for Lombardie, to the house of the
Viscounts, who then bore great sway in Millaine; in respect of which honor,
they gave him an huge mass of money, and not they only, but others also upon
whom he had bestowed any thing: which act much extenuated the Emperors
authority in that Country.

After his return out of Italy, he summoned a Diet of the Princes, and there
preferred that decree of the Empire, called the Containing the laws and rites
to be observed in the election of the Emp: as also the dignity and office of
each Elector, and other Princes and Nobles.
Golden bull: lastly, he assigns his son Wenceslaus his successor in the
Empire; which, as it is wri^ten, he procured with great difficulty, though
with large rewards: and not long after died.

In his reign, John King of France Philip of Valois his son, together with
his youngest son Philip, afterward Duke of Burgundy, surnamed the Stout, or
the Bold; was, in pitched field, near Poictiers, taken prisoner by the English,
who were then in possession of a good part of Aquitaine, and the City of
Bordeaux. Many of the prime Nobility were slain in that battle. The
Annall-Writers record, that the English were not above 7000. when the French
made against them with many forces, about 60000 strong. This was in the year,
1356. the XII. of the Kalends of October. The King was carried prisoner into
England, and died the feuenth year after.

Wencestaus being (as history speaks of him) both by nature and course of
life, Wenceslaus, 1379 an. 2. m. 5. d. 28.
very vicious, quite neglected the Commonwealth. He for a sum of money,
created John Galeas, of the house of the Viscounts, (a man both covetous and
cruel) Duke of Millaine and Lombardie.

In his reign, Iagello Duke of Lithuania or Luten, was, after King Lewis his
death, created King of Polonia, by consent of the Nobles: This King was great
Grandfather to Sigismund, the modern King there, and was the first that
received Baptism, changing his name to Vladislaus.

Sigismund King of Hungary was overthrown in battle at Nieopolis by Bajazet
Emperor of the Turks, the third of the kalends of October. Charles the VI. K.
of France, sent a goodly troop of horse for aid into Hungary, under conduct
of John, son of Philip the bold Duke of Burgundy, which John was taken in
that battle, and carried prisoner to the Turk, where he stood at the next
door to death, but yet escaped, which (as the French Writers relate) happened
thus: There was a certain Physiognomer (one of that pack that profess to
know the dispositions and natures of men, by their body, eyes, countenance and
face) familiar with Bajazet; who viewing the prisoner, willed and persuaded the
Emperor to dismiss him in safety. For he should be the man, that after his
return home, should kindle a most violent combustion, which should set a good
part, either of Europe, or of the Christian world, on fire. Upon this
persuasion, the Turk dismisses him, and the rest of the Nobility, that were
prisoners, after they had paid 20000. crowns for their ransom. After his
return into France, he began to quarrel with Lewis Duke of Orleans, the
Kings brother. For he by reason of the Kings sickness, which was in a manner
desperate, desired to govern the Commonwealth, being nearest of kindred to
the king. But the Duke of Burgundy, for that he was cousin-germane to the
King, and elder then the other, challenged the government (his Father Philip
being dead) rather to belong to him. This sore every day more and more
festering, at length the Duke of Orleans was murdered in Paris in the night
time, as he was going home from supper. The murderers were sent privily by
the Duke of Burgundy, who was so far from denying the fact, that he
maintained it. This was in the year 1407. the ninth of the kalends of December

The XII. year following, the Duke of Burgundy coming to a place appointed,
about a pacification in this cause, was entrapped by treachery and murdered by
certain of the Duke of Orleans his friends that had sworn his death: Charles
the Dolphin, the Kings son, who was judge in that controversy being present
at the fact.

This is the head-spring of the war betwixt those two houses, which has so
often broke forth ever since that time, till within our memory.

Wenceslaus, by reason of his negligence grown into contempt: Robert 14^0. an.
9 m 8. d. 22.
the Princes deprive him of the government, and elect Robert Duke of Bauaria,
Count Palatine. He presently applied himself about reformation of Wenceslaus
his misgouernment: and would not ratify the grant made by him to John Galeas,
but contrived a new, how to reduce Lombardy into the Imperial dominions: for
which, and other such like causes, marching down into Italy, the said Galeas
hindered and repelled him. The State of Italy, was in those times very
troublesome, chiefly by the Emperor Charles and Wenceslaus their default,
being too indulgent over that Nation: For over and besides Galeas lately made
Duke of Millaine: The Venetians, Florentines, and Genowaies, made war upon
their neighbors: and all right was swayed by the sword and violence.
Furthermore by reason of the Popes continual absence, nothing but factions,
and those dangerous ones, swarmed at Rome. Then also Galeas D. of Millaine made
war upon the Florentines, who to work their own revenge solicit the
Emperor by large proffers, to march down again into Italy: but when the
Emperor was come to Padua, He (at request of the Venetians, who likewise hated
Gal^^a, and withal perceiving that their provision was not answerable to their
great promises) retires into Germany, casting off all care of Italy, whose
estate afterward grew more weak, by its own civil broils.

To the Emperor Robert, Sigismund 14^^. an. 26. m. 8.
Sigismund the Emperor Wencest^us his brother King of Hungary succeeds. At
this time there were three Popes, John the XXXIII. Gregory the XII. and
Benedict the XIII. insomuch as by their factions, almost all the Provinces of
Europe, were at odds. For there was not one public Council, at any time since
Innocent the III. as their books testify, being 200. years, and the state of
the Clergy was most corrupt, a kind of bottomless sincke of vices and
maladies having made an inundation, which in a manner scorned to be stopped.
For Boniface the VIII. was Pope in the interim, who took upon him both the
Papal and Imperial authority. Then the next after him, Clement the V. of
Bordeaux, at Philip the Fair the French Kings request (forsaking Rome) removed
his Court into France: and after his death the Cardinals falling into sharp
dissentions amongst themselves, made a vacancie for some years: but at length
John the XXII. of Aquitaine, was created Pope at Lions. The fifth Pope after
him, which was Gregory the XI. (when the Popes had kept their Court in France
then for 71. years together) returns to Rome; but after his death Vrbane the
VI. a Neapolitan, and Clement the VI. a Sauoysin, contended for the Papacy. The
first whereof vpheld himself by the Italian party, and lived at Rome, the
other by the French, and lived at Auinion. After those two were dead, the other
there before mentioned, were by several factions chosen in their places, the
Papal Monster having then three heads.

At what time many worthy men both Italians and French, deplored the State of
the Church, inueighing bitterly enough against the corruptions and vices of
those times, as far as they could see in those days of darkness. Amongst
the rest, Petrarch was one, who when the Popes and Cardinals lay at Auinion,
called that City the whore of Babylon.

Whereupon to determine that Controversy, a Council was assembled at
Constance in Germany, by order whereof those Three were deposed, and Martin
the V. elected. At this Council John H^^ and Hierome of Prague were burnt for
heresy, though they came thither under safe conduct from the Emperor
Sigismund: the Emperor is much commended, for that He, to benefit the
Commonwealth went almost to all the Kings in Christendom, to exhort them to
have a care of the common good.

After the affairs were settled in Germany, he goes down into Italy, at what
time the Venetians and Florentines were up in Arms both by sea and land,
against Philip Maria, John Galeas his son, Duke of Millaine, and so forward to
Rome, being there consecrated by Eugenius the IIII. and returned by Basil,
where then there was another Council held.

Albertus Archduke of Austria, Albertus II. 1437. an. 1. m. 9. d. 27.
King of Hungary and Bohemia, was his successor: whom the civil wars at
home, and foreign abroad held back from Italy.

About this time, those wits were rouzed up again, which began to polish the
liberal sciences, language, and good letters, the Italians indeed gave the
onset, who were furthered by help of the Graecians, and then after followed
the Germans, French, and other Nations: and further, when the invention of
Printing was invented in Germany in the year 1440 So Pollydor Virgill, and
others affirm.
Printing came to light, so immense was the profit thereof, that it is
incredible what a happy and joyful progress ensued. For now, this course of
study having been constantly continued ever since that time; It is advanced
so high, that this our age may enter into comparison, with the most learned
ages in time past, and in this regard is blessed above all the rest, in that it
has pleased God to illuminate this knowledge of the best Arts and languages
with the true knowledge of Him: Whereas those Ancients, furnished only with
the help of learning, though men most eloquent, yet they were plunged in depth
of darkness, and searched in vain, after that quintessence of goodness, whereof
they writ so much.

To Albertus, Frederick III. 1440. an. 53. m. 7. d. 19.
Frederick the III. Archduke of Austria, succeeded, he passed quietly to
Rome, and received consecration from Pope Nicholas the V. so returning home
without drawing a sword in Italy. In the fourth year of his reign Vladislaus,
Vladislaus his son King of Polonia and Hungary, having by Pope Eugenius the
III. his instigation, broke the Truce, was overthrown in battle, and slain
at Varna, or Dionysiopolis, the XI. of November, by Amurath the II. Emperor of
the Turks. The IX. year after this, Mahomet Amuraths son, Constantinople
taken by Amurath the II. 1453. The Turkish Army at the siege thereof consisted
of 400000. men.
took the City of Constantinople by force of Arms, which his successors have
now held this From 1453. when it was taken, till 1556. when Sleidan writ this
book. Maximilian 1493. an. 25 m. 4. d. 25. The Moors chased cut of Granado in
Spain, 1487. Charles the V. 1519. an. 38. m. 6. d. 27.
103. years, keeping their Imperial Court there. Casimi^, Vladislaus his
brother succeeded him in the Kingdom of Polonia: and Ladislaus, the Emperor
Albert the II. his posthume son, in Hungary.

To Frederick the Emperor his son Maximilian succeeded. A little before the
death of this Emperor Frederick, Ferdinando King of Spain, chasing out the
Moors, annexed Betica, commonly called the Kingdom of Granado, to his own
Crown.

Maximilian (as he did many more) made war also upon the Venetians. Him the
most puissant Emperor Charles (being his grandchild by his son Archd. of
Austria.
Philip) succeeded, who now swayes the Scepter.

Thus out of that which we have mentioned, it clearly appears, after what
manner the Roman Empire, then which, none ever was or will be, more potent: is
now in a manner crushed in pieces. For throughout Asia we have not so much as a
foot, or a nails breadth, as the proverb is. The Turks, Scythians, and other
Enemies of our Religon, hold all there. We have lost all Africa, but what has
been recovered of late years, by Charles the V. when he won Tunis from
Aenobarbe the Turkish Lieutenant, archieuing a glorious victory, and made the
King there tributary to him: as also the fifteenth year following, besieged
and took the Town of Aphricke.

Portugal, Spain, France, Britain, Denmark, Sarmatia, Pannonia, Illyricum,
all Greece, with the adjacent Countries are torn away: as also the Islands of
Sicilie, Sardinia, Corsica, Maiorique and Minorique, and Sauoy, which Provinces
have their peculiar Lords, who hold full power in all matters, and are not at a
penny charge about any affairs of the Empire.

Now let us look upon Italy, the old, ancient, and first patrimony of the
Roman Empire: but wherein does it participate with us? The Kings of Spain, by
ancient succession hold Calabria, Apulia, Campania, and Naples. The Popes keep
in their hands the City of Rome, formerly the Emperors Palace and Court
Imperi^ll, together with Marca de Ancona, Romandiola, and part of Tuscane, who
are so far from acknowledging subjection to the Emperor, that they hold the
Emperors and their Deputies to be bound to them.

Those Cities there of any strength, either have their proper Lords, or else
are swayed by factions, and having nothing at all to do with us. Now for the
Venetians what a company hold they, not only of goodly Cities, and
freeburrowes, but also Provinces: they themselves in the interim, being an
absolute freestate, and quite separated from the Roman Empire. As for
Insubria, commonly called Lombardy, that indeed belongs somewhat nearer to us:
but it totters too, neither receive we any certain profit from thence. For
after that our Emperors had, as abouesaid, first constituted Viscounts there,
as they call them, and afterward Dukes, how miserably was it rent to pieces,
and ever since that time how little did it benefit us? For our Emperors
neglecting it in time of the wars there, the house of the Sfortia's
dispossessing the Vicounts, seized upon it, whom afterward Lewis the XII. and
Francis the I. Kings of France, excluded; the latter whereof held it for six
years, till the Emperor Charles the V. recovered it.

Thus you see, no revenues come from any part of Italy, for they neither
repair to our Diets, nor contribute any thing at all to any public use or
necessity, but what they do voluntarily, or in favor to the Emperor: only
Germany remains, which always repugned the Roman Empire, scarce ever free
from rebellion, as before appears, till at length it was gathered together by
the Emperor Charles the Great, and reduced into one body: after which time,
when the power of electing the Emperors, was committed to the seven Electors,
as we have formerly showed, it became the Emperors Court and Mansion place.
And here too we must consider, with what difficulty this little diminitiue
body of the Empire, congealed in Germany, could incorporate it self: for when
were we ever free from iarres and civil broiles? So now whatsoever goes under
the name of the Empire, is incuded within the bounds of Germany, for all
foreign places, and those without the compass thereof, are fallen away.
Howbeit we see there are many, even within those small compast limits, that
fly back, and as much as they can, withdraw themselves and their countries
forth of the jurisdiction of the Empire. I pass over in silence those
neighboring Kings and other Princes, that day by day catch and snatch away, as
much as they can from this feeble and saplesse little body, which scarce
cleaues to the bones: striving to bring that into their own dominions, which
belonged to the Commonwealth.

But to come to an end in some time, let us lend our attention to Daniels
prophecy, concerning all that is spoken. We have treated of the Image that
Nabuchodonozar saw in his dream, whereto we will return again; but in the
interim, take a view of some other places. In his VII. Chap. he describes the
four beasts, which in a dream he saw coming out of the Sea: A Lion, a Bear,
a Leopard, and the fourth and last, he says, was terrible and dreadful to
behold. The Lion signifies the kingdom of Assyria, the two wings which he had,
are as it were the two members of that Empire, Babylon and Assyria. By the
Bear is understood the kingdom of Persia, by which Babylon was conquered: the
three ribs which he says were in his mouth betwixt his teeth, are the three
chief Kings of that Monarchy, Cyrus, Darius and Artaxerxes, who were more
famous then the rest, and eat much flesh as he speaks, that is, brought many
nations into their subjection.

The Leopard is Alexander the Great, or the Greek Empire; his four wings and
heads, are the four kingdoms which rise out of that Monarchy, after
Alexanders death. The fourth and last Beast is the Roman Empire: the ten
horns are his members or Provinces, such as were Syria, Egypt, Asia, Greece,
Affricke, Spain, Gallia, Italy, Germany, Britain: for all those they held.

Now a certain little horn, grew up and shot forth amongst the ten horns,
which plucked away three horns from those ten. This notifies the kingdom of
Mahomet or the Turk, which from a small beginning, budding forth of the Roman
Monarchy, seized upon three of the chiefest parts thereof, Egypt, Asia, and
Greece. Further this little horn has eyes, and was reproachful against God:
For Mahomet vented a new kind of doctrine, which was well liked of by his
followers, as carrying some show of wisdom in it. Those are the eyes, but
indeed he blasphemes God. For he abolishes the Books of the Prophets and
Apostles, and acknowledges no benefit by Christ, but reproachfully railes
against all doctrine concerning Christ. Further, that little horn, says he,
shall make war with the Saints, and sore afflict them, till the Ancient of
days shall come to judgment, who has neither beginning nor end: whereby it
clearly appears, that within the time of this Empire, the term of this
world shall have an end, and shall never be again: but after the dissolution
of all earthly Principalities, then shall follow that perpetual kingdom,
whereof Christ shall be Prince and Head.

In his eight chapter, the Prophet Daniel describes the Ram and the Goat,
which the Angel afterward plainly interprets, saying, the Ram with two
horns, betokens the Kings of the Medes and Persians: and the Goat, the Greek
Empire, and the great horn in his forehead, the first king of that Empire: and
that four horns succeeded after that horn was broken; it signifies, says
he, that four kingdoms shall rise out of that Empire, but not to be compared
to that first King for strength and puissance.

Here we may see how properly and infallibly the Prophet Daniel portraies
Alexander the Great, two hundred years and more before his reign. For it
shall so fall out, says he, that the Goat shall not touch the earth; that is,
he should run over his wars with exceeding celeritie, and no man should be
able to deliver the Ram out of his hand: for Alexander reigned only twelve
years, in which little inch of time, he almost subdued all Asia, as we have
above showed. And though the Medes and Persians were of incredible strength,
yet in three set battles, Darius was overthrown, and lost his life and his
Empire both at once.

Many write, that when Alexander came to Jerusalem, the High Priest read that
place of Daniel to him, which exceedingly rejoiced him.

Again, that another horn should rise from amongst those four horns, at
first but small, but afterward very powerful, which should grievously
oppress the Sanctuary: herely says he, he foretells those most bitter
persecutions which the Jews should suffer under Alexander the Great his
successors, the Kings of Egypt and Syria, betwixt whom the Country of Judea
lies: For the Jews have felt that horn which rose out of the four horns, in
Antiochus Epiphanes King of Syria, that most cruel destroier.

Hither also, we must apply the eleventh chapter, wherein he speaks again of
Alexander the Great, and so copiously and properly, that it may rather seem an
History, then a Prophecy.

But now again let us return to Nabuchodonozors Image, whereof, upon occasion,
we spoke in our first book; as for the interpretation thereof, concerning the
three first Monarchies, I will not repeat it, because it is both perspicuous,
as also made good by the times themselves, only we will speak something of
the fourth, because it both properly appertains unto us, who live in it, and
is more exactly described by Daniel: It shall be of iron, says he, which shall
break in pieces, and bring all the rest of the Monarchies in subjection to it:
there needs not many words in explanation hereof; for the matter it self
speaks, and it manifestly appears out of the history of those Monarchs which
we have reckoned up.

But the Images feet, and the toes of the feet, are part of iron, part of
potters clay. As the foot of a man's body is divided into toes, so the Roman
Empire, after it has for a while continued strong, being supported by iron
legs, and incircled the whole world in its circumference; shall fall into
toes, and that massy body shall be dissolved. This also is plainly effected,
and needs no explication: for at this day, what is more divided then the body
of that most spacious Empire? And though the case thus stand, yet because the
sole of the foot is of iron, the foundation shall remain, and shall never be
extinguished, but the relics, title, and dignity thereof shall endere till
Christ at his coming shall set a period to all humane things, but it is clear
as noone day, and beyond all doubt, that it is now at the lowest ebb.

That goodly tree is fallen, but the root sticks fast, and remains yet, not
having any sap, and therefore unable to grow up, and increase again: but
quite dead and withered, yet no force of man shall be able utterly to
extirpate this root, and foot-soale of iron nature, but it shall stick fast
grounded in the earth, till the whole world shall be destroyed. Hereof also we
have had experience, for many have often attempted the subversion of this small
and slender parcel of the Empire, as the Popes of Rome, and lastly the Turks:
who though they have done great matters, and it may be promise greater to
themselves; yet they shall not make up such a massy body, as may hold
comparison with the puissance of the Romans: nether shall they subvert this
seedplot of the Empire which remains, though it be both dry and withered: nor
can any fifth Monarchy be raised.

Though Germany only has the title and possession of the Empire, yet if it
would join hearts and hands, it might easily expel all foreign force, as may
be proved by many arguments.

The Turks of late years have run in very far upon us, and after the
winning of The straight whereupon Constantinople stands in that part dividing
Europe and Asia, being not above 7. miles ^^oad.
Bosphoros, or Bogazin in Thrace, raged up and down far and wide in Europe,
whose terr^^o^ies are now directly bordering upon Germany, which seems
exposed to the greatest danger, as also Italy, by reason of the neerenesse.
But if we look a little nearer into Daniel, it is to be hoped, that their
power and greatness is now at its full height. For Daniel gives them only
three horns, as we have before recited, which they now have, being first of
all made Lords of all Asia, then of Greece and Egypt. Under the name of Greece,
may be comprehended all those Countries almost as far as Sclauonia or
Wendenland. And though at this present they are in possession of a good part of
Hungary, and be it granted, that so it may fall out; as they may infest
Germany, or other adjacent Countries: yet because their dominions must be
confined to certain bounds, and must not extend to comparison with the Roman
potencie, as we have formerly showed: it is credible that those Provinces shall
not fall into their subjection, as those three are at this day, Greece, Egypt,
and Asia.

They shall make war with the Saints, and rage with extremity of cruelty,
against the Professors of the name of Christ, and this their fury shall endure
till the end of the world as Daniel clearly testifies. And this is the maine
cause of his Prophecy, that we being hereby admonished and ascertained of the
calamities and miseries of the last days, should not be dejected in mind,
but look for a freedom by the coming of Christ our Savior: who will
presently, as he himself speaks, take off these afflictions, and transport
his servants into a fi^me and peaceable station, and wipe all tears from their
eyes.

Certain places in Daniel, Dan 9.
do properly appertain to the Jews, wherein their deliverance from
captivity is foretold, and likewise the certain time (which is there set down
and expressed) of the coming of the Messiah promised to the Fathers. The rest
of his Prophecies belong to the worlds last age of all, and to those that shall
then live: when also that little horn, Mahomets posterity, shall make war
with the Saints: and when that man of sin and wickedness shall be revealed
and disclosed; who sits in the Temple of God, vaunting himself as though he
were God: for Daniel also presignified his tyrannies, 2 These. 2.
as Paul in his Epistles expressly interprets.

Satan, whom Christ himself calls the Prince of this world, who at all times
else, but especially in the last age of this fading world, shall rage most of
all, letting loose the raines of all his wrath and fury, and shall stir up
enemies against Christ; who shall not only tyrannize by force of Arms, but
also by false doctrine seduce men into deceit and error, insomuch that the
very elect shall scarce escape their snares, Mat. 24.

Surely this is the very time which Daniel in his twelfth chapter points at:
being so full fraught with affliction and calamity, as never was before, or
ever shall be hereafter. For he promises us no joy, but denounces most cruel
persecutions, when he says, that those calamities which he speaks of, Dan.
12.7.
shall endure till the scattering of the power of the holy people be
accomplished.

Therefore Gods servants shall be persecuted all the world over, and the godly
shall be afflicted in diverse places, till the end of the world: which testimony
of the Prophet, or rather of the Angel, bereaues us of all hope of
reconciliation and aggregation. For he speaks of a perpetual scattering and
dissipation; and after that dissentions have arisen about doctrine and
Religion, then at length he mentions the end, when CHRIST himself shall
appear.

But to comfort, cheer up, and sustain those, that shall then live, presently
after those miseries, he places the resurrection of the dead, which that we may
find to our joy and comfort, we ought with seruent prayers to beseech God.
And Christ himself warrants us for the credence we ought to give to Daniel,
who in his sermon rehearses a place taken out from thence, Mat. 24. Mar. 13.
and commends it to his Auditors.

Thus therefore, these our times, being the most miserable, we ought
considerately to ponderate and diligently look into this Prophet, who preaches
to us now acting the last scene upon this worlds stage: that we may fortify
our selves, both in time of these present afflictions, as also against all
imminent storms and tempests, with true and assured consolation, as with a
certain rampire and bulwark.

The Names of those Kings of Assyria from Ascatades to Sardanapalus, which
Sleidan mentions in the beginning of his first Book, but names them not.
Amyntas. Belochus. Bellopares. Lamprides. Sozares. Lampares. Pannias.
Sosarmus. Mitreus. Tautannes. Teuteus. Timaeus. Dercilus. Eupales. Laosthenes.
Pirithidias. Ofrateus. Ofragineus. Ascrazapes.
FINIS.

