THE GLASS OF TIME, IN THE two first Ages.

Divinely handled, By Thomas Peyton, of Lincolnes Inn, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, and are to be had at Laurence Chapmans shop
ouer-against Staple Inn. 1620.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE Charles, Prince of Wales.
MOst hopeful Prince, Europaes richest Iem,
Successor to these famous western Isles,
Chaste Olive Branch, descended of that Stem,
Whose, what he has, all on thy fortune smiles:
Inheritor to such a Potent King*
As no Age yet, his Like could ever bring.
Brave Pearl of men, within whose lovely Face,
The sacred Muses learned Arts combine,
And all Heavens gifts from great Apollos Race,
Apparent seem within thy Brows to shine,
Thy Fathers Doran, kingly works of State,
This more then needs, as borne but out of date.
Yet Royal Prince, let but thine eyes behold,
This lofty Subject in these Rural Rimes,
It Will more encourage then Earths purest gold,
To make my Muse to all succeeding times,
Blaze forth thy parts and high deserved Fame,
That thy rare worth may all the World inflame.
As in a Garden of sweet fragrant flowers,
Where each man takes what to his mind seems best,
Then sits him down within their pleasant Bowers,
Peruseth all, and for a Time does Rest,
Contented, Joyed (Admiring) to have found;
So great a change, in one small piece of Ground.
So dearest Prince, within thy Fathers works,
What Poesies sweet, Grave sentences divine,
Sad morrall matter in each Subject lurkes?
To draw thy youth to trace him line by line,
Whilst this may chance to recreate thy mind,
As glimmering Luna in Sols absence shined.
Persist go on, and as thy Virtues won,
The Loyal Love of every faithful heart,
So to the end, thy course (directly) run,
And winged Fame shall from thee never start,
But scale the Clouds and mount the lofty Skies,
To sound thy worth as far as India lies.
Your Highness in all humbleness, Thomas Peyton.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, FRANCIS Lord Verulam, Lord Chancellor of England.
MOst Honored Lord,
within whose reverend face,
Truth, Mercy, Justice, Love and all combine,
Heavens dearest Daughters of Iehouahs Race,
Seem all at full within thy Brows to shine,
The King himselefe (T'immortalize thy fame)
Has in thy Name Foretiped out the same.
Great Verulam, my Soul has much admirde,
Thy Courtly carriage in each comely part,
Worth, Merit, Grace, when what the land desirde,
Is powered upon thee as thy just desert,
Grave liberal mind contending with the rest,
To seat them all in thy Iuditious breast.
Thrice noble Lord, how do thou prize of gold,
Wealth, Treasures Money and such Earthly cash?
For none of them thou have thy Justice sold,
But held them all as base (infected) trash
To snare, allure, out from a dunghill wrought,
The seared conscience of each muddy thought.
Weigh but my cause, refer me not to those,
That from the first were partial in my right,
Ah this is more then once thine Honor knows,
Thou see mine own has now undone me quight,
Whilst by a trick they got me in their paw,
Against the Order of thy Court and Law.
If I were such as some would have thee think,
I mean my Foes which utterly defame,
Mine Innocence and all together link
To wound my state, and blemish much my name:
Yet Justice wills, what in their hands has lain,
Thus to my loss should be restord again.
Ah, dearest Lord, hold but the Scales upright,
Let Court nor favor ouersway my cause,
To press me more then is beyond my might,
Is but their Reach to cross thy former Laws,
Let me have Peace, or that which is mine own,
And thy just worth shall over the World be blown.
Your Lordships in all humbleness, Thomas Peyton.

TO THE READER, The Title described.
Unto the Wise, Religious, Learned, Grave,
Judicious Reader, out this Work I send,
The tender sighted that small knowledge have,
Can little loose, but much their weakness mend:
And generous spirits which from heaven are sent,
May Solace here, and find all true content.
A Paradise (presented) to each eye,
Within the Vinnet of the Title page,
Where Justice, Mercy, Nature, Love, do lie,
Beforeth' Almighty in the first found Age.
Time stands betwixt, and Truth his daughter bears
His train behind, a world of Aged years.
Fierce Nemesis she mounts (within the Air)
On Pegasus, that winged Horse of Fame,
And by her side a Sword all naked bare,
Grave Justice sits, a ( sable) lowering Dame,
Under her feet the worlds most spacious Globe,
And weighs men's Actions in a scarlet Robe.
This may denote the goodly glorious worth,
The precious Value, Majesty and Grace,
Of all the Sisters (Glory of this Earth)
Gods dearest daughters in their several place,
Above the world, heavens crown their brows adorn,
To show (at full) how they do ( bribing) scorn.
Peruse it well for in the same may lurk,
More ( obscure) matter in a deeper sense,
To set the best and learned wits on work,
Then has as yet in many Ages since,
Within so small a little Volumne been,
Or on the sudden can be found and seen,
Urania (dear) attired in her silk,
To draw thee on with more attentive heed,
The weaker sort she sometime feeds with milk,
All guilty men's damned vices up to weed:
Th'enuious Momes that her chaste Muse does tuch,
She hopes to mend, but cares not for them much.
Thine to his power, Tho. Peyton.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
Beati Pacifici.



THE GLASS OF TIME, IN THE FIRST AGE.
The Argument.
The Author first, does Gods assistance crave,
Throughout the work that he his help may have;
The sacred Sabbath, Satan's envious gall,
The Woman framed, and Man's most dismal fall;
The Tree of Life protected from the Brute,
The Tree of Knowledge with her fatal Fruit:
For fear the World should finally be ended,
Gods dearest Daughters down in have descended,
The flaming Sword the Tree of Life which guarded,
The Cherubins upon the walls that warded.
The Land of Eden is discrib'd at large,
Heavens judgment just to all men's future charge.
SInce true examples in Gods holy Book,
Are found of those that in it love to look,
Of men whose Image, portraiture and soul,
Have been transformed to monstrous shapes and foul.
According as their lives have pleasing been, Genesis 19, 26

To him whose sight their secret thoughts has seen,
And as his goodness sacred is that some, Dan. 4. 30

Should be examples for these times to come:
His Church to comfort, Pagans to appall,
To teach to us what did to them befall;
Within the stories of the new and old, Romans 15 4

Of many more then can by me be told.
And since that Ovid in a pleasing verse,
Does pretty Tales and Metaphors rehearse,
Of men to birds, and then again to beasts,
To make you parley at your welcome feasts:
Whose fabled fictions warbled in that age,
The infancy and sacred pupill-age
Of the Religion which we hear maintain,
Under our Sovereigns thrice most happy reign;
May seem from Moses and the rest divine,
In's Metaphors to trace them line by line;
In some I mean, and not in all his work,
For pleasant folly couch't, therein may lurk,
Yet the allusion, and the meaning sure,
May reference have unto the Scripture pure,
And though it shines as Tytans western rays,
By some it is held but wanton in our days.
But most of all the ripeness of these times,
The heavenly works up to the clouds that climes:
The envious eye which ouerlookes our deeds,
When each man's taste on sundry dishes feeds:
The snarling cur at every thing that bites:
The slandring Mome which no good work endites:
The monster cursed with his vile forked tongue,
That from Hels vault up to the earth first sprung,
With Hidra heads, and Ianus double face,
To fawn before, then wound to our disgrace:
Has made my Muse unwilling here to sing,
As loath her self upon the stage to bring
To each man's view, and her own painful toil,
But that the sight may many vices spoil.
When sin we see unmasked brought to light,
And damned offenses naked to our sight:
Like lezabel that did the Clouds aspire, 1. Kin. 4. 18, 19 Chap. 19. 2 Cha.
21. 10, 23

In rusling silks and glorious brave atire,
Under a holy outward form and rite,
Gods chosen flock are fleec't and murdered quite,
But once vnmask't, the Minions of her court
Hurl heri'th dirt, pash out her brains in sport:
And as a foul misshapen painted monster, 2. Kin 9. 30, 33 35, 37.

Conceit of her as all the world does conster:
Then is she seen disrobed, disrank't of all,
The map of folly in her sudden fall,
Her cup with poison, damned Envy fills,
Her cursed eyes have seen those seven built hills,
Where all the Saints, Apostles, Martyrs stood,
With crimson colors all imbrued in blood.
O glorious God inspiror of my Muse,
Grant that thy Word my soul may daily use,
And that what learning painefully it got,
Still from the truth may never swerue a jot.
That in her spring, beginning, and her bud,
May sing thy glory to the Churches good,
And in foul folly none asleep I rock,
Nor give offense to any of thy flock:
But that my speech as general to all,
May like a Sermon in the Pulpit fall:
And not to wade in curious questions deep,
But feed thy flock, and edify thy sheep,
That none at all may have a just excuse,
By such examples as I shall produce-
And all that see their faults, their lives may mend,
That to thy glory I this Work may end.
Then shall the world with admiration see,
Her face vnmask't to all eternitee;
The famous actions heretofore lay dead,
Shall then be roused out from obliuions bed.
And all the noblest kingdoms ever known,
Will be revived, within my verse be shown,
Their manners, customs, nature and their state,
Their end, beginning, fortune and their fate,
From Adam first throughout in every age,
Shall here be mustred on this public Stage,
In Rural Robes to give the earth content,
How heretofore the ages past weee spent.
O that my Muse might once but rest in peace,
Then would she sing divinely, never cease,
But work out Truth within her holy Rimes,
Glyding along descending to our times,
And dear Urania Sovereign of my verse,
Should here the glory of this world rehearse,
Unfolding still to Gods immortal glory,
The heavenly sweetness of a sacred story.
What may we think of all the judgments just,
Of great Jehovah buried in the dust;
Beside all those in holy Scriptures pend,
Which humane wit as yet could never mend,
Nor all the Rabbis in their learned fame;
Could ever tell how to correct the same:
Shall we go on, and still be bold to think,
He Will punish them, and on us always wink;
For some of them the earth it self did gape,
How can we know that we are sure to escape,
The Angels which against the Lord did swell,
He quite casheer'd, and cast them down to hell:
Where being bound eternally in chains,
They feel the torments of ten thousand pains,
Far more then can expressed be in ink,
And all the world, and sinful man can think.
Adam what made thee, wilfully at first,
To leave thy offspring, to this day accursed;
So wicked, foul, and over grown with Sin;
And in thy person all of it begin?
That had thou stood in Innocenie framed,
Death, Sin, and Hell, the world and all thou had tamed.
Then had thou been a Monarch from thy birth;
Gods only Darling both in heaven and earth:
The world and all at thy command to bend,
And all heavens creatures on thee to attend.
The sweetest life that ever man could live;
What could thou ask but God to thee did give?
Protected kept thee like a faithful Warden,
As thy companion in that pleasant Garden*
No canckred malice once thy heart did move:
Free Will thou had endude from him above:
What could thou wish, all worlds content and more?
The best Divine that ere the Earth yet bore,
Gods only Son, the Prince of Peace except,
For thy sad fall how often mine eyes have wept.
Alas weakeman, had thou in honor stood
How heavenly blessed, thrice happy been thy blood?
And all thy aged issue to this day
Had lived secure, as in the Month of May.
What need had we, that any should have died
Upon the Cross, our sinful souls revived?
And that Messiah, God himself the Son,
Should here descend to put our nature on,
To live dejected, poor, contemned, forlorn'd,
Derided, beat, tossed vpside down and scorned.
And more, to bear for this thy woeful fall,
Then ever man which lived upon this ball.
Cursed be that Devil that first thy sense belied;
If thou had lived, then we had never died.
Oh God! to purchase with that bloody cost,
Our souls redeemed when they were fully lost.
Here is a love which far surmounts the skies,
My senses rapts, and dazles both mine eyes.
But tell me Adam, what might be the cause
That thou should break thy holy Makers laws.
When of a thousand which might make us weep,
In all the world thou had but one to keep,
And that but light? Alas could thou not see,
But touch and taste that one forbidden tree,
Which in the midst of all the garden grew,
An ill known tree to make thy offspring rue?
What pleasant taste or relish had the same?
How were thy senses dimmed and much to blame,
That had the Garden sole at thy command,
And all the fruits within thy sight to stand:
Far better, pure, more daintier every way,
Then such an Apple painted like a gay:
Fit for a woman, or some lickorish fool,
A silly child, or one that goes to school.
Thy wilful, foul, absurd, and gross abuse,
Against thy God, admits no just excuse,
It Is not the loss of one poor Apple mist,
That thou did grapple in thy sinful fist,
Could be the cause his anger to procure,
Fierce heavy wrath eternal to endure.
It was not that he did so much respect,
But thy foul error, wilful, bad neglect:
Contempt of Him, rebellion, treason, pride;
And all the sins within the world beside,
That linked were within thy fault at first,
Chained to thy Act, and in thy folly nursed.
What may we think of that ambitious Pope,
Which dared to scoff under heavens glorious Cope,
Against that God, that in his sacred frown
Turns up his heels, and hurles his pride soon down?
When having mist a simple childish toy,
A Peacocke bird which seemed his only joy.
Distempered much began in heat to chide,
That few men could his holy presence bide.
And afterward ashamed of what was past,
To show his choler not long time did last;
Excusde himself, that he might angry be,
As well for that, as was the Trinity.
When discontented for an Apple lost,
Both Eve and Adam to their pain and cost,
From Paradise were thrust quite out and beaten,
And much disgraced for one poor Apple eaten.
Now tell me Rome, that think thy self the minion,
Christ's only Vicar in thine own opinion?
And should his sheep still to this day have fed:
Where was thy Church when Julius was thy head?
Thy Papacy I may not here dispute,
As yet my tongue must of that thing be mute.
And back to Adam whence I last digrest,
Too fortunate my Muse had been and blessed,
Had it but sung thy first estate and all,
And never known the horror of thy fall.
A greater love on man was never shown,
Nor on the earth as yet was ever known,
Then all the world to be at thy command,
Still to this day to serve thy turn and stand:
All that again, for this he did require,
To keep the Garden that was his desire.
At other times to his immortal fame,
That thou should praise his glorious holy Name.
Here was thy calling ( Adam) naught; beside,
His own example must thy actions guide.
Six days to work, to till that holy ground;
And in the seventh, thy Makers praises sound.
For as at first, thou wast a body framde;
So time and place himself he has ordainde,
Designed, appointed for his service pure,
Not for a day, but ever to endure.
By this thou know that he thy person blessed,
To give thee then his holy sacred Rest,
And sanctify the Sabbath to thy good;
Aye to be kept in all thy future blood.
Those that refuse to keep his Sabbath holy,
Gods own example may convince of folly.
But soft, I hear some Laodicean make, Reu. 3. sinon inuenter of the horse of
Troy.

Even Sinon like, the ground of all to shake.
To stay my pen with such a question strange,
As first from Rome, now ore the world does range.
How God could Rest, which never wrought as yet,
For he that works, his labor must be great
To frame a matter of so huge a worth,
As is the Fabrike of the spacious Earth,
The Sea and Heavens, the Firmaments and all,
Which ever yet within thy sight could fall.
Oh righteous God that sinful man should make,
Within his mouth thy holy word to take:
And by the same thy sacred actions tax,
To wring them now like to a Nose of Wax. simile.

Too make a doubt and question of that Rest,
Which to the world for ever thou have blessed.
It Is true, I know when God first framed the world,
The waters all within their limits curled,
The firmaments and every living thing,
Out from the dust he then did Adam bring:
Made him a man, a demi-God in birth,
Placed him his Viceroy here upon the earth.
And by his power all sacred and divine,
So framed the world as if he had wrought by line,
Set all in order working in their time,
Like to the wheels within a clock or chime,
To serve the turn of Adam and his race,
And all these made but full in six days space.
Then did he rest and sat him down to view,
And to the heavens up again he flew:
And from the work which by his word he wrought,
In six days space, and seeing none* was naught,
But from creating any further matter,
He only ceast, and least the same might scatter,
And so return to what it was at first,
His providence his works has ever nursed:
Aye by his power, his wisdom, and his might,
The heavens and earth are governed aright.
He works still preserving what was made,
Far more then can by any man be said:
His arms supporting all this weighty ball,
Else would the same dissolve again and fall.
O God, thy Rest has ever bin admired,
Seen of thy Saints, and of my soul desired!
The Pagan people to this day that slept
In ignorance, have yet a Sabbath kept. Exodus 16. 23. 26. Number. 15. 32. Eze. 20.
13. 20. 24.

The Jew at first with Manna wondrous fed,
His Sabbath kept by thy example led:
Though now in error great he snores and sleeps,
The Saturday his Sabbath still he keeps.
No Christian state is so uncivil rude,
But keeps thy Rest as thou have him endude:
With grace and goodness from the Prince of peace,
The Sunday he from all worlds works does cease,
Lead thereunto by that all rising Son,
On Easter day, that rose again and won
The eternal crown in Paradise first lost,
A bloody prize to his great pain and cost.
Besides the examples of thy dearest Saints,
Thine institution and the holy plaints,
Of all the Apostles, famous men and Martyrs,
In all the world within her utmost quarters:
Which ever used to preach thy word and pray,
And sanctify the sacred Sabbath day.
The Ethiopian, least he should offend
To break thy Rest in superstition pend,
The Saturday and Sunday both he keeps,
And in those days he often prays and weeps,
That thou would pardon all his former sins,
There is his Rest, his happiness begins:
In childish toys, in gaming, sports and plays,
He spends small time but keeps his Sabaoths days.
Their royal Queen which came so many miles,
(With cunning questions, witty speeches, wiles) 1. Kin. 10. 1. to the 11. 2.
Chr. 9. 1.

To tempt, to hear and see the courtly guise,
The wit and words of Solomon the wise,
May rise in judgment at that dradfull hour,
When Christ may also on our faces lower,
That more respect our pleasures work and play,
Then him to serve upon his sacred day.
What shall we think when Christ the Lord of life, Luke 11. 31.

Which shed his blood to end our mortal strife?
Shall speak these words out of his holy lips,
And not a word as yet that ever slips:
But still has been most weighty powerful round,
One jot thereof has never fell to the ground.
When he himself shall thus pick out their Prince,
To warn us all our follyes to convince,
May we not think as well he meant her land,
Now at this day as it is known to stand,
Shall like wise rise at his last trumpe and call,
To stain our lives and shame our actions all.


Father of Lights, which dwell in a Light,
That far exceeds our Owely bleared sight:
What will become of all our learned wit,
When Jesus Christ at thy right hand shall sit,
To make our peace and step twixt thee and us,
And we in Vice to run our course on thus,
To anger thee so good and just a God,
Not once afraid of thy revenging Rod:
But in the day that thou did early rise,
Of death and hell to get the immortal prize,
In which we were partakers of thy blood
And body both unto our sovereign good.
And when we should repent us of our sins,
By true contrition, which thy mercy wins:
Engrafted made the members of that head,
Whose precious blood our souls but then has fed,
Relieve the poor, examine well our fall,
In meditation spend the day and all,
And when we should thy sacred praises sing,
To make thy people all the while to ring,
Whilst we at Bowls shall sometimes curse and fret,
And all for threepence which we cannot get,
And shall maintain our sinful deeds in Churches,
And run our selves to gather up the Lurches:
Those that behold us with repentant eyes,
We call them fools and Puritants precise;
And when the best our company do shun,
Home to their house we send for them and run.
Pardon us Lord, forgive our great misdeedes,
Cull out thy Wheat, and pluck out all the weeds,
Which wrong thy people by their ill example,
The truth neglectin ugly vice to trample:
Though our Religion we may seem to halue,
Like to the Jews which made the golden calue: simile. Exodus 32. 4. 5, 6, 10.

In Aarons time, and on their holy day,
Did eat and drink, and rose again to play,
If these men by their rude uncivil sport,
Thy Majesty did anger in such sort,
That had not Moses knowing of their fall,
In zeal besought them they had perish't all,
His great desire thy fury could not stay,
But that three thousand fell within one day,
Their guerdon just no living man can tell,
But very like they had gone down to hell,
All quick alive amongst the damned bad,
The punishment which after Korah had, Number. 16. 32.

We see (alas) both grace and goodness lurkes, scal. and li. 5.

Within the hearts of fierce and crewell Turks,
Of Sarazens and Pagan people rude,
Which with thy truth were never yet indude,
Before such time as their seducer nursed,
By Sergius help most dangerously at first,
A banefull poison to infect their blood,
O'reflowes the earth much like to Noah's flood:
Yet these alone by thy example led,
Or by the light of Nature in them bred,
Have ever kept the Friday in that worth,
Long time before the most untimely birth,
Of Mahomet that Antechrist indeed,
Who found it so and left it to their seed.
Besides a world of other people more,
That here I could produce in ample store,
Which ever kept a holy resting day,
Abstayning then from all rude works and play,
The Indian people have a rest alow'd, Ind. Hist. gasp. Balb. guin. dis. (...)
^d. ^cot.

And those of Iaua that to Idols bowd,
The Negro black and rich Peguan left,
Have each of them a several Sabbath kept,
The sacred Sibils, with their frantike mother,
Have still preferred one day before another.
We have great God that which these never knew,
Thine own example and the scriptures true,
Thy all divine and holy morrall law, Ex. 20. 8, 9. 10 Cha. 31. 14, 15 Cha. 34.
1. 21.

Which these as yet have never heard or saw,
Ingrost in Sinah writ twice by thy hand,
To show the same for evermore should stand*
Both in the Law and in the Gospells light,
To come to Church and praise thy name aright,
Else how should we thy glorious worth extol,
But like to Swine live all at home and loll:
And never think how thou at first did take,
A little earth and so our bodies make,
Our souls infuse in Paradise us plaste
Till for our sins we soon from thence were cast,
'Gau'st us this world Christ Jesus sent besides,
Which wrought our life out from his bleeding sides.
But soft I here that some upon this clause,
Have ventured far to abbrogate the laws,
The holy rest a Jewish Sabbath call,
Have us live free, tide to no law at all:
But then (alas) what would become of us,
That sift Gods actions, tempt his highness thus,
Of all the laws that to the Jews he gave,
But ten of them in all the world we have,
And those reduc'st for fear they may be lost,
May be compiled but into two at most:
These far more weighty ponderous then the rest,
Were by his glorious sacred mouth expressed,
And Christ himself that death and hell did tame,
Has not abolish't but confirmed the same;
Else what meant he when oftentimes he said,
The heavens and earth, the sea and all shall fade,
Before such time that Gods eternal Word,
One jot or tittle shall thereof be stird,
Did this his coming breed a doubt and flaw,
Still to destroy, and not fulfill the law?
Have not the Prophets told long since before,
Of this our Sabbath which we now adore?
It Is true that some even in our christian Law,
Which have the arts and learned Muses saw,
Yet have alleged as their assertion,
Upon this place anticipation,
Affirming Moses when those words were writ,
In Genesis and still are extant yet, Genesis 2. 3.

Then knew the rest and Sabbath of the Jews,
But this to me seems rather uncouth news:
For can we think that Moses did intend,
When first of all that Genesis was pend,
These should forgo and be incerted best,
As an introduction to the Sabaoths rest,
That the command cannot be firm and strong,
Unless these words did guide it all along,
Upon this place still trained up and nursed,
As grounding it on Gods example first.
What can they say to all the ancient men,
The Patriarchs and holy fathers then,
Before the law which lived long and blessed,
Yet ever kept a sacred seemly rest,
To serve their God to give him thanks and pray,
That late preserved them from that lowering day,
In which the world and all therein was found,
Besides the Arc were washed away and droun'd.
And to the Jews that were with Manna fed,
Over the mountains forty years were led:
Which in the Arabian vasty deserts wear,
Tipe of our Church that God himself did rear,
Out of affliction, hunger, heat and cold,
Over hills and dales and highest mountains rold,
Until at length with wandering hither, thither,
Like sheep dispearst fould all at last together.
When often they murmured, much repined and grieved,
Until their God their bodies had releeu'd,
By sending Quails more thick then any hail,
Upon their fields quite over hill and dale:
And showring down a pearely dew at need,
In show much like to Coriander seed,
Six days together did this Manna fall,
And in the seventh was sent them none at all:
But in the day before the Sabaoths Rest,
Full twice so much as other days at least,
They gathred up, and till the morrow kept,
In which they eat, and prayed to God (and wept)
To pardon those which on that sacred day
Durst seek the fields to find the same and play.
But yet admit the holy Law be past,
And that in Christ the same away be washed:
Yet the Apostles instituted sure,
A sacred day, a holy Rest and pure:
The Church of God they planted well and watered,
And but the day they only changed and altered,
In which the flock they traind along and fed them,
As God above in's holy Spirit led them.
And ever since the Christians kept that day,
To hear the word, to come to Church and pray:
For God is good, and will be mocked of none,
His glorious face the Saints behold alone.
Paul the Apostle that was after called,
When Jesus Christ was in the heavens instald: 1. Cor. 16. 13. Heb. 4. 9.

Both with the word and holy Spirit anointed,
The Christian Sabbath in Gods Church appointed:
To meet together, hear his voice divine,
The Scriptures search, to trace them line by line;
To preach and pray, to lay up for the poor,
For all the Saints to open wide the door.
That sweet Disciple whom the Lord of life Ioh. 21. 7. 20. 33.

More dearly loved, then any faithful wife
(Which ever yet upon the earth was bred)
Could seem to show unto her spouse and head.
The last of all more loving then the rest,
Which leaned at suppervpon Christ his breast,
And stayed behind his holy Church to guide:
His fellows thought he should have never did.
When by Domitians spightfull cruel word, Vit. Sanct.

Ore all the world hot persecution stirred:
Though often times before he had escaped the paws,
Of barbarous Tyrants, and their cursed Laws.
Lived still secure, as not afraid of fire,
Sword, famine, murder, in their devilish ire.
Yet at the length, at his most damned command,
Again he is caught, subjected to their hand;
And in a Tun of hot and scalding Oil,
He hurles his body ore the fire to boil.
But seeing that could do no good at all,
Worse then a Devil, most treacherously does fall
To stratagems, inhumane actions vile,
To banish him in Pathmos wandering I Will,
Among savage beasts which lurk in every bower,
With open mouth his body to devour.
Where solitary in that vnked place,
Christ Jesus showed his glorious burnisht face, Reu. 1. 9. 10. 11. 13. 14.

Whose feet like Brass, and eyes as flames of fire;
Ravished John's spirit, made his soul admire
To see the Lord, which for our sins late died.
His Christian Sabbath from the Jews divide,
By that all powerful sharp two edged sword,
His glorious holy mild Maiesticke word:
His own example to the Apostles all,
That on this day was ever seen to call,
To come amongst them, and to show his face,
To distribute his goodness and his grace.
This great Apostle to heavens potent Prince,
The Lords day he has called it ever since.
It Is writ in the Hebrews if the law be ceast,
That to Gods people there remains a Rest, Heb. 4 9.

From sin to cease his holy name to praise,
Together flock, our meditations raise
Above the clouds, to that commanding king,
Which out of darkness did our senses bring.
Dispersed the Truth, and by his sacred might
Placed all our thoughts w'thin the Gospels light.
O let it never sink within my breast,
That to Gods people should remain no Rest:
But toil and travel painful work always,
And Hoddy Loddy, Topsie Turuy play.
It Is true they say, that Constantine the Great,
First Emperor of all the Christian Seat:
A learned, wise, religious Council called, First Nicene Counsel.

Himself amongst them in his Robes instald,
An Order set, abuses foul corrected:
Reformed the Church which Arrians infected,
Established Peace, adored the Royal Law;
Made Penalties to keep them more in awe. Iam. 2. 8.

And by his power as head of all the Earth,
Christ's government was now but in her birth:
According to the word and Scriptures pure,
Confirmed our Sabbath ever to endure.
In every Age since first the world was made,
God showed his judgments on those men which wade
Beyond the Truth, profanely still devise
To break his Rest, and publish wicked lies.
As for example, though I could produce
A multitude, that none might plead excuse
(Before his Justice) at that dreadful bar,
For leading others in a maze so far.
And yet of them, but three in all I Will cite,
As fitting to the times wherein I write:
To show how God has ever hated, cursed,
The very place that Sabbath breakers nursed.
The ancient Jews which in Arabia walked Exodus 13. 16.

Before the Law, when God with Moses talked,
And bad him warn the people all, that none
Should dare to gather (every one alone)
More then a Omer of that blessed food
Which fell from heaven unto their sovereign good.
And in the day before the Sabaoths rest,
Two Omers full (as is before expressed)
Should then be gathered, roasted, baked and sod,
But in the rest mind nothing else but God.
How has that food releeu'd the lingering mind,
Of those his people, whom true love did bind
In awful fear, divinely wondrous fed,
And only in the light of nature led?
Those which abusde his sacred Rest and grace,
How did it then infect the air and place
With putrefaction, loathsome, deadly, rank,
In noy some manner ore the earth it stanke,
Until such time that God above did please,
To clear the air and send them better ease:
Causde all that was so lewd profanely got,
To wast, dissolve, consume away and rot.
The next example, of his judgments great,
Was in those days that Babylon did beat
The chosen people, and the holy Nation, Ier. 17: 21. to the last.

With such a scourge, as since the worlds foundation,
Was never heard as yet in any land;
To feel the weight of his most heavy hand:
For profanation of his sacred Day,
In carrying burdens, toyling work, and play
In revel rout, and such phantasticke sport;
Even from the greater to the meaner sort.
All run from Church to damned offenses foul,
Neglecting still the danger of their soul.
But God above although he often mand,
Their chosen Host by his victorious hand,
Brought them from Egypt through the red seas wave*
When mighty Neptune fomes aloft and raues:
And in despite of envious Fortunes fate,
Great powerful riuals and their deadly hate,
Led them at length with all their ventrous host,
And plast their feet upon the promised coast.
Yet for their foul abusing of his rest,
In all those things which are above expressed,
He sends the Plague, pale Famine, Sword and Fire, Ier. 52. 67

Four furious foes to execute his Ire,
Razed down their walls their temple desolated,
Their City sacked and Land depopulated:
That for the space of threescore years and ten,
It lay untilled, and had her rest as then.
O holy God, was ever thing more plain
Then these thy judgments on thy flock again, 2. Chr. 36. 21

Upon thy land? what stony heart but fears,
To give them now a Sabbath just of years,
For all their foul abuses, wicked, lewd,
As in my work shall more at large be showed.
The third example of his wrathful frown,
Was lately showed upon Geneua town:
The Imperial goodly Christian City chaste, R* Johnson

Within the Duke of Sauoyes country plast,
Whose people wise, religious, sober, true,
Not given to wine with drunken Bacchus crew:
Nor to those foul abuses which abounds,
Within our land, and ore the earth now sounds;
But ever been of civil chaste behavior*
Neat in attire, and of a comely favor:
So decent in the actions which they wrought,
That every man which saw their city thought,
Jerusalem before it was abated,
Had been deuinely to that place translated.
And yet these men which have the rest outstript,
In one thing still themselves have ouerslipt,
Upon Gods rest, his sacred Sabbath Day,
To shoot in Guns about the fields and play;
Until a custom in a lawful pleasure,
Upon that day grew far beyond all measure:
So that their Churchmen, reverent Preachers grave,
Let them alone careless their souls to save.
But God above to show his anger just,
Upon these people for their lawless lust,
In violating of his sacred rest,
A fury sent their country to moiest:
Fierce horrid war now thunders on their land,
The Pope, the Spaniard, and the French King stand,
All linked alike, to undermine her wall,
Expecting thus a conquest by her fall.
Alas ( Geneua) how art thou beset,
With three such foes as in Europa yet,
Were never known so strongly to combine,
To sack a town, extracted from their line?
What can thy shooting in those Guns avail,
If God for sakes thee, how thy foes prevail?
Weakens thy strength, abateth much thy store,
Mewes up thy Camp, and makes thee extreme poor,
Ransackes thy Country all thy land belurches,
And brings thee now to be relieved in Churches.
These eyes of ours have seen the worst and best,
And judgment past for breaking of his rest.
That Antechrist which in the scriptures pure,
Is propheci'd to come amongst us sure,
Began to show his cursed face on earth,
Six hundred years after the glorious birth,
Of that sweet Babe the Man, God, Christ and King,
Which came on earth, our souls to Heaven to bring,
By the Alcoran on his Sabbath day:
Discardeth quite all gaming, sports and play,
Denounces Judgment on the heads of all;
Which on that day in those offenses fall:
And brands the Devil an actor in all games,
Void of Religion yet such sports he blames,
As good for little but to swear, and cup,
Fit Instruments to bring new quarrels up.
The parrable of Christ upon the earth,
Is of such weight, and glorious heavenly worth, Mat* 13* 3. to 44.

Which by the sea to multitudes he spoke,
What living man but at the same must wake,
To see how God like to a husbandman,
Works up his ground as well as e're he can,
Winnowes the seed, and sifteth every grain,
In hope at harvest by the same to gain,
But that the Diuelli'th instant follows hard,
Whose cursed seed the goodly field has mard;
Throws round about as much as in him dares,
In every place to sow his wicked tares.
How can we think to escape Gods Iudgementiust,
Fond men (alas) that are but earthly dust:
Weak silly worms when he shall on us lowre,
Then are we but a Winters withered flower,
That such conceits within our hearts should lurk,
To tempt his love, examine thus his work,
And what himself from heaven above has taught,
To slight it ore, and hold it idle naught.
Although most true in Paradise at first,
His own example has the Sabbath nursed,
The Patriarcks and all the holy men,
Before the law observed their Restas then:
And his command to keep us more from sinning,
Has a Memento in the first beginning,
The heathen men even from the worst to best,
In every age still kept a seemly Rest,
And all the Saints, Apostles, men, and Martyrs,
Throughout the world, in all her utmost quarters,
The general counsels, learned fathers grave,
Those God above elected has to save,
The greatest Kings, and noblest personages,
Throughout the world, in all her former ages,
The fearful judgments, on that holy Land,
Which he did plant against all foes to stand,
The Lord of life, Christ Jesus on the earth,
(Then all before we prize him better worth,)
Ordained himself our Rest upon this day,
To come to Church, to hear the Word and pray,
Yet we contemn and not respect the least,
But others lead to break the Sabaoths rest.
Grant heavenly God that ever more my heart,
May upright be, and from thee never start,
But that my soul the purest of my thought,
May be with love, like to an Anuill wrought,
To make a conscience of thy sacred day,
To read thy word, within the Church to pray,
That all my life until my glass be run:
Be not offensive to thy dearest Son,
Which sits triumphant far above the skies,
Grant that I may behold him with mine eyes,
And when I shall appear before thy face,
Then may I find thy mercy goodness, grace,
And not thy Justice for offenses past,
But let thy Love be ever on me cast:
Even in the day that some men dream of least,
Place him betwixr us, give my soul her Rest.
And yet great God, thou have not so restraind
Our liberty, but that thou have ordaind, 1* Cor. 10. 31. 1. Pet* 4. 11.

At vacant times from serious meditations,
To ease our selves in honest recreations,
Such that all others to no vice allure,
Nor in our minds shall add a thought impure:
But that our sports, our actions, and our plays,
May praise thy name the Rest of all our days.
The Puritant, he is again as nice
As these uncivil in their clamorous vice, 1. Cor. 6. 12. 2. Cor. 3. 13. 17
Gal. 3. 11. Gal. 2. 14. 16. 17.

That all the week with superstition fed,
To good conceits of others scarce are led:
Adopted sons, elected brethren wise,
To think all damned beside their sect precise:
Pure hypocrite under a formal cloak,
That on Gods Rest must draw the Jewish yoke,
And walk to Church as if his steps he told,
To make no fire but sup his broth up cold:
And many things which if I here should tell:
I might too long upon the matter dwell.
But whither is my Muse transported now,
Beyond her compass far away* and how
Comes it to pass that she has rambled thus
About the earth these questions to discuss,
In every Age her sacred holy Rimes,
To walk along descending to our times,
And tax the world of unbeseeming plays,
To reprehend the abuses of these days.
And all this while is Adam still alone
In Paradise, and company has none,
Unless sometimes God comes himself, and sallies?
Before his eyes within those pleasant Allies. Simile.

Then is he glad, his heart does leap for joy,
He runs and skips much like a little boy
That goes to school, al weary at his book,
Is glad to peeke in every bush and look
(With those his fellows) for some bird or nest,
Their company his mind still pleases best.
So art thou Adam when thou art all alone,
Then do thou grieve, complain, and make thy moan
Unto the Earth, the Air, the Winds and trees,
But God above thy present want that sees,
Comes down himself to give thee all content,
One of thy ribs out of thy body rent,
And made a creature of such wondrous fame,
That heaven and earth have since admird the same.
To be thy sollace in his absence pure,
And glad thy heart, binding thy love more sure,
To him at first without thine own direction,
Gave thee a Phoenix of such rare perfection. Simile.

So sweet an eye, and pretty pleasing look,
Like Adamant and glittring sugared hook.
She draws thy love to mind her speeches more,
Then God himself that gave thee her in store.
Now art thou complete ( Adam) all beside
May not compare to this thy lovely bride,
Whose radiant tresse in silver rays to wave,
Before thy face so sweet a choice to have,
Of so divine and admirable mould,
More daintier far then is the purest gold,
And all the Jewels on the earth are borne,
With those rich treasures which this world adorn.
Though God at first this earth for thee has made,
The creatures all at thy command to trade:
The Sun and Moon ordaind to be thy light,
The Stars and all unto their utmost might,
The world it self and Paradise the place,
Where still his love has ever given thee grace:
Yet all of them compared in every part,
Cannot content and satisfy thy heart,
Until thy God even with his sacred Rest,
Had given thee this to make thee perfect blessed.
For presuppose as then thou stoodst before,
Though all the world thou had in ample store,
Plenty of wealth and gold at thy command,
And all the creatures in the earth to stand,
Before thy face subjected to thy will,
And thou the Lord of Paradise yet still.
No man besides which dare oppose thy power,
Hemmed in with Angels in that sacred tower,
And God himself within that holy place,
Unmasked his brows to show his glorious face:
Yet at the best that ever wit can scan,
Thou leadst thy life but like a single man.
But now thy God has perfect made thy state,
Linck't thee in marriage with so choice a mate,
Himself the Priest which brought her to thy hand,
And knit the knot that ever more must stand,
Ring'd her with virtue, glorious beauty chaste,
Upon thy self and no man else to waste,
Made her the Tipe our senses all to rouse,
Of Christ himself, and of the Church his Spouse:
And charged the Angels for thy fence and guard,
Of nothing now, but one thing thou art bard.
As the two lights within the Firmament, simile.

So has thy God his glory to thee lent,
Compoz'd thy body exquisite and rare,
That all his works cannot to thee compare,
Like his own Image, drawn thy shape divine,
With curious Pencill shadowed forth thy line:
Within thy Nosthrils blown his holy breath,
Impaled thy head with that inspiring wreath,
Which binds thy front, and eleuates thine eyes,
To mount his throne above the lofty skies,
Summons his Angels in their winged order,
About thy brows to be a sacred border:
Gives them in charge to honor this his frame,
All to admire, and wonder at the same.
But Lucifer that soard above the sky,
And thought himself to equal God on high,
Enuies thy fortune, and thy glorious birth, Wis. 2. 24.

In being framed but of the basest earth,
Himself compacted of pesteferous fire,
Assumes a Snake to execute his ire,
Winds him within that winding crawling beast,
And enters first whereas thy strength was least.
Damned wicked Devil what made thee thus to spite,
Our grandame Eve and holy Adams Right,
What hurt have they or either of them said,
That thou a trap and secret snare have laid?
To bane their youth and undermine their wall,
To gain a curse upon their woeful fall:
Thy false proceedings in thy actions best,
How does the world thy cunning sleights detest?
Which since that time in many ages past,
In every corner of the earth are cast,
How have thou mallist one that hurt thee not?
When all thy envy upon Job was shot,
Transforming thus thy cursed scourge and rod, Job. 16.

Into the shape just of the child of God.
At other times thy nimblenesse and slight, Ephe. 2. 2. Romans 12. 7. 9.

Above the clouds will be an Angel bright,
And through the air close in a fiery Wagon,
Thou Wilt sometimes mount as monstrous as a Dragon,
And when thou list thou any shape can take,
Even from an Angel to an ugly Snake.
The four maine wheels on which thy cart does move,
Are Rauin, Lust, and want of grace and love,
The sable horses which thy chariot led,
Have been at Rome or else near Tiber bred,
For first Ambition with a lofty pace,
Then cursed Envy with a pale lean face,
And Cruelty that tramples best in blood,
The next is Guile which never yet did good,
Appostacy that will his faith renounce,
A stony heart by all of these will bounce,
The Coachmen which do drive them with their rod,
Are treason often and want of fear of God.
In these and such like shapes thou lie in weight, Mat. 4. 1 to the 12.

To gull the world as with a poisoned baight,
That being taken man's vital life straight baines,
Infects his blood, and runs through all his veins,
And as thou art, do cozen lie and lurch,
Transformed sometimes into a man in the Church, Mar. 8. 33.

Under that holy habit, mask, and guise,
Thou setst abroach thy cancred venomed lies.


And thus thou camstvnto our grandame Eve, Genesis 3. 1.

And as a Devil into her thoughts do diue,
Seeming a Serpent crawling on thy breast,
Much like a simple foul misshapen beast, simile.

Just in the midst of all the garden fair,
Thou singlest forth, the happy blessed pair.
And watching Time, when Adam stepped aside,
Even but a little from his lovely Bride,
To pluck perhaps a Nut upon the Trees,
Or get a comb amongst the honey Bees:
Or some such thing to give his welcome Spouse,
Even just to Eve thou dostthy body rouse,
And questions with her, of much idle prattle,
As women they delight to talk and tattle,
What they may not, and what it is they eat,
And what is best, within that pleasing seat,
What Tree it is that was to them forbidden,
They dare not eat, for fear they may be chidden.
Then Eve again, which thought no hurt at all,
Or once suspect the venom of thy gall,
As a kind woman full of pleasing love,
Told thee indeed that God in heaven above,
Had licenst them to eat of every Tree,
Beast fish and foul, with all that they can see,
Within the compass of the spacious air,
And that were living in the garden fair:
Only the tree that was before their eyes,
They might not touch and taste in any wise,
For in the day that they thereof should eat,
Their God in Heaven would both their bodies beat,
Plague them with pain, and punishment extreme,
Subject to Sickness, Choler, Pangs, and Phleame,
Casheire them both out of that lovely place,
To dye a deathin miserable case.
But thou again that ever did devise,
In nothing else but execrable lies,
Straight told the woman that they need not fear,
To eat the fruit that pleasant tree did bear:
For in the day that they should thereof eat,
The Gods themselves they would indeed defeat.
Attain much knowledge, far above man's reach,
And all the Gods in many things would teach.
To think of death they need not fear at all,
For why, their eyes should opened be withal:
The goodly fruit would breed this wondrous ods,
Never to die, but ever live as Gods.
O cursed, damned, execrable Devil,
Delighting best in that thing which is evil!
What made thee now thy banefull speech to blow,
Out of that canckred venomed mouth below?
Thus to entice by thy allurements working,
Within so sly an ugly creature lurking.
That Eve must reach, and in her hand to grapple
So fair a fatal cursed bewitching Apple:
And not content herself thereof to eat,
But reached another as a dainty meat;
And in her sweet delightful lovely hands,
Runs to her Lord, where all alone he stands
Plaining and grieuing that he her had mist,
Takes her in's arms, and both together kissed.
Then she began (in smiling wanton sort)
To show that Apple, which before in sport
She late had taken from that fatal tree,
The better now to make her eyes to see*
And in the hands of her beloved Lord*
The same she put, according to her word,
And mild persuasions, gentle speeches plain,
In hope much knowledge by the same to gain.
The gaudy looks and curious pleasing sight,
She takes the same and so of it does bite.
Oh cursed, oh cruel, woeful, fearful deed,
What have thou done now Adam to thy seed?
Baind all thy offspring in thy folly nursed,
And left them all still to this day accursed.
What can thou be even at thy very best,
But little better then the vilest beast?
How is thy sight (which thought to pierce the skies)
Dazzled and dimd often times in both thine eyes,
Before thou can to fifty years attain,
Diseases, Rhumes, do in the same remain?
Out of thy head such slimy stuff does fall,
That oftentimes thou can not see at all.
What has thy knowledge purchased to thy race?
Thy nakedness thou feast before thy face.
The thorny Brambles all thy skin beschratches,
Now thou can tell to make a woman breaches.
How has the fruit yet to this day amazed
The wandering minds of curious men that gazed,
So far above the top of that same tree,
That still the wood for trees they cannot see?
In every corner of this spacious ball,
To name the tree that thus made Adam fall.
Alas, weakeman; what can it do thee good
To know the tree that thus has baind thy blood?
What can the sight of that all dismal fruit,
But discontent, and make thee much more brute?
Thou feast the world in wandering strange opinions,
And every land within her own dominions,
Still to this day maintaining errors plain,
To tell the fruit that thus themselves did baine.
The Jews this day, that Cabalists are called, Rich Epit. de Talmud.

The highest Rabbis in their art instald:
They still affirm, and for a truth do tell,
That Adams sin (when first from God he fell)
Was nothing but the sweet delicious wine,
Extracted from the sprawling crawling Vine,
That all Eues faults and foul offensive skapes,
Was nothing but the wringing forth of grapes:
Within her hand unto her husband dear,
That supt it up in stead of wholesome beer,
The which no sooner had the brains assaild,
But that his wit and memory both faild:
His senses drowned with such a sottish feast,
God comes himself and finds him like a beast.
The Sarazens, and all the Turks this day, Bosk* ara coeli* lib. 5. c. 4. and
Alcar^n.

From Mahomet in every age do say,
The fruit that Eve and Adam both did eat,
Was but an Ear of perfect Indian Wheat,
Which Adam plucked and rubd it in his hand,
Smiling on Euah that hard by did stand.
Two grains whereof he did unto her give,
Eat two himself to make him ever live.
And that remaind which was but one in all,
Away he took out of the garden wall,
And far in India where he rambled long,
The desert fields and savage beasts among:
This as the cause (mayn object) of his shame,
He hid i'th'ground, and that brought forth the same.
The Southern people, and the Indian Bold,
Do still affirm and oftentimes have told,
That near to Indus and brave Ganges stream,
Which yield all sorts of excellent fish and breame:
Is to be seen a gallant tree this day,
Under whose shade a thousand men may play.
The fruit thereof not very pleasant pure,
But as it is, it will long time endure,
Much like to Olives both in shape and taste:
The Indian birds this famous fig does waste,
That on this tree does grow the very meat,
And only food which Eve and Adam eat.
The ancient Jew and Arabian borne,
They still do think that Adam well might scorn
To taste the fruit that grows on Ganges shore,
The which but late I told you of before,
And that more like and probable it is:
If that their judgments do not err amiss,
The dainty tree that in their country grows,
And twice a year his pleasant fruit that shows,
Yielding a fragrant and a lovely sent,
If but the same be either crushed or rent:
A Cucumber much like it is in show,
Of pleasing taste, and sweet delightful hew.
If with a knife the fruit in two you reaue,
A perfect cross you shall therein perceive:
The spacious leaves are full a fadome long*
In breadth three spans, that I may do it wrong,
If in this place their error I should blame,
But much admire and wonder at the same,
By which the Christians in those parts that dwell,
Persuaded are, and for a truth it tell:
That this indeed was that delitious fruit
Which Eve brought Adam: whose enticing suite,
The Opall color and perfumed sent,
Made him do that which all of us repent.
And other countries in their rouing sits,
Their lofty, proud, and high aspiring wits,
Have labourd much upon this point to write,
To show the fruit that Adam ill did bite.
As though themselves in Paradise had been,
And at the first the very tree had seen,
That bare this cursed ever dismal fruit,
Which make our souls still to this day to ruite:
Let them seek still to find the same and moan,
I Will sit me down and let them all alone.
And yet the place I must not thus forget,
Wherein at first our parents both were set:
Whose glorious worth and ever during fame, Genesis 28.

These rural lines can but obscure the same.
Oh Paradise, where is thy lovely seat?
Whilome so famous, wondrous, rich, and neat;
That all the stately buildings, curious things,
And goodly prospects, of the greatest kings:
The pomp and pleasures various decking rare,
In all the world cannot to thee compare.
The Lords of these have still in every age,
As carried in their holy furious rage,
Adventured forth with admiration, grace,
But to behold thy ancient sacred face,
And none of them as yet have ever found,
Or came in sight of thy most heavenly ground:
Which far in Eden in the orient lies,
Unfit for man to see with sinful eyes.
Some men there be which are persuaded plain, Papists Bellermine: and others.

That real place does to this day remain:
Where holy Enoch, dear Elias pure,
And John the Saint, shall till doomes day endure,
In far more pleasures then can be expressed,
Their bodies living with their souls at rest,
Transported safe within that sacred wall,
But in what climate of this spacious Ball,
The same should be, far in the air have gazed,
Their learning, knowledge, wits, and all amazed,
The goodly Region in the Sirian land, Esaias. 7 3. Julian Tzet ad ^uo page 100
Hier^com. in Eze. lib. 8

Is thought the place wherein the same did stand,
Where rich Damascus at this day is built,
And Habels blood by Caine was after spilt:
The wondrous beauty of whose fruitful ground,
The great content which some therein have found,
The sweet increase of that delightful soil,
Yielding a world with little care and toil,
The dammaske Roses, and the fragrant flowers,
The lovely fields, and pleasant arbour'd bowers,
And every thing that in abundance breed,
Have made some think this was the place indeed,
Where God at first did on the earth abide,
With holy Adam and his lovely Bride.
And some there be that in the Orient waded, Barbasa*

Which to this day are certainly persuaded,
The goodly land that far in India lies,
Whose rich renown through all the world now flies,
Under the Line and famous Zeilan called,
On every side with mighty Neptune wal'd,
May be the place where first our Parents stayed,
The earth it self with all heavens gifts arai'd.
Besides the treasures of that pleasant land, Linschotten An Corsali*

The fruitful regions in the same which stand,
The goodly rivers and brave mounting hills,
Sweet temperate air on every side that fills,
The downy plains with such a fragrant smell,
As winged fame unto our ears does tell:
The spicy Trees, and brave delightful flowers,
The dainty walks, and guilt aspiring towers,
And all things else that man can well desire,
Or discontent of nature may require:
Long life of days, plenty of cates and cheer,
All which she powers as on her daling dear,
Within her lap has plaste a wonder strange,
For every man which to that place shall range;
Persuading all that ever saw the same,
That Eve and Adam forth from thence first came.
Just the midst of this delicious land,
Within the center of the same does stand
A lofty mount, whose top does pierce the skies,
And round about on every side there lies
The goodliest plain which ever man beheld*
That four foot deep with water fresh is filled,
And eighteen miles in breadth the same is over, Simile.

Much like the Sea, from Calis strand to Dover.
Upon the top of this admired hill, Maffrus. lib. 5.

Stands yet a Table fixed firmly still,
Of sollid stone that long time there has been,
In which the form of Adams foot is seen,
The Mores believing, that that stamp and print
Was first by him indented on the flint,
The mount it self Piramid like is built;
Upon whose top are stately buildings guilt:
Plenty of wealth, of rarest jewels store,
The height thereof full twenty miles and more,
The people all on every side which dwell,
Have still affirmed, and for a truth do tell,
That this indeed was Paradise at first,
Whose fatal fruit made all of us accursed.
And to this day has superstition led, Vertoman* lib. 3. Chap. 4

A world of Pilgrims, with blind error fed,
By Mahomet, that antechristian beast,
Which Paradise plaste in the radiant east,
Whose fond conceits of this religious place,
Made some men come three thousand miles apace:
With great devotion, extreme labor, pain,
To wash their sins within this miry plain,
Thinking the water in this valley lies,
Distilled at first from Eve and Adams eyes;
When great with grief, and far surcharged with tears,
They shed so much as all the ground here bears:
In woe bewayling of their wilful sins,
The joyful end where true content begins.
From sin first washed, then up the hill they clime,
With labors great, in prayers spend their time,
And sacrifize to Mauors God their fill,
Which plaste their feet upon this holy hill,
Though their mistakings may be wail'd and blamed,
Yet Adams hill, the lofty mount is named.
And that which better may confirm their hope,
That this indeed under heavens starry cope,
Of all the earth may be the likeliest place,
Where Adam first received his great disgrace:
Not far from hence is seen a flaming hill,
Of every man called Balananus still,
Which sends forth smoke and hideous brands of fire,
Threatening the clouds and elements to tire:
Much like the sword the tree of life did guard,
As if with heaven the earth and all it ward.
This makes them think confirms their fancies more
Then all the rest I told you of before.
But if in India on this famous mount,
Adam at first received his sacred count,
And so from thence his fruitful spawne at last,
Upon the face of all the earth are cast.
What may we think of that renowned hill,
Whose matchless fame full all the world does fill:
Within the midst of Ethiopia framed,
In Africa and Amara still manned,
Where all the Gods may sit them down and dine,
Just in the East, and underneath the line.
Pomona, Ceres, Venus, Juno, chaste,
And all the rest their eyes have ever cast
Upon this place so beautiful and neat,
Of all the earth to make it still their seat:
A crystal river down to Nilus purl'd,
Wonder of Nature, Glory of this world.
Dear Amara, thy amorous name does cite
My lowly pen thy lofty praise to write.
If all the world and all therein were mine,
All were to weak to match themselves with thine.
In all the earth, and all the rest to loose,
Thy seat to love instead of all I Would choose.
There are the Temples covered all with guilt,
The Palaces, and glorious buildings built,
A Library so famous rich and round,
As that the like on earth was never found.
There are the Muses and the learned Nymphs,
The royal issue, and the best borne Imppes:
The seed of kings upon thy body nursed,
The Preet himself kept long within the first.
Admired mount, how have thou in all ages
Been still renownde for rarest personages,
Thy treasures rich beyond compare that lies,
Within thy walls may dazzle both mine eyes.
Two famous Queens in Majesty and grace,
With Laurel boughs have much adornd thy face,
As if themselves with Nature did combine,
To wreath thy brows with sacred work divine.
The first of those was fair Magueda called,
Brave gallant Queen within thy tower instald: 1. King. 10. to 11.

That let the rest and wenther self to see, 2. Chro. 9. 1.

If Solomon could well compare with thee.
But when she saw, and glutted had her eye,
With sight of that which far and wide did fly:
Alone she leaves his glorious Temple guilt,
His stately Court, and all that ere he built.
His pleasant land, and curious deckings fine,
As all not worth for to compare with thine.
And so returns within short space again,
Within thy walls a royal Queen to reign:
Gods true Religion in those days professed,
Away she brought and placed it in thy breast.
The other Queen that has adornd thy brows,
With Laurel crown of sacred Christian bows, Act, 8. 27.

Was Candace great Empress of such fame,
As Envy still cannot obscure her name,
When Indica her loyal Eunuch went
To Iewry land upon Embassage sent:
Homewards returning on his weary way,
In Pilgrymage straight forced was to stay
By God himself, which by the faithful bide,
And Philip sent to be his only guide.
O matchless Queen, brave pearl of women kind,
Renowned fame shall thy chaste temples bind,
Which by thy means as old Records yet says,
Converted all unto the Christian faith:
Baptized thy self within that sacred fount,
Which stands still firm upon thy holy mount:
And in that Church whereas the God of love
Descended down in shape of flaming Dove.
All sacred hill, how can I choose but wonder,
To see the God of lightning flames, and thunder,
That rends the rocks, and all to powder pashes
The sturdy mounts with sudden sulphery flashes!
Descend himself upon thy glorious head,
When all thy Princes were baptized and fed.
With that true Manna that from heaven was showred,
When Christ his blood upon thy brows was powered:
Within that Temple of immortal fame,
That till doomes days shall ever bear his name,
And which before his dearest blood was spilt.
Unto the Son was consecrate and built.
O Amara which thus have been beloved,
Still to this day thy foot was never moved:
But in the heat of most tempestuous wars,
God hemmed thee in with strong unconquered bars.
Protected safe, and kept thy feet upright,
Against the world, the flesh, and all to fight.
No marvel then since man at first was humbled
Upon thy head has fallen himself and stumbled,
In admiration of thy gifts divine,
When Nature, Arts the Gods and all combine,
To cull thee out in far abundant measure;
And on thy brows to shower their dearest treasure.
If in thy walls as some this day have thought,
Adam and Eve by God himself were brought,
And plast secure in pleasures wondrous well,
Till from thy top for wilful sin they fell.
Some men again more far then these are wide,
Whose large conceits in Eden cannot bide:
Fond, frantic men the sacred truth to reach,
And Paradise ore all the world to streach. Wolfangus. Wissenburg. Soropius.
Vadianus.

The land of Eden of that spacious worth,
To think it went quite over all the earth.
The lofty walls which hemmed the same in round,
To be the Spheres that in their utmost bound.
On every side about the world do pass,
And seem to us much like a wall of Brass.
The flaming Sword that guards the tree of life
From sinful Adam and his likorish wife,
Have presupposd in all the world alone,
To be the hot and horrid burning Zoane,
That man's exile by cursed envious fate,
Was nothing but the changing of his state;
When at the first from God above he fell,
To be entombd within the grave and hell.
In ancient times when people were besotted, Patricius van 10, lib. 20.

Not in that vice which some of us us call potted,
But in blind error of the heavenly light,
Till God by Christ enlightened had their sight,
Persuaded were that Paradise at first,
In which old Eve and Adam both were nursed,
A real place upon this earth was set,
Until for sin the world it self was wet:
With such a shower on every side and round,
That all therein were quite consumed and drowned.
Then Paradise his own peculiar seat, Genesis 7. 1. To Thelaste.

A pleasant place, delightful, sweet, and neat,
For fear the flood which over the earth did flow,
When Noah's Arc did on the waters row,
Should ruinate the goodly sacred place,
And bring the walls just in the self same ease,
That Henoch City in those days was found,
When all the world, and all therein was drowned:
Transported it within a instant quite,
Far from the earth, and reach of this our sight,
And plaste the same even in a moment soon,
Within the circle of the lofty Moon.
And some there be as far as Rome have rambled, The Manichees origin. Romans
familestes ad Renegaoes.

Which back again, for want of means have ambled,
Like ugly Bat the monster of his kind,
That vice can see, but yet to goodness blind;
Happy were we when first they ran from hence,
Casting a mist upon the Scriptures sense,
To think the place where Adam first did fall,
Was but a tale, and no such place at all,
That holy Moses in his sacred work,
Has little true but only fictions lurk.
Damned wicked man, the child of unbelief, Esa. 33. 15, 16, 17.

The Word distrust, and thus to play the thief,
Gods Church to rob, his chosen flock to fleece,
The truth to blur, and here to pick a piece;
Wringing the same* or as we use to squeese,
A Sponge with water or such kind of Leese: Simile.

The Scriptures true, and heavenly Hebrew Story,
Converting all into an allegory.
Thou soarest high, here is thy lofty flight, Genesis 2. 8. 2. King* 19. 12*

False hearted Rome, which can not see the light
That shines clear, within the Scripture lies,
The truth it self has bleared both thine eyes:
Like to the Bird thou bears in thy crest,
That seldom times upon the earth can rest,
But mounts aloft with proud aspiring wings. Simile. The Eagle.

Till base desires down to the ground him brings,
As if the light he could no more endure,
But falls and stoopes unto a carrion lure.
The Sodomites which in the days of Lot,
About the walls where groaping very hot, Genesis 19. 11.

To find the Angels that his house possessed,
Till fearful blindness stayed their course to rest,
Were beaten down with horrid sulphery smoke,
That instantly their cursed breath did choke:
Transformed their towns in less then half an hour,
When God but once upon their vice did lowre;
With fire and brimstone strange unwonted thunder,
Of all the world the sad and fearful wonder,
Amazing all which at this day behold it:
To see how God has up to nothing rold it.
Made it a puddle and infectious sink,
Not fir for man once of her source to drink.
Even so thy wilful cursed unbelief,
Profane abusing of the scriptures chief,
Thy Sabbath breaking, couetuousnesse and pride,
With all the sins within the world beside,
Have made thee blind to find that lovely place,
Where Adam first was in his greatest grace:
About the walls thou can not find the door,
To come withinland view the plenteous store;
Thy brains confuz'd as in a maze are led,
Dark unbelief thy cloudy sense has fed,
The heavenly light thou can not well discern,
From Sodom first to loose thy self do learn,
In all the earth that ever eye did see,
How well these men we may compare to thee.
But stay; whilst they about the world are seeking, Paradise discribed.

To find the Garden Adam had in keeping,
My sacred Muse with lofty nimble flight,
On Paradise the place it self does light:
From Rome transported tyrant of the west:
To Nimrods Tower within the orient east,
Near Eden plaste within Assiria land,
On Euphrates and Tygris goodly strand,
By Babylon first Empress of the earth,
Mother of Arts most glorious in her birth,
Whose towering fame as Monarch of the world,
Where golden floods in silver streams have purld;
My senses wrapped in admirations wonder,
To think how she has all the world brought under,
Making her seat the glory of her time, Franciscus. Iunius. Curtius. Plinui.
Solinus.

Brave star of Fortune, subject of my Rhyme.
Here was the seat the likeliest place indeed,
Where Ene at first did of the Apple feed,
By learned judgment of those worthy men,
Whose high desert, fames lofty quill does pen,
Which far and near about the world have ventred,
And but at last within her walls have entered.
O Paradise, that first our Parents stayed, Ptol Geor. lib 65. chap. 20 strabo
lib. 16

Until such time Gods will they disobay'd;
How far my pen does of thy worth come under,
Mirror of earth, of all the world the wonder.
Where sacred Thetis from her lovely lap,
Has power'd her treasures, much inrich't thy hap,
Which Euphrates and Tigris has combined,
Their Source divided in four parts, to wind
About thy borders, as heavens dearest work,
Within thy bowels glide along and lurk;
Venting such Jewels as were never found,
A welcome tribute to thy holy ground.
Nature her self has much impald thy head, plin. lib. 2 Chap. 1^6

And wreathed thy brows as fortune has her led,
With such a ridge of rocky mountains small,
To hemme thee in as with a sacred wall,
Upon the top toward the east still there stands,
A smoky hill which sends forth fiery brands,
Gfburning oil, from hels infernal deep,
Much like the sword the tree of life did keep.
Deuinest land the sun has ever seen,
How fortunate thrice happy have thou been,
To have that God which framed the world and all,
Frequent thy walks before thy fearful fall:
Yet as thou art and as thou do remain,
The total earth on on every side do stain:
Where can a man in all this world below,
Find Bdelium that pleasant tree to grow,
Whose fragrant branches, sweet delightful fruit,
And lofty height has made my senses mute,
The Onix stone and other things to bide,
In all the earth scarce in one place beside.
How is thy ground exceeding rich and fair*
A region seasoned with a temperate air,
Thy channels crawling full of golden Ore,
The fruitful'st soil that e're the earth yet bore:
Neptune himself with four great rivers greeing,
To deck the bosom which gave Adam being,
Upon thy temples all their treasures powered,
And all their wealth at once upon thee showered.
After the flood when all the world was killed,
In Noah's time there man began to build,
When having rambled in the sacred keele,
About the world, on every side did feel
Thy fragrant scent so pleasing rich and neat,
Of all the earth, to make thy Throne their seat.
Here was religion planted in her prime,
The golden age and infancy of time,
When man's worst actions like the Turtle Dove,
In all the world was little else but love:
Dear Paradise, how famous was thy name?
When God himself crected first thy frame,
Endude thy Land with such things in it set,
As time for ever never can forget.
The fabling Praises of Elysium fields,
The Turks, Eutopia nothing to it yields,
The Paradise of Romes fantastike brain,
Is but a jest a little wealth to gain,
And Aladeules with his place of pleasure,
Comes far behind and still is short of measure,
Worth honor, grace, when brought into compar^
With this so rich and glorious garden rare.
The persian fancies of their heavenly land,
In sight of this not able is to stand,
The world it self and all that is therein,
I could forsake that very place to win,
And all the greatest Kingdoms ever found,
But dung and trash to that most holy ground.
The lofty walls were all of lasper built,
Lined thick with gould, and covered rich with gui
Like a quadrangle seated on a hill,
With twelve brave gates the curious eye to fill,
The sacred luster as the glistring Zoane,
And every gate framed of a several stone:
On stately columes reared by that hand,
Which grau'd, the world and all that in it stand;
The Chalsedony, and the Iacinth pure,
The Emrald green, which ever will endure,
The Sardonix, and purple Amethist,
The Azurd burnish't Sapphire is not mist,
The Chrisolite, most glorious to behold,
And Tophaze stone, which shines as beaten gold,
The Chrisophrasus of admired worth,
The Sardius, Berill seldom found on earth,
The doors thereof of siluer'd Pearl most white,
Do show that none by wrong oppression might
Be crossed, by cunning, wringing, wresting guile,
By wicked plodding in all actions vile,
By foul offenses like base envy fast,
Can pass the doors but those are pure and chaste.
That sweet Disciple which the Gospel wrate, Reu. 21. 10. to ihe 6. verse of
the 22. chap.

And lent at supper, (when Christ lesus sat)
Upon the bosom of his Lord and King,
He from the heavens this Paradise did bring,
Perused the walls, and viewed the same within,
Described it largely all our loves to win.
The crystal river with the Tree of Life,
Gods dearest lamb, and sacred Spouse his wife,
The various fruits that in the garden grows,
And all things else which in abundance flows:
Has rapt my sense to think how God at first,
Framed all for Adam and his offspring cursed.
To come within how can we but admire,
Why should our minds to view the same a spire,
It being sacred tipe of heaven it self,
Our sinful thoughts worse then the vilest pelf,
That all divine by God himself first wrought,
Above the Clouds, and then by Angels brought, Simile.

Like to an Infant in his timely birth,
Into the Church, and plaste upon this earth:
The midwife there which did attend the same,
Was dear Urania that brave noble Dame,
Whose glorious worth my weakness cannot rehearse,
Queen of the Muses, Sovereign of my verse.
But yet Urania be not bold to pry,
Into the secrets of this treasury,
Locked up from us and bard from all to enter,
Where none but thee may without danger venture,
Least thy great God thou tracest in thy step,
Should from the Heavens down on a sudden leap,
As if from sleep he had been rowz'd and waked,
And find thy self like Eve and Adam naked.
Adam, what made thee fearfully to hide?
Entangled in the allurement of thy bride,
Thy self from God, who by his sacred voice,
Amongst the Trees within the garden choice;
Repaired now as oftentimes before,
To recreate and view the various store,
Even in the cool and dawning of the day,
The winds before him vshering of his way,
Thinking to find as heretofore he found,
Thine innocence upright, perfect, sound;
But contrary, thou lurkest in a bush,
Until thy God did near unto thee rush,
And starting of thee as thou then wast loath,
He takes thy spouse and thee all naked both.
Adam (quoth God) why do thou hide thy face?
What is the cause thou art so poor and base?
That thou should thus with simple shifts begin,
Ashamed of me to cover now thy skin,
How have thou known in less then half an hour,
To lurk so close within this secret bower,
And sew those leaves to patch them so together,
To hide thy shame and keep thee from the weather?
The Tree of Knowledge in this pleasant seat,
I do believe that thou thereof did eat,
Which*I commanded on deaths dismal pain,
Thou should not touch the iewce thereof to gain,
Have thou now eat of that delicious fruit.
I am afraid thy offspring all will rue it.
O heavenly God (then Adam answered strait) Gen* 3. 12.

I was intrapt with such a pleasing bait,
That made my reason, sense, and all to yield;
My strength but weak within so strong a field:
For why, the woman which thou gave me,
A help most meet and comfort sweet to be.
She of that tree did pluck but one in all,
And brought it to me as a sacred ball:
The sight whereof by her persuasion moved,
Whom more then gold and all the world I loved.
Straight in my arms began for to embrace,
And she entreating with her smiling face,
Gave me that Apple in her lovely hand,
Which makes me thus before thy sight to stand,
All naked, poor, lamenting of my fall,
As loath to speak when thou at first did call.
She, she it was which gave me of that meat,
By her intisements only I did eat.
If I have broke thy holy heavenly laws,
Blame her (not me) for being first the cause?
Then God (again) unto the woman said,
Why have thou thus most treacherously betrayed
Thy loving husband and thy darling dear,
Whom to displease thou oughtst in conscience fear?
He is thy head, thy Sovereign, Lord, and King,
Why do thou thus his feet in bondage bring,
Insnaring him, thy self and Issue all,
In woeful danger of your souls to fall?
Sweet God (quoth she) a foul misshapen beast,
The ugly Serpent crawling on his breast,
When but a little that I stepped a side,
From my dear husbands best beloved side:
A goodly fruit presented to my view,
That in the midst of all the garden grew:
Persuaded much the only taste of it,
Would far increase my simple woman's wit:
The touch thereof would sight and knowledge give,
Never to die, but still as Gods to live*
By which inticements snared in his trap,
He shakt the tree, and up I held my lap:
That Plumme alone which fell into the same,
I kept it safe, and to my husband came.
But yet before his presence well I saw,
Not thinking once of thine eternal Law.
By fresh allurement of that Snaky wite,
I viewd the same, and so of it did bite.
The which when as that I the deed had done,
Away he crawles, and leaves me all alone:
Mine eyes i'th'instant woefully did see
The murraine Elfe had first beguiled me.
Like to a Mouse not far off from her muse,
So is a woman sild without exscuse. Simile*

When on a sudden God himself descends,
The winged clouds on every side he rends:
All foggy mists of darkesome errors quite,
He does disperse and brings the Truth to light.
That all the world his Wisdom may admire,
To see how soon he finds the devil a liar.
Justice her self with grim and frowning eyes, Iustitiae descriptio.

Descends down beneath the lofty skies:
That ever lowres and holds in her hand
A pair of Scales to weigh both sea and land*
The secret actions infinite to name,
Which ever yet were hatched upon the same.
But at her back there oftentimes attends, Misericordiae discriptio*

A noble Dame to many a one that bends:
Of smiling cheer and sweet delightful face,
Borne of the Muses in their royal Race.
Whose silver tresses as heavens glorious Queen,
The goodliest creature ever eye has seen:
In all her robes she sits at Gods right hand,
Descends to some, but by his side does stand.
In secret corners of the heart she lurkes,
Gods Mercies great are far beyond his Works:
In heaven and earth, and all that in them are,
None may come near, much less to her compare.
Alone she sits, and sends Justice down
To God himself, that in a sacred frown
Summons the Serpent to appear in place,
Whose accusation laid before his face,
Without demurre and wresting of the Law,
His heinous crime before his eyes he saw,
And stands mute without exscuse at all,
When God above to judgment once does fall.
Accursed devil, thrice damned is all thy race,
Thy wicked plots and secret actions base: Genesis 3. 14.

What made thee wind within this winding Snake,
The shape of Serpent in thy mind to take?
Why have thou sat on Adams sacred skirt,
To harm a man which never did thee hurt:
And wrong a woman with mischievous guile,
By envious plodding in a deed so vile?
Could it not serve that first thou wentest about
To scale my throane, from heaven to shut me out?
But this my work* which more I did admire
Then all the Angels framed of burnisht fire:
The heavenly lights and all that ever were,
Within the compass of the spacious air.
The man himself in whom I took delight;
Placed him in Eden by my powerful might.
That thou shoulst thus with all the devils combine,
In spite to me his person undermine.
To creep to Eve as if she were thy Ant,
And fawn on others like a Puritant.
What have thou got for all thy villainy?
A beast thou live, worse then a beast thou wilt dye.
And yet not die, for euerduring pain,
(For this thy treason) shall be sure to gain.
The fire of my just wrath will make thee gurne,
As burning Brass thy bowels scorcht shall burn. Simile.

The worm of Conscience shall torment thee ever,
And like a Vulture* feed upon thy Liver. Simile*

That still in death, a horrid fearful smart,
Shall dying live, to ouerloade thy heart.
Grind all to powder thy damned wicked rout,
With coals of fire, which never shall go out.
Thy tongue shall be a sure and certain token,
How false to woman thy cursed mouth has spoken;
For in the same a forked sting shall be,
That after times may still thy envy see:
And all her race shall thee torment and vex,
And thou again shall skare her fearful Sex,
Lurking in dens and secret holes obscure,
To trap the just with banefull breath impure.
Thy hide bepainted with a peckled varnish,
Thy venomed carcass in thy pride shall barnish:
An ugly creature shall thou be uncouth,
Thy teeth all black within thy lying mouth.
Out of that hollow irksome vast abisse,
Upon thy belly shall thou crawle and hiss.
Dust shall thou eat, and canckred be thy skin,
Thy body swollen with poison all within.
Thy viperous seed in ugly envy borne,
To all the world shall be the hateful scorn.
In every path, and out of every hedge,
Their poison fell in humane flesh shall wedge:
That when they time and place to purpose feel,
Their venomed tongue shall bite them by the heel.
Thus till the earth shall mould away and fall,
Where men least think there shall they lie and crawle.
The Woman's seed in just revenge again,
Thy head shall break, and cursed actions baine,
When that sweet Babe shall to the world be borne,
That heaven and earth with glory shall adorn.
Then shall he trample on thy cursed hide,
And on the clouds* with winged fame shall ride.
Before his face shall rattling cracks of thunder,
Amaze thy sense, and reasons false bring under.
To see when he shall on the earth descend,
How thou in chains and fetters shall be pend:
Tormented in those pains no tongue can tell,
Scorcht all to cinders with damned devils in hell.
Cursed is thy life, thrice cursed is thy race,
Void of all goodness, mercy, love, and grace:
Here is thy doom upon thy Snakie head*
That others with thee have to sin misse-lead.
Scarce these last words were spoke by God himself,
Of his sad judgment against this cursed Elfe:
And but beginning of Eues dismal speech,
When suddenly she began to cry and screech:
When in the instant from the lofty skies, Miscricordia.

Mercy comes down and into Eden hies;
Prostrated falls upon her bended knees,
But God himself his daughter dear that sees,
With weeping eyes before his face to crave,
That but on Eve he would compassion have:
Began to stay his mind, to alter clean,
And to the woman now began to lean:
But that hard by stood Justice in the place,
And urged him much to prosecute the case:
When all the reason Mercy well could render,
Was that her self was of the female gender.
Whilst both of these each other do oppose, Iustitia and Misericordia.

Loath each of them their humble suite to lose:
Contending still as advocates at Bar,
Or combatants in furious fearful War:
And altogether judgment speedy fears, Natura.

Gods eldest daughter in the place appears.
Nature divine, like to Aurora faced,
A noble Lady, beautiful and chaste: Simile. Naturae descriptio.

Brave famous Queen, a royal person borne,
Whom heaven and earth and all therein adorn.
Her hair disheueld, trailing to the ground,
And in the same the rarest secrets bound,
Without all art in curious manner curld,
And in her hand the Globe of all the world:
Ten thousand colors in her gown are seen,
Wrought by her self upon a ground of green.
In all her jewels of admired gain,
With four brave Ladies bearing up her train: The Elements

She sober enters in that sacred place,
And down she falls before the Almighties face.
Father, said she, dear Father here behold, Oration.

Give me but leave to be a little bold,
Finding my sisters iarring never cease,
To reconcile and set them both at Peace:
A holy work which thou have ever loved,
My self thereto by charity first moved.
One of my dear affected sisters sweet,
That from this place to heaven did lately fleet,
Brought me such news when at the first we met,
Till all dissolve I never shall forget.
And like it is this massy weighty ball
Which hangs so even just in the midst of all:
Would soon return to what it was at first,
If all thereon for this one fault were cursed.
Behold this Fabric here within my hand,
The mighty Gloabe of all the world does stand:
What will become of all thy Noble works,
This goodly frame, and all that ever lurkes
Within the compass of the heaven and earth,
If now destroyed within their prime and birth,
All will consume and vnterly decay,
If Justice once thy Mercy ouersway.
Justice I know does urge thy sacred word,
Which from the Truth as yet has never stird:
Thy penalty on Adam and his Race,
For foul offending in this holy place.
The execution of thy Law divine,
In the least tittle of each Statute line:
Which has ordaind that in that dismal day,
In which the woman did the devil obey;
To taste the fruit and suck it with her breath,
That both of them should die a fearful death.
Mercy again as being full of Love,
Pity, compassion from thy throane above
Presents her self before thy sacred face,
Imploring Goodness, Majesty, and Grace:
To be a means to mediate a peace,
And that for once all further judgment cease,
When by the Envy of a viperous tongue,
Hatched by the devil this cursed malice sprung:
And their offense to take it at the worst,
By Justice weighed will yet be found the first.
O then dear Father let me speak my mind,
Be lust and Loving, Merciful and Kind:
Punish all sin according to thy word,
The Truth preserve, that none at Justice gird:
But yet let Mercy at thy right hand sit,
Thy noble works in sacred holy writ,
Shall then be blazed unto their utmost worth,
And thou be known a God upon this earth.
Then shall large volumes with thy praises swell.
Thy Mercy drop to infant souls in hell,
Which never have offended much thy mind,
But borne in sin and never known unkind,
Whose cursed parents crossed thy heavenly will,
The sperme of those that live in error still.
Thy sentence past cannot again be called,
And truth must stand before thy face instal'd,
That very day according to thy word,
In which the tree of Knowledge first was stird,
By Eve and Adams wilful treachery,
Both of them then a cruel death should dye:
If mercy now had not come down in have,
And at thy feet her humble suit had cast;
Before this time that judgment had been given,
Both of their lives might well have been beriuen.
O then what would become of all this frame,
And all thereon, too infinite to name,
The famous actions by thy spirit nursed,
All must return to what it was at first.
One day with thee is as a thousand years,
The hour of death Incertaine full of fears.
First save the seed and let them live in awe,
Then dye a death for breaking of thy Law;
So is thy word confirmed, my sisters pleaz'd,
The world remain and judgment somewhat eaz'd,
Then shall thy creatures in all ages stand,
The work divine of thy all powerful hand,
And every thing that on the earth is bred,
Shall show thy glory both alive and dead:
That all may stand to all eternity,
Thy only Son offers himself to dye.
But silenc'st once by Gods commanding Word,
The iarring sisters never after stird,
But satisfied, and resting well content,
They spent the time in hapless merriment,
And God above to judgment does proceed,
With fearful Evah and her timorous seed,
Her naked husband that himself excuz'd,
And said his wife his love had much abuz'd.
O silly woman to be thus beguiled, Gods judgment on Euah.

In sorrow now that shall bring forth thy child,
A hard conception with an extreme pain,
Sick loathsome vomits at my hands shall gain,
Thy husband now shall ouerrule thee still,
Thy fond desires be subject to his will:
A constant love shall* hardly once be found,
Within the breast of any on this ground,
And from this day the most of all unkind,
Fickle, uncertain as the wavering wind;
Tossed too and fro with every blast that blows,
Entangled straight with gaudy curious shows,
That most of you your husbands will forsake,
A golden bribe or licorish thing to take.
Heavens glorious judge to Adam also said, Gods judgment on Adam

Because thy wife thou have an I doll made,
To trace her steps which lead to deadly sin,
Thou do but now to feel thy woe begin,
Cursed is the earth, and cursed is for thy sake,
The fruit thereof accursed will I make;
In great vexation, extreme labor pain,
Toil, sweat and dust, thou shall much sorrow gain,
The earth henceforth shall now no more endure,
Unless thou till, and much her sides manure,
And when thou think thy barnes top full to fill,
Thy Vintage stored with plenty at thy will,
In monstrous Mows to pile a wondrous heap,
Then thistles, thorns instead thereof thou wilt reap,
Much like the beast which on his belly feeds,
So shall thou live by herbs and garden seeds,
Till thou return unto the earth again,
And that therein thy limbs all cold be lain,
This is the mother that thy body nursed,
Out from the same thou taken wast at first,
Sorrow and sickness shall thy body burn,
For dust thou art, to dust thou shall return.
O heavenly God, here is a judgment past,
Throughout this world eternally to last,
No writ of error can the same revoke,
When as the words by thine own mouth are spoke:
Here is a sentence with a sacred seal,
No inhibition can thy law repeal,
Nor all the tricks, devises subtle shifts,
Of greedy Lawyers with their bribes and gifts,
Can once dissolve a knot so surely knit,
With all their brains and cunning peevish wit*
But that the same for evermore must stand,
A just decree by heavens diuinest hand,
Drawn up above in Eden ratified,
With all the Angels in the world beside,
And all the powers of firmament and all,
To this decree consented at thy call;
Heavens dearest Babe whose fame shall perish never,
Has with his blood confirmed the same for ever.
The Register that up this order drew, Tempus and veritas ear* descriptio.

Was Time it self clad all in Azure blew,
Winged like an Angel, shadowed with a veil,
And Truth his Daughter bearing up his traile,
Nobly attended with a Lady kind,
More quick and nimble then the swift foot hind.
Within his mouth a lofty Trumpe does stand,
And a sharp since or sickle in his hand.
A glass of sand continually that runs,
Within his way no living thing he shuns,
Locked long before his head, behind all bald,
To show what is past can never be recal'd.
O Time, preserver of all ages past,
How are men's eyes on all thy actions cast,
Thou should be true and constant in thy course,
Why should base gold thy mind to ill enforce,
Allure thy sense and reasons temporize,
Alter an order daube up both thine eyes,
When God the King and all the Lords decree,
A Judgment just to all eternitee,
In open court pronounce the same at large,
Commit it safe to thy sole care and charge;
Yet for a bribe within thy griping fist,
Thou Wilt ad, substract and set down what thou list.
Princes and peers, grave Judges of the Land,
Let ever Justice in your actions stand,
Look well to time, for time it self does call,
It may deceive and go beyond you all:
Dispatch the poor* and hear the widows cause,
Let not the Orphant perish by your laws,
The Innocent is oftentimes undone,
But in defending of a suit begun:
By mighty foes that over dares his youth,
And lies suggest instead of naked truth,
Then is he posted too and froin have,
His life, lands, living, all he has to wast:
And never left so long as worth a groate,
His weary limbs often times in prison rot,
All by delays when golden angels houer,
Within the fist of every servile lover,
That but attends and comes before your face,
By bribing lives unto your foul disgrace,
O to be swayed with every glistring fee:
This is injustice in the worst degree.
But you are wise, to you a word is more,
Then all the works to this day kept in store,
Can be to those that little understand,
And more respect, some feeling in their hand.
Trace that great God in all your actions out,
Let him be still to bring the day about:
Your only star sole level and your square,
The several frames of all your works to rear,
But you are men your memories may fail,
Let not your servants set your worth to sail;
Justice and Mercy, Time and all for gold,
Against Natures laws outright are bought and sold,
And why should man thus to base bribing fall,
There is a God which takes account of all?
And oftentimes what by the diuill is got,
Under his feet he treades it till it rot.
And yet what reason have we to complain,
When England thou have got the richest gain, Iacobus Rex*

The dearest treasure and the welcom'st fee,
That ever any land attained but thee,
A royal King derived from the race,
Of Edens Monarch in her greatest grace,
Within whose face true Majesty does shine,
Justice and Mercy in his brows combine,
His temples chaste with laurel boughs are wreathed,
The sacred Muses in his breast have breathed,
Upon his head three famous crowns do stand,
Gods dearest book is ever in his hand.
Whose Angels still his person has protected,
And all his daughters him for King elected,
Too weak (alas) I must my self confess,
O that my Muse could but his worth express,
Though in this place I do but give a glance,
Of that which after in my work may chance,
His fame renown shall ever flourish green,
Sire to a Prince, and father to a Queen.
So shall the fame of his illustrious son, Carolus Princeps.

Mount up the air, in Phoebus chariot run,
About the earth on every side shall sound,
As far as Eden and the Indian ground,
And still his Glory all the world shall pass,
And be engraven in monuments of brass,
That Time for ever shall his worth adorn,
The greatest prince that ever yet was borne.
Brave Prince of peace from heaven it self descended,
How has this land been by thy birth befriended,
To have a spirit of such noble wit,
hereafter sway within her lap to sit,
When England thou may joy, delight and court thee,
Under his wings may sit thee down and sport thee,
Sollace thy labors with a glad content,
And give God thanks that him to thee has lent:
Whilst other lands have not so rich a pawn,
About succeession out their sword is drawn,
Nothing but blood, confusion, shreikes and skars,
As late was seen within thy civil wars.
Here could I stay and sit me down and pause, Nobilitas.

And view thy court and all thy reverent laws,
Admiring all the nobles of thy Lands,
How with devotion all their service stands,
Prone ever pressed to reattend thy will,
To run and go as thou command'st them still,
Whose worth and merit, every one in order,
Should all be ranck't within this sacred border:
But that to Adam I must post apace,
And tell what fell upon his foul disgrace,
Mean while when Time shall work unto my mind,
Then shall my Muse their several virtues find.
Adam no sooner had his Judgment past,
But God his Mercy on his darlings cast,
As one that never both of them forsakes,
For one sole fault but mild compassion takes,
Pitties their want, and wailes their foul abuse,
Tenders their good admits a weak excuse:
Like to a father of a loving heart, Simile.

Loath with his son and daughter both to part,
Though much provoked by their folly mere,
Still clothes them well and makes them often good cheer:
So God above whose love does far surpass,
The greatest love as yet that ever was,
For all their faults and foul enormious sins,
Yet clothes them warm, in well furd coats of skins. Genesis 3. 2. 1.

And thus attired as in a mantle curld, Simile:

From Eden now they come into this world,
For Justice urged unto their sinful face,
They might not stay within that sacred place,
For fear that Adam and his longing wife,
Should take and eat but of the tree of Life,
And so for ever both of them should live,
To think the fruit did life unto them give:
Like to a man when publikly detected, Simile.

But for one fault is still of more suspected.
O Holy God, here is a mystery,
The Tree of life what it does signify,
But that dear Lamb out of whose bleeding heart,
Our souls were held much to his pain and smart.
The time indeed when Eve the fruit did gripe,
The tree of Life was not then fully ripe,
But long time after in his glorious birth,
Just in the midst and center of the earth,
It flowrisht green on sacred Sion sat,
Till it was cut down by cursed envious fate.
Now winged Time Gods speedy messenger, Tempus.

A nimble hasty posting passenger,
That hard by stood recording what was past,
Up to the skies his eyes in the instant cast,
Spide Eve and Adam standing in the place,
Thus clothed both before the almighties face:
When but commission from that sacred lip,
He had obteyn'd, lets no advantage slip,
But mild and gently takes them by the hand,
Shows them the gate that to the east does stand,
Leads them along lamenting of their fall,
For all their cries, sets them without the wall;
Bars up the door with such an iron lever,
As none alive that once can enter ever.
(Alas poor Adam) now thou feel'st thy hurt,
The air all cold does make thy body smart,
Weakness thy limbs, benummeth much thy strength,
And makes thee glad to fall to work at length.
Thy wandering first, and losing of thy wife,
Thy penance then and toyling weary life,
With all the rest that did to thee befall,
Before thy sad and sacred funeral:
Within this place I must forbear to tell,
For fear my book would to a volume swell,
And prove more big then any of the rest,
Like one great dish among many at a feast.
And yet a word (though Time again do call)
To answer that which in my way does fall:
Amongst some men there is a question made,
Of those that love before their time to wade,
How long it was in innocence first.
That Adam lived before he grew accursed,
How many weeks, years, months, or count of days
Were past before Eve fell to foolish gayes:
And how long after that they were detected,
They stayed in Eden all with sin infected.
Some men there be which are of this opinion,
Even in our days within our own Dominion:
That in the day when Adam was created,
The diuelli'th instant straight his fortune hated:
Enuyde his glory, sought his ruin more,
As in my work I told you of before.
It Is very like that when Aurora blushed,
The morning clear, and all were calm and hushed:
That Adam then and his sweet spouse were made,
But ere that Titan far from home did wade,
In western Seas his weary coursers duckt,
And heavens wide curtain ore the earth was plucked.
It may be true that he might fall again,
And be expulst out of that sacred plain:
For some there be that heretofore did say,
Man never stayed in honor yet a day.
Others there be that cannot think it true,
Their punishment did instantly ensue:
But that long time they lived in the place,
Enjoying favor, countenance and grace.
That God himself did oftentimes descend
To Eden land, like to a loving friend.
After the man had lived long alone,
He framed the woman of his left side bone:
Brought them together, as before you heard,
Whose foul offense the godly Garden mard.
O heavenly God! why should we here below
Trouble our selves thy secrets past to know:
When thy drad word which thou from heaven have sent,
The world and all can give us scarce content,
But still we strive, and at thy secrets aim,
Till thou our Reason in our Sense do maime.
Here is the glory of the eternal Crown,
Man's earthly wisdom utterly thrown down:
Though in Gods book we love to pry and peeke,
In things divine sometimes we are to seek.
But Time again to God himself retiring, Tempus.

Where all his daughters were with joy admiring,
To see the devil damned to the lowest hell,
Adam expulst, themselves contented well*
After a gentle kind respectfull awe,
Before his eyes that all men's actions saw,
Takes sacred Justice by her reverent hand,
That nobly, grave, within that place did stand,
Leads her along in mild maiesticke state, Iustitia descrip.

Placed both her feet upon the Eastern gate.
In Scarlet roabes down to her Anckles trayling,
A Crown of gold her brows all chaste impaling.
Her hands are clean, not carried with a tale,
Her modest eyes are covered with avail.
Out from her mouth as heavens eternal crier,
There streams a blade of purest burnisht fire,
A Sword (which shakes) that up wards down wards curld,
Like blazing stars amazing all the world. Simile.

Just by her side (at her right hand) Time places
The goodliest Dame among all the Nymphs and Graces
The sweet borne Maid, and noblest Cherubim,
That ever Nature at her best could lim:
Brave peerless Queen, most Angel* like thy face, Misericordia.

The Saints in heaven thy very name embrace.
There thou do stand by Justice reverent side,
Till all be ended thou by her must bide,
And she again at Gods diuinest word,
Does guard thy person with her flaming sword.
Not long before (if you remember well)
When Adam first with Eve his darling fell, Charitas.

And both all naked justly for it blamed,
Loves bashful Lady was thereof ashamed:
And as offended in that sacred place,
Mounts up the clouds with discontented face,
Bewailes man's fall with tears, bedewes her cheeeks,
Most lovely looks, and round about she seeks,
If she can find with all her toil a friend,
To set all right, and past offenses mend.
When she had past to silver Cinthia fair,
Through the cold Region of the liquid Air,
And crossed the way that Phaeton begun,
With his proud Teame about the world to run,
Above the stars and fiery regions hot,
With extreme labor pain and travel got.
On every side through danges great had ventred,
Yet at the last within heavens walls she entered,
Where she beheld a goodly glorious sight,
Ten thousand candles all the world to light,
Carried in course about the earth to reele,
And Nature nobly turning of their wheel.
After those kind embraces ever used
Twixt Ladies fair, dame Nature smiling, musde
To see her sister with her lovely face
Thus rapt alone within that sacred place,
To pass the clouds and fiery frozen Air,
The earth to leave, unto her to repair:
Even in an instant at that happy time,
What heaven so high but love divine will clime?
Scale up the throane of God himself above,
Thrice noble Lady full of grace and love.
Nature amazed as wondering what it meant,
To see thy looks bewray a discontent.
Enquires the cause that makes thy face so sad,
The news below she thinks is worse then bad.
But when she heard and understood the cause,
That Eve and Adam brake their Makers laws,
Incurred a curse on all their future seed,
She thought the world and all therein would bleed,
And that Gods anger for so foul offense,
Would not be pleased unless she went from thence.
Not staying now to hear the matter scand,
She takes her sister by her lovely hand,
Descending both in all their rich attire,
Down the hot region of heavens burnisht fire,
Through the cold Air beneath the Moon they diued,
And at the last in Paradise arrived.
Here she stood by and saw Gods judgment past,
And oftentimes forth from her eyes she cast
A Sea of salt and driery briny tears.
Her love (alas) was ever full of fears,
To make her venture in the heat and cold,
And mount the skies, as even but late I told:
Bring Nature down in speedy postapace,
To appease Gods Justice in that sacred place.
Time spies her forth, and takes her by the hand,
Which lovely there within that place did stand:
And as before he used each other Sister,
So now this Lady first of all he kissed her.
Then leads her forth much like a lovely Queen,
Spangled in Jewels, wrought with gold in green:
Brings her to Justice, placed her by her side,
In future ages evermore to bide.
That till this world by power divine shall stand,
These sisters both should be on either hand,
To guide the earth and keep her feet upright,
And govern all under the Prince of might:
When Mercy, Justice both from Love do flow,
The Scarlet garment seems as white as Snow.
Time back retires as heretofore he did,
When now the place was of the Ladyesrid,
And on a Dame of Noble birth does light,
Called Truth his daughter clothed all in white: Veritas.

He takes her gently by her lilly hand,
Wherein Gods book did at that instant stand.
Brought her along (as all the rest before)
Over the gate upon the sacred door,
In all her roabes with comely pomp and grace,
And placed her right before dame Justice face,
O heavenly God, may I not well resemble Iusticia.

The flaming Sword which made the earth to tremble,
When all the world thy sacred Justice saw,
To dear Elias living in the Law,
Rapt up a live within a flaming Cart,
His coat imblazde might be a bleeding heart. 2. Kin. 18. 40. 2. King. 1. 10.
2. Kiug. 2. 11.

When Iesabel the monster of her sex,
His harmless soul upon the earth did vex:
Her Prophets false to Babylon that ran,
He quite consumed, and scarcely left a man
To carry news of that un wonted fire,
Which fell upon them at his just desire.
That Cherubin upon the right hand placed, Misericordia

Which time himself has with his favor graced,
In all the world how well I may compare,
To aged Henoch walking in the Air,
Within whose days when God his body rapt
Above the clouds in innocence lapt,
Before such time as Moses Law was gaued,
By Mercy only all the world was saved
The other damsel which my pen does lim, Charitas.

The sweetest fast and louelyest Cherubim,
That Time himself upon the left hand set,
And which my Muse can never well forget.
If that we read the holy sacred Book,
How near her person (all divine) does look,
To that Disciple which the rest suruiu'd,
In Pathmos I Will into the heavens a riu'd:
Ravished in spirit on a sacred day,
Within a coffin did his body lay,
And round about a light there shined bright,
The coffin caught quite out of all their sight.
The lesson still that he did ever preach,
Both in his life, and by example teach,
In all his works like to the Turtle dove,
Throughout his books was little else but love.
That Cherubin which stood before the face Veritas.

Ofsacred Justice in that reverent place:
Like to an infant that his Nurse does weane,
Whose face is smiling, fingers ends are clean.
All full of Truth, not knowing how to feign,
Dissemble falsely all the world to gain.
How well I may compare her settled look,
To Gods eternal ever blessed book.
These Cherubins all glorious to behold,
Surpassing far the purest burnisht gold:
The radiant splendour of whose sacred rays,
Resemble those adored within our days,
Justice divine, much like to God himself, Iustitia.

That scorneth bribing and all ill got pelf,
And shows by judgments fearful past examples,
How all the world under his feet he tramples,
Mercy again much like to Christ his son, Miserecordia.

That has the crown of glory for us won,
And from the heavens descended to the earth,
To make us happy in his welcome birth,
Whose panting soul had never minutes rest,
Suffering those torments not to be expressed,
Surpassing far the greatest learned wits,
To see how he at Gods right hand now sits,
Triumphing over sin, world, death and hell,
In joys eternal which no tongue can tell,
Thrice ever blessed be his glorious name,
It was his mercy made him do the same.
Then Charity much like the God of love, Charitas.

I mean no Cupids which to folly move,
But that great spirit ere the world was made,
Upon the waters through the deep did wade, Genesis 1. 2 Mat. 1. 13. 20.

By whom the Virgin happily conceived,
To bring forth him that lustice wrath appeased,
When afterward by Iordans silver sides,
From Libanon to Sodoms lake that glides,
Along the plains where Jesus was baptized,
The holy Ghost in shape of Dove disguised, Mat. 3. 15, 16, 17.

Heavens windows open, thus speaks in their sight,
This is my Son in whom I take delight.
When all was finished, and to Heaven Christ went,
Then down came he to give us all content:
As Justice, Mercy, both with Love are linck't, Simile.

So God is one, the Persons three distinck't.
These altogether as the heavens decreed, Iustitia. Misrecordia. Charitas.
Veritas.

The Tree of Life protect from Adams seed,
The World it self with wonderment they fill,
Their meat is known to do their fathers will,
Who all this while is with their sister sweet, Natura.

His eldest daughter as 'twas ever meet.
When Time had done, discharged full his due,
Above the clouds up to the Heavens God flew,
Where he remains leaving the world and all,
Which ever yet was known upon this ball;
To the protection of that noble Dame,
That to the earth with love her sister came,
So well affected, laboring what she can,
That all her care is but for sinful man,
Let him his mind to goodness always bend,
And Nature ever is his loving friend.
Great God of Heaven, now is thy Justice shown,
Thy Love and Mercy with thy Nature known,
Time has thy Face and glorious brows vnmask't,
And thus at first my Rural Muse has task't,
Here brought forth Truth from her has never sturd:
Revealed the same wrapped in thy holy Word,
Of Paradise the sacred curtain drawn,
The Sabbath showed, on no man's vice does fawn,
Of all the world has sung the first beginning,
Told Adams faults, and Eues offensive sinning,
Their seed defaced in breaking of thy laws,
And here I Will stay, and sit me down and pause.
The end of the first Age.
THE GLASS OF TIME, IN THE second Age.

Divinely handled, By Thomas Peyton, of Lincolnes Inn, Gent.

Seen and allowed.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, for Lawrence Chapman, and are to be sold at
his shop over against Staple Inn. 1620.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
Beati Pacifici.



THE GLASS OF TIME, IN THE SECOND AGE.
The Argument.
The sacred Muse by envious Foes is crossed,
Adam and Eve how each from other lost,
Their first borne son by cursed malice led,
Unkindly wounds his dearest Brother dead,
Apostasy the cause of all this ill,
The total World on every side does fill;
With Blood, Oppression, Cruelty and Hate,
To waste, consume, and wind each others state,
The Church derived from the third borne child,
Is staind, polluted, with Caines Race defilde,
So that the World and all there in was found,
Besides the Arc were washed away and drowned.
Urania Sovereign of the Muses nine,
Inspire my thoughts with sacred work divine,
Come down from Heaven, within my Temples Rest,
Inflame my heart and lodge within my Breast.
Grant me the story of this World to sing,
The Glass of Time, upon the Stage to bring,
Be Aye within me by thy powerful might,
Govern my Pen, direct my speech aright,
Even in the birth and infancy of Time,
To the last Age, season my holy Rhyme:
Oh lead me on, into my Soul infuse,
Diuinest Work, and still be thou my Muse,
That all the World may wonder and behold,
To see Times pass in Ages manifold,
And that their wonder may produce this end,
To live in love their future lives to mend.
Then shall thy looks with sacred luster shine,
The Muses all within thy Brows combine,
Richly adorned with all the Nymphs and Graces,
Shall sound thy praise with lovely pleasing faces,
Ioying to see thy glorious heavenly hap,
The golden Ball cast down into thy lap;
To thy delight and great contentment more,
Then if the World were only thine in store.
Though cursed Envy on thy Fortune frown,
Yet thy chaste Brows shall wear heavens laurel crown,
In future Ages as the Muses Queen,
Thy Temples wreathed, shall ever flowrish green.
And what if Hymen something do annoy
Thy tender Fruit, yet shall thou live in joy:
And when pale death shall close up both thine eyes,
Thy fame shall mount above the lofty skies.
And yet Urania how can thou be glad,
To see this Age wherein we live so bad,
All ouergrowne far worse then at the first,
Bemir'd in sin as if it were accursed,
Nothing but blood, contention, Brides and braules,
The Serpent still upon his belly crawles,
And round about on enery side does wind,
With cunning sleights the Infants face to grind.
Nay thouthy self, noble Urania dear,
Since first thy landing and ariuall here,
Have thou not been on every side turmoyl'd,
Tossed too and fro, by Envy ouertoyl'd?
Whose viprous tongue within a sacred place,
Has belcht her venom, aimed at thy disgrace;
Like to the Devil in Paradise at first, Simile.

That banefull poison in his Breast has nursed,
To wrong thy person, weaken much thy state,
Enrich himself to satisfy his hate,
Took all advantage working on thy youth,
Suggested lies instead of naked truth:
Locked thee up close (Immured) within a Wall,
When not a Groate was due to him at all;
But by the order of this noble Land,
He in that place for debt to-thee should stand.
Great God of Heaven it makes* me weep and wail,
To see Iuiustice oftentimes prevail;
To domineere and catch into her hand,
When Innocence must at her mercy stand,
Then does she squeese, wring* wrest, extort and lurch,
When seldom times oppression comes at Church,
Dear friends persuasion once can never prevail,
To work a peace till all be set to sail,
Then swallows all into a griping purse,
Not satisfied, continues ten times worse,
Vowing to wast and Ruin all thy state.
Oh cursed malice hatched by envious fate,
When thy false heart has made the act thy worst,
What art thou then more then a beast accursed:
Nay far more worse, for thou must count at large,
For every soul committed to thy charge,
If by thy fault the least of them be lost,
Thy soul in hell the price of it will cost.
But yet my Muse, unfold to me the cause,
Why thou did fall into the treacherous paws
Of hateful foes, devouring Tigers fierce,
False hearted friends which in thy state did pierce,
That thou should thus be tossed on every side,
Compeld often times to be from home and ride,
To see if Envy with her viperous face,
Has foysted lies in sacred Justice place.
I know no cause, nor could I ever tell,
Why she should thus against thee always swell,
Winding her self, her malice best to smother, Ier. 23. 12. 10. 11. 13. 14.
15. 16. 17.

Into the habit of thine elder brother.
One thou have loved, enough to make me doat,
To see vice lurk under a formal coat.
And thou thy self that yet did never hurt,
To harm a child, or throw a worm i'th'durt,
Or take delight to glory in the fall
Of any one, much lesle thy tongue to gall.
Bite, scandal, blurre, to Injury, defame,
The worth of any in their goods or name:
By wicked ways the Infants face to grind,
Nor in thy hands thy neighbors living wind,
But to thy power have showed thy best endeavor,
To love the Saints withal thy heart for ever.
Urania (dear) thy very case is mine,
How did my Foes still to this day combine,
Back sliding friends (much like to slippery Eles)
Have vndermind, to turn up both mine heels:
With fawning terms my company have sought,
Inuerted that (which yet) I never thought;
Reported words, the which were never spoke:
Let every man by this a warning take,
And careful be whom they converse withal,
The Bird often times in Fowlers nets does fall:
Even when ( Alas) not any hurt she thinks,
Then is she caught, under their burden Sinkes.
How oftentimes have I bin tossed and tired,
Plunged in the deep and all with dirt bemir'd,
Tossed too and fro by those in Ambush lay,
With secret Gins to trap me in my way,
Vowed my destruction, all my state to baine:
Much to my Trouble, Injury, and pain,
Swallowed my goods within a griping purse,
Have I not cause all Roman wolves to curse,
When all I have can scarcely give content,
Unless my life and living both be spent.
Were it for debt or title of my Land,
That thus my foes did in their fury stand:
If possibly they could me more abuse,
Yet in some sort I would then here excuse.
Dear Muse, the cause why I am thus perplexed,
Turmoyld about on every side and vexed,
To waste my state, and pass through dangers many,
Is not for wrong that I have done to any:
But by fell Envy hatched in hell below,
In Eden nurc't, now ore the Earth does flow.
When Adam least suspected her intent,
Then was her mind on mischief fully bent,
And ever since has labored what she may,
Eues seed to baine her secret traps to lay:
But all the spite against me she can use,
May waste my State, and hinder thee my Muse.
For this alone, by her I am misused,
Hurried about* by slandrous tongues abused,
Kept long from home, unto my great expense,
Weakened my Lands and living ever since,
On all sides crossed (by Greatness) over swayed,
By guile and cunning (treacherously) betrayed,
Of smooth faced friends abandoned and forsaken,
And all God knows, but for a Word mistaken.
Nay had I been sole Author of that thing,
Which some untimely to my hands did bring,
And blazed it forth, why should I thus be blamed,
When no man ( living) in the same is named,
Nor any scandal in those words alone,
Intended are but by a man in the Move,
Yet I turmoyl'd against all right and reason,
Am used by some, as if it were High Treason.
Sacred Religion brought from Heaven above,
Thou should be constant, full of Grace and Love,
From God (himself) thou have a holy task,
O let not vice (under a Surplisse) mask,
By this alone Christ's Flock are scattred all,
Over all the Earth, in every place do fall,
Some run to Rome and some renounce their Creed, Simile.

And come again, like to a stinking Weed*
That bears a Flower a woman's Love to win,
But yet the seed contagious all within.
All powerful God, when both by Night and Day,
Incessantly my Heart to thee did pray,
To ease my Grief, and if it were thy will,
To send me Peace to walk up Sion hill,
That in thy House where all thy Saints do meet,
My Soul might sing and offer Odours sweet,
To hear thy Word come purling from the Rock,
Feeding thy Sheep and building up thy Flock,
Where none at all should have a cause to fall, Simile.

Christ's Coat was wouen without a Seame at all:
In stead of Peace which I desird in haste,
Thou sentst me down a lovely Virgin chaste,
Noble Urania soberly attired,
Which when I saw, (with Joy) I much admired,
Finding a Friend (copartner) thus to be,
A fit Companion in my misery,
Great God of Heaven upon my bended knees,
Before that Face which every actions sees,
Let me but know what good I ever wrought,
That thou in Mercy thus on me have thought?
Or have I not offended much thy will,
That thou my Br^st do with Urania fill,
Sending her Down as thou did send thy Son,
To save those sheep which from thy Fould did run.
Eternal God, what shall I give to thee,
For thy great Love and Favor showed to me?
If all the World within my power did stand,
And all therein were sole at my command:
If all the waves within the Seas which boil,
And all the Rivers on this Earth were oil:
With all those things that ere I did behold
Under Heavens Cope were framed of beaten gold,
In Thankfulness for all thy Mercies sweet,
I Would all Surrender, lay them at thy feet.
But soft my Muse, whilst thee and I am playning,
Each others griefs, and still but little gaining:
Time posts away, as if it had forgot
What Adam did (after the Gates were shut)
In Paradise, I mean that sacred door,
Which in my Work I told you of before.
Adam and Eve about the glistring walls
Of Paradise, with mournful cries and calls,
Repenting sore, lamenting much their Sin,
Longing but once to come again within,
In vain long time about the walls did grope,
Not in Despair as those are out of hope:
But all about, in every place did feel,
His loving Wife still following at his heel,
To find the Door with all their care and pain,
To come within, their former state to gain.
Like to a man that in a Palace built Simile.

Of Jasper stone, and covered rich with guilt,
One every side lined with a golden wall,
And no Town near, nor any house at all,
In such a place suppose one should abide,
Be entertaind like to a lovely bride.
Yet in the night for some abuse absurd,
Perchance for drink or some distastefull word.
If he should be fast by the shoulders caught,
Lead forth a doors and set by all at naught,
Haild all along (even in the Evening late)
Between his foes, and thrust quite out of gate,
In no place near, hearing a Dog to bark,
All comfortless wanders about in the dark:
Gropes every where, if he can find a door
And enter in, he will offend no more.
Or like a man that venters for a prize, Simile.

Hoodwinckt, and made stark blind in both his eyes,
Wheels round about, in every place does reele,
At every post and corner house does feel,
To find the door where he should enter in,
With all his toil his Wager for to win.
Even so is Adam in that vncked place,
The flaming Sword still blazing in his face;
On every side the glistering walls to shine,
The Sun himself just underneath the line.
The radiant Splendour of those Cherubims,
Dazles, amates, his tender eye sight dims. Simile.

Like to a man that gazeth at the Sun,
Is then unfit, far any way to run,
Least whilst his looks above the Clouds he pitch,
He chance to fall and tumble in a ditch,
Such is the state of Adam and his Wife,
And every Man within this mortal life,
To wander, Grope, as in the dark be lost,
And farthest off from that they aim at most:
The sacred luster of Gods Word divine,
The Gospels truth which ore the Earth does shine,
The Son of Peace (Christ Jesus) being borne,
Whose glorious Light does all the World adorn:
Have made Man blind and dazzled both his eyes,
To see that Joy which in the Scripture lies.
When many days were past away and spent,
Finding at last they mist of their intent:
And that their toil and travel to their pain,
Was frustrate quite, their labor still in vain:
Much discontented for their sad mishap,
Yet once again upon the walls they rap,
Then weep and howl, lament, yearne, cry, and call,
But still no help, nor answer had at all.
Perplexed in mind, and dazzled with the light,
With grief and care, distempered in their sight,
Amazed both just as the wind them blew,
To Paradise they bad their last adieu:
Like those are Moapt with wandering hither, thither, Simile.

From thence they went, themselves they knew not whither
The Crosses, griefs, vexations, troubles, care,
Befell them after, with their hungry fare,
Straggling about, abiding in no place,
And Discontent, upon their late disgrace,
The angry Heavens, for many days that lowred,
The sable clouds which sulphury showers down powered:
The very Earth combining with them both,
Strange hideous sights, of irksome Lights uncouth,
The Elements, as all together bent,
Against man's Sin, themselves in sunderrent.
The Sun ashamed, the inconstant angry Moon
Began to wane, sending a Night at Noone,
Surcharged with Sorrows, no where now to rest:
Their griefs more great, then can be well expressed.
The discontent some say which Adam found, Comment. in Cabalist vidi Reuch.
lib. 1.

Being expulst out of that holy Ground,
By Eues foul error to be thus disgra'ste,
Made Him, the World, his Wife, and all distaste:
And like a Hermit in his wandering weeds, Simile.

On little else but grief and sorrow feeds,
Repentant thoughts are harbored in his breast,
His Mind impatient, finds no place to rest,
But to the East from Paradise does run,
Toward the rising of the morning Sun.
Here, here ( Alas) his tender dazzled sight,
With the great splendour of that glorious light,
Whose matchless grace when up to Heaven it enters, Simile.

Much like a Queen forth from her Chamber venters,
Climes up the Skies, and tramples on the Air,
With cheerful looks in glittring Robes most fair,
Prances about, in no place long it bides,
Viewes all the World on every side it rides,
The radiant Rays which sparkled in his face,
Made Adam think that God was in that place.
With this conceit, he tarries in no coast,
But on he goes, and all in have does poast,
Ore Hill, and Dale, with toil, vexation, pain,
Like Siciphus, that labors still in vain, Simile.

To roll a stone against a monstrous Mount,
His grief more great then any man can count,
Finds to his cost his travel to no end,
His weary works all to no purpose tend:
So on he runs, on nothing else does dream,
Until he came at Ganges watery stream,
And as before, ore many a little River,
He made a way up to his Heart and Liver,
So in this stream, hoping the same to win,
He enters bold, and wades up to his chin.
Here is a Bar in superstions way,
Too deep a rub to make his fury stay,
For all his have he can no further pass,
By Ganges coast, like to a Wall of brass, simile.

Where he is forced, to try his utmost skill,
Against the stream, he strives and labors still:
Until by Practice with his active limbs,
A Mile or two upon the waves he swims,
But yet too far in absence of his Wife,
May breed a skarre and hazard so his life.
Thus discontented, with that watery wall,
The grief conceived of his dismal fall;
The loss of her that late before he lost,
When as he thought to pass to God in post,
Himself alone bewayling of his sins,
To true Repentance faithfully begins:
And as some say did Circumcize himself,
Washed all his Skin, (bemir'd) in durty pelf,
Forsakes the World, for certain days did stand,
Within the stream, and never came at land,
Until his flesh from top to toe was seen,
With cold and froath, all ouergrowne with green.
Then God which late upon his fault did frown,
Now smiles again, and sends Raziel down,
One of the three in sacred Roabes of Light,
That ever stand before the most of might,
Since Sathiel one of their number fell,
From highest Heavens unto the lowest Hell,
Michael, Gabriel, this Raziel stood,
Still to this day the sole Archangels good.
This noble Angel brings those tidings glad,
And cheeres the Man to be no more so sad,
Tells him that God is not with him offended,
But with the Devil which first his Reason blinded,
That his Repentance purchased has his peace,
From further Penance wil'd him to surcease,
Although of Sin he has been once detected,
Yet his good will was in the Heavens accepted,
Bad him go seek and comfort up his Wife,
People the World and live a joyful Life.
The Messenger that from the Heavens descended,
To bring these tidings up again Ascended, simile.

Like to a flame of pure celestial light,
So vanished he from earthly Adams sight,
Yet some do think he tarried in those parts,
And taught the man the liberal learned Arts:
Was his Companion as a friendly guide, Jews and Turks.

That ever kept by Adams fearful side,
When he went seeking to his care and pain,
With extreme toil to find his Wife again,
For many years within the stream did stand,
Whilst Eve was wandering in the Nubian Land,
His faithful Angel, in all storms and weather,
Until such time he brought them both together.
At Araffe hill within Arabia ground,
This was the place where Eve her husband found,
Here at this Mount they both together met,
And each with (Joy) their lovely eyes did wet,
With such a shower of pearely crystal tears,
Distilled in Loves pure Limbeck, full of fears,
That one the other finally had mist,
Here once again they smile, embrace and kissed.
Still to this day the reverent fear and awe,
Of those which yet the Mount have ever saw,
The great respect that Superstition wins,
Amongst men denout in pardon of their sins;
The Worlds conceit by Mahomet late nursed,
That Eve and Adam here repenting first,
Found Peace with God unto their souls content,
Built them a House in which their lives they spent,
Has made the Hill admired to this day,
For Turkish Pilgrims ever more to pray,
The sacred Skirtes with goodly plains are wal'd,
And at this day the Mount of Pardons called.
No less admired is that Renowned stream,
By Bengala which makes all Asia dream,
And fills the World with superstious guile,
From Eastern India to the Atlantike I Will
Brave Ganges flood how do thou draw together?
Fierce warlike Nations mustring hither thither,
Captiu'st them all fettred within thy banks,
To wade within thee, yield thee humble thanks,
For staying Adam in thy siluerd flood,
When he neglected all his future blood,
Lost wilfully his nearest dearest wife,
Careless of all endangring much his life.
This may be true, and yet I cannot think, Confutation of the former opinion.

That those whom God in Paradise did link,
Brought them together by his powerful might,
Should thus be parted each from others sight,
Eve in the South, by fearful Negro Land,
Adam in the East, on Ganges goodly strand,
Between both these a wondrous weary space,
For two to travel in so poor a case:
Unshod, all bare, among horrid thunder dints,
Through woods to walkevpon the thorns and flints:
He in a maze, not knowing where to find
His loving Wife: like to a man stark blind, Simile.

Toils out himself for that he never saw,
To find a needle in a heap of straw;
She all alone wandering she knew not whether,
Blown every where much like unto a Feather, simile.

Inconstant light (and wavering) apt to vex,
As is the Nature of her timorous sex.
It is not like in all men's Judgment sound,
They rambled far from Edens fruitful ground,
Or that but two so kind and tender hearted,
In all their lives should for a year be parted:
Besides the opinion of the learned wits,
Grave ancient fathers evermore that sits,
Reuoluing of the highest deepest works,
That in Gods Book divinely lies and lutkes:
The sacred stories of all Ages past,
Which evermore eternally shall last,
Have made it clear for every man to tell,
That in this place our Parents both did dwell,
Lived long secure, about the Garden kept,
Joyed with the sight, yet for their fall they wept,
Though they were bard to come again within,
By reason of their foul contagious sin,
Yet they desired for all their past disgrace,
But for to live near to that lovely place.
Here first with boughs, and such like broken stuff,
They built a House, under a simple Ruff,
Then like a couple that but late did wed,
With Pelts and leaves, they make a homely Bed,
Where they enjoyed more pleasure, true content,
Then in the Courts of greatest Kings are spent:
Himself all naked in a Sheep skin curled,
The sole Commander of this total World,
Is glad to work to pass his time in peace,
To serve his God from further sin to cease.
Thus ouer-ioyd, upon a time it fell,
The circumstance I must forbear to tell,
Playing with (...) within that shady bower,
And in his arms his loueliest sweetest flower,
Embracing, toying, smiling, kissing sweet,
The sports most chaste unto a Spouse bed meet,
Thinking the time he had with her beguiled,
Forgets himself, and she conceiues with child.
Strange is the change she in her self does find,
An extreme Passion working in her mind,
Longing often* times some sops in Tar to lick,
Her bodies altered, and her stomach sick,
Black ugly Berries, fulsome unripe Plums,
And every thing that in her way next comes,
The goodly fruits which are within the walls,
Of Paradise, she to her husband calls,
Desires, intreates him, as he loves his Wife,
Forth with to have, and fetch to save her life.
Full forty weeks she lived in this case,
Feeding on toys and greenest drugs most base,
On Dirt and Trash, on Ashes, Hips and Hawes,
She finds she is ill, and yet she knows no cause,
At length it fell whilst he was forth of doors,
Chasing the Dear, hunting the furious Bores,
To get some Venison, or such dainty dish,
To satisfy his Wives desired wish:
Like Hercules that in a strange disguize, Simile.

Retired home with such a welcome prize,
Finds his dear Darling full of mirth and joy, Caine borne.

And in her arms a goodly infant Boy.
The Admiration, wondrous great content,
To see a Child thus fortunately sent,
Sweet living Picture module of himself,
The World and all he now esteems as pelf,
With Joy over cloyd, upon the face does gaze:
Like to a man astonished in amaze, Simile.

All mute he stands not knowing what to think,
No Reason yet, into his head can sink,
How it can be conceived in the breast,
Of Eve (sweet woman) whom he loved best.
When once revived out of that pleasing trance,
The tender Babe he in his arms does dance,
Smiles on his face and questions with his Wife,
How first was sent thus to prolong his life;
The Child she said, to her immortal fame,
She knew not well how first to her it came,
But that she thought although her sense was weak,
This was the Seed the Serpents head should break,
Told him in words and gentle speeches mild,
That by the Lord she had conceived that Child. Genesis 4, 1.

True are thy words dear Eve, most true thy heart,
Why should a Man thy meaning pure I nuert,
It cannot sink into thy sacred thought,
How of thy self an Infant thou have brought,
As well might Adam in thy senses seem,
To bear a Child, for ought that thou can deem,
When of the World it was in the early morn,
And the first Babe that ever yet was borne,
How damned profane are those accursed lips, Renegado proselites
.
Which in Gods Church shall make such dangerous slips,
Within the same to belch to thy disgrace,
Even in a sacred and most public place,
Behind thy back when thou art dead and past,
And can not answer what their mouth out cast,
Thus to be lie men's souls to sin allure,
Wresting thy speech with banefull breath impure:
Not terrifide with Heavens all threatening Rod,
But dares to teach (that thou did swear by God Genesis 4. 1.

Thou had a Child) and oftentimes to speak it,
If it were true, unto the world to break it,
Is worse then was that Serpent damned accursed,
In Paradise which wronged thy Person first.
Ah thus we see the cursed envious Snake, Simile.

That sleeps to goodness, but to evil does wake,
To lurk all close under the sweetest flower,
When Goddess Flora all her pride does power,
Upon the Earth within the midst of May,
To suck fell poison from the holesom'st gay,
When the dear painful wise laborious Be,
Ten thousand ways about heavens blossoms flee,
On every flower within the Garden sits,
And out from them the wax and honey gets,
Conueys it safely to her well wrought Hiue,
To pleasure Friends, and keep her self alive.
Let Serpent snake, and all the viperous seed
That ever Envy in her womb did breed,
Hacht in the Bowels of the infernal vault,
Where none but Devils and damned Atheists hault:
Twixt God and Belial still thy speech oppose,
Yet shall thy words smell as the fragrant Rose*
Or like those Flowers in Paradise were plaunted Simile.

By God himself, when he the Garden haunted.
Dear Eve, thy worth I ever must admire,
Thou sitst above within the Angels Quire,
Tuning thy voice unto their sacred lays,
To sound forth Glory to the Prince of praise. Simile.

Like Gods own Daughter (whom he loves most dear)
Warbling sweet Music in the Almighties ear,
Or that pale Virgin with her glimmering lamp,
That lights the world under heavens starry Camp,
The Virtues which within thy breast were bred,
Shall near be stained by any viperous head,
So long as Fame can sound thy glorious worth,
Chaste Paragon, the richest Iem on Earth.
Take all the Ladies breathing on this Ball,
The sweetest faced, the noblest borne, and all
The famous Queens and Monarchs of the World,
Which on the wheel of Fortnne have been hurld,
That ever lived upon this earthly frame:
Now gone and past too infinite to name,
The saints themselves and all the blessed troop,
Those that now live within heavens burnisht hoope*
Though thou art blamed as Author of their fall,
Yet art thou still the mother to them all.
Like to the Vine so is thy fruitful Womb, Psalm. 128. 3. Simile*

Thy speech more sweet then is the honey comb:
Thy Breath all pure, which from thy lips comes out,
Thy Brows impalde with Chastnesse round about:
From thee at first were peopled every land,
Like O live Plants thy tender Infants stand simile.

About thy Table, in a seemly sort,
To ouer-ioy and make thee gladsome sport.
But why should I run farther in thy praise,
Upon Fames wings thy living name to raise,
Blazing thy parts, maintaining of thee still,
And foul* detraction aims to work thy ill.
Aye to deface thy modest speeches pure,
With scandals vile, for ever to endure:
When as thy worth exceeds the learned thought,
That by thy means into the world is brought,
And still the Truth conuinceth brings to light,
The actions false, obscurd, in enuyes night, 1. Cor. 3. 12.

Dissolues to naught the mortar made of clay,
The buildings framed of stubble, trash, and hay,
The good from bad, the sheep from wolves does sever,
And brands the devil in his false tongue for ever.
And yet we see, the sacred Truth not free
From viperous tongues, gnawne in the worst degree, simile.

Taxt oftentimes, and squeesed like a Sponge,
By Romish Tigers at her sides that hunge,
Inuerting, stretching, construing all her words,
With error, falsehood, damned ways and girds.
Chaste virtuous Eve, now she is past and dead,
The Serpents seed must break the Woman's seed.
But in the heavens the eternal God of power,
At Justice bar will on their faces lowre*
And on their heads thunder his judgments down,
When Eve shall stand adorned with a Crown:
Then shall their actions in his dradfull ire,
Be purged all, and tried as gold in the fire.
The wickeds words their envious tongue has spoke,
To her disgrace, shall make them yearne and quake:
And in the end the sword shall just divide,
The good from those which have her worth belide,
Whose feet shall totter on hels fatal wheel,
And headlong down to damned devils shall reele:
Whilst Eve shall sit triumphant on the skies,
Viewing their fall, hearing their moanes and cries,
Ioying to see the sacred Truth prevail,
Her meaning cleared, her foes to weep and wail.
And yet dear Eve I must not leave thee there,
But bring thee down, more children for to bear:
If but with one thou had begun and ended,
Yet had the World been by thy means befriended.
But to replenish with thy fruitful spawne,
From Sols first rising where his teame does dawne,
The total earth on every side and round,
Here is a love the like was never found,
Within the breast of any woman kind,
Our thoughts, hearts, actions, all our zeal to bind,
In true devotion to thy reverent name,
Much to admire so sweet a noble Dame*
When thy first child into the world was borne,
Straight he began to take delight in Corn,
In large possessions working up the soil,
Near Paradise with painful labor toil,
Tilling the ground, and planting of the grain,
His name thereby was fitly, called Cain.
Whilst thou again conceiu'st a second child,
A sweet borne babe of countenance more mild:
And after that, about some threescore more
Of sons and daughters which thy body bore,
All nursed by thee after their timely birth,
To fill the world, and people all the earth.
Thus with thy husband (in that arbour'd Tent)
Thou spentst thy days in wondrous great content,
In true Religion, Sacrifices, Rites,
Such as thy heart unto thy God indites,
Ioying in him, and he again in thee,
The sweetest life that ever eye could see,
When as together in your children small,
You train them up on Edens God to call:
And teach them young by your own steps allure,
Them to all good, chaste, honest actions, pure,
The golden ground, the heavenly star, and guide,
From which but few do ever after slide.
Happy, thrice happy are those children borne,
A crown of Glory shall their brows adorn,
Whose infant years are by their parents first,
With the pure milk of true Religion nursed:
In riper days when blustering blasts assail,
The mountains high, that ouertops the dale,
Their Faith stands firm as fixed, upon a Rock,
Not easly stird by every wauing shocke:
But constant bides, most permanent and sure,
The assaults of Satan strongly to endure.
In Elder Time when Age does threaten death
At latest gasp, even when our vital breath
Begins to fail, in hastening on our end;
And kinsfolks, friends, upon us all attend,
With sad lamenting, discontented eyes,
To see our Soul how up to heaven it flies,
Forsakes the Earth, willing the world to lose,
Incombred with a thousand cares and woes,
That in this life daily attend the sheep,
Until with Christ above the clouds they keep.
O then the comfort* sweet delight and joys,
When all things else seems to their sense but toys.
There the good shepherd in his arms embraces,
All those that love him, wondrously he graceth,
With this kind welcome, Come ye blessed Souls,
Come drink the Nectar kept in Crystal bowls,
Eat this Ambrosia as a sacred token,
That for thy sin my body once was broken:
Receive heavens crown the eternal kingdom kept,
For all those ( Saints) which from the world have slept.
But soft my Muse, what makst thou now above
Out of this world, thus on a sudden move
Adam to leave his fruitful wife, and all
His pleasures, joys, and both his children small,
Even in the spring and glory of their birth,
Weary of all, thus to forsake the Earth,
As if thou tookst more pleasure, true delight
Within the heavens, then in their sinful sight.
Stay yet a while, and as thou have begun,
So to the end thy course directly run:
Leave them not thus; O do not now surcease,
Till thou have brought them to their graves in Peace:
Show all their lives, the chief of every thing,
Their Crosses, Griefs, do thou ( divinely) sing,
But yet (at first) tell how in loving sort,
The Brothers lived, and made their Parents sport.
Those that long time without a child have been,
And never issue of their own have seen,
But without kindred, friends, and those which may
With some content succeed at latter day.
If these (I say) when least of all they thought,
Should children have so fortunately brought,
To prittle, prattle every word by chance,
And up and down about the house to dance:
With many toys that in their minor years
Gives great content, the Parents love endeares.
Let these men speak, but with a Judgment sound,
What high content themselves have often found,
In the like sports of tender Infants sweet,
That hardly* yet can crawle upon their feet;
The fame we may of Eve and Adam think,
And ten times more then in our heads can sink,
How in their Babes they ioyd and took delight,
And never well when they were out of sight.
Caine in the blossoms of his blooming youth,
As it is recorded in the sacred truth,
Takes much delight in planting of the seeds,
The fruitful Vine, and all that Nature breeds,
The choycest, rarest, daintiest, and the best
That ever yet she bare upon her breast.
Walks all about, and viewes the richest ground,
By Paradise on every side and round,
With shou'ls and spades he tumbles up the earth,
His chiefest aim to be a man of worth,
And Lord it ore his other brethren all,
That they may bow, within his presence fall:
To that intent he labors, works and toils,
In sweat and dust, i'th'durt (often times) he moyles,
Like a mere worldling spends his youthful days,
His mind (often runs) a thousand kind of ways:
If he can find some new contrived trick,
To ease himself, the soil up clean to stricke,
And bring the same in temper for the grain,
That he may play and yet possess the gain.
Industry, Reason, all the Arts conspire,
To frame an Engine fiercest horse to tire;
The Oxen, Cattle, and the strongest Waines
That ever wrought upon the fertile plains:
Himself and all (in laboring with) this plough,
His Joints grow stiff, and brawny hands all rough,
Yet in the same he finds so much content,
That his best days in this hard work are spent.
His brother Habell does not idly live,
But to some Art his toward mind does give,
Whose chief delight is in the harmless sheep,
The bleating flocks upon the downs to keep,
To follow them when oftentimes his eyes
Are upwards fixed toward the lofty skies,
Observing thus a thousand several things,
That heavenly matter to his senses brings,
Their number, Order with their great increase,
And quiet life, spending their days in peace,
By faith perceiving hidden mysteries,
The sum of that which in the Scripture lies: Esa* 53. 67.

How from the fould a Lamb shall forth be taken,
Which would be one day of the rest forsaken,
That he should be the sacrifice and guide,
Sole Ransom full for all the world beside.
Thus these two brothers lived, and spent their days
Often times in work, sometimes in sport and plays:
In as much love, delight, content and all,
As ever two that breathed upon this Ball.
If you should ramble ore the total Earth,
You Will hardly find two brethren from their birth,
Throughout the world in all the Ages spent,
In true bred Love an euener course that went,
At Bed, at Board, at Home, abroad in the weather,
They seldom part but always keep together:
Walk, talk, discourse, even all the day and night,
They are not well but one in the others sight.
All the week long delightfully they pass
The time away in browzing up the grass,
In husbandry and such as I have told,
But on Gods Rest pins them within a fold,
Or ground well fenc't on every side about,
That they may feed, but yet not wander out*
Upon which Day, when once out of their bed,
By the example of their Parents led,
They altogether meet, to Rest and Pray,
To sanctify the sacred Sabbath day,
To think on God, crave pardon for their sins,
Where Adam then to teach them all begins,
Instructs them well in true Religion first,
Tells them the cause which made them thus accursed,
To use their wits, to labor work and toil,
In the wide fields to spend their days and moyle,
To keep the sheep and by their cunning slight,
To frame an Engine of such wondrous weight,
Whereas God knows before their fearful fall,
In Paradise they needed none at all,
Wills them to love entirely, void of strife,
The Heavenly way unto the Tree of Life.
This is their work and holy practice pure,
Sweet exercise for ever to endure,
Thus they continue running of their race,
Whilst shearing day and Harvest comes apace,
Then they bestir them; toil it out all day,
Inning their corn making the new Mowne Hay,
And in the end they altogether feast,
So give God thanks, and from their labor Rest:
When the next Sabbath clad in seemly suites,
They Sacrifice the first of both their fruits,
In show of thanks for all the plenteous store,
That flocks and fields to their content has bore.
Habell begins to show his grateful mind,
Seeks all the flock the chiefest Lambs to find,
The first fallen fruits, the goodliest fat and fair,
That all the World cannot with them compare,
The golden prize that Jason brought to Greece,
From C^^ch^s I Will was not so fine a fleece,
As each of these upon their backs did bring,
To fleede and cloth in Earth the greatest King.
He brings them freely with a willing heart,
Even glad with them and all the rest to part,
And lays them down before the God of might,
Both in his fathers and his brothers sight,
Offering them up a sacrifice most pure,
Unspotted clean his sinful soul to cure,
Implores the eternal praying ever still,
For to be pleased thus to accept his will,
As a mere figure and a ( sacred) Tipe,
Of that dear Lamb whose blood away shall wipe,
The scarlet sins that in the Earth shall flow,
With Isop wash, cleanse them as white as Snow.
The Prayers, speeches, heavenly grateful words,
The inward heart and meaning all accords,
The ascending savor, sweet perfuming scent,
With that pure Lamb which in the same is meant:
Climes up the Air and mounts to God above,
An Offering free, (accepted) full of Love,
Which thing to show that he was partly pleaz'd,
His anger past, and all his wrath appeaz'd,
Just at that instant down from Heaven did shine,
A burning fire and sacred light (divine)
Which in their sight conuey'd the Sacrisice,
Of from the Earth, up to the lofty skies,
"When presently a voice was downward cast,
"This I accept for thine offenses past.
Caine more for show then either Love or zeal,
To God, Religion or his own souls weal,
Stands by beholding of the sacred light,
And voice (divine) down from the Prince of might,
Expecting that his formal sacrifice,
Stuffed with all Guile, Hippocrisie and Lies,
Ambition, Pride, base Covetousness accursed,
Yet thought his gift should he accepted first,
As coming from the eldest first borne Peer,
The Son and Heir, whom Adam loved dear.


Medusa (damned) in foul black ugly clothes,
That all the world most deadly hates and loathes,
Swollen (like a Toade) her looks cast down to hell,
Where none but fiends, and hateful monsters dwell,
Whose cursed hair about her shoulders falls,
Powdered with Serpents full of poisoned Galls,
Hissing and crawling round about her head,
Hatched by a Viper in her womb that bred,
Rends up the Earth ascends like a Ghost,
Conueyes her self into the promised coast,
By Paradise where Caine was sacrificing,
Some of his corn his double heart disguising,
Watches the Time when as she thought most best,
And winds her close in his dissembling breast.
No sooner she was in his heart acquainted,
But his best blood was with her venom tainted,
His veins swollen up and all his body puffed,
His Head, Heart, Lungs (infectuously) were stuffed,
With Envy, Malice, Wrath and deadly Rage,
Nothing could now his stomach fell assuage,
Finding no ease, his countenance falls down,
His cankred mind discerned by his frown,
Now Father, Mother, Brother, none he brooks,
That Heaven it self takes notice of his looks.
Since first the light from darkness was discovered,
Or that the Clouds within the Air have houered,
The Heavens and Earth, the Sea and all begun,
And Phaeton his endless Race has run,
About the World in twice twelve hours right,
Or silver Cinthia showed her pale faced light,
Never was seen a more delightful day,
The glittring Sun in burnish't bright array,
Nor Heaven (it self) more pleasing ever smil'de,
Then when the brothers on Loves Alter pilde,
The Sacrifice before their Fathers face,
To God above within that holy place.
But when Medusa from Hells deepest vaults,
Began but once to spy man's secret faults,
And from her Den in dark Oblivion pent,
The bowels of her Mother Earth had rent,
To come aloft into the open Air,
With her foul breath, infectious poisoned hair,
And Rags (most base) as late before I told,
To seat her self in Caines securest hold.
Then Heaven and Earth, and all began to change,
The winged clouds about this Ball to range,
The burning lamps within the firmament,
Seemed for to wink as if their oil were spent,
The glorious Sun to hide his glistring face,
Ashamed of Envy in a sacred place:
And all at once most fearfully to lowre,
To threaten tempests or some sudden shower,
When instantly on Caines dissembling head,
A sable cloud from all the rest out shed,
Began to stand himself and all just under,
Hearing this voice out from a dreadful thunder.
"False Hippocrite, how can thou simulize,
"Before my face thy actions foul disguize, Genesis 4. 6. 7.

"To think that I which all the World adorn,
"Would thus be fed with riffe raffe of thy Corn,
"Or yet in blood to satiate my self,
"To live as thou by base and Earthly pelf,
"And not conceive that Holy thing is meant,
"Within the same which gives me full content?
"Why is thy Soul thus pestred with a sore,
"Ranckled, bespaked, like a rotten core, Simile.

"Thy conscience, deeds, false envious mind so bad,
"Thy looks cast down, and countenance so sad?
"Do thou not know that if thy heart be right,
"Thy actions good and pleasing in my sight,
"That thou shall be accepted best and more,
"That other wise sin lies at thy door?
"Think on my Words, halt not within my sight,
"I am that God which brings the Truth to light
"Amend thy life, at cursed Envy hiss,
" Repent thy self of what is done amiss,
"Let her not once be harbourd in thy breast,
"Nor in thy Heart her banefull poison rest,
"Redeem the Time, behold the lofty skies,
"Where Love and Mercy for offenses lies.
"One comfort more then thou deseru'st I give,
"Thy Brother yet shall at thy service live:
"Thou like a Lord shall overrule him still,
"And his desire according to thy will,
"Shall subject be, devoted ever stand,
"To run and go with (Joy) at thy command,
"But yet take heed, do not too high aspire,
"Go (sin no more) and add no coals to fire. Caveat.

The Heavenly voice down from the Clouds descending,
In these sad words sweetly divinely ending,
The day cleared up, and Sol began again,
To show his face upon the sacred Plain:
The Air all still, the lofty Winds quight calm,
Adam and Abell singing of a Psalm;
Caines sacrifize alone upon the ground,
Untouched at all still to their view they found,
Whereat (with Joy) to see the God of power,
To smile on one, and on the other lowre:
To veil his face unto their sinful sight,
Hearing his voice out from the dradfull light,
Home they depart in wonderment and peace,
Minding a while from further work to cease*
Whilst Caine alone retireth discontent,
Forsakes his God, and to the field he went,
His envious mind still runs on his disgrace, First Apostasy in Caine.

False to be found before his fathers face,
All working Power, deep searcher of the Reins,
Discerner of the in ward heart and Veins,
What secret Art can from thy sight be hid?
Thine Eye still saw what either Brother did,
How just art thou and full of mercies sweet,
The eyes of all are cast down at thy feet;
The greatest men and Monarchs of the earth,
The first borne seed, and noblest in their birth,
The proud Commanders in their formal coats,
The homebred Sheep thou do divide from Goats:
The eldest Brother, youngest in thy sight,
Are both alike, so that their hearts be right,
No outward form can make thee partialize,
Thou look upon the inward sacrifize,
Beholding Habels willing gtatefull gift,
Which thou art pleased up to the Clouds to lift;
When Caine false hearted, though he was first borne,
Him thou forsakst, leaving his Gift forlorn.
O woeful, fearful, is the dangerous state,
Of every man so ouerswolne with Hate,
Whom God by this cannot to good convert,
But gives quight over to a storry Heart,
Apostasy making a man to quake,
God, Father, friends all utterly forsake:
Prince, Country, Kingdom, all the Land in hope,
To run perhaps unto the Turk or Pope,
In discontent, for conscience, gain or pelf,
To sell their souls unto the Devil himself*
Some to their shame have had small cause to boast, Mat. 12. 31. Luke 12. 9.
10. Mar. 3. 29. Pro. 26. 11.

Of this foul sin against the Holy Ghost,
Accursed and damned of all that ever fell,
But few I know, but quick went down to hell,
Amongst the Devils in everlasting pains,
Laden with Boults of heavy burning chains;
Whilst those returned like to a Dog that gurnes, Simile.

That back again unto his vomit turns,
Or beastly Sow bemir'd in dirty tilth, simile.

Clear water shuns to scour away her filth,
But in a ditch with some unsavory Bore,
She lays her down far worse then ere before.
How can we think or well conceive in heart,
That those which once do from their country start,
And shall distaste the grounds wherein at first,
With Pastors pure they were trained up and nursed, Heb. 6 4, 5, 6.

That do renounce their Faith and every thing,
Their Oath Alegiance to the State and King,
And in this sin without Repentance fall?
How of that man can there be hope at all,
When as his case what show so ere he gain,
Is but the same with cursed envious Caine?
I must confess Repentance is a work, Repentance

Of Gods great love, which caunot lie and lurk,
Within the Heart, but that it forth must shine,
Like to a Light upon a Hill divine, Simile.

Kindled by faith, a conscience clean and pure,
That cannot once her former ways endure;
But by good works does blaze the same abroad,
Without all Guile, Hipocricy or Fraud,
Full of true Love, avoiding babbling suites,
A Tree that is good is ever knownebi'th fruits. Mat. 12. 33

But yet for him that from the Church is sold,
And in his Heart is neither hot nor cold, Revel. 3. 16.

With God and Mammon can with both indent,
Whose mind on mischief is full set and bent,
That what he can into his hands does get,
And all is Fish which comes to his net.
That does forsake his own Religion first,
The same I mean wherein he has bin nursed,
Inconstantly another shall embrace,
What ere he think he is in woeful case.
Well may one judge his conscience may be pang'd,
For that one thing how many have bin hanged:
And he again that in his ripest years,
Forsakes the same, as plain by Caine appears,
And both of them he has distasted quite,
May be in's Age demned Pagan right.
Besides examples in the Scriptures pure,
Which aye shall last, eternally endure,
Of cursed Athiests in their bitter gall,
That Julian like from God and Christ did fall,
The Monster vile within the Gospel cursed,
Which hanged himself, when all his bowels burst:
And diverse others tedious here to name,
Whose ends have showed just judgments to their shame: Act* 1. 14.

Has not Experience in this Age of ours,
Branded Apostates of the heavenly powers,
With fearful Vengeance woeful to behold,
Upon the earth for being (impious) bold:
As amongst many, infinite to write,
But one near us in stead of all I Will cite,
Whose scandal foul about the world is blown,
His Story rife amongst us all well known.
Faustus by name, by birth a German bred, The story of D. Faustus.

Whose minor years were with Religion fed,
In liberal Arts his mind but young did wade,
A school Divine and Doctor after made,
Traind up as well as ever man could be,
In learnings Lore, and sweet Divinity:
So was this Caine, the like was Judas fell,
All three no doubt with damned devils in hell.
The foremost two with bolld their hands defilde,
But this a man, which never hurt a child.
How with a knife made he his veins to bleed,
Then with his blood to write the devil a deed,
Conuaying Soul and Body by the same,
To be tormented in eternal flame,
Never repenting till it was too late,
Damned, woeful, fearful, in a desperate state:
Cursing the hour of his untimely birth,
By God for saken, taken from the Earth,
With exclamations, hideous fearful cries,
Sprites, Ghosts, and devils about the house there flies:
His brains thrasht out on every post and wall,
Sad spectacle, dire, mournful, fearful fall,
When soul, life, learning, all at once he lost,
A woeful purchase to his painful cost:
His bowels mangled carrion like (and tore)
Imbrude in filth, and stinking poisoned gore:
Next day tormented in this case, was found
(By devils) cast out upon a dunghill ground.
When once the Prince of darkness in the deep,
By power divine, enjoined was to keep,
And that the Serpent hateful and accursed,
Was in the center of the Earth down thrust:
Their ugly spawne then hacht the vilest Elfe
That ever crawld, besides the devil himself,
Foul furious Envy, as but late I told,
With viperous snakes about her head all rold:
And she again outfrom their banefull breath,
Has brought an Impe like ghastly fearful Death*
Limb of the devil still worse then all the rest,
Misshapen, vile, base Antichristian beast,
Monster of Nature, false in every part,
Apostacy with crablike crawling heart: simile.

Contagious, fell, most dangerous in her tongue,
From whom all treasons in this world first sprung:
The hateful deeds which some have pacht together,
Under Religion, may be brought all hither;
The secret actions infinite that lurk,
Which in man's heart and gall together work:
The poysonings, murders, every cursed rape,
For whom this Earth does yawne her mouth, and gape,
Seeking to swallow, in her Jaws deuowre
Within the midst of her dark womb, to power
The actors damned under obliuions night,
Not fit to breath, or to behold heavens light:
Base scum and dregs, the works of darkness first,
Proceeding from Apostacy at first.
But what make I with damned Atheists vile,
My sacred verse with Antechrist defile,
To rowze from hell tormented hideous sprites,
Foul ghastly Ghosts which all the world afrights:
That my dear Muse should thus by friends be crossed*
From heaven of late within the deep be tossed.
Hels vgliest Monster to unmask, and lay
All open thus, falling within my way,
That little taste to every Palate yields.
And all this while Caine wanders in the fields
With passions working in his hateful breast,
Sad, discontent, may in his face be guest:
Revenge all bloody, with a poisoned dart, Revenge.

Starts up from hell, enters within his heart:
Base cursed Fury hacht by Envy first*
Apostacy this damned heil hound nursed:
The masked train that all her life befriend her,
Are Guile, Deceit, and Falsehood to attend her.
This monster, Caine close in his breast did hide,
With all the rest of that damned rout beside:
And home returns as if he had forgot,
The discontent of his discovered blot:
The blurre late made in his Religious cote,
As out of mind he seems not now to note,
But full of form and outward complement,
As if his mind was all to goodness bent;
With much respect unto his father first,
And duty showed to her his body nursed:
Upon his brother (fawningly) he looks,
And learns him then to make the shepherd hooks,
To catch a sheep running with all her speed,
And he again helps him his land to weed.
Thus Caine continues for a certain space,
Before his fathers and his mothers face,
In outward guise, formality and speech,
As if his heart had had no further reach:
Until that Act* foul barbarous deed befell,
Which makes me mute, almost afraid to tell:
But that from God the same at first I heard,
Described plain in his drad sacred Word. Genesis 4. 3.

Caine but few nights in this bad meaning slept,
For Fire in Flax can but a while be kept:
And not long after as may well be guest,
When father, friends, and all suspected least,
Even then he takes Occasion by her lock,
Singles forth Habel from his harmless flock,
With flattring words trains him along to walk,
The fragrant fields, holds him on still with talk,
Until at last ( Inhumane wretch) unkind,
Base Villain cursed he staid a while behind,
To find a Leauer that he late had laid,
Within the corn which wondrous heavy waid.


This on his shoulders up from thence he takes,
His fatal way to his dear brother makes,
Who all this while lay in a slumber sweet,
Upon the grass resting his weary feet,
Thinking no hurt, full of all Peace and Love,
His mind in Heaven walking with God abouc;
Which when the Caitife (varletvile) had spide,
No longer then he could his Envy hide,
But with a blow on Habels head down right,
With both his hands, and all his maine and might,
The Leauer laid him in that woeful case,
That Blood and Brains flew round about the place:
And least his deed might afterward be found,
He takes his body, rakes it up in the ground.
Damned Miscreant, unworthy that thine eyes,
Should once behold the cleerenesse of the skies,
What have thou done unto thy brother dear?
That thou should thus about the corn fields leere,
And watch a time to work that fearful fact,
For which twere pity but thy neck were cracked.
What art now the better to have seen,
His crimson blood bedew'e the ground all green,
His Body mangled, Skull to pieces beat?
How can thou ( Vengeance) from the Heavens defeat?
Do thou not see that all begins to lowre,
The Clouds to wrack, upon thy head to power
Down sulphery flames of hot consuming fires,
The Sun for shame his glorious face retires;
All to grow dark, the singing birds to weep,
To see man brought thus to his latest sleep,
The Furies loose the Devils from Hell to roll,
Above the Earth gaping for this thy Soul?
How can thou think to hide thy cursed deed,
When as the Fowls within the Air which breed,
The creatures all presented to thy sight,
Will murders show and bring the truth to light. Nemesis the Goddess of
Revenge. Acts 28. 4.

Great Nemesis the Lady of the skies,
Without a Mask before her nimble eyes,
On Pegasus the Horse of Fame does ride,
With Justice Sword close to her valliant side,
Scowres through the Air just at that instant time,
When as the steame of Habels blood did clime,
Up to the Heavens like to a smoke ascending, simile.

The Clouds in sunder all betearing, rending,
Casts down her looks upon his crimson blood,
Beholds the gore like to a streaming flood:
No longer stays but mounteth up the Throne, Simile.

Of God above making a fearful moan,
Tells all the cause discovers this thy deed,
Desires just Judgment on thy self and seed,
Imploreth all the sacred powers divine,
That they would now but with her self combine,
And grant her leave to take Revenge on this,
So foul a murder as thy fact now is.
Behold a voice down from the God of might,
Revenger of the poor man's cause and right, Romans 12. 19.

That seldom sleeps but in the Heavens he hears,
The wrongs, oppressions, mournful cries and tears,
Of Innocents by greatness ouersway'd,
By Guile and Treason oftentimes betrayed,
Brought to their ends by the malicious guilt,
Of Envious men that others blood have spilt,
Wasted their State, consumed their lands and life,
Swallowed their goods, contending still in strife.
The sacred voice out from a thunderclap,
Of dradfull lightnings at that hard mishap,
Thus spoke to Caine hard by that fat all place,
Where Habels blood lay covered in that case,
With clods and moulds as even but late I told,
By that vile Wretch over his body rold,
"Come tell me Caine the thing I shall demand,
"Seek not to hunt, on no excuses stand,
"Halt not before me as of late thou did,
"When a false heart under thy coat thou hidst,
"What made thou here thus wandering all alone,
"Where is thy brother, whither is he gone?
"What is become of Habel* loved thee dear,
"That next thy Parents was to thee more near,
"Then all the World, and all that therein moved,
"Whose faithful mind thy presence ever loved.
The graceless Villain impudently bold,
As if he scorned of God to be controld,
Or ask't a question from that heavenly lip,
This answer straight out of his mouth let slip:
I cannot tell, for what have I to do,
To take account of Habell yea or no,
Or in his presence to be tide to stay,
Within the fields as heretofore to play,
It Is like enough if that the Sun had shined,
About the foulds you might him chance to find,
It may be that he is feeding of his sheep,
Upon the downs or fallen fast asleep,
Or else you may go look a little deeper,
How can I tell, am I my brothers keeper,
"Blasphemous Wretch, what have thou done, quoth God,
"Art not afraid of my revenging Rod,
"But thus to spill thy dearest brothers blood,
"Upon the ground in thy inhumane mood?
"Why ( Varlet) have thou to my face belide,
"How can thou think thy fact from me to hide,
"When as the blood of this thy Brother shed,
"For Vengeance just upon thy murdering head?
"Cryde from the Earth making afearefull moan,
"With pitteous shreeks ascended up my throne,
"That down I came from heaven above with speed,
To give thee Judgment for thy damned deed.
"Cursed therefore art thou in thy chiefest worth,
"Cursed from the heavens, and cursed from all the Earth,
"That kindness showed her mouth has opened wide,
"Within her womb thy brothers blood to hide,
"Hereafter now when thou the ground shall till,
"It shall not yield not yet thy barnes shall fill:
"With that increase which heretofore it gave,
"To thy content that thou desirdst to have.
"A vacabond upon the spacious face
"Of all the earth, Roming from place to place
"With every Rascal thou shall now cologue,
"Base Runnagate, no better then* a Rogue,
"Thy days shall waste, thy glass shall hourly run,
"Until the thread of this thy life be spun,
" Content with peace, quiet, thou shall have never:
"A Scared conscience shall torment thee ever:
"And in the end even in thy fearful sight,
"Hels Furies cursed before thy face shall light,
"The damned devils with all their hideous rout,
"Shall wind thee in, hemming thy Soul about,
"Attending on thee till thine eyes be shut,
"And so devour thee in their greedy gut.
The sturdy villain with these last words stroke,
In woeful fear his heart is welnigh broke,
Despairing quite of any help at all,
To this sad speech does (most profanely) fall.
O who shall rid me from these torments fell,
Hacht in the Bowels of the deepest Hell,
Nurc't in my breast, harbourde within my heart,
That now I feel much to my pain and smart,
The Furies (damned) about my head I hear,
My punishment is more then I can bear.
A vacabond I am cast out this day,
Both from the earth, and from thy face for aye,
I shall be hid from all the world beside,
Wretch that I am, which know not where to bide:
My Father, friends, will ever after hate
The foul disaster of my envious fate,
And whosoever finds me one or other,
Will murder me, as I have done my brother.
The voice ( Divine) left him not thus alone
In Desperation, making of his moan;
But from the Clouds, yet once again it spoke,
Perchance for Habel, or his Fathers sake:
Go where thou will, for he that dares to lay
Revenging hands upon thy head, for aye,
Upon the earth, to murder, slay or kill,
Which in his wrath shall seek thy blood to spill,
That damned wreth both in his goods and fame,
In life and death, and all that thou can name;
Even in his lands, his basket and his store:
That man (I say) I Will punish seven times more.
Because thou shall not need that thing to fear,
My badge ( divine) for ever thou shall wear,
A fearful Sign, which whosoere shall eye
But in thy face, my dradfull Judgments spy,
Shall see and know that I have marked thy hide,
And branded thee from all the world beside.
Great (powerful God) Creator of this Ball,
The heavens and earth the firmaments and all,
How good art thou, in every action just?
Thou Habels blood beholdest in the dust;
Come down below, examinst first the deed,
To Judgment then thou do at large proceed;
And lest the same might chance neglected be,
Thou do thy self the execution see:
Searing Cains conscience, body, heart and liver
And marking him (as now I told) for ever.
Yet ( holy Father) let us know the pith,
The Badge and Sign that thou did brand him with.
Some men there be which think the mark of Caine,
Was that foul, horrid* irksome, fearful pain,
Scabd Leprosy, or woeful falling Evil,
As if possessed with some spirit or Devil:
Or shiuering, shaking of his sturdy joints,
That every way his body reels and points,
Fears, quauers, trembles in that dradfull case,
As most of us have seen before our face:
Or some such thing apparent to each eye,
That every man may his foul fact espy,
Yet what it was, who sound this vaste abbisse,
When Reason blind leads every man amiss.
It Is true, the* world in every States Dominion,
Is now of this, and then of that opinion;
For none alive (which on the Earth do well)*
Can show what 'twas, or yet for certain tell,
But by conjecture (likelyest) to be guest,
The ground and sum of all men's Judgments best,
Reueald by study in the Arts divine,
To all the Sisters, learned Muses nine,
That Cains most fearful punishment and mark,
For raking up his brother in the dark*
Was that his skin was all to blackensse turned,
Like to a Coal within the fire half burnd. simile.

Ah cursed Caine the scourge of all thy Race,
Now thou have got a black and murdring face,
For God above (in Justice) has ordaind,
Thy offspring all should to this day be staynd,
Unto the grief and terror of their Souls.
For laying Habel in could dusty mouldes:
No other cause the world could ever tell,
To make them look as if they came from hell,
Amongst the devils at every step to start,
The fatal place where thou (vile wretch) now art.
Some have alleged out of their brains and wit, Alex Prob. Celius Rhod.

The Sun himself to be the cause of it,
That in the hot and torrid burning Zone,
Under the line there Phaeton alone
Must drive his Cart and teame a little hire,
Or else again the world would be on fire,
The heat extreme their bodies does inflame,
Their flesh it parches, and their stomachs tame,
Their blood it dries, their humors all adust,
As if their skin were ouergrowne with rust:
If this be true, how is it that there be
In Africa, America, to see
Under the line both people white and fair,
As many men that now in Europe are,
There borne and bred by courteous Natures laws,
A pregnant Sign that cannot be cause.
Again, the Sun with labor great and pain,
If that the line but once he does attain,
Though to the Earth he seems somewhat nigher,
Yet in his Sphere he mounted far more higher,
More temperate there, the people live and well,
Then do the men under the Tropicks dwell,
And twice a year he uses there to burn,
When once a year (in the Tropicks) serves his turn.
And other men have other Reasons found,
To show the cause which to like purpose sound:
There be that say, the dryness of the Soil,
May be the cause that does their bodies foil,
To make them look worse then a Colliers Elfe, simile.

Much like the Devil and cursed Cuine himself,
From top to toe, from head unto the foot,
As if* with grease they were besmeard and soote.
Unto such men I would but know and try,
If the Libian deserts be not far more dry,
Whose people parch't, the very Sun does roast,
Yet are they white or tawny at the most,
The want of water with the Sun and Sand,
May be the cause that they so much are tand:
But yet in Negro land the people have,
Of water store in every ditch and Cave:
For Niger great, even from his very source,
Just through the midst has ever kept his course,
And all the land on every side and round,
Even like to Nilus ouerflowes the ground,
The dryness of their Reason we may wave,
Because it is known they water plenty have.
Those that ascribe it proper to the Earth,
And see us there even from our very birth,
How we and they are borne within one place,
And we are white, and they are black and base,
May sit them down and well may take a pause,
To think with us that cannot be the cause.
And some there be which to this day affirm,
That it is the blackness of the Parents sperme,
To be the cause and for a ground it take,
But how came they so close a search to make?
If it be black, which some men have denide,
How came it so Imprinted on their hide,
That in their youth just in their prime and bud,
Then is their skin as red as any blood*
And in their age when perished is their sight,
From top to toe they are all yellow quight,
And if you try to throw one in a ditch,
To wash him white, he will be as black as pitch.
Others there be above the clouds do fly,
To search the secrets of their destiny,
Whose wits and learning sure must wander far,
To a Constellation or some fixed Star,
I would the cause they would unto us teach,
And not to fly to far above our reach,
Until which time I shall be well content,
To think it was Gods righteous punishment,
On cursed Caine, and all his offspring lewd,
For doing that which I before have showed.
I must confess upon the upper face,
Of this wide Ball almost in every place,
Variety we see in strange attire,
Complexion, Color, Nature and Desire,
Shape, gesture, face, the belly, limbs and back,
But none more differ then the white from black,
The Indian borne there where the Sun does rise,
Is palefast ( Ashey) with red flaming eyes,
The American which we but late have seen,
Is Olive colored of a sad french green,
The Libian dusky in his parched skin,
The More all tawny both without and in,
The Southern man, a black deformed Elfe,
The Northern white like unto God himself:
And thus we see, even still upon the earth,
God shows his works both in our lives and birth.
The fatal place where Habels blood washed, Esaias. 7. 8.

Is called Damascus, Arams chiefest head,
Iem of the Earth, the eye of all the East,
Pearl of the World, where Jupiter did rest,
In Siria Land, the goodliest City seen,
And sister to ( Jerusalem) the Queen, Eze. 23. 4

Sweet Parragon, a royal Empress borne,
That all the World with glory did adorn,
Until the second Habels dearest blood,
Ran down thy streets like to a crimson flood, Simile. Titus in Iosep. and
Adri. Aelius.

Then was thy fields with blood and slaughter did,
And made the Stage to all the World beside,
Whereon fierce Tyrants in their barbarous hearts,
With murdring minds have acted all their parts.
So has Damascus seldom been at rest,
Whose fatal name bewrayes her bloody breast,
When Benhadad, Hazael, Rezin, fierce, 2. King 16 9.

The scarlet sinews of her Heart did pierce,
There were the Titans murdered by the Blade,
Of Jupiter, that all their army laid,
In such a sleep as till the Earth be shook,
By power divine will never more be wak't,
Great Babylon, the Tyrant of the East,
The Sarazens and Egypt in her pierst,
Brave Pompey wan it in sad mournful sort,
And Tamberlaine, he made them all amort;
Jerusalem, which loved her dearly well,
Even in her streets has tol'd her passing Bell.
Haalon, the Tartar in his lowering war, Chapter Adricom. Theatrum ^ter sanct.

Within her bowels made a fearful skarre:
The Persian, Grecian, Christian, Roman last,
The cruel Turks have all their fortunes cast,
And filled the Air with pitteous shreikes and groans,
Piling up heaps of dead men's Skuls and bones,
As if the place where Habels blood was laid,
The burial ground of all the World were made.
Even as the blood of dear Adonis slain, Simile.

By cruel Mars, fair Venus love to gain,
Stained all the ground, bedyde the crimson grave,
That powers divine willing his worth to save,
From dark Obliuions black forgetful night;
Which smothers all in silence from the light,
With Nature joined to bring forth such a sign,
As shall for ever to all Ages shine,
In memory of that detested fact,
Which murdering Mars did in his fury act:
Upon the body of that lovely youth,
Though some perhaps will hardly think it truth,
But rarher by the ancient Poets feigned,
Yet they I say have to this day ordained,
That from the blood of dear Adonis young,
The Safron* flowers of all the Earth first sprung*
So may I say that from the scarlet blood
Of Habel shed, like to* a crimson flood
Within the midst of rich Damasco plains,
When Caine unkindly pasht out all his brains.
It pleased God to his immortal Fame,
That still the Soil should testify the same
With fragrant flowers, adorning all the ground,
As no where else in all the world is found:
That some have thought by this vile deed accursed,
The Damask Rose sprang from his grave at first.
Ah dearest Muse, here in this world of woes,
Among Tigres fell, and cruel barbarous foes,
Prodigeous men, ( Inhumain) in their minds,
Devouring Beasts that all to powlder grinds
The Infants face, the Innocent to hurt,
The Lamb to tear, and throw him in the dirt.
How blessed are we, which have such wholesome laws,
To keep us safe out from the murdring paws
Of rancorous men, that in their deadly rage
Would (else no doubt) straight shorten all our age,
By macerating blows to wound and brain,
And spill our blood, as did that damned Caine.
But yet we cannot say, that we live free
From as foul sins, and hateful treachery:
Now Murders, Treasons, envious deeds begun,
Must close be kept, and privately be done.
We diue to Hell and sound the deepest pits,
Ransacke the Graves, and use our utmost wits
To find a Devil, or some small sugared Gall*
To witch a friend, or poison him withal:
Or else perchance, if we do hap to fail*
As some there be, will not set all to sale*
Yet that which curbes them from this damned use,
I mean the Law, how do they it abuse,
Making the same the poor man's feet to tie,
The instrument of all their villainy?
How are some men by greatness over swayd,
Their Lives, Lands, Goods, and all they have betrayed:
The Foote-ball made, tossed up and down by foes,
Turmoyld and vexed, plunged in a world of woes,
Never at Peace, forced all their state to sell,
Unfortunate by envious men to dwell:
Clapped up in Prison, all their days to spend
In wrangling, Iangling, brangling to noe end.
There is the Law where Purses well are linde,
To wrong the weak to satisfy their mind,
The loving Wise, the self same course must run,
The Children small all utterly undone.
When once man's heart infected is with gall,
How does it then to all foul vices fall?
Baines the whole house, leaving them all forlone,
Much better far if they were never borne:
Then here to live (subjected) toyld with pain,
But near the door to some fell envious Caine*
Yet sacred Muse, even in this mortal life,
The Judgment, just of those delight in strife:
Thou often see upon their heads to fall,
Some break their necks off from their horse and all,
And some there be which wanting of their will,
Have sought themselves their own heart blood to spill,
With Poison strong hastened their way to death,
Or with a Rope strangled their cruel breath:
Used all ill means to make away their lives
To childrens grief and terror of their wives,
Rauing, inuoaking, all the Damned fiends,
That all the world takes notice of their ends.
Others there be that touched before their death,
With some remorse lie languishing in breath:
Out of this life cannot at all depart,
Till they have craved forgiveness from their heart,
To ease their soul their conscience over pang'd,
Have sent for those whom they before have wronged
Confessed the Truth desirde them all to pray
To God above for to be pleased to lay
No further torments, ( Judgments) full of fear,
Upon their backs then they can welnigh bear.
Those that run on their current with the tide,
And all their life in envious courses bide:
Dear Muse thou know their lowering day is near,
When pale faced death shall to their eyes appear.
Then shall the devil take them within his power,
With ghastly looks even at that dismal hour:
Tortring their souls in euerlastling woes,
Heavens just Reward for all damned envious foes.
Mean while the Joys that are laid up above,
For those delight in quiet Peace and Love,
Which have bin wronged with Patience much enurde
Earths stormy brunts have to their pain endurde,
That yet do live suffering the woeful smart,
Vexation, grief, trouble of mind and heart,
And to their end like Christian Martyrs bold,
Hold on their Race, as I before have told,
How is there in the Heavens above the line,
A sacred Crown of purest gold most fine,
Inlayd with Iems and orient Pearls of worth,
More richer far then all upon this Earth, Iam. 1. 12. Reu. 2. 10.

Preserved for those, and laid up safe in store,
When all theirfoes must stand without the door,
In endless pains with all the Devils of hell,
And they with God above the clouds shall dwell,
Possessing there this conquering crown of life,
Free from all care, vexation, trouble, strife*
To muster here upon a Sacred stage,
The Murders, Treasons, Plots in every age,
Injurious dealings, treacherous actions, base,
Sly cunning traps to grind the poor man's face,
Vexations, wrongs, fell viperous proiects vile,
As bad and worse then those which do defile,
Their foul black hands in Christian crimson blood,
Waste others State to do themselves no good:
The damned rout of hell spurd Furies cursed,
That from Caines fact took all beginning first,
Would tire my Muse, and weary all your ears,
Amaze your thoughts, and fill you full of fears:
With Wonder strike you as a man half dead,
And set your hair upright upon your head,
To see since first this world by God was framed,
The envious deeds not fitting to be named:
But Time diuider of each day from night,
Will all disclose and bring the Truth to light,
Successively shall lay them open all,
Just as Occasion in my way may fall.
Mean while (dear Muse) let us retire again,
To show the life of cursed envious Caine:
And tell what course after this deed he took,
How round about on every side his look
Was fearful gazing, least his fathers eye
Might glance that way, and so the fact espy,
And see Gods judgment on his branded skin,
His black foul face for this vile murdring sin.
Ashamed, and shameless barbarous wretch unkind,
From thence he goes, leaves Habel dead behind:
Steals out away, and pryes in every nooke,
For fear his fact should be bewraid by's look:
At length by chance as he was lingering late,
He finds his sister by his fathers gate,
Takes her away, even in the evening dark, simile.

As does a Kite a simple harmless Lark,
And when ( Alas) she could not well descrye
His foul black color by her clowded eye.
His speech she knew, which made her willing more
To leave her Jewels, kindred, and her store,
And go with him then all the rest beside:
She little thought his hands with blood were did. Simile.

All night they walked, talking of this and that,
She lovely fair, he like an ugly Bat
That shuns the light, is neither bird nor beast,
Of both partakes, (a monster) at the least:
Or like to those that in our days do hie,
From us to Rome, from thence again do fly,
And little care so they may have their will,
Men's Souls, their Lives, their State and all to spill,
As was the case of that damned murdring rout,
Which from Hels bowels brought their treasons out,
Until at last with wandering weary grown,
And want of sleep together both lay down,
Whilst he even then, lays open all his mind,
Tells her his love he minds with hers to bind,
That she shall be the Object of his eye,
His darling dear from her to never fly,
By means of which adulterous flattring wild,
Incestuously he gets her there with child.
But when Aurora, glory of the World,
Heavens candle bright about the Earth had purld,
And but began to show a burnisht face
Upon these two, in that polluted place:
From slumbring sleep his Sister sudden wakt,
Starts up and cries, most fearfully she quakt,
So foul a sight by her was never seen,
Thinking the devil in shape of Caine had been:
Upright she stands, her hair upon her head,
Rowzd in the light from her adulterous bed,
Feign would she run (wishing her self at home)
Cursing the Time when she from thence did come,
And glad would be no longer here to stay,
But that from thence she knew not well the way.
Like to a Lady in an evening dark, (...).

Walking alone within her pleasant Park,
Thinking to meet her loving husband dear,
Her father, brother, or some welcome Peer;
Is by a villain suddenly surprisde,
In shape, speech, gesture all of them disguisde:
Carried away, traynd on a long to walk,
Misdoubts no hurt in all his treacherous talk,
But freely spends the sable lowering night,
Her joys, toys, pleasures in her loves delight,
Until the morning of the day appears,
Draws wide heavens Curtain, all the skies it cleares,
And makes her see how she has bin misled,
By folly, guile, brought to an unknown bed:
Weeps, mourns, laments, teareth her Amber hayres,
Raues, frets, and grieves, as one distracted stares.
That once her body lovely chaste and pure,
Should now be staind thus by a wretch impure;
And that her corpse when Heavens bright Candle winkt,
Should be but found close to a Monster linkt.
So may we judge was this young Virgins case,
Traynd (as I told you) from that lovely place,
Where father, friends, acquaintance all she had,
To cast her fortunes on a Varlet bad:
Damned homicide, dame Natures vglyest mark,
To be betrayed thus trecherously i'thdarke:
The vnblowne Rose defended by the thorns,
Vermillion blush that both her cheeks adorns,
Chaste, modest thoughts to give the soul content,
When these shall be all each in sunder rent,
Deflowered, defaced, by treason cropped and staind,
To have i'th'end none but a Mungrell gained.
Thus in a maze astonished all the while,
Caine looks up, and on her face does smile,
Gently entreats, persuades her not to fear,
The Sun burnt color that his skin did bear:
Tells her his face was nothing else but tan'd,
With walking much about his new plowed land:
And that the color on his face which lay,
Would clean be washed and skowred all away.
She him believes, and so from thence they went,
Like Vagabonds without a pasport sent: Simile*

Roming about, until at last they found,
A pleasant, sweet, delitious, dainty ground,
Just to the East, hard to the lowering face
Of sacred Justice in that Orient place,
Far from their Friends, their Country, Church, and God,
To live with ease within the Land of Nod,
Here first they stayed, and to secure their state.
They built a house of timber, stones and slate,
Turfe; Mortar, Dirt, and every thing they find,
They pile up close to keep off showers and wind,
And at the length as if they were afraid,
That after wards their lives might be betrayed,
By savage beasts, in humane monsters feil,
Such as himself has hatched below in Hell,
Reuengefull Tyrants, murdering men and all,
About his house he builds a spacious Wall,
And in the same he lives for many years,
His conscience stuffed with horror, drad and fears,
At length his Wife brings forth her first borne child,
A bloody Elfe, deformed foul and wild,
Like to the Sire, so is his picture drawn, Simile.

Brought up to swear, cheat, cousen lie and fawn,
No God to know, his tongue to curse and fret,
With envious face, for like does like beget,
And he again his sister rude does take,
Makes choice of her to be his only make,
That she and he and all the rest beside,
Which in that place within the walls did bide:
The cursed spawne of Caines adulterous race,
Did in short time soouerswarme the place,
With multitudes of that incestuous rout.
Poligamy from this vile Race sprangout,
That in seven hundred twenty years and ten,
Their hateful stock grew to a world of men,
This was this Age that Caine did live some say, Genebrard ^x Rab. sol.

When then began his fatal lowering day,
For Justice always in man's life or death,
Will yet at length her flaming sword, vnsheath,
Lamech the fifth, from his own blood descended,
With one hard blow his vital life straight ended:
Just Judgment of the Highest ever still,
To make the blind to execute his will,
That though man runs unpunished all his days,
Yet in the end he pays him many ways,
And when the least of all his time he thinks,
Then is he caught, under Gods vengeance sinkes.
For as the Rabbyes of the Jews do tell,
This monster Caine about these parts did dwell,
And was the first that ever City built,
Led thereunto by his foul murdering guilt,
More to secure him in so strong a Wall,
And shun the curse then any thing at all,
Even where sin most of all the earth was bred,
He lays him down and makes that place his bed,
There wallowes, tumbles, spends his aged days,
In wicked works ten thousand kind of ways;
When at the last he for a beast was slain,
By Heavens just Act in treacherous Tubal-Caine,
Guiding the hand of Lamech being blind,
To murder Caine against his fathers mind,
And Tubal-caine had his just Guerdon paid,
For Lamech struck him that all dead he laid,
His bleeding corpse upon the cold green ground,
What they wrought others, they themselves have found.
The City Caine by Henocks name did call,
His eldest Son whom most he loved of all,
Some say the same by Libanus was framed,
But afterward by others ( Oenus named)
And some affirm the building Iesca leed,
Great Iebab Mauly were his only deed,
And Tehe, Celet, Cities six in number,
Were raiz'd by him with such a world of lumber,
As in our days those that behold the place,
May see their ruins in Caines woeful case.
You Cities all, how were you framed at first?
But in the sin of wicked Caine accursed,
Was not your Mortar tempered with the blood,
And slaughter vile of righteous Abel good?
Is not the Earth her bowels rent and torn,
Your walls to build and lofty towers adorn?
Great Thetis lap is all beslic't and cut,
To bring forth treasures in your wombs to put;
The lofty Ceders, Timber Trees of worth,
Are hack't down flat, and leuel'd with the earth,
Base gold and silver that man's mind appalls,
Where does it rust but in your cankred walls?
How are your streets with Paracides bepestred,
With noisome Air (contagious) fowly festred,
So banesull grown, that from you, all or some,
Hels Antechrist the Prince of Devils shall come.
So Babylon the tyrant of the earth, Dan. 7. 8.

And Rome Usurper since her Popish birth,
How were they built but in the crimson gore,
Of thrice ten millions of men's souls and more,
Nimrod the hunter of Gods fearful flock,
First raiz'd that Tower which seemed the heavens to mock
By tyranizing on the feeble weak,
As in my work heereafrer I shall speak,
And Romulus the monster of his age
How did he murder in his barbarous rage,
His brother Remus, in whose scarlet blood*
Rome first was built by Tybers treacherous flood,
And since the sincke of superstition made,
For every wretch within her walls to trade,
Idol of Nature sprang at first from hell,
As afterward I shall have cause to tell,
But what make we (deareMuse) within the walls,
Oftraiterous Towns and Cities full of braules,
Where nothing savors wholesome, sweet and fair,
But earthly bad to putrify the Air,
Let us retire into the country coats,
To hear Heavens birds to chirp ten thousand noates,
About the woods on every side along,
Sweet Nightingales to warble forth their song,
The Lennet, Lark, the Blackbird, Thrush and all,
How night and day their smooth sweet tunes do call,
Melodiously unto the God offame,
To sound forth praises to his glorions name,
And where our Grandsire Adam last was left,
When Caine his brother of his life bereft.
Whether the Soul of Habels body slain,
By the cursed hand of treacherous damned Caine,
His Genius spirit Angel, blood, or Saint,
Or God himself did Adam first acquaint,
With the sad news of this so vile a deed,
Or that suspicion in his breast might breed,
Abroad he walks, and finds the bleeding quarre,
Of Habell slain under a fatal star,
Weeps and laments* grieves to have lost his son,
Caine, Daughter, Brother all of them undone,
He loving Father piles a wondrous heap,
( Collossus like,) of massy stones not cheap, Simile.

And with much care his dying name to save,
Builds a huge Mount upon his crimson grave,
From thence as one distracted for the time,
With deep conceit of this so foul a crime,
Surcharged with sorrow, ouergrowne with grief,
He hates the place as Author of it chief,
And with his Wife and all his children left,
He bids adien unto the ground and wept,
Travels along like to a Pilgrim poor,
Or as a Hermit with small litlle store; Simile.

Till at the last, it was their chance to stay,
In Canaan, and there their bones to lay,
As in this rugged, ragged, rural verse,
I hope ere long ( divinely) to rehearse.
But sacred Muse, here we must stay awhile, seth borne.

And with Sethes birth the posting time beguile,
That sweet borne Babe of Heaven it self befriended,
From whom the Church is lineally descended,
Just as a hundred twenty years and ten,
Of Adams age into this world of men,
He was begat, Tipe of that promised Lamb,
To save the World, into the World first came,
Preaching Repentance all our lives to mend,
Whose Government shall never earthly end,
Until the Trumpet in the skies shall sound,
To summon souls from their dead sleep in the ground:
How did the Heavens even in his infant birth,
Rejoice and dance about the Ball in the earth,
Melodiously their sacred Organs went,
To see young Seth into the World thus sent,
In Minor years their fortunes on him showred,
And on his head their dearest blessings powered,
Enduing him with towardnes and wit,
That on his temples all the Arts did sit;
About his Brows the Laurel wreath have wound,
As the first man that ever letters found,
How did the Saints at this thy Fortune smile,
"True Isralite in whom there is no guile. Ioh. 1. 47.

Thy manly* days they were not ouersway'd, Genesis 4. 26. Chap. 5. 34.

With fond conceits but in Religion stayed,
Envy, Opression, Lust, and Rauine base,
Within thy heart could never find a place,
Nor yet the thought of any deed unkind,
Could once be found to harbor in thy mind,
But full of peace like to thy father dear,
Or God himself in all his works most clear; Simile.

So art thou blessed to bring forth such a Son,
From whom the Church successively must run,
True Picture of thy Body Mind and Thought,
Enoch the man to God himself that brought, Enoch borne.

Thee sacred flock which wandering almost lame,
And taught them first to call upon his Name,
By prayer, preaching, Heaven blessed dearest Muse,
Which on the Sabbath they did daily use.
Yet some do say the Church again did fall,
In this man's days to wicked vices all, Brough. Mart. Luther. Calvin*
Tremelius. Perecius upon Genesis 4. 26.

That Sethes great son, and all his future Race,
Did now begin ( dumb Idols) to embrace,
And that their rites and sacrifices slain,
Were all intended unto Charles his waine,
The Sun and Moon* the Stars about this border,
As blind Devotion led them out of order.
Yet Enoch dear, my Muse can hardly think,
Nor can it once within my Brains to sink,
But that the Plant from whence rose Christ his flock,
Did yield forth fruit according to the stock,
And that the line from whence the Church is sprung,
But that must be unspotted, chaste and young,
Clean, undefiled, pure in every part,
In Ages all according to the Heart:
Even in the time when Adam and Wife,
Lived both in peace, deuoid of care and strife,
And Seth their Son though all the rest were bad,
Yet he the knowledge of the Godhead had,
And taught it thee to leave unto thy seed,
By which thy soul did hourly on it feed:
Until the last of this thy Glass was run,
Then did thou dye and leftst it thy son,
And so from thence in every Age it past,
Till Noah's Arc was on the waters cast,
Successively from whence it after went,
Till Christ himself upon the Earth was sent,
And that the Cross (with crimson blood) was did,
To pay the sins of all the world beside;
With such a Ransom of eternal fame,
As evermore must always blaze his Name,
From whence the Church now in her latest night,
In many a place yet has her Candlelight.
Full ninty years thou liuedst at the least,
When Kenan was conceived in the breast, Kenan born^*

Of thy dear Spouse and thou wast all the while,
Quight out of hope, not seen at once to smile,
In disperation as a man for lorne,
Till thy first Babe into the World was borne,
Thy name bewraying of thy discontent,
When Kenan be to glad thy heart was sent,
And made thee Father of a thriuing son,
Whose actions all unto thy mind did run.
He at the age of threescore years and ten, Psalm. 90. 10, Mahalaieel. borne.

(In David's days, the dying age of men)
Did then beget great Mahalaleel young,
A sweet faced Imp with nimble pleasing tongue,
Whose whole delight was working ever still,
To praise the Lord and execute his will:
Whilst by examples void of envious guile,
By smooth sweet preaching in a goulden style,
And beating down Oppression, Pride and Hate,
The Churches eyes he did illuminate.
Just at the age of threscore years and five,
Adam and Eve yet being both alive,
Great* Mahalaleel son of Kenan past,
He ^ared brings into the world at last, Iared borne.

Whose whole delights were all to goodness bent,
As if that he was from the clouds down sent,
To cheer up Eve and Adam in their Caves,
And comfort them unto their happy graves.
He long time lives the chastest man of all,
Loves darts were thrown but at a brazen wall,
Until at length it sanke into his breast,
The Churches Line upon his Race should Rest.
Then does he pause, and unto marriage go,
Just at a hundred threescore years and two,
And in the strength of this his body high,
Begat a child which never lived to dye.
Enoch the seventh that ever yet was bred, Enoch borne. Genesis 6. 24.

From whom the Church does now derive her head,
But Enoch stay, I cannot but admire,
The chaste condition of thy reverent Sire,
To live so long within so prime an Age,
When every object as a pleasing Page,
Might ravish sense, allure the chastest eye,
With looks more clear then is the purest dye,
And when the Angels if the Book be true, Book of Enoch

Came down from Heaven their beauties all to view.
Great powerful God what can I think or speak,
When all my wits are for this point to weak,
But to conceive thy glorious Angels bright,
How they can be entangled with the sight,
And pleasing looks of this fond sinful sex,
Though framed as twere out of the Virgins wax.
Yet drawn (entiste) to every thing is ill,
Even as occasion works unto their will.
I know some think their weak opinions sound, Viues Eusebius. Lactan.

That in those days few women chaste were found,
But that Pride, Envy, Lust, Dissembling, Guile,
Did their white hands with all foul things defile,
And that the Devils with Lucifer which fell,
From Hell arose with woman kind to dwell:
By which their seed against (dame) Natures laws,
Prodigiously thus mixed was the cause,
To bring forth Monsters in that fearful case,
Huge Giants tall of Gog and Magogs Race, Eze. 38. 23. Revel. 20. 8.

Such as not now can any where be found,
For whom the world was shortly after drowned.
Others there be that think the Angels bright, Tertullian. Sarazens l. 3. 5

Which then stood pure before the most of might,
With twelve great Princes of their royal band,
Came down from Heaven, in lareds days did stand,
Upon the top of lofty Hermon Hill,
There cursed and vowed for to obtain their will,
Upon men's Daughters which their eyes had seen,
Sweet lovely fair, delightful, young and green,
And that the Mount from that time forth was named,
The Hill of Hermon as not once ashamed,
That their foul plot to this vile Hidra grown,
Should by the name still to this day be known.
Semixas great, which was their chiefest Prince, Book of Enoch Jude. 6. 9. 14.

Dissuaded first from this foul cursed offense,
Fearing the tortures of the Angels all,
Their sins and shame upon his head would fall,
Till by Arachiell and the rest all ten,
That in this place my Muse is loath to pen:
He gave consent, and so from thence all went,
Even as their minds on Hermon hill were bent,
But God above soon sends ( Michaell) down,
Who binds Semixa with a sacred frown, Reu. 12. 7. 8, 9.

Chains him in hell and all his of-scum Race,
Ties to the hills as Fairy Goblins base,
The rest and all the self same cup do taste,
Heavens four Archangels these foul fiends so waste,
That all Earths monsters sprung from hell at first,
Must by the flood be washed away and cursed.
A third opinion that our Age does yield,
In this large, goodly, ample, spacious field,
Amongst the Arabian, Christian, Turk and Jew,
Which sounds to reason (likelyest) to be true.
Is that Seths issue from the Church derived,
Though in the depth of learned Arts they diued,
And seemed Gods Sons (adopted) sweet of face,
Yet linck't themselves in Caines adulterous Race,
By which their Spawne from this vile mingle mangle,
Began with Pride (contentiously) to brangle,
With griping paws to satiate their fill,
The harmless child's poor weak man's state to spill:
Most barbarously to trample on the head
Of the chaste Virgin to deflowre her bed:
To feed on gore (inhumanly) to tare
Man's flesh in pieces, gnawe his bones all bare,
And tyranize, the great to wrong the less,
To act those things which all the world may guess.
Out from this Medly sprang those Giants first, Genesis 6. 4. 5. 12. 13.

Monsters of men that made the Earth accursed,
Base devilish minds with big aspiring looks,
When as a man his neighbor hardly brooks,
But sheds his blood squeeseth the flesh and gall,
Licks up the gore worse then a Canniball,
Nature (prodigious) in their mungrell birth,
Made them adord, yet demi Gods on earth:
Whilst fear restraind the weaker men in aw,
To Idolize against her sacred law,
They spend their days to tread the self same trace,
Or worse if may be in this barbarous case,
That in the end with Brazen cotes of maile,
They tempt the heavens and seek the clouds to scale,
To pull down God from his triumphant throne,
By their damned Pride and hellish power alone.
Thus whilst oppression ouerflowes the world,
The little men still by the greater hurld,
Their states consumed, their lands and lives all spoiled,
Their cause (though just) by greatness crossed and foiled,
Themselves by others (basely) bought and sold,
And hardly used as I before have told:
Adam he grieves at this accursed Race,
Eve she laments with discontented face,
Both prostrate fall before the God of power,
To take their souls and send them happy hour.
So dearest Muse here in this mortal life, The Author.

That swarms in troops of those delight in strife,
Which never rest till all my state be spent,
But at my Ruin all their aim is bent,
How could I wish that my last days were come,
Or that my foes were Cardinals of Rome,
Or that my Peace which (almost) cost the best,
Of Lands and Life, to live in quiet rest;
Were granted me, I cared not which of all,
But in my way would (fortunately) fall,
So should I rest, no living man annoy,
Or to the Heavens translate my soul with joy.
But why do I cast stones against the wind,
Thus to disclose the secrets of my mind,
To wail my woes, lay open all my grief,
My foes wish well as Authors of it chief,
And all this while no comfort yet I have,
But still fell Envy more and more does rave,
To wound my Soul with such inueterate hate,
As murders all to swallow up my State.
O pardon me, God may an Angel send,
To work my Peace, or else some welcome friend,
Convert my Foes, their Conscience touch with fears,
Or bring my Cause unto my Sovereigns ears.
Oh then how joyful shall that happy hour
Be to my Soul, more sweet then sweetest flower:
And glad me more then if I ( treasures) found,
The greatest Riches on this Earthly ground:
My future life shall warble ( sacred) lays,
To sound my God, and then my Sovereigns praise.
But Adam (yet according to thy mind)
Thou do Gods love and all his favors find,
Though in thy youth thou wastvntimely croft,
When Paradise was by thy folly lost.
Thy first borne sons before thine eyes both slain,
Thy daughter stole, thy days to end in pain:
And worst of all, that these vile Monsters base
Should but descend and come from this thy Race:
That thou should live but to behold the sins,
The wrongs, Oppressions, in the and begins,
The Horrors, Griefs, Vexations howrely fall
Upon the heads of this thy of spring all:
And last, these Giants heavens blew veil to rend*
To tread in blood without all hope to mend,
Made thee desire that thou thy wish mighst have,
To come (in Peace) to this thy welcome Grave.
God hears thy cry, and sends his Angels bright,
Clad in white garments of heavens sacred light,
Attired like Nymphs of chaste Dianaes train,
With glistring wings a Crown of life to gain,
All to be spangled in rich costly Iems,
From the crowns top, unto their skirts and hems,
With Laurels wreathd close to their Temples chaste:
And Trumpets dangling by each lovely waste
These all came down thy sorrows to aswage,
In thine nine hundredth thirty years of Age,
To guard the souls both of thy self and wife
From this worlds care, vexation, grief and strife:
Of from the earth, up to the lofty skies,
When they have cheerd and clozd up both thine eyes.
Then all their Trumpets in the air does sound,
From Heavens blew wall down to the lowest ground,
Melodiously about the clouds resounding,
The hills and dales (with Echo) all rebounding,
Till at the last they brought both safe and sure,
Two welcome souls into Gods presence pure.
Seth yet suruiues, grieves for his parents loss,
Mourns, weeps, laments, at this sad heavy cross:
So he conceiues the Love of two such friends,
From this worlds point, unto hervtmost ends:
On every side of all the Earth and Round,
Can hardly well be parareld and found.
He sheds salt tears, down from his cheeks distilling,
Plaining his woes, showing himself unwilling
To part with both, stoops down (often times) and kisses
Their dead pale lips, and from his soul he wishes
That his lives blood (dear tender hearted Seth)
Had gone before, and but excusd their death.
His friends (come in) and brothers, sisters all,
Some cheer him up, others to weeping fall;
Even as we see the case (often times) our own,
The loss of friends to cast our courage down,
Amate our minds, and makes us veil our face,
Knowing that we must tread the self same trace.
Then up they take their withered bodies dead,
Imbalme them both, and wrap them close in lead
But first with Nitre Orient spices meet,
And Mummia, Cedar, fragrant, rich and sweet,
They all perfume, and dress their bodies cold,
Then wind them up as I (before) have told,
And lay them (seemly) on a Sable Hearse,
Sad heavenly sight, a bleeding heart to pierce,
To see the Parents of the total world
(Before their eyes) thus up to nothing curld.


Four of Seths brothers on their shoulders take,
The Sable trunk, and so from thence they make
Procession like, a solemn sacred way
To Caluerie, upon our Lady day:
For as the Church does evermore begin.
Since God heavens crown for all our sakes did win,
Upon that day to count the Christian year,
So some still say he did man's body rear,
Out of the dust, just at that instant hour,
The day and time in which himself did power
His holy Spirit in the Virgins womb,
And did therein the second Adam tomb*
And true it is that Adam (framed by God)
Lived years complete, no months nor days as od,
By which we gather that that very day,
They were both buried wrapped up cold in clay.
The Ceremonies and the sacred Rites,
The form and manner (all my Senses) cites;
Which Seth then used and holy Henoch pure,
Draws on my Muse (as with a golden lure)
To sing the same unto all future times,
In these rude, ragged, harsh, unpolished rimes::
But that my course another way must bend,
As one that trauells near his iourneys end,
And that my Muse may chance for to be cursed,
When this shall grow and swell beyond my first.
But yet one thing I may not ouer-slip,
And leave the Vales, up to the Mounts to skip:
For certain it is that evermore the Jew,
Has steadfast held his own opinion true,
And he affirms the likeliest place of all:
This goodly spacious, wide, delitious Ball,
Where Adams corpse was by his children laid,
Was not in the mount, as late before I said,
But in the sweet and dainty pleasant vale
Of Hebron plain, hemd in with such a Rale,
And lofty border of brave mounting Trees,
With fragrant Flowers to feed the honey Bees:
And all Heavens gifts upon this holy ground,
As search the world the like was never found.
Here afterward was Sarahs body laid,
Both Abraham and his son Isaacke stayed: Genesis 23. 12. 4. 7. 9. 16. 17. 18.
19. 20. Cha* 25. 9. 10. Cha. 35. 29. cha. 50. 13.

Rebecca, Jacob, Patriarchs and all
Were here interred (as in a Brazen wall)
And many a Jew wrapped up within this plain,
That till Doomes day shall never rise again.
This is the place that Abraham admired,
Which more then gold his very soul desired,
And made him purchase on his bended knee,
That with his Fathers all his seed might be.
And there remain until the trumpe shall sound,
Then rise together from that holy ground,
And so mount up the throane of God above,
And scale the Heavens upon the wings of Love.
But yet dear Muse amongst the dead men's graves,
With piles of sculs in hollow vaults and caves,
Ghast (fearful) sights, we must no longer stay,
But post with speed to some more pleasing way,
Though all the Earth be but the sink of sin,
For Adams Race to (tumble) wallowin:
Yet is it better every way beside,
With living men then with the dead to bide.
Show therefore now what afterward befell,
How most men lived, worse then the devils of hell:
In blood, oppression, feud and deadly hate,
Base cruelty to wast each others state,
Making no conscience of the eternal Law,
When Adam's dead, that kept yet some in awe:
The Father, Mother, Sister Friends and Brother,
Like treacherous Wolves devour up one the other,
Each* man cries out, the little ones as fishes,
Can scarcely live to serve the great men's dishes,
All sin abounds from poor to men of worth,
Like to a Stream which ouerflowes the Earth, Simile.

Or general deluge from great Neptunes hand,
That on a sudden ouerflowes the Land,
In such abundance with that powerful sway,
That nothing now can this maine current stay:
But Heavens great Maker of Earths total frame,
If he descend and but behold the same,
When least of all the World shall thereof dream,
Then may he Alter, turn their tide and stream.
It Is true as then they had no Law beside,
The Law of Nature in their Conscience did,
Graven in their hearts, and stamp't within their mind,
By him whose Image in our Souls we find,
The sin the less yet not to be excuz'd,
When God himself has in our Breasts infuz'd,
Both in our birth succeding infant youth,
His holy Spirit to lead us in all Truth.
But yet if God so sharp a Judgment took,
As shall be showed hereafter in this Book,
Upon these men the monsters of their time,
Whose haiuous sins up to the Clouds did clime,
What may we think of this last Age of ours:
Wherein we live not many days nor hours,
Yet we exceed the former Ages all,
And God to Judgment ready is to call,
The Glass near run man's dated Time expired,
Doomes fearful day when all things must befired,
Draws near at hand Earths candle light does blinke,
When all the World must under Justice sink;
And give account of every action past,
This Age of ours it cannot long time last.
For now Oppression ouerflowes the Earth,
Far more and worse then in her Infant birth,
Foul Cruelty, Extortion, Envious Pride,
Hypocrisy and smooth faced sins beside,
I etting and masking under formal Coats,
That hard it is to know the Sheep from Goats,
The Puritant which hates the name of Mammon, Act. 2. 44.

Is yet content to hold men's goods in common,
And all the rest in this my tedious task,
When Time shall serve I hope for to unmask,
Mean while Romes Wolf has entered in our I Will,
Devoured some by Craft, Dissembling, Guile,
Base Covetousness the monster of our Age,
How does she creep upon the Grave and Sage,
When Money swayes, and Charity is cold,
What is it not, but some will do for gold?
O Plague, O Poison, hatched in Hell below,
Thy banefull Breath over all the World does flow,
The Earth it self within her bowels pent,
Her proper womb is ripped for thee and rent,
The ( sacred) lap of Thetis cut and slic'st,
Above the clouds with Belzabub thou fly'st,
Thou gnawst the minds of holy men like Mice, Ier. 6. 13 Chap. 3. 10. 2. Pet.
2. 3. Eclus 40, 12.

Thy sight does sting worse then the Cockatrice,
How have thou spoyl'de corrupted in all Ages,
The purest minds of greatest Personages?
Whose Servants painted with foul leperous Kibes,
Now sell their souls and all they have for bribes.
Like cursed Gehazies base polluted paws, simile* 2. King. 5. 22. 26* 27.

Which wronged his God, and holy Masters laws,
And runs apace to catch into his hands,
A little gold to purchase Nabaoths lands,
Perchance to hang upon his gaudy back,
When Wife and Children starved at home may lack,
Or else to spend in drinking drunk and play,
Amongst beastly Wbores to cast the same away.
But God above that spies the inmost thought,
Discernes the fact which is in secret wrought,
Upon the top of damned Gehazies head,
Showers down his Judgments as Elisha said,
And in an instant all his body over,
From top to toe is pestred with a sore,
An Irksome Scab upon his skin does grow,
A Leprosy as white as any snow,
Nor this alone unto his body sticks,
A mates his mind and seared conscience pricks,
But all his kindred best acquainted friends,
Forsake him quight and none unto him sends,
And to this day his offspring and his Race,
Are leperous tainted in that cursed case.
Father of Lights, and God of Spirits all,
Power down thy Justice let thy Judgments fall,
Upon the hairy Scalpes of those that wrest,
Dishonestly their Friends or Neighbors beast,
Their goods, their Lands, their living or their life,
Not satisfied, continue still in strife*
Great God that all the world may see thy good,
Taint thou their Issue offspring and their blood,
These are the Cankars of the common wealth,
Base Caterpillars powling best by stealth;
That never care so they may have their will,
Men's blood their lives their state and all to spill:
If thy good pleasure says my prayers nay,
Thy Will be done, Lord fat them for thy day.
But holy God, what will become of those,
Which in an open public place shall chose,
To give occasion first to show their gall,
Do call a man both this and that and all,
And afterward shall lie upon the catch,
Their friends estate, into their hands to snatch,
By Deeds, Conueyance, Obligations, Bonds,
To wring and wrest, to make them sell their Lands,
Before such time as any thing is due,
To clap up such with Cerberus his crew,
In woeful prison sick to lie and rot,
Not once to case, assawge their griefs a jot;
And all the while in Equity and Right,
There Is nothing due but what is got by might,
By Wrong, Oppression devilish traps and guile,
And wicked plodding in such actions vile.
Lord pardon them, forgive their great offenses,
Call once again, illuminate their senses,
Waken their careless too secure a slumber,
Forget their faults too infinite to number,
Let them Restore what they have wrongly got,
Else will those goods consume away and rot,
And aye the Infant yet unborn will cry,
For Vengeance just on their posterity.
But let not us (good Lord) O let not us,
Trace out their steps to give examples thus,
Make us avoid to fall into the like,
Lest suddenly thy Judgments do us strike,
With far more terror on our bodies known,
Then ever was upon Gehezi shown,
Or all thy chosen people thou did make
A warning sad for us (in Time) to take,
Besides the loss ( eternal) of thy Grace,
Where such a one shall never see thy face.
But chaste Urania, Sovereign of my Muse,
In whom the Heavens do their best gifts infuse,
Why do thou now thy love so far engage,
As to descend down to our times and Age,
Leaving the world that at the first was drowned,
To ramble out, beyond thy scope to sound?
Damned Vice, unmask with those that wrest and lurch,
And all this while (thus) to forget the Church.
Retire again, and stay not with us long,
Thou may be blamed for this thy wholesome song,
For it is most true one harldly* scapes of* ten,
That hunts the Fox too near the Lions den.
Avoid, begone, contend not much with these,
For fear perhaps thou do some men displease,
And so incur some danger on thy self,
For taxing those which are in love with pelf:
Come to the Church dear Muse, where last of all
Thou Henoch leftst upon this goodly Ball.
There thou art tide; O do not much abound.
Take sanctuary in their holy ground:
And from these things till time shall serve surcease,
Then shall thou Rest and live in perfect Peace.
Henoch the seventh from Adams pupillage, Genesis 5. 21. Iud. 14.

At sixty five years of his manly Age,
Begat a child whose like was never found,
From this worlds birth in all her spacious Round,
That lived to see so many weeks of days
As this man did, and yet no strength decays:
Methuselah the wonder of his time,
Whose age may claim of all the earth the prime,
Which lived to see with Simeons heart inflamed,
The Arc of Noah before his death all framed; Luke 2. 25. 26. 27.

Tipe of that Church which from mount Sion purl'd,
When Caesar's scepter swayd the Western world.
Methuselah both ancient, grave and sage,
One hundred fourscore and seven years of Age,
All chaste does live, and then begets a Son,
Upon whose death the world was quite undone,
Lamech the father of that faithful child,
Which saved seauens Souls, and all the rest beguild,
When that the Arc was by the waters heaued,
O then they knew their wits were all deceived.
Great Noah's self from Lamechs loins descended,
When full one hundred eighty years were ended,
And that the Sun had four times crossed the line,
Then is he borne, and in his birth did shine,
Like to a glimpse of that all sacred light, Simile.

Which in these days may dazzle all our sight:
His name fore-tiping from his mothers breast,
That he was borne to be the Churches Rest. Ioh 1. 19.

Five hundred years (or near upon) he past
His manly days both continent and chaste,
And then espowsed to his future Fame,
A Noble, Fair, and courteous, lovely Dame,
Some think the sister of great* Tubal-Caine, Genebrard. in Cron* Jew Rab.

Sweet Naamah his love at first did gain.
Though from the Line of cursed Caine descended,
Yet of the Heavens she was so highly friended,
As that her Lot before the world was drowned,
Fell lucky forth within the Churches ground.
Oh God thy works are far beyond our reach,
The least of them may all our Senses teach:
Thou have thy sheep dispersed in every place,
From Henochs, Seths and Caines proud envious Race:
It is thy pleasure bad men's sins to pay,
To save (some yet) and cast not all away,
The Flowers often times which do among Cockle grow,
May smell more sweet then any plant we sow.
And tender Seeds out from the Popish Seat,
May yet at length prove Ears of perfect wheat,
Chiefly when Noah Gods husbandman shall till,
And work the ground according to his will,
With pruning, planting in that form and manner,
As was the Church once under Caesar's Banner.
So Abraham was out from Chaldee called, Genesis 12. 28. Chap. 12. 2. Cha* 41. 42.
43 44. Job. 1. Exodus 2. 5. 6. 11. 13. 15. Hest. 2. 17. cha. 7. 6. 10.

And Joseph great in Egypts Court instald:
Job in the land of Vz amongst those men,
Where so he lived that grieves my soul to pen:
And Moses mild amongst the murdring sort,
Was nursed, brought up within king Pharohs Court.
Hester the Queen, that made her foes a scorn,
Was married, ( tide) unto a Pagan borne.
And Paul hims:elfth' Apostle of us all,
Yet first was bred within proud Tarsus wall:
And diverse others which my Muse could name,
Were traind up thus, and yet deserved no blame.
For he that builds upon the slippery sand,
Yet Time may serve to make his fabric stand,
And these were such as from the rest reculde,
The weaker sex are by the greater ruled,
Though some (perhaps) have tried the same and mist,
Yet wise men still do wind them as they list.
As by example, from Noah's happy choice,
This world of ours may ever just rejoice,
To have a mother without blurre or stain,
When all were lost to store the Earth again.
But what make we (dear Muse) with Noah's wife,
Chaste Matron, grave preserver of our life?
Whose Fame deserves heavens azurd richest gown,
A garland decked and Laurel wreathed Crown,
And in her lap the Frame of all to hold,
I fall were made of solid beaten gold,
What if she be derived from the Race,
Of cursed Caine, yet has she better face*
A Conscience clean, Religion in her breast,
Within whose Soul Heavens dearest gifts do rest,
Tipe of the Church now to perfection wrought,
Which was at first but out of darkness brought.
Look back again, and post not one too fast,
For fear thou be beyond thy compass cast:
Tell what befell to Adams issue left,
What misdemeanors all his offspring kept,
Each man his neighbor deadly hates and wounds,
Sin ouerflowes (in every place) abounds,
The greater still devouring up the small,
That in the end the oppressed blood does call
For vengeance just unto the God of Power,
Who does descend, and on the world does lowre,
Repents himself that ere he did begin,
To frame the same thus poisoned all with sin,
Whose true repentance from his eyes did draw,
That stream of tears which woefully they saw,
When all the Earth could scarce support, contain
The Inundation of his furious rain;
But sunk, shranke in, under the water dives,
As loath to save the wicked treacherous lives,
Of hateful men that never lived at Rest,
But when they blood spilt on her (crimson) breast.
This was the cause which made the Clouds to drop,
Sad sudden showers (down) from Dame Natures shop,
And all the fountains of the greatest deep,
To be broke up over all the Earth to creep, Genesis 7. 11.

Heavens Windows open, the rattling Air to sound,
With fearful storms like to a Chaos drowned, simile.

Rumbling and tumbling, iumbling all together,
As we have seen in sudden sulphery Weather,
Gods voice to tear (Heavens Curtain) to our wonder, Psalm. 29. 23

Out from a dark black horrid dreadful thunder.
But yet before God does to Judgment pass, Esa. 40. 67 simile. 1. pet. 1. 24.
psalm. 90 56 simile.

He meditates, and sees that man's but grass,
Like to a flower that in the morning cut,
Is yet ere night with their dead bodies put,
Into the Grave, and so consume together,
Even in a Moment changed hither thither,
Dride up to nothing by Heavens altring time,
When (yesterday) they flourisht in their prime.
God re-ascends, and lets the world alone,
Takes Enoch up that lived therein to moan,
Wail, grieve, lament, the abuses which he saw,
Committed were against the conscience, law,
Of noble Nature in that sinful age,
Small hope to mend when all could not assuage,
The furious current of their stream and tide,
Too good (sweet Saint) with these foul men to bide.
The Angels bright, and all the powers divine, Enoch taken up*

Before thy face in glittring Robes do shine,
Their number more then are the stars and sands,
With golden Censors in their pure white hands,
Winged with Fame to mount the highest Heavens,
Rank 't all in order mustring just by seauens,
Descending sweetly on thy lovely Breast,
To bring both soul and body to their Rest,
By safe conueyance in a Chariot framed,
Of burnisht gold, the Horse with love inflamed;
Mount up the Air with stately stomach fierce,
And at the last the brazen Wall does pierce:
Where like a Prince that Paradise had gained,
Of Eve and Adam thou art entertained,
With far more love within so brave a field,
Then all the World and all therein can yield,
There thou do live when they are wrapped in dust, Genesis 5. 24 Jude 14.

The seventh from them, Tipe of our Sabbath just.
Now thou art gone what can be here expected,
But Envy, Hate, with all good deeds neglected,
Pride, Cruelty, Extortion, ouer-rules;
Making the Earth Vermilion did with gules,
And sable shows of foul inueterate spleen,
Hatch 't in Hels vaults whose like was never seen,
Before this time so strongly to abound,
And ouerflow the Universal Round,
As that small hope there is at all to mend,
Till God to Justice shall from Heaven descend,
And view the world not as he made it first,
But as it is poluted, stained accursed,
Contagious, vile in Caines adulterous race,
And ouerspred with all damned actions base,
When what we should not in our paws we get,
As bad and worse as ere I told you yet.
But cease dear Muse for thou at large have laid,
Their sins wide open and all their spite betrayed,
Unmask 't the Brows of all that wicked Rout,
Which diu'd to Hell to bring their plots about,
The rest preserved I mean those Children dear,
That live in Love and worshipped God in fear,
Whose blood ascended, Mounted up the sky,
And for just Vengeance at his Throne did cry.
God hears their moan and re-descends again,
And sees that Sin the total Earth did stain,
In stead of Flowers and wholesome pleasing fruit,
He finds but Weeds and barbarous actions brute,
The weak poor man still by the greater cast,
In far worse case then when he viewed it last;
Now Cruelty does grind the Infants face,
To swallow all with griping proiects base,
Corruption, Bribes, the World it self does fill,
From Sodoms Vale to Sions sacred Hill,
Comes near the Church to enter in her walls,
To fill it full of deadly poisoned galls.
But one man living on this spacious Round,
From Sols first sight till where his teame is drowned,
In all the Earths large goodly plenteous scope,
From Colmogro unto the Cape of Hope,
That God could find to have an upright heart,
Which from his Love could not be drawn to start,
By ill examples of that froward Race,
Which ouerswarm'd (the World) in every place,
With Guile, Oppression, Cruelty and Hate,
As in this Work I told you of but late.
Him God selects and (graciously) culs out,
From the rude Rabble of that murdring Rout, Genesis 19. 16 24, 25 Psalm. 34* 6, 7
19. 22 Psalm. 83. 35.

As in the days when Sodom was destroyed,
Just righteous Lot was not at all annoyed,
But well brought forth by Angels safe and sure,
Preserved was from their cursed hands impure,
The harmless man may suffer extreme wrong,
Amongst those men that are (perchance) too strong,
In Wealth, Friends, Kindred, Combination, Coat,
To draw slye oaths to cut the poor man's throat:
Yet this may be a comfort to his soul,
For all their tricks and treacherous actions foul,
Damned Policies unto their utmost might,
Although he fall, he shall not perish quight.
So art thou just in all thy works O God,
When the World feels the burden of thy rod,
And heavy weight of thy all powerful hands,
The upright man still (at thy mercy) stands,
Although sometimes thou shewst thy hinder part,
To let him taste that which his mind thinks tart, Exo. 33. 23 1. Pet. 4. 12,
13, 14. These. 4. 6 Esaias 26. 16, 17, 18, 19

Yet as thy Word in many places says,
Thou do but try to prove his utmost faith,
And when (oft-times) his courage fails and sinkes,
As brought near to their dangerous pits and brinkes,
Then do thou keep him from their murdring pawer,
Base, cruel, cursed, devouring, griping jaws,
And full of Love, compassion, pity, grace,
Vnuailsthy Brows to show thy glorious Face,
(Ah dearest God) even whilst my Muse was working
Upon this Place, how were my foes all lurking
About my house, to undermine my state,
With secret trains, close to my doors and gate.
But thou did wake when I was fast asleep,
To make me know that thou do always keep,
Thy sheep from danger of a Wolf most fierce,
Which in my blood (next to my state) would pierce
Then did thou give me at that instant hour,
A Vision strange to show thy secret power,
That in a dream when once my body wak't,
My inward thoughts and all my senses shook;
But Reason guides and swayes me down her stream,
To make me prize it boue an usual dream.
Whereat I went, locked up my doors most sure,
To keep me safe from treacherous paws impure,
Which never yet in all my life was done,
The hateful laws of cruel foes to shun;
But (Heavenly God) when least I knew ofharme,
How did they then about my house all swarm
On every side, with rauing speeches hot,
Like Sodomits about the walls of Lot, Genesis 19. 4, 5, 9, 10, 11.

Till thou protectedst broughtst me safely out,
From the cursed fury of that griping Rout;
Stroke them with blindness all like Tigers lay;
While thou conueydst my body sure away,
To sound thy praise, and blaze thy glorious name,
To end (this work) to thy renowned fame.
So do thou now to make us all admire,
Thy favor shewde unto our reverent Sire,
Descend to Noah the wonder of his Time,
When Nemesis up to thy Throne did clime,
To crave just Vengeance at thy hands for all,
The blood shed, spilt, upon this spacious Ball,
Told him an end of all men's barbarous lives,
With the sad fall of their (incestuous) Wines,
The cruel Race of monstrous Giants great,
That like to Wolves (the flock) did tare and beat,
And wound them so, as now not one was left,
Besides himself, that from his birth had kept:
His mind unspotted ( Conscience) clean and pure,
Not tainted, stained with every golden Lure,
And every beast which on the earth does feed,
The fowls of Heaven that in the Air do breed,
With all flesh living on this goodly frame,
The young and old too tedious here to name,
With those hard hearted which the weak anoyd,
Should (by a flood) be all of them destroyed,
And that himself would (alter) turn their glass,
Before a hundred twenty years should pass,
Those which repented in that time and space,
Should respite have to find his love and grace,
And all the rest within this boundless round,
Should then be washed, consumed away and drowned.
God wills him further to provide in time,
Against the Flood that highest Mounts will clime,
And frame an Arc for to secure his life,
His children dear and tender hearted wife,
From the fell furious raging tide, and streams,
Of Neptune (proud) that undermines her seames,
To pierce her Joints and lay them open all,
When blustering waves upon her sides do fall:* Maesia in Asia minor.

Bids him go poast to Maesia land with speed,
And fell those Pines which now the world did need,
whose wondrous height may dazzle all our sight,
To see them grow two hundred foot upright
Firm from the ground, and to be parted plain
Into the three parts, and then unite again.
Tipe of that Church, whose ground was laid by Paul,
When three make one and one but all in all.
So was the Arc divided into parts,
To amaze the minds of true Religious hearts:
Three stories high the same was fully framed,
To hold the sorts of creatures wild and tamed,
Made all of Pine, pitched both without and in,
To suckor none that perished for their sin:
And that the rest as God had just decreed,
The Male and Female in the same should breed,
To store the world, replenish it again
With fruit more mild then first the earth did stain.
The Arc once framed according to the form
That God had laid before the furious storm,
Fell crosly forth contrary to the mind,
Of those great men, which did the weaker grind:
They wondered all at this so huge a frame,
Derided, scoft, too bitter here to name,
And at the last attempted barbarous rude
Their hands polluted all with blood imbrude:
To tear it down and make it but the scorn
To all those men hereafter should be borne*
But God above perceiving that their pride,
The total earth on every side had did,
With crimson gore and that they meant outright,
To spoil his Work, deface it utter quight,
Powers down his Judgments, sends those fearful showers
That all the Air in the instant thunders lowers,
With sable clouds, and sulphery flames of fire.
Tearing the Heavens, making the World admire:
To see the Earth, the Air, Fire, Waters all,
Flock altogether round about this Ball,
Join all as one even in an instant soon,
To stop man's breath sending a night at noone*
Thatin a Moment all their lives are dround,
Their pride much like the Egyptian army found,
That in the Sea upon the crimson sands,
Against Gods sheep heau'd up their murdring hands,
The Arc protected from their treacherous paws,
Damned Envious foul base cursed devouring Jaws,
Heau'd from the Earth, upon the Water bides,
Secure from hurt, when God her Pilot guides,
Triumphant marches, in all storms it stands,
Their unbelief bold impudency brands,
With that just scourge, which if they had repented,
All had been well, his Judgments staid and stented.
Full sixteen hundred complete years were ended,
And fifty six when God in sunder rended,
The sable clouds, and made the Waters mount,
To drown the World according to the count,
Of all the Hebrews, glory of the Earth,
Whose sacred stories of admired worth,
Have purchased fame, and aye deserved well,
Before the rest to bear away the Bell.
Here could I sing the afflictions, sorrows, grief,
Vexations, troubles, sundry mischiefs reife:
That daily happened to Noah's sacred Arc,
Tossed too and fro as is a little Bark.
Upon the wings of (envious) Eols rage.
And some good men within this iron Age,
The Surges, Waves, upon her sides all beat,
The sturdy Rocks to split, her womb do threate,
The Sands to choke, the storms to batter down,
As all the Rest so she her self to drown.
But still protected by Gods powerful hands,
Against the stream of all these rubs she stands,
And on the Waters Waves, foul mischiefs all,
She passes through, and viewes this spacious Ball,
Until at last she chanst her self to ease,
From the fell fury of the envious Seas,
Upon the top of that admired Hill, Ararat. Genesis 8. 4.

Whose worthy fame the total Earth does fill,
As more at large shall be described plain,
In my next Book, when once (my peace) I gain,
Mean time dear Muse, with Noah's sacred Pile,
Let us but stay and rest our selves a while.
FINIS.

